+++
title = "21 Book Three, Part IVâ€”What\nis not Dhamma"

+++


|     |
|-----|
|    |

> Book Three, Part IVâ€”What is not Dhamma
>
> 1\. \*[Belief in the Supernatural is Not Dhamma](03_04.html#01)\* --
> 2. \*[Belief in Ishwara (God) is Not Essentially Part of
> Dhamma](03_04.html#02)\* -- 3. \*[Dhamma Based on Union with Brahma is
> a False Dhamma](03_04.html#03)\* -- 4. \*[Belief in Soul is Not
> Dhamma](03_04.html#04)\* -- 5. \*[Belief in Sacrifices is Not
> Dhamma](03_04.html#05)\* -- 6. \*[Belief Based on Speculation is Not
> Dhamma](03_04.html#06)\* -- 7. \*[Reading Books of Dhamma is Not
> Dhamma](03_04.html#07)\* -- 8. \*[Belief in the Infallibility of Books
> of Dhamma is Not Dhamma](03_04.html#08)\*  
> 
>
>   
> § 1. Belief in the Supernatural is Not Dhamma
>
>  1. Whenever any phenomenon occurs, humanity is always wanting to
> know how it has happened, what is the cause of it.  
>  2. Sometimes cause and the effect are so proximate and so close
> that it is not difficult to account for the occurrence of the event.  
>  3. But oftentimes the effect is so far away from the cause for
> \[=that\] the effect is not accountable. Apparently there appears to
> be no cause for it.  
>  4. Then the question arises: How has this event occurred?  
>  5. The commonest answer is that the occurrence of the event is due
> to some supernatural cause, which is often called a miracle.  
>  6. The Buddha's predecessors gave very different answers to this
> question.  
>  7. Pakauda Katyana denied that there was a cause for every event.
> Events, he said, occurred independently.  
>  8. Makhali Ghosal admitted that an event must have a cause. But he
> preached that the cause is not to be found in human agency, but is to
> be sought in nature, necessity, inherent laws of things,
> predestination, or the like.  
>  9. The Buddha repelled \[=rejected\] these doctrines. He
> maintained that not only every event has a cause but the cause is the
> result of some human action or natural law.  
>  10. His contention against the doctrine of Time, Nature,
> Necessity, etc., being the cause of the occurrence of an event, was
> this:  
>  11. If Time, Nature, Necessity, etc., be the sole cause of the
> occurrence of an event, then who are we?  
>  12. Is man merely a puppet in the hands of Time, Nature, Chance,
> Gods, Fate, Necessity  
>  13. What is the use of man's existence, if he is not free? What is
> the use of man's intelligence, if he continues to believe in
> supernatural causes?  
>  14. If man is free, then every event must be the result of man's
> action, or of an act of Nature. There cannot be any event which is
> supernatural in its origin.  
>  15. It may be that man is not able to discover the real cause of
> the occurrence of an event. But if he has intelligence, he is bound
> one day to discover it.  
>  16. In repudiating supernaturalism, the Buddha had three
> objects.  
>  17. His first object was to lead man to the path of rationalism.  
>  18. His second object was to free man to go in search of truth.  
>  19. His third object was to remove the most potent source of
> superstition, the result of which is to kill the spirit of inquiry.  
>  20. This is called the law of Kamma or Causation.  
>  21. This doctrine of Kamma and Causation is the most central
> doctrine in Buddhism. It preaches Rationalism, and Buddhism is nothing
> if not rationalism.  
>  22. That is why worship of the supernatural is not Dhamma.
>
>   
> § 2. Belief in Ishwara (God) is Not Essentially Part of Dhamma
>
>  1. Who created the world is a common question. That the world was
> created by God is also a very common answer.  
>  2. In the Brahmanic scheme this God is called by a variety of
> names: Prajapati, Ishwar, Brahma, or Maha Brahma.  
>  3. To the question who this God is and how He came into being,
> there is no answer.  
>  4. Those who believe in God describe Him as a being who is
> omnipotent, i.e., all-powerful; Omni-present, i.e., he fills the whole
> universe; and Omniscient, i.e., he knows everything.  
>  5. There are also certain moral qualities which are attributed to
> God. God is said to be good, God is said to be just, and God is said
> to be all-loving.  
>  6. The question is, did the Blessed Lord accept God as the creator
> of the universe.  
>  7. The answer is, "No." He did not.  
>  8. There are various grounds why he rejected the doctrine of the
> Existence of God.  
>  9. Nobody has seen God. People only speak of God.  
>  10. God is unknown and unseen.  
>  11. Nobody can prove that God has created the world. The world has
> evolved and is not created.  
>  12. What advantage can there be in believing in God? It is
> unprofitable.  
>  13. The Buddha said that a religion based on God is based on
> speculation.  
>  14. A religion based on God is, therefore, not worth having.  
>  15. It only ends in creating superstition.  
>  16. The Buddha did not leave the question there. He discussed the
> question in its various aspects.  
>  17. The grounds on which he rejected the doctrine were various.  
>  18. He argued that the doctrine of the Existence of God is not
> based on truth.  
>  19. This he made clear in his dialogue with the two Brahmins,
> Vasettha and Bhardvaja.  
>  20. Now a dispute arose between them as to which was the true path
> of salvation and which false.  
>  21. About the time the Blessed One was journeying through Kosala
> with a great company of the brethren, he happened to halt at the
> Brahmin village called Manaskata, and stayed in the mango grove on the
> bank of the river Akiravati.  
>  22. Manaskata was the town in which Vasettha and Bhardvaja lived.
> Having heard that the Blessed Lord was staying in their town, they
> went to him, and each one put forth his point of view.  
>  23. Bhardvaja said: "The path of Tarukkha is the straight path,
> this is the direct way which makes for salvation and leads him who
> acts according to it into a state of union with Brahma."  
>  24. Vasettha said: "Various Brahmins, O Gautama, teach various
> paths. The Addhariya Brahinmins, the Tittiriya Brahmins, the Kanchoka
> Brahmins, the Bheehuvargiya Brahmins. They all lead those who act
> according to them, into a state of union with Brahma.  
>  25. "Just as near a village or a town there are many and various
> paths, yet they all meet together in the village--just in the same way
> all the various paths taught by the various Brahmins lead to union
> with Brahma."  
>  26. "Do you say that they all lead aright, Vasettha?" asked the
> Buddha. "I say so, Gautama," replied Vasettha.  
>  27. "But Vasettha, is there a single one of the Brahmins versed in
> the three Vedas who has ever seen Brahma face to face?"  
>  28. "No indeed, Gautama."  
>  29. "Is there a single one of the teachers of the Brahmanas
> versed in the three Vedas who has seen Brahma face to face?"  
>  30. "No indeed, Gautama."  
>  31. "Nobody has seen Brahma. There is no perceptual knowledge
> about Brahma." "So it is" said Vasettha. "How then can you believe
> that the assertion of the Brahmins that Brahma exists is based on
> truth?  
>  32. "Just, Vasettha, as when a string of blind men are clinging
> one to the other, neither can the foremost see nor can the middle one
> see nor can the hindmost see--just even so, methinks, Vasettha, is the
> talk of the Brahmins nothing but blind talk. The first sees not, the
> middle one sees not, nor can the latest one \[see\]. The talk of these
> Brahmins turns out to be ridiculous, mere words, a vain and empty
> thing.  
>  33. "Is this not a case, Vasettha, of a man falling in love with a
> woman whom he has not seen?" "Yes, it is," replied Vasettha.  
>  34. "Now what think you, Vasettha? If people should ask you,
> 'Well! Good friend! This most beautiful woman in the land, whom you
> thus love and long for, who is she? Is she a noble lady, or a Brahmin
> woman, or of the trader class, or a Sudra?'  
>  35. "With regard to the origin of Maha Brahma, the so-called
> creator," the Blessed Lord said, addressing Bhardvaja and Vasettha,
> "Friends, that being who was first born thinks thus: I am Brahma, the
> Great Brahma, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the All-seeing, the
> Disposer, the Lord, the Maker, the Creator, the Chief, the Assignor,
> the Master of Myself, the father of all that are and are to be. By me
> are these beings created.  
>  36. "This means that Brahma is the father of those that are and
> are to be.  
>  37. "You say that the worshipful Brahma, the Vanquisher, the
> Unvanquished, Father of all that are and are to be, he by whom we were
> created, he is permanent, constant, eternal, unchanging, and he will
> remain so for ever and ever. Then why are we who are created by that
> Brahma, \[and\] have come hither, all impermanent, transient,
> unstable, short-lived, destined to pass away?"  
>  38. To this Vasettha had no answer.  
>  39. His third argument had reference to the Omnipotence of God.
> "If God is Omnipotent and is also the efficient cause of creation,
> then because of this man cannot have any desire to do anything, nor
> can there be any necessity to do anything, nor can he have the will to
> do anything or to put forth any effort. Man must remain a passive
> creature, with no part to play in the affairs of the world. If this is
> so, why did Brahma create man at all?"  
>  40. To this also Vasettha had no answer.  
>  41. His fourth argument was that if God is good, then why do men
> become murderers, thieves, unchaste, liars, slanderers, abusive
> babblers, covetous, malicious and perverse? The cause of this must be
> Ishwara. Is this possible with the existence of God who is good?  
>  42. His fifth argument was related to God being Omniscient, just,
> and merciful.  
>  43. "If there is a supreme creator who is just and merciful, why
> then does so much injustice prevail in the world?" asked the Blessed
> Lord. "He who has eyes can see the sickening sight; why does not
> Brahma set his creatures right? If his power is so wide that no limits
> can restrain \[it\], why is his hand so rarely spread to bless? Why
> are his creatures all condemned to suffering? Why does he not give
> happiness to all? Why do fraud, lies, and ignorance prevail? Why does
> falsehood triumph over truth? Why does \[=do\] truth and justice fail?
> I count your Brahma as one of the most unjust, who made a world only
> to shelter wrong.  
>  44. "If there exists some Lord all-powerful to fulfil in every
> creature, bliss or woe, and action good or ill, then that Lord is
> stained with sin. Either man does not work his will, or God is not
> just and good, or God is blind."  
>  45. His next argument against the doctrine of God was that the
> discussion of this question about the existence of God was
> unprofitable.  
>  46. According to him, the centre of religion lay not in the
> relation of man to God. It lay in the relation between man and man.
> The purpose of religion is to teach man how he should behave towards
> other men so that all may be happy.  
>  47. There was also another reason why the Blessed Lord was against
> belief in the existence of God.  
>  48. He was against religious rites, ceremonies, and observances.
> He was against them because they were the home of superstition, and
> superstition was the enemy of Samma Ditthi, the most important element
> in his Ashtangmarg.  
>  49. To the Blessed Lord, belief in God was the most dangerous
> thing. For belief in God gave rise to belief in the efficacy of
> worship and prayer; and the efficacy of worship and prayer gave rise
> to the office of the priest; and the priest was the evil genius who
> created all superstition, and thereby destroyed the growth of Samma
> Ditthi.  
>  50. Of these arguments against belief in the existence of God,
> some were practical, but the majority of them \[were\] theological.
> The Blessed Lord knew that they were not fatal to the belief in the
> existence of God.  
>  51. It must not, however, be supposed that he had no argument
> which was fatal. There was one which he advanced which is beyond doubt
> fatal to belief in God. This is contained in his doctrine of *Patit
> Samutpad*, which is described as the doctrine of Dependent
> Origination.  
>  52. According to this doctrine, the question whether God exists or
> does not exist is not the main question. Nor is the question whether
> God created the universe the real question. The real question is, how
> did the creator create the world? The justification for the belief in
> God is a conclusion which follows from our answer to the question, how
> was the world created?  
>  53. The important question is: Did God create something out of
> nothing, or did he create something out of something?  
>  54. It is impossible to believe that something could have been
> created out of nothing.  
>  55. If the so-called God has created something out of something,
> then that something out of which something new was created has been in
> existence before he created anything. God cannot therefore be called
> the Creator of that something which has existed before him.  
>  56. If something has been created by somebody out of something
> before God created anything, then God cannot be said to be the Creator
> or the first Cause.  
>  57. Such was his last but incontrovertible argument against belief
> in the existence of God.  
>  58. Being false in premises, belief in God as the creator of the
> universe is not Dhamma. It is only belief in falsehood.
>
>   
> § 3. Dhamma Based on Union with Brahma is a False Dhamma
>
>  1. When the Buddha was preaching his religion, there was current a
> doctrine called Vedantism.  
>  2. The tenets of this doctrine are few and simple.  
>  3. Behind the universe there is omnipresent a common principle of
> life called Brahma or Brahman.  
>  4. This Brahma is a reality.  
>  5. The Atman, or the individual soul, is the same as Brahma.  
>  6. Man's liberation lies in making Atman to be one with Brahma.
> This is the second principle.  
>  7. This unity with Brahma, the Atman can achieve by realising that
> it is the same as Brahman.  
>  8. And the way to make the Atman realise that it is the same as
> Brahman, is to give up Sansara.  
>  9. This doctrine is called Vedantism.  
>  10. The Buddha had no respect for the doctrine. He regarded it as
> based on false premises and producing nothing of value, and therefore
> not worth having.  
>  11. This he made clear in his discussion with two Brahmins,
> Bharadvaj and Vasettha.  
>  12. The Buddha argued that there must be proof before one can
> accept a thing to be a reality.  
>  13. There are two modes of proof, perception and inference.  
>  14. The Buddha asked, "Has anybody perceived Brahma; have you seen
> Brahma; have you spoken to Brahma; have you smelt Brahma?"  
>  15. Vasettha said, "No."  
>  16. "The other mode of proof is inadequate to prove the existence
> of Brahma."  
>  17. "From what is Brahma the inference of?" asked the Buddha.
> There again was no answer.  
>  18. There are others who argue that a thing exists although it is
> invisible. So they say that Brahma exists, although it is invisible.  
>  19. In this bald statement, it is an impossible position.  
>  20. But for argument's sake, let it be granted that a thing exists
> although it is invisible.  
>  21. The best illustration of it is electricity. It exists although
> it is invisible.  
>  22. This argument is not enough,  
>  23. An invisible thing must show itself in some other form that is
> visible. Then alone it can be called real.  
>  24. But if an invisible thing does not show itself in any visible
> form then it is not a reality.  
>  25. We accept \[the\] reality of electricity, although it is
> invisible, because of the results it produces.  
>  26. Electricity produces light. From light we accept the reality
> of electricity, although it is invisible.  
>  27. What does this invisible Brahma produce? Does it produce any
> visible results?  
>  28. The answer is in the negative.  
>  29. Another illustration may be given. In law too, it is common to
> adopt as a basic concept a fiction--a proposition the existence of
> which is not proved, but which is assumed to be true.  
>  30. And we all accept such a legal fiction.  
>  31. But why is such a legal fiction accepted?  
>  32. The reason is that a legal fiction is accepted because it
> gives a fruitful and just result.  
>  33. "Brahma is a fiction. What fruitful result does it give?"  
>  34. Vasettha and Bharadvaj were silent.  
>  35. To drive the argument home he turned to Vasettha and asked
> "Have you seen Brahma?"  
>  36. "Is there a single one of the Brahmanas versed in three Vedas
> who has ever seen Brahma face to face?"  
>  37. "No indeed, Gautama."  
>  38. "Is there a single one of the teachers of the Brahmanas versed
> in the three Vedas who have seen Brahma face to face?"  
>  39. "No indeed, Gautama."  
>  40. "Is there, Vasettha, a single one of the Brahmanas up to the
> seventh generation who has seen Brahma face to face?"  
>  41. "No indeed, Gautama."  
>  42. "Well then, Vasettha, did the ancient Rishis of the
> Brahmanas--did even they speak thus, saying : We know it, we have seen
> it, where Brahma is, whither Brahma is?"  
>  43. "Not so, Gautama."  
>  44. The Buddha continued his questioning of the two Brahmin boys
> and said:  
>  45. "Now what think you, Vasettha? Does it not follow, this being
> so, that the talk of the Brahmanas about union with Brahma turns out
> to be foolish talk?  
>  46. "Just, Vasettha, as when a string of blind men are clinging
> one to the other, neither can the foremost see, nor can the middle one
> see, nor can the hindmost see--just even so, methinks, Vasettha, is
> the talk of the Brahmanas all but blind talk? The first sees not, the
> middle one sees not, nor can the last one \[see\]. The talk of these
> Brahmanas turns out to be ridiculous, mere words, a vain and empty
> thing.  
>  47. "Just, Vasettha, as if a man should, say, 'How I long for, how
> I love the most beautiful woman in this land.'  
>  48. "And people should ask him, 'Well! good friend! This most
> beautiful woman in the land, whom you thus love and long for, do you
> know whether that beautiful woman is a noble lady or a Brahmin woman,
> or of the trader class, or a Sudra?'  
>  49. "But when so asked, he would answer: 'No.'  
>  50. "And when people should ask him, ' Well! good friend! This
> most beautiful woman in all the land, whom you love and long for, do
> you know what the name of that most beautiful woman is, or what her
> family name, whether she be tall or short or of medium height, dark or
> brunette or golden in colour, or in what village or town or city she
> dwells?' But when so asked, he would answer, 'No.'  
>  51. "Now what think you, Vasettha? Would it not turn out that
> being so, that the talk of that man was foolish talk?"  
>  52. "In sooth, Gautama, that would be so," said the two
> Brahmins.  
>  53. So Brahma is not real and any religion based upon it is
> useless.
>
>   
> § 4. Belief in Soul is Not Dhamma
>
>  1. The Buddha said that religion based on soul is based on
> speculation.  
>  2. Nobody has seen the soul or has conversed with the soul.  
>  3. The soul is unknown and unseen.  
>  4. The thing that exists is not the soul but the mind. Mind is
> different from the soul.  
>  5. Belief in soul He said is unprofitable.  
>  6. A religion based on soul is therefore not worth having.  
>  7. It only ends in creating superstition.  
>  8. The Buddha did not leave the question there. He discussed it in
> all its aspects.  
>  9. Belief in the existence of soul is as common as the belief in
> the existence of God.  
>  10. Belief in the existence of soul was also a part of the
> Brahmanic Religion.  
>  11. In the Brahmanic Religion the soul is called Atma or Atman.  
>  12. In the Brahmanic Religion, Atman is the name given to an
> entity which was held to be abiding separate from the body, but living
> inside the body, constantly existing from the moment of his birth.  
>  13. Belief in the soul included other beliefs, connected with
> it.  
>  14. The soul does not die with the body. It takes birth in another
> body when it comes into being.  
>  15. The body serves as an external clothing for the soul.  
>  16. Did the Buddha believe in the soul? No. He did not. His
> doctrine about the soul is called An-atta, no soul.  
>  17. Given a disembodied soul, various questions arise: What is the
> soul? Where did it come from? What becomes of it on the death of the
> body? Where does it go? In what form does it exist "hereafter"? How
> long does it remain there? These questions the Buddha tried to argue
> out with the upholders of the doctrine of the soul.  
>  18. He first tried to show how vague was the idea about the soul,
> by his usual method of cross examination.  
>  19. He asked those who believed in the existence of the soul, what
> the soul was like in size arid in shape.  
>  20. To Ananda he said, "The declarations concerning the soul are
> abounding. Some declare: 'My soul has a form and it is minute.' Others
> declare the soul to have form and to be boundless and minute. Others
> declare it to be formless and boundless.  
>  21. "In so many ways, Ananda, are declarations made concerning the
> soul."  
>  22. "How is the soul conceived by those who believe in the soul?"
> was another question raised by the Buddha. Some say, "My soul is
> feeling." Others say, "Nay, my soul is not feeling, my soul is not
> sentient"; or again: "Nay, my soul is not feeling, nor is it
> non-sentient; my soul has feeling, it has the property of sentience."
> Under such aspects as these is the soul conceived.  
>  23. The Buddha next asked those who believed in the existence of
> the soul, as to the condition of the soul after the death of the
> body.  
>  24. He also raised the question whether the soul was visible after
> the death of the body.  
>  25. He found \[an\] infinite number of vague statements.  
>  26. Does the soul keep its form after the death of the body? He
> found that there were eight different speculations.  
>  27. Does the soul die with the body? There were innumerable
> speculations on this.  
>  28. He also raised the question of the happiness or misery of the
> soul after the body is dead. Is the soul happy after the death of the
> body? On this also the Recluses and Brahmins differed. Some said it
> was altogether miserable. Some said it was happy. Some said it. is
> both happy and miserable; and some said it is neither happy nor
> miserable.  
>  29. His answer to all these theories about the existence of the
> soul was the same which he gave to Cunda.  
>  30. To Cunda he said, "Now, Cunda, to those recluses and Brahmins,
> who believe and profess any one of these views, I go and say this: 'Is
> this so, friends?' And if they reply: 'Yes. This alone is true, any
> other view is absurd,' I do not admit their claim. Why is this?
> Because persons hold different opinions on such questions. Nor do I
> consider this (or that) view on a level with my own, let alone
> higher."  
>  31. Now the more important question is, what were the arguments of
> the Buddha against the existence of the soul.  
>  32. The general arguments he advanced in support of his denial of
> the soul were the same as those which he advanced in support of his
> denial of the existence of God.  
>  33. He argued that the discussion of the existence of the soul is
> as unprofitable as the discussion of the existence of God.  
>  34. He argued that the belief in the existence of the soul is as
> much against the cultivation of Samma Ditthi as the belief in the
> existence of God.  
>  35. He argued that the belief in the existence of the soul is as
> much a source of superstition as the belief in God is. Indeed, in his
> opinion the belief in the existence of a soul is far more dangerous
> than the belief in God. For not only does it create a priesthood, not
> only is it the origin of all superstition, but it gives the priesthood
> complete control over man from birth to death.  
>  36. Because of these general arguments, it is said that the Buddha
> did not express any definite opinion on the existence of the soul.
> Others have said that he did not repudiate the theory of the existence
> of the soul. Others have said that he was always dodging the issue.  
>  37. These statements are quite incorrect. For to Mahali he did
> tell in most positive terms that there is no such thing as a soul.
> That is why his theory of the soul is called Anatta, i.e., non-soul.  
>  38. Apart from the general arguments against the existence of the
> soul, the Buddha had a special argument against the existence of the
> soul which he regarded as fatal to the theory of the soul.  
>  39. His theory against the existence of the soul as a separate
> entity is called Nama-Rupa.  
>  40. The theory is the result of the application of the Vibhaja
> test, of sharp, rigorous analysis, of the constituent elements of
> Sentient being, otherwise called Human Personality.  
>  41. Nama-Rupa is a collective name for a Sentient Being.  
>  42. According to the Buddha's analysis, a Sentient Being is a
> compound thing consisting of certain physical elements and certain
> mental elements. They are called *Khanda*s.  
>  43. The Rupa Khanda primarily consists of the physical elements
> such as earth, water, fire, and air. They constitute the Body or
> Rupa.  
>  44. Besides Rupa Khanda, there is such a thing as Nama Khanda,
> which goes to make up a Sentient Being.  
>  45. This Nama Khanda is called Vinana, or consciousness. This Nama
> Khanda includes the three mental elements : Vedana (sensation
> springing from contact of the six senses with the world); Sanna
> (perception); Sankhara (states of mind). Chetana (consciousness) is
> sometimes spoken of along with the three other mental states as being
> one of them. A modern psychologist would say that consciousness is the
> mainspring from which other psychological phenomena arise. Vinana is
> the centre of a sentient being.  
>  46. Consciousness is result of the combination of the four
> elements, Prithi, Apa, Tej, and Vayu.  
>  47. An objection is raised to this theory of consciousness
> propounded by the Buddha.  
>  48. Those who object to this theory ask, "How is, consciousness
> produced?"  
>  49. It is true. that consciousness arises with birth and dies with
> death. All the same, can it be said that consciousness is the result
> of the combination of the four elements?  
>  50. The Buddha's answer was not that the coexistence or
> aggregation of the physical elements produces consciousness. What the
> Buddha said was that wherever there was rupa or kaya, there was
> consciousness accompanying it.  
>  51. To give an analogy from science, there is an electric field,
> and wherever there is an electric field it is always accompanied by a
> magnetic field. No one knows how the magnetic field is created, or how
> it arises. But it always exists along with the electric field.  
>  52. Why should not the same relationship be said to exist between
> body and consciousness?  
>  53. The magnetic field in relation to the electric field is called
> an induced field. Why cannot consciousness be called an induced field
> in relation to Rupa-Kaya?  
>  54. The Buddha's argument against the soul is not yet complete. He
> had further to say something of importance.  
>  55. Once consciousness arises, man becomes a sentient being.
> Consciousness is, therefore, the chief thing in man's life.  
>  56. Consciousness is cognitive, emotional, and volitional.  
>  57. Consciousness is cognitive when it gives knowledge,
> information--as appreciating or apprehending, whether it be
> appreciation of internal facts or of external things and events.  
>  58. Consciousness is emotional when it exists in certain
> subjective states, characterised by either pleasurable or painful
> tones, when emotional consciousness produces feeling.  
>  59. Consciousness in its volitional stage makes a being exert
> himself for the attainment of some end. Volitional consciousness gives
> rise to what we call will or activity.  
>  60. It is thus clear that all the functions of a sentient being
> are performed by the sentient being through and as a result of
> consciousness.  
>  61. After this analysis, the Buddha asked what are the functions
> which are left to be performed by the soul? All functions assigned to
> the soul are performed by consciousness.  
>  62. A soul without any function is an absurdity.  
>  63. This is how the Buddha disproved the existence of the soul.  
>  64. That is why the existence of the soul cannot be a part of
> Dhamma.
>
>   
> § 5. Belief in Sacrifices is Not Dhamma
>
> (5.i)
>
>  1. The Brahmanic religion was based upon sacrifices.  
>  2. Some sacrifices were classified as *Nittya* and other
> sacrifices were classified as *Naimitik*.  
>  3. The Nittya sacrifices were obligations and had to be performed
> whether one got any fruit therefrom or not.  
>  4. The Naimittitik sacrifices were performed when the performer
> wanted to gain something by way of worldly advantage.  
>  5. The Brahmanic sacrifices involved drinking, killing animals,
> and merry-making.  
>  6. Yet these sacrifices were held as religious observances.  
>  7. The Buddha declined to regard a religion based on sacrifices as
> worth having.  
>  8. He has given his reasons to many a Brahmin who went to have a
> controversy with him as to why sacrifices were not part of religion.  
>  9. It is reported that there were three Brahmins who had a
> controversy with him on the subject.  
>  10. They were Kutadarita, Ujjaya, and the third was Udayin.  
>  11. Kutadanta the Brahmin requested the Blessed One to tell him
> what he thought about the value of a sacrifice.  
>  12. The Blessed One said, "Well then, O Brahmin, give ear and
> listen attentively and I will speak."  
>  13. "Very well, sir, " said Kutadanta in reply; and the Blessed
> One spoke as follows:  
>  14. "Long ago, O Brahmin, there was a king by name Maha Vigeta,
> mighty, with great wealth and large property; with stores of silver
> and gold, of aids to enjoyment, of goods and corn; with his
> treasure-houses and his garners full.  
>  15. "Now when King Maha Vigeta was once sitting alone in
> meditation he became anxious at the thought: 'I have in abundance all
> the good things a mortal can enjoy. The whole wide circle of the earth
> is mine by conquest to possess. It were well if I were to offer a
> great sacrifice that should ensure me weal and welfare for many
> days.'  
>  16. Thereupon the Brahmin who was chaplain said to the king, 'The
> king's country, sire, is harassed and harried. There are dacoits
> abroad who pillage the villages and townships and who make the roads
> unsafe. Were the king, so long as that is so, to levy a fresh tax,
> verily his majesty would acting wrongly.  
>  17. "'But perchance his majesty might thin : 'I'll soon put a stop
> to these scoundrels' game by degradation and banishment, and fines and
> bonds and death!' But their licence cannot be satisfactorily put a
> stop to. The remnant left unpunished would still go on harassing the
> realm.  
>  18. "'Now there is one method to adopt to put a thorough end to
> this \[dis\]order. Whosoever there be in the king's realm who devote
> themselves to keeping cattle and the farm, to them let His Majesty the
> King give food and seed-corn. Whosoever there be in the king's realm
> who devote themselves to trade, to them let His Majesty the King give
> capital. Whosoever there be in the king's realm who devote themselves
> to government service, to them let His Majesty the King give wages and
> food.  
>  19. '''Then those men, following each his own business, will no
> longer harass the realm; the king's revenue will go up; the country
> will be quiet and at peace; and the populace, pleased one with another
> and happy, dancing \[=rocking\] their children in their arms, will
> dwell with open doors without fear.'  
>  20. "Then King Maha Vigeta, O Brahmin, accepted the word of his
> chaplain, and did as he had said. And those men, following each his
> business, harassed the realm no more. And the king's revenue went up.
> And the country became quiet and at peace. And the populace, pleased
> one with another and happy, dancing their children in their arms,
> dwelt with open doors.  
>  21. "When peace and order was restored, King Maha Vigeta had his
> chaplain called again and said, 'The disorder is at an end. The
> country is at peace. I want to offer that great sacrifice--let the
> Venerable One instruct me how--for my weal and my welfare for many
> days.'  
>  22. "The chaplain, replying to the king, said, 'Be it so. Let His
> Majesty the King send invitations to those in the town and the country
> in his realm who are Kshatriyas, vassals of his; who are ministers and
> officials of his, or who are Brahmins of position, or who are
> householders of substance, saying: 'I intend to offer a great
> sacrifice. Let the Venerable Ones give their sanction to what will be
> to me for weal and welfare for many days.'  
>  23. "Then the king, O Brahmin Kutadanta, accepted the word of his
> chaplain, and did as he had said. And they each--Kshatriya and
> Ministers and Brahmins and householders--made a like reply: 'Let His
> Majesty the King celebrate the sacrifice. The time is suitable, O
> King!'  
>  24. "King Vigeta was wise and gifted in many ways. And his
> chaplain was equally wise and gifted.  
>  25. "The chaplain, O Brahmin, before the sacrifice had begun,
> explained to the king what it would involve.  
>  26. "'Should His Majesty the King, before starting on the great
> sacrifice or whilst he is offering the great sacrifice, or when the
> great sacrifice has been offered, feel any such regret as: 'Great
> alas, has been the portion of my wealth used up herein,' let not the
> king harbour such regret.  
>  27. "And further, O Brahmin, the chaplain, before the sacrifice
> had begun, in order to prevent any compunction that might afterwards
> arise as regards those who had taken part therein, said, 'Now there
> will come to your sacrifice, sire, men who destroy the life of living
> things, and men who refrain therefrom; men who take what has not been
> given, and men who refrain therefrom; men who act evilly in respect of
> lusts, and men who refrain therefrom; men who speak lies, and men who
> do not; men who slander, and men who do not; men who speak rudely, and
> men who do not; men who chatter vain things, and men who refrain
> therefrom; men who covet, and men who covet not; men who harbour ill
> will, and men who harbour it not; men whose views are wrong, and men
> whose views are right. Of each of these, let them who do evil, alone
> with their evil. For them who do well, let Your Majesty offer; for
> them, sire, arrange the rites; them let the king gratify, in them
> shall your heart within find peace.'  
>  28. "And further, O Brahmin, at that sacrifice neither were any
> oxen slain, neither goats, nor fowls, nor fatted pigs, nor were any
> kinds of living creatures put to death. No trees were cut down to be
> used as posts, no Dabbha grasses mown to strew around the sacrificial
> spot. And the slaves and messengers and workmen there employed were
> driven neither by rods nor fear, nor carried on their work weeping
> with tears upon their faces. Whoso chose to help, he worked; whoso
> chose not to help, worked not. What each chose to do, he did; what
> they chose not to do, that was left undone. With ghee, and oil and
> butter, and milk and honey, and sugar only was that sacrifice
> accomplished.  
>  29. "Let your sacrifice be such as that of King Vigeta, if you at
> all wish to perform any sacrifice. Sacrifices are a waste. Animal
> sacrifices are cruelties. Sacrifices cannot be part of religion. It is
> a worst form of religion which says you can go to heaven by killing an
> animal."  
>  30. I was inclined to ask "Is there, O Gautama, any other
> sacrifice with more fruit and more advantage than killing animals?"  
>  31. "Yes, O Brahmin, there is."  
>  32. "And what, O Gautama, may that be?"  
>  33. "When a man with trusting heart takes upon himself the
> precepts--abstinence from destroying life; abstinence from taking what
> has not been given; abstinence from evil conduct in respect of lusts;
> abstinence from lying words; abstinence from strong, intoxicating,
> maddening drinks, the root of carelessness--that is a sacrifice better
> than open largesse, better than perpetual alms, better than the gift
> of dwelling places, better than accepting guidance."  
>  34. And when he had thus spoken, Kutadanta the Brahmin said to the
> Blessed One: "Most excellent, O Gautama, are the words of thy mouth,
> most excellent."
>
> (5.ii)
>
>  1. Now the Brahmin Ujjaya said this to the Exalted One:  
>  2. "Pray, does the worthy Gautama praise sacrifice?"  
>  3. "No Brahmin, I do not praise every sacrifice. Yet I would not
> withhold praise from every sacrifice. In whatever sacrifice, Brahmin,
> cows are slaughtered, goats and sheep are slaughtered, poultry and
> pigs are slaughtered, and divers living creatures come to
> destruction--such sacrifice. Brahmin, which involves butchery, I do
> not praise." "Why so?"  
>  4. "To such a sacrifice, Brahmin, involving butchery, neither the
> worthy ones nor those who have entered on the worthy way draw near.  
>  5. "But in whatever sacrifice. Brahmin, cows are not slaughtered,
> and living creatures come not to destruction, such sacrifice not
> involving butchery, I do praise--such as, for instance, a
> long-established charity, an oblation for the welfare of the
> family."  
>  6. "Why so?" "Because, Brahmin, the worthy ones, those who have
> entered on the worthy way, do draw near to such a sacrifice which
> involves not butchery."
>
> (5.iii)
>
>  1. The Brahmin Udayin asked the same question to the Exalted One
> as was asked by the Brahmin Ujjaya:  
>  2. "Pray, does the worthy Gautama praise sacrifice?" The Buddha
> gave the same answer which he gave to Ujjaya.  
>  3. He said:
>
> > *"Fit sacrifice performed in season due*  
> > *And free from cruelty, to such draw near*  
> > *Those well trained in the God-life, even those*  
> > *Who have the veil rolled back while (yet on earth),*  
> > *Who have transcended time and going--*  
> > *Such do the enlightened praise, those skilled in merit.*  
> > *"Whether in sacrifice or act of faith,*  
> > *Oblation fitly made with heart devout*  
> > *To that good field of Merit--those who live.*  
> > *The Good--life, sacrificed, conferred,--so given*  
> > *Lavish the offering; devas therewith are pleased.*  
> > *Thus offering, the thoughtful, thereby becoming wise,*  
> > *Wins the blissful world from suffering free."*
>
>   
> § 6. Belief Based on Speculation is Not Dhamma
>
> (6.i)
>
>  1. It was usual to ask such questions as: (1) Was I in ages past?
> (2) Was I not in ages past? (3) What was I then? (4) From what did I
> pass to what? (5) Shall I be in ages to come? (6) Shall I not be in
> ages to come? (7) What shall I then be? (8) How shall I then be ? (9)
> From what shall I pass to what? Or, again, it is Self today about
> which he is in doubt, asking himself--(1) Am I? (2) Am I not? (3) What
> am I? (4) How am I? (5) Whence came my being? (6) Whither will it
> pass?"  
>  2. As regards the Universe various questions were raised. Some of
> them were as follows:  
>  3. "How was the Universe created? Is it everlasting?"  
>  4. In answer to the first question, some said everything was
> created by Brahma; others said it was created by Prajapati.  
>  5. In answer to the second question, some said it was everlasting.
> Others said it was not. Some said it was finite. Others said. it was
> infinite.  
>  6. These questions the Buddha refused to entertain. He said that
> they could only be asked and entertained by wrong-headed people.  
>  7. To answer these questions required omniscience which nobody
> had.  
>  8. He said that he was not omniscient enough to answer these
> questions. No one could claim to know all that is to be known; nor
> what we wish to know at any time is known at the time. There is always
> something that is unknown.  
>  9. It is for these reasons that the Buddha excluded such doctrines
> from his religion.  
>  10. He regarded a religion which made such doctrines a part of it
> as a religion not worth having.
>
> (6.ii)
>
>  1. The doctrines with which the contemporaries of the Buddha had
> made the basis of their religion were concerned with (1) Self; and (2)
> the origin of the Universe.  
>  2. They raised certain questions about the self. They asked: "(1)
> Was I in ages past? (2) Was I not in ages past? (3) What was I then?
> (4) From what did I pass to what? (5) Shall I be in ages to come? (6)
> Shall I not be in ages to come? (7) What shall I then be ? (8) How
> shall I then be? (9) From what shall I pass to what? Or, again, it is
> Self today about which he is in doubt, asking himself--(1) Am I? (2)
> Am I not? (3) What am I? (4) How am I? (5) Whence came my being? (6)
> Whither will it pass?"  
>  3. Others raised the question regarding the origin of the
> Universe.  
>  4. Some said it was created by Brahma.  
>  5. Others said it was .created by Prajapati sacrificing himself.  
>  6. Other teachers had other questions to raise: "The world is
> everlasting; the world is not everlasting; the world is finite; the
> world is infinite; the body is the life (jiva); the body is the one
> thing and the life another; \[a\] truth-finder exists after death; a
> truth-finder does not exist after death; he both exists and does not
> exist after death; he neither exists nor does not exist after
> death."  
>  7. These were questions which the Buddha said could be asked by
> wrong-headed persons.  
>  8. There were three reasons why the Buddha condemned these
> religious theories.  
>  9. In the first place, there was no reason to make them part of
> religion.  
>  10. In the second place, to answer these questions required
> omniscience, which nobody had. He emphasised this in his addresses.  
>  11. He said that at one and the same time, no one can know and see
> everything. Knowledge is never final. There is always something more
> to be known.  
>  12. The third argument against these theories was that they were
> merely speculative. They are not verified, nor are they verifiable.  
>  13. They were the result of imagination let loose. There was no
> reality behind them.  
>  14. Besides, of what good were these speculative theories to man
> in his relation to men? None whatever.  
>  15. The Buddha did not believe that the world was created. He
> believed that the world had evolved.
>
>   
> § 7. Reading Books of Dhamma is Not Dhamma
>
>  1. The Brahmins put all their emphasis upon knowledge. They taught
> that knowledge was the be-all and end-all of everything. Nothing
> further was to be considered.  
>  2. The Buddha was on the other hand an upholder of education for
> all. Besides, he was more concerned with the use of knowledge a man is
> likely to make, than with knowledge itself.  
>  3. Consequently he was very particular to emphasise that he who
> has knowledge must have Sila (Virtue), and that knowledge without Sila
> (Virtue) was most dangerous.  
>  4. The importance of Sila, as against Prajna, is well illustrated
> by what he told the Bhikku Patisena.  
>  5. In olden times when Buddha was residing at Sravasti, there was
> an old mendicant called Patisena who, being by nature cross and dull,
> could not learn so much as one Gatha by heart.  
>  6. The Buddha accordingly ordered 500 Arahatas day by day to
> instruct him, but after three years he still was unable to remember
> even one Gatha.  
>  7. Then all the peoples of the country (the four orders of
> people), knowing his ignorance, began to ridicule him, on which the
> Buddha, pitying his case, called him to his side, and gently repeated
> the following stanza: "He who guards his mouth, and restrains his
> thoughts, he who offends not with his body, the man who acts thus
> shall obtain deliverance."  
>  8. Then Patisena, moved by a sense of the Master's goodness to
> him, felt his heart opened, and \[at\] once he repeated the stanza.  
>  9. The Buddha then addressed him further: "You now, an old man,
> can repeat a stanza only, and men know this, and they will still
> ridicule you; therefore I will now explain the meaning of the verse to
> you, and do you on your part attentively listen."  
>  10. Then the Buddha declared the three causes connected with the
> body, the four connected with the mouth, and the three connected with
> the thoughts, by destroying which men might obtain deliverance; on
> which the mendicant, fully realizing the truth thus explained,
> obtained the condition of an Arahat.  
>  11. Now at this time, there were 500 Bhikkhunis dwelling in their
> Vihara, who sent one of their number to the Buddha to request him to
> send them a priest to instruct them in the Dhamma.  
>  12. On hearing their request, the Buddha desired the old mendicant
> Patisena to go to them for this purpose.  
>  13. On knowing that this arrangement had been made, all the nuns
> began to laugh together, and agreed on the morrow, when he came, to
> say the Gatha wrong (backward), and so confuse the old man and put him
> to shame.  
>  14. Then on the morrow when he came, all the Bhikkhunis, great and
> small, went forth to salute him and as they did so, they looked at one
> another and smiled.  
>  15. Then sitting down, they offered him food. Having eaten and
> washed his hands, they then begged him to begin his sermon. On which
> the aged mendicant ascended the elevated seat, and sitting down,
> began:  
>  16. "Sisters! My talent is small, my learning is very little. I
> know only one Gatha, but I will repeat that and explain its meaning.
> Do you listen with attention and understand."  
>  17. Then all the young nuns began to attempt to say the Gatha
> backwards; but lo! they could not open their mouths; and filled with
> shame, they hung down their heads in sorrow.  
>  18. Then Patisena, having repeated the Gatha, began to explain it,
> as the Buddha instructed him.  
>  19. Then all the Bhikkhunis, hearing his words, were filled with
> surprise; and rejoicing to hear such instruction, with one heart they
> received it, and became Arahatas.  
>  20. On the day after this, the King Prasenjit invited the Buddha
> and the whole congregation of priests to assemble at his palace to
> partake of hospitality.  
>  21. The Buddha therefore, recognizing the superior and revered
> appearance of Patisena, desired him to bear his alms-dish and follow
> him as he went.  
>  22. But when they came to the palace gate, the porter, knowing his
> character (antecedents), would not let him go into the hall, saying:
> "We have no hospitality for a priest who knows but one Gatha; there is
> no room for such common fellows as you; make place for your betters
> and begone."  
>  23. Patisena accordingly sat down outside the door.  
>  24. The Buddha now ascended the dais, after having washed his
> hands, and lo! the arm of Patisena, with the alms-dish in its hand,
> entered the room.  
>  25. Then the king, the ministers, and all the assembly, seeing
> this sight, were filled with astonishment, and said, "Ah! Who is
> this?"  
>  26. On which the Buddha replied, "It is Patisena, the mendicant.
> He has but just obtained enlightenment, and I desired him to bear my
> alms-dish behind me; but the porter has refused him admission."  
>  27. On this he was admitted and entered the assembly.  
>  28. Then Prasenjit, turning to Buddha, said, " I hear that this
> Patisena is a man of small ability, and knows only one Gatha; how,
> then, has he obtained the supreme wisdom?"  
>  29. To which Buddha replied, "Learning need not be much; conduct
> (Sila) is the first thing.  
>  30. "This Patisena has allowed the secret virtue of the words of
> this one Gatha to penetrate his spirit; his body, mouth, and thoughts
> have obtained perfect quietude; for though a man knows ever so much,
> if his knowledge reaches not to his life, to deliver him from the
> power which leads to destruction, what benefit can all his learning
> be?"  
>  31. Then the Buddha said:  
>  32. "Although a man repeats a thousand stanzas (sections), but
> understands not the meaning of the lines he repeats, his performance
> is not equal to the repetition of one sentence well understood, which
> is able when heard to control thought. To repeat a thousand words
> without understanding--what profit is there in this? But to understand
> one truth and, hearing it, to act accordingly--this is to find
> deliverance.  
>  33. "A man may be able to repeat many books, but if he cannot
> explain them, what profit is there in this? But to explain one
> sentence of the law and to walk accordingly, this is the way to find
> supreme wisdom."  
>  34. On hearing these words, the two hundred bhikkhus, the king and
> his ministers were filled with joy.
>
>   
> § 8. Belief in the infallibility of Books of Dhamma is Not Dhamma
>
>  1. The Brahmins had declared that the Vedas were not only sacred,
> but in point of authority they were final.  
>  2. Not only were the Vedas declared by the Brahmins to be final,
> but they were declared by them to be infallible.  
>  3. The Buddha was totally opposed to the Brahmins on this point.  
>  4. He denied that the Vedas were sacred. He denied that whatever
> the Vedas said was final. He denied that the Vedas were infallible.  
>  5. There were many teachers who had taken the same position as he
> had done. However, later on they or their followers all gave in, in
> order to win respect and goodwill from the Brahmins for their systems
> of philosophy. But the Buddha never yielded on this issue.  
>  6. In the Tvijja Sutta the Buddha declared that the Vedas were a
> waterless desert, a pathless jungle--in fact, perdition. No man with
> intellectual and moral thirst can go to the Vedas and hope to satisfy
> his thirst.  
>  7. As to \[the\] infallibility of the Vedas, he said nothing is
> infallible, not even the Vedas. Everything, he said, must be subject
> to examination and re-examination.  
>  8. This he made clear in his sermon to the Kalamas.  
>  9. Once the Blessed One, while passing through the land of the
> Kosalas accompanied by a large following of disciples, came to the
> town of Kesaputta, which .was inhabited by the Kalamas.  
>  10. When the Kalamas came to know of his arrival, they betook
> themselves thither where the Blessed One was and sat down on one side.
> So seated, the Kalamas of Kesaputta spoke thus to the Blessed One:  
>  11. "There are, Lord, some ascetics and recluses who come to
> Kesaputta and who elucidate and exalt their own views, but they break
> up, crush down, revile, and oppose the views of others. And there be
> \[=are\] other ascetics and recluses, Lord, who come to Kesaputta, and
> they too expound and magnify their own beliefs, but destroy, suppress,
> despise, and set themselves against the beliefs of others.  
>  12. "And so, Lord, we are in uncertainty and doubt, knowing not
> which among these venerable ascetics speaks truth and which
> falsehood."  
>  13. "Good cause, indeed, have you Kalamas to be uncertain; good
> cause have you to doubt," said the Blessed One. "Truly, upon just
> occasion has uncertainty and doubt arisen in you."  
>  14. "Come, O you Kalamas," continued the Lord, "Do not go merely
> by what you hear; do not go merely by what has been handed down from
> one to another; do not go by what is commonly reported; do not go
> merely by what is found written in the scriptures; do not go by
> subtleties of reasoning; do not go by subtleties of logic; do not go
> merely by considerations based upon mere appearances; do not go merely
> by agreeable beliefs and views; do not go merely by what looks to be
> genuine; do not go merely by word of some ascetic or superior."  
>  15. "What, then, should we do? What test should we apply?" asked
> the Kalamas.  
>  16. "The tests are these," replied the Blessed One. "Ask.
> yourselves, do we know whether these things are insalutary; these
> things are blameworthy; these things are reprehended by the wise;
> these things being done or attempted lead to ill-being and to
> suffering?'  
>  17. "Kalamas, you should go further and ask whether the doctrine
> taught promotes craving, hatred, delusion, and violence.  
>  18. "This is not enough, Kalamas, you should go further and see
> whether the doctrine is not likely to make a man captive of his
> passions, and is not likely to lead him to kill living creatures; take
> what has not been given to him; go after another's wife; utter
> falsehood; and cause others to practise like deeds.  
>  19. "And finally you should ask whether all this does not tend to
> his ill-being and suffering.  
>  20. "Now, Kalamas, what think you?  
>  21. "Do these things tend to man's ill-being or well-being?"  
>  22. "To his ill-being, Lord," replied the Kalamas.  
>  23. "What think you, Kalamas, are these things salutary or
> insalutary?"  
>  24. "They are insalutary, Lord."  
>  25. "Are these things blameworthy?"  
>  26. "Blameworthy, Lord," replied the Kalamas.  
>  27. "Reprehended by the wise, or approved by the wise?"  
>  28. "Reprehended by the wise," replied the Kalamas.  
>  29. "Being done or attempted, do they lead to ill-being and to
> suffering?"  
>  30. "Done or attempted, Lord, they lead to ill-being and to
> suffering."  
>  31. "A scripture which teaches this cannot be accepted as final or
> infallible?"  
>  32. "No, Lord," said the Kalamas.  
>  33. "But this, O Kalamas, is just what I have said. What I have
> said is 'do not go merely by what you hear; do not go merely by what
> has been handed down from one to another; do not go merely by
> subtleties of reasoning; do not go by subtleties of logic; do not go
> by considerations based upon mere appearances; do not go merely by
> agreeable beliefs and views; do not go merely by the word of some
> ascetic or superior.  
>  34. "Only when of yourselves you indeed know these things are
> insalutary; these things are blameworthy; these things are reprehended
> by the wise; these things being done or attempted lead to ill-being
> and to suffering--then, Kalamas, you should put them away."  
>  35. "Wonderful, Lord, most wonderful! We go to \[the\] Lord, the
> Blessed One, for refuge, and to his Teachings. As followers, Lord, may
> the Blessed One accept us; from this day henceforth \[as\] long as
> life shall last, we take our refuge in you."  
>  36. The substance of the argument is plain. Before you accept
> anybody's teachings as authoritative, do not go by the fact that it is
> contained in the scriptures; do not go by the subtleties of logic; do
> not go by considerations based upon mere appearances; do not go merely
> by the fact that beliefs and views preached are agreeable; do not go
> merely because they look to be genuine; do not go merely by the fact
> that the beliefs and views are those of some ascetic or superior.  
>  37. But consider whether the beliefs and views sought to be
> inculcated are salutary or insalutary, blameworthy or blameless, lead
> to well-being or ill-being.  
>  38. It is only on these grounds that one can accept the teachings
> of anybody.  
> 

|     |
|-----|
|    |

-- [main book index page](index.html#index) -- [detailed book
section-map](sectionmap.html) -- [book sources](sources/index.html) --  
-- [Dr. Ambedkar's work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[fwp's main page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
