+++
title = "22 Book Three, Part Vâ€”What\nis Saddhamma"

+++


|     |
|-----|
|    |

> Book Three, Part Vâ€”What is Saddhamma  
> 
>
> SECTION ONE--THE FUNCTIONS OF SADDHAMMA  
> 1. \*[To Cleanse the Mind of its impurities](03_05.html#01_01)\* -- 2.
> \*[To Make the World a Kingdom of Righteousness](03_05.html#01_02)\*
>
> SECTION TWO--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PROMOTE PRADNYA  
> 1. \*[Dhamma is Saddhamma when it makes learning open to
> all](03_05.html#02_01)\* -- 2. \*[Dhamma is Saddhamma when it teaches
> that mere learning is not enough: it may lead to
> pedantry](03_05.html#02_02)\* -- 3. \*[Dhamma is Saddhamma when it
> teaches that what is needed is Pradnya](03_05.html#02_03)\*
>
> SECTION THREE--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PROMOTE MAITRI  
> 1. \*[Dhamma is Saddhamma only when it teaches that mere Pradnya is
> not enough: it must be accompanied by Sila](03_05.html#03_01)\* -- 2.
> \*[Dhamma is Saddhamma only when it teaches that besides Pradnya and
> Sila what is necessary is Karuna](03_05.html#03_02)\* -- 3. \*[Dhamma
> is Saddhamma only when it teaches that more than Karuna what is
> necessary is Maitri](03_05.html#03_03)\*
>
> SECTION FOUR--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PULL DOWN ALL SOCIAL
> BARRIERS  
> 1. \*[Dhamma to be Saddhamma must break down barriers between man and
> man](03_05.html#04_01)\* -- 2. \*[Dhamma to be Saddhamma must teach
> that worth and not birth is the measure of man](03_05.html#04_02)\* --
> 3. \*[Dhamma to be Saddhamma must promote equality between man and
> man](03_05.html#04_03)\*  
>   
> 
>
> SECTION ONE--THE FUNCTIONS OF SADDHAMMA  
>   
> § 1. To Cleanse the Mind of its Impurities
>
>  1. Once when the .Blessed Lord was residing at Shravasti,
> Prasenjit,the king of the Kosalas, came to the place where he was
> staying and, descending from his chariot, approached the Teacher with
> the deepest reverence.  
>  2. And invited him on the morrow to enter the city and partake of
> his hospitality, with a view to exhibit to the people the excellence
> of his person and doctrine, that they might believe in him.  
>  3. The Buddha, having consented, on the morrow entered the city
> with all his disciples, and having passed through the four cross
> streets of the town, he came to the place appointed and sat down.  
>  4. After finishing the meal, he began, on the request of the king,
> to preach in the midst of the four highways, whilst his auditors were
> very many.  
>  5. At this time there were two merchants listening to him.  
>  6. One of them reflected, "What excellent wisdom on the part of
> the king, to have such doctrines as these publicly preached! How wide
> their application, how searching their character!"  
>  7. The other reflected thus: "What folly is this on the part of
> the king, bringing this man here to preach!  
>  8. "Like the calf that follows the cow, here and there, fastened
> to a vehicle she draws, by eating as it goes, so is this Buddha
> following the king." The two merchants, having departed from the city,
> came to an inn where they put up.  
>  9. In taking some wine the good merchant was restrained and
> protected by the four guardian spirits that watch over the world.  
>  10. The other, on the contrary, was incited by an evil spirit to
> drink on, till he was overpowered by sleep, and lay down in the road
> near the inn.  
>  11. Early in the morning, the merchants' wagons leaving the place,
> the drivers not perceiving the man lying in the road, crushed him to
> death by the wagon wheels.  
>  12. The other merchant, having come to a distant country, was
> selected by the genuflection of a sacred horse to succeed the king;
> and he accordingly was appointed to the throne.  
>  13. After this, considering the strange turn events had taken, he
> returned, and invited the Buddha to visit him, and preach to his
> people.  
>  14. On which occasion the World-honoured One declared the reason
> of the death of the evil-minded merchant, and the prosperity of him
> who thought wisely, and then added these lines :  
>  15. "The mind is the origin of all this is; the mind is the
> master, the mind is the cause.  
>  16. "If in the midst of the mind there are evil thoughts, then the
> words are evil, the deeds are evil, and the sorrow which results from
> sin follows that man, as the chariot wheel follows him (or it) who
> draws it.  
>  17. "The mind is the origin of all that is; it is the mind that
> commands, it is the mind that contrives.  
>  18. "If in the mind there are good thoughts, then the words are
> good and the deeds good, and the happiness which results from such
> conduct follows that man, as the shadow accompanies the substance."  
>  19. On hearing these words, the king and his ministers, with
> countless others, were converted, and became disciples.
>
>   
> § 2. To Make the World a Kingdom of Righteousness
>
>  1. What is the purpose of Religion?  
>  2. Different religions have given different answers.  
>  3. To make man seek after God, and to teach him the importance of
> saving his soul, is the commonest answer one gets to this question.  
>  4. Most religions speak of three kingdoms.  
>  5. One is called the kingdom of heaven. The second is called the
> kingdom of earth; and the third is called the kingdom of hell.  
>  6. This kingdom of heaven is said to be ruled by God. The kingdom
> of hell is described to be a place where the supremacy of the Evil One
> is undisputed. The kingdom of earth is a disputed field. It is not
> under the dominance of the Evil One. At the same time God's
> sovereignty does not extend to it. It is hoped that one day it will.  
>  7. In some religions the kingdom of heaven is said to be a kingdom
> in which Righteousness prevails, no doubt because it is directly ruled
> by God.  
>  8. In other religions the kingdom of heaven is not on earth. It is
> another name for heaven. It can be reached by one who believes in God
> and his Prophet. When he reaches heaven, all the carnal pleasures of
> life are placed within the reach of all those who are faithful.  
>  9. All religions preach that to reach this kingdom of heaven
> should be the aim of man, and how to reach it is the end of all.  
>  10. To the question "What is the purpose of religion?" the
> Buddha's answer is very different.  
>  11. He did not tell people that their aim in life should be to
> reach some imaginary heaven. The kingdom of righteousness lies on
> earth, and is to be reached by man by righteous conduct.  
>  12. What he did was to tell people that to remove their misery,
> each one must learn to be righteous in his conduct in relation to
> others, and thereby make the earth the kingdom of righteousness.  
>  13. It is this which distinguishes his religion from all other
> religions.  
>  14. His religion emphasizes Panch Sila, the Ashtanga Marga, and
> the Paramitas.  
>  15. Why did the Buddha make them the basis of his religion?
> Because they constitute a way of life which alone can make man
> righteous.  
>  16. Man's misery is the result of man's inequity to man.  
>  17. Only righteousness can remove this inequity and the resultant
> misery.  
>  18. That is why he said that religion must not only preach, but
> must inculcate upon the mind of man, the supreme necessity for being
> righteous in his conduct  
>  19. For the purpose of inculcating righteousness, religion, he
> said, had certain other functions to undertake.  
>  20. Religion must teach man to know what is right and to follow
> what is right.  
>  21. Religion must teach man to know what is wrong and not to
> follow what is wrong.  
>  22. Besides these purposes of religion, he emphasised two other
> purposes which he regarded as of supreme importance.  
>  23. The first is \[the\] training of man's instincts and
> dispositions, as distinguished from offering prayers or performing
> observances or doing sacrifices.  
>  24. This the Buddha has made clear in his exposition of Jainism in
> the Devadaha Sutta.  
>  25. What Mahavira, the founder of Jainism, affirmed was that
> whatsoever the individual experiences, be it pleasant or unpleasant,
> all comes from acts done in former births.  
>  26. That being so, by expiration and purge of former misdeeds and
> by not committing fresh misdeeds, nothing accrues for the future; as
> nothing accrues for the future, the misdeeds die away; as misdeeds die
> away, misery dies away; as misery dies away, feelings die away; and as
> feelings die away, all misery will wear out and pass.  
>  27. This is what Jainism affirmed.  
>  28. On this the Buddha asked this question: "Do you know that,
> here and now, wrong dispositions have been got rid of and right
> dispositions acquired?"  
>  29. The answer was "No."  
>  30. "What is the use," asked the. Buddha, "of a purge for former
> misdeeds, what is the use of not committing fresh misdeeds, if there
> is no training of the mind to turn bad disposition into good
> disposition?"  
>  31. This was in his opinion a very serious defect in religion. A
> good disposition is the only permanent foundation of, and guarantee
> of, permanent goodness.  
>  32. That is why the Buddha gave the first place to the training of
> the mind, which is the same as the training of a man's disposition.  
>  33. The second thing to which he gave great importance is courage
> to stand by what is right, even if one is alone.  
>  34. In the Sallekha-Sutta the Buddha has emphasised this point.  
>  35. This is what he has said:  
>  36. "You are to expunge by resolving that, though others may be
> harmful, you will be harmless.  
>  37. "That though others may kill, you will never kill.  
>  38. "That though others may steal, you will not.  
>  39. "That though others may not lead the higher life, you will.  
>  40. "That though others may lie, traduce, denounce, or prattle,
> you will not.  
>  41. "That though others may be covetous, you will covet not.  
>  42. "That though others may be malignant, you will not be
> malignant.  
>  43. "That though others may be given over to wrong views, wrong
> aims, wrong speech, wrong actions, and wrong concentration, you must
> follow (the Noble Eightfold Path in): right outlook, right aims, right
> speech, right actions, right mode of livelihood, right effort, right
> mindfulness, and right concentration.  
>  44. "That though others are wrong about the truth and wrong about
> Deliverance, you will be right about truth and right about
> Deliverance.  
>  45. "That though others may be possessed by sloth and torpor, you
> will free yourselves therefrom.  
>  46. "That though others may be puffed up. you will be
> humble-minded.  
>  47. "That though others may be perplexed by doubts, you will be
> free from them.  
>  48. "That though others may harbour wrath, malevolence, envy,
> jealousy, niggardliness, avarice, hypocrisy, deceit, imperviousness,
> arrogance, forwardness, association with bad friends, slackness,
> unbelief, shamelessness, unscrupulousness, lack of instruction,
> inertness, bewilderment, and unwisdom, you will be the reverse of all
> these things.  
>  49. "That though others may clutch at and hug the temporal, nor
> loose their hold thereon, you will clutch and hug the things that are
> not temporal, and will ensue \[=pursue? ensure?\] Renunciation.  
>  50. I say it is the development of the will which is so
> efficacious for right states of consciousness, not to speak of act and
> speech. And therefore, Cunda, there must be developed the will to all
> the foregoing resolves I have detailed."  
>  51. Such is the purpose of religion as conceived by the Buddha.  
> 
>
> SECTION TWO--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PROMOTE PRADNYA  
>   
> § 1. Dhamma is Saddhamma when it Makes Learning Open to All
>
>  1. The Brahminic doctrine was that acquisition of knowledge cannot
> be thrown open to all. It must necessarily be limited to a few.  
>  2. They permitted acquisition of knowledge only to the Brahmins,
> Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas. But it was only to the male sex of these
> three classes.  
>  3. All women, no matter whether they belonged to the Brahmin,
> Kshatriya, and \[=or\] Vaishyas, and all Shudras, both males and
> females, were prohibited from acquiring knowledge, \[and\] even from
> acquiring literacy.  
>  4. The Buddha raised a revolt against this atrocious doctrine of
> the Brahmins.  
>  5. He preached that the road to knowledge must be open to all--to
> males as well as to females.  
>  6. Many Brahmins tried to controvert his views. His controversy
> with the Brahmin Lohikka throws great light on his views.  
>  7. The Exalted One, when once passing on a tour through the Kosala
> districts with a multitude of the members of the Order, arrived at
> Salavatika, a village surrounded by a row of sala trees.  
>  8. Now at the time, Lohikka the Brahmin was living at Salavatika,
> a spot teeming with life, with much grassland and woodland and corn,
> on a royal domain granted him by King Pasenadi of Kosala, as a royal
> gift, with power over it as if he were the king.  
>  9. Lohikka the Brahmin was of \[the\] opinion that if a Samana or
> a Brahmana acquired knowledge, he should not communicate it to the
> women or to the Shudras.  
>  10. Then the Brahmin Lohikka heard that the Blessed Lord was
> staying in Salavatika.  
>  11. Having heard of this, he said to Bhesika the barber, "Come
> now, good Bhesika, go where the Samana Gotama is staying, and, on your
> arrival, ask in my name as to whether his sickness and indisposition
> has abated, as to his health and vigour and condition of ease; and
> speak thus: "May the venerable Gotama, and with him the brethren of
> the Order, accept tomorrow's meal from Lohikka the Brahmin."  
>  12. "Very well, sir," said the barber.  
>  13. Acquiescing in the word of Lohikka the Brahmin, he did so,
> even as he had been enjoined. And the Exalted One consented, by
> silence, to his request.  
>  14. Early next morning, the Exalted One went robed, and carrying
> his bowl with him, with the brethren of the Order, towards
> Salavatika.  
>  15. Bhesika, the barber, who had been sent by Lohikka to fetch the
> Blessed One, walked step by step behind the Exalted One. On the way he
> told the Blessed One that Lohikka the Brahmin held the wicked opinion
> that a Samana or a Brahmana shall not communicate any knowledge or
> learning to women and the Shudras.  
>  16. "That may well be, Bhesika, that may well be," replied the
> Blessed One.  
>  17. And the Exalted One went on to the dwelling place of Lohikka
> the Brahmin, and sat down on the seat prepared for him.  
>  18. And Lohikka the Brahmin served the Order, with the Buddha at
> its head, with his own hand, with sweet food both hard and soft, until
> they refused any more.  
>  19. And when the Exalted One had finished his meal, and had
> cleansed the bowl and his hands, Lohikka the Brahmin, brought a low
> seat and sat down beside him.  
>  20. And to him, thus seated, the Exalted One said, "Is it true,
> what they say, Lohikka, that you hold the view that a Samana or a
> Brahmana should not communicate any knowledge or learning to women and
> Shudras?"  
>  21. "That is so, Gotama," replied Lohikka.  
>  22. "Now what think you, Lohikka? Are you not established at
> Salavatika?" "Yes, that is so, Gotama."  
>  23. "Then suppose, Lohikka, one were to speak thus: 'Lohikka the
> Brahmin has a domain at Salavatika. Let him alone enjoy all the
> revenue and all the produce of Salavatika, allowing nothing to anybody
> else!' Would the utterer of that speech be a danger-maker, as touching
> the men who live in dependence upon you, or not?"  
>  24. "He would be a danger-maker, Gotama."  
>  25. "And making that danger, would he be regarded as a person who
> sympathised with their welfare?"  
>  26. "No. He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama,"
> replied Lohikka.  
>  27. "And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast
> in love towards them or in enmity?"  
>  28. "In enmity, Gotama."  
>  29. "But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound
> doctrine, or sound?"  
>  30. "It is an unsound doctrine, Gotama."  
>  31. "Now what think you, Lohikka? Is not King Pasenadi of Kosala
> in possession of Kasi and Kosala?"  
>  32. "Yes, that is so, Gotama."  
>  33. "Then suppose, Lohikka, one were to speak thus: 'King Pasenadi
> of Kosala is in possession of Kasi and Kosala. Let him enjoy all the
> revenue and all the produce of Kasi and Kosala, allowing nothing to
> anybody else.' Would the utterer of that speech be a danger-maker as
> touching the men who live in dependence on King Pasenadi of
> Kosala--both you yourself and others--or not?"  
>  34. " He would be a danger-maker, Gotama."  
>  35. "And making that danger, would he be a person who sympathised
> with their welfare?"  
>  36. "He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama."  
>  37. "And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast
> in love towards them, or in enmity?"  
>  38. "In enmity, Gotama."  
>  39. "But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound
> doctrine, or sound?"  
>  40. "It is an unsound doctrine, Gotama."  
>  41. "So then, Lohikka, you admit that he who should say that you,
> being in occupation of Salavatika, should therefore yourself enjoy all
> the revenue and produce thereof, bestowing nothing on anyone else; and
> he who should say that King Pasenadi of Kosala, being in power over
> Kasi and Kosala, should therefore himself enjoy all the produce
> thereof, bestowing nothing on anyone else; would be making danger for
> those living in dependence on you; or for those, you and others,
> living in dependence upon the king. And that those who thus make
> danger for others, must be wanting in sympathy and have their hearts
> set fast in enmity. And that to have one's heart set fast in enmity is
> unsound doctrine.  
>  42. "Then just so, Lohikka, is he who should say that a Samana or
> a Brahmin should not communicate his knowledge and learning to women
> and Shudras.  
>  43. "Just so, he who should say thus would be putting obstacles in
> the way of others, and would be out of sympathy for their welfare.  
>  44. "Being out of sympathy for their welfare, his heart would
> become established in enmity; and when one's heart is established in
> enmity, that is unsound doctrine."
>
>   
> §2. Dhamma is Saddhamma when it Teaches that Mere Learning is Not
> Enough: it may Lead to Pedantry
>
>  1. Once when the Buddha was residing in the country of Kausambi,
> in a certain Vihara called the "Beautiful Voice," preaching to the
> people assembled there was a certain Brahmacharin.  
>  2. The Brahmacharin felt that he was unrivalled for knowledge of
> scriptures; and being unable to find anyone equal to himself in
> argument, \[he\] was accustomed to carry, wherever he went, a lighted
> torch in his hand.  
>  3. One day a man in the market place of a certain town, seeing him
> thus, asked him the reason of his strange conduct, on which he
> replied:  
>  4. "The world is so dark, and men so deluded, that I carry this
> torch to light it up so far as I can."  
>  5. Seeing this, the Buddha forthwith called out to the
> Brahmacharin, "What ho there! What are you about with that Torch?"  
>  6. The Brahmacharin replied, "All men are so wrapped in ignorance
> and gloom, that I carry this torch to illumine them."  
>  7. Then the Blessed Lord asked him again, "And are you so learned
> as to be acquainted with the four treatises (Vidyas) which occur in
> the midst of the Sacred Books, to wit, the treatise on 'Literature'
> (Sabdavidya); the treatise on the 'Heavenly Bodies and their Paths';
> the treatise on 'Government'; and the treatise on 'Military Art'?"  
>  8. On the Brahmacharin being forced to confess he was unacquainted
> with these things, he flung away his torch, and the Buddha added these
> words:  
>  9. "If any man, whether he be learned or not, considers himself so
> great as to despise other men, he is like a blind man holding a
> candle--blind himself, he illumines others."
>
>   
> §3. Dhamma is Saddhamma when it Teaches that what is Needed is Pradnya
>
>  1. The Brahmins regarded Vidya (Knowledge, Learning) as in itself
> a thing of value. A man of mere learning and knowledge was to them an
> object of veneration, irrespective of the question whether or not he
> was a man of virtue.  
>  2. Indeed they said that a king is honoured in his own country,
> but a man of learning is honoured all over the world, suggesting
> thereby that a man of learning is greater than the king.  
>  3. The Buddha made a distinction between Vidya and Pradnya, i.e.,
> between knowledge and insight.  
>  4. It may be said that the Brahmins also made a distinction
> between Pradnya and Vidya.  
>  5. That may be true. But there is a vast difference between the
> Pradnya of the Buddha and the Pradnya of the Brahmins.  
>  6. This distinction has been well brought out by the Buddha in his
> sermon reported in Anguttara Nikaya.  
>  7. On a certain occasion the Exalted One was staying near
> Rajagraha, in the bamboo grove at the squirrels' feeding ground.  
>  8. Now on that occasion Vassakara the Brahmin, a great official of
> Magadha, came to visit the Exalted One, and on coming to him greeted
> him courteously, and after exchange of greetings and courtesies sat
> down at one side. As he sat thus, Vassakara the Brahmin said this to
> the Exalted One:  
>  9. "Master Gotama, we Brahmins proclaim a man, if he possesses
> four qualities, as one of great wisdom, as a great man. What are the
> four qualities?  
>  10. "Herein, Master Gotama, he is learned. Of whatsoever he hears
> he understands the meaning as soon as it is uttered, saying: 'This is
> the meaning of that saying!' Moreover, he has a good memory, he can
> remember and recall a thing done long ago, and said long ago.  
>  11. "Again, in all the business of a householder he is skilled and
> diligent, and therein he is resourceful and capable of investigating
> what is proper to be done, what should be arranged.  
>  12. "Now, master Gautama, if a man possesses these qualities, we
> proclaim him as one of great wisdom, as a great man. If the worthy
> Gautama thinks me worthy of commendation herein, let him commend me.
> On the contrary, if he thinks me blameworthy, let him blame me
> therefor."  
>  13. "Well, Brahmin I neither commend you nor blame you herein. I
> myself proclaim a man to be one of great wisdom, if he possesses the
> following four qualities which are quite different from those
> mentioned by you,  
>  14. "Herein, Brahmin, we have a man given to the welfare of many
> folk, to the happiness of many folk. By him are many folk established
> in the Ariyan Method, to wit: in what is of a lovely nature, in what
> is of a profitable nature.  
>  15. "To whatsoever train of thought he wishes to apply himself, to
> that train of thought he applies himself; to whatever train of thought
> he desires not to apply himself, to that train of thought he applies
> not himself.  
>  16. "Whatever intention he wishes to intend, he does so or not if
> he so wishes. Thus is he master of the mind in the ways of thought.  
>  17. "Also he is one who attains at will, without difficulty and
> without trouble, the four musings which belong to the higher thought,
> which even in this very life are blissful to abide in.  
>  18. "Also by destruction of the asavas (fetters) in this very
> life, thoroughly comprehending it by himself, he realises the heart's
> release, the release by wisdom, and attaining it, abides therein.  
>  19. "No, Brahmin, I neither commend nor blame you herein, but I
> myself proclaim a man possessed of these four different qualities to
> be one of great wisdom, to be a great man."  
>  20. "It is wonderful, Master Gautama! It is marvellous, Master
> Gautama, how well this has been said by the worthy Gautama!  
>  21. "I myself do hold the worthy Gautama to be possessed of these
> same four qualities. Indeed, the worthy Gautama is given to the
> welfare of many folk, to the happiness of many folk. By him are many
> folk established in the Ariyan Method, to wit: in what is of a lovely
> nature, in what is of a profitable nature.  
>  22. "Indeed, the worthy Gautama, to whatever train of thought he
> wishes to apply himself, to that train of thought applies
> himself...Surely the worthy Gautama is master of the mind in the ways
> of thought.  
>  23. "Surely the worthy Gautama is one who attains at will...the
> four musings...Surely the worthy Gotama by destruction of the
> asavas...realises the heart's release, the release by wisdom...and
> attaming it abides therein."  
>  24. Herein is stated in the clearest terms the difference between
> Pradnya according to the Buddha, and Pradnya according to the
> Brahmins.  
>  25. Herein is set out his case why the Buddha regarded Pradnya as
> more important than Vidya.  
> 
>
> SECTION THREE--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PROMOTE MAITRI
>
>   
> § 1. Dhamma is Saddhamma only when it Teaches that Mere Pradnya is Not
> Enough: it must be accompanied by Sila
>
>  1. Pradnya is necessary. But Sila is more necessary. Pradnya
> without Sila is dangerous.  
>  2. Mere Pradnya is dangerous.  
>  3. Pradnya is like a sword in the hand of a man.  
>  4. In the hand of a man with Sila it may be used for saving a man
> with danger.  
>  5. But in the hand of a man without Sila it may be used for
> murder.  
>  6. That is why Sila is more important than Pradnya.  
>  7. Pradnya is Vichar Dhamma or thinking aright. Sila is Achar
> Dhamma, acting aright.  
>  8. The Buddha prescribed five basic principles regarding Sila.  
>  9. One relating to taking life.  
>  10. Second relating to stealing.  
>  11. Third relating to sexual immorality.  
>  12. Fourth relating to telling a lie.  
>  13. Fifth relating to drink.  
>  14. On each of these the Blessed Lord directed the people not to
> kill; not to steal; nor to tell a lie; nor to indulge in sex
> immorality; and not to indulge in drinking.  
>  15. The reason why the Buddha gave greater importance to Sila than
> to knowledge is obvious.  
>  16. The use of knowledge depends upon a man's Sila. Apart from
> Sila, knowledge has no value. This is what he said.  
>  17. At another place, he said, "Sila is incomparable in this
> world.  
>  18. "Sila is the beginning and the refuge, Sila is the mother of
> all good. It is the foremost of all good conditions. Therefore, purify
> your Sila."
>
>   
> § 2. Dhamma is Saddhamma only when it Teaches that besides Pradnya and
> Sila what is Necessary is Karuna
>
>  1. There has been some difference of opinion on the issue as to
> \[the\] foundation of Buddha's Dhamma.  
>  2. Is *Pradnya* alone the foundation of his religion? Is *Karuna*
> alone the foundation of his religion ?  
>  3. The controversy had divided the followers of the Buddha into
> two schools. One school held that Pradnya alone is the foundation of
> the Buddha's religion. The other school held that Karuna alone is the
> foundation of the Buddha's religion.  
>  4. These two schools still remain divided.  
>  5. Both the schools seem to be wrong, if judged in the light of
> the Buddha's own words.  
>  6. There is no difference of opinion that Pradnya is one of the
> two pillars of the Buddha's religion.  
>  7. The dispute is whether Karuna is also a pillar of his
> religion.  
>  8. That Karuna is a pillar of his religion is beyond dispute.  
>  9. His own words can be quoted in support of it.  
>  10. In days gone by there was a country called Gandhara, in which
> was a very old mendicant afflicted with a very loathsome disease,
> which caused him to pollute every place he occupied.  
>  11. Being in a certain Vihara belonging to the place, no one would
> come near him or help him in his distress.  
>  12. On this Buddha came with his 500 followers, and obtaining all
> sorts of necessary utensils and warm water, they together visited the
> place where the old mendicant lay.  
>  13. The smell in the place was so offensive that all the Bhikkus
> were filled with contempt for the man; but the World-honoured, causing
> Sakra-deva to bring the warm water, then with his own hand began to
> wash the body of the mendicant and attend to his maladies.  
>  14. Then the earth shook, and the whole place was filled with a
> supernatural light, so that the king and the ministers, and all the
> heavenly host (Devas, Nagas, etc.) flocked to the place, and paid
> adoration to Buddha.  
>  15. Having done so, they all addressed the World-honoured, and
> inquired how one so highly exalted could lower himself to such offices
> as these, on which Buddha explained the matter thus:  
>  16. "The purpose of Tathagata in coming into the world, is to
> befriend those poor and helpless and unprotected, to nourish those in
> bodily affliction, whether they be Samanas or men of any other
> religion; to help the impoverished, the orphan, and the aged, and to
> persuade others so to do."
>
>   
> § 3. Dhamma is Saddhamma only when it Teaches that More than Karuna
> what is Necessary is Maitri
>
>  1. The Buddha did not stop with teaching Karuna.  
>  2. Karuna is only love for human beings. Buddha went beyond, and
> taught Maitri. Maitri is love for living beings.  
>  3. The Buddha wanted man not to stop with Karuna, but to go beyond
> mankind and cultivate the spirit of Maitri for all living beings.  
>  4. This he has well explained in a Sutta, when the Blessed One was
> staying in Shravasti.  
>  5. Speaking about Maitri, the Blessed Lord told the almsmen:  
>  6. "Suppose a man comes to dig the earth. Does the earth resent
> \[it\]?"  
>  7. "No, Lord," the almsmen replied.  
>  8. "Supposing a man comes with lac and colours to paint pictures
> in the air. Do you think he could do it?"  
>  9. "No, Lord."  
>  10. "Why?" "Because there are no dark patches in the air," said
> the Bhikkus.  
>  11. "In the same way you must not have any dark patches in your
> mind which are the reflections of your evil passions."  
>  12. "Suppose a man comes with a blazing wisp of bracken to set the
> River Ganges on fire. Could he do it?"  
>  13. "No, Lord."  
>  14. "Why?" "Because the Ganges has no combustibility in its
> water."  
>  15. Concluding his address, the Blessed Lord said, "Just as the
> earth does not feel hurt and does not resent, just as the air does not
> lend \[itself\] to any action against it, just as the Ganges water
> goes on flowing without being disturbed by the fire, so also you
> Bhikkus must bear all insults and injustices inflicted on you, and
> continue to bear Maitri towards your offenders.  
>  16. "So, almsmen, Maitri must flow and flow for ever. Let it be
> your sacred obligation to keep your mind as firm as the earth, as
> clean as the air, and as deep as the Ganges. If you do so, your Maitri
> will not be easily disturbed by an act however unpleasant. For all who
> do injury will soon be tired out.  
>  17. "Let the ambit of your Maitri be as boundless as the world,
> and let your thought be vast and beyond measure, in which no hatred is
> thought of.  
>  18. "According to my Dhamma, it is not enough to practise Karuna.
> It is necessary to practise Maitri."  
>  19. In the course of the sermon, the Blessed Lord told a story to
> the almsmen which is worth remembering.  
>  20. "Once upon a time there lived in Shravasti a lady named
> Videshika, who was reputed gentle and meek, and mild. She had a maid
> servant named Darkie, a bright girl, an early riser, and a good
> worker. 'I wonder,' thought Darkie, 'whether my mistress, who is so
> well spoken of, has really got a temper of her own which she does not
> show, or whether she has got no temper at all. Or do I do my work so
> well, that though she has got a temper, she does not show it? I will
> try her.'  
>  21. "So next morning she got up late. 'Darkie! Darkie!' cried the
> mistress. 'Yes, madam,' answered the girl. 'Why did you get up so
> late?' 'Oh, that's nothing, madam.' 'Nothing , indeed, you naughty
> girl!' thought the mistress, frowning with anger and displeasure.  
>  22. "'So she has got a temper, though she does not show it,"
> thought the maid. 'It is because I do my work so well that she does
> not show it; I will try her further.' So she got up later next
> morning. 'Darkie! Darkie!' cried the mistress. 'Yes, madam,' answered
> the girl. 'Why did you get up so late?' 'Oh that's nothing, madam.'
> 'Nothing, indeed, you naughty girl!' exclaimed the mistress, giving
> vent in words to her anger and displeasure.  
>  23. "'Yes,' thought the maid, 'she has got a temper, though she
> does not show it because I do my work so well; I will try her yet
> further.' So next morning she got up later still. 'Darkie! Darkie!'
> cried her mistress. 'Yes, madam,' answered the girl. 'Why did you get
> up so late?' 'Oh, that's nothing, madam.'  
>  24. "'Nothing indeed you naughty girl, to get up so late!'
> exclaimed the mistress, and in her anger and displeasure she picked up
> the lynch-pin and struck the girl on the head with it, drawing
> blood.  
>  25. "With her broken head streaming with blood, Darkie roused the
> neighbourhood with shrieks: 'See, lady, what the gentle one has done!
> See, lady, what the meek one has done! See, lady, what the mild one
> has done. What for? Just became her only maid got up late, she was so
> angry and displeased that she just jumped with the lynch-pin to strike
> her on the head and break it.'  
>  26. "In the result, the lady Videshika got the reputation of being
> violent, anything but meek and mild.  
>  27. "In like manner an almsman may be gentle and meek, and mild
> enough so long as nothing unpleasant is said against him. It is only
> when unpleasant things are said against him that you can test if he
> has Maitri, fellowship, in him."  
>  28. Then he added, "I do not call an almsman charged with the
> spirit of Maitri if he shows it only to get clothes and food. Him only
> do I recognise as a true almsman whose Maitri springs from the
> doctrine."  
>  29. "None of the means employed to acquire religious merit, O
> Monks, has a sixteenth part of the value of loving kindness. Loving
> kindness, which is freedom of heart, absorbs them all; it glows, it
> shines, it blazes forth.  
>  30. "And in the same way, O Monks, as the light of all the stars
> has not a sixteenth part of the value of the moonlight, but the
> moonlight absorbs it and glows and shines and blazes forth; in the
> same way, O Monks, none of the means employed to acquire religious
> merit has a sixteenth part of the value of loving kindness. Loving
> kindness, which is freedom of heart, absorbs them; it glows, it
> shines, it blazes forth.  
>  31. "And in the, same way, O Monks, as at the end of the rainy
> season, the sun, rising into the clear and cloudless sky, banishes all
> the dark spaces and glows and shines and blazes forth; and in the same
> way again, as at night's end the morning star glows and shines and
> blazes forth; so, O Monks, none of the means employed to acquire
> religious merit has a sixteenth part of the value of loving kindness.
> Loving kindness, which is freedom of heart, absorbs them; it glows, it
> shines, it blazes forth."  
> 
>
> SECTION FOUR--DHAMMA TO BE SADDHAMMA MUST PULL DOWN ALL SOCIAL
> BARRIERS  
>   
> § 1. Dhamma to be Saddhamma must break down barriers between Man and
> Man
>
>  1. What is an ideal society? According to the Brahmins, the Vedas
> have defined what is an ideal society; and the Vedas being infallible,
> that is the only ideal society which man can accept.  
>  2. The ideal society prescribed by the Vedas is known by the name
> Chaturvarna.  
>  3. Such a society, according to the Vedas, must satisfy three
> conditions.  
>  4. It must be composed of four classes. Brahmins, Kshatriyas,
> Vaishyas, and Shudras.  
>  5. The interrelations of these classes must be regulated by the
> principle of graded inequality. In other words, all these classes are
> not to be on equal level but to be one above the other, in point of
> status, rights, and privileges.  
>  6. The Brahmins were placed at the top; the Kshatriyas were placed
> below the Brahmins but above the Vaishyas; the Vaishyas were placed
> below the Kshatriyas but above the Shudras; and the Shudras were
> placed the lowest of all.  
>  7. The third feature of Chaturvarna was that each class must
> engage itself in an occupation assigned to it. The Brahmins'
> occupation was to learn, teach and officiate at religious ceremonies.
> The Kshatriyas' occupation was to bear arms and to fight. The
> occupation of the Vaishyas was trade and business. The Shudras'
> occupation was to do menial service for all the three superior
> classes.  
>  8. No class is to transgress and trench \[=trespass?\] upon the
> occupation of the other classes.  
>  9. This theory of an ideal society was upheld by the Brahmins, and
> preached to the people.  
>  10. The soul of this theory, it is obvious, is inequality. This
> social inequality is not the result of historical growth. Inequality
> is the official doctrine of Brahminism.  
>  11. The Buddha opposed it root and branch.  
>  12. He was the strongest opponent of caste, and the earliest and
> staunchest upholder of equality.  
>  13. There is no argument in favour of caste and inequality which
> he did not refute.  
>  14. There were many Brahmins who challenged Buddha on this issue.
> But he silenced them completely.  
>  15. The story is told in the Assalayana-Sutta that once the
> Brahmins persuaded one of them, by name Assalayana, to go to the
> Buddha and controvert his views against caste and inequality.  
>  16. Assalayana went to the Buddha and placed before him the case
> in favour of the superiority of the Brahmins.  
>  17. He said, "Brahmins maintain, Gotama, that only Brahmins form
> the superior class, all other classes being inferior; that only
> Brahmins form the white class, all other classes being black fellows;
> that purity resides in Brahmins alone and not in non-Brahmins; and
> that only Brahmins are Brahma's legitimate sons, born from his mouth,
> offspring of his, creations of his, and his heirs. What does Gotama
> say hereon?"  
>  18. The Buddha's answer simply pulverized Assalayana.  
>  19. The Buddha said: "Assalayana, are not the Brahmin wives of
> Brahmins known to have their periods, and to conceive, and to lie and
> give birth? Notwithstanding this, do Brahmins really maintain all what
> you have said, though they are themselves born of women like everybody
> else?"  
>  20. Assalayana gave no answer.  
>  21. The Buddha went further and asked Assalayana another
> question.  
>  22. "Suppose, Assalayana, a young noble consorts with a Brahmin
> maiden, what would be the issue? Will it be an animal or human
> being?"  
>  23. Again Assalayana gave no answer.  
>  24. "As to the possibility of moral development, is it only a
> Brahmin, and not a man of the other three classes, who in this country
> can develop in his heart the love that knows no hate or ill-will?"  
>  25. "No. All four classes can do it," replied Assalayana.  
>  26. "Assalayana! Have you ever heard," asked the Buddha, "that in
> the Yona and Kamboja countries and in other adjacent countries, there
> are only two classes, namely, masters and slaves, and that a master
> can become a slave and vice versa?"  
>  27. "Yes, I have heard so," replied Assalayana.  
>  28. "If your Chaturvarna is an ideal society, why is it not
> universal?" .  
>  29. On none of these points was Assalayana able to defend his
> theory of caste and inequality. He was completely silenced. He ended
> by becoming a disciple of the Buddha.  
>  30. A Brahmin by name Vasettha had embraced the religion of the
> Blessed Lord. The Brahmins used to abuse him for his conversion.  
>  31. One day he went to Buddha and disclosed to him what the
> Brahmins said of him.  
>  32. Then Vasettha said, "The Brahmins, Lord, say thus: 'Only a
> Brahmin is of the best social grade; other grades are low. Only a
> Brahmin is of a clear complexion; other complexions are swarthy. Only
> Brahmins are of pure breed; not they that are not of the Brahmins.
> Only Brahmins are genuine children of Brahma, born of his
> mouth--offspring of Brahma, created by Brahma, heirs of Brahma.  
>  33. "'As for you, you have renounced the best rank and have gone
> over to that low class, to the shaven recluses, to \[the\] vulgar
> rich, to them of swarthy skins, to the foot-born descendants. Such a
> course is not good, such a course is not proper: even this, that you,
> having forsaken that upper class, should associate with an inferior
> class, to wit, with shavelings, fair folks, menials, swarthy of skin,
> the offspring of our kinsmen's heels.'  
>  34. "In these terms. Lord, do the Brahmins blame and revile me
> with characteristic abuse, copious, not at all stinted."  
>  35. "Surely, Vasettha," said the Buddha, "the Brahmins have quite
> forgotten the ancient lore when they say so. On the contrary, the
> wives of Brahmins, like all women of other classes, are seen to be
> with child, bringing forth and nursing children. And yet it is these
> very womb-born Brahmins who say that Brahmins are genuine children of
> Brahma, born from his mouth; his offspring; his creation; and his heir
> ! By this they make a travesty of the nature of Brahma."  
>  36. Once the Brahmin Esukari went to the Buddha to argue with him
> three questions.  
>  37. The first question he raised related to the permanent division
> of occupations. In defence of the system he began by saying, "I have
> come to ask you a question. The Brahmins say they shall serve nobody
> because they stand above all. Everyone else is born to serve them.  
>  38. "Service, Gotama, is divided into four--service of \[a\]
> Brahmin, service of \[a\] noble, service of a middle-class man, or by
> \[=of\] a peasant; while a peasant may be served only by a peasant,
> for who else could? What does the reverend Gotama say hereon?"  
>  39. The Buddha answered him by asking a question, "Is the whole
> world in accord with Brahmins in their fourfold division of service?"
> asked the Lord.  
>  40. "For myself, I neither assert that all service is to be
> rendered, nor that all service is to be refused. If the service makes
> a man bad and not good, it should not be rendered; but if it makes him
> better and not bad, then it should be rendered.  
>  41. "This is the guiding consideration which should decide the
> conduct alike of nobles, of Brahmins, of middle-class men, and of
> peasant ; each individual should refuse service which makes him bad,
> and should accept only the service which makes him a better man."  
>  42. The next question raised was by Esukari. "Why should ancestry
> and lineage not have a place in determining the status of a man?"  
>  43. To this question the Buddha replied thus: "As against pride of
> ancestry, the station into which a man happens to be born determines
> only his designation, be it noble or Brahmin or middle-class or
> peasant. Even as a fire is called after the material out of which it
> is kindled, and may thus be called either a wood-fire, or a chip-fire,
> or a bracken-fire, or a cowdung fire, just in the same way the noble,
> transcendant doctrine, I aver, is the source of true wealth for every
> man, birth merely determining his designation in one of the four
> classes.  
>  44. "Lineage does not enter into a man's being either good or
> bad; nor do good looks or wealth. For you will find a man of noble
> birth who is a murderer, a thief, a fornicator, a liar, a slanderer, a
> man of bitter tongue, a tattler, a covetous person, a man of rancour
> or of wrong views; and therefore I assert that noble birth does not
> make a good man. Or again you will find a man of noble birth who is
> innocent of all these vices; and, therefore, I assert that it is not
> lineage which makes a man bad."  
>  45. The third question which Esukari raised was with regard to the
> ways of earning a living assigned to each class.  
>  46. The Brahmin Esukari said to the Lord: "Brahmins give a
> fourfold assignment of income: from alms, for Brahmins; from his bow
> and arrows, for the noble; from ploughing and tending cattle, for the
> middle-class man; and for the peasant, by the carriage of crops on the
> pole slung over his shoulder. If anyone of these deserts his vocation
> for something else, he does what he should not do, not less than a
> guardian who appropriates what is not his. What does the reverend
> Gotama say on this "  
>  47. "Is the whole world in accord with this Brahmin
> classification? asked the Lord.  
>  48. "No," replied Esukari.  
>  49. To Vasettha he said, "What is important is high ideals and not
> noble birth.  
>  50. No caste; no inequality; no superiorit ; no inferiority; all
> are equal. This is what he stood for.  
>  51. "Identify yourself with others. As they, so I.. As I, so
> they." So said the Buddha.
>
>   
> § 2. Dhamma to be Saddhamma must Teach that Worth and not Birth is the
> Measure of Man
>
>  1. The theory of Chaturvarna, preached by the Brahmins, was based
> on birth.  
>  2. One is a Brahmin because he is born of Brahmin parents. One is
> a Kshatriya because he is born of Kshatriya parents. One is a Vaishya
> because one is born of Vaishya parents. And one is a Shudra because
> one is born of Shudra parents.  
>  3. The worth of a man, according to the Brahmins, was based on
> birth and on nothing else.  
>  4. This theory was as repulsive to the Buddha, as was the theory
> of Chaturvarna.  
>  5. His doctrine was just the opposite of the doctrine of the
> Brahmins. It was his doctrine that worth, and not birth, was the
> measure of man.  
>  6. The occasion on which the Buddha propounded his doctrine has
> its own peculiar interest.  
>  7. Once the Blessed One was staying in Anathpindika's Asram. One
> day in the forenoon he took his begging bowl and entered Shravasti for
> alms.  
>  8. At that time a sacrificial fire was burning and an offering was
> prepared. Then the Blessed One, going for alms from house to house in
> Shravasti, approached the house of the Brahmin Aggika.  
>  9. The Brahmin, seeing the Blessed One coming at a distance,
> became angry and said, "Stay there, O Shaveling! There, stay, ye
> wretched monk! Stay there, ye miserable outcast."  
>  10. When he spoke thus, the Blessed One addressed him as follows:
> "Do you know, O Brahmin, who an outcast is, or the things that make a
> person an outcast?  
>  11. "No, Gotama, I do not know who an outcast is. Nor indeed do I
> know what things make a man an outcast."  
>  12. The Lord pleaded that nothing would be lost in knowing who is
> an outcast. "Now that you insist on my knowing it," the Brahmin Aggika
> said, "well, go on and explain."  
>  13. The Brahmin having responded, the Blessed One spake as
> follows:  
>  14. "The man who is irritable, rancorous, vicious, detractive,
> perverted in views, and deceitful--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  15. "Whosoever in this world harms living beings, once-born or
> twice-born, in whom there is no compassion for living beings--know ye
> that he is an outcast.  
>  16. "Whosoever destroys and besieges villages and hamlets, and is
> known as an oppressor--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  17. "Whether in the village or in the forest, whosoever
> appropriates by theft what belongs to others, or what is not
> given--know ye that he is an outcast,  
>  18. "Whosoever, having really taken a debt, flees, when pressed,
> saying, 'There is no debt to you,'--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  19. "Whosoever, desiring some trifle, kills a man going alone on
> the road, and pillages him--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  20. "Whosoever for his own sake, or for the sake of others, or for
> the sake of wealth, utters lies when asked as a witness--know ye that
> he is an outcast.  
>  21. "Whosoever by force or with consent is seen transgressing with
> the wives of relatives or friends--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  22. "Whosoever, being rich, does not support aged mother and
> father who have passed their youth--know ye that he is an outcast.  
>  23. "Whosoever, when questioned about what is good, counsels what
> is wrong. and teaches in a concealing way--know ye that be is an
> outcast.  
>  24. "No one is an outcast by birth--and no one is a Brahmin by
> birth."  
>  25. Aggika, on hearing this, felt greatly ashamed for the abuse he
> had hurled against the Blessed Lord.  
> 
>
>   
> § 3. Dhamma to be Saddhamma must Promote Equality between Man and Man
>
>  1. Men are born unequal.  
>  2. Some are robust, others are weaklings.  
>  3. Some have more intelligence, others have less or none.  
>  4. Some have more capacity, others have less.  
>  5. Some are well-to-do, others are poor.  
>  6. All have to enter into what is called the struggle for
> existence.  
>  7. In the struggle for existence, if inequality be recognised as
> the rule of the game, the weakest will always go to the wall.  
>  8. Should this rule of inequality be allowed to be the rule of
> life?  
>  9. Some answer in the affirmative, on the ground that it results
> in the survival of the fittest.  
>  10. The question, however, is: is the fittest the best from the
> point of view of society?  
>  11. No one can give a positive answer.  
>  12. It is because of this doubt that religion preaches equality.
> For equality may help the best to survive, even though the best may
> not be the fittest.  
>  13. What society wants is the best, and not the fittest.  
>  14. It is, therefore, the primary reason why religion upholds
> equality.  
>  15. This was the viewpoint of the Buddha, and it was because of
> this that he argued that a religion which does not preach equality is
> not worth having.  
>  16. Can you respect or believe in a religion which recommends
> actions that bring happiness to oneself by causing sorrow to others;
> or happiness to others by causing sorrow to oneself; or sorrow to both
> oneself and others?  
>  17. Is not that a better religion which promotes the happiness of
> others simultaneously with the happiness of oneself, and tolerates no
> oppression?  
>  18. These were some of the most pertinent questions which he asked
> the Brahmins who opposed Equality.  
>  19. The religion of the Buddha is perfect justice, springing from
> a man's own meritorious disposition.  
> 

|     |
|-----|
|    |

-- [main book index page](index.html#index) -- [detailed book
section-map](sectionmap.html) -- [book sources](sources/index.html) --  
-- [Dr. Ambedkar's work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[fwp's main page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
