+++
title = "02  2         RELIGIOUS INTOLERANCE OF TIPU SULTAN"

+++
2  
RELIGIOUS INTOLERANCE OF TIPU SULTAN

LATE P.C.N. RAJA  

INTRODUCTION

Tipu Sultan had, ruled his kingdom only for sixteen-and-a-half years,
from December 7, 1782 to May 4, 1799. The territory of Malabar was under
his effective control only for a short period of eight years. If he had
not secured the assistance of the wily Purnaiyya, there would not have
been so many Muhammadans in the states of Kerala and Karnataka. Hindus
also would not have become less prosperous, and fewer in number.

When that Brahmin Prime Minister, Purnaiyya, presented to Tipu Sultan
90,000 soldiers, three crore rupees, and invaluable ornaments made of
precious stones, he was tempted to rule as the Emperor of the South
India. Tipu did not consider the Hindu rulers of Maharashtra, Coorg and
Travancore or the Muslim ruler Nizam as impediments. He was afraid of
only the British. He had convinced himself that he could easily become
the Emperor of South India if he could somehow vanquish the British.
Because of his intense and-British attitude, the so-called progressive
and secular historians have made a vain attempt to paint Tipu Sultan as
a great national hero.

Opposition to foreign powers need not always be due to love for one's
country. To achieve his selfish goal and to face the British forces,
Tipu Sultan sought the assistance of another foreign power, the French,
who were manoeuvring to establish their own domination in the country.
How is it possible, therefore, for Tipu Sultan to be an enemy of foreign
forces when he himself had sought help from Napoleon who was then a
prisoner in St. Helena Island and also the French King, Louis XVI?

Besides, he also wanted to establish Islamic rule in the country; to
achieve that he had to first defeat the British. For this purpose, Tipu
Sultan solicited the assistance of Muslim countries like Persia,
Afghanistan and Turkey. It is true that Tipu did not harm the Raja of
Cochin or anyone for that matter who surrendered and pledged loyalty to
him. But how does that make him a friend of Hindus?

Tipu and the Nizam were the only Muslim rulers in the Deccan at that
time and hence he wanted to avoid any dispute with the Nizam. He
insisted that the Nizam should agree to give his daughter in marriage to
his son. But the Nizam, considering Tipu as an upstart with no
aristocratic heredity, refused the offer. (According to Bhagwan Gidwani,
Hyder Ali Khan had suggested earlier to the Nizam that he should agree
to the marriage of his daughter to the young Tipu, then in his teens.)
As if to spite the Nizam, Tipu Sultan got another of his sons married to
the daughter of Arackal Bibi of Cannanore mainly to secure the loyalty
of Malabar Muslims for subjugating the entire Malabar region. The result
was for everybody to see in due course. It may be noted that the family
of Arackal Bibi, though converted to Islam, followed the matriarchal
system a system which the Muslim fanatic, Tipu, wanted to reform.

  
HE WANTED TO BE A PADISHAH

He wanted to become an Emperor after defeating the British. He wanted to
achieve his ambition after consulting the astrologers. There were a few
Brahmin astrologers in Sree Ranganatha Swami Temple. They predicted that
if some of the suggested remedial rituals were performed, Tipu would
achieve his cherished ambition. Believing that he could become the
undisputed ruler of the whole of South India, after defeating the
British, he performed all the suggested rituals in the Sree Ranaganatha
Swami Temple, besides giving costly presents to the astrologers. This
act is being widely interpreted by secularist historians as love and
respect for Hindu religion and traditions! They also doubt if there were
any Hindu temples which were desecrated or destroyed by Tipu Sultan and
his Islamic army in Malabar.

The reputed historian, Lewis Rice, who wrote the *History of Mysore*
after going through various official records, stated as follows: "In the
vast empire of Tipu Sultan on the eve of his death, there were only two
Hindu temples having daily pujas within the Sreerangapatanam fortress.
It is only for the satisfaction of the Brahmin astrologers who used to
study his horoscope that Tipu Sultan had spared those two temples. The
entire wealth of every Hindu temple was confiscated before 1790 itself
mainly to make up for the revenue loss due to total prohibition in the
country."

There are people who proclaim to the world that Tipu Sultan's rule was
fair and progressive in his own state of Mysore. It would be appropriate
to have a look at what a Mysorean, M.A. Gopal Rao, stated a few years
ago in one of his articles: 'In a deliberately designed taxation scheme,
the religious prejudice of Tipu Sultan became quite clear. His
co-religionists, Muslims, were exempted from house tax, commodity tax
and also the levy on other items of household use. Those who were
converted to Muhammadanism, were also given similar tax exemptions. He
had even made provisions for the education of their children. Tipu
Sultan discontinued the practice of appointing Hindus in different
administrative and military jobs as practised by his father, Hyder Ali
Khan, in the past. He had deep hatred towards all non-Muslims. During
the entire period of sixteen years of his regime, Purnaiyya was the only
Hindu who had adorned the post of Dewan or minister under Tipu Sultan.
In 1797 (two years before his death) among the 65 senior Government
posts, not even a single Hindu was retained. All the Mustadirs were also
Muslims. Among the 26 civil and military officers captured by the
British in 1792 there were only 6 non-Muslims. In 1789, when the Nizam
of Hyderabad and other Muslim rulers decided that only Muslims would be
appointed henceforth in all Government posts, Tipu Sultan also adopted
the same policy in his Mysore State. Just because they were Muslims,
even those who were illiterate and inefficient, were also appointed to
important Government posts. Even for getting promotions, one still had
to be a Muslim under Tipu Sultan's regime. Considering the interest and
convenience of only Muslim officers, all the records relating to tax
revenue, were ordered to be written in Persian rather than in Marathi
and Kannada as followed earlier. He even tried to make Persian the State
language in place of Kannada. In the end all the Government posts were
filled by lazy and irresponsible Muslims. As a consequence the people
had to suffer a great deal because of those fun-seeking and
irresponsible Muslim officers. The Muslim officers, occupying important
posts at all levels, were all dishonest and unreliable persons. Even
when people complained to him with evidences against those officers,
Tipu Sultan did not care to inquire about the complaints lodged."

  
EVEN THE PLACE-NAMES WERE CHANGED

Gopal Rao had written all these on the basis of the writings of Tipu's
own son, Ghulam Muhammad, and Muslim historians like Kirmani. Even the
Hindu names of places, the Sultan could not tolerate. Therefore,
Mangalapuri (Mangalore) was changed to Jalalabad, Cannanore (Kanwapuram)
to Kusanabad, Bepur (Vaippura) to Sultanpatanam or Faruqui, Mysore to
Nazarabad, Dharwar to Quarshed-Sawad, Gooty to Faiz-Hissar, Ratnagiri to
Mustafabad, Dindigul to Khaliqabad, and Calicut (Kozhikode) to
Islamabad. It was after the death of Tipu Sultan that the local people
reverted to old names.

  
ISLAMIC ATROCITIES IN COORG, BEDNUR, AND MANGALORE

The cruelties which Tipu Sultan committed in Coorg, has no parallel in
history. On one occasion, he forcibly converted over ten thousand Hindus
to Muhammadanism. On another occasion, he captured and converted to
Islam more than one thousand Hindu Coorgis before imprisoning them in
the Sreerangapatanam fortress. In the period of confusion and anarchy
prevailing in Sreerangapatanam during the last war of Tipu Sultan
against the British, all the Coorgi prisoners escaped from the prison
and became Hindus again after reaching their native kingdom. Against the
solemn oath given to the Raja of Coorg, Tipu Sultan forcibly abducted a
young princess from the Coorg royal family and made her his wife against
her will.

The atrocities committed by Tipu Sultan in Bidnur in North Karnataka
during and after its capture by him, were most barbarous and beyond
description. Ayaz Khan who was Kammaran Nambiar from Chirackal Kingdom
before his forcible conversion to Islam by Hyder Ali Khan, had been
appointed as Governor of Bidnur. Tipu Sultan was jealous of and opposed
to Ayaz Khan from the very beginning because Hyder Ali Khan had
considered the latter more intelligent and smart. When Ayaz Khan learnt
that Tipu Sultan was scheming to kill him secretly, he escaped to Bombay
with plenty of gold. Tipu Sultan came to Bednur and forcibly converted
its entire population to Islam. The people accepted Islam for the sake
of their lives.

After the capture of Mangalore, thousands of Christians were also
forcibly sent to Sreerangapatanam where all of them were circumcised and
converted to Islam. Tipu Sultan's justification was that during the
Portuguese domination, prior to the arrival of the British, many Muslims
had been converted to Christianity by their Missionaries. He proudly
proclaimed his action as a sort of punishment for the conversion of many
Muslims by the Portuguese.

Then he marched upto Kumbla on the northern borders of Kerala, forcibly
converting to Islam every Hindu on the way. This time, his argument
(repeated by the Muslim and secularist historians of today) was that if
all belonged to one religion - Muhammadanism - there would be unity and
consequently it would be easy to defeat the British!

  
INSIDE MALABAR

In Malabar, the main target of Tipu Sultan's atrocities were Hindus and
Hindu temples. According to Lewis B. Boury, the atrocities committed by
Tipu Sultan against Hindus in Malabar were worse and more barbarous than
those committed against the Hindus in Hindustan by the notorious Mahmud
of Ghazni, Alauddin Khalji, and Nadir Shah. He disputes in his book
Mukherjee's version that Tipu Sultan had converted only his opponents.
Normally even a cruel person kills or tortures only his enemies. But
that argument does not justify the cruelties committed by him against
innocent women and children.

  
DANCE OF THE ISLAMIC SATAN

According to the *Malabar Manual* of William Logan who was the District
Collector for some time, Thrichambaram and Thalipparampu temples in
Chirackal Taluqa, Thiruvangatu Temple (Brass Pagoda) in Tellicherry, and
Ponmeri Temple near Badakara were all destroyed by Tipu Sultan. The
*Malabar Manual* mention that the Maniyoor mosque was once a Hindu
temple. The local belief is that it was converted to a mosque during the
days of Tipu Sultan.

Vatakkankoor Raja Raja Varma in his famous literary work, *History of
Sanskrit Literature in Kerala*, has written the following about the loss
and destruction faced by the Hindu temples in Kerala during the military
regime (Padayottam) of Tipu Sultan: "There was no limit as to the loss
the Hindu temples suffered due to the military operations of Tipu
Sultan. Burning down the temples, destruction of the idols installed
therein and also cutting the heads of cattle over the temple deities
were the cruel entertainments of Tipu Sultan and his equally cruel army.
It was heartrending even to imagine the destruction caused by Tipu
Sultan in the famous ancient temples of Thalipparampu and Thrichambaram.
The devastation caused by this new Ravana's barbarous activities have
not yet been fully rectified."

  
KOZHIKODE MADE A GRAVEYARD

As per the provisions of the Treaty of Mangalore of 1784, the British
had allowed Tipu Sultan to have his suzerainty over Malabar. 'In
consequence, the Hindus of Malabar had to suffer the most severe
enormities the world had ever known in history,' observes K.V. Krishna
Iyer, in his famous book, *Zamorins of Calicut*, based on historical
records available from the royal house of Zamorins in Calicut. "When the
second-in-line of Zamorins, Eralppad, refused to cooperate with Tipu
Sultan in his military operations against Travancore because of Tipu's
crude methods of forcible circumcision and conversion of Hindus to
Islam, the enraged Tipu Sultan took a solemn oath to circumcise and
convert the Zamorin and his chieftains and Hindu soldiers to Islamic
faith," he adds.

L.B. Boury writes: "To show his ardent devotion and steadfast faith in
Muhammaddan religion, Tipu Sultan found Kozhikode to be the most
suitable place. It was because the Hindus of Malabar refused to reject
the matriarchal system, polyandry and half-nakedness of women that the
'great reformer' Tipu Sultan tried to honour the entire population with
Islam." To the Malabar people, the Muslim harem, Muslim polygamy and the
Islamic ritual of circumcision were equally repulsive and opposed to the
ancient culture and tradition in Kerala. Tipu Sultan sought a marriage
alliance with the matriarchal Muslim family of Arackal Bibi in
Cannanore. Kozhikode was then a centre of Brahmins and had over 7000
Brahmin families living there. Over 2000 Brahmin families perished as a
result of Tipu Sultan's Islamic cruelties. He did not spare even women
and children. Most of the men escaped to forests and foreign lands.

Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai wrote in the *Mathrubhoomi Weekly* of December
25, 1955: "Muhammadans greatly increased in number. Hindus were forcibly
circumcised in thousands. As a result of Tipu's atrocities, strength of
Nairs and Chamars (Scheduled Castes) significantly diminished in number.
Namboodiris also substantially decreased in number."

The German missionary Guntest has recorded: 'Accompanied by an army of
60,000, Tipu Sultan came to Kozhikode in 1788 and razed it to the
ground. It is not possible even to describe the brutalities committed by
that Islamic barbarian from Mysore." C.A. Parkhurst also noted that
'Almost the entire Kozhikode was razed to the ground."

  
TEMPLES DESTROYED

Thali, Thiruvannur, Varackal, Puthur, Govindapuram, Thalikkunnu and
other important temples in the town of Kozhikode as well as those nearby
were completely destroyed as a result of Tipu's military operations.
Some of them were reconstructed by the Zamorin after he returned
following the defeat of Tipu Sultan in Sreerangapatanam and the Treaty
of 1792.

The devastation caused by Tipu Sultan to the ancient and holy temples of
Keraladheeswaram, Thrikkandiyoor and Thriprangatu in Vettum region was
terrible. The Zamorin renovated these temples to some extent. The famous
and ancient Thirunavaya Temple, known throughout the country as an
ancient teaching-centre of the Vedas, revered by the devotees of Vishnu
from Tamil Nadu, and existing before the advent of Christ, was also
plundered and destroyed by Tipu's army (*Malabar Gazetteer*). After
dismantling and destroying the idol, Tipu converted the Thrikkavu Temple
into an ammunition depot in Ponnani (*Malabar Manual*). It was the
Zamorin who repaired the temple later. Kotikkunnu, Thrithala, Panniyoor
and other family temples of the Zamorin were plundered and destroyed.
The famous Sukapuram Temple was also desecrated. Damage done to the
Perumparampu Temple and Maranelira Temple of Azhvancherry Thamprakkal
(titular head of all Namboodiri Brahmins) in Edappadu, can be seen even
today. Vengari Temple and Thrikkulam Temple in Eranadu, Azhinjillam
Temple in Ramanattukara, Indyannur Temple, Mannur Temple and many other
temples were defiled and damaged extensively during the military regime.

Tipu Sultan reached Guruvayoor Temple only after destroying Mammiyoor
Temple and Palayur Christian Church. If the destruction caused by Tipu's
army is not visible today in the Guruvayoor Temple, it is mainly because
of the intervention of Hydrose Kutty who had been converted to Islam by
Hyder Ali Khan. He secured the safety of the temple and the continuation
of land-tax exemption allowed by Hyder Ali earlier, besides the
renovation and repairs done by the devotees later. According to
available evidences, fearing the wrath of Tipu Sultan, the sacred idol
of the Guruvayoor Temple was removed to the Ambalapuzha Sri Krishna
Temple in Travancore State. It was only after the end of Tipu's military
regime, that the idol was ceremoniously reinstated in the Guruvayoor
Temple itself. Even today, daily *pujas* are conducted in Ambalapuzha
Sri Krishna Temple where the idol of Guruvayoor Temple was temporarily
installed and worshipped.

Damages caused to the nearby temples at Parampathali, Panmayanadu and
Vengidangu are visible even today. The deplorable state of the
architecture of the sanctum sanctorum of Parampathali Temple destroyed
during the military operations of Tipu Sultan is really heart-rending.
The atrocities committed in Kozhikode during the nightmarish days of the
military occupation are vividly described in the works of Fra
Bartolomaeo who had travelled through Kerala at that time. How cruelly
Tipu Sultan, ably assisted by the French Commander M. Lally, had treated
the Hindu and Christian population can be clearly understood from his
writings.

  
TALKING RECORDS OF KERALA HISTORY

Govinda Pillai says in his famous book, *History of Literature*; "During
Malayalam Era 965 corresponding to 1789-90, Tipu Sultan crossed over to
Malabar with an army of uncivilised barbarians. With a sort of fanatical
love for Islamic faith, he destroyed many Hindu temples and Christian
churches which were the custodians of precious wealth and religious
traditions. Besides, Tipu Sultan abducted hundreds of people and
forcibly circumcised and converted them to Islam - an act which was
considered by them as more than death."

A small army of 2000 Nairs of Kadathanadu resisted the invasion of the
huge army of Tipu Sultan from a fortress in Kuttipuram for a few weeks.
They were reduced to starvation and death. Tipu Sultan entered the fort
and offered to spare their lives, provided they accepted conversion to
Islam. The unfortunate lot of 2000 Nairs were then forced to eat beef
after being converted to Islamic faith, at the end of usual religious
ritual of mass circumcision. All the members of one branch of Parappanad
Royal Family were forcibly converted to Muhammadan faith except for one
or two who escaped from the clutches of Tipu Sultan's army. Similarly,
one Thiruppad belonging to Nilamboor Royal Family was also forcibly
abducted and converted to Islam. Thereafter, it was reported that
further conversions of Hindus were attempted through those converts. In
the end, when the Kolathiri Raja surrendered and paid tribute, Tipu
Sultan got him treacherously killed without any specific reason, dragged
his dead body tied to the feet of an elephant through the streets, and
finally hanged him from a tree-top to show his Islamic contempt for
Hindu Rajas.

It may be mentioned here that the entire Wodayar Royal Family of Mysore
had been humiliated and kept in prison by Hyder Ali Khan and Tipu Sultan
in their capital city, Sreerangapatanam. Even the Palghat Raja,
Ettipangi Achan who had surrendered, was imprisoned on suspicion and
later taken to Sreerangapatanam. Nothing was heard of him subsequently.
Christians in Palghat fled out of fear. Tipu Sultan terrified the entire
Hindu population in Malabar, stationing his army contingents in
different regions for the purpose. The tax initially imposed by Hyder
Ali Khan was forcibly collected by Tipu Sultan. Standing crops were
confiscated. This act provoked even some influential Mappila landlords
to revolt against Tipu Sultan.

Hyder Ali Khan had exempted temples from the payment of land tax. But
Tipu Sultan forced the temples to pay heavy taxes. The famous Hemambika
Temple at Kalpathi of the Palghat Raja who had surrendered to Hyder Ali
Khan, the Kachamkurissi Temple of the Kollamkottu Raja who had deserted
the Zamorin and sided with Hyder Ali Khan, and also the Jain Temple at
Palghat suffered serious damages due to the cruel policies of Tipu
Sultan.

Many Nair and Brahmin landlords fled the country leaving their vast
wealth behind. The Mappilas forcibly took possession of their lands and
wealth. Tipu Sultan did not object to their actions. Most of the Mappila
landlords of today claim that they purchased the ownership of the landed
properties from Nairs and Brahmins after paying heavy compensation.
These blatant lies are being repeated by them in spite of the fact that
practically nothing was paid to the Hindu landlords then or later. (The
same Islamic treachery was repeated during the Mappila riots of 1921.)

In any case, Tipu Sultan succeeded in mass killing, converting lakhs of
Hindus to Islamic faith, driving thousands out of their traditional
homes, and finally making the rest extremely poor. Many Hindus belonging
to lower castes accepted conversion to Islam under duress. However, many
others, especially the Thiyyas, fled to Tellicherry and Mahe for safety.

When the British established their rule in Malabar and the Hindu
landlords made efforts to recover their landed properties, illegally
occupied by the local Mappilas, Mullahs started preaching to their
fanatic followers that "killing of Hindu landlords was a sacred Islamic
act," leading to frequent Mappila outrages in Malabar.[1](#1)

In Cherunad, Vettathunad, Eranad, Valluvanad, Thamarassery and other
interior areas, local Mappilas unleashed a reign of terror on the Hindu
population, mainly to retain the illegally occupied land and to
establish their domination over Hindus as during Tipu's regime. Fearing
the organised robberies and violence, people could not even travel
freely in the Malabar hinterland of predominantly Mappila population.

Lt. Col. E. Phitiyan, Andriansi, Mayan, K.P. Padmanabha Menon
Sadasyathilakan T.K. Velu Pillai, Ullur Parameshwara Iyer, and other
prominent people have described vividly the various types of atrocities
committed by Tipu Sultan during the days of his Islamic rule in Malabar.
There is no count of the wealth looted from Hindu temples and taken away
by him to Sreerangapatanam. It is, therefore, very pitiable that a few
shameless Hindus of today have come forward to orchestrate the nefarious
propaganda of the fanatic Muslims, namely, that it was the imperialist
divide-and-rule policy of the British that was responsible for blaming
the Muslims for various atrocities committed against Hindus. This Big
Lie was surreptitiously entered subsequently in history books and
related records. It is obvious that these "Hindus" are speaking on the
theme of Hindu-Muslim unity and praising the 'secular' credentials of
the Muslim League, Tipu Sultan and Aurangzeb to the sky, not sincerely
for the sake of Hindu-Muslim amity but only because of their inherent
cowardice. They even proclaim that the notorious Mappila outrage of 1921
was part of the freedom struggle!

  
CONCLUSION

A few observations about the attack of Tipu Sultan on the Travancore
State would be appropriate in this context. If the Nedunkotta had not
been constructed earlier mainly to stop the danger from the powerful
Zamorin, the same fate would have befallen the helpless Travancore State
as well. Because of the above fortification, Tipu Sultan could wreak
vengeance only in Angamally, Alwaye, Varapuzha, Alangod and other towns
on the northern borders of Travancore State. That is what the Dewan of
Travancore, Madhava Rao, had written in the history of Travancore. It
may be emphasized here that he had relied on the original local records,
not the ones published by the European historians. He wrote: "Whatever
cruelties, the local Mappilas were desirous of indulging in the land,
Tipu Sultan and his army of Muslim converts did. The ancient and holy
temples were heartlessly defiled or burnt down. The ruins of those
temples destroyed by Tipu's fanatic army are the existing evidences of
the atrocities committed by Muslims in the country. Christian churches
also had to suffer widespread destructions. However, Tipu Sultan spared
only the territories of Cochin Raja who had surrendered to Hyder Ali
Khan in the beginning itself. Still, when Tipu Sultan and his army
entered Parur and started firing at Kodungallur, the Cochin Raja sent a
letter to the Travancore Raja requesting him 'to protect me and my
family'." (A copy of the original letter was also published in the
book.)

These are the recorded facts about the atrocities unleashed by Tipu
Sultan during his military regime notoriously known as Padayottakalam.
Poets have written a number of poems about the sufferings of the people
and the land during those nightmarish days. The following was written by
a member of the Katathanad Royal Family about the consequences of
Padayottakalam:

"Oh Shiva! Shiva Lingam (idol) has gone (destroyed) from the temple, and
also the Lingam (manliness) from the land:"

(This is the English translation of the Malayalam article by P.C.N. Raja
first published in *Kesari Annual* of 1964. The late Raja was a senior
member of the Zamorin Royal Family.)

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) During this period and upto the notorious mappila riots of
1921, there occurred over 45 minor/major Mappila riots of various
dimensions and intensifies.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
