+++
title = "03  3         TIPU'S OWN TESTIMONY"

+++
3  
TIPU'S OWN TESTIMONY

C. NANDAGOPAL MENON  
(The writer is convenor of Bombay Malayalee Samajam)

"If you love me, should you not put up with my weakness sometimes?" -
Tipu Sultan is purported to have asked Mir Sadik who was one of his
ministers. This is a remark invented by Bhagwan S. Gidwani in his
controversial novel, *The Sword of Tipu Sultan*.

Across-section of the new generation of historians and novelists is of
the opinion that all the available documents and history books on Tipu
Sultan originate from the British and, therefore, they cannot be relied
upon, the ostensible policy of the British being to 'divide and rule'.
Pointing to the correspondence between Shrimad Paramahamsa
Parivrajakacharya Shri Sankaracharya of Sringeri Mutt and Tipu Sultan
during 1791-92 and 1798, they argue that Tipu was an apostle of
secularism and as such respected Hindu religious heads and places of
worship. Tipu is also identified as among the first nationalists who
fought against the British to liberate the country.

However, the arguments fall apart if one goes through various letters
and edicts issued by Tipu Sultan to various public functionaries,
including his principal military commanders, the governors of forts and
provinces, and diplomatic and commercial agents.

William Kirkpatrick, who compiled many of Tipu's letters, writes in his
book, *Selected Letters of Tipoo Sultan* (published in 1811): "Tipoo
knew his will to be a law the propriety of which… would never be
questioned or doubted by any of his slaves… He probably measured the
sentiments in question by a different standard from that with which we
estimate them. Thus the various murders and acts of treachery which we
see him directing to be carried into execution, were not criminal, but
on the contrary just, and even meritorious, in his eyes."

  
GREAT VICTORY

Kirkpatrick continues: "The Koran taught him that it was not necessary
to keep faith with infidels, or the enemies of the true religion, in
which case it was not difficult for him to persuade himself that it was
right to include all who opposed or refused to cooperate in his views
for the extension of that religion; or, in other words, for his own
aggrandisement."

This observation of Kirkpatrick is found to be valid when one goes
through the letter of January 19, 1790, sent to Budruz Zuman Khan by
Tipu himself. It says: "Don't you know I have achieved a great victory
recently in Malabar and over four lakh Hindus were converted to Islam? I
am determined to march against that cursed 'Raman Nair' very soon
(reference is to Rama Varma Raja of Travancore State who was popularly
known as Dharma Raja). Since I am overjoyed at the prospect of
converting him and his subjects to Islam, I have happily abandoned the
idea of going back to Srirangapatanam now" (K.M. Panicker, *Bhasha
Poshini*, August, 1923).

In a letter dated 8th Eezidy (February 13, 1790) addressed to Budruz
Zuman Khan, Tipu writes: "Your two letters, with the enclosed
memorandums of the Naimar (or Nair) captives, have been received. You
did right in ordering a hundred and thirty-five of them to be
circumcised, and in putting eleven of the youngest of these into the
Usud Ilhye band (or class) and the remaining ninety-four into the Ahmedy
Troop, consigning the whole, at the same time, to the charge of the
Kilaaddar of Nugr…" (*Selected Letters of Tipoo Sultan* by Kirkpatrick).

In a letter dated January 18, 1790 to Syed Abdul Dulai, Tipu writes:
"With the grace of Prophet Mohammed and Allah, almost all Hindus in
Calicut are converted to Islam. Only on the borders of Cochin State a
few are still not converted. I am determined to convert them also very
soon. I consider this as Jehad to achieve that object" (K.M. Panicker,
*Bhasha Poshini*).

  
THEY SPEAK VOLUMES

The translation of the great seal of Tipu found in Major Alex Dirom's
comprehensive account of the Third Mysore War published as early as 1793
in London, reads as follows:

"I am the Messenger of the true faith.  
"I bring Unto you the Edicts of Truth.  
"From CONQUEST and the Protection of the Royal Hyder comes my tide of
SULTAN and the world under the Sun and Moon is subject to my Signet."

The letters and the seal speak volumes of the mind of the man who
wantonly roamed and terrorised South India and the southeastern borders
of Maharashtra for a decade. It cannot be said that he did so because
the Hindus were assisting the British.

The contention of a secularist section of historians and novelists that
Tipu was a patriot since he fought the British, has no validity. The
renowned historian, Dr. I.M. Muthanna, says in his Tipu *Sultan X-Rayed*
that Tipu was a traitor as he invited the French to invade India. The
letter, dated April 21, 1797, written by Tipu and classified as No. 4 in
the Persian File of Records, and quoted by Muthanna in his book, reads:

"Citizen Representatives:

"Since I manifested my friendship in writing to you, my messengers have
arrived with the following intelligence which will not be displeasing to
you.

"The Nizam, an ally of the English, and the Chief of the Mughals, is
very ill and his age leaves no prospect of his recovery. He has four
children who are disputing the right of succession. One of them is much
attached to me, (he) is the favourite of the chiefs of the people and is
expected to succeed him.

"I inform these events in order to prove to you that it is now the
moment for you to invade India. With little trouble we shall drive the
British out of India. Rely on my friendship.

"Your ally (Sd) Tipu Sultan."

That was Tipu's expression of love for India!

The world-famous Protuguese traveller, Fr. Barthoelomeo, not a
Britisher, writes in his book Voyage to East Indies: "First a corps of
30,000 barbarians who butchered everybody on the way… followed by the
field-gun unit under the French Commander, M. Lally… Tipu was riding on
an elephant behind which another army of 30,000 soldiers followed. Most
of the men and women were hanged in Calicut, first mothers were hanged
with their children tied to necks of mothers. That barbarian Tipu Sultan
tied the naked Christians and Hindus to the legs of elephants and made
the elephants to move around till the bodies of the helpless victims
were torn to pieces. Temples and churches were ordered to be burned
down, desecrated and destroyed. Christian and Hindu women were forced to
marry Mohammadans and similarly their men were forced to marry
Mohammadan women.[1](#1) Those Christians who refused to be honoured
with Islam, were ordered to be killed by hanging immediately. These
atrocities were told to me by the victims of Tipu Sultan who escaped
from the clutches of his army and reached Varappuzha, which is the
centre of Carmichael Christian Mission. I myself helped many victims to
cross the Varappuzha river by boats."

  
COW-SLAUGHTER

"The Padayottam military occupation period won't be forgotten by the
Malayalis for generations. It was this invasion, between Malayalam era
957 to 967 (1782 to 1792) that turned Malayalam upside down," says P.
Raman Menon, biographer of Shaktan Tampuran, the King of Cochin during
Tipu's invasion. He adds: "There was hardly any cowshed left in
Malayalam where the Mysore Tiger did not enter." The reference is to the
mass cow-slaughter carried out by Tipu's army on his orders.

In 1783-84, 1788 and 1789-90, Tipu personally led the attacks on
Malayalam (Kerala), besides sending his army contingents to various
resistance spots during the intervening period. Well-known Muslim
historian, P.S. Syed Muhammed, author of *Kerala Muslim Charitram*
(History of Kerala Muslims), has this to say about these invasions:
"What happened to Kerala because of Tipu's invasion, reminds one of the
invasion of Chengez Khan and Timur in Indian history."

Vadakunkur Raja Raja Varma writes in *Kerala Samskrita Sahitya
Charitram* (History of Sanskrit Literature in Kerala): "The number of
temples destroyed during Tipu's invasion is countless. It was the hobby
of Tipu and his army to put the temples on fire destroy the idols and
indulge in cow-slaughter. The memory of destruction of the Talipparampu
and Trichambaram temples aches the heart."

According to the *Malabar Gazetteer*, the important temples in the towns
of Tali, Srivaliyanatukavu, Tiruvannur, Varakkal, Puthur, Govindapuram,
and Talikunnu were destroyed by Tipu's ravaging armies. Even the
Tirunavaya Temple known all over India as a centre of Rig Veda teaching
was destroyed. Tipu personally ordered the destruction of Calicut which
was the capital of the Zamorin Rajas.

The record books maintained at the Vadakumnatha Temple of Trichur,
*Zamorins of Calicut* by K.V. Krishna Iyer, and *Malabar Manual* by
William Logan also list hundreds of temples destroyed during Tipu's
invasion.

  
FAITH IN ASTROLOGY

It is common knowledge that Tipu had immense faith in astrology. He used
to keep a number of astrologers in his court who were asked to calculate
the time auspicious for his invasions. It was at the appeals of these
astrologers and his own mother that Tipu spared two temples out of more
than a dozen within Srirangapatanam Fort. Moreover, by the end of 1790,
Tipu was facing enemies from all sides. He was also defeated at the
Travancore Defence Lines. It was then that in order to appease the
Hindus of Mysore, he started giving land-grants to Hindu temples.

This view finds endorsement in the biography of the Diwan of Travancore,
*Life History of Raja Kesavadas* by V,R. Parameswaran Pillai. Pillai
writes: "With respect to the much-published land-grants I had explained
the reasons about 40 years back. Tipu had immense faith in astrological
predictions. It was to become an Emperor (Padushah) after destroying the
might of the British that Tipu resorted to land-grants and other
donations to Hindu temples in Mysore including Sringeri Mutt, as per the
advice of the local Brahmin astrologers. Most of these were done after
his defeat in 1791 and the humiliating Srirangapatanam Treaty in 1792.
These grants were not done out of respect or love for Hindus or Hindu
religion but for becoming Padushah as predicted by the astrologers."

Sanjay Khan, producer of the controversial TV serial on Tipu, contended
in the beginning that there was no distortion in his serial (based on
Gidwani's novel). He has now admitted in an interview to The Week that
"Gidwani's novel may not be historically correct".

*Indian Express* (Bombay), March 10, 1990

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) A non-Muslim marrying a Muslim woman becomes a Muslim under the
"law" of Islam. Marrying a Muslim woman without getting converted to
Islam invites death penalty under that "law".

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
