+++
title = "11  8         THE TELE-SERIAL ON TIPU SULTAN"

+++
8  
THE TELE-SERIAL ON TIPU SULTAN

P. PARAMESWARAN

In normal course, Doordarshan should have full freedom to telecast any
serial which is not against the interest of the general public. But
here, the problem is not a novel. It is the distorted presentation of
historical events and historical personalities. In the process of
projecting certain people in glorifying terms, an attempt is also being
made to deliberately defame certain other people. When it is mixed with
a dose of religious fanaticism, it becomes dangerous. It could lead to
religious conflicts. Is it not better to avoid such personalities?

Tipu Sultan had not only given some financial assistance to a few
temples including Sringeri Mutt, but he had also destroyed hundreds of
temples and carried out forcible mass conversions as well. He had also
indulged in mass murders. Letters and orders directing to do such
horrible things were also issued by Tipu Sultan. If such things are
deliberately suppressed, that will amount to injustice to the population
who were the victims of his cruel atrocities. Even if it is only for
promoting communal harmony, blatant lies should not be deliberately
propagated. For the promotion of communal harmony, let people produce
novel, poetry or even cinema. In the case of history, acknowledging the
mistakes would be the best way to correct the mistakes; and not to
whitewash the mistakes. If it is not done, that will result in emotional
outbursts (as now).

Donations and grants supposed to have been given by Tipu Sultan to
Sringeri Mutt and temples were, as revealed in the letters concerned,
meant only to promote his selfish interests and also to ward off the
evil spirits through the conduct of *pujas* and *homas*. It is absurd to
argue that such occasional good deeds bore testimony to Tipu Sultan's
faith in all religions. Probably Tipu Sultan had committed atrocities as
well as some good deeds. If Doordarshan which has a special obligation
and duty to the general public, wants to project a serial on Tipu
Sultan, let it present both sides. Doordarshan is the most powerful
official media. That media should not be used to do injustice to the
people and to distort recorded history. Project truth as truth; if that
is not possible for some reason, it is better to keep complete silence
on the whole issue.

Telecast of the serial is not that essential. Do not think that all the
people in the country consider Tipu Sultan only as a hero. If necessary,
let there be a national debate and serious research among honest
historians (not of JNU and AMU variety) within the universities and
outside. Then the resultant conclusion could be presented to the public
for their benefit.

*Kesari*, February 11, 1990  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
