+++
title = "14 Hindu Pad-Padashahi"

+++

Soon after penning the letter, Raghunath Rao hastend back with his forces to the Deccan as the rainy season was imminent. It was, however, unfortunate that he had to do so and leave the newly conquered but weakly garrisoned provinces. A yet more fatal factor that was not satisfactorily dealt with was that Nazib- Khan, the most intriguing leader of the Pathani plot, was yet spared even after he was captured by the Marathas and in spite of the desire of almost all the Marathas to make him pay with his life for his treacherous dealing with Ahmedsha Abdally, in instigating him against the Maratha power. But that wily chief was a consummate actor. He offered numberless apologies, adopted Malharrao as his father and begged him to spare his penitent life as he would that of his son. Malharrao was ever anxious to adopt as his son all those who forfeited their lives as the enemies of the Maratha cause, pleaded so pressingly for Nazib, that Raghunath Rao had to give in against his will.+++(5)+++ It will soon be seen how Nazib spent his penitent life in fomenting most dangerous intrigues against those who had so foolishly spared it. 

Upto this time, the Marathas, for diplomatic reasons, were more or less acting in the name of the Emperor of Dehli. That was the line of least resistance and it paid them well. The position they occupied then was anologuos to that which the English held in India before the fall of the Marathas in 1818. The same political and diplomatic reasons, which forced the English to pretend to be merely the Agents of the Emperor down to 1857, even when they were the de facto emperor themselves, made the Marathas not hurry the process much, which could only be done by raising a storm of opposition, not only from in Indian Moslems but from the English, the French, the Pathans and even the Hindu princes themselves. For each of these had so eye to the dying empire’s crown and inheritance, but each one willed that it should linger on its death-bed till rest of the claimants disappeared and it fell an easy prey to him alone. 

But the great successes in the north, coupled with those with the Peshwa had himself won in the South, raised the Manta power to such a position that, from Balaji and Sadashivrao Bhau to the very man in the street, the whole nation felt itself strong enough to give the finishing stroke to the great work they had undertaken. Grand Schemes came up for discussion before the Maratha Councils. They felt their strength. They knew they had dealt a death-blow to the Moslem Empire in India They knew that they had grown into an Asiatic power and that Poona had begun to be the centre, not merely of Indian, but of Asiatic politics. The Mogul Empire lay smashed at their feet now they decided to sweep off all that still impeded them in taking the last and crowning step of openly assuming the imperial crown. Sadashivrao Bhau, more than any other leader in the Maratha camp, felt himself the chosen instrument of this great cause and was determined to render it possible or die fighting for it. They had brought about the downfall of the Moslem Empire: the Hindus had conquered the conqueror: and, fired at the eloquence of Bhau, they decided to strive in such a wise as to ‘free’ all India and bring it directly and openly under the Hindu sway w ithin the next few years. 

The great campaigns were laid out with this object in view. Dattaji Shinde was ordered to march towards the Punjab and Multan and introduce order and regular Government in the newly conquered provinces. He had thence to come down to Kashi, Prayag, where Raghunath Rao was to meet him at the head of another army. Thence the allied Maratha armies were to march on to Bengal, and free the whole province right to the seas by sweeping it clear of the Moslem and of the English who but recently had won a battle at Plassey (1757) and aimed to make themselves the masters thereof While Dattaji, Jankoji and Raghunath Rao were thus charged to reduce all North from Sind and Multan to the seas, the task of liberating all South was under-taken by Balaji himself with Vishwasrao, bit son and Sadashivrao Bhau. 

Accordingly, Dattaji, with his forces, started towards the North. Balaji and Bhau first undertook the task of reducing the Nizam to a mere nonentity in the Deccan. They marched againtf him with a powerful army and up-to-date artillery and after several manoeuvres and fights, won one of the most decisive victories at Udgir in 1760. The Moslem forces were simply crushed, the Nizam so cowed down as to deliver his own Royal seals into the hands of Bhau and humbly express his readiness to sign any conditions the victors dictated.+++(5)+++ A treaty was signed by which the great forts of Nagar, Barhanpur, Salher, Mulher, Ashirged and Daulatabad, as well as the four districts of Nanded, Fulumbri, Ambed and Vizapur, were handed over to the Marathas. Even Bhau was satisfied with the result. "The Nizam ceases to be a power. But for the North, all Deccan would have been liberated before this year passed.” At last the Maratha colours rose above the reduced capitals of Nagar and Vizapur, the kings whereof used to laugh contemptuously at the little rebel when Shivaji took Torna and openly hoisted the flag of a Hindu revolt. 

After these great diplomatic and military achievements, the victor of Udgir meant to march on and crush Haidar Ali who, besieging Mysore and trying to upset the ancient Hindu dynasty there, had set himself in its stead. The Hindu king and his minister sent pressing and personal appeals to the Marathas to save them from the new Moslem adventurer’s ambition. Sadashivrao Bhau, only too eager to seize this opportunity, to crush Haidar Ali and complete his task of liberating all Deccan, meant immediately to march against Haidar Ali, but for the serious news that just then reached the Peshwa from the North. The cup of success Bhau writes, was snatched away from bis hands even while he was raising it to his lips. 

The northern division of the Maratha forces that Dattaji led reached Delhi the end of 1758. Thence, as ordered, Dattaji proceeded to settle down the newly conquered province of Lahore and Multan. He appointed Sabaji Shinde and Trimbak Bapuji to govern them upto Attock and garrisoned Sarhind, Lahore and other important places. Then he left the Punjab and came down to undertake the second task allotted to him of crossing the Ganges and marching on Patna and then to settle his account with the English and extend the Hindu sway to the sea. 

But here he committed a great mistake in not carrying out the orders of the Peshwa as regards Nazibkhan, who, instead of being severely dealt with by the Shindia, was actually allowed to increase his power and influence in return for the vaguest promises he gave to help Dattaji in his campaign in Bengal and render faithful service. The Peshwa wrote almost angrily: “You write that Nazib promises to pay 30 lakhs of rupees to us if we appoint him as a Bukshee: touch not a farthing. Nazib is half Abdally: trust him not: nor feed a vile and treacherous reptile.”— (Palar-roop itihaas).+++(5)+++ But Dattaji was almost hypnotized by that consummate hypocrite and actually depended on his promises to build a bridge of boats to cross the Ganges. Thus delaying the Maratha campaign in Bengal on the one hand, Nazib got ample opportunity, on the other, to form in secret a second and far more formidable coalition against the Marathas and succeeded in inducing the Moslem Emperor himself to send autograph letters to Abdally to try again and invade India once more. Fervent appeals were made to rouse Pathan fanaticism in the name of religion and Allah and all that was sacred to Moslem. Would not Abdally be the Defender of the Faith, a gazi and rescue the Mahummadan empire in India from the death-grip of the unbelieving idolators ? Abdally too was simply smarting under the defeats the Marathas had inflicted on his son. They had snatched away the imperial Crown of India from him. Nay, they had driven him from the Punjab and Multan and were actually claiming Kabul and Kandahar as a part of their Indian Empire and yet he could do nothing to pay them back. But now he saw his chance had come again and under better auspices than ever. Once more he determined to bid for the Imperial Crown of India and crush the ambitious designs of the Marathas to establish a Hindu-Pad-Padashahi in India which has well nigh been actualized. So Adbally eagerly promised to lead the coalition and with a mighty army crossed the Indus and rapidly reached Lahore and occupied it. 

As the news of Abdally’s invasion reached Dehli, Nazib threw off the mask and openly gave himself out as his sworn adherent. Now Dattaji saw the fatal mistake he had committed in not acting on the Peshwa’s advice. He saw also how thoroughly he had been duped the Nazib and Suja and how dangerously he was hemmed in by powerful armies of the foe. On one side was Suja on another Nazib and the Rohillas and Pathans and Abdally from behind was rapidly advancing with a mighty force. The small Maratha garrisons at Attock and Lahore had necessarily to fall back before the overwhelming forces of Abdally. The only Hindu section that, besides the Marathas, kept opposing the Muhammadan power in the North was the new rising Sikhs. These brave people did all they could to hamper and hit the alien foes. But they were as yet but getting forged into an organised power, and had not been able to liberate even their own province. That day was yet to come. So Abdally led his mighty forces rapidly on Sarhind without facing any serious opposition. The majority of the Hindu princes of Rajputana and elsewhere in the North actually sympathised with Abdally, the destroyer of Mathura and the sworn enemy of Hindudom. The- only obstacle that stood between Abdally and the imperial Crown at Delhi was that one division of the Marathas which Dattaji led. He had written to Holkar to march forthwith to his help. But that general, the adopted father of Nazib, thought it fit to busy himself in wrangling with petty chiefs here and there. Thus hemmed in by the overwhelming forces of the foe all round, there was only one way for the Maratha division to save themselves, and that was to leave Delhi and fall back. Every experienced and even brave man pressed Dattaji to withdraw and wait till Hoikar joined him. Even Jankoji, the gallant youth, requested his uncle to fall back. But Dattaji would not listen. The consciousness of having been the cause of involving his section into an overwhelming catastrophe, through his credulity weighed heavily on his mind.+++(5)+++ He determined not to add cowardice to the credulity that had spared and trusted Nazib, the arch enemy of the Marathas. He returned only one reply to all pressure to withdraw; “Let them withdraw who like. I press none. But I myself must stick to my post; how can I show my face to Nana and Bhau in this life ? I will face Abdally and, God willing, vanquish him in the field, or die fighting in the attempt” (Bhausahebanchi Bakhar) 

In the meanwhile, Gaziuddin had discovered that the emperor was a party to the Pathani plot against his life and position. So be took the emperor out, put him to death, seated another person on the throne and joined the Maratha forces. 

True to his words Dattaji faced Abdally at Kurushetra. His personal valour so enthused the Maratha soldiers that they actually forced Abdaly to fall back and convinced him that he could not hold out long single-handed against the Shindia. So he attempted to cross and succeeded in crossing the Jumna and joined Nazibkhan’s forces at Shukratal. Suja too met him there and Ahmed khan Bangash and Kutub Shah as well. The Moslem coalition grew more formidable than ever. It was now clear that the single division under Dattaji could not stem the tide. Again his advisers requested Dattaji to fall back: ‘Let him go who likes: Dattaji must do the duty of a soldier.’ Such words, from the lips of such a general, could not but have their effect. None left him. On the 10th January 1760, the Marathas marched out to hold the ghats of the Jumna and repel the forces of Abdally that attempted to cross the river. The fight began. Bayaji, Maloji, leader after leader of the Marathas, fought valiantly and fell facing heavy odds. The opponents mixed and griped each other. Accidentally the banner of Maharashtra got surrounded by the crowding Pathan and Rohilla forces. The Marathas rushed to rescue it. The fight thickened, Dattaji and Jankoji, unable to bear the sight of their national banner in danger, both rushed in and engaged in an epic fight. Just then a bullet struck Jankoji and the gallant youth fell wounded from his horse. Dattaji saw it and, instead of fighting back to a safer position rushed headlong ahead, striking the foes as one possessed and followed by his faithful follower, soon got inextricably mixed with the enemy forces. At last the inevitable came. Dattaji was hit by a bullet and fell mortally wounded on the ground. 

Kutub Shah, the religious preceptor of Nazibkhan and one of the zealots who led the Pathani plot, saw it; he advanced towards the fallen Maratha general and inquired, with ironical bitterness: ‘Well Patel: will you fight again and against us ?’ ‘Yes,’ replied the dying and undaunted Dattaji. ‘If I survive, I will fight again.’ These words exasperated the zealot still more and angrily he kicked the fallen hero, drew his sword, cut off and carried Dattaji’s head in triumph as that of a Kafir.+++(5)+++ Thus Dattaji fell. No soldier in the world defended his national colours more faithfully, or died in defending them more valiantly, than he. 

The news of the fall of Dataji and the mean dastardly insults heaped upon that dying hero reached Maharashtra and set it aflame. The whole people rose like one man and demanded vengeance. 

They had only that week won a splendid battle at Udgir and meant to crush Haidar and finish the task of liberating all South. Just then the news of Dattaji’s defeat and death reached them. Balaji and Bhau lost not a moment in preparing themselves to meet the momentous issue. In spite of their having that very week fought out a great campaign in the south, they denied themselves and their forces the rest of a single day, ordered their generals and councillors to assemble at Patdur, discussed the serious question in all its bearing and decided to dispatch a powerful army to face Abdally and fight him out before he could reach Malva. The flower of the Maratha nation joined the forces, Samsher Bahadur, Vithal Shivdeo, Manaji Dhaigude, Antaji Mane. Nimbalkar and several other veterans and generals assumed their respective coasmands. Bhau the victor of Udgir was appointed generallissimo and the youth prince Vishwasrao the eldest son of Balaji, who had only recently distinguished hiaself at Leg* and was the rising hope of his nation. Bhau .... Ibrahim Khan Gardi commanded the most efficient artillery of the time. Damaji Gaikwad, Santoji Wagh and other Maratha generals continued joining, as the army advanced Leasers and messengers were dispatched, to the several Rajput courts in the North to win them over to the Hindu cause and persuade them to join hands with the Marathas, at is their attempt to fight the foe of Hindudom, the destroyer of Mathura and Gokul. Crossing Vindhyadri and the Narbada, the Maratha army reached the Chambai. All north stood awed at the sight of the strength and the splendour it presented. All elements, Rajas and Raos, Nabobs and Khans, got cowed down and dared not raise a finger against them. Soon Jankoji Shinde too came with his division and joined Bhau. The whole Maratha camp received that young prince, as handsome as brave, with enthusiasm and love, and in him honoured the memories of Dattaji, his uncle, who fell in the battle of Badan. Bhau called a general assembly in honour of the valiant prince who though w ithin his teens, had fought battles, won victories and borne several dangerous wounds in the defence of his people and his faith and publicly showered on him valuable presents and robes of honour. When Vishwasrao, the gallant and noble youth who in the absence of Balaji, was the beloved leader of the Maratha nation, advanced to meet the valiant young Jankoji, every Maratha near that vast national concourse was moved. The two splendid youths,—both so handsome, so brave and so devoted to the aspirations and ideals of their people,— were the Rising Hope. 

Malharrao Holkar, too, came in. He had already paid a heavy price for his suicidal folly in adopting Nazibkhan and in being deliberately negligent in advancing to Dattaji’s help before it was too late had been badly beatern by Abdally after the fall of Dattaji. Now Bhau meant to cross the Jumna and beat Abdally before he could advance to face him on this side of the river. He had ordered Govindpant Bundela to attack, whenever possible to do so, the rear of Abdally’s forces and cut off his supplies. But the rivers were in floods and it was difficult to cross them in the face of the powerful enemy moving along the other bank. So Bhau decided to march on to Delhi and recover it from the hands of Abdally’s forces there. Of all Hindu princes in the North the Jat along came over to the Marathas. Bhau personally advanced to receive him with great honours and both of them swore by the scared waters of the Jumne to fight out Abdally, and to fight to a finish. 

The eyes of all people now turned towards Delhi. The Hindus and the Moslems both realized the great moral effect that the occupation of Delhi— the historical capital — meant Bhau sent forth the forces of Shindia, Holkar and Balwantrao Mehendale to attack Delhi. The Pathans who held it fought well. But unable to hold it against the Marathas, they ultimate! surrendered the city. The fort too held out bravely, but well directed guns of the powerful Maratha artillery soon rendered it untenable and the Muhammadan forces there gave in. The news of the fall of the capital and the fort caused great rejoicings in the hearts of all lovers of the Hindu cause. The Maratha forces made a triumphant into the capital and Bhau planted the Maratha colours on the fort of the capital of the Pandavas. It was for the first time that the Hindu forces, or as they proudly styled themselves ‘The forces of the Hari-bhaktas', the worshippers of Hari, effected a triumphant entry into Delhi under an independent Hindu banner ever since the days of Prithviraj. The Moslem crescent set; the banner of Hindu-Pad-Padashahi rose at last over the capital of the Indian Empire in spite of all that the Pathans and the Rohillas the Moguls or the Turks, the Shaiks or the Sayids could do against it. Abdally, with all the powerful allied forces of the Mouslems, was but on the other bank of the Jamuna and yet could do nothing to prevent it. 

Sadashivrao Bhau felt that his dream of the Hindu Pad Padshahi was—be it for a day—but realized before his eyes. To bring about and render the birth of even one such day possible justifies the existence of a nation. Such a day, even in its short span of life, focuses in its rising splendour the activities and achievements, the rejoicings and sufferings, the trials and tribulations, of centuries of national existence. For, that day proved- beyond cavil or criticism that seven centuries of Moslem persecution and power had failed to crush the Hindu spirit or its vital faculty of rejuvenation. They had, not only proved themselves equal to, but had ultimately prevailed over their foes. 

Bhau, left to himself, would have got Vishwasrao crowned as the Emperor of all India, and thus ceremoniously ushered in Hindu-Pad-Padashahi. But he rightly doubted the political wisdom of such an immediate step. For he knew that, not only the Muhammadans who still hesitated to take sides through the fear of the Marathas,—but alas !— Also even the Hindu princes in the north would be totally alienated by such a step as that. Still he determined to test the temper of the people and also not to let pass such a unique occasion without impressing its momentous meaning on the minds of the people of all Hindustan, friends and foes alike. So he ordered an Imperial Assembly to be held in honour of the great event and the gallant and valiant Vishwasrao presided over it. All Maharashtra was represented there: nay, the flower of Hindu valour and wealth and statesmanship and learning shone brightly there. Royal rejoicings commenced. Cavalry and artillery, thousands of horses and elephants, tens of thousands of soldiers and warriors that had carried the Hindu colours from the Godavari to the Indus in the north and to the seas in the south, burst forth in victorious salutes through thousands of trumpets and horns and guns and big martial drums. Then General after General and Statesmen and Sardars and Governors and Viceroys, humbly advanced, did hearty homage to their beloved prince, as they would do to their Emperor, who presided over their nation and tendered him the honours of a victor. All who witnessed that splendid scene knew what it meant. All who took part in it realized that it was but a reharsel of a great coronation wherein this youthful Hindu prince would -God willing- be crowned as the greatest Hindu Emperor of all Hindustan. 
