+++
title = "07 "

+++
<div align="right">

**4. P. N. Awasthi**

</div>

I have gone through both the letters written by a Pune Swayamsevak for
the RSS organisation. The issue pointed out in the letters is quite
genuine and crucial, particularly after the formation of Pakistan and
Bangla Desh. We had the same Constitution before also, but partition
could not be prevented in spite of the sacrifice of Mahatma Gandhi -
showering liberties on a people bent on separation.  Retaining the same
Constitution automatically invites the same happenings repeatedly. If
this is really intended, at least after the partition the country should
have been named as ‘Secularistan’ or ‘Sam Dharmastan’ or something like
that to indicate its proper nature. If this was put to vote people would
have known what they were preferring. But calling it ‘India’ and
‘Hindustan’ with a permanent policy of strangulating the original
inhabitants of this land - forced to be recognised by the foreign
identification ‘Hindus’ - who did not convert, in spite of all the
atrocities, to recently originated religions, born in the places once
under the umbrella of the culture and civilization of this land, has
confused the people.

I have heard the debate in Parliament when BJP could not prove its
majority. The people talking there were all bound by the Indian
Constitution. But there were quite a good number talking of India not as
one Nation but as multi-nation. More vocal were those pleading for
disunity and disintegration. They were keen to show their separateness.
They were the representatives of Indian Nation, Indian Constitution! If
expression and toleration of all this is the speciality of our
Constitution then divisions must be our glorious future.

I am a freedom fighter, and I have painfully seen four chunks of my
Motherland falling apart and now called as foreign. The present map of
India is incomplete in my eyes, a pain to my eyes such as can never be
realised by the younger generation.

The names given to us are all from those who separated from us. Our
trouble is that we still harbour our original spirit, and those calling
themselves ‘Others’ harbour the opposite - their original spirit.

It is under such diagonally opposite psychologies that emergence of a
common totality - the feel of a Nation - has become impossible. But it
is to be noted, this all is away from actual living conditions. This is
mental and is created by separatist politicians. None of us can
annihilate the other. But the other side cannot be overlooked. The
so-called minorities in this country are a problem on account of their
narrow vision, hostile philosophies and attitudes, and irrational
fanaticism. As against this, the philosophy and history of the majority
of this land has constantly proved its capacity to sustain the society.
It is, therefore, necessary that erosion of the base of this majority is
prevented, broadened, and the whole is consolidated. Hatred-based
religions and their followers cannot be appeased or satisfied because
their survival means the non-survival of others.

I am concerned with RSS only through newspapers. I think it is not a
political organisation. I believe it has tried to create self-confidence
in the people of this country who are the original inhabitants having
not converted to any prophet-based religion. They have quite a wide
field for themselves. They have no reason to please those who are bent
upon being recognised as Others - outsiders. Even from political angle
it is the solidarity of the majority that matters rather than help from
Others.

In all organisations, there are always different trends. It all depends
on the character, knowledge, experience and outlook of the individuals
of the organisation. The commonness of the objectives becomes thinner
and thinner as these varieties increase. Somehow our culture is
habituated to openness and liberties. In the West, it is the opposite in
the name of etiquette and descipline.

I remember that in the earlier Congress there were people like Bal
Gangadhar Tilak, Madan Mohan Malaviya, Purushottam Das Tandon and many
others who knew Sanskrit, ancient treatises etc., and had different
depths of thinking. They had a different image of independence. The wave
of Communism swept all those educated in the West, on account of absence
of basic moorings on home stuff. The RSS also might be having problems,
but if the common wall of objectives is allowed to erode the edifice is
bound to fall apart. This in particular should be realised by those
creating diversions. They have to see whether they are constructive.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is a Freedom Fighter living in Mumbai.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


