+++
title = "21 "

+++
<div align="right">

**18. B.L. Jaju **

</div>

I have received the circular ‘Time For Stock Taking’. You have desired
that the intelligentsia, particularly the Hindu intelligentsia, should
offer their opinion about the ideology of Islam and how do they react to
the same.

I am liberally educated, having an open mind, and have no prejudices or
preconceived thoughts about any religion, much less against Christianity
or Islam.

In my opinion Hinduism or Sanatan Dharma has a long history of
toleration. They have never tried to see the darker side of any culture
or religion, and have always tried to accept and respect the points of
view of others. I think this is the reason why Sanatan Dharma has
survived during the last five thousand years. I am particularly grateful
to Dr. Godbole for asking the opinion and to elicit the Hindu response.
I have read with great interest the tenets of Christianity and Islam. I
am afraid that unlike Hinduism they do not allow any equality, much less
respect for other religions.

Many of our thinkers, writers and commentators have talked of composite
culture, toleration of Sufism and what not. It is only Hindus who mouth
such pious platitudes just to cover up the shortcomings or loopholes of
Islam.

I have no desire to give a long history or examples of cruel behaviour
of the followers of Islam right from the hordes from Arabia down to Mr.
Jinnah. It was just like the American policy, of Dulles: ‘If you are not
with us, then you are against us.’

It is high time that Hindus should resolve and be resolute as to how we
should react to the supine behaviour of our leaders who tried to placate
and please Muslims by surrendering to all their demands including the
demand of partition of India.

We all know how Bernard Shaw ridiculed the barbarism of Christianity
when he wrote about sending troops to avenge the murder of a priest and
taking the markets of the colonies as a gift from God. Similarly, H.G.
Wells wrote about Islam and Mohammad Sahib.

In my opinion, during the last fifty years, politicians like Mulayam
Singh or Kanshi Ram have tried to play the same tune to get the votes of
Muslims. I am afraid if we do not act we are in for another partition of
the country, and the intelligentsia whose reaction you want will be
responsible for this.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is an industrialist living in New Delhi.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


