+++
title = "23 "

+++
<div align="right">

**20.  Dr. S.D. Kulkarni**

</div>

**Semitic Faiths are Political Creeds, not Religions**

Since its inception, Islam is being practised as a political creed. It
is not a religion. These two terms creed and religion are poles apart.
Creed is a dogmatic belief system as propounded by a person who claims
himself to be a prophet like the Jewish prophet Moses or the Islamic
prophet Muhammad, or a super-intelligent person, or a thinker like Marx,
next only to God. Whatever they say or do is the revealed truth. The
followers are not to question, why? They have only to put implicit faith
in what the prophet ordains them to do. They have no other choice.
Religion, on the other hand, is a system of beliefs agreed upon by a
group, particularly in the matter of worship of God who is taken to be
the Creator. Religion thus is a mode of worship of the Creator.

Hindus haven’t studied the tenets of Islam and Christianity deeply.
They, therefore, consider these faiths as religions and project
conceptions like ‘Sarva-Dharma-Samabhãva’ or ‘Sarva-Panth-Samãdara’ and
the like. Let us see what are the fundamental tenets of Judaism for both
Christianity and Islam follow the Mosaic belief system known as Ten
Commandments. The first two are: (I) “I am Jehovah your God who has
brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slaves. You
must not have any other God against my face; (2) You must not make for
yourself carved image or a form like anything anywhere on the Earth or
in the Heavens or in the Water.” (Bible, Old Testament, Ex-20, 2 to 16).

The other commandments are ethical rules like the teachings of the Hindu
Puranas. There is nothing to quarrel about these. The first two are
further elaborated in Ex-34,12 to 16 by Jehovah, the Jewish God Himself:
“Watch yourself that you do not conclude a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land to which you are going… But their altars, you people are to
pull down and their sacred pillars, you are to shatter and their sacred
poles, you are to cut down. For you must not prostrate yourself to
another God, because Jehovah whose name is Jealous, he is a jealous
God.”

This is a political command. It means: “You and your group are
exclusively chosen by God. You should not have any relationship with any
other group with a different belief system. It is your duty to destroy
the places of worship of the others.”

In Ex-34.17 it is ordained: “You must not make idols of gods for
yourself.” Moses himself destroyed the idols made by his followers
(Ex-32,19 to 20). And Jehovah the Jewish God, forbade his followers to
make any image of any god. It will be seen that in these commandments,
there is no spiritual content at all. It is a hegemonistic political
creed in the name of religion, so devised as if it is God’s word and
directing the followers to put implicit faith in whatever is commanded.
But the Jews were not proselytisers. They confined their beliefs to
their group.

These two tenets are common to both Christianity and Islam.

Are these commands not criminal in content? Jehovah’s covenant is with
the Jews alone. Christianity and Islam follow these. But their position
is different. They call for utter destruction of life and property of
those who do not believe in the utterances of their exclusive gods and
their messengers. Christian theologians would throw into flaming fire
all the non-Christians including the Jews and the Muslims. Christians
are against the Jews in particular, even though to them the Old
Testament (the Jewish Bible) is ‘holy’. Similarly, Islam consigns to
hell-fire all the non-Muslims including the Jews and the Christians,
even though the Bible is its mother scripture. Islam is modelled on the
Jewish Bible.

Thus Islam and Christianity exhaust between themselves the universe of
discourse and throw the whole of humanity into the hell-fire.  This way
also, Islam and Christianity are not religions for under their laws all
human beings go to hell-fire.

Islam shares all the above Christian tenets and adds to these its own
exclusive tenets, viz. an open war-declaration against those professing
faiths other than theirs. They regard the land where Muslims are in
majority or the land where they are in power as holy Dar-ul-Islam. The
land where they are in minority or the land where they are not the
rulers, they regard as Dar-ul-Harb or sinful land. Their theology tells
them to lie low in such situations or act as fifth-columnists. They
have, however, to continue to strive till they convert the Dar-ul-Harb
into Dar-ul-Islam. Can a religion with such war-like theology be on par
with the other faiths which have no such declared intentions?

In such a situation, only the Hindus, who believe in ‘universal
botherhood’ irrespective of caste, creed or religion as their
fundamental tenet, would have a place in heaven. Their God’s name is
Sat-Cit-Ananda or Existential Blissful Energy or simply Conscious
Energy, which is the source of this Universe constituted of human
beings, animals and plants. Even inanimate matter springs from this
source. The Hindu prayer, therefore, is *‘lokãH samastãH sukhino
bhavantu’* - let all people be happy.

Hindus are, therefore, the only people fit to be the inmates of heaven.

The Hindu confusion about ‘sarva-dharma-samabhãva - all dharmas are
equally honourable (dharma is wrongly taken as synonymous with religion)
- is born out of misreading of the Semitic scripture, the Bible - Old
and New Testaments. Religion is a mode of worship. Dharma means ethical
conduct intended to hold human society together. It is a way of life,
devised for the common good of all.

Without studying the fundamental tenets of Islam and Christianity,
Hindus unwittingly call these as faiths or religions. Had the Muslims
and Christians confined their belief systems to their groups alone, like
the Jews, it would not have mattered much to the non-Muslims or
non-Christians. But they are out to convert the whole world to their way
of thinking. Even the use of the sword to achieve this objective is not
taboo to them.

Are these illogical, dogmatic, exclusionist tenets not criminal in
nature and content? Christianity thus cannot be on par with the Hindu
tenet of ‘universal brotherhood’.  Hindus have no quarrel with the
Christian God. For the Hindus welcome good thoughts from any quarter.
After all, Muslims and Christians are human beings as good or as bad as
the Hindus or any others. By discarding these criminal elements in their
belief systems, they can become part of the Hindu mainstream. The
experience of leaders like Gandhiji and others is that Christian and
Islamic theologies prevent these religionists to accept the Hindu theme
of ‘sarva-dharma-samabhãva’ or ‘sarva-panth-samãdara’.

Let the opinion-making leaders from the Muslim and Christian communities
come forward with some proposal like ‘sarva-panth-samãdara’, and then
there can be some dialogue with them; to-day, it is a one-sided affair.
We concede to these religionists whatever is not due to them in the
belief that they would join the Indian mainstream, once we take the
initiative and be liberal to them, for Hindus are a majority community.
Unilateral gestures are considered as a sign of weakness by hardheaded
politicians as well as religionists.

Christians are showing signs of opening a dialogue with Hindus. The
elites amongst them feel that Christian tenets and beliefs are illogical
and thus irrelevant in the present-day world where rationalism is fast
replacing the old-fashioned belief systems. Islamic thinkers also are
showing cracks in their otherwise solid front. The present generation of
Hindus should not commit the same mistakes as their preceding
generations did. On the other hand, they should conduct a sustained
operation to educate the Muslims by persuasive but firm methods,
pointing out to them what their belief system means. They cannot
continue their old game of raising their demands whenever some demand is
conceded by the Hindus unilaterally.

As I have stated at the outset, the Semitic faiths are political creeds
and not religions. In politics, firmness backed by diplomatic skill
pays. The liberal stance is considered as weakness. In such a situation,
they close their eyes and ears and pursue terrorist tactics ruthlessly
against Hindus.

Can BJP succeed where Gandhi failed? Gandhi was considered as number one
enemy of the Muslims. If the Sarva-Panth-Samãdara-Manch professes to
have equal respect for all faiths, then this Manch would have to start a
campaign against conversions. If Islam and Christianity are not better
than the Hindu faith, then where is the case for conversion? Then why
are Muslims against the common civil code? If the Islamic Sharia is
better, let us sit together and discuss and adopt a common approach to
all laws.

I agree with the approach of Dr. Shrirang Godbole, a young man from the
R.S.S. ranks.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is General Editor of BHISHMA, an 18 Volume series on History
and Culture, and an 11 Volume series of Veda Translations. He lives at
Thane in Maharastra.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


