+++
title = "25  Equality of Religions as Secularism"

+++
<div align="right">

**22.  Professor K. Lakshminarayana**

</div>

**First Document**

With reference to Dr. Godbole’s analysis of the eight conceptions of the
so-called Hindu Organizations regarding the Muslim Problem, his first
two responsive comments reiterate the fact that Cults of Uniformism
masquerading as religions are bound to be imperialist aggressors.

Regarding the third conception – ‘Islam is good but Muslims are bad’ -
Dr Godbole has rightly reiterated that the difficulty resides in the
Cult that is fundamental to the group consciousness of the Muslims. The
problem, however, seems to be more complicated. On the one hand, there
are the ‘Hindu Caste’ Muslims (HCMs). On the other hand there are those
whom the HCMs call ‘Musalmans’ (MMs)\*. The latter appear to recognize
themselves as foreigners and as erstwhile and would-be rulers. They tend
to align themselves strategically with our ‘Secular Progressives’.
Hindus will have to interact differently with these two groups, but
interact they must. Healthy interaction with the HCMs cannot be based
either on appeasement or on aggression. Before anything in the way of
fruitful interaction can happen, Hindu Society has to get organically
strengthened. The synthetic top-to-down organization is doomed to fail.

Dr. Godbole points out: ‘If Muslims renounce Islam, they will also
become tolerant.’ People, however, do not renounce things: they keep
them for use. When their perceived security and other needs are better
satisfied at some future date by aligning with the strong (i.e. the
organically strengthened Hindu Society), the problem disappears. Shri
Ram Swarup has rightly pointed out that when our Hindu National Society
regains its prestige (by virtue of its strength), this alignment and
return will automatically take place. The real problem is how to shake
loose of the stranglehold of the secularist progressives on the one hand
and that of those who have hijacked the Hindu ‘card’ on the other. This
latter comment does not refer to those who are working for the
upliftment of our Hindu Society.

Dr. Godbole’s response to perceptions 4, 5, 6 and 8 are very well taken,
except to add that BJP itself has been moving towards being another
Congress. People may prefer the original to the duplicate.

Item 7 calls for further comment. The response that the community’s
leaders are not the primary cause of isolationism needs more careful
consideration. The leaders (MMs) sustain themselves on this isolation
(of the HCMs). The former are to be bypassed. This can happen only when
the ‘alignment with the strong’ mentioned earlier takes place. The upper
layers of the community see practical advantage in the separate identity
of the community: nurtured by our Constitution and Realpolitik. When the
advantage lies with alignment/return, no leader and no ism will really
come in the way of younger generations. These will be intent on making
good in this world.  
 

**Second Document**

Dr. Godbole’s comments on the ‘Sarva Dharma Samãdar Manch’ are fully
justified. It is only necessary to add, with reference to his item 3,
that there is one group of oppressors and a *different* group of victims
within the same community. Developments such as this Samãdar Manch are
perhaps only an indication that the RSS is tired and apprehends failure
on the political front.  
 

**Equality of Religions as Secularism**

Several eminent and well-meaning people have been enunciating Secularism
in the Indian context as ‘equality of religions’. Let us see the
implications of this approach.

It must be clearly understood at the very outset that the term religion
is used for two entirely different approaches to life. We have religions
which may be variously described as uniformist, exclusivist, outer
seeking, aggressively converting. There are, on the other hand,
religions which may be variously described as pluralistic, inclusive,
inner seeking, non-aggressive. This second variety reject the first
variety as false and such repudiation is *inherent* in them, even though
not put forward as a tenet. They cover Hinduism (including Jainism,
Buddhism, Sikhism of the Gurus), Taoism, Confucianism, Shintoism and
others. People of these religions see heir religious cultures and
spiritual approaches as having essentially the same eternal and true
foundation. Equality of religions is thus inherent within this second
variety. On the other hand, each religion of the first variety holds
itself as the only true one and all others as false. This exclusivism is
in fact fundamental to its existence. Equality of religions is thus
fundamentally excluded by the first variety.

If Secularism is part of the basic structure of the Constitution as has
been regularly emphasized by our higher judiciary and if, at the same
time, Secularism is equality of religions, then there is only one way of
upholding the Constitution in this matter. That is, the State is bound
*not* to encourage the practice of/subscription to the first variety of
religions. This is under a policy of benevolent neutrality. At least one
member of our higher judiciary has taken the view that Indian Secularism
consists of an *active* pursuit of the policy of equality of religions,
benevolent neutrality not being good enough. In that case the State will
have to *positively discourage* the practice of the first variety (if
not ban it) and specially encourage the practice of the second variety.
And it has to take positive steps to prevent discrimination *within* the
*second* variety.

Persons occupying the highest positions in the land, such as members of
the Cabinet, judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts and the
Election Commissioners, have to take the oath to uphold the
Constitution. That is, at least the basic structure and, therefore,
Secularism. Even under a policy of benevolent neutrality, people
subscribing to the first variety will not be able to take the oath.
Their oath will be invalid without a repudiation of their current
membership of the first variety of religions. They may of course commit
fraud with the connivance of their communities, as a sincere oath will
mean Apostasy. Much more simply, the oath becomes meaningless just like
so many other oaths.

‘Equality of Religions’ as Secularism is, however, not the definition
followed by most members of our political establishment and the Press.
Their definition has long been made the clearest, even if not stated:
encourage the first variety and discourage the second variety.

The recent apex court pronouncement on Hindutva essentially means, in my
understanding, that the second variety, taken as a *whole*, is not a
religion. That is of course true: it is simply Religion with a capital R
and without the article a. And it covers many who are not looking for
any mystery or even enlightenment.

Most human beings, left to themselves, are automatically in the second
variety. The State does not have to do anything in this regard. Its
duty, on the other hand, is at least not to encourage uniformist and
hence exclusivist creeds. These creeds include both the ‘religious’ and
the ‘secular’ varieties. ‘Secularism’ is thus a *term unfit* to be used
to describe any liberal and humanistic policy of the Indian State.

It is also pertinent to point out that the doctrine of Neutrality of the
State is a pernicious one. Only a Government by the Aliens can take that
attitude or, as in our case, a Government by the Alienated. A democratic
State must be imbued with the consciousness of the people and their
culture and civilization at the deepest levels.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Agehananda Bharati: *Hindu Views and Ways and the Hindu-Muslim
Interface*, New Delhi, 1981, p. 90 and ref. to A.C. Mayer (1 966). \[The
writer of this response lives in Chennai.\]  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


