+++
title = "45 "

+++
<div align="right">

**42. Shrikant G. Talageri**

</div>

Dr. Godbole’s views are stated so succinctly, so concisely and so
comprehensively that there is really little need for any comments on
them: it is for the Sangh leadership to read his views very carefully
and repeatedly, and to seriously ponder over the matter.

However, I would like, nevertheless, to make the following elaborations
of my views on the following points raised by Dr. Godbole as well as by
**Voice of India** in their comments on his views:

> 1\. *Leaders of the Sangh Parivar look like following the Congress
> path in taking Hindus for granted; and their concept of
> sarva-pantha-samãdar is even more dangerous than the secularist
> concept of sarva-dharma-samabhãv.*

This is true. But, apart from the ideological aspect of it as stressed
by Dr. Godbole, the practical aspect of it is even more fraught with
danger for the future of Hindutva and Hinduism:

Congress secularism can only succeed in subverting the consciousness and
morale of the *general* Hindu public. The more conscious Hindus remain
unmoved by it. Similar secular propaganda by the Sangh Parivar, however,
directly targets these sections of Hindu society, and can succeed in
effectively and completely neutralising Hindu sentiments, Hindu
reactions and Hindu activism.

Today, the situation is such that the Hindu plank on the national level
has been totally appropriated by the Sangh Parivar. Opponents of Hindus
and Hinduism have often tried to create schisms within the Hindutva
front, either by trying to drive wedges between different groups within
this Parivar; or by floating alternative Hindu bodies. These efforts
have only served to underline the need for Hindus to rally behind the
Sangh Parivar to thwart such attempts; they only strengthened the
monopoly of the Sangh Parivar over this plank.

The result is that when the Sangh Parivar, either misguidedly or
deliberately, starts taking Hindus down the garden path, conscious
Hindus are caught in a real trap. Supporting, or going along with, this
suicidal course is a travesty of all that they believe in, and opposing
it would constitute the dreaded sin of playing into the enemy’s hands.
Either way, they are, in a sense, stabbing Hinduism and Hindutva in the
back. This is the grim tragedy.

The whole situation has a macabre resemblance to the situation in George
Orwell’s *Animal Farm*. A deep reading of this classic shows close
parallels with the Sangh Parivar, with one difference: the fierce,
growling dogs who curb all dissent are missing. The Sangh Parivar is a
Hindu family, and, among Hindu families, a decent and respectable
middle-class one. Hence these particular creatures are absent from this
Animal Farm.

It is the perception of *this* single but significant difference, and of
the unique factor (Hinduism) responsible for it, that gives one the
faint hope that this Animal Farm will not end up like the one in
Orwell’s classic, and it is perhaps this hope that has led to this
process of stock-taking initiated by Dr. Godbole and **Voice of India**.
Whether this process of stock-taking will result in arresting the trend
of “Animal Farm” becoming “Manor Farm”, or not, depends on only two
entities: “God”, and the Sangh leadership.

At this point, we need not discuss the parallels between Animal Farm and
the Sangh Parivar, or list the betrayals of Hindutva and Hinduism by the
political wing of this Parivar, the BJP. The only thing we need discuss
is the need to arrest and reverse this trend, and the means of doing so.

*The very first thing, in my opinion, is that the Sangh Parivar should
see to it that the BJP changes its flag from saffron-green to saffron.*
This is only a symbolic change, but it *symbolizes everything*.

Till this is done, all other pleas, assurances, acts and actions of the
Sangh Parivar must be regarded as so many squealings of Squealer (the
smooth-talking Goebbles of *Animal Farm*).

In *Animal Farm*, it must be remembered, the Animals realize the full
extent of the betrayal only when they hear the sheep (who are utilised
by the leaders to drown out murmurs of dissent with their loud and
continuous slogan-chanting), who have all along been chanting “four legs
good, two legs bad”, suddenly start a cacophony of “four legs good, two
legs *better*”.

This viewpoint of the Sangh Parivar, even if not precisely expressed in
the form of a slogan, was always “saffron flag good, saffron-green flag
bad”. H.V. Sheshadri, in his book, *The Tragic Story of Partition*,
castigates the Congress for introducing a green strip in the national
flag “for the sake of pampering the communal Muslim mind”. He calls it a
betrayal of “the most adored and shining symbol of a Nation - of its
ideals and aspirations, its history and traditions, the endless
sacrifices and sufferings of its martyrs, the prowess and penance of its
heroes and saints”.

However, it has been quite some time since the Sangh Parivar’s viewpoint
appears to have changed to “saffron flag good, saffron-green flag
*better*”. Swayamsevaks who chant *nîla gagan mêñ laharãyêñge bhagwã
amar nishãn* (we shall unfurl the saffron flag in the blue firmament) on
the *shãkhã* grounds, change their perspective as soon as they step out
of the *shãkhã* : it is not the saffron flag of some other party (like
the Jana Sangh, Shiv Sena or Hindu Mahasabha) that they hold aloft, but
the saffron-green flag of the BJP.

The flag of a party is its *own* prerogative. No-one can legitimately
question the BJP if it changes over to a saffron flag. The fully green
flag of the Janata Dal gets countless Hindu votes; and as recent trends
in Mumbai (e.g. in the Muslim stronghold of Behrampada in the recent
municipal corporation elections) show, the saffron flag of even a
rabidly Hindutva-spouting party like the Shiv Sena can effectively gamer
staunch Muslim votes, if that is to be any consideration in deciding the
colour of the Sangh Parivar’s political flag.

The only thing preventing the BJP from having a saffron flag is its own
leadership. And here lies a *fundamental* question : is it even within
the realms of possibility that this party which does not even have the
guts to paint the colour of its *own* flag saffron, could ever have the
guts to paint the colour of the national polity saffron?

If the Sangh Parivar’s followers believe it to be so, it is only because
they have internalised the squealings of Squealer and been reduced to
the different species of Animal Farm inhabitants - the horse whose only
two maxims are “I will work harder” and “the leader is always right”;
the sheep who mindlessly memorises and chants every new slogan given to
it by the leaders; the cow who is sad, confused and depressed by the
goings-on, but resigned to them; the ass who sees everything with a
clear, unjaundiced eye, but chooses to remain silent except for a
cynical snort every now and then… 

There is still, of course, a way; but only if there is the will or
desire.

> 2\. *The concept of “Sarva Panth”" should include all Bharatiya and
> non-Biblical, non-Bharatiya spiritual practices, but not Islam and
> Christianity.*

This is, again, perfectly right. Unfortunately, the Sangh parlance on
these matters consists only of hypocrisy and doubletalk.

At a recent seminar held in Aurangabad, the Sangh leaders passed a
resolution that Hindutva is not a *dharmavãchak* (meaning perhaps
*panthavãchak*) but a rashtravãchak concept, and that it therefore
includes Islam and Christianity since Muslims and Christians are also
Indians.

This is, of course, intrinsically absurd: from a *rashtravãdî* point of
view, Islam and Christianity are even more obviously alien than from a
*panthavãdî* point of view - the two clearly represent *foreign* lands,
cultures and imperialisms.

Hinduism is the name for the Indian *territorial* form of worldwide
Sanatanism (call it Paganism in English). The ideology of Hindutva
should therefore be a Universal ideology:

On the international level, the Sangh, as the apex organisational body
of Hindutva ideology, should spearhead a worldwide revival, rejuvenation
and resurgence of spiritualism, and of all the religions and cultures
which existed all over the world before the advent of imperialist
ideologies like Christianity, Islam, Fascism, Marxism, etc.

On the Indian front, it should spearhead the revival, rejuvenation and
resurgence of Hinduism, which includes not only religious, spiritual and
cultural practices springing from Vedic or Sanskritic sources, but from
*all* other Indian sources independently of these: the practices of the
Andaman islanders and the (pre-Christian) Nagas are as Hindu in the
territorial sense, and Sanatana in the spiritual sense, as classical
Sanskritic Hinduism.

And this ideology should cover not only religious and spiritual
practices and concepts, but every single aspect of India’s matchlessly
priceless cultural heritage: climate and topography; flora and fauna;
races and languages; music, dance and drama; arts and handicrafts;
culinary arts; games and physical systems; architecture; costumes and
apparels; literature and sciences…

A true *Hindutvavãdî* should feel a pang of pain, and a desire to take
positive action, not only when he hears that the percentage of Hindus in
the Indian population is falling due to a coordination of various
factors, or that Hindus are being discriminated against in almost every
respect, but *also* when he hears that the Andamanese races and
languages are becoming extinct; that vast tracts of forests, millions of
years old, are being wiped out forever; that ancient and mediaeval Hindu
architectural monuments are being vandalised, looted or fatally
neglected; that priceless ancient documents are being destroyed or left
to rot and decay; that innumerable forms of arts and handicrafts,
architectural styles, plant and animal species, musical forms and
musical instruments, etc. are becoming extinct; that our sacred rivers
and environment are being irreversibly polluted and destroyed…

Hindutva is not a narrow ideology: its true vision is limitless. The
tragedy is that the Hindutva leadership, *bogged down as it is in the
swamp of electoral politics*, is more concerned with making a show of
“broadening” the parameters, of what they themselves seem to secretly
believe is a narrow ideology, by bringing imperialist ideologies within
its scope. It is as if Sri Krishna, instead of revealing the limitless
vision of the Universe to Arjuna, had opted instead to show that he had
two faces : a Pandava one and a Kaurava one.

> 3\. *Muslims should be viewed not as oppressors but as the greatest
> victims of Islam. They should be weaned away from Islamic ideology.*

This is also true. But, in this matter, I have some problems. 

Indian Muslims are not generally first generation converts to Islam.
They are Muslims from birth: born of Muslim parents, and members of
distinct Muslim communities or *jamaats*.

Weaning away entire communities of Muslims away from Islam is rather
difficult to imagine. Weaning away individual Muslims, also, is no
easier: it is like asking an individual Hindu to cut off all his ties
with his caste and community. In the case of a Muslim individual, it is
worse : hated by his erstwhile *jamaatwalas*, shunned by secularist and
leftist Hindus, ignored by a caste-bound Hindu society, and only
indifferently welcomed by conscious Hindus, his position is not likely
to be an enviable one.

Without actively discouraging such a process, however, the following
fourfold policy should be adopted:

1\. Muslims, whether they remain staunch Muslims or awakened
(weaned-away) ones, should be assured that as individuals and as general
groups, they will get *full* justice in every sense of the term: the
position of a Muslim individual or group will be *exactly* the same as
that of a Hindu individual or group. The BJP’s slogan, “justice for all,
appeasement of none” says it in a nutshell.

But there will be *no* religious appeasement or pampering, *no* positive
discrimination in their favour, and *absolutely no* tolerance of any
expansionist agenda. The establishment of a Hindu *rashtra*, with all
its symbolism and ethos, and of a Hindu cultural policy as suggested
earlier, will be the primary aim of Hindutva ideology.

2\. *Hindus* will have to be weaned away from Islamic ideology or its
more poisonous form - secularist ideology. In this respect, **Voice of
India** is doing *everything*, and the Sangh Parivar nothing.

What is necessary is an all-out *pracãr* and *prasãr* of **Voice of
India** books, which, in entirety or in essence, should be indispensable
reading for all conscious Hindus; and whose import should be common
knowledge among all Hindus.

3\. Hindus will also have to be weaned away from evils *within*
Hinduism. This is also a must, and such activity should not be
erroneously regarded (except where it is part of secularist strategy) as
leading to a weakening of the Hindu front or the Hindu morale.

Hindus should adopt as open an attitude to *pantha-cikitsã* of Hinduism
as to that of Islam and Christianity: there is nothing to fear, since
Hinduism in its essence will shine out white and pure in comparison with
Islam and Christianity in *their* essence. It will only be cleansed of
impurities which stand in its *own* way.

Can we honestly expect Muslims to be weaned away from Islam if they can
expect nothing better from Hinduism? The VHP had reconverted thousands
of Rajput Muslims in Rajasthan to Hinduism; but, as Sangh leaders wryly
admit in private, the subsequent treatment of these reconverted brethren
by a caste-bound Hindu society has not been a very happy one.

The situation between different caste groups within the Hindu fold, and
even the outlook of the Sangh Parivar in such matters (*although, to be
just, the Sangh Parivar has been ahead of any other Hindu group in
genuinely trying to do away with the caste divisions in Hindu society*),
have not been favourable even to a consolidation of Hindus behind
Hindutva, let alone to a weaning away of Muslims back to the Hindu fold.

Take the Ayodhya case. The Ramajanmabhoomî case has everything in its
favour. But with what face can the Sangh Parivar approach the
“low”-caste Hindus of certain areas in, say, Marathwada - where they are
not allowed to enter a temple, but *would* be allowed to enter a mosque
if they became Muslims, or perhaps even without that prerequisite - with
the suggestion that the Babri Masjid be replaced once more with a Rama
temple? Especially if those “low”-caste Hindus happen to be aware of
certain Sangh publications which glorify or whitewash the *interpolated
story* in the Valmiki Ramayana where Ram cuts off the head of a
“low”-caste Shambuka for the sin of performing ritual austerities?

Or, again, there is the incident in Rajasthan, under a BJP government,
where a “low”-caste woman was allegedly raped by a gang of “upper”-caste
men. The “upper”-caste judge let them off with the remark that her
charges were false, on the ground that “upper”-caste men, including a
brahmin, could never have raped a “low”-caste woman! The leftists had a
field day, while the Sangh Privar maintained an ominous silence. Certain
BJP MLAs, however, held a massive rally in which the alleged rapists
were feted, and a resolution was passed demanding that the woman be
tarred and paraded as a punishment for defaming decent people.

Striking hard, and *really hard*, at the roots of this intra-Hindu
injustice, and, what is more, being seen to do so, is a primary
requisite of Hindu polity.  No Hindu (let alone a weaned-away Muslim)
should feel doubtful about getting justice in a Hindutva-based set-up.

4\. Hindu organisations suffer from certain crippling disabilities and
liabilities vis-à-vis “minority” organisations. Except for the
occasional, and practically inaudible, whimper, the Sangh Parivar has
done *nothing* about it.

Because of this, it is Hindu groups and sects which are being weaned
away from Hinduism. It is easy to blame these groups and sects, and to
tell them: “You *are* suffering from injustice, and we *are* being
grossly indifferent to your woes in this respect; but you must suffer in
silence and continue to call yourself Hindus.”

It would be in the interests of justice, however, if the Sangh Parivar
took up this matter on a war-footing, staking its all in a bid to ensure
that Hindus do not have to suffer for being Hindus in this land.

As I said before, it all depends on two entities: “God” and the Sangh
leadership.

If the Sangh leadership refuses to take stock of the situation, or
responds with the usual evasionist squeals – “We know all these things,
we do not require *you* to tell us… why don’t *you* do something instead
of doling out advice to us… we are doing everything that is required to
be done, but in the *proper* way as only *we* know how… you will find
out in good time, trust us” - then only “God” can help us.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer lives in Mumbai. He is the “unknown Indian” who became widely
known as an outstanding scholar when the late Girilal Jain credited him
with demolishing very effectively the established theory of an Aryan
Invasion of India in his book, *Aryan Invasion Theory And Indian
Nationalism*, published by Voice of India in 1993.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


