+++
title = "46 "

+++
<div align="right">

**43. Mrs. Leela Tampi**

</div>

**First Document**

We Hindus find it deeply distressing that quite a few Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) leaders of national stature have taken to
propagating among the Hindu public certain proposition to propitiate the
Muslims. These propositions, besides being false and misleading, are
highly dangerous to Hindu society as they implant Negationism - the
denial of the centuries-long Muslim havoc in India - in the Hindu mind.
They also conceal the truth that it is Islamic theology, based on
Quranic exhortations, that is the direct inspiration for all Islamic
atrocities.

The systematic spreading of these deceptive propositions among Hindus
for constructing an all-accepting attitude to Muslim overlordism and
also the continuing Muslim threat, borders on brainwashing. This
Negationism will entrap Hindus into a sense of false security, and
endanger the very survival of the Hindu Nation. In short, it is making
the Hindus sitting ducks for Muslim aggression.

Let us take a close look at some of the pernicious anti-Hindu and
pro-Muslim exhortations now being insidiously propagated by some of our
national leaders among the trusting Hindu public.

1\. *What is the harm in adding Jesus and Muhammad to the 33 crore Hindu
gods and goddesses?*  
This exhortation - dressed up as an innocent supposition - to Hindus is
so mischievous as to be actually subversive. For it sabotages our
precious Hindu identity, pride and also honourable existence.

The reasons are not far to seek. To begin with, the notion that Hindus
have 33 crore ‘gods and goddesses’ to worship is a vicious, calculated
lie spread by Christian missionaries to bring Sanatana Dharma into
disrepute among the monotheistic Westerners by deliberately
mistranslating the Sanskrit term ‘deva’ as ‘god’.

The truth is that the 33 crore ‘devas’ referred to in the Puranas and
Itihasas are not gods and goddesses at all in the usual Western sense.

Our ‘devas’ include luminous heavenly beings like Gandharvas, Apsaras,
Kinnaras, Vasus and many others. They are always present in the
background in our sacred books, and accomplish many vital assignments.
They are also well represented in the sculptures in our temples. But
they are never worshipped.

We are, of course, proud of our real and traditional Gods and Goddesses
(the correct appellation would be Bhagavan and Bhagavathi), and we take
immense joy and find spiritual fulfillment in offering them worship. The
Gods and Goddesses we worship are Vishnu and Lakshmi, Shiva and
Parvathi, Saraswathi, Brahma, Ganesha, Karthikeya and Dharma Sastha, and
also their various forms. We worship them as the several beautiful
facets of the same Ultimate Reality.

Our Gods and Goddesses themselves know that they represent the same One
Truth, the One Reality that is everywhere, in every being, in every
thing, and which is the Ground of Being for all. Hence they revere each
other, and bless every righteous human being, no matter which God or
Goddess one worships.

The Semitic Gods, Yahweh and Allah, and Yahweh’s only-Begotten Son Jesus
and Allah’s Final Prophet Muhammad, offer a study in stark and tragic
contrast. Yahweh and Allah are constantly boiling over with jealousy and
wrath for others gods and screech in anger that these other gods must be
eliminated. With a cruelty that is worse than satanic, they also cry for
the blood of the worshippers of other gods through the media of the
only-Begotten Son and the Final Prophet.

Jesus claimed that his father Yahweh is the only true God, that his
religion is the only true religion, and that followers of all other
religion will be roasted for all time in the terrible fires of hell -
not for crimes like murder and pillage, but for not believing in the
unproved claims of Jesus!

Later on, Muhammad said the same to his followers with more hideous
vindictiveness and hatred. He declared that those who believed in him
will go to heaven full of sensual enjoyments and all kafirs who did not
(read Hindus) will burn horribly, screaming in pain, and denied water
(but given new skins to be burned) for all eternity - mind you, for all
eternity - in the dreadful fires of hell.

So for both Jesus and for Muhammad, our Gods and Goddesses whom we
worship with all our heart and soul are hideous excrescences to be
cursed and loathed and at once destroyed.

Thus Jesus and Muhammad are implacable, hate-filled enemies of our
gentle, tolerant Gods and Goddesses. Hence installing the two of them
side by side with our own Gods will be as insulting to our Gods, our
sages and ancestors (millions of whom have been killed as infidels on
Allah’s orders transmitted by Muhammad) as worshipping Ravana along with
Sree Rama and Kamsa along with Sree Krishna.

This being so, why should we, long-oppressed Hindus, cringe and crawl in
the dirt even more, and worship the jealous gods of the Bible and the
Quran who have instilled so much hatred for our Gods and Goddesses into
their followers and inspired the destruction of thousands of our great
and ancient temples where we were worshipping our own Gods and Goddesses
with devotion?

We Hindu could spend our time much better by keeping our holy temples in
beautiful condition, by arranging much better facilities for our
pilgrims, and also by offering worship to our chosen Gods and Goddesses
with greater sincerity and devotion.

2\. *All religions (including Islam) lead to God.*  
Here we have first to make up our minds as to what we mean by religion.
Or Shastras and our sages have always taught that true religion or
spirituality is our striving to reach God through right conduct,
self-sacrifice and sincere seeking. Sanatana Dharma teaches that not
only all human beings, but the whole of creation, both animate and
inanimate, are overflowing with the presence of the Divine, and thus
worthy of reverence. True spirituality is the recognition - and
knowledge - that the same Supreme Self is immanent in all, and
transcends all. Also that each seeker after Truth must continue his
seeking till he has experienced the Truth within himself.

Unlike Muhammad and Jesus, our Avataras and sages never divided humanity
into two - the believing aggressors and the ready-made victims of the
privileged believers, the Christians and the Muslims. Muhammad also laid
down the unalterable rule that it is the holy duty of every Muslim to
wage permanent war on the infidels and establish the supremacy of Allah
and his Prophet by forcible conversions, mass slaughter, pillage, arson
and sadistic destruction, that is to say, jihad. Muslim have a special
duty to desecrate temples and destroy the idols the kafirs worship. We
Hindus should know; we have been at the receiving end of jihad for the
last 1200 years - and it continues to be perpetrated on us even today.

Such monstrous, anti-human doctrines are not religions, but only the
political totalitarian tyrannies. They certainly do not lead to God but
only to the lowest levels of human depravity.

3\. *Islam is good, but Muslims are bad.*  
This statement is not only irrational but also senseless. It is also
extremely dangerous for the survival of Hindu society as it prevents
Hindus from taking cognizance of the real nature of the peril that is
facing them and adopting defensive measures. The ridiculous statement
that Islam is good reflects the tragic failure of Hindu leaders - from
Muhammad bin Qasim’s time till today - to trace the motivating factor
behind the horrendous desecrations, massacres, slave-taking, molestation
of women, rapine and destruction by the Muslims that our Motherland has
suffered for so long. The Quran teaches to do all these to the kafirs as
the mandatory duty of every Muslim. Not recognising this tragic fact,
Hindus went on respecting Islam as a religion which resulted in the
Partition and the butchering of millions of Hindus, the on-going tragedy
of Kashmir, and the bombing and rioting by Muslims everywhere in the
country.

People are more or less the same all over the world - many good, some
bad - except, of course, where they are subjected to inhuman
brainwashing. Brainwashing turns ordinary people into killers, as
happened to the Nazi killers of Jews, the Communist killers of workers
and peasants, or the Arab killers of kafirs. The pre-Islamic Arabs were
a liberal, civilized people who never attacked their neighbours, nor
desecrated their temples. The advent to kafir-hating Islam changed all
that. Islam taught that it was the most sacred obligation of the Arabs
to Allah to kill and plunder the kafirs, no matter how innocent and good
the latter were.

Subjected to this cold-blooded brainwashing, the previously peace-loving
Arabs turned into the scourge of half the world, destroying great and
ancient civilizations wherever they established Islam and Arab
imperialism. Now we find the Egyptians, whose ancient civilization the
invading Arabs ruthlessly destroyed, calling themselves Arabs. Such is
the power of theological brainwashing.

Muslims in India at present are a totally brainwashed people under the
tyrannical rule of the mullahs. It is quite true that Indian Muslims are
the victims of Islam. But they happen to be very compliant and willing
victims.

The great tragedy facing all of us Indians is that even the thinking,
discriminating Muslims - and there are many of them - have utterly
failed in their duty of freeing their gullible fellow Muslims from the
shackles of slavery to the fatwa-issuing mullahs. The progressive
Muslims seem to have been driven underground by the terror tactics of
the all-powerful Islamic clergy.

4\. *If Muslims are told of their common ancestry, they will unite with
Hindus.*  
Nothing can be more preposterous and fallacious. Every Muslim knows that
his ancestors were Hindus who were forcibly converted - mostly by the
sword, some by the jiziya and other inhuman means. But the brainwashing
that Muslim children undergo in *madrasas* makes them identify
themselves with the Islamic invaders who are invariably presented as
liberators. They become very proud of barbarous invaders and ashamed of
their own ancestors. They are also taught to hate and despise the great
civilization and cultural heritage of the Motherland as *jahiliya* -
mere relics from an age of ignorance preceding the advent of Islam.

Teaching the citizens of a country to hate and despise their own
ancestors and homeland is of course the surest and easiest way of making
them slaves of a foreign country and ideology - in this case Arab
imperialism. This has already happened to the Muslims in India.

If Muslims are to join the national mainstream, they have to be first
liberated from the monstrous theology of Islam.

5\. *Congress used Muslims. Congress treats Muslims as vote banks. We
(BJP) will treat them as human beings.*  
This is a dreadful, unforgivable falsification of recent history. In
pre-Partition days, the Muslims were still chewing the cud of their
earlier imperial glory and arrogantly dedicated to re-establishing
Muslim supremacy in India. They considered themselves the
Allah-ordained, most privileged class in the country. True to Quranic
injunctions, they were filled with hate for the kafirs (Hindus) and
could visualise only a master-slave relationship between themselves and
Hindus.

Tragically, Gandhiji and the Congress accepted this supremacist attitude
of the Muslims and surrendered to every atrocious Muslim demand,
sacrificing every vital Hindu interest. This led to the sickening
matricide of Partition and the ensuing genocide of Hindus left at the
mercy of the massacring Muslim mobs.

After Partition, Muslims continued to follow their blackmailing tactics
which had served them so well with the Congress earlier. In democratic
India, Muslims have been keenly aware of, and used to the maximum, the
power of their organised vote banks to obtain privileges over the
Hindus.

Thus it was the Muslims who were, in a very organised and anti-secular
manner, exercising their vote-bank power over the greedy, unscrupulous
politicians. Congress, of course, tried their best to win over the
Muslim vote bank, but the Muslims did not oblige. They would vote only
for those who offered the heaviest price.

It will be the greatest national tragedy if the BJP also falls prey to
the vote-bank blackmail of the highly organised Muslims. By now the BJP
should have learned that what is relevant is not whether the BJP will
treat the Muslims as human beings but whether the Muslims will treat the
kafir BJP as human beings. If they do, they will be acting against the
dictates of their religion. Let us not forget for a minute that
murdering an infidel BJP activist is for a Muslim a meritorious act that
will guarantee him a place in the Islamic heaven.

6\. *Sufis are tolerant Muslims.*  
This is another line of dangerous propaganda unleashed upon the Hindus
to trick them into discovering spirituality and mysticism in Islam, thus
preventing them from resisting its sinister, devastating aggression. The
orthodox Muslims have always considered the Sufis as heretics. They were
tolerated by the Muslim rulers as they had proved their great skill in
beguiling Hindus by pretending to be mystics and thus effecting mass
conversions of Hindus.

All too often, the Sufis were traitors who invited nearby sultans to
invade Hindu kingdoms, and then gave all help to the sultans. While
pretending to be friends of Hindus, they fully supported the gruesome
depredations of the Muslim invaders. They took a leading part in jihad,
and encouraged the desecration and destruction of temples. Worse, the
Sufis profited immensely from the spoils. Many Sufi dargahs, including
the famous Chishti Dargah in Ajmer, to which Hindus foolishly go on
pilgrimage, stand on the ruins of ancient Hindu temples. While
masquerading as saints, they were in fact the sworn sappers and miners
of the deadly military machine that is Islam.

7\. *Muslim leaders are responsible for the ghetto mentality of the
Muslims.*  
Before discussing the issue, let us take a look at the actual meaning of
“ghetto”. A ghetto means a very separate, inferior, and poor part of a
city or town in Christian countries where the Christians used to force
all the hated Jews to live, as the former did not want any social
contact with the latter.

But in India, when Muslims live in segregated areas, it is not
ghettoization that is in operation but the supremacist mentality of the
Muslims. During the Apartheid rule of white racist Christians in South
Africa, the whites also lived in segregated areas as they did not want
any contact with the blacks except as servants.

It is this master-race complex and the indoctrinated feeling of
religious exclusivism and superiority combined with contempt and hatred
for the kafirs that makes the Muslims in India live apart from others.
Unlike Jewish ghettos, it is the free and calculated choice and decision
of the Muslims to live in segregation exclusively by themselves.

The vast community of well-to-do aristocratic and middle class Muslims
live not in ghettos but in comfortable enclaves. Poor Muslims also
choose to live in colonies of their own.

Another reason for this self-chosen segregation is avoidance of contact
with an open society like that of the Hindus, as it may lead to demand
for reforms in Islam. Yet another reason is that it is easier to store
explosives and fire-arms in exclusively Muslim areas for the massacring
of Hindus.

The actual source of the apartheid mentality of the Muslims is the
Quran. The Quran orders: “Believers! do not choose the infidels rather
than the faithful for your friends” (5:144). Also: “Believers, know that
the idolators are unclean” (9: 28).

Do we have to look farther for the source of the two-nation dogma of the
Muslim League?

8\. *Namaz offered at a disputed site (like Ayodhya) is not acceptable
to Allah.*  
Here our naive Hindu leaders whom Allah hates with concentrated venom,
are actually offering advice to kafir-killing Muslims regarding Allah’s
preferences concerning his mosques. Is this not a tragic joke?

Allah’s own Final Prophet destroyed in Mecca the 360 idols that the
pre-Islamic Pagan Arabs were devotedly worshipping in their holy temple,
Kaaba. And now the Kaaba is the holiest Muhammedan Mosque. The same
ghastly destruction and conversion of non-Muslim places of worship was
wrought not only all over Arabia but in every other land, invaded by the
armies of Islam. From all that is commanded in the Quran, it would seem
that the site Allah likes best for his mosque is that of a desecrated
non-Muslim place of worship - a Hindus temple in the case of India.

Knowing this, let us not waste time teaching Muslims about what is and
what is not acceptable to Allah. What we Hindus have to do urgently is
to take steps to protect our remaining temples from desecration and
destruction by Islam. We must also do our best to regain our ancient
holy temples now defiled by being used as mosques. Passage of time does
not legitimise usurpation.

For this, we Hindus have to act from a position of strength. And to
become strong and organised, Hindus have to be informed about the true
history of the Quran-based Muslim havoc in India, which is bound to
continue unless neutralised by the organised strength of Hindus.

Islam is a closed, imperialist, conquering political ideology
masquerading as religion. Hence free enquiry, which will expose its
pretensions, is the worst sin in Islam attracting the mandatory death
sentence for Muslims who seek freedom of democratic discussion. It is
reprehensible that this terrorism is being allowed to continue in free
and secular India where Muslims should have the same religious and
political freedom and right to free enquiry as the Hindus.

If this enslavement of Muslims by the fatwa-mongering mullahs through
sheer terror is removed, Muslims will soon realise the humane values of
the cultural heritage of their Motherland - Bharatavarsha. This will
encourage them to join the national mainstream, become friends of all
their fellow citizens, and a great asset to the nation.  
 

**Second Document**

It is heart-rending and sickening that our respected leaders of the RSS
and some allied organisations have formed the Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch
- a platform for extending equal honour to all religions - and are busy
propagating this slogan, as usual, among the all-accepting, passive
Hindus alone.

As we can see at once, the Sarva Panth Samãdar credo is a resurrection -
albeit more sharp-edged - of Gandhiji’s Sarva Dharma Samabhãva which he
used to great effect to disarm the Hindus and make them complaisant
acceptors of all Hindu-bashing, anti-national demands of the Muslims
including the catastrophic Partition of the Motherland.

Many of us Hindus feel that the Sarva Panth Samãdar slogan makes an even
more unjust and humiliating demand from Hindus than Gandhiji’s Sarva
Dharma Samabhãva. For while the earlier slogan asked us only to extend
equal regard for all religions, what the RSS credo demands is that we
Hindus accord equal respect and honour to Islam and Christianity whose
basic, unalterable tenet is the destruction of ‘polytheistic’ religions
- especially our own sacred mother religion, Sanatana Dharma. This
demand is as unacceptable and unfair as asking us to give the very same
respect and care we give our own loving mothers even to those mothers
who commit infanticide.

We Hindus also fail to understand the need for our leaders to browbeat
us with this slogan when the Hindu people from the remotest past have
been a most tolerant people, accepting not only various forms of worship
but also severe dissent. The reason of course is the solid spiritual
basis and universal vision of Sanatana Dharma. Because of this vast
vision, Hinduism never demanded blind belief and slavish obedience.

Mahavira and Buddha were both dissenters. In Islam, then, and also
today, they would have been beheaded as apostates. In Christianity
dissenters have been burned at the stake. But the Hindus then and at all
times accepted and absorbed their teachings and revered them as great
sages. Buddha is even worshipped as an Avatara of Bhagavan Vishnu. Thus
Jainism and Buddhism and also the more recent Sikhism - are regarded as
offshoots of Sanatana Dharma.

While Jainism and Buddhism were indigenous religions and their
terminology and ideals easily understood, Judaism and Zoroastrianism
from across the seas were totally strange to the people of ancient
Bharat. Both these peoples - the Jews and the Parsis - were horribly
persecuted and driven out of their ancient homelands - the Jews by
Christianity and the Parsis by Islam.

But both these peoples were accorded refuge with dignity by the Hindus
of the time and were also given every assistance. While zealously
keeping up their very distinct identity and practices, the Jews and
Parsis prospered hugely, leaving the Hindus behind.

Thus it is clear as the midday sun that sincere and happy acceptance of
even strange foreign religions is the inherent, most fundamental
character of Hindu Dharma.  Hence the present all-out effort to
sermonize the Hindus about their duty to respect other religions is
really quite bizarre - as lunatic and redundant as training a lamb to
become herbivorous. Our leader know this as well as we do.

This being so, we can only conclude that the real intention of the
promoters of Sarva Panth Samãdar is not just to make Hindus respect
other forms of worship - which they have been doing anyway from the most
ancient times - but for some other hidden, unsavory purpose, which
cannot be publicised among the Hindu at large, namely, all-out Muslim
propitiation.

It is thus quite obvious that the motive behind the formation of the
Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch is to please and cadge favour with the Muslim
vote banks under the control of the imams and moulvis. Our Hindu leaders
obviously believe that by disguising the military machine of Islam by
this slogan and presenting it as just another religion like Buddhism,
Hindus can be thrown off their guard. Then Hindus can be made to believe
that 1200 years of holocaust and genocide on Hindus and the satanic
desecration and destruction the Muslims wreaked in our homeland as per
the dictates of Islam, never took place at all. This will make the
Hindus forget about the dire Muslim threat staring them in the face even
today. Then the Hindus can be made to accede to the sky-rocketing
demands for special privileges by Muslims for establishing their
supremacy over the Hindus.

Obviously, our ingenuous Hindu leaders believe that when the Muslims see
the Hindus cringing all around them for their goodwill at death-dealing
cost to themselves, they will shed their Islamic hatred for the Hindu
kafirs and call off the many holy wars they are constantly waging
against the Hindus even today from Kashmir to Kanya Kumari. These
leaders also believe with sweet optimism that they - the Muslims - will
join the national mainstream and start voting for political parties like
the BJP.

This is Muslim propitiation at its worst. It is also the stuff mirages
are made of.

It is a great tragedy for the Hindu nation that Hindu leaders refuse to
learn from the cataclysmical tragedies that Hindus have suffered even in
recent times from the blunder of Gandhiji’s limitless, obsequious Muslim
appeasement at the cost of legitimate Hindu interests and Hindu honour.

In the hope of bringing Muslims into the Freedom Movement (illusory, as
it proved), Gandhiji gave all-out support to the retrogressive, fanatic
khilafat agitation. This was the cover the Moplahs of the Muslim
majority areas in Malabar were waiting for in order to unleash mass
slaughter, arson, loot, and forced conversion on their unsuspecting
Hindu neighbours. The price for Gandhiji’s Sarva Dharma Samabhãva was
paid by thousands of innocent Hindu men, women and children who were
gruesomely murdered. One favourite pastime of these Moplah jihadists in
Malabar was to cut open the abdomen of pregnant Hindu women, show the
foetus to the mother, and then cut her throat. Hundreds of children were
butchered in front of their mothers. Hundreds of women jumped into wells
to save their honour. Temples were destroyed and the images desecrated
by putting cow intestines around them. It requires a particularly
bestial mind (my apology to the beasts) to desecrate a holy image - the
symbol of All-Pervading Ultimate Reality that is the sacred object of
worship for other human beings. But all this and more, much more, was
done for the glory of Islam.

Referring to these fiendish deeds Gandhiji actually said: “They are a
brave God-fearing people who were fighting for what they considered as
religion and in a manner they considered religious.” Obviously, Gandhiji
did not bother to distinguish between religion and the most
reprehensible barbarism.

And what did Gandhiji get in return from the Muslims for all this
limitless love and consideration? Maulana Mohammad Ali, who had become
Congress President with Gandhiji’s support, declared publicly: “Yes,
according to my religion and creed, I do hold an adulterous and fallen
Mussalman to be better than Mr. Gandhi.” Gandhiji accepted this
compliment also as Mohammed Ali’s devotion to his religion!

Gandhiji lived to see the Direct Action Day carnage of Hindus in
Calcutta organised by the Muslim League Government. Partition, the most
horrible maiming and mangling of Mother India, and the worst genocide in
history - the Muslim extirpation of the Hindus left in Pakistan at the
mercy of Jinnah by Nehru - followed. Today, we have to live with the
tragedy of Kashmir, with tens of thousands of Hindus killed, and half a
million Kashmiri Pandits, wealthy at one time, now living like beggars
in refugee camps.

Gandhiji failed so horribly with his Sarva Dharma Samabhãva credo
because he failed to study Islam and hence had no inkling of the
massacres, pillage, desecration and forcible conversion it orders for
the infidels everywhere at the hands of pious, God-fearing Muslims. He
had accepted Islam as a “noble-faith”.

When our Apostle of Peace, Gandhiji, had to accept such tragic defeat
for himself and our ancient nation from kafir-hating Islam, after
decades of proclaimed reverence for Islam and abject surrender to every
blackmailing Muslim demand for special benefits, can or present-day
leaders expect anything better from the Quran-wielding Muslims simply by
shouting ‘Sarva Panth Samãdar’ - a pathetic rehash of Gandhiji’s Sarva
Dharma Samabhãva?

Obviously - and tragically for us - our leaders of today have not only
learned nothing but also forgotten everything regarding the horrible
devastation Muslims perpetrated in India and the blood-curdling
atrocities they committed on our ancestors for 1200 years for the glory
of their creed - Islam. For it is distressingly clear that Sarva Panth
Samãdar is a calculated and duplicitous strategy to brainwash Hindu
society into making it even more submissive to ruthless Islamic
imperialism; and also to make Hindus capitulate without protest to the
tyrannical Hindu-bashing demands of Muslim leadership - political and
religious. And for this Manch to ask the Hindus to give all honour and
respect to Islam is just like asking a sheep to give all respect to the
butcher cutting its throat.

What we Hindus can do and should do in the cause of giving respect to
all real religions and helping human improvement through spiritual
vision, is to do our best to revive the great religions and
civilizations of the ancient past that Christianity and Islam have
savagely destroyed. We Hindus are the only great civilization to survive
- albeit with horrendous wounds and suppurating sores such as the
mosques standing at the sites of holy temples. We have, therefore, the
moral responsibility to set up a powerful world movement to revive and
revitalise these destroyed religions of the world. We should also set up
a research foundation to study the remaining traces of these destroyed
civilizations, starting with the pre-Islamic Pagan religion of the
Arabs.

This effort will serve yet another crying need of all humanity. It will
encourage today’s thinking Muslims and Christians to reassess their
blackmailing, anti-human creeds which are really political imperialist
frauds able to masquerade as religions only because of their ability to
brainwash and terrorise.

Some proponents of Hindus spirituality like Sri Ram Swarup, whose work
in this field has attracted world-wide attention, have already sown the
seeds of this vast, humane and global spiritual - vision - and also
caused it to sprout.  Its fruit will be the removal of barriers erected
between human beings on the fatuous basis of belief, by power-greedy
imperialists bent on conquest and enslavement of others through sheer
terrorism parading as divine commands. Its most precious fruit will be
the renewal of the universal spirituality indwelling in every human
mind, seeking the Truth.

Movements like the Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch cobbled together by Hindu
leaders in the hope of propitiating Muslims with an ocean of goodwill,
can invite only the utmost contempt and derision from the Muslims for
Hindus and Hindu religion. They can see it only as grovelling and
bootlicking. Muslims have been indoctrinated from childhood that they
are Allah’s chosen master race.

To affirm to Muslims that Islam is a religion, will certainly be doing
them a serious disservice. For it will be thrusting them - millions of
our fellow Indians - into further depths of vicious hate for their
non-Muslims fellow citizens.

Muslims must be made aware that if they want fairness and respect for
themselves, they have to extend these to others. It is their minimum
civic duty. Muslims themselves should banish the word ‘kafir’ and the
hate and violence that go with it.

Muslims at present are victims not only of Islam but also of the
fatwa-mongering mullahs. In secular and democratic India, no one should
be allowed to exercise any kind of extra-judicial power over others
Therefore, it is the duty of the Central and State governments to
deprive the imams and mullahs of the power they presently have to
terrorise Muslims through fatwa blackmail. Such blackmail should be made
a very serious criminal offence.

Equally important, our leaders, instead of sanctimoniously repeating
failed old slogans and teaching religious tolerance to all-tolerating
Hindus, should make clear a vital point (which they have not even
thought of till now) to the kafir-hating Muslim leaders and their
followers, namely, that in a civilized society respect for religious and
other rights has to be a two-way traffic. Muslims should realise that
they cannot expect to be showered with fulsome praise when they and
their scriptures are heaping the vilest abuse on others, and that Hindus
too want their human rights to be respected, no matter what Allah says.
This is not the Quranic stone age. We are entering the 21st century in
democratic India.

Many of us Hindus also feel that Hindu leaders should be more honest
when dealing with this life-and-death issue. Why should they so
recklessly waste their time and effort to propitiate the Muslims and
bring them into the mainstream, when, as things stand at present, a
pious Muslim can never be a friend of the idolatrous Hindu? Our leaders
should concentrate on enabling Hindu society to fully react to the
ever-present Muslim threat from a position of strength.

For this, the first requirement is to ensure that, in our Motherland,
Sanatana Dharma is respected. Tragically, the opposite is the case at
present. Just a few examples from the hundreds of terrible disabilities
and deprivations we Hindus are suffering in our own land, may be cited
here.

It is well-known that Government of India gives a subsidy of Rs. 5000/-
to every Muslim going on hajj to Mecca. Every possible arrangements is
made by the Government of India and the State Governments for the
convenience and welfare of the hajj pilgrims. Seventy crores of the
Hindu taxpayers’ money is spent on this subsidy for Muslims. This is
happening when Islam hates Hindus so much that for a Hindu found within
seven miles of Mecca, the mandatory punishment is public beheading.
Could there be a worse humiliation for Hindus and waste of a secular
Government’s money, nearly all of it from Hindu taxpayers?

In stark contrast is the horrible state of affairs in the holy hill
shrine of Dharma Sastha (Bhagwan Ayyappa) Temple in Sabarimala in
southern Kerala which attracts more devotees every year than any other
pilgrimage centre in the world. Millions of devoted pilgrims, after
weeks of fasting and penance undergone with joy, come to this ancient
holy shrine from all other States in India, and also from abroad. Unlike
in Mecca, there are no public beheadings of unbelievers here, all are
allowed to come.

The Central and State Governments should have given all support and
assistance to the Hindu pilgrims from far away, at least as much as they
are extending to Muslim pilgrims to Mecca in foreign Arabia. But exactly
the opposite prevails. As in all Hindu pilgrimage places in India, Hindu
pilgrims on their way to Sabarimala and also at Sabarimala Temple itself
are subjected to gross and insulting neglect; and worse, also to cruel
extortion by all the official and officially supported agencies. The
Dewaswom Board which manages the Temple, is only a department of the
Government of Kerala which has always been anti-Hindu after attainment
of Independence. Not even minimum facilities for resting and ablutions
are provided for the devotees. The suffering and ill-treatment inflicted
on millions of Hindu devotees are beyond words. The very same
Government, without batting an eye, imposes extra-high charges on
tickets in government buses taking the Hindu pilgrims to Sabarimala!

There is another irony also. All the offerings of the Muslim hajj
pilgrims subsidized so hugely by the taxpayers’ money, goes to the
filthy-rich Saudi Arabian Government. Thus India is in fact paying
*jiziya* to an Islamic establishment which finances a whole network of
*madrasas* for spreading faith in jihad and hatred for Hindus.

But in Sabarimala, on the other hand, the Government of Kerala takes
away and exercises total control over the vast collection contributed by
the Hindu pilgrims who are not only NOT subsidized but also finagled and
robbed by government agencies at every turn. Can there be a worse
slavery for Hindus? Do we Hindus and our temples have no rights at all
in our own Hindu homeland?

Another deadly threat and also an intolerable thraldom that Hindu
society is being subjected to and against which our national leaders
should launch an all-out war, is the distorted Secularism that is being
inflicted on the Hindu people by the Government of India with the
connivance of all political parties. This criminally perverted
Secularism is nothing but the continuation of colonial Muslim and
Christian overlordship in disguise.

This deliberately falsified and perverted Secularism was concocted by
Jawaharlal Nehru and smuggled into the Constitution by Indira Gandhi
during the Emergency. Now it is being used to the hilt by fanatic Muslim
and Christian leaders bent on liquidation of Hindus. The fake Secularism
that is being inflicted on the Hindus, the most secular-minded people in
the world, is nothing but a calculated and dirty swindle. It is now
being openly used as sanctified weapon to dishonour Hindus and at the
same time to bestow royal privileges on the opulent Muslim and Christian
establishments.

Secularism really means equal treatment for all citizens by the
Government without regard to religion. But our mercenary politicians are
using the Nehruvian version of ‘secularism’ for placing the battered and
oppressed ‘Hindu majority’ at the mercy of the pampered and privileged
Muslim and Christian ‘minorities’. The Government of India has raised
this phony Secularism to the status of the regnant, holiest *mantra* of
the State, which has totally eclipsed the much needed basic qualities of
the State like national integrity and justice for all. For political
parties in India, this *mantra* means nothing but the competitive
propitiation of the Muslim and Christian communities. The minority
lobbies, with vast foreign funds at their disposal, are always ready to
give handsome rewards to politicians for special “secular” favours.

On the other hand, Hindus, who are truly secular, have no religion-based
vote banks. The tragic irony for Hindus here is that they are being
relentlessly punished for their innate Secularism in the true sense of
this concept. And the Muslims and Christians are being handsomely
rewarded for being fierce foes of genuine Secularism. Could there be a
worse slavery and a more painful dishonour for Hindus in their own
homeland than their victimisation through this swindle of perverted
‘secularism’?

As part of the war which Islamic and Christian imperialisms are waging
against Hindus through their minions in the Government and their hired
politicians, Hindus are also being denied the basic human right of
imparting religious education to their children. Hindu children by law
cannot be given this instruction in the natural and ideal place for it -
the schools they attend. But Muslims and Christians enjoy this right to
the maximum in their schools aided by the Hindu taxpayers’ money!

Another grave threat - and insult - to the Hindus in this ‘secular’
education policy of the Government is that, in Christian missionary
schools, millions of Hindus children are systematically brainwashed in
Bible classes to adore Christianity and despise their own religion. Many
minors are converted behind the backs of their parents, and in the name
of minority rights and Secularism!

In *madrasas*, which the majority of Muslim children attend, virulent
hate-mania against India and the kafir Hindus is constantly injected
into the children. These children are innocently receptive. They would
have accepted respect for India and fairness to their non-Muslim fellow
citizens equally well. But their Muslim teachers fill them with venom
against the kafirs and India that is the kafirland for them. This, of
course, is the starting point for all the riots, murders and bomb blasts
staged by Muslim mobs and ISI agents. They are now spreading deep into
the South also. This is also an Islamic minority right!

The organizers and propagators of the Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch
aggravate the explosive peril by accepting Islam as a way of worship
rather than as a way of waging war. One self-evident danger in this is
that it will at once legitimize conversions to Islam among gullible
Hindus. Even now, large-scale conversions are taking place all over
India with Arab money and other inducements. If Hindu leaders start
paying homage to Islam as a religion, the would-be convert, falling prey
to fraud and bribery, can at once justify his perfidy by saying: “If all
religions are equally good, where is the harm in converting?”

The horrendous threat to the country and Hindu culture that conversion
to Islam poses will be evident when we realise that the Hindu Holocaust
that was the Partition of Bharat and the formation of Pakistan, took
place only because of the conversion of Hindus to Islam. While the Hindu
ancestors of present-day Pakistanis loved Bharat, their Muslim
descendants spew venom on Bharat, and their most cherished goal is its
destruction and replacement by a Hindu-extirpating Islamic state. This
applies to millions of converts to Islam living in India also.

Let us not forget for a minute that Jinnah, who maimed and mutilated the
Motherland and caused the genocidal slaughter of millions of innocent
Hindu men, women and little children for the sake of Islam, was the
grandson of a Hindu convert. Such is the destruction and hate and
bloodshed that lurk behind conversion. But for the conversion of a
majority of Kashmiri Hindus to Islam, the diabolic distancing from the
Motherland would not have befallen Kashmir, the great seat of Hindu
religion and culture from times immemorial.

The fact is that conversion to Islam (or Christianity, as can be seen in
the North-East) makes the convert an enemy of India and Hindus as had
been seen by Swami Vivekananda a hundred years ago.

The so-called Secular Government of India allow the free use of money
and force and fraud and even open threats for conversion to Islam.
Rather than genuflect before Islam with the Sarva Panth Samãdar credo,
Hindu leaders should organise effective defensive measure for Hindu
society so that the genocide our forefathers suffered at the hands of
Muslims are not inflicted all over again on our children.

We feel forced to tell to the leaders at the helm of the Manch that all
our available effort and energy, always in such short supply, should be
concentrated on giving vitally needed support to our weakest brethren -
the Tribals and the Dalits. The conversion and consequent elimination of
Hindu Nagas by Christian missionaries is now complete. They almost
succeeded in the secessionist war they made the converted Christian
Nagas wage against India. Now the Christian missionaries (many of them
Indian) are spreading their poisonous tentacles to every State in the
North-East, and inciting armed insurrections and mass killings
everywhere they have gained a footing. Any Christian missionary can go
about converting and inciting rebellion anywhere in Nagaland and
neighbouring Mizoram, but no Hindu Sannyasin - not even the
Shankaracharya - can enter without special permission! Christian
missionaries have banned any non-Christian school from coming up in
Nagaland. So a Hindu Naga child has to convert to Christianity to get
modern education. Hindu Nagas are officially and quite openly denied
their basic human right to education.

The Bishops in India are spending vast sums from their limitless funds
for lobbying to get the Parliament enact a law by which the real Dalits
will be deprived of their special benefits by getting the same ceded to
Christian converts. The real purpose behind the vast effort costing many
millions is, of course, to facilitate mass conversions and also to
enable the Christians to corner all the Scheduled Caste reserved seats
in the Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies in the States so that the
Bishops can rule India. Their effort to accomplish this cultural
genocide of the Dalits is getting full support of the Government and all
‘secular’ political parties.

Another mortal threat India and Hindus are facing in the North-East and
also in cities in the rest of the country, is the undeclared demographic
war which the Islamic Republic of Bangladesh is waging victoriously by
arranging the planned infiltration of millions of Bangladeshi Muslims
into India. They are thus able to effectively colonize and capture many
urban and rural areas. This underground attack on India is even more
dangerous than an open war. In case of an armed invasion, our Government
will have to join battle and chase the enemies back into their own land.
But this undeclared yet very effective war is being aided and abetted by
traitors in our Government and politics who are anxious to corner the
illegal votes of the infiltrators. In any other country, such traitorous
officials and political leaders will at once be put behind bars. But in
India they are the ruling elite of the country.

Just fifty years ago, the Muslims of what is now Bangladesh had insisted
that they were a separate Islamic nation and could not live in amity
with Hindus. They had also declared that they would launch a civil war
if East Pakistan was not formed out of Bengal. And after most of Bengal
was ceded to Pakistan, most of the Hindus there were ruthlessly driven
out into India. Now these very Muslims are pouring into India not in
lakhs but in crores. Such is the contempt these Bangladeshi Muslims (and
local Bengali Muslims who aid and abet them) have for the Indian
Government and Hindus that they have already started asking for a
Greater Muslim Bengal including all of West Bengal and Assam. We must
keep in mind that not one of these crores of Muslim infiltrators has
given up the Quranic exhortation to kill the idolators. In fact each of
these infiltrators is a time-bomb for Hindu society. They are allowed to
live freely in India with stolen citizenship rights.

Another burning question to the leaders of the Manch: Before we proceed
further with this campaign for bestowing all honour and respect on
Islam, should not we Hindus focus our attention on ourselves and ensure
that Sanatana Dharma, the highest expression of the civilization of
Bharat, and also its sacred symbols, are given the respect they deserve?
The most sacred, cherished episodes in our Itihasas and Puranas are
grotesquely parodied and heinously insulted regularly on television and
in the movies. Our national dailies publish filthy attacks on Hinduism
and Hindu sacred figures - even Gods and Goddesses - and also on all
Hindu causes.

These calculated attacks on Hinduism and Hindu sacred symbols are quite
clearly a part of the relentless psychological war being waged by the
Islamic and Christian establishments on the all-accepting Hindus in
order to destroy their self-pride and make them steeped in self-loathing
and self-hate; they can thus be made an easy prey for the Muslim and
Christian missionaries and the secularists. Till today, very little has
been or is being done to discourage these licentious insults to Hindu
Dharma going on all around us under cover of ‘secularism’ and ‘freedom
of expression’.

We Hindus believe that, under these circumstances, the duty of the
leaders of the Manch is not to further victimise the Hindu victims by
demanding respect for their persecutors and killers but to organize an
All India Hindu Restitution and Reparations Organisation.

The greatest service the leader of the Manch can render to the Hindus
and also the Muslims is to emancipate Muslims from the prison-house that
is Islam. There are many enlightened Muslims among us who have love for
the Motherland, and goodwill for their Hindu fellow citizens. Tragically
now, all of them seem to be too terrified of the fatwa-mongering mullahs
to come out in the open. For them, Tasleema’s fate is a great deterrent.

But 200 years ago when Europe was in the grip of inquisitorial
Catholicism, it was the enlightened Christians who rose to the occasion
and liberated Europe and the Christian masses from the fiendish tyranny
of the Popes and the Church. Later, in the United States of America
also, freedom of religion and expression were accepted as the most
fundamental of human rights because of the dedicated efforts of freedom
lovers.

If a thousand good-hearted Muslims loyal to the nation will assert their
right to freedom of enquiry and expression, they too could render this
priceless service to fellow-Muslims. Surely the mullahs cannot get a
thousand great Muslim leaders killed or banished at the same time - at
least not today in democratic India.

It is no one's case that Hindus, who have at all times been
civilizationally a peaceful people, should return hate for Muslim hate,
howsoever institutionalized and rabid. But at the same time, we Hindus
should take steps to ensure the survival of the Hindu Nation as a great
and humanising force in the world. Let us not forget for a minute that
Islam, the malignant foreign invader, has already robbed us Hindus of
one-third of our Motherland and one-fourth of our people, who have been
turned into our enemies on the basis of their new religion - Islam. We
should also learn not to cower and grovel as we have been doing till now
and assert our strength, human dignity and citizenship rights to the
full.

Our sages declared in the anterior most times: *ekam sad viprah bahudha
vadanti*: “Truth is one but sages call it by various names.” This axiom
has resonated in our holy Motherland through the ages, and it is a
living, great truth for us Hindus. But the vital fact here is that our
sages were referring to the Universal and Ultimate Truth; and NOT to
maleficent political ideologies for conquest, enslavement and plunder
claiming legitimacy under untested claims of ‘divine’ sanction from God
Himself. Such claims of divine exhortation for genocidal slaughtering of
innocent people and also rapine to bring the world under the command of
this self-appointed God, is a grotesque perversion of the very idea of
Godhood.

We Hindus are thrice blessed that Sanatana Dharma does not impose on us
any blind belief - be it of the only true religion, or the only true
God, or the only-Begotten Son, or the Last Prophet. Nor does our
religion force blind obedience on us. We are given limitless right to
free enquiry, and freedom of expression, and choice of faith.

This is beautifully illustrated in the last chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad Gita. After bestowing the Supreme Knowledge on Arjuna, Bhagavan
Sree Krishna says to him: “I have thus declared to you Wisdom, which is
the greatest secret of all secrets. Having reflected upon it fully, you
now act as you choose.” This personal autonomy and total freedom of
action is the life-breath of Sanatana Dharma, and the secret of its
survival against great and deadly odds.

The Muslims of India should now realise at least the self-evident fact
that it is in their own interest to discard their hatred and aggression
against Hindus and join the national mainstream as loyal Indians.

For our part, let us long-oppressed and long-persecuted Hindus put aside
our obsession with Muslim appeasement. Let all of us Hindus jointly
dedicate ourselves, with courage and determination, to build a proud,
dynamic and powerful Hindu Nation, if need be, all by ourselves.

It is quite within our capability to do it. For, as our sages from
immemorial times have taught us, we Hindus are *Amritasya Putrah* - the
Children of Bliss.

Let us proclaim from the mountain-tops for all the Muslim and Christian
world to hear: We are not kafirs, nor are we heathens. Each one of us,
the beloved child of Bharat Mata, is a Child of Bliss.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Secretary of Hindu Matru Samiti, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala. she is a
gifted writer and a great champion of Hindu causes.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


