+++
title = "49 "

+++
<div align="right">

**46. P. S. Yog**

</div>

It was indeed very nice of you to give me an opportunity to express my
views on the important points raised by Dr. Godbole of Pune.

Alas! every word of Dr. Godbole is true. This truth has been brought out
clearly in many documented publications on Christianity and Islam.  
 

*“Sarva Dharma Samabãhva”*

People, who think on these lines commit the blunder of believing that
Islam is only Namaz, Roza, Zakat and Hajj which are of course common to
all religions in one form or the other. The fact is, and it needs to be
widely known, that individual and communal effort for converting other
people to Islam and Jihad for achieving it, is as much a part of
religious duty prescribed by the Quran and the Hadis for every Muslim.

Only Hindus ignorant of the true nature of Islam can preach the concept
of unity of Hindu and Semitic religions. It has never been accepted by
the Muslims, and justifiably so. They say, “How can we respect a
philosophy which we believe to be entirely misguided? Where is the
question of equal respect?” (Dr. Mushirul Huq: *Islam in Secular
India*). Had India been an Islamic country run by Shariat law, people
claiming that both Islam and Hinduism are true would have been beheaded
as is recorded by Muslim historians to have been the rule during the
reign of Firoz Tughlaq and Sikandar Lodi etc.

The famous Ali Mian (of Nadwa Madrasa, Lucknow), one of the most
respected and internationally recognised authority on Islam today, says
in his book, *Calamity of Linguistic and Cultural Chauvinism*: “A man
should have not only emotional attachment to Islam, he should also hate
all un-Islamic philosophies, thoughts and ideals. As a matter of fact,
the Quran expresses at numerous places its hatred for the devil and the
standard-bearers of falsehood and ignorance.” (Read Non-Muslims)

Scholars like Maududi, founder of the Jamaat-i-Islami, Maulana Abul
Kalam Azad and Syed Qutb of Egypt strongly assert that Quran divides
humanity into two parties: Muslims, the party of God, and all others,
the party of the Devil.

Therefore, people who think that Muslims can retain the Islam of the
Quran, the Hadis and the Hidayah and yet respect or tolerate the
polytheistic and idolatrous Hindus, are living in a fool’s paradise. –
“Islam with all its apparatus was conceived and devised as the religion
to end all religions” (M.R.A. Beg), and not to compromise or fraternize
with them, except as a matter of strategy. Its scriptures and history
repeatedly proclaim that it is engaged in perpetual war against Kufr
(idol-worship and polytheism). The celebrated author of the Hidayah says
that war with Kafirs is the norm and peace contingent upon circumstances
beyond the control of Muslims. This war will end only when the whole of
humanity accepts Islam.

Indian religions and Islam are not two currents flowing in the same
direction and converging towards a common goal as is often argued. They
are in fact two currents of thought flowing in diametrically opposite
directions. No sane person can ever think of riding two boats floating
in these two currents and reach the same destination. Nothing but
disaster awaits such a person. Hindus have been witnessing that disaster
for 1400 years. They may go on pleasing themselves by repeating such
experiments till ultimately Islam catches up with them. The latest to
take up such experiment is the Gayatri Parivar based in Shantikunja
(Haridwar). The founder of this organization, Acharya Shriram Sharma, is
reported to have said’ “The Gita is the Quran of India, while the Quran
is the Gita of Arabia.”^([1](#1))

Only a few people like Dr. Godbole realize that Muslims are what Islam
has made them, otherwise how is it that neo-convert Muslim rulers were
more cruel and ruthless than foreign Muslims towards Hindus, their
co-religionists of a few days earlier? They did not brutalize Islam,
Islam brutalized them.  
 

**Muslims commitment to Islam**

If there is one religion which still sits heavily on its followers in
the modern world, it is Islam. It has not shed its Quranic
proselytization zeal a bit over 14 centuries. In the words of Syed
Shahabuddin, a person who denies even a single word of the Quran or the
Hadis ceases to be a Muslim. The Quran and the Hadis have not a single
word advocating respect (ãdar) for prevailing un-Islamic faiths.

Preaching Mantras like “equal respect for all religions”, “all religions
advocate non-violence and egalitarianism”, and “all religions are
different paths leading to the same universal truth”, has done
incalculable harm to the gullible Hindu.

The modern Hindu youths’ knowledge of Islam is nil and their knowledge
of Hinduism is confined to what they see in the weekly visits of their
parents to the temples, or in abundantly increasing commercial screening
of mythological films and T.V. serials (some of them produced by
Muslims), or the very effective propaganda presenting Islam as tolerant
and secular and Muslims as the persecuted lot by Hindu rulers.

The result of ad nauseum repetition of the above Mantras during last 120
years has been that Hindu boys and girls find no objection to changing
over from their religion to what they have come to believe as equally
good or better - Islam or Christianity - for petty matrimonial or
financial benefits.

On the other hand, Islam has a vast, well-organised and well funded
educational system. It runs in India about 40,000 Madrasas and 8,00,000
Maktabs (most of them opened after 1950) besides thousand of Islamic
schools and colleges and three Universities. There are said to be about
30,00,000 mosques in India where congregational prayers are held and
sermons given by learned and devout persons having views similar to the
Maulanas quoted above. It has a large and well-organised Muslim press
and propaganda machine publishing lakhs of books and pamphlets every
year in all Indian languages. Young Muslim boys and girls born and
brought up in such religiously charged atmosphere can under no
circumstance be persuaded into believing that any religion other than
their’s is true and worthy of respect. The result is a constant flow of
youth from Hinduism to Islam.

Another result of this propaganda is that any political party which
talks of Hinduism is looked upon as communal even by the vast majority
of Hindus fed upon it.

Speaking of propaganda, I can do no better than quote the French scholar
*JACQUES ELLUL* from the preface of *BAT YE’OR’s* well-documented book,
*The Dhimmi (Jews and Christians under Islam)*:

> One ought not to forget that the terrible war of 1947 in India between
> the Muslims and Hindus was fought on a purely religious basis. More
> than one million people died and since massacres had not taken place
> when the Muslims had lived within the Hindu-Buddhist orbit, one may
> presume that the war was caused by the attempt to set up an
> independent Islamic republic… The discovery of Islam’s oil resources
> and economic power, hardly needs elaboration. Taken as a whole,…
> \[it\] follows a logical sequence: Political independence, religious
> revival, and economic power. We are now witnessing a vast program to
> propagate Islam, involving the building of mosques everywhere, even in
> the USSR, the diffusion of Arab literature and culture, and the
> recovery of history. Islam now boasts of having been the cradle of all
> civilization at a time when Europe was sunk in barbarism and the Far
> East was torn asunder by divisions. Islam as the origin of all the
> sciences and arts is a theme that is constantly developed.
>
> In France it is no longer acceptable to criticize Islam or the Arab
> countries. This has led many intellectuals, Christians and others, to
> be favourably and uncritically disposed towards them. On the
> intellectual level there is first of all an increasing number of works
> of an apparently scholarly nature whose declared purpose is to
> eradicate prejudices and false preconceptions about Islam, with regard
> to both its doctrines and its customs (History). Thus these works
> ‘demonstrate’ that it is untrue that the Arabs were cruel conquerors
> and that they disseminated terror and massacred those people who would
> not submit to their rule. It is false that Islam is intolerant; on the
> contrary, it is held to be tolerance itself. It is false that women
> had an inferior status and that they were excluded from public life.
> It is false that the Jihad (Holy War) was a war fought for material
> gain, and so on. In other words, everything that has been regarded as
> historically unquestionable about Islam is considered as propaganda,
> and a false picture of Islam has been implanted in the West, which, it
> is claimed, must be corrected by the truth.
>
> It is no longer a matter of an exchange of ideas between
> intellectuals, but rather of an authentic religious adherence. Several
> well known French intellectuals have made a spectacular conversion to
> Islam. Islam regards itself as having a universal vocation and
> proclaims itself to be the only true religion to which everyone must
> adhere. We should have no illusions about the matter: no part of the
> world will be excluded. Now that Islam has national, military, and
> economic power, it will attempt to extend its religion everywhere,
> including the British Commonwealth and the United States.

This was written in 1980.

If advanced Christian countries like Britain, France and USA are worried
about such propaganda by Islam, a sister religion of Christianity, Hindu
India can ignore it only at her great peril. Muslim leaders and scholars
are never tired of telling their co-religionists, “India, the whole of
it, is our heritage because every inch of it had been conquered by our
ancestors by sheddig their blood” (F.K. Durrani in *Meaning of
Pakistan*, Hussain Ahmad Madni quoted by Hamid Dalwai in *Muslim
Politics in Secular India*, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad quoted by B.R.
Nanda in *Gandhism, Pan-Islamism, Imperialism and Nationalism*).  
 

**Common Ancestors**

It is no use reminding Muslims that their ancestors were Hindus. They
can only feel sorry for them like the Prophet of Islam who felt sorry
for his uncle on the latter’s refusal to convert to Islam at the time of
his death. Consequently, according to the Prophet, he had to go to hell.
While Allah is all forgiving, the sin of polytheism and idolatry is so
heinous that even the Prophet was not permitted by Allah to pray for the
soul of his deceased mother because she died a non-Muslim. (*Sahi
Muslim*)

So those with 33 crores of gods and goddesses can only be looked upon by
devout Muslims as denizens of hell to be abhorred and at best pitied.  
 

**Sufis, Pirs, Ghazis and Shahids**

For those who have read about Sufis, the most ludicrous event is the
sight of our big-wigs placing wreaths and *chadars* on their graves and
praising them for their humanism and secularism. Their biographies,
written by Muslim scholars, rapturously boast of their enthusiasm for
converting Hindus to Islam by fair and foul means including threat of
death and slavery. Athar Abbas Ali Rizvi, the author of *History of
Sufism in India*, feels disgusted by the ignorance/indifference of
Hindus. Says he: “To the Hindus who considered him (Salar Masud Ghazi,
who offered only the sword or the Quran to lakhs of Hindus), a saint of
miraculous powers, the number of their brethren he killed or Islamised
was then, as it is now, meaningless.”

This comment of a Muslim scholar who has made a special study of Sufism
in India applies to most of the Sufis and Muslim saints, who have been
honoured by their co-religionists by affixing to their names the
honorific Ghazi (the killer of Hindus) or Shahid (the martyr in war
against Hindus). Many of the important ones amongst them are publicly
venerated by our Presidents, Prime Ministers, Chief Ministers and
Governors setting an examples for the ignorant and gullible Hindu
masses.  
 

**Need of the Hour**

The need of the hour for Hindus is to wake up to realities instead of
perpetuating delusions. Listen and give a chance to the realists.

The realist Dr. B.R. Ambedkar says: “This (Hindu-Muslim) antagonism is
not to be attributed to material causes. It is spiritual in character…
historical, religious, cultural and social… the realist must take note
of the fact that the Mussalmans look upon the Hindus as Kafirs, who
deserve more to be exterminated than protected.”

Another realist Mohammad Ali of Khilafat fame says: “It is poor
statesmanship to slur over inconvenient realities… honest and frank
recognition of the deep-seated prejudices that hinder it (Hindu-Muslim
Unity) and the yawning differences that divide.”

Dr. Ishwari Prasad, the eminent historian, says: “The religions of the
two (Muslims and Hindus) are so fundamentally different that coalescence
is only possible when some parts of their orthodox religions are
forgotten and their place is taken by liberal tolerance.” Hinduism, time
and again, has proved its capacity and desire to accommodate. The big
and inconvenient question is: Can Islam give up its hatred for Kufr
(Hinduism) and its right to destroy it? Can it give up its
proselytization of Hindus? Can it officially accept family planning? Can
the Muslim Ulema be made agreeable to issue unanimous fatwas to this
effect?  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer lives in Lucknow (UP), and has been doing great service to
Hindu Dharma and Society through his writings and publications.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


