+++
title = "53 "

+++
<div align="right">

**2. Meaning of Conversions**  
Suresh Desai

</div>

(Suresh Desai, writer and journalist, was invited to speak on his
perceptions of the Christian Missionary activities at St. Pius Seminary
at Goregaon, Mumbai, on 10th March 1997. The Seminary trains Christians
in priesthood.

The audience was composed of 70 to 80 trainee priests, Father Julian who
teaches at the college, a couple of lecturers and Mr. Arvind Singh from
Hindu Vivek Kendra. Father Julian introduced Suresh Desai to the
audience.)

Desai said in his speech:

Father Julian just said that it is a Christian practice to invite people
of other religions and understand their views and perceptions. I am very
happy about this practice because it fits in with the Hindu tradition of
not only understanding the other people’s views but also of
appreciating, adapting and assimilating the best of them.

I thank Mr. Norbert DeSouza, National President of AICU and Father
Julian for inviting me here to apprise you of my perceptions of the
Missionary activities.

As you are aware I am a Hindu and I am very deeply interested in the
Hindu tradition and civilization which is the oldest surviving
civilization in the world. What appeals to me the most is that the
content of Hindu thought is universal in nature and is not confined to
or doesn’t address itself to a particular geographical area or time or
only to the people who are baptized in Hinduism or believe in the Hindu
pantheon. I am not a religious person, do not indulge in any worship of
any deity, do not believe in rituals, do not go to any temple and still
I confess that I am a devout Hindu and am accepted as such by my Hindu
milieu. My perceptions of missionary work are, therefore, inevitably
influenced by my attachment to the Hindu culture.

I belong to Goa, where Christianity has a great deal of importance at
the religious, cultural, political and social levels. It was here that
the missionary activities gained momentum four centuries ago with the
work of Francis Xavier and then Father Stevens. As students we freely
mixed with our Christian friends whose ancestors were Hindus and were
converted to Christianity only a few generations ago, In retrospect I
find that this span of their being Christians had not at all improved
their spirituality nor their socio-economic status. The improvement came
in the wake of the freedom from the Portuguese rule in 1962. Many of
them now have bungalow type houses, own cars, give Hindu names to their
children and profess to not being much interested in religion.

In my mind, as in the mind of anybody who is conversant with the history
of Europe, the missionary activities and Christianity are inseparably
associated with inquisition, with intolerance of science, with the fate
of Galileo, Copernicus, Bruno, Joan of Arc, with burning of lakhs of
women as witches, with crusades, and with thousands of victims in the
Goa Inquisition. There is something like Heresy and heretics not only in
Christianity but in other semitic religions like Islam, and if I may say
so, the dogma of Marxism, beside the Book and the Prophet.

When you are working in the land of an ancient and dominant religion and
try to preach the gospel of your faith and convert a large member of
people who after conversion disown their cultural roots, it is
inevitable and also justifiable that all your activities are viewed with
suspicion and are attributed to one fundamental motive, that is, to
convert people to your faith. Such cultural alienation in a country like
India where nationalism is based on cultural and civilizational
heritage, creates piquant situations such as those on the northeast
frontiers. Ultimately, what is the objective of conversions? At the
spiritual level, conversions from one religion to another are quite
meaningless unless the motives are purely mundane.

Those who work with ulterior motives have to adjust, readjust and
reorient their strategies according to the change in times which have
been moving very fast during the last couple of decades. Strategies
change but not the motive. The change of strategies is very often
projected as basic change in the outlook, which is wrong. The basic
change comes only with the reformulation of objectives. If the basic
motive of the missionaries is still to bring Hindus to the fold of
Christianity, no amount of change in strategies whether inculturation,
acculturation or deculturation, will exonerate them in the eyes of their
critics, despite liberal theology and acceptance of salvation through
other religions but either in ecclesiocentric or Christocentric or
theocentric manner. These terms are hair-splitting, pure and simple.

The inculturation is not a new concept. When Father Stevens wrote
*KhristapurãNa* in Marathi 400 years ago in the style of Dnyaneshwar, he
gave an excellent example of inculturation. The objective was to promote
Christianity among natives.

The Hindu civilization is a movement of incredible continuities. In its
march of over seven millennia it has taken in its stride innumerable
vicissitudes, changes in the sources of livelihood, pastoralism,
agriculture, and has entered the era of industrial development. Not all
people have kept pace with the progress. Many of them are left behind
either accidentally or of their own choice. So much so that pockets
remained in the preagricultural, food gathering stages, and a large
number of people remained agriculturist and a few urban areas have
stepped into modernity. Nobody can readily say when it all started. The
entire process is *sanãtana*, without a definite beginning. I once again
remind you that Hinduism is not a religion of the book in the semitic
sense. Therefore, the Supreme Court has opined it is a comprehensive way
if life.

The uneven development of this process has left some people in
agriculture, pre-agricultural, pastoral, nomadic and even the stage
before that. That is why the existence of tribal pockets. However, the
underlying continuity of the process is such that they all belong to the
same stream of Hinduism.

The British imperialists had other ideas. They wanted to sow the seeds
of division, dissension and separatism in the Hindu society to
perpetuate their own rule. That’s why the 1871 census described the
tribals as animists. Animists means people who worship spirits and
propitiate them. It is indeed very difficult to define where Hinduism
ends and tribalism begins.

I give my own instance. I read Gita and the Upanishads. I am a devotee
of Hindu thought, I am well acquainted with the idea of the Absolute.
But when I go to my village, I see there my own cousins doing yoga for
meditation in the morning and indulging in worshipping the spirits of
the ancestors, the Kuladevata, the Gramadevata, the Vetala and the Cobra
in the evening. Would you say that they are Hindu in the morning and
animists in the evening? Some of them are extremely well-versed in the
subtlest nuances of the philosophies of Hinduism. Even Ramakrishna
Paramahansa, Swami Vivekananda and Mahatma Gandhi have been organically
imbedded in this what you may call animist past. Hinduism is a
continuous process of evolution over the last thousands or perhaps lakhs
of years. Some people moved up by the elevator, some people are coming
up the ladder rung by rung.  But they are the same people. Hinduism has
developed from animism to the subtle and scintillating philosophies of
the Gita and the Upanishadas.

Tribals are therefore unmistakably Hindus. There are many tribal Gods in
the Hindu pantheon.  Vithoba, Viroba, Giroba, Khandoba, Mhasoba, Satwai,
Jokhai and many such Gods are still being worshipped. Hinduism doesn’t
reject anybody simply because he worships his own Gods. Gita
specifically mentions that whatever deity a man may worship, whether it
is Rama or Shiva or Govinda, if he does it with single-minded devotion,
he ultimately reaches the Absolute.

One question which continues to plague my mind is: Why missionaries want
to expand Christianity in numbers? There is no evidence that the
conversion to Christianity has improved the world spiritually. However,
Christianity has helped colonialism and imperialism. From what I learn
from North-East States, I feel the aims of the missionaries are
predominantly political. I would like to be proved wrong in my
assessment. What happened in America in the wake of the assaults of
Conquistadors like Cortez, Pizarro and Balboa and the Portuguese in Goa
and the Goa Inquisition, reinforces my theory that their ulterior motive
is political power and spirituality is used as means to achieve it. In
Latin American countries, it is a well known fact that the Jesuits were
involved in the game of power.

Today, Europe and America which were the bailiwicks of Christianity have
spurned the religion in a large measure. I think missionaries and the
churches should turn their efforts to first bring them back to
Christianity, instead of spending their precious efforts on evangelising
the tribals in India. Why are they not doing it?

At the same time, there are movements like New Religion Movement (NRM)
which are weaning the Catholics away from the orthodoxy in favour of
Pentecostal churches. Catholics also don’t like their sheep straying to
Protestant fold. I trust you have not forgotten their massacre in Paris
on the day of St. Bartholomew. If Catholic missionaries don’t like
Catholics moving away from their fold, how do they expect Hindus to like
their people being lured away to Christianity? Think over this in the
context of the Pope saying during his visit to South America that he
wanted to save Catholics from Protestant wolves.

Today, it is not the question of how many follow this religion or that.
There is a pronounced current of thinking that religion has long
outlived its utility. First, because of the capitalist orientation of
the world, and secondly but equally important, because of the
techno-scientific advance which tends to take man’s thinking along
empirical lines. Along with religion, ethical foundations also weaken.
They are pooh-poohed as middle class morality. Communism and Fascism
were the symptoms of this malaise. The disorientation from the
traditional morality has caused tremendous frustration among mankind.
You as priests should address yourselves to this dilemma and cease to
think of conversions.

Finally, I once again bring to your notice that mankind is turning its
back on God and that is the real problem. Conversions from one faith to
another in this context are ridiculous. We should all make concerted
efforts to see that citadels of moral restraints imposed by religion and
faith in divinity are not shattered. As priests, a great deal of
responsibility devolves on you in this respect.

This was followed by a Questions and Answers Session:

**Q.: You say all religions are equal. Is there equality in
Hinduism?**  
A.: I did not say all religions are equal. You are putting words in my
mouth. There are hundreds of religions and cults in the world and they
are at different stages of evolution.

**Q.: You said there is equality in Hindu religion. What about caste
system?**  
A.: Equality is a socio-economic and socio-political concept and relates
to mundane matters. It is not relevant to an individual’s efforts to
identify himself with the Absolute. This can be done at the spiritual
level only.

Caste system is purely a social phenomenon and is dependent on a
particular system of production and distribution of the surplus. India
was the first country to take to agricultural production which required
a lot of manpower woven in an elaborate social network. Today, in modern
cities where industrial production is predominant, caste system is
considerably weaker than in villages where the plough and the bullock
have a sway.

**Q.: Are you sure caste system is not based on religion?**  
A.: Yes. I am sure and emphatically so. Castes and classes were there in
all countries depending on the means of production and the distribution
of surplus. In Rome, there were patricians plebeians and slaves. Was
Christianity responsible for the slave system? French Revolution
occurred because of the conflict of castes or classes and so did Russian
and Chinese Revolution.

For the last more than hundred years Hindu social reformers have worked
to demolish castes. They have not done this because there was sudden
revelation in their mind but their awareness of the changes in social,
economic and political contexts which spurred them to work against the
caste system which was losing its relevance.

Would any of you show me a single reference where caste is associated
with religion?

**Q.: What about untouchability?**  
A.: Where is untouchability today? In our Constitution? In our legal
system? The social evolution takes place over many centuries. At
different stages, in the process, there may have developed social
practices which appear ugly distortions today. The whole Hindu society
is setting its face against such outmoded distortions.

**Q.: Has Hindu religion given them equality?**  
A.: I repeat that equality is a social and not a religious concept. At
the religious level, our galaxy of saints who realised God includes
Mahars like Chokha Mela, a Chamar like Rohidas and many other saints
from lowest depressed classes. Moksha is not withheld from anybody. Gita
says that a sage views in the same light a Brahmin, a dog, a bull, an
elephant and a pig.  He treats them all as equals.

**Q.: What is your idea concerning reservations for Christian
dalits?**  
A.: Are there dalits among Christians? Impossible. You just said it is
Hinduism and not Christianity which believes in castes. How come this
shameful reference to the caste of Christian dalits? Christian dalits is
a contradiction in terms.

Coming to reservations, are their such reservations in your own schools
and autonomous institutions for Christian dalits? You invited these
people to embrace Christianity with a promise that they would cease to
be dalits after conversion. Now you are reimposing and perpetuating
their dalithood.

We Hindus are aware that in the past, depending on the contexts of
times, we have heaped injustices on dalits and reservations is a way to
atone for these wrongs. What Christians have to atone for? Perhaps they
also seem to have perpetrated similar treatment on their dalits all
these years. Then why did you convert them? They would have enjoyed the
reservations had they continued to be Hindu dalits.

**Q.: You said God could be realised by Dnyana and also through Bhakti.
Is Bhakti practised by people?**  
A.: Those people who are spiritually inclined practise Bhakti. I concede
that just as among Christians those who are interested in salvation are
microscopic few and among Muslims majority of people disregard Koranic
injunctions and indulge in all sorts of pleasures - womanizing beyond
the scriptural limit of four wives, booze, eat sausages and take Pathani
interest on their lending. Among Hindus too followers of Charvaka might
be in overwhelming majority. Man by nature is a licentious and
lascivious creature and religion tries to keep his waywardness in check.

Those people who are capable of it among Hindus can straight go to
Nirguna through Dnyana or Hathayoga like Dnyaneshwar. The devotees who
are not capable of it, do it through Bhakti. Dnyaneshwar’s friend and
disciple Namdeo, was a Bhaktimargi and there were friendly arguments
between them about the superiority of Dnyana over Bhakti or vice-versa.
A story has it that once they together were on an all India tour and in
the thick of summer came to the Rajsthan desert. No water was seen
around to quench their thirst. With parched mouths they discerned a
distant well and rushed to it. The well was very deep and water lay at
the bottom. How to get it? Dnyaneshwar looked at Namdeo with an air of
achievement and said. “Namdeva, now you see the power of Yoga.” By his
yogic powers, Dnyaneshwar took the form of a tiny ant and went down the
well along its wall, had a mouthful of water and came up. Namdeo said,
“Dnyanoba, now you see the power of Bhakti.” He took his cymbals in hand
and to their rhythm started singing “Vithal, Vithal”. As the recitation
reached its crescendo, water at the bottom of the well flushed up and he
quenched his thirst. “That is the power of Bhakti,” he said.

Now this might be an apocryphal story, but it makes a point. Bhakti is
as effective as Dnyana or Yoga, if not more. Adi Shankaracharya was an
Advaitin but subsequent philosophers, Madhva and Ramanuja, were Dvaitins
or Vishistadvaitins. They conceded that God could be realised by Bhakti.

Unfortunately, very few people today are anxious to realise God and, the
world over, they have become worshippers of mammon.

**Q.: You have spoken against conversions. What about Christians being
reconverted to Hinduism?**  
A.: If somebody wants to return home to his ancient religion, it is
definitely not conversion. Let him come back like the Prodigal Son.
(*laughter*).

**Q.: Why are you against conversions?**  
A.: Why are you for conversions? What is your objective in converting
the people to your faith and expand it numerically? I can understand
qualitative improvement of a religion, say from Saguna to Nirguna or
from Animism to Bhakti. Religion means an individual’s craving and
efforts to realise God. He may do it in the way he thinks is most
suitable for him. That’s what Hinduism teaches - Sarva Deva Namaskara
Keshavam Pratigachhati. It is immaterial whether you worship Jesus or
Mohammed as your worship ultimately reaches the Absolute, what we call
Brahman.

vSemitic religions, however, whether it is Islam, Christianity or dogma
of Marxism, thirst for quantitative expansion, simply because they
hanker after political power - a materialistic, mundane objective - and
want to exploit religion for the purpose. That’s why missionary
activities blossomed in America under the patronage of Spanish
Conquistadors and in India it sanctified the colonialism of the British
and the Portuguese. When I rack my brains about what is the fundamental
objective of conversions, I get the resounding reply, “Imperialism”.

That’s what made Francis Xavier write that every time a new convert
smashes his idols and destroys his temples where he worshipped just
before conversion, his joy knows no bounds. And such a man is called a
saint! If our Dnyaneshwar and Tukaram had written a similar thing, we
would have called them criminals.

**Q.: Do you think it is possible for you to settle your problems with
Muslims through a dialogue with them?**  
A.: That will depend on the attitude of Muslims. Hinduism has reached
understanding with Scythians, Huns, Parthians, Greeks, Parsees and Jews
and has had no problem with them. But Muslims are different. Their
religion is highly imperialistic. That is why it came into this world in
622 A.D. and by 732 A.D. it had reached India, outer walls of China, and
overrun Europe. Had Charles Martel not defeated them at the Battle of
Tours, the entire Europe would have been Muslim today.

The civilization and culture of this country existed many thousands of
years before the advent of Islam in the world and Muslims in this
country have to take cognizance of it and be proud of the ancient
cultural and civilisational traditions of this country. You may not
worship Rama and Krishna as religious figures and I myself do not give
them religious importance. But they were among the architects of the
civilization and the ethos of this land. Muslims or Christians in this
country have to identify their cultural roots with their messages and
the message of Ramayana, Mahabharata and the Upanishadas. If Muslims
sincerely do it, there won’t be any problems.

**Q.: If Bhakti can lead to Moksha, why Hindu people go to
pilgrimage?**  
A.: As I have said earlier, people perceive God according to their
comprehensional capacity. Although majority of mankind is irreligious
and materially oriented, paying cosmetic loyalty to religion is also
part of life, like going to Church on Sunday. If people get happiness
through it, let them have it. All men can’t be Paramahansas.

**Q.: You said the problem is to check decline into irreligiosity and
crass materialism. How can we do it?**  
A.: I am not competent to give you guidance. I have made a suggestion
and leaders of thought and spirituality and learned people all over the
world should sit together and find a way out. Terrorism, violence,
obscenity, moral chaos - all are offshoots of decline of spirituality.
You are going to be priests and you should do something about it.
Bringing some Hindus to Christianity or taking Christians to Islam is
puerile and meaningless in the context of the bigger problem of
promoting spiritual inclination among the entire mankind.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


