+++
title = "56 "

+++
<div align="right">

**3. Turning away from Mecca**  
Antony Flew

</div>

*Why I am not a Muslim*, Ibn Warraq, Prometheus Books,   
Buffalo, 1995 $25.99. (UK Agent 10 Crescent View,  
Loughton, IG10 4PZ).

This book was written by a man who was raised in a totally Muslim
environment in an overwhelmingly Muslim country. But he has since moved
to one of the NATO states which have since World War II been accepting
mass immigrations from such countries. *Why I am not a Muslim* is
apparently the first book of its kind to have appeared in the English
language.

Ibn Warraq arranges his abundant materials on no obvious principles. He
begins with a chapter entitled ‘The Rushdie Affair’, which deals mainly
with the maltreatment of dissidents within the Islamic world and the
failure of so many Western Islamicists to adopt a properly critical
approach to their subject. This is followed by four chapters on ‘The
Origins of Islam’, ‘The Problems of Sources’, ‘Muhammad and His Message’
and ‘The Koran’. Then, when we might have expected to go on to the
development of the Hadith and the Sharia, we have instead two chapters
on ‘The Totalitarian Nature of Islam’ and ‘Is Islam Compatible With
Democracy and Human Rights?’ After that we have seven chapters on such
various Islamic topics as ‘Sufism or Islamic Mysticism’ and ‘Taboos:
Wine, Pigs and Homosexuality’ before reaching a ‘Final Assessment of
Muhammad’ and a final chapter on ‘Islam in the West’.

The pseudonymous author makes no pretensions to being himself a
professional Islamicist. But all his materials about the doctrines and
history of Islam are drawn from the works of Western scholars and so -
as I am assured by one of them - we can take the book to be factually
reliable. It does, therefore constitute an invaluable compilation.
Unlike professional Islamicists who are alive and working today, this
author is not afflicted with inhibitions from offending either Muslim
friends or Muslim regimes.

Although he does make the crucial point that all true Muslims are as
such fundamentalists, and that this term should not be applied only to
the Ayatollah Khomeini and his like (p. 11) he does not either make it
adequately or insist upon it consistently. The term ‘fundamentalist’,
which was coined in 1920, derives from the title of a series of tracts -
*The Fundamentals* - published in the United States from 1910 to 1915.
It has since been implicitly defined as meaning a person who believes
that, since *The Bible* is the Word of God, every proposition in it must
be true; a belief which, notoriously, is taken to commit fundamentalist
Christians to defending the historicity of the accounts of the creation
of the Universe given in the first two chapters of *Genesis*.

On this understanding a fully believing Christian does not have to be
fundamentalist. Instead it is both necessary and sufficient to accept
the Apostles’ and/or The Nicene Creed. In Islam, however, the situation
is altogether different. For, whereas only a very small proportion of
all the propositions contained in the Old and New Testaments are
presented as statements made directly by God in any of the three persons
of the Trinity, *The Koran* consists entirely and exclusively of what
are alleged to be revelations from Allah (God). Therefore, with regard
to *The Koran*, all Muslims must be as such fundamentalists; and anyone
denying anything asserted in *The Koran* ceases, ipso facto, to be
properly accounted a Muslim. Those whom the media call fundamentalists
would therefore better be described as revivalists.

This conceptual truth not only places a tight limitation upon the
possibilities of developmental change within Islam, as opposed to the
tacit or open abandonment of one or more of its original particular
claims, but also opens up the theoretical possibility of falsifying the
Islamic system as a whole by presenting some known fact which is
inconsistent with a Koranic assertion. Unfortunately Ibn Warraq fails to
emphasize this point and to bring out its implications consistently.
Thus, even on the page immediately following that on which he argues
that all true Muslims must be fundamentalists, he goes on to argue that,
because “the vast majority of victims of ‘Holy Terror’ are inhabitants
of Islamic states, therefore “Islam is a threat to thousands of
*Muslims*” (p. 12: emphasis original).\*

*Why I am not a Muslim* gives readers abundant excellent reasons for not
becoming or remaining Muslims and also makes a compelling case for the
conclusion that Islam is flatly incompatible with the establishment and
maintenance of the equal individual rights and liberties of a liberal,
democratic, secular state. It thus provides further support for Mervyn
Hiskett’s more particular contentions about the threat to British
traditions and values arising from our rapidly growing Muslim minority.

To his suggestions as to how an administration with vision, backbone and
truly conservative principles might counter this threat - by, for
instance, insisting that the criminal law must be applied equally to
all, *including Muslims and non-whites inciting to murder* - we can now
add another. For this threat might be slightly reduced if some
individual were to write a much shorter, persuasive book deploying all
the good reasons for not becoming or remaining a Muslim.

Attempts to get the present book into public libraries would also be
worthwhile. They would force the opposition to choose between allowing
it to become more widely accessible and providing evidence of the
reality of the Islamic threat to freedom of expression.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This review was published in *The Salisbury Review*, Spring 1996. The
quarterly is published from London.

\* The reviewer has not presented Ibn Warraq correctly. The sentences he
quotes from p. 12 relate not to fundamentalism but to a book, *The
Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality?*, by the American Islamicist John
Esposito. The book, Ibn Warraq says, is “based on the same dishonesty as
soft-core pornography… What Esposito and all Western apologists of Islam
are incapable of understanding is that Islam is a threat to thousands of
*Muslims*.  As Amir Taheri puts it, ‘the vast majority of victims of
‘Holy Terror’ are Muslims’.” Here the word ‘Muslims’ has a double
meaning, namely, that all believing Muslims being fundamentalists, they
threaten with death the *Muslims* who try to dissent. The implication is
that if believing Muslims were not fundamentalists, many born *Muslims*
may choose to dissent.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


