+++
title = "72 "

+++
<div align="right">

*Indian Express*  
New Delhi, 27 July 1995  
‘One country, one people’  
**13. Secret of BJP’s success**  
K.R. Malkani

</div>

Only a year ago when the BJP did not get as many seats in UP, MP and
Himachal Pradesh as expected, many people thought that the party had
passed its peak. Not many of them paused to consider that even in its
reduced state the party had polled one crore votes more - and won a
hundred seats more - than the Congress. And so now the same people find
that the party has not only peaked higher than ever before, it is poised
to attain even bigger heights.

Today the BJP is not only in power in Delhi, Rajasthan, Gujarat and
Maharashtra, it is the main Opposition in Karnataka and Bihar where it
has pushed the Congress to the third position. Its masterstroke in UP
has not only toppled its sworn enemy in that biggest of States, its
support for a Dalit woman as Chief Minister has at once endeared it to
millions of Dalits and millions of women voters. The Hindi Press has
said: “Rama has appointed Shabari as king.”

In this situation all other parties view the BJP as the first party in
the country. Frantic efforts are being made to checkmate this meteoric
rise of the BJP. As a Janata Dal MP put it humorously: “The party of
Rama is the only party standing firmly on its two feet; all other
parties are there on *Ram Bharosey*.” Even Mr. Nripen Chakravarty,
former Marxist Chief Minister of Tripura, has said that the next
election will be won by the BJP.

What is the reason for this steady rise of the BJP? Two of the more
popular theories are that alliance with Mr. V.P. Singh’s Janata Dal in
1989 helped the party to jump from two seat to 89 - and that the Ayodhya
issue helped the party in 1991 to further increase its strength from 89
to 119. These theories are at best half-truths.

It should not be forgotten that in 1977, the BJP had won almost a
hundred seats. Although in 1984 it got a pathetic two seats - thanks to
the sympathy wave in favour of Rajiv Gandhi - its popular vote of more
than seven percentage points put it ahead of all other opposition
parties. Under a system of proportional representation this would have
got it something like 40 seats.

It is true enough that adjustment with the Janata Dal over the Bofors
issue, etc. helped the BJP in 1989; but it is no less true that
adjustment with the BJP helped JD to form the Government. It was a
mutually beneficial arrangement. As for the Ayodhya issue, the BJP took
it up early in 1989 out of innate conviction and not on electoral
calculation. The issue did help the party in 1991 - particularly in UP.
But even this was due more to the excesses of the then UP Government
which had shocked the masses than to the espousal of the Ayodhya issue
as such.

However, Ayodhya was not much of an issue in the recent elections in
Bihar and Karnataka, Gujarat and Maharashtra, and yet the BJP performed
there very well. Serious students of public affairs, therefore, will
have to look deeper for the basic causes of the rise of the BJP than
Bofors or Ayodhya. These reasons go deep into political philosophy.

Today the BJP is the only Indian party that has a philosophy, the
philosophy of nationalism - the philosophy of commitment to “Our Country
and Our People”. There was a time when the Congress had a philosophy; it
was Gandhism before 1947 and Nehruism after 1947. Today the Congress is
neither Gandhian nor Nehruite; it is IMF-World Bankite. And this is not
going to cut any ice with the Indian people.

The communists also had a philosophy once. But with the collapse of
communism all over the world, it has fallen flat on its face. Had the
communists Indianised Marxist theory - as Mao Sinoized it in China and
Ho Chi Minh nationalised it in Vietnam - they could have had some hope.
But having failed to do that, they do not have any credible ideology to
move the masses.

The Janata Dal in its many splinters also has a philosophy; but it is a
philosophy of one set of castes against another. It is not a philosophy
that can inspire or elevate; it can only divide, irritate and alienate.
It is, therefore, not a ‘philosophy’ - which word, literally and
etymologically, means, ‘love of wisdom’ - but something of an
anti-philosophy.

It will be argued that if the JD pits castes against castes, does not
BJP pit community against community? The answer would be - yes and no.
There is no doubt that some people in the *sangh parivar* are allergic
to Muslims. Apart from the baggage of history -which we all carry in
varying degrees - the main reason for this was the Muslim demand for the
partition of India. The RSS had been in existence since 1925, but not
even one in a thousand Hindus had heard of it, until after the League
passed the Partition Resolution in March 1940. It was a case of action
and reaction being equal and opposite. As and when India-Pakistan
problems are sorted out - and a BJP Government can certainly sort them
out better and sooner than any other Government - the Hindu-Muslim
problem also will no doubt sort itself out.

Also nobody need be allergic to Hindutva. Every society has to have a
cement, a glue, an identity that will hold it together. China finds it
in the ‘Han race’. Russia finds it in the ‘Slav race’. Britain finds it
in the ‘Church of England’. The US finds it in the ‘market economy’.
India is held together by our culture - call it Hindu, Indian, Bharatiya
or whatever. It is this cultural commonality that keeps Assam and
Gujarat and Punjab and Tamil Nadu together in one State.

To emphasise Hindutva is to emphasise this national commonality for
national unity. To see it as ‘Hindu’ challenge to ‘Muslims’ is a recent
and passing phenomenon. Sir Syed Ahmed of Aligarh education movement
fame proudly called himself ‘Hindu’. And so did a Muslim leader like
M.C. Chagla, a Christian leader like Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur and a Parsi
leader like A.D. Gorwala. Even the Jamaat-i-Islami organ *Radiance*
wrote on March 1, 1970: “Muslims can quite reasonably claim to be Hindus
in the geographical sense.” And Iqbal himself hailed Rama as the Prophet
of Hindustan when he wrote: *“Hai Ram ke wujud pe Hindustan ko naaz /
Ahl-e-watan samajhte hein usse, Imam-e-Hind.”*

It must be clearly understood that whatever the differentiation, Hindus
and Muslims are One People, One Nation. The solution to their problems
lies in an elaboration and implementation of the ideology of nationalism
- and not in communalism, casteism or classism. Once this allergy to
Hindutva is over, what is dubbed today as ‘Hindu nationalism’ will be
seen as nationalism pure and simple. All BJP programmes - whether it is
support to Swadeshi and Swabhasha, missile defence and food security,
full employment and small-scale industry, or opposition to exploitation
masquerading as ‘liberalisation’, and neo-colonialism masquerading as
‘globalisation’ - are meant to protect and promote the interest of the
whole country and of all our people. Herein lies the strength of the
BJP’s appeal. It is this foundation of nationalism that has made BJP
unstoppable.

As the French historian Ameury de Reincourt has noted in his *The Soul
of India*: “Like every old civilisation still represented on this globe,
India has been, and is, increasingly, in spite of appearances, returning
to its original sources.” It is, he said, “from the depths of that old
civilisation that India is most likely to draw the strength needed to
adapt itself to the modern world.” And he added: “Indian masses will
give their heartfelt allegiance to that party and ideology that appears
to be a true emanation, more or less modernised no doubt, of some aspect
or other of timeless Hinduism.” It was “Gandhism yesterday” and, he
said, it can only be the “redoubtable RSS” tomorrow.

That is the reality of the Indian situation today - and the secret of
the BJP’s strength.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


