+++
title = "74 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Times of India*  
New Delhi, 16 October, 1995  
**15. BJP bid to woo Muslims**  
The Times of India News Service

</div>

ALIGARH, October 15 - The BJP today kicked off its pre-election campaign
to woo Muslim voters by promising to provide a “riot-free India in which
human rights of all sections would be protected”.

Addressing the first state convention of the newly-formed minority front
of the BJP, former national president of the party Murli Manohar Joshi
urged Muslims to take a “fresh look” at the BJP, if they wished to
escape from the clutches of the Congress, which he alleged had been
“exploiting them over the past several decades”.

The proceedings of the convention began with a recitation from the holy
*Quran*. Mr. Joshi said the British had sown the seeds of a “minority
complex” in the minds of the Muslims. Later the Congress had exploited
this “complex” by whipping up a “fear psychosis” against the BJP, he
alleged.

Mr. Joshi said the history of India was replete with instances which
clearly indicated that Muslims had always been “an integral part of the
national mainstream”. “They have now only to be made conscious of their
genuine role in this mainstream,” he added.\*

Mr. Joshi and other senior BJP leaders, including former chief minister
Kalyan Singh, state BJP president Kalraj Mishra and party’s national
secretary Arif Baig, stressed that the BJP was now offering a more
liberal form of *hindutva* as its main election plank. They also claimed
that the BJP’s economic policies would “protect the economic interests
of the weaker sections of society including minorities”.

Mr. Baig, who is also the national president of the BJP’s minority
front, announced that in the next few months similar conventions would
be held all over the country.

Though well-attended, the percentage of various minority communities
among the participants was “much below” the expectations of the
organisers. A local Muslim leader felt: “By making such a move, the BJP
may not be able to actually fetch Muslim votes, but it could certainly
succeed in blunting the ‘anti-BJP’ image amongst Muslims.”  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi excels K.R. Malkani when it comes to
inventing convenient history - convenient, that is, for catching Muslim
votes. Unfortunately for him, however, Muslims happen to know their own
history much better, and refuse to be hoodwinked by fools or crooks.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


