+++
title = "80 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Hindustan Times*  
New Delhi, 31 August 1996  
**21. Bihar BJP’s first-ever Muslim**  
**leader emerges**  
HT Correspondent

</div>

PATNA, Aug. 30 - A growing realisation in the BJP that the support of
the minorities may prove crucial to its hopes of ruling the country
appears to have set the stage for the emergence of the party’s
first-ever top ranking Muslim leader in Bihar.

If things work out to a plan, Prof. Azfar Shamshi - State chief of the
party’s Minority Front for the past three years - may soon be rubbing
shoulders with the top brass of the Bihar BJP. Already, the party
leadership has been sending out signals that it rates the ‘ideologically
correct’ professor rather highly and has high hopes of him.

In fact, if one were to go by the laudatory references of State BJP
president Ashwini Kumar and veteran party leader Kailashpati Mishra to
Prof. Shamshi’s intellectual proficiency and leadership qualities, the
35-year old Munger-based college teacher is expected to play a vital
role in allaying Muslim misgivings about the BJP.

Although Prof. Shamshi has been waiting in the wings for quite some
time, the unexpected success with which he organised the first ever
ideological orientation camp of the BJP Minority Front earlier this week
at Madhupur, seems to have impressed the party leadership and catapulted
the young leader into the reckoning for greater things.

It would be naive to ascribe a mere coincidence Prof. Shamshi’s
prominent presence besides Mr. Kailashpati Mishra and Mr. Ashwini Kumar
at the Press conference convened at the State BJP headquarters here
yesterday to announce the induction into the party of former Congress
MPs C.P. Thakur and Kunwar Ram.

In fact, Mr. Kumar and Mr. Mishra made it a point to ensure that the BJP
Minority Front chief shared the limelight with them in almost equal
measures and made him answer several of the newsmen’s queries directly.

Besides, the shape of things to come is also indicated by the party’s
claim to having about 40,000 Muslims on its rolls in the State and talk
of 3,000 active member delegates attending the Minority Front’s
first-time State-level convention here in December.

What makes Prof. Shamshi the BJP’s man of the hour is that he has
impeccable credentials not just as an adherent but even an exponent of
the Sangh Parivar philosophy. A powerful orator, the youthful
professor’s grasp of the Hindutva ideology is so clear he could put to
shame a well trained RSS pracharak.

Drawn towards the Jana Sangh and its allied organisations for their
nationalistic views since his early teens, Prof. Shamshi has weathered
many a storm blowing from within his community for his political ideas
and activities.

On Dec. 6, 1992 - the day the Babri demolition took place - he was
present in Ayodhya doing “Rashtra seva” as he calls it and was promptly
ostracised by the Muslim community in his home town of Munger. Bombs
were thrown at his house, his wedding engagement was broken off and he
had to remain underground for over a month to save his life.

However, the community’s strong disapproval of Prof. Shamshi’s actions
metamorphosised into some kind of a reverence for him and his family in
1994 when his father died in Mecca while doing Haj-e-Akbar there and
fulfilled the most cherished of Muslim dreams of being buried at the
holy city.

“This divine benediction in the best Islamic traditions not only caused
my community to accept me back whole-heartedly but even conferred on us
something akin to celebrity status,” explained the Jamalpur College
teacher. Confirmation o t is came next year when as BJP nominee for the
Munger Town Assembly seat - the only Muslim to be fielded by the party
in the 1995 elections - the professor secured about 30,000 votes.

The figures represented the highest number of votes the Jana Sangh or
the BJP has secured in an election for this seat since Independence. The
Professor dismisses his narrow defeat to factors other than the popular
support he had secured and says he lost no sleep over it.

Prof. Shamshi’s eloquent espousal of the BJP concepts of nationalism and
secularism should be music to the ears of the party top brass. Among
other things, he believes Muslims need to be wary of hardliners and
confrontationists within the community instead of harbouring misgiving
about Hindutva.

“Hindutva imbibes the finest Indian traditions of liberalism and
humanism and secularism will survive only till the spirit of Hindutva
exists. So Muslims have a stake in the longevity of Hindutva”, argues
the emerging “minority” face of the BJP.  He insists the Muslims at
large will swear by this position some day.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


