---
title: 1393 THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS

---
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

,

November 28, 1893\]

. . . Vivekananda, the popular Hindu monk, whose physiognomy bore the
most striking resemblance to the classic face of the Buddha, denounced
our commercial prosperity, our bloody wars, and our religious
intolerance, declaring that at such a price the "mild Hindu" would have
none of our vaunted civilisation. . . . "You come," he cried,

with the Bible in one hand and the conqueror's sword in the other — you,
with your religion of yesterday, to us, who were taught thousands of
years ago by our *Rishis* precepts as noble and lives as holy as your
Christ's. You trample on us and treat us like the dust beneath your
feet. You destroy precious life in animals. You are *carnivores*. You
degrade our people with drink. You insult our women. You scorn our
religion — in many points like yours, only better, because more humane.
And then you wonder why Christianity makes such slow progress in India.
I tell you it is because you are not like your Christ, whom we could
honour and reverence. Do you think, if you came to our doors like him,
meek and lowly, with a message of love, living and working and suffering
for others, as he did, we should turn a deaf ear? Oh no! We should
receive him and listen to him, and as we have done our own inspired
*Rishis* (teachers). . . .

[→](03_the_indian_mirror_dec_7_1893.htm)