---
title: Research
---

## Preparation: Importance

The first great discovery may take a long time to come. The task is to
relentlessly prepare oneself for that great discovery. It is important
to keep working at the boundary of one’s abilities.

## Central pleasure of solving problems

The pleasure is great when you are tackling a problem,

  - which you are certain is worth tackling - guaranteeing enthusiastic
    effort;

  - requires you to invest an amount of thought and effort which is
    neither too small nor too huge in order to start reaping rewards;
    like activation energy in chemistry

  - you feel confident about making significant progress towards a
    solution - or even about solving it.

All other pleasurable activities associated with a research career -
such as mentoring, presentation, gathering knowledge etc - depend on
this for meaningful existence; so this is the primary pleasure. However,
one must take pleasure in these surrounding activities; as the
anticipation of the pleasure of solving problems may not provide
sufficient enthusiasm.

## High level process for each problem

General loop: Find area. Find problem in a given area. Find solution
strategy for a given problem. Implement solution, evaluate, communicate.

"Read many papers; write many papers; repeat."

Popular research mode: Knowing and heavily using old techniques: take a
few hammers, hit everything with it. Finding new techniques is rare and
hard.


## Problems: Finding candidates

### Overview

It is very important to critique a paper or a talk, understand its
shortcomings, suggest future improvements. Thence, incremental research
occurs.

OFTEN, perturb the problem and extrapolate a solution. This is a very
important skill.

### Papers

In doing incremental-improvement research, it is important to be able to
critique papers, find their shortcomings, identify unsolved problems,
then to be able to solve them.


### Talking to others

Another person may be facing a problem in research where you, having a
different perspective, may have a good solution strategy. Research shows
that this mode of finding and solving problems is results in very good
quality research.

### Choosing problems to pursue

#### Judging impact: theory

The most applicable of all is a good theory.

#### Importance of selectivity

You don’t have enough time and energy to pursue all interests. So, must
be selective.

#### Fresh problems: Importance

Find your own, fresh problems and work on them. If a senior person is
not actively involved, it is much harder to beat others who have worked
in the field for years.

#### High vs Low impact work: balance

Aim for rough water. Devote adequate time to important research, like
Leslie Valiant.

Short term/ competitive research should be avoided. As Dijkstra
\[EWD637\] said, do not compete with your colleagues who are as well
equipped as you are to tackle a certain problem.

Andy Yao said this: When you get a paper accepted to a good conference,
the main effect is that it buys you some time: some number of weeks or
months during which the pressure to publish is off and you can focus on
exciting but very hard open problems. Thus, your work should be
organized to achieve a balance between projects that will probably
improve your vita, and projects that will most likely not get you
anywhere in the short term, but that are important in the long term.

### Solving problems

See problem solving strategy.

### Parallelism

Execute many research projects/ threads in parallel. Switch between
problems. Know when a project isn’t right for the present moment.

#### Time multiplexing

Must have a good way of dividing time amongst various activities.

This worked well in Fall 2009: Experiments from 4 or 5, reading and
classes before that.

## Multitasking

You end up balancing multiple research projects and teaching and
administrative tasks. You do need to find a way of making progress on
various projects simultaneously. The process is probably similar to the
way that we figure out how to balance career and family/ community life.

### Balancing research activities

There should be effort and focus spent on both acquiring knowledge and
on solving difficult problems. One must do both daily.

In Fall 2009, I split time thus: Before 1600 or 1700 each day I focused
on theoretical thought and knowledge acquisition. After that, until
2000, I did experiments and focused on a single research problem. This
split worked very well.


## Communicating research

### Sell work for timely impact

For your work to have a timely impact, others who might use your
research should know about it. It is absurd to expect others to do it
for you.

### Publishing venues

Workshops: Some explicitly deny that a presentation in a workshop does
not count as a publication. So such stuff is publishable elsewhere.
Other workshops are contrary.

Publish long versions of conference papers in journals.

1 top tier paper = many 2nd tier papers. It is far more important to
publish regularly in a top tier conference than to publish profusely in
a 2nd tier conference. Read papers from those conference and aim for
such work.

### Publicising by emailing

If you discover a new exciting result in a hot area, it is a good idea
to inform others who have tackled similar problems about your result.
Eg: PratIk, raghu, inderjit did this with their compressed sensing/
matrix completion paper. Thence increase impact, get new suggestions.
