+++
title = "02 Chapter 1 Early Muslims"

+++
**Chapter 1**  
**Early Muslims**

No integrated contemporary account exists to say how Islam spread in
India.  Medieval chroniclers very graphically describe the achievements
of Muslim invaders, conquerors, monarchs, governors, rulers of
independent Muslims kingdoms, and even officials, in effecting
conversions.  Muslim hagiological works, some reliable others not so
reliable, too report on addition to Muslim population through
conversions.  But the actual numbers who embraced Islam year after year
and decade after decade are not known.  Some Muslims no doubt came from
abroad as conquerors and soldiers.  Some scholars and religious men also
arrived either in the train of conquerors or at the invitation of Indian
sultans or as refugees.  Arabs, Abyssinians, Egyptians, Persians and
Transoxionians, all find mention as having come to India to seek refuge
or fortune.  But the majority of Muslims are converts from Hinduism. 
One has, therefore, to collect facts and figures contained in stray
references of medieval writers, especially Persian chroniclers, to make
a conversion-cum-immigration survey to be able to estimate the growth of
Muslim population.

On a study in depth on the growth of Muslim population, one is struck by
the fact that as against the zig-zag pattern of rise and fall of the
overall population in the medieval period, Muslim population shows only
a constant rise.  Another is that in spite of centuries of exertion in
the field of proselytization, India has been converted only but
partially.  This proves that in contrast to the quick conversion of some
West Asian countries,

Islam received a definite check in India.  In other words, while
countries like Arabia, Persia, Mesopotamia and Syria succumbed to the
onslaught of Islam and converted *en masse*, the sword of Islam was
blunted in India.  This check provided provocation and enthusiasm to
some Muslim conquerors and rulers to take to the task of proselytization
with great zeal and earnestness.  Their exertions and achievements find
repeated mention in official and non-official chronicles and similar
other works.  Sometimes, besides broad facts, actual data and figures in
this regard are also available.  All this information is very helpful in
estimating Muslim numbers as they grew from almost a cipher.

By the year 1000 of the Christian Era the extreme north-western parts of
India, in the trans-Indus region, had become introduced to Islam.  As
early as C.E. 664, consequent upon an invasion of Kabul and its environs
(which then formed part of India), by Abdur Rahman, a few thousand
inhabitants are reported to have been converted to Islam.[¹](#1a) 
Subuktagin also fought against the Hindus and converted some of
them.  But all these events took place in the trans-Indus region, and we
may, therefore, agree with Lanepoole in saying that in C.E. 1000 there
were no Muslims in northern India east of the Indus.[²](#2a)

However, there were some small settlements of Muslims in Sind, Gujarat
and the Malabar Coast.  Parts of Sind were conquered by Muhammad bin
Qasim Sakifi in C.E. 712.  Whichever towns he took, like Alor, Nirun,
Debul and Multan, in them he established mosques, appointed Muslim
governors, and propagated the Muhammadan religion.[³](#3a)  In Debul,
for instance, he enslaved and converted some women and children, and
left a contingent of 4,000 Muhammadans to garrison the
place.[⁴](#4a)  In Multan about 6,000 persons were made to accept
Islam.  Al Biladuri’s narrative indicates that the people of Sawandari,
Basmad, Kiraj, and Alor were converted in large numbers.[⁵](#5a)  The
reports of Muhammad bin Qasim Sakifi to Hajjaj also point to large
number of conversions.[⁶](#6a) Caliph Umar wrote to some Indian rulers
in C.E. 717 inviting them and their people in Sind and Hind to become
Musalmans.  It is said that in response to his appeal some people
‘turned Musalmans and took Arab names’.[⁷](#7a)

Muhammad bin Qasim remained in Sind for a little more than three
years.[⁸](#8a)  After his recall not only the Arab power in Sind
declined rapidly, but also most of the neo-converts returned to their
former faith.  Al Biladuri informs that ‘in the days of Tamim, the
Musalmans (had) retired from several parts of India… nor have they up to
the present time (he wrote in the middle of the ninth century) advanced
so far as in days gone by”.  When Hakim succeeded Tamim, “the people of
India had returned to idolatry excepting those of Kassa, and the
Musalmans had no place of security in which they could take
refuge”.[⁹](#9a)  Sir Dension Ross also says that “after the recall of
Muhammad bin Qasim, the Muslim retained some foothold on the west bank
of the river Indus, but they were in such small numbers that they
gradually merged into Hindu population.  In Mansura (the Muslim capital
of Sind) they actually adopted Hinduism.”[¹⁰](#10a)

In brief, because of the efforts of Muhammad bin Qasim and Caliph Umar
II (C.E. 717-24) some Hindus in Sind had been converted to Islam, but by
the time of Caliph Hashim (724-43), when Tamim was the governor of Sind,
many of these Sindhi converts had returned to Hinduism.  Those who
continued to retain the new faith remained confined mostly to cities,
particularly Multan.  After Mahmud of Ghazni’s attack on Multan their
number seems to have gone up for, writing in the twelfth century, Al
Idrisi says: “The greater part of the population (of Multan) is
Musalman, so also the Judicial authority and civil
administration.”[¹¹](#11a)  However, up to C.E. 1000 there were very few
Muslims in Sind.[¹²](#12a)

Similar was the situation in Gujarat.  A military expedition was sent
out in C.E. 636 from Oman to pillage the coasts of India.  It proceeded
as far as Thana (near Bombay).[¹³](#13a)  About the same time
expeditions were sent to Broach and Debul, but because of Caliph Umar’s
opposition to hazardous voyages, the policy of armed interference by sea
remained in abeyance.  Meanwhile commerce by sea continued.  In the
eighth century, Arab fleets attacked Broach and port towns on the
Kathiawar coast.[¹⁴](#14a)  Thus because of armed attacks, but more so
through the channel of trade, foreign Muslims and indigenous converts
began to be seen in the coastal towns of Gujarat.  Ibn Hauqal (C.E. 968)
observes that ‘from Kambaya to Saimur is the land of Balhara…  It is a
land of infidels, but there are Muslims in its
cities’.[¹⁵](#15a)  Masudi, who visited India in 916, found Muslims of
Siraf, Oman, Baghdad and Basra at Saimur (modern Chaul) besides others
who were children of Arabs born there.  There were Jama Masjids at
Famhal, Sindan, Saimur and Kambaya.[¹⁶](#16a)  All these facts indicate
the presence of some Muslims in Gujarat.  But their number was small. 
This finds confirmation in the fact that in an anti-Muslim riot in
Cambay, in the middle of the eleventh century, only eighty persons had
been killed.[¹⁷](#17a.)  Besides, the population of traders is by nature
and profession migratory, and the number of Muslims in Gujarat does not
seem to have been large.

Arab Muslims first settled on the Malabar coast about the end of the
seventh century.  ‘These Arab traders who settled down on India’s coast
between the seventh and the ninth centuries were treated with tolerance
by the Hindus’, and so they grew in numbers.  In the early part of the
eighth century, Hajjaj bin Yusuf (who sent Muhammad bin Qasim to Sind),
drove out some persons of the house of Hasham, and they left their
homeland to settle in Konkan and the Cape Camorin area.  Refugees or
traders, Muslims were welcome in India, and ‘apparently, facilities were
given to them to settle and acquire lands and openly practice their
religion…’[¹⁸](#18a)  In course of time mosques were erected at eleven
places on the Malabar coast.[¹⁹](#19a) But till the end of the tenth
century their settlements were only too small.  The Muslim Arab
historiog-raphers, while describing the achievements of Muslims on the
Malabar Coast, exaggerate their numbers and influence.  They also miss
to mention the Hindu reabsorbtion of neo-converts, for Sulaiman, who
visited India in the ninth century, states that he did not find any
Muslims or Arabic speaking people on the western coast.[²⁰](#20a)

In short, while there can be no doubt about the presence of some Muslims
in Sind, Gujarat and on the western coast of India, their number till
the end of the tenth century was almost microscopic.  In Hindustan
proper, east of the river Indus, there were hardly any Musalmans in C.E.
1000.

In the year C.E. 1000 the first attack of Mahmud of Ghazni was
delivered.  The region of Mahmud’s activity extended from Peshawar to
Kanauj in the east and from Peshawar to Anhilwara in the South.  In
this, wherever he went, he converted people to Islam.  In his attack on
Waihind (near Peshawar) in 1001-3, Mahmud is reported to have captured
Jayapal and fifteen of his principal chiefs and relations some of whom,
like Sukhpal, were made Musalmans.  At Bhera all the inhabitants, except
those who embraced Islam, were put to the sword.  Since the whole town
is reported to have been converted the number of converts may have been
quite large.  At Multan too conversions took place in large numbers for,
writing about the campaign against Nawasa Shah (converted Sukhpal), Utbi
says that this and the previous victory (at Multan) were ‘witnesses to
his exalted state of proselytism’.[²¹](#21a) In his campaign in the
Kashmir Valley (1015) Mahmud ‘converted many infidels to Muhammadanism,
and having spread Islam in that country, returned to Ghazni’.  In the
latter campaigns, in Mathura, Baran and Kanauj, again, many conversions
took place.  While describing ‘the conquest of Kanauj’, Utbi sums up the
situation thus: ‘The Sultan levelled to the ground every fort…, and the
inhabitants of them either accepted Islam, or took up arms against him.”
In short, those who submitted were also converted to Islam.  In Baran
(Bulandshahr) alone 10,000 persons were converted including the Raja. 
During his fourteenth invasion in C.E. 1023, Kirat, Nur, Lohkot and
Lahore were attacked.  The chief of Kirat accepted Islam, and many
people followed his example.  According to Nizamuddin Ahmad, ‘Islam
spread in this part of the country by the consent of the people and the
influence of force’.  Conversion of Hindus to Islam was one of the
objects of Mahmud.  Al Qazwini writes that when Mahmud went “to wage
religious war against India, he made great efforts to capture and
destroy Somnat, in the hope that the Hindus would then become
Muhammadans”.[²²](#22a)  Sultan Mahmud was well-versed in the Quran and
was considered its eminent interpreter.[²³](#23a)  He ardently desired
to play the role of a true Muslim monarch and convert non-Muslims to his
faith.  *Tarikh-i-Yamini*, *Rausat-us-Safa* and *Tarikh-i-Ferishtah*,
besides many other works, speak of construction of mosques and schools
and appointment of preachers and teachers by Mahmud and his successor
Masud.[²⁴](#24a) Wherever Mahmud went, he insisted on the people to
convert to Islam.  Such was the insistence on the conversion of the
vanquished Hindu princes that many rulers just fled before Mahmud even
without giving a battle.  “The object of Bhimpal in recommending the
flight of Chand Rai was, that the Rai should not fall into the net of
the Sultan, and thus be made a Musalman, as had happened to Bhimpal’s
uncles and relations, when they demanded quarter in their
distress.”[²⁵](#25a)

There is thus little doubt that during the first thirty years of the
eleventh century, consequent upon the invasions of Mahmud of Ghazni,
some thousands of people were converted to Islam.  During and after his
raids, a few Muslim colonies were also established, some in as far off
places as Kanauj, Banaras, and Bahraich.[²⁶](#26a)  This is partially
corroborated by the sixteenth century Lama historian Taranatha who
refers to the settlements of the Turks in the Antarvedi or the
Ganga-Jamuna Doab.[²⁷](#27a)  He further adds that during the time of
Lavasena and his successors, prior to the invasion of Odantapuri and
Vikramsila (1203), the Turks had increased in number in
Magadh.[²⁸](#28a)  The traditional history of Maner and an inscription
found there also corroborate the presence of Turks in Bihar in the
twelfth century.[²⁹](#29a)  In Mahmud Ghazni’s time some conversions had
taken place in Gujarat and Kashmir also.  Besides king Kalasa of Kashmir
(C.E. 1063-89) employed some Turkish architects to erect a golden
parasol over the temple of Kalasesvara.  Another king of the same state,
Harsha, employed Turks in his army.[³⁰](#30a)

In spite of his great success the sway of the descendants of Mahmud in
Punjab was precarious, and their proselytizing efforts could not have
been quite rewarding of success.  Therefore, the number of Muslims in
the Punjab, like in Sind, Gujarat and Malabar could have been only
small.  Islam being a proselytizing religion, its followers have not
only taken pride in winning converts but also often exaggerating the
numbers of real or imaginary conversions.  For instance it is claimed
that in Gujarat some members of the depressed classes like Kunbis,
Kharwars and Koris were converted to Islam by Nuruddin Nur
Satgur.[³¹](#31a) But ‘Nur Satgur’s figure is one which is more
legendary than real, at least in determinable historical
tenns.’[³²](#32a)  The story of the conversion of Cheraman Perumal of
Malabar too is only legendary.[³³](#33a)  There is no doubt that the
invasions of Mahmud of Ghazni brought good crop of converts, and a few
more Muslims were added through the influence of Muslim Mashaikh and
traders in Gujarat and Malabar.  But if the example of Sind provides any
precedent, it is possible that many Hindus forcibly converted to Islam
during Mahmud’s raids returned to their former faith.  Very few Muslims
were left in Sind after the decline of Arab rule.  A local Karmatian
Muhammadan dynasty was, however, ruling at Mansura and Multan.  Mahmud
of Ghazni destroyed it root and branch (1010) and Multan was
deserted.[³⁴](#34a)  There was another wave of Shia immigrants.  In 1175
Shihabuddin Ghori attacked, defeated, and massacred them; and the
majority of survivors began to live in the guise of Hindus.[³⁵](#35a)

Thus while the story of the conversions to Islam has been very
enthusiastically narrated by Muslim chroniclers, the attitude of the
Hindus to conversion and the endeavours of the hurriedly converted
Hindus to revert to their former faith, has not been even referred to by
them.  Alberuni mentions a number of restrictions imposed upon
reconversion to Hinduism,[³⁶](#36a) but he has probably noted only the
extremely orthodox Brahman opinion.  On the other hand
*Devalasmriti*[³⁷](#37a) and many other similar works[³⁸](#38a), lay
down liberal rules for the reconversion of men and women who might have
stayed with the *mlechchhas* for even as long a period as twenty
years.[³⁹](#39a)  All this points to a keenness on the part of the
converted to return to Hinduism.  We know that Nawasa Shah reverted to
Hinduism at the earliest opportunity.  There is also the case of Rai
Sal.[⁴⁰](#40a)  Between Mahmud of Ghazni’s death (1030) and Muhammad
Ghori’s invasion (1191-92) such opportunities of reconversion were many,
even on a large scale.[⁴¹](#41a) Consequently, during this Period of
more than a century and a half, Muslim numbers do not seem to have shown
any great rise.

About the end of the twelfth century, Muhammad Ghori established Muslim
rule in India on a durable basis.  When he captured Bhatinda in 1190-91,
he placed in its command Qazi Ziyauddin with a contingent of 1200
horse.[⁴²](#42a)  In 1192 he invaded Hindustan with an army of 120,000. 
A good number of his soldiers would have been killed in the sanguinary
battle with Prithviraj.  A major portion of the remainder would have
stayed on in India under Qutbuddin Aibak, who must not have been left
empty handed in an alien and hostile country.[⁴³](#43a)

Aibak entered upon a series of conquests.  He despatched Ikhtiyaruddin
Bakhtiyar Khalji to the East and himself captured Kol (modern Aligarh)
in 1194.  There “those of the garrison who were wise and acute were
converted to Islam, but those who stood by their ancient faith were
slain with the sword”.[⁴⁴](#44a)  In 1195 when Raja Bhim of Gujarat was
attacked, 20,000 prisoners were captured,[⁴⁵](#45a) and in 1202 at
Kalinjar 50,000,[⁴⁶](#46a) “and we may be sure that (as in the case of
Arab conquest of Sind) all those who were made slaves were compelled to
embrace the religion of the masters to whom they were
allotted.”[⁴⁷](#47a)  Ferishtah specifically mentions that on the
capture of Kalinjar “fifty thousand *Kaniz va ghulam*, having suffered
slavery, were rewarded with the honour of Islam”.[⁴⁸](#48a)  According
to Ferishtah three to four hundred thousand Khokhars and Tirahias were
also converted to Islam by Muhammad Ghori.[⁴⁹](#49a)

Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji’s military exploits in the east also
resulted in conversions to Islam.  About the end of the twelfth or the
beginning of the thirteenth century,[⁵⁰](#50a.) he marched into Bihar
and attacked the University centres of Nalanda, Vikramshila and
Uddandapur, erecting a fortress at the site of Uddandapur or
Odantapuri.[⁵¹](#51a)  The Buddhist monks in these places were massacred
and the common people, deprived of their priests and teachers, turned
some to Brahmanism and some to Islam.  Buddhism did not die out
immediately or completely in Bihar.[⁵²](#52a)  But Bakhtiyar’s raid on
Bihar did deliver a shattering blow to Buddhism and its lost followers
were gained mainly by Islam.  Muslim sway extended from Varanasi through
the strip of Shahabad, Patna, Monghyr and Bhagalpur district,[⁵³](#53a)
and the presence of Muslims in this tract from early times indicates
that conversions by the Khalji’s warriors were common in this
region.  Bakhtiyar converted some tribes in the Himalayan foothills
also, and one chieftain, known after his conversion as Ali the Mech, had
exchanged his native beliefs for the religion of Islam.[⁵⁴](#54a)

During the time of Qutbuddin Aibak a large number of places were
attacked and prisoners captured for which actual figures or written
evidence are available.  Figures of any conversions during campaigns to
Kanauj, Varanasi (where the Muslims occupied “a thousand”
temples).[⁵⁵](#55a)  Ajmer (attacked thrice), Gujarat, Bayana and
Gwalior, and the campaigns carried out right up to Bengal are not
available.  However, since the notices of medieval chroniclers are
usually full of exaggeration where figures of the defeated or captured
non-Muslims are concerned, it would be reasonable to take into
consideration only those which are specifically mentioned, any
exaggeration being rounded off by those which are not.

I have calculated elsewhere that the numbers converted between 1193,
when the rule of the Turkish Sultanate was established at Delhi, and
1210, when Qutbuddin Aibak died, and the immigrant Muslims were about
two and a half lakhs.[⁵⁶](#56a)  To this may be added the Muslims
converted, migrated and procreated since the days of Mahmud of Ghazni in
the Punjab, U.P., Gujarat and the South.  Thus by the beginning of the
thirteenth century, there surely was emergence of a Muslim community in
India.  Structurally, the term community connotes “a geographical area
with definite legal boundaries occupied by residents engaged in
interrelated economic activities and constituting a politically
self-governing unit”.[⁵⁷](#57a)  Thus in a community is discerned a
process of social interaction, interdependence, cooperation,
collaboration and unification and a conscious sense of “belonging”.  In
modern times means of communication have broken community boundaries. 
In medieval times human associations like family, relatives, marriages,
class (or caste), status, and neighbourhood played a very important role
in the community’s life.  Even now, despite modern times, it is to be
noted that in rural areas, villages and smaller cities the community
process is still more closely related to family, neighbourhood,
religious beliefs and institutional factors.[⁵⁸](#58a)

With this conceptual framework let us examine the structure and
organization of Muslim community in Hindustan in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries.  Punjab saw the emergence of Muslims as a local
community consequent to the invasions of Mahmud of Ghazni.  But for a
few immigrants in the shape of Ghaznavid officers and soldiers, the bulk
of Muslims were converts from the indigenous Hindu population.  Similar
was the case in “pockets” of Sind, Gujarat, Bihar and Malabar.  The
process of their conversion was hurried.  All of a sudden the invader
appeared in a city or a region, and in the midst of loot and murder, a
dazed, shocked and enslaved people were given the choice between Islam
and death.  Those who were converted were deprived of their scalp-lock
or *choti* and, if they happened to be caste people, also their sacred
thread.[⁵⁹](#59a)  Some were also circumcised.  Their names were
changed, although some might have retained their old names with new
affixes.  They were taught to recite the *kalima* and learnt to say the
prescribed prayers.  But beyond this, to them their conversion would
have meant little.  These neo-converted Muslims lived, as before, among
the vast majority of the Hindus.  Their interest lay, as before, in
co-operating with their erstwhile friends and relations rather than with
their foreign co-religionists whose main occupation was to fleece the
Punjab and exploit the people.  They continued in their old professions
and vocations; perhaps they were given some preferential treatment in
the redistribution of the conquered land, but there was hardly any
change in the economic set-up with its inter-dependence, cooperation and
collaboration, and they remained as intimately associated with their old
social and economic order as in days before they were made Musalmans. 
Situated as they were, some of them might have even tried and succeeded
in reverting to Hinduism.[⁶⁰](#60a)

But no community, however newly born, however weakly constituted it may
be, exists without a moral power which animates and directs it.  After
the passing of a few generations, Indian Muslims would have forgotten
the circumstances of their conversion, and developed a sense of oneness
amongst themselves.  With time, they would have begun to be considered a
distinct and separate entity in the caste-oriented Hindu society.  “The
Hindus were so well organized in their social and religious
life”,[⁶¹](#61a) that a few conversions had not even made a dent in
their social organization, and gradually they would have tended to
become indifferent towards those who had become Musalmans, thereby
creating in the latter a sense of oneness and cohesion amongst
themselves.  As the influence of the parent society on them declined and
the influence of Muslim regime and religion increased, the Indian
Muslims began to look more and more to foreign Muslim ruling and
privileged classes for guidance, help and protection, and in return gave
them their unflinching cooperation.[⁶²](#62a)  Much more important than
the recession of Hindu moorings and the ascension of Muslim beliefs and
culture in their life and thought, was the fact that these Muslims were
governed by a new set of laws - the Shariat.  They prayed in a different
fashion now, in congregation and many times a day.  They began to marry
amongst themselves.  The magic word of ‘Islam’ would have given them a
unity of thought, interest and action.  Lahore and Delhi were their
political and cultural centres.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1) Ferishtah, *Tarikh-i-Ferishtah*, Persian text, Nawal Kishore
Press, Lucknow 1865, Vol.1, p.16.

[²](#2) Stanley Lane-Poole, *Medieval India under Muhammadan Rule*
(London, 1926), p.1.

[³](#3) *Chachnama*, trs. in H.M. Elliot and J. Dowson, *History of
India as told by its own Historians*, 8 Vols., London, 1867-77, (here
after as E and D), Vol. I, p. 207.

[⁴](#4) Al Biladuri, *Futuh-ul-Buldan*, trs. E and D, I, p.120.

[⁵](#5) *Ibid*., pp.122-24.

[⁶](#6) *Chachnama*, op. cit., pp. 163-64. Also pp. 205-07, 208.

[⁷](#7) Biladuri, pp.124-25. Also cf. *Chachnama*, pp.207-208. Also
*Cambridge history of India* (hereafter C.H.I.) ed. Wolseley Haig, Vol.
III, p.3.

[⁸](#8) Elliot’s Appendix in E and D, I, p.439.

[⁹](#9) Biladuri, op. cit., p.126, Also cf. Idrisi, E and D, I,
*Nuzhat-ul-Mushtaq*.

[¹⁰](#10) Dension Ross, *Islam*, p.18.

[¹¹](#11) Al Idrisi, p.83.

[¹²](#12) See also Elliot’s Appendix, E and D, I, p.459.

[¹³](#13) Biladuri, pp.115-16. Also p.415.

[¹⁴](#14) Tara Chand, *Influence of Islam on Indian Culture* (Allahabad,
1946), pp.31-33.

[¹⁵](#15) Ibn Hauqal, *Ashkalal-ul-Bilad*, trs. in E and D, I, p.34.
Also p.457. See also Istakhri *Kitab-ul-Aqalim*, E and D, I, p.27.

[¹⁶](#16) Ibn Hauqal, p.38.

[¹⁷](#17) Muhammad Ufi, *Jami-ul-Hikayat*, E and D, II, pp.163-64. Also
S. C. Misra, *Muslim Communities in Gujarat* (Bombay,1964), p.5.

[¹⁸](#18) Tara Chand, op. cit., p.33. Also Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in
Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment* (Oxford, 1964), p. 77.

[¹⁹](#19) Tara Chand, *Ibid*., p.34.

[²⁰](#20) Sulaiman Saudagar, Hindi trs. of his Narrative by Mahesh
Prasad, (Kashi, Sam. 1978, C.E. 1921), p.84.

[²¹](#21) For conversions at various places under Mahmud see
*Kitab-i-Yamini*, Eng. trs. of Utbi’s work by James Reynolds, (London)
1858, pp. 451-52, 455, 460, 462-63 and Utbi, *Tarikh-i-Yamini*, E and D,
II, pp.27, 30, 33, 40, 42, 43, 45, 49.  Also Appendix in E and D, II,
pp.434-78.

[²²](#22) Zakaria al Qazwini, *Asar-ul-Bilad*, E and D, I, p.98.

[²³](#23) C.E. Bosworth, *The Ghaznavids* (Edinburgh, 1963), p. 129. 
Utbi, Reynolds trs. op. cit., pp.438-39 and n.

[²⁴](#24) Utbi, trs. Reynolds, *op.cit.*, pp. 322-25, 462.  Utbi, E and
D, II, p.37 Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, I, p.44.

[²⁵](#25) Utbi, E and D, II, p.49.

[²⁶](#26) About Banaras Ibn Asir says, ‘there were Musalmans in that
country since the days of Mahmud bin Subuktagin’.  Ibn-ul-Asir,
*Kamil-ul-Tawarikh*, trs., E and D, II.

[²⁷](#27) *Indian Antiquary*, IV, 1875, p.366.

[²⁸](#28) *Indian Historical Quarterly*, XXII, 1951, p.240.

[²⁹](#29) Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, VI Session, Patna,
pp.123ff. Also B.P. Mazumdar, *The Socio-Economic History of Northern
India*, (Calcutta, 1960), p.126.

[³⁰](#30) Kalhana, *Rajatarangini*, trs. by M. A. Stein (Westminster,
1900), VII, 528-29, 1149, cited in Mazumdar, *op. cit.*, p.128.

[³¹](#31) Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam* (Westminster, 1896), p.275;
Murray Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan*, (Calcutta, 1959), p.43.

[³²](#32) S.C. Misra, *Muslim Communities in Gujarat*, p.57.

[³³](#33) Tarachand, *op. cit.*, pp.34-35.

[³⁴](#34) Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, I, p.27, M. Habib, *Sultan Mahmud of
Ghaznin*, Delhi reprint, 1951, p.34,

[³⁵](#35) W. Ivanow, *Brief Survey of the Evolution of Ismailism*
(Bombay, 1942), pp.34-35.

[³⁶](#36) Alberuni, *India*, trs. Edward Sachau, 2 Vols., (London,
1910), II, pp.162-63.

[³⁷](#37) Published by Anandasrama Sanskrit series, Poona, trs. by M.N.
Ray in J.B.O.R.S.,1927.

[³⁸](#38) P.V. Kane, *History of the Dharmashastra Literature*, 4 Vols.,
II, pp.390-91.

[³⁹](#39) See B.P. Mazumdar, *op. cit.*, pp. 131-33.

[⁴⁰](#40) Utbi, E and D, II, p.39. *Camb. Hist. India*, III, p.47.

[⁴¹](#41) Ferishtah, *op. cit.*, I, p.45.

[⁴²](#42) *Camb. Hist. India*, III, p.40.

[⁴³](#43) Hasan Nizami says that ‘the Sultan then returned to Ghazna…
but the whole army remained… at the mauza of Indarpat’.
(*Taj-ul-Maasir*, E and D, II, p.216). Surely Muhammad Ghori would not
have gone back all alone. 

[⁴⁴](#44) *Ibid.*, p.222.

[⁴⁵](#45) Ferishtah, I, p.62.

[⁴⁶](#46) Hasan Nizami, p.231. Also Ferishtah, I, p.53. Habibullah, *The
Foundation of Muslim Rule in India*, (Allahabad, 1961), pp.69 and 334
(n.26), has missed to cite Hasan Nizami’s assertion that 50,000 were
enslaved.

[⁴⁷](#47) Titus.  *Islam in India and Pakistan* (Calcutta, 1959), p.31.

[⁴⁸](#48) Ferishtah, I, p.63.

[⁴⁹](#49) Ferishtah, I, pp.59-60. The authenticity of Ferishtah’s
statement has been challenged by Raverty (*Notes on Afghanistan*,
p.367). The numbers of Khokhar converts have certainly been
exaggerated.  Amir Khusrau refers to Khokhars as a non-Muslim tribe
(*Tughlaq Namah*, Aurangabad, 1933, p.128), and the way they were
constantly attacked and killed by sultans like Iltutmish and Balban
confirms Khusrau’s contention.  There is, however, nothing strange about
Ferishtah’s statement; only the figure seems to be exaggerated.

[⁵⁰](#50) The exact date of the raid is difficult to determine.  Ishwari
Prasad, *Medieval India* (Allahabad, Fourth Impression, 1940), p.138
places it” probably in 1197”, Wolseley Haig (C.H.I., III,pp.45-46) a
little earlier than this, and Habibullah, *op. cit.*, pp.70 and 84, n.
78 in 1202-03.

[⁵¹](#51) *Indian Antiquary*, IV, pp.366-67.

[⁵²](#52) Fuhrer, *The Sharqi Architecture of Jaunpur*, pp.70-73.

[⁵³](#53) Habibullah, op. cit., p.147.

[⁵⁴](#54) *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, trs. H.R. Raverty, (London, 1881), I,
p.560.

[⁵⁵](#55) Ferishtah, I, p. 58.

[⁵⁶](#56) K.S. Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India*
(Delhi, 1973), p.108.

[⁵⁷](#57) *Encyclopaedia of Social sciences* (Macmillan, New York
Reprint, 1949), pp. 102ff.

[⁵⁸](#58) Ibid., p.105.

[⁵⁹](#59) It may be noted here that Jayapal, after fighting Subuktigin
near Kabul, “was contented to offer the best things in the most distant
provinces to the conqueror, on condition that the hairs on the crowns of
their heads should not be shaven off”.  Utbi, op. cit., p.23.

W. Crooke in his *Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces*, IV,
p.226, quoting Ibbetson says that *chotikat* “is even now a term of
reproach which is applied in the Punjab to those who have, on conversion
to Islam, cut off the choti.”

Also Hodivala, S.H., *Studies in Indo-Muslim History* (Bombay, 1939),
pp.137-38.

[⁶⁰](#60) Ferishtah, I, p. 45. 

Murray Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan* (Calcutta, 1959), p.170.

[⁶¹](#61) *Ibid.*, p.8

[⁶²](#62) *Chachnama*, mentions the case of a converted Hindu who could
not pay respect to his old Hindu king by curtly declaring: ‘When I was
your subject it was right of me to observe the rules of obedience; but
now that I am converted, and am subject to the king of Islam, it cannot
be expected that I should bow my head to an infidel.” E and D, I, p.165.

Swami Vivekanand has aptly remarked that conversion means not only a
Hindu lost but also an enemy created.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)   [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
