+++
title = "65 CHAPTER XII NATIONAL FRUSTRATION"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XII

NATIONAL FRUSTRATION  


IV  
\[Muslim leaders' views, once nationalistic, have grown much less so
over time\]

 Such are the religious beliefs, social attitudes and ultimate
destinies of the Hindus and Muslims, and their communal and political
manifestations. These religious beliefs, social attitudes, and views
regarding ultimate destinies constitute the motive force which
determines the lines of their action, whether they will be cooperative
or conflicting. Past experience shows that they are too irreconcilable
and too incompatible to permit \[of\] Hindus and Muslims ever forming
one single nation or even two harmonious parts of one whole. These
differences have the sure effect not only of keeping them asunder, but
also of keeping them at war. The differences are permanent and the
Hindu-Muslim problem bids fair to be eternal. To attempt to solve it on
the footing that Hindus and Muslims are one, or if they are not one now
they will be one hereafter, is bound to be a barren occupation—as barren
as it proved to be in the case of Czechoslovakia. On the contrary, time
has come when certain facts must be admitted as beyond dispute, however
unpleasant such admission may be.

 In the first place, it should be admitted that every possible
attempt to bring about union between Hindus and Muslims has been made
and that all of them have failed.

 The history of these attempts may be said to begin with the year
1909. The demands of the Muslim deputation, if they were granted by the
British, were assented to by the Hindus, prominent amongst whom was Mr.
Gokhale. He has been blamed by many Hindus for giving his consent to the
principle of separate electorates. His critics forget that withholding
consent would not have been a part of wisdom. For, as has been well said
by Mr. Mahomed Ali:—

> ". . .paradoxical as it may seem, the creation of separate electorates
> was hastening the advent of Hindu-Muslim unity. For the first time a
> real franchise, however restricted, was being offered to Indians, and
> if Hindus and Musalmans remained just as divided as they had hitherto
> been since the commencement of the British rule, and often hostile to
> one another, mixed electorates would have provided the best
> battle-ground for inter-communal strifes, and would have still further
> widened the gulf separating the two communities. Each candidate for
> election would have appealed to his own community for votes and would
> have based his claims for preference on the intensity of his ill-will
> towards the rival community, however disguised this may have been
> under some such formula as 'the defence of his community's interest'.
> Bad as this would have been, the results of an election in which the
> two communities were not equally matched would have been even worse,
> for the community that failed to get its representative elected would
> have inevitably borne a yet deeper grudge against its successful
> rival. Divided as the two communities were, there was no chance for
> any political principles coming into prominence during the elections.
> The creation of separate electorates did a great deal to stop this
> inter-communal warfare, though I am far from oblivious of the fact
> that when inter-communal jealousies are acute the men that are more
> likely to be returned even from communal electorates are just those
> who are noted for the ill-will towards the rival community."

 But the concession in favour of separate electorates made by the
Hindus in 1909 did not result in Hindu-Muslim unity. Then came the
Lucknow Pact in 1916. Under it the Hindus gave satisfaction to the
Muslims on every count. Yet, it did not produce any accord between the
two. Six years later, another attempt was made to bring about
Hindu-Muslim unity. The All-India Muslim League at its annual session
held at Lucknow in March 1923 passed a resolution**[/1/](#n01)** urging
the establishment of a national pact to ensure unity and harmony among
the various communities and sects in India, and appointed a committee to
collaborate with committees to be appointed by other organizations. The
Indian National Congress in its special session held in September 1923
at Delhi under the presidentship of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad passed a
resolution reciprocating the sentiments expressed by the League. The
Congress resolved to appoint two committees (1) to revise the
constitution and (2) to prepare a draft of a national pact. The
report**[/2/](#n02)** of the committee on the Indian National Pact was
signed by Dr. Ansari and Lala Lajpat Rai and was presented at the
session of the Congress held at Coconada in 1923. Side by side with the
making of the terms of the Indian National Pact there was forged the
Bengal Pact**[/3/](#n03)** by the Bengal Provincial Congress Committee
with the Bengal Muslims under the inspiration of Mr. C. R. Das. Both the
Indian National Pact and the Bengal Pact came up for
discussion**[/4/](#n04)** in the Subjects Committee of the Congress. The
Bengal Pact was rejected by 678 votes against 458. With regard to the
National Pact, the Congress resolved**[/5/](#n05)** that the Committee
do call for further opinions on the draft of the Pact prepared by them
and submit their report by 31st March 1924 to the A. 1. C. C. for its
consideration. The Committee, however, did not proceed any further in
the matter. This was because the feeling among the Hindus against the
Bengal Pact was so strong that according to Lala Lajpat
Rai**[/6/](#n06)** it was not considered opportune to proceed with the
Committee's labours. Moreover, Mr. Gandhi was then released from jail,
and it was thought that he would take up the question. Dr. Ansari,
therefore, contented himself with handing over to the A. 1. C. C. the
material he had collected.

 Mr. Gandhi took up the threads as soon as he came out of the gaol.
In November 1924 informal discussions were held in Bombay. As a result
of these discussions, an All-Parties Conference was constituted and a
committee was appointed to deal with the question of bringing about
unity. The Conference was truly an All-Parties Conference inasmuch as
the representatives were drawn from the Congress, the Hindu Maha Sabha,
the Justice Party, Liberal Federation, Indian Christians, Muslim League,
etc. On the 23rd January 1925, a meeting of the committee**[/7/](#n07)**
appointed by the All-Parties Conference was held in Delhi at the Western
Hotel. Mr. Gandhi presided. On the 24th January the committee appointed
a representative sub-committee consisting of 40 members (a) to frame
such recommendations as would enable all parties to join the Congress,
(b) to frame a scheme for the representation of all communities, races
and sub-divisions on the legislative and other elective bodies under
Swaraj, and recommend the best method of securing a just and proper
representation of the communities in the services without detriment to
efficiency, and (c) to frame a scheme of Swaraj that will meet the
present needs of the country. The committee was instructed to report on
or before the 15th February. In the interest of expediting the work some
members formed themselves into a smaller committee for drawing up a
scheme of Swaraj, leaving the work of framing the scheme of communal
representation to the main committee.

 The Swaraj sub-committee under the chairmanship of Mrs. Besant
succeeded in framing its report on the constitution and submitted the
same to the general committee of the All-Parties Conference. But the
sub-committee appointed to frame a scheme of communal representation met
at Delhi on the 1st March and adjourned *sine die* without coming to any
conclusion. This was due to the fact that Lala Lajpat Rai and other
representatives of the Hindus would not attend the meeting of the
subcommittee. Mr. Gandhi and Pandit Motilal Nehru issued the following
statement**[/8/](#n08)**:—

> "Lala Lajpat Rai had asked for a postponement by reason of the
> inability of Messrs. Jayakar, Srinivas lyengar and Jai Ram Das to
> attend. We were unable to postpone the meeting on our own
> responsibility. We, therefore, informed Lala Lajpat Rai that the
> question of postponement be placed before the meeting. This was
> consequently done but apart from the absence of Lala Lajpat Rai and of
> the gentlemen named by him the attendance was otherwise also too
> meagre for coming to any decision. In our opinion there was moreover
> no material for coming to any definite conclusions nor is there
> likelihood of any being reached in the near future. . . ."

 There is no doubt that this statement truly summed up the state of
mind of the parties concerned. The late Lala Lajpat Rai, the spokesman
of the Hindus on the committee, had already said in an article in the
**Leader** of Allahabad that there was no immediate hurry for a fresh
pact and that he declined to accept the view that a Hindu majority in
some provinces and a Muslim majority in others was the only way to
Hindu-Muslim unity.

 The question of Hindu-Muslim unity was again taken up in 1927. This
attempt was made just prior to the Simon Commission inquiry, in the hope
that it would be \[as\] successful as the attempt made prior to the
Montagu-Chelmsford inquiry in 1916 and which had fructified in the
Lucknow Pact. As a preliminary, a conference of leading Muslims was held
in Delhi on the 20th March 1927 at which certain
proposals**[/9/](#n09)** for safeguarding the interest of the Muslims
were considered. These proposals, which were known as the Delhi
proposals, were considered by the Congress at its session held in Madras
in December 1927. At the same time, the Congress passed a
resolution**[/10/](#n10)** authorizing its Working Committee to confer
with similar committees to be appointed by other organizations to draft
a Swaraj constitution for India. The Liberal Federation and the Muslim
League passed similar resolutions appointing their representatives to
join in the deliberations. Other organizations were also invited by the
Congress Working Committee to send their spokesmen. The All-Parties
Conference,**[/11/](#n11)** as the committee came to be called, met on
12th February 1928 and appointed a sub-committee to frame a
constitution. The committee prepared a report with a draft of the
constitution—which is known as the Nehru Report. The report was placed
before the All-Parties Convention which met under the presidentship of
Dr. Ansari on 22nd December 1928 at Calcutta just prior to the Congress
session. On the 1st January 1929 the Convention adjourned *sine die*
without coming to any agreement, on any question, not even on the
communal question.

 This is rather surprising because the points of difference between
the Muslim proposals and the proposals made in the Nehru Committee
report were not substantial. This is quite obvious from the
speech**[/12/](#n12)** of Mr. Jinnah in the All-Parties Convention in
support of his amendments. Mr. Jinnah wanted four amendments to be made
in the report of the Nehru Committee. Speaking on his first amendment
relating to the Muslim demand for 33 1/3 per cent. representation in the
Central Legislature, Mr. Jinnah said :—

> "The Nehru Report has stated that according to the scheme which they
> propose the Muslims are likely to get one-third in the Central
> Legislature and perhaps more, and it is argued that the Punjab and
> Bengal will get much more than their population proportion. What we
> feel is this. If one-third is going to be obtained by Muslims, then
> the method which you have adopted is not quite fair to the provinces
> where the Muslims are in a minority because the Punjab and Bengal will
> obtain more than their population basis in the Central Legislature.
> You are going to give to the rich more and keeping the poor according
> to population. It may be sound reasoning but it is not wisdom. . . .
>
> "Therefore, if the Muslims are, as the Nehru Report suggest, to get
> one-third, or more, they cannot give the Punjab or Bengal more, but
> let six or seven extra seats be distributed among provinces which are
> already in a very small minority, such as, Madras and Bombay, because,
> remember, if Sind is separated, the Bombay Province will be reduced to
> something like 8 per cent. There are other provinces where we have
> small minorities. This is the reason why we say, fix one-third and let
> it be distributed among Muslims according to our own adjustment."

 His second amendment related to the reservation of seats on
population basis in the Punjab and in the Bengal, i.e., the claim to a
statutory majority. On this Mr. Jinnah said :—

> "You remember that originally proposals emanated from certain Muslim
> leaders in March 1927 known as the 'Delhi Proposals.' They were dealt
> with by the A. I. C. C. in Bombay and at the Madras Congress and the
> Muslim League in Calcutta last year substantially endorsed at least
> this part of the proposal. I am not going into the detailed arguments.
> It really reduces itself into one proposition, that the voting
> strength of Mahomedans in the Punjab and Bengal, although they are in
> a majority, is not in proportion to their population. That was one of
> the reasons. The Nehru Report has now found a substitute and they say
> that if adult franchise is established then there is no need for
> reservation, but in the event of its not being established we want to
> have no doubt that in that case there should be reservation for
> Muslims in the Punjab and Bengal, according to their population, but
> they shall not be entitled to additional seals."

 His third amendment was in regard to residuary powers which the
Nehru Committee had vested in the Central Government. In moving his
amendment that they should be lodged in the Provincial Government Mr.
Jinnah pleaded :—

> "Gentlemen, this is purely a constitutional question and has nothing
> to do with the communal aspect. We strongly hold—I know Hindus will
> say Muslims are carried away by communal consideration—we strongly
> hold the view that, if you examine this question carefully, we submit
> that the residuary powers should rest with the province."

 His fourth amendment was concerned with the separation of Sind. The
Nehru Committee had agreed to the separation of Sind but had subjected
it to one proviso, namely, that the separation should come "only on the
establishment of the system of government outlined in the report." Mr.
Jinnah in moving for the deletion of the proviso said :—

> "We feel this difficulty. . . .Suppose the Government choose, within
> the next six months, or a year or two years, to separate Sind before
> the establishment of a government under this constitution, are the
> Mahomedans to say, 'we do not want it'. . . .So long as this clause
> stands its meaning is that Mahomedans should oppose its separation
> until simultaneously a government is established under this
> constitution. We say delete these words and I am supporting my
> argument by the fact that you do not make such a remark about the
> N.-W. F. Province. . . .The Committee says it cannot accept it as the
> resolution records an agreement arrived at by parties who signed at
> Lucknow. With the utmost deference to the members of the Committee I
> venture to say that that is not valid ground. . . .Are we bound, in
> this Convention, bound because a particular resolution was passed by
> an agreement between certain persons?"

 These amendments show that the gulf between the Hindus and Muslims
was not in any way a wide one. Yet there was no desire to bridge the
same. It was left to the British Government to do what the Hindus and
the Muslims failed to do and it did it by the Communal Award.

 The Poona Pact between the Hindus and the Depressed Classes gave
another spurt to the efforts to bring about unity.**[/13/](#n13)**
During the months of November and December 1932 Muslims and Hindus did
their best to come to some agreement. Muslims met in their All-Parties
Conferences, Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs met in Unity Conferences.
Proposals and counter-proposals were made but nothing came out of these
negotiations to replace the Award by a Pact, and they were in the end
abandoned after the Committee had held 23 sittings.

 Just as attempts were made to bring about unity on political
questions, attempts were also made to bring about unity on social and
religious questions, such as (1) cow slaughter, (2) music before the
Mosques, and (3) conversions, over which differences existed. The first
attempt in this direction was made in 1923 when the Indian National Pact
was proposed. It failed. Mr. Gandhi was then in gaol. Mr. Gandhi was
released from gaol on the 5th February 1924. Stunned by the destruction
of his work for Hindu-Muslim unity, Mr. Gandhi decided to go on a
twenty-one days' fast, holding himself morally responsible for the
murderous riots that had taken place between Hindus and Muslims.
Advantage was taken of the fast to gather leading Indians of all
communities at a Unity Conference**[/14/](#n14)** which was attended
also by the Metropolitan of Calcutta. The Conference held prolonged
sittings from September 26th to October 2nd, 1924. The members of the
Conference pledged themselves to use their utmost endeavours to enforce
the principles of freedom of conscience and religion and condemn any
deviation from them even under provocation. A Central National Panchayat
was appointed with Mr. Gandhi as the chairman. The Conference laid down
certain fundamental rights relating to liberty of holding and expressing
religious beliefs and following religious practices, sacredness of
places of worship, cow slaughter, and music before mosques, with a
statement of the limitations they must be subject to. This Unity
Conference did not produce peace between the two communities. It only
produced a lull in the rioting which had become the order of the day.
Between 1925 and 1926, rioting was renewed with an intensity and
malignity unknown before. Shocked by this rioting, Lord Irwin, the then
Viceroy of India, in his address to the Central Legislature on 29th
August 1927, made an appeal to the two communities to stop the rioting
and establish amity. Lord Irwin's exhortation to establish amity was
followed by another Unity Conference which was known as the Simla Unity
Conference.**[/15/](#n15)** This Unity Conference met on the 30th August
1927 and issued an appeal beseeching both the communities to support the
leaders in their efforts to arrive at a satisfactory settlement. The
Conference appointed a Unity Committee which sat in Simla from 16th to
22nd September under the chairmanship of Mr. Jinnah. No conclusions were
reached on any of the principal points involved in the cow and music
questions, and others pending before the Committee were not even
touched. Some members felt that the Committee might break up. The Hindu
members pressed that the Committee should meet again on some future
convenient date. The Muslim members of the Committee were first divided
in their opinion, but at last agreed to break up the Committee, and the
President was requested to summon a meeting if he received a requisition
\[=request\] within six weeks from eleven specified members. Such a
requisition never came, and the Committee never met again.

 The Simla Conference having failed, Mr. Srinivas Iyengar, the then
President of the Congress, called a special conference of Hindus and
Muslims which sat in Calcutta on the 27th and 28th October 1927. It came
to be known as the Calcutta Unity Conference.**[/16/](#n16)** The
Conference passed certain resolutions on the three burning questions.
But the resolution had no support behind them, as neither the Hindu Maha
Sabha nor the Muslim League was represented at the Conference.

 At one time it was possible to say that Hindu-Muslim unity was an
ideal which not only must be realized but could be realized, and leaders
were blamed for not making sufficient efforts for its realization. Such
was the view expressed in 1911 even by Maulana Mahomed Ali, who had not
then made any particular efforts to achieve Hindu-Muslim unity. Writing
in the **Comrade** of 14th January 1911 Mr. Mahomed Ali
said**[/17/](#n17)**:

> "We have no faith in the cry that India is united. If India was united
> where was the need of dragging the venerable President of this year's
> Congress from a distant home? The bare imagination of a feast will not
> dull the edge of hunger. We have less faith still in the
> sanctimoniousness that transmutes in its subtle alchemy a rapacious
> monopoly into fervent patriotism. . . .the person we love best, fear
> the most, and trust the least is the impatient idealist. Goethe said
> of Byron that he was a prodigious poet, but that when he reflected he
> was a child. Well, we think no better and no worse of the man who
> combines great ideals and a greater impatience. So many efforts, well
> meaning as well as ill-begotten, have failed in bringing unity to this
> distracted land, that we cannot spare even cheap and scentless flowers
> of sentiment for the grave of another ill-judged endeavour. We shall
> not make the mistake of gumming together pieces of broken glass, and
> then cry over the unsuccessful result, or blame the refractory
> material. In other words, we shall endeavour to face the situation
> boldly, and respect facts, howsoever ugly and ill-favoured. It is poor
> statesmanship to slur over inconvenient realities, and not the least
> important success in achieving unity is the honest and frank
> recognition of the deep-seated prejudices that hinder it and the
> yawning differences that divide."

 Looking back on the history of these 30 years, one can well ask
whether Hindu-Muslim unity has been realized? Whether efforts have not
been made for its realization? And whether any efforts remain to be
made? The history of the last 30 years shows that Hindu-Muslim unity has
not been realized. On the contrary, there now exists the greatest
disunity between them: that efforts—sincere and persistent—have been
made to achieve it, and that nothing now remains to be done to achieve
it except surrender by one party to the other. If anyone who is not in
the habit of cultivating optimism where there is no justification for
it, said that the pursuit of Hindu-Muslim unity is like a mirage and
that the idea must now be given up, no one can have the courage to call
him a pessimist or an impatient idealist. It is for the Hindus to say
whether they will engage themselves in this vain pursuit in spite of the
tragic end of all their past endeavours, or give up the pursuit of unity
and try for a settlement on another basis.

 In the second place, it must be admitted that the Muslim point of
view has undergone a complete revolution. How complete the revolution is
can be seen by reference to the past pronouncements of some of those who
insist on the two-nation theory and believe that Pakistan is the only
solution of the Hindu-Muslim problem. Among these Mr. Jinnah, of course,
must be accepted as the foremost. The revolution in his views on the
Hindu-Muslim question is striking, if not staggering. To realize the
nature, character, and vastness of this revolution it is necessary to
know his pronouncements in the past relating to the subject so that they
may be compared with those he is making now.

 A study of his past pronouncement may well begin with the year 1906,
when the leaders of the Muslim community waited upon Lord Minto and
demanded separate electorates for the Muslim community. It is to be
noted that Mr. Jinnah was not a member of the deputation. Whether he was
not invited to join the deputation or whether he was invited to join and
declined is not known. But the fact remains that he did not lend his
support to the Muslim claim to separate representation when it was put
forth in 1906.

In 1918 Mr. Jinnah resigned his membership of the Imperial Legislative
Council as a protest against the Rowlatt Bill.**[/18/](#n18)** In
tendering his resignation Mr. Jinnah said:

> "I feel that under the prevailing conditions, I can be of no use to my
> people in the Council, nor consistently with one's self-respect is
> cooperation possible with a Government that shows such utter disregard
> for the opinion of the representatives of the people at the Council
> Chamber and the feelings and the sentiments of the people outside."

 In 1919 Mr. Jinnah gave evidence before the Joint Select Committee
appointed by Parliament on the Government of India Reform Bill, then on
the anvil. The following views were expressed by him in answer to
questions put by members of the Committee on the Hindu-Muslim question.

> EXAMINED BY MAJOR ORMSBY-GORE.
>
> Q. 3806.—You appear on behalf of the Moslem League— that is, on behalf
> of the only widely extended Mohammedan organisation in India ?—Yes.
>
> Q. 3807.—I was very much struck by the fact that neither in your
> answers to the questions nor in your opening speech this morning did
> you make any reference to the special interest of the Mohammedans in
> India: is that because you did not wish to say anything ?—No, but
> because I take it the Southborough Committee have accepted that, and I
> left it to the members of the Committee to put any questions they
> wanted to. I took a very prominent part in the settlement of Lucknow.
> I was representing the Musalmans on that occasion.
>
> Q. 3809.—On behalf of the All-India Moslem League, you ask this
> Committee to reject the proposal of the Government of India?—I am
> authorised to say that—to ask you to reject the proposal of the
> Government of India with regard to Bengal \[i.e., to give the Bengal
> Muslims more representation than was given them by the Lucknow Pact\].
>
> Q. 3810.—You said you spoke from the point of view of India. You speak
> really as an Indian Nationalist ?—1 do.
>
> Q. 3811.—Holding that view, do you contemplate the early disappearance
> of separate communal representation of the Mohammedan community ?—I
> think so.
>
> Q. 3812.—That is to say, at the earliest possible moment you wish to
> do away in political life with any distinction between Mohammedans and
> Hindus ?—Yes. Nothing will please me more than when that day comes.
>
> Q. 3813—You do not think it is true to say that the Mohammedans of
> India have many special political interests not merely in India but
> outside India, which they are always particularly anxious to press as
> a distinct Mohammedan community? —There are two things. In India the
> Mohammedans have very few things really which you can call matters of
> special interest for them—I mean secular things.
>
> Q. 3814.—I am only referring to them, of course.—And therefore that is
> why I really hope and expect that the day is not very far distant when
> these separate electorates will disappear.
>
> Q. 3815.—It is true, at the same time, that the Mohammedans in India
> take a special interest in the foreign policy of the Government of
> India ?—They do; a very.—No, because what you propose to do is to
> frame very keen interest and the large majority of them hold very
> strong sentiments and very strong views. \[\[There seems to be a
> confusion in the text of the reply. --FWP\]\]
>
> Q. 3816.—Is that one of the reasons why you, speaking on behalf of the
> Mohammedan community, are so anxious to get the Government of India
> more responsible to an electorate ?—No.
>
> Q. 3817.—Do you think it is possible, consistently with remaining in
> the British Empire, for India to have one foreign policy and for His
> Majesty, as advised by his Ministers in London, to have another ?—Let
> me make it clear. It is not a question of foreign policy at all. What
> the Moslems of India feel is that it is a very difficult position for
> them. Spiritually, the Sultan or the Khalif is their head.
>
> Q. 3818.—Of one community ?—Of the Sunni sect, but that is the
> largest; it is in an overwhelming majority all over India. The Khalif
> is the only rightful custodian of the Holy Places according to our
> view, and nobody else has a right. What the Moslems feel very keenly
> is this, that the Holy Places should not be severed from the Ottoman
> Empire— that they should remain with the Ottoman Empire under the
> Sultan.
>
> Q. 3819.—I do not want to get away from the Reform Bill on to foreign
> policy.—1 say it has nothing to do with foreign policy. Your point is
> whether in India the Muslims will adopt a certain attitude with regard
> to foreign policy in matters concerning Moslems all over the world.
>
> Q. 3820.—My point is, are they seeking for some control over the
> Central Government in order to impress their views on foreign policy
> on the Government of India ?—No.
>
> EXAMINED BY MR. BENNETT
>
> Q. 3853.—. . . .Would it not be an advantage in the case of an
> occurrence of that kind \[i.e., a communal riot\] if the maintenance
> of law and order were left with the executive side of the Government
> ?—1 do not think so, if you ask me, but I do not want to go into
> unpleasant matters, as you say.
>
> Q. 3854.—It is with no desire to bring up old troubles that I ask the
> question ; I would like to forget them.—If you ask me, very often
> these riots are based on some misunderstanding, and it is because the
> police have taken one side or the other, and that has enraged one side
> or the other. I know very well that in the Indian States you hardly
> ever hear of any Hindu-Mohammedan riots, and I do not mind telling the
> Committee, without mentioning the name, that I happened to ask one of
> the ruling Princes, "How do you account for this?" and he told me, "As
> soon as there is some trouble we have invariably traced it to the
> police, through the police taking one side or the other, and the only
> remedy we have found is that as soon as we come to know we move that
> police officer from that place, and there is an end of it."
>
> Q. 3855.—That is \[a\] useful piece of information, but the fact
> remains that these riots have been inter-racial, Hindu on the one side
> and Mohammedan on the other. Would it be an advantage at a time like
> that \[that\] the Minister, the representative of one community or the
> other, should be in charge of the maintenance of law and order
> ?—Certainly.
>
> Q. 3856.—It would ?—If I thought otherwise I should be casting a
> reflection on myself. If I was the Minister, I would make bold to say
> that nothing would weigh with me except justice, and what is right.
>
> Q. 3857.—I can understand that you would do more than justice to the
> other side; but even then, there is what might be called the
> subjective side. It is not only that there is impartiality, but there
> is the view which may be entertained by the public, who may harbour
> some feeling of suspicion?—With regard to one section or the other,
> you mean they would feel that an injustice was done to them, or that
> justice would not be done?
>
> Q. 3858.—Yes; that is quite apart from the objective part of it.—My
> answer is this: That these difficulties are fast disappearing. Even
> recently, in the whole district of Thana, Bombay, every officer was an
> Indian officer from top to bottom, and I do not think there was a
> single Mohammedan—they were all Hindus—and I never heard any
> complaint. Recently that has been so. I quite agree with you that ten
> years ago there was that feeling what you are now suggesting to me,
> but it is fast disappearing.
>
> EXAMINED BY LORD ISLINGTON
>
> Q. 3892.—. . . .You said just now about the communal representation, I
> think in answer to Major Ormsby-Gore, that you hope in a very few
> years you would be able to extinguish communal representation, which
> was at present proposed to be established and is established in order
> that Mahommedans may have their representation with Hindus. You said
> you desired to see that. How soon do you think that happy state of
> affairs is likely to be realized?—1 can only give you certain facts: I
> cannot say anything more than that: I can give you this which will
> give you some idea: that in 1913, at the All-India Moslem League
> sessions at Agra, we put this matter to the lest whether separate
> electorates should be insisted upon or not by the Mussalmans, and we
> got a division, and that division is based upon Provinces; only a
> certain number of votes represent each Province, and the division came
> to 40 in favour of doing away with the separate electorate, and 80
> odd—1 do not remember the exact number—were for keeping the separate
> electorate. That was in 1913. Since then I have had many opportunities
> of discussing this matter with various Mussulman leaders; and they are
> changing their angle of vision with regard to this matter. I cannot
> give you the period, but I think it cannot last very long. Perhaps the
> next inquiry may hear something about it.
>
> Q. 3893.—You think at the next inquiry the Mahommedans will ask to be
> absorbed into the whole?—Yes, I think the next inquiry will probably
> hear something about it.

  
 Although Mr. Jinnah appeared as a witness on behalf of the Muslim
League, he did not allow his membership of the League to come in the way
of his loyalty to other political organizations in the country. Besides
being a member of the Muslim League, Mr. Jinnah was a member of the Home
Rule League and also of the Congress. As he said in his evidence before
the Joint Parliamentary Committee, he was a member of all three bodies
although he openly disagreed with the Congress, with the Muslim League,
and that there were some views which the Home Rule League held which he
did not share. That he was an independent but a nationalist ,is shown by
his relationship with the Khilafatist Musalmans. In 1920 the Musalmans
organized the Khilafat Conference. It became so powerful an organization
that the Muslim League went under and lived in a state of suspended
animation till 1924. During these years no Muslim leader could speak to
the Muslim masses from a Muslim platform unless he was a member of the
Khilafat Conference. That was the only platform for Muslims to meet
Muslims. Even then Mr. Jinnah refused to join the Khilafat Conference.
This was no doubt due to the fact that then he was only a statutory
Musalman with none of the religious fire of the orthodox which he now
says is burning within him. But the real reason why he did not join the
Khilafat was because he was opposed to the Indian Musalmans engaging
themselves in extra-territorial affairs relating to Muslims outside
India.

 After the Congress accepted non-co-operation, civil disobedience,
and boycott of Councils, Mr. Jinnah left the Congress. He became its
critic, but never accused it of being a Hindu body. He protested when
such a statement was attributed to him by his opponents. There is a
letter by Mr. Jinnah to the Editor of the **Times of India** written
about the time which puts in a strange contrast the present opinion of
Mr. Jinnah about the Congress and his opinion in the past. The
letter**[/19/](#n19)** reads as follows :—.

> "To the Editor of 'The Times of India':
>
> Sir,—1 wish again to correct the statement which is attributed to me
> and to which you have given currency more than once and now again
> repeated by your correspondent 'Banker' in the second column of your
> issue of the 1st October that I denounced the Congress as 'a Hindu
> Institution'. I publicly corrected this misleading report of my speech
> in your columns soon after it appeared; but it did not find a place in
> the columns of your paper and so may I now request you to publish this
> and oblige."

 After the Khilafat storm had blown over and the Muslims had shown a
desire to return to the internal politics of India, the Muslim League
was resuscitated. The session of the League held in Bombay on 30th
December 1924 under the presidentship of Mr. Raza Ali was a lively one.
Both Mr. Jinnah and Mr. Mahomed Ali took part in it.**[/20/](#n20)**

 In this session of the League, a resolution was moved which affirmed
the desirability of representatives of the various Muslim associations
of India representing different shades of political thought meeting in a
conference at an early date at Delhi or at some other central place with
a view to develop "a united and sound practical activity" to supply the
needs of the Muslim community. Mr. Jinnah in explaining the resolution
said**[/21/](#n21)**:—

> "The object was to organize the Muslim community, not with a view to
> quarrel with the Hindu community, but with a view to unite and
> cooperate with it for their motherland. He was sure once they had
> organized themselves they would join hands with the Hindu Maha Sabha
> and declare to the world that Hindus and Mahomedans are brothers."

 The League also passed another resolution in the same session for
appointing a committee of 33 prominent Musalmans to formulate the
political demands of the Muslim community. The resolution was moved by
Mr. Jinnah. In moving the resolution, Mr. Jinnah**[/22/](#n22)**:—

> "Repudiated the charge that he was standing on the platform of the
> League as a communalist. He assured them that he was, as ever, a
> nationalist. Personally he had no hesitation. He wanted the best and
> the fittest men to represent them in the Legislatures of the land
> (Hear, Hear and Applause). But unfortunately his Muslim compatriots
> were not prepared to go as far as he. He could not be blind to the
> situation. The fact was that there was a large number of Muslims who
> wanted representation separately in Legislatures and in the country's
> Services. They were talking of communal unity, but where was unity? It
> had to be achieved by arriving at some suitable settlement. He knew
> he said amidst deafening cheers, that his fellow-religionists were
> ready and prepared to fight for Swaraj, but wanted some safeguards.
> Whatever his view, and they knew that as a practical politician he had
> to take stock of the situation, the real block to unity was not the
> communities themselves, but a few mischief makers on both sides."

 And he did not thus hesitate to arraign mischief makers in the
sternest possible language that could only emanate from an earnest
nationalist. In his capacity as the President of the session of the
League held in Lahore on 24th May 1924 he said**[/23/](#n23)**:—

> "If we wish to be free people, let us unite, but if we wish to
> continue slaves of Bureaucracy, let us fight among ourselves and
> gratify petty vanity over petty matters, Englishmen being our
> arbiters."

 In the two All-Parties Conferences, one held in 1925 and the other
in 1928, Mr. Jinnah was prepared to settle the Hindu-Muslim question on
the basis of joint electorates. In 1927 he openly said**[/24/](#n24)**
from the League platform :—

> "I am not wedded to separate electorates, although I must say that the
> overwhelming majority of the Musalmans firmly and honestly believe
> that it is the only method by which they can be sure."

 In 1928, Mr. Jinnah joined the Congress in the boycott of the Simon
Commission. He did so even though the Hindus and Muslims had failed to
come to a settlement, and he did so at the cost of splitting the League
into two.

 Even when the ship of the Round Table Conference was about to break
on the communal rock, Mr. Jinnah resented being named as a communalist
who was responsible for the result and said that he preferred an agreed
solution of the communal problem to the arbitration of the British
Government. Addressing**[/25/](#n25)** the U. P. Muslim Conference held
at Allahabad on 8th August 1931 Mr. Jinnah said :—

> "The first thing that I wish to tell you is that it is now absolutely
> essential and vital that Muslims should stand united. For Heaven's
> sake close all your ranks and files and stop this internecine war. I
> urged this most vehemently and I pleaded to the best of my ability
> before Dr. Ansari, Mr. T. A. K. Sherwani, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and
> Dr. Syed Mahmud. I hope that before I leave the shores of India I
> shall hear the good news that whatever may be our differences ;
> whatever may be our convictions between ourselves, this is not the
> moment to quarrel between ourselves.
>
> "Another thing I want to tell you is this. There is a certain section
> of the press, there is a certain section of the Hindus, who constantly
> misrepresent me in various ways. I was only reading the speech of Mr.
> Gandhi this morning and Mr. Gandhi said that he loves Hindus and
> Muslims alike. I again say standing here on this platform that
> although I may not put forward that claim but I do put forward this
> honestly and sincerely that I want fair play between the two
> communities."
>
> Continuing further Mr. Jinnah said: "As to the most important
> question, which to my mind is the question of Hindu-Muslim
> settlement—all I can say to you is that I honestly believe that the
> Hindus should concede to the Muslims a majority in the Punjab and
> Bengal and if that is conceded, I think a settlement can be arrived at
> in a very short time.
>
> "The next question that arises is one of separate vs. joint
> electorates. As most of you know, if a majority is conceded in the
> Punjab and Bengal, I would personally prefer a settlement on the basis
> of joint electorate. (Applause.) But I also know that there is a large
> body of Muslims—and I believe a majority of Muslims—who are holding on
> to separate electorate. My position is that I would rather have a
> settlement even on the footing of separate electorate, hoping and
> trusting that when we work our new constitution and when both Hindus
> and Muslims get rid of distrust, suspicion and fears and when they get
> their freedom we would rise to the occasion and probably separate
> electorate will go sooner than most of us think.
>
> "Therefore I am for a settlement and peace among the Muslims first; I
> am for a settlement and peace between the Hindus and Mahommedans. This
> is not a lime for argument, not a time for propaganda work and not a
> time for embittering feelings between the two communities, because the
> enemy is at the door of both of us and I say without hesitation that
> if the Hindu-Muslim question is not settled, I have no doubt that the
> British will have to arbitrate and that he who arbitrates will keep to
> himself the substance of power and authority. Therefore, I hope they
> will not vilify me. After all, Mr. Gandhi himself says that he is
> willing to give the Muslims whatever they want, and my only sin is
> that I say to the Hindus give to the Muslims only 14 points, which is
> much less than the 'blank cheque ' which Mr. Gandhi is willing to
> give. I do not want a blank cheque, why not concede the 14 points?
> When Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru says: 'Give us a blank cheque ' when Mr.
> Patel says : 'Give us a blank cheque and we will sign it with a
> Swadeshi pen on a Swadeshi paper' they are not communalists and I am a
> communalist! I say to Hindus not to misrepresent everybody. I hope and
> trust that we shall be yet in a position to settle the question which
> will bring peace and happiness to the millions in our country.
>
> "One thing more I want to tell you and I have done. During the lime of
> the Round Table Conference,—it is now an open book and anybody who
> cares to read it can learn for himself—I observed the one and the only
> principle and it was that when I left the shores of Bombay I said to
> the people that I would hold the interests of India sacred, and
> believe me—if you care to read the proceedings of the Conference, I am
> not bragging because I have done my duly—that I have loyally and
> faithfully fulfilled my promise to the fullest extent and I venture to
> say that if the Congress or Mr. Gandhi can get anything more than I
> fought for, I would congratulate them.
>
> "Concluding Mr. Jinnah said that they must come to a settlement, they
> must become friends eventually and he, therefore, appealed to the
> Muslims to show moderation, wisdom and conciliation, if possible, in
> the deliberation that might take place and the resolution that might
> be passed at the Conference."

 As an additional illustration of the transformation in Muslim
ideology, I propose to record the opinions once held by Mr. Barkat Ali
who is now a follower of Mr. Jinnah and a staunch supporter of Pakistan.

 When the Muslim League split into two over the question of
cooperation with the Simon Commission, one section led by Sir Mahommad
Shafi favouring co-operation and another section led by Mr. Jinnah
supporting the Congress plan of boycott, Mr. Barkat Ali belonged to the
Jinnah section of the League. The two wings of the League held their
annual sessions in 1928 at two different places. The Shafi wing met in
Lahore and the Jinnah wing met in Calcutta. Mr. Barkat Ali, who was the
Secretary of the Punjab Muslim League, attended the Calcutta session of
the Jinnah wing of the League and moved the resolution relating to the
communal settlement. The basis of the settlement was joint electorates.
In moving the resolution Mr. Barkat Ali said**[/26/](#n26)**:—

> "For the first time in the history of the League there was a change in
> its angle of vision. We are offering by this change a sincere hand of
> fellowship to those of our Hindu countrymen who have objected to the
> principle of separate electorates."

 In 1928 there was formed a Nationalist Party under the leadership of
Dr. Ansari.**[/27/](#n27)** The Nationalist Muslim Party was a step in
advance of the Jinnah wing of the Muslim League and was prepared to
accept the Nehru Report, as it was, without any amendments—not even
those which Mr. Jinnah was insisting upon. Mr. Barkat Ali, who in 1927
was with the Jinnah wing of the League, left the same as not being
nationalistic enough and joined the Nationalist Muslim Party of Dr.
Ansari. How great a nationalist Mr. Barkat Ali then was can be seen by
his trenchant and vehement attack on Sir Muhammad lqbal for his having
put forth in his presidential address to the annual session of the
All-India Muslim League held at Allahabad in 1930 a
scheme**[/28/](#n28)** for the division of India which is now taken up
by Mr. Jinnah and Mr. Barkat Ali and which goes by the name of Pakistan.
In 1931 there was held in Lahore the Punjab Nationalist Muslim
Conference and Mr. Barkat Ali was the Chairman of the Reception
Committee. The views he then expressed on Pakistan are worth
recalling.**[/29/](#n29)** Reiterating and reaffirming the conviction
and the political faith of his party, Malik Barkat Ali, Chairman of the
Reception Committee of the Conference, said:

> "We believe, first and foremost in the full freedom and honour of
> India. India, the country of our birth and the place with which all
> our most valued and dearly cherished associations are knit, must claim
> its first place in our affection and in our desires. We refuse to be
> parties to that sinister type of propaganda which would try to appeal
> to ignorant sentiment by professing to be Muslim first and Indian
> afterwards. To us a slogan of this kind is not only bare, meaningless
> cant, but downright mischievous. We cannot conceive of Islam in its
> best and last interests as in any way inimical to or in conflict with
> the best and permanent interests of India. India and Islam in India
> are identical, and whatever is to the detriment of India must, from
> the nature of it, be detrimental to Islam whether economically,
> politically, socially or even morally. Those politicians, therefore,
> are a class of false prophets and at bottom the foes of Islam, who
> talk of any inherent conflict between Islam and the welfare of India.
> Further, howsoever much our sympathy with our Muslim brethren outside
> India, i.e., the Turks and the Egyptians or the Arabs,—and it is a
> sentiment which is at once noble and healthy,—we can never allow that
> sympathy to work to the detriment of the essential interests of India.
> Our sympathy, in fact, with those countries can only be valuable to
> them, if India as the source, nursery and fountain of that sympathy,
> is really great. And if ever the lime comes, God forbid, when any
> Muslim Power from across the Frontier chooses to enslave India and
> snatch away the liberties of its people, no amount of pan-lslamic
> feeling, whatever it may mean, can stand in the way of Muslim India
> fighting shoulder to shoulder with non-Muslim India in defence of its
> liberties.
>
> "Let there be, therefore, no misgivings of any kind in that respect in
> any non-Muslim quarters. I am conscious that a certain class of
> narrow-minded Hindu politicians is constantly harping on the bogey of
> an Islamic danger to India from beyond the N.-W. Frontier passes but I
> desire to repeat that such statements and such fears are fundamentally
> wrong and unfounded. Muslim India shall as much defend India's
> liberties as non-Muslim India, even if the invader happens to be a
> follower of Islam.
>
> "Next, we not only believe in a free India but we also believe in a
> united India—not the India of the Muslim, not the India of the Hindu
> or of the Sikh, not the India of this community or of that community
> but the India of all. And as this is our abiding faith, we refuse to
> be parties to any division of the India of the future into a Hindu or
> a Muslim India. However much the conception of a Hindu and a Muslim
> India may appeal and send into frenzied ecstasies abnormally orthodox
> mentalities of their party, we offer our full throated opposition to
> it, not only because it is singularly unpractical and utterly
> obnoxious but because it not only sounds the death-knell of all that
> is noble and lasting in modern political activity in India, but is
> also contrary to and opposed to India's chief historical tradition.
>
> "India was one in the days of Asoka and Chandragupta and India
> remained one even when the sceptre and rod of Imperial sway passed
> from Hindu into Moghul or Muslim hands. And India shall remain one
> when we shall have attained the object of our desires and reached
> those uplands of freedom, where all the light illuminating us shall
> not be reflected glory but shall be light proceeding direct as it were
> from our very faces.
>
> "The conception of a divided India, which Sir Muhammad lqbal put
> forward recently in the course of his presidential utterance from the
> platform of the League at a time when that body had virtually become
> extinct and ceased to represent free Islam—I am glad to be able to say
> that Sir Muhammad lqbal has since recanted it—must not therefore
> delude anybody into thinking that it is Islam's conception of the
> India to be. Even if Dr. Sir Muhammad lqbal had not recanted it as
> something which could not be put forward by any sane person, I should
> have emphatically and unhesitatingly repudiated it as something
> foreign to the genius and the spirit of the rising generation of
> Islam, and I really deem it a proud duty to affirm today that not only
> must there be no division of India in to communal provinces but that
> both Islam and Hinduism must run coterminously with the boundaries of
> India and must not be cribbed, cabined and confined within any shorter
> bounds. To the same category as Dr. lqbal's conception of a Muslim
> India and a Hindu India, belongs the sinister proposals of some Sikh
> communalists to partition and divide the Punjab.
>
> "With a creed so expansive, namely a free and united India with its
> people all enjoying in equal measure and without any kinds of
> distinctions and disabilities the protection of laws made by the
> chosen representatives of the people on the widest possible basis of a
> true democracy, namely, adult franchise, and through the medium of
> joint electorates—and an administration charged with the duty of an
> impartial execution of the laws, fully accountable for its actions,
> not to a distant or remote Parliament of foreigners but to the chosen
> representatives of the land,—you would not expect me to enter into the
> details and lay before you, all the colours of my picture. And I
> should have really liked to conclude my general observations on the
> aims and objects of the Nationalist Muslim Party here, were it not
> that the much discussed question of joint or separate electorates, has
> today assumed proportions where no public man can possibly ignore it.
>
> "Whatever may have been the value or utility of separate electorates
> at a time when an artificially manipulated high-propertied franchise
> had the effect of converting a majority of the people in the
> population of a province into a minority in the electoral roll, and
> when communal passions and feelings ran particularly high, universal
> distrust poisoning the whole atmosphere like a general and
> all-pervading miasma,—we feel that in the circumstances of today and
> in the India of the future, separate electorates should have no place
> whatever."

 Such were the views Mr. Jinnah and Mr. Barkat Ali held on
nationalism, on separate electorates and on Pakistan. How diametrically
opposed are the views now held by them on these very problems?

 So far I have laboured to point out things, the utter failure of the
attempts made to bring about Hindu-Muslim unity and the emergence of a
new ideology in the minds of the Muslim leaders. There is also a third
thing which I must discuss in the present context for reasons arising
both from its relevance as well as from its bearing on the point under
consideration, namely whether the Muslim ideology has behind it a
justification which political philosophers can accept.

 Many Hindus seem to hold that Pakistan has no justification. If we
confine ourselves to the theory of Pakistan there can be no doubt that
this is a greatly mistaken view. The philosophical justification for
Pakistan rests upon the distinction between a community and a nation. In
the first place, it is \[=has been\] recognized comparatively recently.
Political philosophers for a long time were concerned, mainly, with the
controversy summed up in the two questions, how far should the right of
a mere majority to rule the minority be accepted as a rational basis for
government and how far the legitimacy of a government be said to depend
upon the consent of the governed. Even those who insisted that the
legitimacy of a government depended upon the consent of the governed,
remained content with a victory for their proposition, and did not cane
to probe further into the matter. They did not feel the necessity for
making any distinctions within the category of the "governed." They
evidently thought that it was a matter of no moment whether those who
were included in the category of the governed formed a community or a
nation. Force of circumstances has, however, compelled political
philosophers to accept this distinction. In the second place, it is not
a mere distinction without a difference. It is a distinction which is
substantial, and the difference is consequentially \[=consequently\]
fundamental. That this distinction between a community and a nation is
fundamental, is clear from the difference in the political rights which
political philosophers are prepared to permit to a community and those
they are prepared to allow to a nation against the Government
established by law. To a community they are prepared to allow only the
right of insurrection. But to a nation they are willing to concede the
right of disruption. The distinction between the two is as obvious as it
is fundamental.. A right of insurrection is restricted only to insisting
on a change in the mode and manner of government. The right of
disruption is greater than the right of insurrection arid extends to the
secession of a group of the members of a State with a secession of the
portion of the State's territory in its occupation. One wonders what
must be the basis of this difference. Writers on political philosophy
who have discussed this subject have given their reasons for the
justification of a Community's right to insurrection**[/30/](#n30)** and
of a nation's right to demand disruption.**[/31/](#n31)** The difference
comes to this : a community has a right to safeguards, a nation has a
right to demand separation. The difference is at once clear and crucial.
But they have not given any reasons why the right of one is limited to
insurrection and why that of the other extends to disruption. They have
not even raised such a question. Nor are the reasons apparent on the
face of them. But it is both interesting and instructive to know why
this difference is made. To my mind the reason for this difference
pertains to questions of ultimate destiny. A state either consists of a
series of communities or it consists of a series of nations. In a state
which is composed of a series of communities, one community may be
arrayed against another community and the two may be opposed to each
other. But in the matter of their ultimate destiny they feel they are
one. But in a state which is composed of a series of nations, when one
nation rises against the other, the conflict is one as to differences of
ultimate destiny. This is the distinction between communities and
nations, and it is this distinction which explains the difference in
their political rights. There is nothing new or original in this
explanation. It is merely another way of stating why the community has
one kind of right and the nation another of quite a different kind. A
community has a right of insurrection because it is satisfied with it.
All that it wants is a change in the mode and form of government. Its
quarrel is not over any difference of ultimate destiny. A nation has to
be accorded the right of disruption because it will not be satisfied
with mere change in the form of government. Its quarrel is over the
question of ultimate destiny. If it will not be satisfied unless the
unnatural bond that binds them is dissolved, then prudence and even
ethics demands that the bond shall be dissolved and they shall be freed
each to pursue its own destiny.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** For the full text of the resolution of the League, see
**Indian Annual Register**, 1923, Vol. I, pp. 395-96.

**[/2/](#m02)** For the terms of the Bengal Pact, see **Indian Annual
Register**, 1923, Vol. I, p. 127.

**[/3/](#m03)** For the report and the draft terms of the Pact, see
**Indian Annual Register**, 1923, Vol. II, supplement, pp. 104-108.

**[/4/](#m04)** For the debate on these two Pacts, see **Indian Annual
Register**, 1923, Vol. I, , pp. 121-127.

**[/5/](#m05)** For the resolution, see **Indian Annual Register**,
1923, Vol. I, p. 122.

**[/6/](#m06)** See his statement on the All-Parties Conference held in
1925 in the **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1925, Vol. I, p. 70.

**[/7/](#m07)** For the proceedings of the committee, see the **Indian
Quarterly Register**, 1925, Vol. I, pp. 66-77.

**[/8/](#m08)** For the proceedings of the committee, see the **Indian
Quarterly Register**, 1925, Vol. I, p.77.

**[/9/](#m09)** These proposals will be found in the **Indian Quarterly
Register**, 1927, Vol. I, p. 33. These proposals subsequently became the
basis of Mr. Jinnah's 14 points.

**[/10/](#m10)** For the resolution of the Congress on these proposals,
see the **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1927, Vol. II, pp. 397-98.

**[/11/](#m11)** For the origin, history and composition of the
All-Parties Convention and for the text of the report: **Indian
Quarterly Register**, 1928. Vol. I, pp. 1-142.

**[/12/](#m12)** See the **Indian Quarterly Register** 1928, Vol. I, pp.
123-24.

**[/13/](#m13)** For an account of these efforts, see the **Indian
Quarterly Register**, 1932, Vol. II, p. 296 *et seq.*

**[/14/](#m14)** Pattabhi Sitarammaya, **History of the Congress**, p.
532.

**[/15/](#m15)** For the proceedings of this Conference, see the
**Indian Quarterly Register**, Vol. II, pp. 39-50.

**[/16/](#m16)** For the proceedings of the Conference, see **Indian
Quarterly Register**, pp. 50-58.

**[/17/](#m17)** Quoted in his presidential address at Coconada session
of the Congress, 1923.

**[/18/](#m18)** The Bill, notwithstanding the protest of the Indian
members of the Council, was passed into law and became Act XI of 1919
as The Anarchical and Revolutionary Crimes Act."

**[/19/](#m19)** Published in the **Times of India** of 3-10-25.

**[/20/](#m20)** Mr. Mahomed Ali in his presidential address to the
Congress at Coconada humorously said: "Mr. Jinnah would soon come back
to us (*cheers*). I may mention that an infidel becomes a Kaffir and a
Kaffir becomes an infidel; likewise, when Mr. Jinnah was in the Congress
I was not with him in those days, and when I was in the Congress and in
the Muslim League he was away from me. I hope some day we would
reconcile (*laughter*)."

**[/21/](#m21)** From the report in the **Times of India**, 1st January
1925.

**[/22/](#m22)** The **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1924, Vol. II. p.
481.

**[/23/](#m23)** See the **Indian Quarterly Review**, 1924, Vol. I, p.
658.

**[/24/](#m24)** The **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1927, Vol. I, p. 37.

**[/25/](#m25)** The **Indian Annual Register**, 1931, Vol. II, pp.
230-231.

**[/26/](#m26)** The **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1927, Vol. II, p.
448.

**[/27/](#m27)** The **Indian Quarterly Register**, 1929. Vol. II, p.
350.

**[/28/](#m28)** For his speech see The **Indian Annual Register**,
1930, Vol. II, pp. 334-345.

**[/29/](#m29)** The **Indian Annual Register**, 1931, Vol. II, pp.
234-235.

**[/30/](#m30)** Sidgwick justifies it in these words: ". . . .the evils
of insurrection may reasonably be thought to be outweighed by the evils
of submission, when the question at issue is of vital importance. . .
.an insurrection may sometimes induce redress of grievances, even when
the insurgents are clearly weaker in physical force; since it may bring
home to the majority the intensity of the sense of injury aroused by
their actions. For similar reasons, again a conflict in prospect may be
anticipated by a compromise; in short, the fear of provoking disorder
may be a salutary check on the persons constitutionally invested with
supreme power under a democratic as under other form is of government. .
. .I conceive, then that a moral right of insurrection must be held to
exist in the most popularly governed community."—**Elements of
Politics** (1929), pp. 646-47.

**[/31/](#m31)** This is what Sidgwick has to say on the right to
disruption : ". . . .some of those who hold that a government to be
legitimate, must rest on the consent of the governed, appear not to
shrink from drawing this inference: they appear to qualify the right of
the majority of members of a state to rule by allowing the claim of a
minority that suffers from the exercise of this right to secede and form
a. new state, when it is in a majority in a continuous portion of its
old state's territory. . . .and I conceive that there are cases in which
the true interests of the whole may be promoted by disruption. For
instance, where two portions of a state's territory are separated by a
long interval of sea, or other physical obstacles, from any very active
intercommunication, and when, from differences of race or religion, past
history, or present social conditions, their respective inhabitants have
divergent needs and demands in respect of legislation and other
governmental interference, it may easily be inexpedient that they should
have a common government for internal affairs; while if, at the some
time, their external relations, apart from their union, would be very
different, it is quite possible that each part may lose more through the
risk of implication in the other's quarrels, than it is likely to gain
from the aid of its military force. Under such conditions as these, it
is not to be desired that any sentiment of historical patriotism, or any
pride in the national ownership of an extensive territory, should
permanently prevent a peaceful dissolution of the incoherent whole into
its natural parts."—**Elements of Politics** (1929), pp. 648-49.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
