+++
title = "02 1. The Ayodhya debate: focus on the “no temple” evidence"

+++
**1. The Ayodhya debate: focus on the “no temple” evidence**

In May 1998, the World Archaeological Congress held a conference on the
island of Brac, Croatia, where a session was devoted to the Ayodhya
dispute. I had registered to read a paper, and though I couldn’t make it
to the conference due to unforeseen family matters, I had prepared the
following text.

**1.1.Two sides to the story**

In references to the question whether there really was a Hindu temple at
the Ayodhya site later covered by the Babri Masjid, the focus is
invariably on the case made by the Hindu side, viz. that there was a
temple, and that different types of evidence confirm this.  The standard
question is: is this evidence for the temple demolition scenario valid? 
Have they succeeded in proving the existence of the temple?  By
contrast, the *opponents* of the temple hypothesis are but very rarely
asked to put their evidence on the table.

Let us now look at the anti-temple argumentation (with due attention to
the several non-archaeological types of evidence)[¹](#1) and in
particular to its offer of positive evidence that the allegedly
demolished Hindu temple never existed.  Of course, some might argue that
it is impossible to prove the non-existence of something, and that it is
therefore unreasonable to demand such proof.[²](#2) But this argument is
not valid: if there was no temple and no temple destruction, then there
must have been something else at the site, some other history preceding
the building of the mosque, which is exactly as capable of leaving some
written or archaeological testimony as a demolished temple would.  There
is no need to prove the temple’s non-existence; it will do to prove the
existence of something else at the site.

The disputed site is an elevated site near the centre of a city, quite
well-known to a whole city population, so it is perfectly reasonable to
expect the existence of testimonies of any alternative history of the
site.  Thus, the site may have been covered with a forest and the city
records mention its felling to make way for a mosque; or the owner of
some secular building standing at the site sold his real estate to the
builder of the projected mosque at a fair price, *vide* the written
sales contract.  As much as the temple party is expected to provide
evidence for the temple, the non-temple party must provide evidence for
the alternative to the temple.

Now, a close scrutiny of the argumentation by the nontemple party,
whether by the Babri Masjid Action Committee, by the scholars
representing it during the Government sponsored scholars’ debate
of December-January 1990-91 (at least its last two meetings)[³](#3), or
by independent scholars such as those of Jawaharlal Nehru
University[⁴](#4) shows that none of them even formulates an alternative
hypothesis.  Not one of the numerous scholars who took up arms against
the temple party has thought it necessary to explicitate even in the
vaguest terms what exactly happened before a mosque was built at the
site.  Much less does any of them provide any kind of evidence for such
an alternative scenario, even though positive proof for a non-temple
scenario would be the best possible refutation of the temple scenario.

**1.2. Vanquishing a straw man**

The non-temple argumentation is confined to two types of evidence:
arguments from silence, and attempts to find fault with pieces of
evidence offered by the temple party.

Criticism of the pro-temple argument is usually directed against a straw
man, not against the actual argumentation as presented by pro-temple
scholars.  A number of much acclaimed anti-temple publications bravely
announce in the introduction or on the cover that they will demolish
every argument given (or “concocted” and “maliciously propagated”) by
the temple party, but then fail to address or even mention the main
statements of the pro-temple party.  Thus, Asghar Ali Engineer has
published two anthologies of articles on this controversy, but carefully
leaves out the official as well as the competent non-official
formulations of the protemple position; instead he includes only a few
clumsy ones to create a semblance of even-handedness.^([5](#5))

The most powerful non-official books by pro-temple scholars are simply
never mentioned, let alone discussed.[⁶](#6) Even the official
argumentation offered by the scholars mandated by the Vishva Hindu
Parishad during the Government-sponsored debate is generally
ignored.[⁷](#7) Gyanendra Pandey manages to leave all this argumentation
by professional historians totally unmentioned in three successive
publications purporting to deal with the Hindu way of doing history
during the Ayodhya controversy, focusing instead on some Hindi pamphlets
by local religious personnel totally unacquainted with scholarly
historiography.^([8](#8))

The same ignoring of the very argumentation which is purportedly refuted
is found in the successive editions of S. Gopal’s *Anatomy of a
Confrontation*, for most foreign scholars the only accessible source on
the Ayodhya conflict.  Even the fact that a Govemment-sponsored debate
between historians mandated by both sides took place is obscured in most
publications, and when it is at all mentioned, it is mostly to denounce
the fact that the Government had “collaborated with the communal forces”
by giving them a hearing at all.

**1.3. Case study of a straw man**

The single, most important book in the whole Ayodhya controversy is Sita
Ram Goel’s two-volume book *Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them*.  Its
first volume contains a number of presentations of specific cases of
temple demolitions, a brief presentation of the Islamic theology of
iconoclasm, and most of all a list of nearly 2,000 mosques standing on
sites of temples demolished by Islamic iconoclasm.[⁹](#9) Everybody
whispered that within the Ayodhya movement, a list of “3,000” demolished
temples was circulating.  The normal thing to do for serious historians
would have been, to analyze this list inside out, and to try to refute
it.  After all, far from basing itself on “myth”, Goel’s argument
consists of two thousand precise and falsifiable claims, as a scientific
theory should.  It turns out that none of the anti-temple historians has
taken up the challenge of refuting even one of those claims, viz. by
proving objectively that one of the mosques in the list had definitely
not been built in forcible replacement of a temple.  The list has never
been discussed and the book figures in practically no
bibliography. ^([10](#10))

Even more important is the second volume, *The Islamic Evidence*.  It is
the key to the whole Ayodhya controversy, no less.  Its main parts are a
174-page compilation (emphatically not claiming completeness, merely the
discovery of a “tip of the iceberg”) of Muslim literary and epigraphic
evidence for the demolition of Hindu temples, and a 138-page
presentation of the Islamic theology of iconoclasm.  Goel’s comment on
the compilation opens thus: “Starting with Al-Biladhuri who wrote in
Arabic in the second half of the ninth century, and coming down to
Bashiruddin Ahmad who wrote in Urdu in the second decade of the
twentieth, we have cited from seventy histories spanning a period of
more than a thousand years.  Our citations mention fifty kings, six
military commanders and three sufis who destroyed Hindu temples in one
hundred and seven localities…”^([11](#11))

The importance of the book is that it provides the historical and
ideological context of the temple demolitions: it demonstrates that the
Ayodhya dispute is not a freak case but on the contrary an entirely
representative case of a widespread and centuries-long phenomenon, viz.
Islamic iconoclasm.  It shows that the iconoclastic demolition of Hindu
temples was practised in practically all Indian regions which were under
Muslim rule at one time.  Historians, particularly modern historians
with their emphasis on “context”, ought to welcome it and study it
closely.  Instead, it has been completely obscured and kept out of the
picture in the whole controversy.

It may have achieved mention in a footnote here or there.  The longest
discussion of it which I am aware of, is by political scientist Chetan
Bhatt (who does not try to hide his ignorance about medieval history),
who devotes fifteen lines to it: two separate lines in his text, and a
13-line footnote.  He accuses Goel of “a highly selective obsession with
archaeology and to some extent anthropology”[¹²](#12), of marshalling
“the most selective archaeological and historical facts”[¹³](#13), and
of this: “Goel’s text uses Islamic sources to ‘prove’ that Mughals were
only interested in religious domination of Hindus and nothing more.  The
historical method used is based almost entirely on highly selective
non-contextual quotations from these sources.”^([14](#14))

It is of course very convenient to allege that embarrassing quotations
are “selective” and “pulled out of context”, especially when you don’t
say what that context is, nor how it changes the meaning of the
quotation.  But here we are dealing with hundreds of quotations,
requiring no less than an equal number of contexts to redeem them, to
turn a testimony of fanatical vandalism into a testimony of tolerance. 
Moreover, it is normal for quotations to be selective (those in Bhatt’s
own book, culled from writings by Hindu nationalist ideologues to put
them in a bad light, certainly are); at any rate, quoting from primary
sources is a decent form of scholarship.  Incidentally, that the
“Mughals” (meaning the Islamic invaders in general) were “only”
interested in religious domination is a caricature misrepresenting Mr.
Goel’s stated views; his point merely is that the religious motive
provides an exhaustive and well-attested explanation for the observed
fact of Islamic temple-demolishing campaigns.

Bhatt also claims that Goel “provides ‘evidence’ that the Black Stone in
the Kaaba at Mecca (the most sacred site for Muslims) was originally a
shrine to the Hindu God Shiva”.[¹⁵](#15) In reality, Goel explicitly
denies just that claim.  He discusses a long-standing Hindu tradition to
this effect, as well as testimonies of the mutual visits to each other’s
temples by Pagan-Arab and Hindu traders and of the (well-founded) Muslim
belief in a connection between Arab and Hindu polytheism, to the extent
that the first Muslim invaders took great risks to reach and demolish
the Somnath temple (Gujarat), in which they believed the Arab Goddesses
had taken refuge after the islamization of Arabia.  At any rate, the
presiding deity of the Kaaba, Hubal, was a male moon-god just like
Shiva, and polytheists have always identified their own Gods with
roughly corresponding deities in other pantheons.[¹⁶](#16) Goel explains
how he always “dismissed” this belief as an invention of crank
historians, until he ran into some new evidence, and even then he
reserves his judgment: “But in the course of the present study this
author has run into some facts which force him to revise his judgment. 
He is *not prepared to say that the Ka’ba was a Shiva temple*.  He,
however, cannot resist the conclusion that it was a hallowed place of
Hindu pilgrimage.”^([17](#17))

Bhatt describes Goel’s book as “a fairly typical RSS-Hindunationalist
text”.[¹⁸](#18) I challenge him to produce a similar text by a declared
RSS man.  Anyone familiar with the Hindu nationalist movement knows that
(and knows why) the RSS scrupulously avoids this type of critical study
of Islam as a doctrine.  Since at least the Emergency (1975-77), when
RSS activists were jailed and developed friendly relations with jailed
activists of the jamaat-i-Islami, the RSS is wooing the Muslim
community; its political ally, the BJP, is courting the Muslim voters
and showing off its fast-increasing number of Muslim election
candidates.  Even when criticizing specified Muslim politicians or
Islamic militants, the RSS and its allies firmly refuse to turn this
into a criticism of Islam as such; rather, they will denounce their
Muslim target as “straying from the true message of Islam, which is a
religion of peace and tolerance”.

In the very book which Bhatt claims to be criticizing, Goel has taken
the RSS-BJP leaders to task for precisely this proIslamic attitude:
“Hindu leaders have endorsed the Muslim propagandists in proclaiming
that Islam does not permit the construction of mosques at sites occupied
earlier by other people’s places of worship.  One wonders whether this
kowtowing to Islam is prompted by ignorance, or cowardice, or
calculation, or a combination of them all.  The Islam of which Hindu
leaders are talking exists neither in the Quran nor in the Sunnah of the
prophet.”[¹⁹](#19) On other occasions as well, Goel has sternly
criticized the RSS and BJP for their policy of eschewing all serious
discussion of Islamic doctrine.[²⁰](#20) His book *Time for
Stock-Taking* is the single most incisive critique of the RSS available;
unlike the stereotyped and sloganeering tirades by Marxists like Chetan
Bhatt, it is based on first-hand knowledge, including the testimonies by
a number of disappointed RSS volunteers.  In spite of this, political
“scientists” like Bhatt can disregard all the evidence and label Goel as
an RSS man.

“Disregarding the evidence” is indeed the name of the game.  Critics of
the Hindu historians’ case on Ayodhya have so far never looked their
opponents in the eye, smugly settling for a labelling number, excelling
in demonizing terminology *ad bominem* rather than in a factual analysis
*ad rem*.  It is historiographical nonsense to discuss the phenomenon of
Islamic iconoclasm, in Ayodhya or elsewhere, without addressing the
question of its motivation - always an important aspect in any history
of human behaviour.  Yet, that is precisely what a whole establishment
of Indian historians have done in suppressing the very mention (or in
the case of Bhatt, at least the true contents) of Sita Ram Goel’s book.

**1.4. The BMAC historians**

The only (partial) exception to the solid front of scholarly disregard
for the pro-temple argument is the official statement by the scholars
mandated by the Babri Masjid Action Committee half-way through the
Government-sponsored scholars’ debate.[²¹](#21) The story behind this is
that the BMAC officials, no historians themselves, had shown up at the
first meeting in December 1990, at which bundles of evidence would be
exchanged, with nothing but a pile of photocopies of newspaper articles
and book excerpts stating *opinions* on the Ayodhya dispute, but no
historical evidence.  The only solid material included pertained to the
fairly uncontroversial judicial history of the site since 1857.  My
reading is that they had been misled into an unwarranted self-confidence
by the assurance propagated by certain media-savvy academics that the
pro-temple case was completely baseless and fraudulent.  To their
surprise, they were confronted with a genuine presentation of evidence
by the pro-temple party, represented by Prof. Harsh Narain, Prof. B.P.
Sinha, Dr. S.P. Gupta, Dr. B.R. Grover, and Mr. A.K. Chatteji (none of
them formally associated with the Vishva Hindu Parishad except for
Gupta).

In desperation, the BMAC representatives approached Prof. Irfan Habib of
the Indian Council of Historical Research asking him to save them. 
Habib collected a team of genuine historians for them, led by Prof. R.S.
Sharma.  We will refer to these employees of the BMAC as “the BMAC
team”, for it is in that capacity that they have participated in the
debate, notwithstanding their initial attempt to be recognized as
“independent historians” (as the BMAC negotiators have continued to call
their own employees).  Now that in spite of minimum coverage in the
English-language Indian press, the impression was out that the
VHP-mandated team of historians was winning the debate, the BMAC team
had little choice but to address the pro-temple argumentation.

On 24 January 1991, when they were expected to present their case,
Sharma and his team failed to show up and unilaterally broke off the
talks.  One could see the unilateral walk-out from the negotiations by
the BMAC team as an admission of defeat.  But the day before, the four
BMAC historians, in their first meeting (chaired by a government
representative) with the VHP team, had said that they needed six weeks
to study the evidence, - a remarkable position for people who had led 40
colleagues into signing a public statement on the absolute non-existence
of any evidence, just a few days before.

However, it must be admitted that they did make their homework as
promised.  A few months later they presented an argumentation under the
title *Historians’ Report to the Nation*, which remained their central
argument when the talks briefly resumed in October 1992.  Then too, they
broke off the talks, viz. in (arguably justified) protest against the
VHP’s announcement that, disregarding the ongoing negotiations, it would
stage a demonstration in Ayodhya on December 6, the occasion when the
Babri Masjid was demolished.

In the BMAC team’s *Report*, the salient point is that the BMAC scholars
exclusively attempted to refute (a part of) the pro-temple argumentation
but made no attempt whatsoever to present any original evidence of their
own.  They had literally “studied the evidence”, meaning the evidence
given by their opponents.  In effect, they pretended to sit in judgment
on evidence presented to them by supplicants, when in reality they
themselves were one of the contending parties in the arena, expected to
present their own evidence.  Unfortunately, to keep both parties to the
rules of a debate and to evaluate the evidence objectively, a genuinely
neutral judge would have been needed, and of course, it seemed that
there was no neutral judge available in India.

**1.5. Arguments from silence**

The central line of argument in the BMAC team’s Report is that until the
late 18th century, no literary source mentions a temple or a temple
demolition at the site.  Arguments from silence are always the weakest
type of argument.  The absence of testimony in a particular source may
simply mean that the author was unaware of an event eventhough the event
did take place; or it can mean that the author had no intention of
providing the kind of information which we are looking for, either
deliberately or simply because he had a different project in mind when
writing that particular text.

Thus, poet Tulsidas, author of the main devotional work on Rama in
Hindi, the *Ramacharitmânas*, is often cited as remaining silent
regarding the alleged temple demolition.  But this proves little, when
you keep in mind that in his day (ca.1600 A.D.) the construction of the
Babri Masjid at the site (1528 A.D. according to the inscription on the
mosque itself) was a long-accomplished fact, and that the same Tulsidas
doesn’t mention *any* of the numerous temple demolitions even in his own
Varanasi.  As a rewriter of ancient traditions, Tulsidas was just not a
reporter on recent events at all; he does not even mention his own most
famous contemporary, the more enlightened Emperor Akbar.

But in this case, there is an even more decisive argument against
reliance on arguments from silence: each argument from silence against
the temple is equally valid as an argument from silence against every
possible alternative scenario, for none of the texts cited mentions any
non-temple entity at the site.  Every cited text which fails to mention
a temple also fails to mention a forest or a secular building or any
alternative at the site.

One frequently mentioned argument from silence is simply disingenuous:
the absence of any reference to Ayodhya in Babar’s memoirs.  As Babar
himself relates, the pages for the period when he may have stayed in
Ayodhya were blown away during a storm.  If those missing pages listed
Babar’s activities day by day and failed to mention his stay in Ayodhya,
then that would constitute a serious argument from silence; but since
those pages are missing, there is not even an argument from silence in
Babar’s memoirs.

**1.6. A British concoction ?**

But if there had never been a temple demolition, why did a tradition
come into being asserting just that?  Usually, this anomaly is explained
by means of an *ad hoc* hypothesis, viz. that the temple demolition
scenario was invented by the British rulers as part of their policy of
“divide and rule”.  Even pro-temple authors like K.R. Malkani,
editor-in-chief of the party paper *BJP Today*, have conceded an
important role to this British “divide and rule” policy, which in my
view is a figment of the imagination.

Admittedly, at the institutional level the British did follow a policy
of “divide and rule”: communal recruitment quota and separate
electorates for Muslims were obviously meant to isolate the Muslims from
the national movement.  In their conquest of India, the British had also
used one community against another, e.g. they took help from the Sikhs,
hereditary enemies of the Moghul Empire, to suppress the so-called
Mutiny of 1857, which was a predominantly Muslim revolt aimed at
restoring the Moghul Empire.  However, in this process, they used
*existing* antagonisms between communities and had no need of inventing
new ones.

Moreover, it is simply not true at all that the British encouraged
inter-religious rioting, nor that they exploited (let alone created) the
kind of emotive issues (such as temple demolitions) which led to street
fighting rather than to purely political disunity.  Once the
British-Indian Empire was securely established, the British rulers
sought to establish communal peace, and did so with remarkable success. 
The period between 1858 and 1920, at the height of British power, saw
the lowest incidence of Hindu-Muslim violence since the Ghorid invasion
of 1192.  When Hindu-Muslim riots started on a large scale in 1922, it
was due to the failure of the illconceived Khilafat agitation started by
the (Muslim and Congress Hindu) Indians themselves.

At any rate, not one of the proponents of the British concoction
scenario has discovered even the faintest evidence for it in the copious
colonial records.  Remark, moreover, that this scenario implies a number
of highly unlikely presuppositions.  Thus, it imputes a great deal of
stupidity to the wily Britons: it has them concoct a temple demolition
scenario when so many factual, well-attested temple demolitions had
marked India’s landscape, often in the form of temple remains being
visibly incorporated in mosques built over them.  In Ayodhya itself,
several Rama temples were destroyed by Aurangzeb (*Treta-ka-Thakur* and
*Swargdwar*), a fact which even the official polemicists against the
Rama-Janmabhoomi have not dared to deny. If the British had wanted to
poke up anti-Muslim feelings among the Hindus of Ayodhya by means of
temple demolition narratives, they had no need at all to go through the
trouble of concocting one.

Further, this scenario credits the guardians of Hindu tradition with an
uncharacteristic open-mindedness.  All through the past centuries, Hindu
Pandits have refused to listen to European scholars who claimed that the
Sanskrit language had been brought from South Russia during the
so-called Aryan Invasion, eventhough this Aryan Invasion Theory is
taught in every schoolbook o history in India.  These Pandits have
consistently turned a deaf ear to European theories about Indian
chronology, Sanskrit etymology or Aryan-Dravidian relations.  They won’t
even allow non-Hindus into Hindu temples.  Yet, we are asked to believe
that a few British agents could infiltrate the local traditions and make
these same Pandits swallow and then propagate a newly invented story
about the birthplace of one of their greatest gods.

The British concoction hypothesis is conclusively refuted by several
pre-British testimonies of (at least the belief in) the temple
demolition scenario.  The best-known and clearest testimony is certainly
the one by the Austrian Jesuit Tieffenthaler, who wrote in
1768: “Emperor Aurangzeb got demolished the fortress called Ramcot, and
erected on the same place a Mahometan temple with three cupolas.  Others
believe that it was constructed by Babor.”[²²](#22) One could speculate,
along with R.S. Sharma and his BMAC team of historians, that the
tradition which Tieffenthaler recorded, was a concoction from the early
18th century (still “in its initial phase of creation”)[²³](#23), but it
cannot, at any rate, have been a British concoction.

To their credit, R.S. Sharma and his team are the only ones in the
no-temple camp to have abandoned the British concoction hypothesis, at
least implicitly.  But they fail to give the elements which could lend
substance to a pre-British concoction hypothesis: no who, no how, no
why.  And no evidence whatsoever.

**1.7. A closer look at the arguments from silence**

While Sharma c.s. leave undiscussed several pre-British testimonies
which the VHP-mandated team had brought as evidence, they do mention a
few other sources of this type nonetheless.  In each case, they claim it
as an argument from silence: the source fails to mention the
pre-existence or the demolition of a temple at the site.  But each of
these Ayodhya related passages cited is very brief and fails to mention
other buildings in Ayodhya, and none of the texts cited purports to be a
history of temple demolitions, so that the non-mention of a birthplace
temple is quite in keeping with the project of the texts concerned, and
not a telling omission.

Thus, Abul Fazl’s *Ain-i-Akbari*, completed in A.D. 1598.  Sharma c.s.
note that it includes Ayodhya among the foremost places of pilgrimage,
calling it “one of the holiest places of antiquity” and “the residence
of Ramchander”, and mentioning the celebration of *Ram Nomi* (Rama’s
birth festival) there.  The BMAC historians comment: “Clearly, the
tradition till then did not confine Rama’s place of birth to the
existing town of Ayodhya, let alone the site occupied by the Baburi
Masjid.”^([24](#24))

But this is hardly incompatible with a tradition concerning a specific
birthplace.  Till today, people can say: “I’m from Scotland”, or: “I was
born in Edinburgh”, rather than to tell you in exactly which house or
maternity ward they were born.  When filling out forms, people still
write the name of the town behind the entry “place of birth”, and not
the full address of the building; yet in doing so, they are not denying
that they were born in that specific building.  You really have to be a
university professor to come up with the brilliant idea that people who
mention a town as their place of birth are implying that they have no
notion of having been born in one specific house.

Anyone familiar with the lore of Hindu devotional tradition would find
it strange that Hindus would come on pilgrimage to Ayodhya as Rama’s
city and not let that Rama association come alive in an enactment of
Rama’s career with the designation of specific sites as the theatres of
specific scenes in Rama’s life.  That, for example, is why another
temple in Ayodhya was associated with Rama’s death: the *Swargadwar*,
“gate to heaven”.  Even if Rama were a purely fictional character, the
religious imagination would have created that kind of landscape, and in
the Bhakti period, i.e. from well before the start of the second
Christian millennium, it was the done thing to adorn such religiously
meaningful sites with temples.

Sharma c.s. assume that the identification of the demolished building as
a “fortress” (*Ramkot*, “Rama’s fortress”) refutes the assumption that
it was a temple; but Hindu “idol-worshippers” consider a temple as the
house of the deity, in the case of a warrior-deity as his fortress.  The
whole idea of idol-worship is to make a deity come alive, realistically:
the idol is washed and clothed and fed, and of course it lives in a
house appropriate to the god’s character and epic career.

**1.8. On balance**

So, in spite of sometimes painstaking attempts to neutralize the
evidence presented by the temple party, the proponents of the non-temple
hypothesis have only come up with some highly contrived readings of some
of the VHP-mandated scholars’ items of evidence, not with a convincing
refutation.  Moreover, they have completely failed to produce any
positive evidence for a non-temple scenario.  This observation raises a
few questions.

First of all: why is there an Ayodhya debate in the first place? 
Normally, scholars only take time from their busy schedules to reopen a
settled affair when fresh evidence has surfaced which throws a new light
on the matter.  In this case, no such new evidence has ever been
presented.  It is most conspicuous by its absence in the opening shot of
the debate, the JNU historians’ pamphlet *The Political Abuse of
History* (Delhi 1989).  Had there not been the purely political motives
which drove some to declare the Ayodhya debate opened, we would still
have been with the consensus of 1989 as laid down in the *Encyclopaedia
Brittannica* (1989 edition, entry *Ayodhya*): “Rama’s birthplace is
marked by a mosque erected by the Moghul emperor Babur in 1528 on the
site of an earlier temple.”

Secondly: what is the score if each one of the attempted refutations of
the items of pro-temple evidence proves correct, and if the non-answered
items of evidence were likewise to be refuted? In that case, the
pro-temple evidence is reduced to zero, but that would still make it
exactly as voluminous as the evidence for every possible non-temple
scenario, which to date is non-existent.  Even if all the trouble taken
by the pro-temple scholars had been in vain, their evidence would still
be equal in magnitude to the evidence offered by their opponents, whose
endeavour has been purely negative.  Anyone weighing the actual evidence
presented by both sides would have to infer that the balance of
evidence, while not yet definitive, is strongly on the pro-temple side.

**1.9. Tampering with the evidence**

Before concluding, we want to register a remark on a minor but quite
significant chapter in the exchange of evidence: the VHP-mandated
scholars have, in their argumentation, pointed out no less than four
attempts where scholars belonging to the anti-temple party have tried to
conceal or destroy documentary evidence.  Those are of course cases
where the attempt failed because it was noticed in time, but the
question must be asked how many similar attempts have succeeded.  At any
rate, there has not been any attempt from the anti-temple side to
counter or even deny these four specific allegations.  They have also
not been able to point out any similar attempt by the pro-temple party
to tamper with the record.

With one possible exception: immediately after the announcement of the
discovery, in the post-demolition debris on 6-7 December 1992, of Hindu
sculptures and an inscription explicitly supporting the temple thesis,
seventy academics issued a statement alleging that this evidence had
been stolen from museums and planted there.  Since then, the allegation
has resurfaced every time the archaeological evidence was mentioned.  It
has also been stealthily expanded to include the dozens of
temple-sculpture pieces found during public works at around the Babri
Masjid in June 1992.  Well, who knows. if proof is offered, we will have
to consider it.

So far, however, this attack against the professional integrity of the
scholars who presented these findings (grouped in the *Historians’
Forum* chaired by Prof. K.S. Lal) remains unsubstantiated.  Unless
proven, the allegation is a case of defamation.  In the six years since
then, this archaeological material has been in the custody of
politicians openly hostile to the Hindu Revivalist movement, who would
gladly have made the material available for inspection by scholars
capable of proving the allegation (especially Human Resources Minister
Arjun Singh, 1991-96). If the anti-temple academics really believed
their own allegations, they could not have dreamed of a better occasion
to expose the mendacity of their opponents, than to invite an
international panel of experts to investigate the archaeological pieces
and prove their fraudulent origins.  Instead, they continued their
bluffing and shouting and kept the public’s attention as far away from
the evidence as possible.

**1.10. The politics behind the debate**

The political equation behind all this intrigue is rarely understood by
non-Indians.  Thus, it requires quite a historical excursus to explain
why declared Marxists like Irfan Habib, R.S. Sharma and Romila Thapar
are making common cause with Islamic fundamentalism in its struggle
against Hindu pluralism.[²⁵](#25) Leaving aside the larger framework of
the alliances and power equations in India’s political arena, we may for
now draw attention to a significant asymmetry in the political
backgrounds of the pro- and anti-temple parties.

Reducing the “belief” in the preexistence of a Hindu temple at the site
to a political agenda is, apart from being a case of the “genetic
fallacy”, also counterfactual.  Among those who uphold the temple
thesis, you find scholars who did not support the movement for replacing
the mosque structure with temple architecture, and who explicitly
distanced themselves from the Vishva Hindu Parishad’s campaign, e.g.
Prof. A.R. Khan and archaeologist Dr. R. Nath.  By contrast, I am not
aware of anyone in the anti-temple party who supported the right of
Hindus to build a temple at the site: every one of them explicitly
subscribes to the position that Hindu attempts to reclaim this Hindu
sacred site should be thwarted.

Of course, the opponents of the replacement of the Babari Masjid
(already back in use as a Hindu temple since 1949) with new temple
architecture could have taken that political stand without dragging in
the historical question, e.g.: “The fact that a Hindu temple stood at
the site still does not give Hindus the right to claim it back.” Some of
them have indeed fallen back on that position when they saw they were
losing the debate on the historical evidence.  But in 1989-91, the field
seemed ripe for the more aggressive position, which was to deny the
Hindu history of the site altogether; nobody had expected that the VHP
would be capable (and in effect, it was not capable, but it found some
independent scholars who were capable) of collecting and presenting the
available as well as some newly-found evidence for the temple.

The VHP-mandated scholars, for their part, have not been aggressive
enough to take the struggle into the enemy half of the field by focusing
public attention on the quality of the evidence presented by the
BMAC-mandated scholars and their allies in academe and the media.  That
is why the latter have gotten away with creating the false impression,
at least among those unacquainted with the actual contents of the
debate, that the pro-temple case is weak and fraudulent while, purely by
implication, their own case must be unassailable.

**1.1 1. The role of foreign scholars**

It is not reassuring to watch the ease with which foreign scholars have
absorbed or adopted the non-temple thesis from their Indian colleagues
(whom they assume to be neutral observers) even without being shown any
positive evidence.  In academic circles in the West, my own restating
the *status quaestionis* in terms of actual evidence has only earned me
hateful labels and laughter, and this from big professors at big
universities whose prestige is based on the widespread belief that
scholarship goes by hard evidence, not politically fashionable
opinions.  Never has any of them offered hard evidence for the newly
dominant view, or even just shown a little familiarity with the contents
of the debate.

Until 1989, there was a consensus about the existence of a medieval
Hindu temple and its destruction by Islamic iconoclasm.  Western
scholars who did primary research, notably the Dutch scholars Hans
Bakker and Peter van der Veer, found nothing which gave reason to
question that consensus.  Had they cared to follow the debate in India,
they would have looked in vain for the presentation by the no-temple
party of any historical or archaeological fact which is radically
incompatible with (and thereby constitutes a refutation of) that
consensus view.

A painful example of a scholar intimidated into conformity by the
demonization of the temple thesis can be witnessed in this climbdown by
Peter van der Veer, who had at first accepted the preexistence of the
Ayodhya temple on the basis of the local tradition: “While Bakker and I
could naively accept local tradition, this cannot be done any
longer.”[²⁶](#26) In fact, the local oral history was confirmed by other
types of evidence as presented by B.B. Lal, S.P. Gupta, Harsh Narain et
al., but none of these are known to Van der Veer (as per his own text
and bibliography) because his only source turns out to be S. Gopal’s
*Anatomy of a Confrontation*, which conceals the pro-temple evidence.

More importantly, because of their implicit support to the old consensus
view of the temple demolition, Van der Veer and Bakker have been
attacked *nomination* in S. Gopal’s book,[²⁷](#27) which falsely
associates them with the Hindu fundamentalist bad guys all while
diverting attention from the historical evidence, which it spurns as
“pointless”.[²⁸](#28) Being associated with “Hindu fundamentalism” is
about the worst defamation one can inflict on an Indologist, and this is
most likely the sole reason for Van der Veer’s change of heart.  At any
rate, he offers no historical evidence at all which could justify his
retreat from the well-established consensus.

**1.12. Conclusion**

Future historians will include the no-temple argument of the 1990s as a
remarkable case study in their surveys of academic fraud and politicized
scholarship.  With academic, institutional and media power, a new
academic-journalistic consensus has been manufactured denying the
well-established history of temple demolition by Islamic iconoclasm to
the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi site; at least among people with
prestige and influence but no firsthand knowledge of the issue.  But the
facts will remain the facts, and their ongoing suppression is bound to
give way as new generations of scholars take a fresh look at the data.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)On the archaeological aspect, see *Ayodhya Archaeology after
Demolition* by Prof. D. Mandal, Delhi 1993, and *Archaeology of Babri
Masjid*, Genuine Publ., Delhi 1994, by Mrs. Surinder Kaur and Mr. Sher
Singh, amateurs with whom other anti-temple authors like Sushil
Srivastava have refused to be associated; and on the pro-temple side,
the *Babari Masjid of Ayodhya* by R. Nath, Jaipur 1991.

[²](#2a)E.g. S. Guhan in Jitendra Bajaj, ed.: *Ayodhya and the Future
India*, Madras 1993, p.89.

[³](#3a)R.S. Sharma et al.: *Historians’ Report to the Nation*, People’s
Publ., Delhi 1991.  To my knowledge, the argumentation offered by the
BMAC office bearers themselves during the first round of the talks, in
December 1990, was never published.

[⁴](#4a)S. Gopal, Romila Thapar, K.N. Panikkar, Bipan Chandra et al.:
*The Political Abuse of History*, JNU 1989; and S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy
of a Confrontation*, 2nd ed., Penguin 1992.

[⁵](#5a)A.A. Engineer: *Babri Masjid Ramjanmabhoomi Controveiy*, Ajanta,
Delhi 1990, and *Politics of Confrontation*, idem 1992.

[⁶](#6a)E.g. Harsh Narain: *The Ayodhya Temple-Mosque Dispute*, Perunan,
Delhi 1993, and S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them*,
vol.2, The Islamic Etddence, Voice of India, Delhi 1991.

[⁷](#7a)Available in two editions: The Great Ramjanmabhoomi Emence, VHP,
Delhi 1991, and *History vs. Casuistry*, Voice of India, Delhi 1991.

[⁸](#8a)Gyanendra Pandey: *Hindus and Others*, Viking/Penguin 1993,
p.9-10; “New Hindu History of Ayodhya”, *Economic and Political Weekly*,
18-6-1994; “The New Hindu History”, in J. McGuire, P. Reeves & H.
Brasted: *Politics of Violence*, Sage Publ., Thousands Oaks, Colorado
1996, p. 143-158.

[⁹](#9a)This first volume includes articles by Harsh Narain, Ram Swarup,
Jai Dubashi and Arun Shourie, apart from the main body by Goel himself.
In appendix, it also reproduces a list of Hindu temples demolished in
Bangladesh in autumn 1989, prepared by the Hindu-Buddhist-Christian
Unity Council of Bangladesh, as if to prove that Islamic iconoclasm is
not ancient history.

[¹⁰](#10a)In a review in the Calcutta *Telegraph* (ca. 30-1-1991),
Manini Chatterjee of the Communist Party (Marxist) calls *Hindu
Temples*, vol. 1, (along with my own book *Ramjanmabhoomi vs. Babri
Masjid*) a “very bad book”, but fails to even attempt a refutation.

[¹¹](#11a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2, p.266-267 of the first
edition, the one which Chetan Bhatt (*cfr. infra*) uses; there is a
much-expanded second edition (1994) citing 10 more histories, and
mentioning quite a few more kings, military commanders, sufis and
localities.

[¹²](#12a)C. Bhatt: *Liberation and Purity.  Race, New Religious
Movements and the Ethics of Post modernity*, UCL Press, London 1997, p.
169.

[¹³](#13a)C. Bhatt: *Liberation and Purity*, p. 175.

[¹⁴](#14a)C. Bhatt: *Liberation and Purity*, p.278.

[¹⁵](#15a)C. Bhatt: *Liberation and Purity*, p. 278.

[¹⁶](#16a)E.g. in his *De Bello Gallico*, Julius Caesar identified the
Celtic gods with the Roman gods familiar to his readers.  Likewise, a
Muslim commentator of the Quran (Md.  Faruq Khan: *Qur’ân Masjîd* in
Hindi, Rampur 1976, p.242, quoted by Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol. 2,
p.364) identifies the Arab Goddesses Al-Lât, Al-Manât and Al-Uzza
typologically with Hindu Goddesses like Saraswati and Lakshmi.

[¹⁷](#17a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (1st ed.), p.429.

[¹⁸](#18a)C. Bhatt: *Liberation and Puritty*, p.278.

[¹⁹](#19a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (Ist ed.), p.ii.

[²⁰](#20a)See S.R. Goel, ed.: *Time for Stocktaking: wheither sangh
parivar?* Voice of India, Delhi 1997.

[²¹](#21a)R.S. Sharma et al.: *Historians Report to the Nation*, cf.
supra, largely copied in Pradeep Nayak: *The Politics of the Ayodhya
Dispute*, Commonwealth, Delhi 1993.

[²²](#22a)Quoted by R.S. Sharma et al.: *Historians Report*, p.19,
italicizing the words “the fortress”.

[²³](#23a)R.S. Sharma et al.: *Historians Report*, p.20.

[²⁴](#24a)R.S. Sharma et al.: *Historians’ Report*, p.16.

[²⁵](#25a)Thapar and Sharma are quoted as representatives of Indian
Marxism in Tom Bottomore’s *History of Marxist Thought*, Oxford 1988,
entry “Hinduism”; Habib has subtitled his recent book *Essays in Indian
History* (Tulika, Delhi 1995) as *Towards a Marxist Perception*.

[²⁶](#26a)P. van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 161. Reference is
to his book Gods on Earth, London 1988, and to Hans Bakker’s book
*Ayodhya*, Groningen 1986.

[²⁷](#27a)S. Gopal: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.30.

[²⁸](#28a)S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
