+++
title = "04 3. The Bodh Gaya temple controversy"

+++
**3. The Bodh Gaya temple controversy**

When anti-Hindu lobbies unite, they often manage to get the contemporary
form of Indian Buddhism on their side, viz.  Ambedkarite neo-Buddhism. 
Because of its political background, the conversion of Scheduled Caste
leader Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar and many of his Mahar castemen to
Buddhism (1956), in effect contributed to the genesis of what one might
call Buddhist communalism.^([1](#1)) The anti-Hindu bias of Ambedkarite
Buddhism was strengthened by the parallel Buddhist animus against Tamil
Hindus in Sri Lanka and Burma/Myanmar, as well as by the tendency among
Nehruvian intellectuals to construe Buddhism historically as an
anti-Hindu revolt.  As a materialization of this anti-Hindu animus, the
neo-Buddhist movement has tried to create controversies over certain
temples in imitation of the Ayodhya temple/mosque controversy.

In particular, the Ambedkarite neo-Buddhists have started a movement for
the “liberation of the Mahabodhi shrine” in Bodh Gaya.  Its aim is to
remove the statutory four Hindu members of the eight-member temple
management committee, and to prohibit worship of a *sivalingam* in the
temple.  Quite in contrast with the secularist calls for “composite
culture” and for multi-religious worship at the Rama-Janmabhoomi site,
this is a demand to free the Mahabodhi site from multi-religious worship
and particularly from the “taint” of Hinduism.  The agitation has been
marked by petty vandalism, as when the neo-Buddhists desecrated their
own holiest site, or at least the *sivalingam* standing there, in
October 1992.

One of the strange things about this agitation is that it revives a
conflict which had been solved several decades earlier.  Since 1590,
Shaiva monks had taken care of the temple, which had been abandoned by
Buddhists after the massacre of the Buddhist monks by Muslim invaders in
ca. A.D. 1192.  In 1874, they agreed to the Burmese king’s proposal to
re-establish the building as a Buddhist place of worship.  But the
Anglo-Burmese War and several foreign interventions spoiled the project.

In 1890-92, Edwin Arnold, author of the Buddha romance *The Light of
Asia*, appealed to the British-Indian Government to hand over the temple
to the Buddhists, and even went to Japan to plead for diplomatic support
to this demand.  A court case ensued which the Buddhists ultimately
lost.  Negotiations dragged on, involving Swami Vivekananda (1901) and
Hindu Mahasabha leader Bhai Parmanand (1935), among others.  A
compromise proposal by Rajendra Prasad (1924), later on President of
India, was thwarted several times but finally became law in 1949: the
Bodh Gaya Temple Act, which gives both Hindus and Buddhists the right to
worship and an equal representation in the management
committee.^([2](#2))

So, the goal of the Bodh Gaya temple movement is not to get the
Buddhists in (they are in since 1949), only to get the Hindus out. 
Given the existing compromise and the Hindu record in tending the
building after the Buddhists had abandoned it, Hindus consider this
Buddhist campaign graceless and ungrateful.

The movement for the “liberation” of the Mahabodhi temple was formally
launched by a Japanese monk, Bhadant Arya Nagarjuna Surai Sasai.  His
involvement provides a typical example of how people spoiling for a
fight tend to attack meek rather than dangerous adversaries.  Buddhism
has been eclipsed by Christianity in South Korea and among the
Indonesian Chinese.^([3](#3)) In Bangladesh, the Buddhist Chakmas of the
Chittagong Hill Tracts have been driven out by the Muslim settlers and
the Government of Bangladesh.  Buddhism is oppressed by Communism in
China, North Korea, Tibet and Vietnam.  If Sasai had started a similar
agitation in those countries, it would not have lasted a single day, and
he would have been lucky to get expelled rather than locked up or
killed.

By contrast, Buddhism is not oppressed or endangered in India.  It is
not obstructed in worshipping at its traditional sacred sites, including
the Mahabodhi temple, which Hindus have made available for Buddha
worship.  India provides shelter to the Dalai Lama, and has sanctioned
the creation of a network of Buddhist monasteries and institutes,
including a Tibetan-Buddhist university (in Sarnath) and the nerve
centres of several international Buddhist organizations.  It welcomes
Buddhist associations from Japan, Taiwan and other countries and allows
them to build pilgrim hostels and research institutes in Sarnath, Bodh
Gaya and other Buddha-related sites.  It is, moreover, one of the few
countries where even most non-Buddhists have a sincere respect for the
Buddha and his Dharma.  And yet, of all places, India is the one where
Arya Sasai has to “liberate” Buddhism from Hindu “oppression”.

Arya Sasai reported thus on the high point of his campaign: “On October
14 \[1992\], a big rally was held at the Boat Club, New Delhi, and over
3 lakh Buddhists of India and foreign countries attended
it.”^([4](#4)) In the next few years, however, nothing much happened,
because Bihar Chief Minister Laloo Prasad Yadav and his wifely successor
Rabri Devi went back on an earlier promise of support to the Buddhist
agitation.  Another agitation, with “indefinite hunger-strike”, took
place in November 1995, but with no results.^([5](#5)) The RSS claims
credit for mobilizing the Hindu opposition, but the main point is
probably that the Backward Castes inside Laloo Prasad Yadav’s own party
(Janata Dal, now Rashtriya Janata Dal) are not as insensitive to Hindu
concerns as some political scientists always assume in their fevered
dreams of a big anti-Brahmin alliance.

The equation of Ayodhya with Bodh Gaya, commonly made in the press, is
not tenable at all.  Hindus never destroyed the Mahabodhi temple, they
never took it from the Buddhists, they have handed it over for Buddhist
worship in a settlement piloted by the Hindu Mahasabha, and they are not
interfering nor claiming a right to interfere with Buddhist practices
there.  More than that, a Buddhist member of the Bodh Gaya temple
management committee has admitted that “the laudable work of the
construction of the Mahabodhi temple” was “undertaken by a Brahmana
minister of Shaivite persuasion”.^([6](#6))

The local RSS leader explains: “The earliest and most authentic record
is of course by Hiuen Tsang \[= Xuan Zang\] who visited Bodh Gaya in
A.D. 637.  He says that two Brahmin brothers prayed to Lord Maheshwara
in the Himalayas to grant their wishes, upon which Maheshwara instructed
them to carry out the meritorious task of erecting a large temple and
excavate a large tank and devote all kinds of religious offerings near
the most sanctified Bodhi tree for attaining ‘the fruit of a
Buddha’.  The elder Brahmin devotee accordingly built a large temple”,
etc.^([7](#7)) Not only did Hindus refrain from demolishing the temple,
but they actually built it. Now find us a Hindu temple built by Babar.

Studying the backgrounds of this quarrel throws a new light on the
now-common allegation that Buddhism was persecuted by the Brahminical
reaction under the imperial Gupta dynasty.  In Bodh Gaya, the Chinese
pilgrim Xuan Zang stayed in the Mahabodhi Sangharama, a “splendid
monastery” with “1000 monks”, which had been built, at the Sri Lankan
king Meghavarmana’s request, under the auspices of Samudragupta, the
Gupta Emperor.^([8](#8)) Bodh Gaya has a large number of dated
sculptures from the Gupta period, which was in fact one of the most
fruitful periods in Buddhist art.^([9](#9))

It is therefore no surprise that Hindus have traditionally worshipped at
Bodh Gaya, even during the heyday of Buddhism.  Prof. Benimadhab Barua
reports that “concerning the right of the Hindus to worship the
Buddha-image Dharmeshwara, \[the Bodhi tree\] in the Bodh-Gaya temple
and its sacred area, we have noticed that as far back as the Kushana age
it is enjoined in the Epic version of the earlier Eulogium that every
pious Hindu visiting Gaya should make it a point to go also to
Dharmaprastha or Bodh-Gaya and have a sacred touch of the Buddha image
of the place.  The later Eulogium in the Puranas enjoins in the same
manner that every Hindu pilgrim to the Gaya region desiring to release
the departed spirits of his ancestors must visit also Bodh Gaya to pay
his respectful homage to the Buddha image Dharmeshvara as well as the
\[Bodhi treel”.^([10](#10))

Even while arguing against the Shaiva Mahant of the Mahabodhi temple,
who in the 1930s and 1940s, in league with the British (who feared
Japanese interference), obstructed the implementation of a
Hindu-Buddhist settlement, Prof. Benimadhab Barua admits: “So far as our
information goes, the Buddhists have never and nowhere prevented the
Hindus from either visiting or conducting worship at their shrines.  As
a matter of fact, they have no case against the Hindu devotees coming to
a Buddhist shrine for worship.  Their shrines remain open to all for
worship, without any distinction of caste and creed.  The inscription of
Keshava, engraved during the reign of Dharmapala, clearly proves that
the Buddhists were liberal and tolerant enough even to allow a Hindu to
instal a figure of his deities, Shiva and Brahma, in their temple at
Bodh-Gaya for the benefit of the resident Shaivite
Brahmins.”^([11](#11))

It may therefore be noted that the Buddhist membership of the Bodh Gaya
temple management board does not altogether share the anti-Hindu animus
of the neo-Buddhists and their secularist manipulators.  Thus, the 5th
European Hindu Conference in Frankfurt featured a speech by Bhikkhu
Jnana Jagat, member of the Bodh Gaya temple management committee and of
the VHP.  He presented the standard VHP viewpoint on Buddhism, viz. that
“from time immemorial the ‘Vedic culture’ and ‘Shramana (ascetic)
culture’ have been growing and flourishing simultaneously in this land. 
Both being the integral part of the same Aryan culture or way of life
have been enriching and sustaining each other through
centuries.”^([12](#12))

Whether the Brahmin control of the Mahabodhi area since the 16th century
upto 1949 was similar in nature to the Muslim control of the
Rama-Janmabhoomi site during the same period, can perhaps best be
decided after considering this statement by a Muslim scholar, Dr. Abdul
Qudoos Ansari: “The iconoclastic fury of Islam must have \[had\] a
terrible effect on the shrines of the Gaya region, and particularly on
Buddhism, with the result that a time came when, there being
no Buddhists to look after their own shrines and worship at Bodh Gaya,
the Brahmins had to do their work even by going \[outside\] their
jurisdiction.”^([13](#13)) Though he gratuitously accuses the Brahmin
management of “the sin of greed”, he does not accuse them of any
destruction or forcible take-over, and this constitutes a radical
difference with the Rama-Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid scenario.

Dr. Ansari’s testimony against Islam rather than against Brahmanism as
being the destroyer of Buddhism in India is doubly strong because
otherwise he is a subscriber to the now-popular theory of an intense
Buddhist-Brahminical antagonism.  Thus, he interprets a depiction of the
Vishnu Dashavatar series in which Vishnu’s ninth incarnation as the
Buddha is missing as proof of this antagonism, along with a more
explicit statement for hostility on the Buddhist side, viz.  “the images
of some of their gods shown as humiliating the Hindu deities”.  He has
no information on temple destructions, idol-breaking, massacres etc.,
only an artistic act of disrespect.  And that only on the Buddhist side:
no Hindu art is mentioned as depicting Hindu gods humiliating the
Buddha.

Showing disagreement or disrespect in words or images is no proof of
effective fanaticism, meaning suppression of a cult or destruction of
its symbols or institutions.  On this type of evidence, Sita Ram Goel
comments: “It is nobody’s case that Hindu sects (in which I include
Buddhists and Jains) did not use strong language vis-à-vis each other. 
Every Brahmanical sect has used strong language about other Brahmanical
sects.  So have the Buddhists and the Jains, not only vis-à-vis
Brahmanical sects but also vis-à-vis each other.  The situation gets
much worse when it comes to the sub-sects \[in their polemic against one
another\], whether Buddhist or Brahmanical or Jain.  But strong language
alone, whether in words or portrayals, is no evidence in the present
context, unless it is followed by overt acts of destruction or
usurpation.”^([14](#14))

The context which Dr. Ansari relates gives the impression that a more
serious and less artistic fanaticism was troubling the Buddhists of Bodh
Gaya, but not from the Brahminical establishment: the then king
Buddhasena (the last but one independent ruler in the area) had “fled
into the forest on the outskirts of Gaya on the approach of the Turkish
raiders but returned soon after withdrawal”.  The famous Tibetan monk
Dharmaswami (1234-36 in that area) “had to flee away for seventeen days,
owing to the \[apprehension of\] the attack of the Turks”, and king
Buddhasena, “not able to provide protection”, also “escaped into the
forest for fear of the Turks”.^([15](#15))

It was the temple’s good fortune that the living Buddhist presence there
had practically disappeared by the time the area passed into Muslim
hands.  Already in Dharmaswami’s time, decades before the actual Muslim
take-over of that very area, all students and pilgrims and lay Buddhists
had stopped coming to the area: “According to Dharmaswami, the Bodh Gaya
establishment had been deserted by all except for \[some\] monks, on
account of the repeated Turkish conquests.”^([16](#16)) The popular
support base and the training grounds for Buddhist monks were being
destroyed in all of North India, and Bodh Gaya was dying as a Buddhist
centre along with all those other establishments that were being
physically eliminated by the Turks.  Not Hinduism but Islam destroyed
Buddhism in India.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))About Dr. Ambedkar, vide K. Elst: *Dr. Ambedkar, a True
> Aryan*, Voice of India.  Delhi 1993.
>
> ^([2](#2a))More details in K. Elst: *Ram Janmabhoomi vs. Babri
> Masjid*, Voice of India, Delhi 1990, p.102-104.
>
> ^([3](#3a))The Christian-dominated Korean leadership has even been
> accused by neutral observers of “military persecution of Buddhism”,
> esp. the crackdown in October 1980, see *Encyclopedia Brittannica,
> Book of the Year 1988*, entry “Buddhism”.
>
> ^([4](#4a))Letter to *Dalit Voice*, published on 1-2-1993.  We need
> not fuss over inflated attendance figures.
>
> ^([5](#5a))“Monks launch fresh stir at Bodh Gaya”, *Indian Express*,
> 2-11-1995.
>
> ^([6](#6a))Dipak K. Barua: *Buddha Gaya*, Bodh Gaya 1981, p.41, with
> reference to Xuan Zang, who saw the temple in 637 A.D., shortly after
> it was built, and who explicitly gave the credit to a Brahmin
> worshipper of Shiva Maheshwara.
>
> ^([7](#7a))“Bodh Gaya: Facts and Fiction”, Daya Prakash speaking to
> *Organiser*, 16-7-1995.
>
> ^([8](#8a))Surendranath Sen: *India through Chinese Eyes*, Bagchi &
> Co., Calcutta 1979 (1956), p. 166.
>
> ^([9](#9a))Reported in Abdul Quddoos Ansari: *Archaeological Remains
> of Bodhgaya*, Ramanand Vidya Bhavan, Delhi 1990, p.15.
>
> ^([10](#10a))B. Barua: “Bodh-Gaya from Buddhist Point of View and
> Bodh-Gaya from Hindu Point of view”, app.2 in D.K. Barua: *Buddha
> Gaya*, p.267. The article is a reprint of an older publication, of
> which no date is given, but which seems to be related to his book
> *Gaya and Buddha-Gaya*, 1934. *Bodhi* = “awakening”; the Bodhi tree is
> the one under which Siddhartha Gautama achieved Bodhi and became the
> *Buddha*, “the Awakened One”.
>
> ^([11](#11a))B. Barua in D.K. Barua: *Buddha Gaya*, p. 268-269. 
> *Mahant*= managing temple priest.
>
> ^([12](#12a))Bhikkhu Jnana Jagat: “Contribution of Buddhism to Indian
> Culture”, *5th European Hindu Conference* (conference souvenir
> volume), p. 57.
>
> ^([13](#13a))A.Q. Ansari: *Archaeological Remains*, p.119.
>
> ^([14](#14a))S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd edition), p.413.
>
> ^([15](#15a))A.Q. Ansari: *Archaeological Remains*, p.26.
>
> ^([16](#16a))A.Q. Ansari: *Archaeological Remains*, p.26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
