+++
title = "07 6. The details about Hindu iconoclasm"

+++
**6. The details about “Hindu iconoclasm”**

A remarkable aspect of the Ayodhya debate is the complete lack of active
involvement by Western scholars.  Their role has been limited to that of
loudspeakers for the secularist-cum-Islamist party-line denying that any
temple demolition had preceded the construction of the Babri Masjid. 
Even those who (like Hans Bakker and Peter Van der Veer) had earlier
given their innocent support to the historical account, putting the
Ayodhya case in the context of systematic Islamic iconoclasm, hurried to
fall in line once the secularist campaign of history-rewriting started.

Given the widely acknowledged importance of the Ayodhya conflict, one
would have expected at least some of the well-funded Western academics
to embark on their own investigation of the issue rather than parroting
the slogans emanating from Delhi’s Jama Masjid and JNU.  Their behaviour
in the Ayodhya debate provides an interesting case study in the tendency
of establishment institutions and settled academics to genuflect before
ideological authorities overruling proper scholarly procedure in favour
of the political fashion of the day.  This is, I fear, equally true of
the one Western academic who has substantively contributed to the
debate, and whose contribution we will presently discuss.

**6.1. Massive evidence of temple destruction**

One Western author who has become very popular among India’s
history-rewriters is the American scholar Prof. Richard M. Eaton. 
Unlike his colleagues, he has done some original research pertinent to
the issue of Islamic iconoclasm, though not of the Ayodhya case
specifically.  A selective reading of his work. focusing on his
explanations but keeping most of his facts out of view, is made to serve
the negationist position regarding temple destruction in the name of
Islam.

Yet, the numerically most important body of data presented by him
concurs neatly with the classic (now dubbed “Hindutva”) account.  In his
oft-quoted paper “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”, he gives a
list of “eighty” cases of Islamic temple destruction.  “Only eighty”, is
how the secularist history-rewriters render it, but Eaton makes no claim
that his list is exhaustive.  Moreover, eighty isn’t always eighty.

Thus, in his list, we find mentioned as one instance: “1994: Benares,
Ghurid army”.^([1](#1)) Did the Ghurid army work one instance of temple
destruction?  Eaton provides his source, and there we read that in
Benares, the Ghurid royal army “destroyed *nearly one thousand* temples,
and raised mosques on their foundations”.^([2](#2)) This way,
practically every one of the instances cited by Eaton must be read as
actually ten, or a hundred, or as in this case even a thousand temples
destroyed.  Even Eaton’s non-exhaustive list, presented as part of “the
kind of responsible and constructive discussion that this controversial
topic so badly needs”^([3](#3)), yields the same *thousands* of temple
destructions ascribed to the Islamic rulers in most relevant pre-1989
histories of Islam and in pro-Hindu publications.

That part is of course not highlighted in secularist papers exploiting
Eaton’s work.  Far more popular, however, is the spin which Eaton puts
on his data: Islam cannot be blamed for the acts of Muslim
idol-breakers, the blame lies elsewhere...

Apparently in good faith, but nonetheless in exactly the same manner as
the worst Indian history falsifiers, Eaton discusses the record of Islam
in India while keeping the entire history of Islam outside of India out
of view.  This history would show unambiguously that what happened in
India was merely a continuation of Prophet Mohammed’s own conduct in
Arabia and his successors’ conduct during the conquest of West and
Central Asia.

That the Arabian precedent is ignored is all the more remarkable when
you consider that the stated immediate reason for Eaton’s paper was Sita
Ram Goel’s endeavour to “document a pattern of wholesale temple
destruction by Muslims in the pre-British\] period”^([4](#4)) Goel’s
elaborately argued thesis, tellingly left unmentioned here by Eaton, is
precisely that Islamic iconoclasm in India follows a pattern set in the
preceding centuries in West Asia and accepted as normative in Islamic
doctrine.  Eaton’s glaring omission of this all-important precedent
makes his alternative explanation of Islamic iconoclasm in India suspect
beforehand.

**6.2. Hindu iconoclasm?**

Instead of seeking the motives of the Islamic idol-breakers in Islam,
Eaton seeks it elsewhere: in Hinduism.  He admits that during the Hindu
reconquest of Muslim-occupied territories: “Examples of mosque
desecrations are strikingly few in number.”^([5](#5)) Yet, in his
opinion, Hindus had been practising their own very specific form of
iconoclasm in earlier centuries.  Though they themselves seem to have
lost the habit by Shivaji’s time, it was this Hindu tradition which the
Muslim invaders copied: “The form of desecration that showed the
greatest continuity with pre-Turkish practice was the seizure of the
image of a defeated king’s state-deity and its abduction to the victor’s
capital as a trophy of war.”^([6](#6))

One of the examples cited is this: “When Firuz Tughluq invaded Orissa in
1359 and learned that the region’s most important temple was that of
Jagannath located inside the raja’s fortress in Puri, he carried off the
stone image of the god and installed it in Delhi ‘in an ignominious
position’.”^([7](#7)) And likewise, there are numerous instances of
idols built into footpaths, lavatories and other profane positions. 
This is not disputed, but can any Hindu precedent be cited for it?

The work for which Indian secularists are most grateful to Eaton, is his
digging up of a few cases of what superficially seems to be Hindu
iconoclasm: “For, while it is true that contemporary Persian sources
routinely condemn idolatry (*but-parastî*) on religious grounds, it is
also true that attacks on images patronized by enemy kings had been,
from about the sixth century A.D. on, thoroughly integrated into Indian
political behavior.”^([8](#8)) Because a state deity’s idol was deemed
to resonate with the state’s fortunes (so that its accidental breaking
apart was deemed an evil omen for the state itself), the generalization
of idol worship in temples in the first millennium A.D. oddly implied
that “early medieval history abounds in instances of temple desecration
that occurred amidst inter-dynastic conflicts”.^([9](#9))

If the “eighty” (meaning thousands of) cases of Islamic iconoclasm are
only a trifle, the “abounding” instances of Hindu iconoclasm,
“thoroughly integrated” in Hindu political culture, can reasonably be
expected to number tens of thousands.  Yet, Eaton’s list, given without
reference to primary sources, contains, even in a maximalist reading
(i.e. counting “two” when one king takes away two idols from one enemy’s
royal temple), only 18 individual cases.^([10](#10)) This even includes
the case of “probably Buddhist” idols installed in a Shiva temple by
Govinda III, the Rashtrakuta conqueror of Kanchipuram, not after seizing
them but after accepting them as a pre-emptive tribute offered by the
fearful king of Sri Lanka.

In this list, cases of actual destruction amount to exactly two:
“Bengali troops sought revenge on king Lalitaditya by destroying what
they thought was the image of Vishnu Vaikuntha, the state deity of
Lalitaditya’s kingdom in Kashmir”^([11](#11)), and: “In the early tenth
century, the Rashtrakuta monarch Indra III not only destroyed the temple
of Kalapriya (at Kalpa near the Jamuna river), patronized by the
Rashtrakutas’ deadly enemies the Pratiharas, but they took special
delight in recording the fact.”^([12](#12))

The latter is the *only* instance of temple destruction in the list,
eventhough rhetorical sleight-of-hand introduces it as representative of
a larger phenomenon: “While the dominant pattern here was one of looting
royal temples and carrying off images of state deities, we also hear of
Hindu kings engaging in the destruction of royal temples of their
adversaries.”^([13](#13))

So, what is the “dominant pattern” in the sixteen remaining cases?  As
we saw in the case of the Lankan idols in Kanchipuram, the looted (or
otherwise acquired) idols were respectfully installed in a temple in the
conqueror’s seat of power, e.g. a solid gold image of Vishnu Vaikuntha,
seized earlier by the Pratihara king Herambapala, “was seized from the
Pratiharas by the Candella king Yasovarman and installed in the
Lakshmana temple of Khajuraho.”^([14](#14)) So, the worship of the image
continued, albeit in a new location; and the worship in the old location
was equally allowed to continue, albeit with a new idol as the old and
prestigious one had been taken away.  In both places, the existing
system of worship was left intact.

This is in radical contrast with Islamic iconoclasm, which was meant to
disrupt Hindu worship and symbolize or announce its definitive and
complete annihilation.  There is no case of an Islamic conqueror seizing
a Hindu idol and taking it to his capital for purposes of continuing its
worship there.  Hindu conquerors did not want to destroy or even
humiliate or disrupt the religion of the defeated state.  On the
contrary, in most cases, the winning and the defeated party shared the
same religion and were in no mood to dishonour it in any way.  The
situation with Islamic conquerors is quite the opposite.

That is why Eaton fails to come up with the key evidence for his thesis
of a native Hindu origin of Muslim iconoclasm.  He can show us not a
single document testifying that a Muslim conqueror committed acts of
iconoclasm in imitation of an existing local Hindu tradition.  On the
contrary, when Islamic iconoclasts cared to justify their acts in
writing, it was invariably with reference to the Islamic doctrine and
the Prophet’s precedents of idol-breaking and of the war of
extermination against idolatry.

No advanced education and specialistic knowledge is required to see the
radical difference between the handful of cases of alleged Hindu
iconoclasm and the thousands of certified Islamic cases of proudly
self-described iconoclasm. It is like the difference between an avid
reader stealing a book from the library and a barbarian burning the
library down.  In one case, an idol is taken away from a temple, with
respectful greetings to the officiating priest, in order to re-install
it in another temple and restart its worship. in the other case, an idol
is taken away from the ruins of a temple, with a final kick against the
priest’s severed head, in order to install it in a lavatory for
continuous profanation and mockery.  Of the last two sentences, a
secularist only retains the part that “an idol is taken away from a
temple”, and decides that it’s all the same.

For Prof. Eaton’s information, it may be recalled that an extreme and
willful superficiality regarding all matters religious is a key premise
of Nehruvian secularism.  While such an anti-scholarly attitude may be
understandable in the case of political activists parachuted into
academic positions in Delhi, there is no decent reason why an American
scholar working in the relative quiet of Tucson, Arizona, should play
their game.

**6.3. Temples and mosques as political centres**

Prof. Eaton develops at some length the secularist theory that temple
destruction came about, not as the result of an “essentialized ‘theology
of iconoclasm’ felt to be intrinsic to the Islamic
religion”^([15](#15)), but as an added symbolic dimension of the
suppression of rebellions.  In some cases this has an initial semblance
of credibility, e.g.: “Before marching to confront Shivaji himself,
however, the Bijapur general \[Afzal Khan\] first proceeded to Tuljapur
and desecrated a temple dedicated to the goddess Bhavani, to which
Shivaji and his family had been personally devoted.”^([16](#16))

Yet, the theory breaks down when the fate of mosques associated with
rebellion are considered.  Eaton himself mentions cases which ought to
have alerted him to the undeniably religious discrimination in the
decision of which places of worship to desecrate, e.g. Aurangzeb
destroyed “temples in jodhpur patronized by a former supporter of Dara
Shikoh, the emperor’s brother and arch-rival”.^([17](#17)) But Dara
Shikoh surely also had Muslim supporters who did their devotions and
perhaps even their intrigue-plotting in mosques?  Indeed, as a votary of
Hindu-Muslim syncretism, he certainly also frequented mosques himself. 
So why did Aurangzeb not bother to demolish those mosques, if his motive
was merely to punish rebels?

Eaton describes how a Sufi dissident, Shaikh Muhammadi, was persecuted
by Aurangzeb for teaching deviant religious doctrines, and sought refuge
in a mosque.  Aurangzeb managed to arrest him, but did not demolish the
mosque.  This incident plainly contradicts the secularist claim that if
any temple destructions took place at all, the reason was nonreligious,
viz. the suppression of rebellion located in the temples affected.  As
per Eaton’s own data, we find that intrigues and rebellions involving
mosques never led to the destruction of the mosque.

He even admits in so many words: “No evidence, however, suggests that
ruling authorities attacked public monuments like mosques or Sufi
shrines that had been patronized by disloyal or rebellious
officers.  Nor were such monuments desecrated when one Indo-Muslim
kingdom conquered another and annexed its territories.”^([18](#18))

Eaton tries to get around this as follows: “This incident suggests that
mosques in Mughal India, though religiously potent, were considered
detached from both sovereign terrain and dynastic authority, and hence
politically inactive.  As such, their desecration could have had no
relevance to the business of disestablishing a regime that had
patronized them.”^([19](#19))

One wonders on what planet Eaton has been living lately.  In the present
age, we frequently hear of mosques as centres of Islamic political
activism, not just in Delhi or Lahore or Cairo but even in New York. 
Sectarian warfare, as between Shias and Sunnis, always emanated from
mosques almost by definition, and inter-Muslim clan or dynastic
rivalries likewise crystallized around centres of preaching.  The Friday
prayers always include a prayer for the Islamic ruler, and Islamic
doctrine never separates political from religious concerns. If Muslim
rulers chose to respect the mosques, it was definitely not because these
were unconnected to politics.

Eaton continues: “Not surprisingly, then, when Hindu rulers established
their authority over territories of defeated Muslim rulers, they did not
as a rule desecrate mosques or shrines, as, for example, when Shivaji
established a Maratha kingdom on the ashes of Bijapur’s former dominions
in Maharashtra, or when Vijayanagara annexed the former territories of
the Bahmanis or their successors.”^([20](#20))

Once people have interiorized a certain framework of interpretation,
they become capable of disregarding obvious facts which don’t fit their
schemes.  In this case, when explaining Hindu non-iconoclasm, Eaton
insists on the contrived and demonstrably false theory of the political
irrelevance of mosques, even though a far simpler and well documented
explanation is staring him in the face: unlike Muslims, Hindus
disapproved of iconoclasm and preferred a universal respect for people’s
religious sensibilities.

**6.4. Raja Bhoja’s temple**

Contrary to the impression created in the secularist media, Prof. Eaton
has not even begun to refute Sita Ram Goel’s thesis.  He manages to
leave all the arguments for Goel’s main thesis of an Islamic theology of
iconoclasm undiscussed.  Of Goel’s basic data in the fabled list of
mosques standing on the ruins of temples, only a single one is
mentioned: “an inscription dated 1455, found over the doorway of a
tomb-shrine in Dhar, Madhya Pradesh” which mentions “the destruction of
a Hindu temple by one Abdullah Shah Changal during the reign of Raja
Bhoja, a renowned Paramara king who had ruled over the region from 1010
to 1053”.^([21](#21))

In the main text, Eaton seems to be saying that Goel is an uncritical
amateur who “accepts the inscription’s reference to temple destruction
more or less at face value, as though it were a contemporary newspaper
account reporting an objective fact”.  But in footnote, he has to admit
that Goel is entirely aware of the chronological problems surrounding
old inscriptions: “Goel does, however, consider it more likely that the
event took place during the reign of Raja Bhoja II in the late
thirteenth century rather than during that of Raja Bhoja I in the
eleventh century.”^([22](#22))

Either way, the inscription is considerably younger than the events
recorded in it.  In history, it is of course very common that strictly
contemporary records of an event are missing, yet the event is known
through secondary younger records.  These have to be treated with
caution (just like the strictly contemporary sources, written from a
more lively knowledge of the event, but also often in a more distortive
partisan involvement in it), yet they cannot be ignored.  Eaton makes
the most of this time distance, arguing that the inscription is “hardly
contemporary” and “presents a richly textured legend elaborated over
many generations of oral transmission until 1455”.  Therefore, “we
cannot know with certainty” whether the described temple destruction
ever took place.^([23](#23))

So, at the time of my writing it has been twelve years since Goel
published his list, and exactly one scholar has come forward to
challenge exactly one item in the list; who, instead of proving it
wrong, settles for the ever-safe suggestion that it could do with some
extra research.  *Given the eagerness of a large and well-funded crowd
of academics and intellectuals to prove Goel wrong, I would say that
that meagre result amounts to a mighty vindication*.  And the fact
remains that the one inscription that we do have on the early history of
the Islamic shrine under discussion, does posit a temple destruction. 
So far, the balance of evidence is on the side of the temple destruction
scenario, and if the evidence for it is merely non-contemporary, the
evidence for the nondemolition scenario is simply non-existent.

For argument’s sake, we may imagine that Eaton is right, and that the
inscription merely invented the temple destruction.  That would only
mean Eaton is right on this point of detail, but also that the very same
inscription proves his main thesis wrong.  For, suppose no temple was
destroyed, yet the Islamic inscription claims the opposite.  In Eaton’s
own words: “Central to the story are themes of conversion, martyrdom,
redemption, and the patronage of sacred sites by indo-Muslim royalty, as
well as, of course, the destruction of a temple.”^([24](#24)) Temple
destruction is thus deemed central to Indo-Muslim identity, even to the
point where local histories free of real temple destruction would be
supplied with imaginary temple destructions, - so as to fit the pattern
deemed genuinely Islamic.  This would illustrate how the Muslims
themselves believed in (and were consequently susceptible to further
motivation by) “an essentialized ‘theology of iconoclasm’ felt to be
intrinsic to the Islamic religion” - what Eaton dismisses elsewhere as a
“wrong” explanations.^([25](#25))

For the rest, all that Eaton has to show against Goel’s thesis is that
it is based on “selective translations of premodem Persian chronicles,
together with a selective use of epigraphic data”^([26](#26)) However,
the larger a body of evidence, the harder it becomes to credibly dismiss
it as “selective”.  Goel’s hundreds of convergent testimonies cannot be
expelled from the discussion so lightly.  But improvement is always
possible, and we are ready to learn from scholars with higher standards,
drawing their conclusions from a wider and less “selective” body of
evidence.  Unfortunately, Prof.Eaton has failed to cite us any paper or
book on Indo-Muslim iconoclasm which is less “selective”. His own
studied silence on each one of the testimonies cited by Goel amounts to
a selective favouritism towards the data seemingly supporting the
secularist theory.

It is of course true that there *are* cases (and Eaton delights the
secularists by citing some new ones) where Muslim rulers allowed Hindu
temples to function, to be repaired, even to be built anew.  This was
never disputed by Goel, for these cases of tolerance firstly do not
nullify the cases of iconoclasm, and secondly they do not nullify the
link between iconoclasm and Islamic theology.  Muslim rulers were human
beings, and all manner of circumstances determined to what extent they
implemented Islamic injunctions.  Many were rulers first and Muslims
second.  Often they had to find a *modus vivendi* with the Hindu
majority in order to keep fellow Muslim sectarian or dynastic rivals off
their own backs, and in order to avoid Hindu rebellion.  But that is no
merit of Islam itself, merely a testimony to the strength which Hindu
society retained even at its lowest ebb.  To the extent that Muslim
rulers took their Islam seriously, a world free of Paganism and
idol-temples remained their stated Quranic ideal, but political and
military power equations often kept them from actively pursuing it.

Richard Eaton’s paper is the best attempt by far to defend the
secularist alternative to the properly historical explanation of Islamic
iconoclasm as being based on Islamic doctrine.  Yet he fails to offer
any data which are incompatible with the latter explanation.  There is
no reason to doubt his good faith, but like many people with strong
convictions, he somehow slips into a selective use of data, contrived
interpretations and special pleading, all converging on a single aim:
exculpating Islam itself from its own record of iconoclasm.

According to the cover text on his book, Eaton is professor of History
at the University of Arizona and “a leading historian of Islam”.  Had he
defended the thesis that iconoclasm is rooted in Islam itself, he would
have done justice to the evidence from Islamic sources, yet he would
have found it very hard to get published by Oxford University Press or
reach the status of leading Islam scholar that he now enjoys.  One can
easily become an acclaimed scholar of Hinduism by lambasting and
vilifying that religion, but Islam is somehow more demanding of
respect.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, OUP, Delhi 2000, p. 128.
>
> ^([2](#2a))Hasan Nizami: *Taju’l Maasir*, in H.M. Elliott and J.
> Dowson: *The History of India as Told by Its Own Historians*, vol.2,
> p.223; emphasis added.  Note that unlike Sita Ram Goel, Richard Eaton
> is not chided by the likes of Sanjay Subramaniam for using Elliott and
> Dowson’s “colonialist” translation.
>
> ^([3](#3a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.128.
>
> ^([4](#4a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.94. This misrepresents the
> thrust of Goel’s book as being merely a morbid piling up of gruesome
> Muslim crimes rather than an insightful tracing of this behaviour
> pattern to its ideological roots.  Goel’s long and unchallenged list
> of temple destruction data is explicitly offered as “a preliminary
> survey” in the smaller first volume before developing the book’s main
> thesis in the bigger second volume, viz. the explicit justification of
> iconoclasm by Islamic theology and the normative precedent set Prophet
> Mohammed.
>
> ^([5](#5a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 123 n.
>
> ^([6](#6a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 112.
>
> ^([7](#7a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 113.
>
> ^([8](#8a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”.
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 105.
>
> ^([9](#9a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim states”,
> *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 106.
>
> ^([10](#10a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 106-107.  Most cases
> are cited from Richard H. Davis: *Lives of Indian Images*, Princeton
> University Press, 1997.  
>
> ^([11](#11a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 106.
>
> ^([12](#12a))Sic, Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 107.
>
> ^([13](#13a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 107.
>
> ^([14](#14a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 106.
>
> ^([15](#15a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> stares”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 105.
>
> ^([16](#16a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 1 18.
>
> ^([17](#17a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.120.
>
> ^([18](#18a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 122.
>
> ^([19](#19a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p. 123.
>
> ^([20](#20a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.123. He adds that the
> Vijayanagara kings built mosques themselves, “evidently to accommodate
> the sizable number of Muslims employed in their armed forces”, - a
> reliance on Muslim mercenaries which would become Vijayanagara’s
> undoing, as they proved disloyal during the crucial battle of Talikota
> in 1565.
>
> ^([21](#21a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.96.
>
> ^([22](#22a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.96.
>
> ^([23](#23a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.97-98.
>
> ^([24](#24a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.98.
>
> ^([25](#25a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.105.
>
> ^([26](#26a))Richard Eaton: “Temple desecration and Indo-Muslim
> states”, *Essays on Islam and Indian History*, p.96.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
