+++
title = "06 "

+++
****

6\. THE (UNFRIENDLY) NEIGHBOURS IN ASIA

India is surrounded mostly by unfriendly neighbors. We see either
Islamic countries promoting a rabid anti-Hindu policy, such as
Afghanistan or Pakistan; or small inconsequent nations such as Nepal,
which owe so much to India, yet often harbor India’s enemies, as shown
by the Indian Airlines hijack of December 1999. Further East, we find
Japan, which has a sad hegemonic history, but was one of the most
vociferous nations against India after Pokhran II

.

****

Pakistan

who was responsible for the Partition of India? Yes, the British used to
the hilt the existing divide between Hindus and Muslims. Yes, the
Congress was weak; it accepted what was forced down its throat by Jinnah
and Mountbatten, even though many of its leaders, including Nehru, and a
few moderate Muslims, disagreed with the principle of partition. It was
also Gandhi's policy of non-violence and gratifying the fanatical Muslim
minority, in the hope that it would see the light, which did tremendous
harm to India and encouraged Jinnah to harden his demands.

But ultimately, one has to go back to the roots, to the beginning of it
all, in order to understand Partition. One has to travel back in history
to get a clear overall picture. This is why memory is essential, this is
why Holocausts should never be forgotten.

For the Jinnah’s, the Zia ul-Hacq’s and today the Mushraraf’s are only
the vehicles, the instruments, the avatars, the latest reincarnations of
the medieval Muslims coming down to rape and loot and plunder the land
of Bharat. They are the true sons of Mahmud Ghaznavi, of Muhammed Ghasi,
of Aurangzeb. They took up again the work left unfinished by the last
Mughal two centuries earlier: 'Dar-ul-Islam', the House of Islam. The
Hindu-Muslim question is an old one - but is it really a Muslim-Hindu
question, or just plainly a Muslim obsession, their hatred of the Hindu
pagans, their contempt for this polytheist religion? This obsession,
this hate, is as old as the first invasion of India by the original
Arabs in 650. After independence, nothing has changed: the sword of
Allah is still as much ready to strike the Kafirs, the idolaters of many
Gods. The Muslims invaded this country, conquered it, looted it, razed
its temples, humiliated its Hindu leaders, killed its Brahmins,
converted its weaker sections. True, it was all done in the name of
Allah and many of its chiefs were sincere in thinking they were doing
their duty by hunting down the Infidel. So how could they accept on 15th
August 1947 to share power on an equal basis with those who were their
slaves for thirteen centuries? "*Either the sole power for ourselves,
and our rule over the Hindus as it is our sovereign right, we the
adorers of the one and only true God - Or we quit India and found our
own nation, a Muslim nation, of the true faith, where we will live
amongst ourselves*".

Thus there is no place for idolaters in this country, this great nation
of Pakistan; they can at best be "tolerated" as second-class citizens.
Hence the near total exodus of Hindus from Pakistan, whereas more than
half the Muslim population in India, chose to stay, knowing full well
that they would get the freedom to be and to practice their own
religion. In passing, the Muslims took revenge on the Hindus -once more-
and indulged in terrible massacres, which were followed by retaliations
from Sikhs and hard core Hindus, the ultimate horror.

Partition triggered one of the most terrible exodus in the history of
humanity. And this exodus has not ended: they still come by the lakhs
every year from Bangladesh (it is estimated that there are today *twelve
million* illegal Bangladeshis in India), fleeing poverty, flooding India
with problems, when the country has already so many of her own. Some
even say that they bring with them more fundamentalism, a Third Column,
which one day could organise itself in a political, social and militant
body.

For Danielou, the division of India was on the human level as well as on
the political one, a great mistake. "It added, he says, to the Middle
East an unstable state (Pakistan) and burdened India which already had
serious problems". And he adds: "India whose ancient borders stretched
until Afghanistan, lost with the country of seven rivers (the Indus
Valley), the historical centre of her civilisation. At a time when the
Muslim invaders seemed to have lost some of their extremism and were
ready to assimilate themselves to other populations of India, the
European conquerors, before returning home, surrendered once more to
Muslim fanaticism the cradle of Hindu civilisation ." (Histoire de
l'Inde, p.355)

For Sri Aurobindo also, the division of India was a monstrosity: " India
is free, but she has not achieved unity, only a fissured and broken
freedom...The whole communal division into Hindu and Muslim seems to
have hardened into the figure of a permanent political division of the
country. It is to be hoped that the Congress and the Nation will not
accept the settled fact as for ever settled, or as anything more than a
temporary expedient. For if it lasts, India may be seriously weakened,
even crippled; civil strife may remain always possible, possible even a
new invasion and foreign conquest. **The partition of the country must
go...For without it the destiny** of India might be seriously impaired
and frustrated. That must not be." (Message of Sri Aurobindo on the 15th
of August 1947).

Sri Aurobindo had long seen through the British and Jinnah's games and
had warned the nation as early as the beginning of the century. His
answer to a disciple on October 7, 1940 is very illustrative of the
point:" Q. But now that our national consciousness is more developed,
there is more chance of unity if the British don't bolster up Jinnah and
his Muslim claims.

A. Does Jinnah want unity?...What he wants is independence for Muslims
and if possible rule over India. THAT IS THE OLD SPIRIT... But why is it
expected that Muslims will be so accommodating?"

Nevertheless, Sri Aurobindo thought that although the old spirit of the
real warriors of Islam, the Muslim invaders, was still present, the
majority of Indian Muslims were unconcerned: "The idea of two
nationalities in India is only a new-fanged notion invented by Jinnah
for his purposes and contrary to the facts. More than 90% of the Indian
Muslims are descendants of converted Hindus and belong as much to the
Indian nation as the Hindu themselves. Jinnah is himself a descendant of
a Hindu named Jinahbahai... (India's Rebirth, p. 237)

Sri Aurobindo also sought to dispel the widespread notion that the
Muslims brought so much to India: "The Islamic culture hardly gave
anything to the world which may be said of fundamental importance and
typically its own Islamic culture was mainly borrowed from the others.
Their mathematics and astronomy and other subjects were derived from
India and Greece. It is true they gave some of these things a new turn,
but they have not created much. Their philosophy and their religion are
very simple and what they call Sufism is largely the result of Gnostics
who lived in Persia and it is the logical outcome of that school of
thought largely touched by the Vedanta... Islamic culture contributed
the Indo-Saracenic architecture to Indian culture. I do not think it has
done anything more in India of cultural value. It gave some new forms to
art and poetry. Its political institutions were always semi-barbaric.
(p.189 India's Reb).

How could Partition have been avoided? Sri Aurobindo had advocated
firmness: "As for the Hindu-Muslim affair, I saw no reason why the
greatness of India's past or her spirituality should be thrown into the
waste paper basket in order to conciliate the Moslems who would not be
conciliated at all by such a policy. What has created the Hindu-Moslem
split was not Swadeshi, but the acceptance of a communal principle by
the Congress". (India's Rebirth, p. 189). History was going to show the
accuracy of Sri Aurobindo's predictions: the Congress' obstinate
pandering to Jinnah and his terms, proved to be disastrous and the
partition of India was a blow from which the nation has not yet
recovered. Ah, Pakistan, finally, everything reverts to Pakistan,
whether you talk about Kashmir, Ayodhya, or Kargil**.** Everywhere the
Indian Government says it sees the "Pakistani hand" behind it. It is an
hostile hand, they add, active, militant, whose ultimate goal is the
destruction of India. Is actually, Pakistan the continuing incarnation
of those Muslim invaders who raped India from the middle of the 7th
century onwards? Militant Hindus contend that nothing has changed:
"their cry is still the same: "Dar-ul-Islam", the house of Islam.
Yesterday they used scimitars, today they have the atomic bomb; but the
purpose is identical, only the weapons have evolved: to conquer India,
to finish what the Mughal Emperors were not able to achieve". To reason
with Pakistan is useless, they conclude, "for once again they are only
putting in practice what their religion teaches them every day -that
'the Pagans shall burn forever in the fire of hell. They are the meanest
of creatures'. Or 'Slay the infidels, wherever ye find them and take
them captive and besiege them and prepare them for all kinds of ambush'.
Or again: 'Choose not thy friends among the Infidels till they forsake
their homes and the way of idolatry. If they return to paganism then
take them whenever you find them and kill them'. All these quotations
are taken from the Koran and are read everyday to the faithful by their
mollahs.(Koran 98:51-9:5-4:89)

Is Pakistan's war against India then a Muslim "jihad", the ultimate
jihad against the Infidel, which if necessary will utilise the ultimate
weapon, nuclear bombs? And as in the case of Ayodhya, the whole of Islam
might side with Pakistan, for to their eyes India is still the Infidel,
the Idolater, which the Koran asks them to slay. Says Belgium scholar
Konraad Elst: "if tomorrow the Pakistani start the Prophet's first
nuclear war against an Infidel country (India), a billion Muslims will
feel compelled to side with this muhajid struggle and dissenters will be
careful not to protest aloud."

But then you also have to understand the Pakistani point of view: take
Kashmir for instance. If one goes by the logic of Partition, then at
least the Kashmir valley, which is in great majority Muslim, (and it
should be emphasised that for long some of the Hindus Pandits in Kashmir
exploited and dominated the Muslims -who are getting back at them
today), should have reverted to Pakistan. It should be clear also that
Pakistan never forgot the humiliating loss of Bangladesh at the hands of
India, although India only helped Bangladesh to gain its freedom in the
face of what the Bangladeshis say was Pakistani genocide. General
Zia-ul-Hacq's emergence was a result of that humiliation and the whole
policy of proxy war by supporting the separatist movements in Punjab and
Kashmir, was a way of getting back at India. And the same can be said
about the nuclear bomb, for Pakistan has realised, after having lost
three wars (four if you count Kargil), that both numerically and
strategically, it can never beat India in a conventional conflict.

It is also clear when one goes to Pakistan today, that the country has
evolved a soul of its own, has its individual identity and that in fact
it has been able to do better than India in many fields. Their
politicians are more accessible than in India for instance; their
bureaucrats more friendly; and PIA is definitely a better airline than
Indian Airlines ! Finally, can Pakistanis be accused of all ills that
befall India ? The Indian Press has become possessed of total paranoia
when it comes to Pakistan and Kashmir, always pointing a finger at its
neighbour. But many of India’s problems are of her own making

Thus, Indians can cry themselves hoarse about Pakistani treachery and
see the evil hand of Islamabad everywhere, even sometimes behind events
where Pak is not involved. But then the Indian Government should only
blame themselves. For have they not recognised at independence the
geographical and political reality *of Partition and have they not
continued to do so up to now?* Is there any political leader in India
who dares say today that India and Pakistan are ONE? Is there any voice
to proclaim the truth in a loud and clear voice, as Sri Aurobindo did in
1947: "But the old communal division into Hindu and Muslim seems to have
hardened into the figure of a permanent division of the country. It is
hoped that the Congress and the nation will not accept the settled fact
as for ever settled, or as anything more than a temporary expedient. For
if it lasts, India may be seriously weakened, even crippled: civil
strife may remain always possible; possible even a new invasion and
foreign conquest. THE PARTITION OF THE COUNTRY MUST GO"... India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh are ONE. And as long as Partition remains, India
will not be able to live in peace: Ayodhya, Kashmir, Kargil, Bangladeshi
infiltration and a potential (nuclear?) war with Pakistan, are always
possible.

****

THE "FRIENDLY" TALIBANS

Poor India ! What a way to start the millennium… For ten centuries, this
sacred land has been raped and plundered by Muslim invaders who came
from Afghanistan and beyond. For ten centuries, Indians have been
converted by force to Islam, their women raped, their children taken
away as slaves, their men slaughtered… And India always took it meekly,
as a lamb goes to the slaughter house - except for a lone Shivaji or
two.

And when the Muslims invaders were spent, then came the European
colonisers - and they too took India for a penny, which surrendered
itself like a humble servant to its arrogant master, bar for the fight
of a few braves Sikhs. And when the Europeans were gone, Nehru and
Gandhism made sure that India remained the goody-goody little boy that
it always was, by clipping the wings of its army, so that when the
Chinese treacherously swooped down from Tibet, it was a cakewalk, a
humiliation which still rankles forty years later.

Is it different today ? No ! Small neighbours of hardly any consequence,
such as Nepal or Bangladesh, lend their territories to enemies of India,
without New Delhi doing anything, in the spirit of the old Nehruvian
"Good Neighbourhood" policy. For three decades, Pakistan, like a Ghazni
of modern times, has been able to send its agents murder and loot into
Indian territory without the Government reacting, except to mouth a few
empty threats. Hindus are still slaughtered in Kashmir, Pakistan or
Bangladesh (see Taslima Nasreen’s book), the perpetrators knowing fully
well that no retaliation will come from New Delhi.

Yet, six months ago, during the battle of Kargil, the soldiers and
officers of the Indian army proved that when they were given a free hand
by the bureaucrats and politicians, they are amongst the best soldiers
in the world, fighting in impossible conditions against an enemy better
equipped and overlooking them. And for the first time in five hundred
years, since the last great Hindu empire of Vijaynagar was razed by the
Moghols, the Kshatriya Spirit was revived in India – and once more, what
the Bhagavad Gita had preached became alive : that violence is sometimes
necessary to protect one’s children women and borders; that Knowledge
has to be preserved by Might in the true spirit of ahimsa…

But look at what happened when these modern Barbarians took over flight
IC 814 : it is not the India of Arjuna, Shivaji, or the Rani of Jhansi
who rose-up, but the meek India – the India of Macaulay’s children, of
Nehru and LK Gujral, the India who always goes to be slaughtered head
down, the India who for fifteen centuries has been conquered and
plundered with such an ease. Instead of giving a free rein to the army,
the only body which has shown that it has the courage and leadership to
stand-up to terrorism, it was left to the bureaucrats to bungle the
Amritsar episode, the only chance India had to overpower five men armed
with a lone pistol (before the Taliban furnished them with more weapons)
and a few knives (and the NSG was caught napping after all these years
of useless and arrogant VIP duties). And it was still in true Nehruvian
spirit ( "we are all gentlemen") left to the bureaucrats, these arrogant
men who think that wearing a tie and speaking polished English make them
superior, to negotiate with the terrorists, after having opened the
"friendly Taliban" avenue.

Friendly Talibans ? Even the hapless Indian reading his newspaper with
his morning tea ( and feeling humiliated – once more), knows that since
time immemorial, Afghanistan has been Bharat’s worst enemy. He knows
that today, Taliban mujahidins are the ones who are inflicting heavy
casualties on Indian soldiers by their bold and suicidal attacks on army
headquarters in Srinagar. He instinctively knows that since Mohamed
Ghazni nothing has changed : Hindus are still for the Afghans (and
unfortunately for the Pakistanis too, who are converted Hindus) the
Infidels against whom a merciless Jihad has to be fought until all are
conquered or slaughtered. True, the odds against a military intervention
were enormous : India’s jet fighters would have had to bypass Pakistan
and fly over the Himalayan ranges or Iran; and a commando’s action would
have put the lives of the passengers in great jeopardy. But such odds
did not deter the Israelis 24 years ago from rescuing their nationals
taken hostage by other Muslim terrorists in a country which was also
hostile to Israel (the Uganda of infamous Idi Amin), nor the French two
years ago to storm the Air France plane and killing the all the heavily
armed Islamic hijackers.

And the saddest thing is that the name "India" evokes no respect today
in the world. Small countries, such as Indonesia or Saudi Arabia, can
harbour deadly terrorists wanted by India; or bigger nations like Japan,
a great war criminal hardly sixty years ago, give India moral lessons,
because they all know that India takes things lying down. But look again
at the Israelis: like the Indians, they were slaughtered for centuries
and during the Second World War, six million of them went to Hitler’s
gas chambers without even a whimper. But after the war, when the new
State of Israel was founded, its leaders decided that enough was enough
: henceforth it will be "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth".
Every time Arab terrorists struck their land, Israelis would retaliate
ruthlessly; and every time the sacred land of Israel was threatened, its
army would steal the initiative by invading the enemy’s territory.
Today, Israel, a tiny nation surrounded by often hostile Arab countries,
is feared and respected not only in the Middle East, but all over the
world.

The vacillating attitude of the Indian Government in giving political
asylum to the Karmapa, again sent the wrong signals : is India really
become a "soft" state ? Are Indians actually "cowards", as Gandhi once
said ? Even Nehru granted immediately political asylum to the Dalai Lama
in 1959, recalls Claude Arpi in his remarquable book "The Fate of Tibet
(Har Anand) ! China is a paper Tiger which growls a lot : but when it
threatened Israel in December to break diplomatic relations because the
Dalai Lama was to meet the Speaker of the Knesset, the Speaker told them
to go to hell and he met the Dalai Lama. The NEXT WEEK the Chinese
signed a huge arm contract with Israel…

India is a much bigger and powerful nation than Israel. It is an ancient
civilization, which in spite of fifteen centuries of Muslim conquests
and European colonialism, still carries within herself a Knowledge which
once roamed the shores of ancient Mesopotamia or Egypt, but which has
today disappeared from a world ruled by the dogmas and intolerance of it
two monotheist religions. But who will protect this Knowledge from the
modern Barbarians ? Who will redeem India’s long battered honor ? Who
will stand-up to Islamic terrorism and Chinese bullying ? Where is the
Shivaji of modern India ?

****

SRI LANKA

There seems to be little doubt that once upon a time, not that long ago,
India and Sri Lanka were linked by a small strip of land, which can
still be seen today from the air: Adam's Bridge. And this is how the
first Tamils, those who settled in the North, came to Sri Lanka (are
they the first inhabitants of Sri Lanka and not the Sinhalese? This is
another question!). There is also no doubt -and the Sinhalese recognise
it- that they ( the Sinhalese) are originally Indians, although some say
that they came from Gujurat, others from Bengal. Thus it can be
established beyond doubt that Sri Lanka and India are one ethnically,
although they differ in religion (but the same can be said within
India). And throughout the ages, under one form or the other, Ceylon was
under the influence of India. That is why, when the British conquered it
in the late 18th century, they chose to attach it to their Indian
empire. But when they left in 47, in their desire to see that India
never dominates too heavily the subcontinent, they facilitated the
creation of Pakistan and handed to Sri Lanka its freedom. And India and
Sri Lanka seemed to part way for ever, as Tamils and Sinhalese were left
to war with each other, until Rajiv sent the IKPF in 1988.

One has to go back a long time to understand what decisive factors
shaped the psyche of the island's two communities. And this decisive
factor bears the names of two of the world greatest religions: Buddhism
and Hinduism. The first one, Buddhism, is a gentle, peaceful creed, that
teaches non-violence and brotherhood, even to enemies. Unfortunately,
Ceylon, often called the "isle of beauty", has always been too tempting
a prey for sea-faring invaders. And indeed, successive colonisers, from
Arabs to Africans, from Portuguese to Dutch and finally, British, preyed
on the tiny, defenseless island. In the name of Buddhism and because,
the Sinhalese are by nature a fun-loving, gentle people, not only did
they hardly resist these invasions, but often, many of their women,
mingled freely with the foreign intruders. The result can clearly be
seen today on the faces of many Sinhalese women folk, with their
African-curled hair, or Arabic features. As a result, the Sinhalese
slowly lost their sense of identity, their feeling of being a collective
being, to the point that when the British came, they collaborated
wholehearted with them and had to be handed back their independence on a
platter, for want of a real freedom movement. Today, democracy and
western institutions are just a flimsy cloak that the Sinhalese wear.
Lurking underneath the pleasant, sometimes servile attitude towards
Westerners, is a sense of hopelessness and a terrible violence. And in
reality, since independence, Sinhalese politicians must have been some
of the least farsighted of the entire subcontinent: nothing is made in
Sri Lanka, everything has to be imported and only tea, tourism and
Western grants help the country survive.

On the other hand, Hinduism with its strict caste hierarchy, which in
the old times forbade contact with outsiders, particularly sexual
contact with foreigners, protected Sri Lankan Tamils from mingling with
their invaders. Thus they preserved their identity, their racial purity
and their culture. Sinhalese live an easier life in the South, which was
always more fertile than the arid North. As a result, Tamils have often
been better at studies and more hard- working, (although one should not
generalise). This was quickly noticed by the British, who often gave
Tamils preference for jobs and university grants, thus angering the
Sinhalese, who after all were the majority community.

It is this deep-rooted resentment of the Sinhalese towards the Tamil
community which is in greater part the cause of the present troubles.
When the British left, the Sinhalese quickly moved in to correct what
they saw as an unbalance: they set on depriving the Tamils of most of
the rights they had acquired under the British and proceeded to
establish a Sinhalese-dominated Ceylon. And every time a Sinhalese
politician tried to give the Tamils their just share of power, he
quickly had to backtrack under Sinhalese resentment. For years, the
Tamils bore the brunt of Sinhalese persecution. But one day, too much
became too much and Tamil armed groups started springing up to defend
their people. To cut short a long story, the LTTE finally emerged as the
most ruthless and sole militant organisation. For those who remember the
Tamil Tigers in their early years: young, bright, soft-spoken university
students, there was no doubt that they had started with a genuine
aspiration to secure their just rights. But violence breeds its own
violence and today the Tigers have lost all sense of measure and
restraint, eliminating ruthlessly all what they think stands in the way
of their freedom.

  
Yet, in 1988, Rajiv Gandi stepped in to mediate between the warring
Sinhalese and Tamils. But the LTTE betrayed the hand that had fed it,
because it wants total and unequivocal freedom and it saw India's move
as thwarting it (that is the main reason for their murdering Rajiv
Gandhi. If he had come back to power, as indeed he was sure to, he would
have pressurized the Sinhalese to grant the Tamils a semi-autonomous
region in the North-East). But that is another matter. India's thus got
bogged down in a guerrilla war it did not want to fight, with one hand
tied behind the back to avoid killing civilians; and ultimately it had
to leave because of pressure at home and Mr Premadasa's distrust of
Indians, which is unfortunately shared by many Sri Lankans.

Today, Tamils have actually come one step nearer to freedom. The
partition of Sri Lanka may be considered a "fait accompli". It might
take some time, but ultimately, some Sinhalese leader will have to come
to the conclusion that Sri Lanka's economy cannot be bled any more by
this senseless war. What happens if one day the island's one million
Tamil tea planters, (whose forefathers were "imported" from India by the
British, another parting gift from dear Britannia), who up to now have
kept away from the conflict, join hand with their North-East brothers?
It would be the end of Sri Lanka. And how long can tourism, the island's
other source of revenue, be promoted in the midst of strife? The LTTE
have chosen for the moment to leave the tourists alone. But it would be
enough that they kill a few, to scare away Sri Lanka’s main source of
revenues.

But even if the partition of Sri Lanka in two is granted by the
Sinhalese, with the north-east portion for the Tamils, the island will
remain a hotbed of uncertainty, a potential time bomb in South Asia.

****

The Great Japanese Hypocrisy

When Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh visited Japan in 1999, Japanese
Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi urged India to sign the global nuclear test
ban treaty, "so as to remove, he said, a lingering thorn in
Indo-Japanese relations". What he implied was that Tokyo, one of India's
main aid donors, will otherwise not resume all the loans and aids which
it had cut off after India’s nuclear explosions in May 1998.

Japan makes it out as if its rigid moral stand against India – the
harshest in the Industrialized World after Pokhran II – stems from the
horrendous memories it has of the two nuclear bombs dropped in 1945 by
the US Air Force on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. "Never again
this monstrosity of man upon man", they say. And to illustrate their
painful point, a ruin has been left standing in Hiroshima and periodical
exhibitions are taken all over the world, showing the unbearable photos
of what nuclear weapons do to humans beings and cities. Adversaries of
nuclear armament within India, such as Prafulla Bidwai in his
co-authored book "South Asia on a short fuse", also repeatedly use the
Japanese example to proclaim : "see what kind of world we are giving to
our children"...

Yet, one has to go a little beyond appearances so as to take a fresh
look at the real facts. Firstly, the Japanese are not as goody-goody as
they would like us to believe. Right from the beginning of the century,
Japan displayed a natural bend for expansionism and colonialism,
acquiring for instance Formose, occupying Manchuria or Korea and
massacring thousands of civilians in the Chinese city of Nanking, a
genocide, which still stands out for its sheer unwarranted barbarism.
The atrocities committed by the Japanese during the Second World War,
where they sided with the Nazis against most of the Free World, are as
horrendous if not more, than the effects of the two nuclear bombs
dropped on them. In 1941, they attacked the United States by treachery
in Pearl Harbor, destroying the entire US fleet and killing thousands of
people. The Japanese were also known to be extremely cruel to their
prisoners of war, starving and beheading many of them, or using "slave"
prostitutes for the pleasure of their soldiers (many of whom were Korean
women and are still alive today). The Japanese soldiers were fanatical
to the point of absurdity - remember how the "kamikaze" pilots would
throw their planes against American ships, taking their lives, along
with many others ? They were disciplined to the point of being robots of
war : until recently, lone Japanese soldiers would still come out of
hiding in remote jungles, forty or fifty years after the end of the war,
because nobody had given them the order to surrender (and note that they
were welcomed as heroes, not as nitwits. Indeed, many present Japanese
politicians still consider that Japan did no wrong during the 2d World
War). Furthermore, India seems to have forgotten that the Japanese
invaded her borders 54 years ago and killed many in Assam.

Quite a few historians believe that in 1945, after four painful years of
war, Japanese morale was still so exalted and its high command had such
a an inexhaustible reservoir of soldiers ready to die for their country,
that that the two nuclear bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki
shortened the war by TWO years. It is true that they created unspeakable
mayhem, killing 150.000 people in Hiroshima and 80.000 in Nagasaki, but
they probably saved four times that amount of lives and allowed the
world to go back to peace and start reconstructing. We all know that
there is no "good" nuclear bomb and that we have to move quickly towards
a denuclearized world if we want lasting peace. But in the spirit of the
Bhagavad Gita, force is sometimes "dharma", duty - when it is to defend
one’s children or borders, or when it helps shorten wars. The two bombs
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki may have sprung from that sense of dharma; and
even India’s nuclear deterrent makes such sense, when one knows about
China’s hegemonic ambitions and the ninety ballistic missiles it has
placed in Tibet, most of them pointed towards Indian cities, or the
"Islamic" Bomb in the hands of volatile Pakistan.

Thus, in the light of Japan’s not-so-ancient violent past, it could be
asked to the Japanese who they are to give moral lessons to India after
Pokhran II ? Because it is also obvious, for those who know contemporary
Japan, that the old hegemonic spirit is not fully dead – it has partly
reincarnated itself in other fields and its expansionism might be
waiting to manifest itself anew. Japan today has shown us, for instance,
how business can be conducted as a war… and also in a spirit of revenge
for their humiliating defeat by the Americans. The ruthlessness of the
Japanese can still be perceived in their over-competitive system of
education, which leads many of their children to commit suicide. It is
also said that Japanese tend sometimes to be racists : they particularly
look down on colored races… such as

Indians ! Militarily, their navy is beginning to flex its muscles and it
may be only because they are forbidden to have nuclear weapons by the
US, that they have not tried their hand at it (and why they vent their
frustration on India for having done so !).

Finally, compare Japanese bloody and war-like history with
India’s.India’s armies never invaded other nations to colonize them;
India has always been a land of tolerance, accepting in its fold all
persecuted communities of the world, be it the Parsis from Iran, the
Jews, or the Christians from Syria; and India never committed genocides
on other communities, like the Japanese did on the Chinese. Finally,
Japan should be a little more grateful to India from whom it got
Buddhism, its martial arts (kalaripayat), or even the concept of the
Samurais (kshatriya) !

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
