+++
title = "07 "

+++
****

7\. THE WEST AND INDIA

The West, if it does not always show outright hostility to India, often
displays aggressive ignorance – the United States being the prime
example – although things are changing thanks to Clinton’s 1999 visit.
France, a country which had a huge sympathy capital in India, has not
exploited it because it is obsessed with China. On the friendly side,
the countries are very few : there is Israel, which shares so much with
India, yet has been ignored for decades to please the Arabs; or
non-communist Russia, which is discovering anew that she and India are
fighting a lonely battle against Muslim fundamentalism.

****

AN OPEN LETTER TO THE US PRESIDENT

Dear Mr. Clinton,

Next month, you will be arriving in India, an extraordinary, but
baffling country to Westerners, because of its immense paradoxes and
mystifying diversity. Yet, I am sure that your ambassador in India will
have done his homework and briefed you suitably before your coming.

Doubtlessly then, he will have told you that India is one of the oldest
civilization in our history and that many of the wonders of humanity
originated here : the concept of the zero for instance, plastic surgery,
or ancient astronomy - and that its philosophy was so subtle, that it
not only influenced the entire East, but that until Nietzsche, many
western philosophers acknowledged India as one of their major
inspirations. Today even, India is a land of a Living Spirituality,
probably the last in a world which has been taken over by the two big
monotheist religions and their aggressive dogmas.

Unfortunately, instead of dwelling on the importance and symbolism of
this visit – no American President has in the last twenty years graced
by his presence the largest democracy on this planet - your Secretary of
State, Madeleine Albright, keeps harping about Kashmir being the "short
fuse" of South Asia. Mrs. Albright’s statement only highlights the
United States’ ignorance about Kashmir, which until two decades ago was
a model of Muslim-Hindu amity. Did you know, Mr. President, that Hindus
and Muslims of Kashmir would often pray at the same shrines and that the
Islam practiced in Kashmir was an open Islam, very close to ancient
Sufism ? But this was not to the taste of the hard-line Sunnis of
Pakistan and Afghanistan - and they proceeded to radicalize the whole of
Kashmir, by unleashing a reign of terror, which in turn triggered the
exodus of all Hindus from the valley of Kashmir : there were 500.000 of
them at the beginning of the century and barely a few hundred today.

Your ambassador would have doubtless told you too, Mr. Clinton, that
historically and geographically, Kashmir has always been part of India
and that the calling of a referendum there would be a suicide for any
Indian government, because the Muslim majority of the Valley would
automatically vote for a union with Pakistan. That in turn, Mr
President, would not only mean that Pakistan would have an immense
strategic advantage on India, because of overlooking the Indian plains,
but also that other Indian states, who are in a secessionist mood, might
follow suit. Bear in mind also, Mr. President, that Indians do not
understand why the West is giving lessons to India about Kashmir, when
England battled thousands of miles away from their home soil to keep the
Falkland islands - which geographically belong more to the Argentineans
than to the British - or as France uses its armed might to retain
Corsica, an island which has mixed French and Italian roots, or when
your own country intervenes militarily in parts of the globe where you
feel your interests are endangered !

All right, we know: Pakistan is threatening a nuclear war - and it
scares you. We do hope, however, Mr. President, that you are going to
call off their bluff by bypassing Islamabad on your way to India (he did
not !). Not only because India is much more important country than
Pakistan in terms of size, population and economic potential, but also
because this country, in spite of all its faults, has been a democracy
for more than fifty years. As you know, the same thing cannot be said
about Pakistan, which has been under different military dictatorships
for more than half its independence - as it is the case now. Your
intelligence people must also have told you that not only Pakistan is
sponsoring terrorism in India, but also all over the world – even the
Empire State Building bombings had a Pakistan connection. Your
ambassador, who by now is very knowledgeable about South Asia, must also
have told you that Pakistan and Afghanistan’s hatred for the Hindu
pagans, their contempt for this polytheist religion, is as old and
obsessive as during the first invasion of India by Arabs in 650.
Pakistan lost the last four wars it initiated against India – and if it
is foolish enough to make first use of a nuclear weapon, it will be
wiped-off this earth.

Lastly Mr. Clinton, your ambassador must have informed you as well you
that there is no such thing as "Hindu nationalists", or "Hindu
fundamentalists", as the foreign press likes to label the party whose
leader is today the Prime Minister of India. Because in the whole
history of India, Hindus - who let me remind you are 800 millions today
and constitute the overwhelming cultural and political majority of this
country - have not only shown that they are extremely tolerant, but
Hinduism is probably the only religion in the world which never tried to
convert others or conquer other countries to propagate their own
religion. This historical tolerance of Hinduism is never taken into
account by foreign correspondents covering India and even,
unfortunately, by Indian journalists.

Mr. President, in the sixties, China was to the world a backward nation,
the "Red Devil". Richard Nixon’s visit there in 1971, changed everything
: today, it is a must for Industrialized nations to invest there, even
if the returns are very poor and China is bound sooner or later to enter
into grave political turmoil when the bloody hand of communism is
withdrawn. Mr. President you have a unique opportunity to do for India
what Nixon did to China. By coming only to India and by giving this
visit the importance it deserves, you will signal to the world that
India is the next superpower of this century, the "other" democratic
giant of Asia and that you, Bill Jefferson Clinton, was the first
western leader to have had the vision of it. And History may just
remember you for that.

Yours sincerely,

François Gautier/ correspondent South Asia Le Figaro

****

"THE TRUTH ABOUT INDO-FRENCH RELATIONS"

(Sleeping with the enemy)

When it was learnt that the French were on the verge of handing over 8
Mirage fighter aircrafts and one Agosta submarine capable of delivering
any missiles to Pakistan, George Fernandes, one of the few ministers who
is not afraid to call a spade a spade (and is often right in what he
says), expressed his surprise in an interview with Le Figaro and warned
the French that supplying lethal weapons to a country known to sponsor
international terrorism, at a time when India was fighting a bloody war
which the Pakistanis had initiated, was not a thing to be done. "Y*ou
have two countries, he said in substance, one Pakistan, a small nation
in near economic bankruptcy, always on the verge of a military
dictatorship, or of fundamentalist take over - and on the other hand you
have India, a huge, pro-western, democratic country, with an enormous
economic potential. France has to make a strategic choice and it should
not be that difficult".*

And he was right ! For in spite of the Indian media’s illusions about
Indo-French friendship, India is not very high on France’s priories -
the ill timing of the now postponed delivery shows it. It may also be
that the right hand of the French Government does not always know what
the left does (which means in this particular case, that the President,
Mr Chirac, is Right Wing, while his Prime Minister, Mr Jospin, is a
socialist - and both do not necessarily have the same foreign
priorities…)

But France could also argue that they too, are not very high on India’s
priorities. For it appears today that the BJP Government is ready to
"sleep with the enemy" - the enemy being the United States. Indians have
long had a ridiculous fascination for anything American (70% of students
graduating from IIT, leave for the Us) - could it be now, that there is
a warming-up of relations with Washington, that the Indian Government is
ready to dump the French, who alone stood by India after Pokhran II,
when it was ostracised by the whole world ? No doubt, Mr Clinton will
charm the BJP leaders with a few smiles and a visit next year, so as to
extract the maximum out of them : signing of the CTBT, freezing their
missile program, stopping production of nuclear material, while making
sure that India buys Boeings and not Airbuses …. And the BJP, who all
along said that it was not in favour of a unipolar world, will do
exactly the opposite ! Can’t the Indian Government take a few lessons
from the Chinese and understand that you get much more respect from
other nations by being firm and taking no s... from anybody, than by
always wallowing like a true Third World country ?

Yet, France is one of the few countries in the West which has affinities
with India. While the average American does not even know where India is
on a map, the French love Satyajit Ray, Indian food, music… There are
also a few Frenchmen who understand the political and economic
importance of India: Jacques Chirac, the French President, who studied
Sanskrit when he was young, and knows that India is an ancient and
cultured country; or Claude Blanchemaison, the French ambassador, who
has tirelessy worked towards improving indo-french relations.

Finally, The BJP would do well to remember the words of Swami
Vivekananda : "In the East, India is the land which gave the world the
invaluable concept of Karma or work as duty; and in the West, the
central field of that work , the Karmakshetra is France."

****

THE SECRET BROTHERHOOD OF INDIA AND ISRAEL

For 40 years, India did not have relations with Israel. Yet, India and
Israel share so much in common and both can learn a lot from each other
! Hindus and Jews, far from being the persecutors of minorities, that
the Marxist, Arab and INC lobby like to portray, have been persecuted
for nearly two thousand years and have been the victims of the two worst
genocides in the sad history of humanity : Hitler, in his monstrous
quest for a "pure" Aryan race, murdered six millions Jews in his gas
chambers during the Second World War; and Belgium historian Koenraad
Elst estimates that between the year 1000 and 1525, eighty million
Hindus died at the hands of Muslim invaders, probably the biggest
holocaust in the whole history of our planet.

Indians and Israelis of today also share in common an awesome problem
with Muslim fundamentalists. And India should learn a lesson of two from
the way Israel handles this problem, however much it is criticized by
the western medias. Unlike India, which since Independence has chosen to
deal with this problem in the Gandhian spirit, that is by compromising
most of the time with Islamic intransigence - if not giving in - Israel
showed that toughness first, accompanied later by negotiations pays much
more. Basically, the "land for money" concept is something that India
should learn from : in 1967, Israel was threatened to be engulfed by its
fanatic neighbors, so it stole the initiative by crushing them in a
lightning six days war and kept some land which it used later as
bargaining chips with Egypt and Syria. India is also surrounded by
hostile Muslim countries: Pakistan, Afghanistan, and more and more
Bangladesh. So far, India has followed the Nehruvian policy of Good
Neighborhood : you give first, expecting that your neighborhood will
reciprocate the gesture later. Unfortunately, history has shown that
India mostly gets stabbed in the back for its generosity by small
insignificant nations such as Bangladesh, which owes its freedom to the
sacrifices of India’s soldiers and is more and more lending its
territory to the ISI. If during the 1965 Indo-Pak war, India would have
kept a chunk of the Pakistani territory it has conquered, or if during
the Kargil war, it had carried on with its victorious momentum by
seizing some of the Pakistan-held Kashmir, which could be used as a
buffer zone, there would be probably today less cross-border terrorism.

There is another area where India has a lot to learn from Israel, it is
the VIP security. We all know how it has become here a status symbol, a
constant hassle for the ordinary citizen, who has to wait endlessly in
his car for the VIP motorcade to pass by, or in his plane for the Prime
Minister of India to land. Mr Vajpayee must be the most protected leader
in the world - and it is a very heavy-handed, unfriendly and ultimately
inefficient protection. But look at the Israelis: their Prime Minister
moves around with only a few boyish looking men, in sneakers and civil
dress and they don’t rough up onlookers or hassle innocent citizens. As
for the recent hijack of the Indian Airline plane, again we have to look
towards Israel, whose airline, EL Al, is the safest in the world, in
spite of being the most threatened. But for them, no rude cops who
hardly talk any English frisking you at airports, but civil and educated
EL Al employees, who ask polite but pointed questions and unobtrusive
security in the airports and aboard their aircrafts. Israelis have also
shown that you should NEVER give in to terrorist demands and also that
its commandos are the best. 24 years ago, when an Air France airplane,
carrying mostly Israelis, was hijacked by Arab terrorists and forced to
land in far away Uganda, which like the Taliban, were actually
protecting the terrorists while pretending to help in the release of the
passengers, Israel in one of the most daring rescue operation ever, sent
its commandos flying in the dead of the night over half of the world,
killed the terrorists, freed the passengers and brought them back to
Israel with very little casualties. Unfortunately, India adopted a total
opposite attitude during the hijack of IC 814, with the catastrophic
result that we know : the terrorists released are today openly preaching
in Pakistan a jihad unto death towards India.

There is also another aspect from which India can learn a great deal
from Israel and it is its language. In 1948, Israel regained part of it
Holy land and Israelis, who had been scattered all over the world, came
back to live in Israel. There was one problem though: they all spoke
different languages and no tongue unified them except Yiddish, a bastard
language spoken by the Jews of Eastern Europe. So the state of Israel
set its scholars to revive Hebrew, Israel’s ancient language, which had
fallen in decrepitude, so that today everybody speaks Hebrew and it has
unified Israel like nothing else. India should invite some of these
linguists and they should sit down with Sanskrit scholars and devise a
way of simplifying and modernizing Sanskrit, which is the mother of all
European tongues, a language so subtle and rich that it will energize
and revitalize the whole Indian culture.

And finally, Like Indians, Israel is one of those ‘elected people of
God’, of whom Sri Aurobindo speaks in his book the "Hour of God", who
have managed to keep their spirituality alive in spite of oppressions,
invasions and genocides. That the Israelis turned their back on their
avatar and crucified him, may account for their sufferings for two
thousand years, as India went through these centuries of atoning for its
‘black karma’. But both, in their own ways, are becoming again powerful
nations, vibrant with spirituality and vigour.

****

RUSSIA AND INDIA : SHARING THE SAME FIGHT

Once more, the West is putting pressure on a nation – Russia, in the
present case – which is trying to fight the scourge of Muslim
fundamentalism, in some of its ex-republics, particularly in Chechnya.
Once more, the western medias are bombarding European countries and the
United States, with images of refugees fleeing, of children and old men
killed by blind bombardments, of women wailing in front of their dead
men, thus setting up the public opinion and politicians against the
"bad" Russians. Once more, we see the United States, the UN, the World
Bank or the International Monetary Fund, applying all kinds of pressure
on Russia so that it stops its "genocide". And Russia being a weak
nation and desperately needing international investment, might well give
in the end and let Muslim fundamentalism take hold again in Chechnya and
then spread elsewhere like a cancer - in Dagestan, for instance, an
Islamic independent state, which has called for a jihad against Russia

But what should be understood is that the pity that the Western world
has for the sufferings of the poor civilians in Chechnya, however noble,
is misplaced. Because not only separatisms are civilian movements - that
is, their armies are dressed in civilian dresses - but generally they
get the covert or overt support of the local population from which they
recruit their militants in the first instance. This is particularly
striking in Kashmir, where – whatever the Indian Government says – 95%
of the Muslim population of the Valley wishes independence from India,
or merging with Pakistan. Indeed, the parallel between Kashmir and
Chechnya is very much relevant, because both the Indian and Russian
governments are waging a war against Muslim separatism; both are
watching with growing horror as it spreads fast from Afghanistan to
Kashmir, or Tajikistan; from Pakistan to Bangladesh, or Dagestan; and
both are drawing flaks from Human Right agencies, the UN, or the United
States for their heavy handed actions against "civilian" populations.

But there is also such a thing as karma. In the Buddhist-Hindu sense, it
means that an individual or a nation pays, many years or many centuries,
later for atrocities or faults committed in past lives or ancient
cycles; in the Western, or Cartesian sense, it means that an individual
or a nation suffers logically at the hands of revengeful traditional
adversaries, against whom it committed earlier wrongs. In this light, it
is easier to understand and accept the sufferings of Muslim civilian
populations, whether in Chechnya, Kashmir, or Yugoslavia, knowing that
throughout the ages, Muslims were ruthless conquerors and have committed
untold atrocities. Take for instance the recent agony of the Bosnian
(and the Albanians) Muslims, at the hands of the Serbs, which again
stirred so much western opinion. But the Bosnian Muslims have themselves
committed countless crimes against the Serbs for many centuries - and as
late as during the Second World War - when they sided with the Nazis
against the Allies. Thus during the recent conflict, they might have got
back, in the Hindu meaning as well as the Western sense of karma, what
they well deserved.

Of all the western medias putting pressure on nations which are fighting
Muslim fundamentalism, the BBC, which prides itself in its unbiased
reporting, has to be singled out for its partiality towards Muslim
separatisms from all over the world. For the BBC has two standards : one
for the Muslims– never mind that that they practice a ruthless religion
which still teaches them that theirs is only one true God – and another
for the bad Hindus / Russians / Israelis. It chooses for instance to
label Sheikh Abhas, the founder of the dreaded terrorist movement Hamas,
a "spiritual leader", when he has ordered numerous bomb attacks against
innocent civilians in Israel. But Hindus, whose history has been of
tolerance and of welcoming all persecuted minorities, do not find grace
in the eyes of the BBC : at best they are "Hindu nationalists", at
worst, "Hindu fanatics". Never mind that they never planted bombs
against Muslims, but only destroyed one single mosque without killing
anybody in the process, when Muslims invaders have razed tens of
thousands of temples in India throughout the centuries and slaughtered
millions of Hindus.

But is the West mad to put down countries like Yugoslavia or Russia, or
India, which are its natural allies and to support nations which are its
sworn enemies ? Samuel Hutington in his famous book "The clash of
civilisations", has predicted that in the 21^(st) century there will be
a clash between two civilisations : the West and Islam. Of course, the
big question mark is China. Huntington wrote that China, for its own
selfish purposes, will sometimes side with Islam against the West. It
has already happened with Pakistan, to whom China not only gave the
know-how to develop nuclear weapons, but also missiles to deliver them.
But China has its own separatist problems in Sin kiang (which by the way
are prodded by Pakistan), and many in India hope that it will bring
China closer to India and dissuade her from helping Pakistan. Will it ?
Some experts are not so sure : China views (and rightly so) India as its
enemy number one; because it is the only country which has the numbers
and the size (but not the will) to contain China’s hegemonic ambitions
in Asia. And secondly, China still believes in the efficiency of the
iron hand, whether to crush any dissent in Tibet, Tianamen Square, or
Sin kiang

Contrary to China, India is a bastion of democracy in Asia, and like
Russia, it is fighting a lone battle against Muslim fundamentalism which
surrounds her. And it deserves the support of the West… which it is not
getting. We have seen how the United States prefers to give the benefit
of the doubt to General Musharraf, even though Pakistan is the biggest
supporter of Muslim fundamentalism in South Asia and Mushrarraf its
champion.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
