+++
title = "10 "

+++
****

10\. THE GREAT INDIAN MYTHS

Since independence a few Great Indian Myths have done immeasurable harm
to the country. Yet not only do they survive today, but they are often
reborn under different avatars. One of these enduring myths concerns
Ashoka the Great embracing Buddhism, and making it a State religion.
Another of these other extremely pernicious myths is the Great
Indo-Chinese friendship, which even the BJP today seems to sometimes
believe in. The Mahatma Gandhi created the Myth of an inner war in the
Gita – and not an outer one. On the lower scale, we find the Great
Cricket Myth, a game of gentlemen, where Indians naturally excel,
although this myth has taken a bit of battering recently.

****

" DID BUDDHISM HARM INDIA ? "

There is little doubt that Buddha came at a time where Hinduism had got
bogged down in too much philosophical talk, rituals and casteism - it
would need much later a Shankaracharya to give it again a new impetus -
and Buddhism offered a simple way out of human misery to anybody,
whatever their caste and social status. This may explain why Ashoka,
whom historians love to call "the Great" embraced Buddhism after the
battle of Kalinga, or why at the beginning of our era, the entire
northern and eastern India was practicing Buddhism. Unfortunately, after
Buddha's death, his followers and disciples gradually made of Buddhism a
religion of rigid tenets, do's and don't, which not only diminished
Buddhism’s popular appeal, but also may have harmed India. This harm has
two facets: non-violence and Maya.

Many Buddhists like to believe that Buddhism disappeared from India,
because it was slowly "swallowed" back by Hinduism at the hands of the
vengeful Brahmins, who had lost their principal source of income with
the self-liberation methods of Buddha. But the truth could be entirely
different. Hinduism of the Vedas and the Bhagavad Gita always held
"ahimsa" as one of its highest spiritual values, but at the same time
understood that violence can sometimes be necessary to defend one's
border’s, women and children, in a word that Might has to protect
Dharma. Which is why, until Buddhism made of non-violence an
uncompromising, inflexible dogma, India's borders were not only secure,
but extended from Afghanistan to Kanyakumari. But when Ashoka embraced
Buddhism, India's great protecting armor, which had worked for
milleniums, had been breached.

As the first Muslim invasions started submerging India in the seventh
century, Hinduism was able to initially withstand the extremely violent
onslaught of Islam, thanks to its tradition of Kshatriyas, the warriors;
but contrary to what History books say, Buddhism was literally wiped-off
the face of India in a few centuries, as it REFUSED to oppose any
resistance. For the Muslim soldiers, Buddhists, who adored statues and
did not believe in Allah, were as much Infidels as the Hindus, and they
razed every single Buddhist temple (and also Jain, as the ruins below
Fathepur Sikri have proved) they encountered, burnt all the precious
libraries (Buddhist philosophy, particularly of the Shankya School, had
shone like a beacon of light on the entire Western world much before
Christ and was quoted till the late 19th century by western philosophers
like Nietzche) and killed tens of thousands of monks, without
encountering any resistance. This is why you cannot find a single trace
of Buddhist structures today in India, save for a few stupas, which were
too cumbersome to be destroyed.

The second unfortunate legacy which Buddhism gave to India is Maya.
"Everything is illusion, everything is misery, misery, misery, Buddhists
said - and still say today - and the sooner you get out of it by
attaining Nirvana, the better. Fine. But Hinduism had always taught that
the Divine is concealed in all things, animate and inanimate and that
every aspect of life has to be conquered by the Spirit: even the Asura
is a fallen Angel, doing unknowingly God's work. Hence Hinduism had
addressed itself to all aspects of life, from the Mundane, as
brilliantly shown in Khajurao, to the subtle spiritual planes which
stand one after the other above Mind.

In contrast, Buddhism came and said : "Just leave Matter and take refuge
in Buddha". And as result, because Buddhism has had a subtle influence
on Hinduism, India started disdaining Her physical envelope, Her very
body and material sheath, India's yogis started withdrawing more and
more in their caves, its people neglecting their surroundings, its
leaders forgetting about Beauty. And the result is there today for
everybody to see: an ugly India, full of trash and refuse, with very
little sense of aesthetics left; cities unplanned, polluted, crowded,
hideous; a people who says it worships its Mighty Himalayas and Sacred
Ganges, but which has allowed the former to be nearly completely
deforested and the latter to be so polluted, that sometimes it is not
even fit for bathing. And Indians cannot put all this on account of
poverty, because its rich people are probably the most guilty, often not
caring for anything and anybody beyond their own doorstep.

It is true that Buddhism has nearly completely disappeared from the
subcontinent, but its rigid spirit endures in subtle ways: Mahatma
Gandhi was no doubt influenced by Buddhist non-violence when he refused
Churchill's proposal in 1943 for a Commonwealth status after the Second
World War, if India collaborated with the Allies' efforts against Japan
and Germany; or when he constantly gave-in to Muslim intransigence,
thereby precipitating India's Partition. Today, we see that the enemies
of a dharmic India often use Buddhism as a weapon, whether it is the
much hyped Ambedkar, who advocated conversion of Dalits to Buddhism, as
he himself showed, or Indian intellectuals such as Prafulla Bidwai, or
Aundhadi Roy, who borrow from Buddhist Thought to show why India should
not have the atom bomb (and let itself wipe-out by Pakistan or China,
who have no such qualms).

We see also, in a country like Sri Lanka, a very militant Buddhism,
chauvinistic in its promotion of Sinhalese interests and anti-Hindu in
its persecution of Sri Lankan Tamils. We notice too that new avatars of
Buddhism, such as the remarkable Vipassana movement of Shri Goenka, have
not fully lost their anti-Hindu slant and are still proponing a very
rigid non-violence.

 

****

"HINDI-CHINI BYE-BYE"

For more than fifty years, China has managed to pretend that it was a
friend of India, while covertly, or sometimes even overtly, doing
everything to harm India’s interests. Remember how Mr Jaswant Singh came
back all glowing from Beijing and announced "that the two sides would
enter consultations on establishing a security mechanism". But a few
hours later, Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji slapped India in the face :
while expressing a token "satisfaction at a new warming in Sino-Indian
relations", he repeatedly kept silent on the proposed security
cooperation.

How is it, that after five decades of bitter experience at the hands of
the Chinese, of double talk, betrayal and contempt, India still gets
hoodwinked by the Chinese ? And on top of that, hasn’t Mr Singh proposed
that India and China celebrate 50 years of friendship ? Fifty years of
friendship - is that a joke ? Doesn’t Mr Singh know that China still
occupies one third of Ladhak, which it took during the 62 war, still
claims for herself the whole of Arunachal Pradesh and has not only
furnished Pakistan with its missiles (via North Korea), but has given
them the know-how to manufacture nuclear weapons ?

How can Mr Singh (who otherwise is a fine gentleman), say that China is
not a security menace to India ? Doesn’t he know also that according to
the CIA, China has transferred one third of its nuclear arsenal to
Nagchuka, 250 kms away from Lhassa, a region full of huge caves, which
the Chinese have linked together by an intricate underground network and
where they have installed nearly one hundred Intercontinental Ballistic
Missiles, many of them pointed at Indian cities ? The reason for this is
that the Chinese, who are probably among the most intelligent people in
the world, have always understood that India is their number one
economic, military and nuclear competitor in Asia (remember Beijing’s
hysterical reaction after Pokhran II). Does Mr Jaswant Singh also know
that the Chinese have killed **1,2 million Tibetans**, that 6254
monasteries have been razed to the ground, that 60% of religious,
historical and cultural archives have been destroyed and that one
Tibetan out of ten is still in jail ? Today a quarter million Chinese
troops are occupying Tibet and there are 7,5 million Chinese settlers
for six million Tibetans - in fact, in many places such as the capital,
Lhassa, Tibetans are outnumbered two to one...

To understand this Indian obsession for hindi-chini bhai bhai, this
crave for appeasing China, whatever the cost, one has to go back to
Nehru, who had decided that India and China were the natural ‘socialist’
brothers of Asia. Nehru should have had second thoughts when China
showed its true face in Tibet - but he chose to ignore the warning. In a
brilliant book (Har-Anand), Tibet specialist Claude Arpi throws light
for the fist time on the Tibet-China-India triangle and Nehru’s
iniquitous role. Mr Arpi first recalls how shortly after Independence,
the Indian Army Chief of Staff had drafted the first paper on the
threats to India's security by China, along with recommendations for a
clear defence policy. But when Nehru read the paper, he said : "Rubbish.
Total Rubbish. We don't need a defence plan. Our policy is non-violence.
We foresee no military threats. Scrap the Army. The police are good
enough to meet our security needs." We know the results of that remark :
when the Chinese invaded India in 1962, the Indian army, thanks to
Nehru’s blindness and appeasement policy, was totally unprepared and was
so badly routed, that the psychological scars even show today.

But the biggest blunder that Nehru did was to betray Tibet, a peaceful
spiritualized nation. For Tibet had always been a natural buffer between
the two Giants of Asia (in fact, the Dalai Lama‘s repeated offer that
Tibet becomes a denuclearized, demilitarised zone between India and
China, makes total sense today and Indian leaders should have
immediately adopted it). But unfortunately, if there is one thing which
all political parties in India share, it is the policy of appeasing
China in exchange for a non-interference of the Chinese in Kashmir. But
what non-interference ? It can be argued that not only China gave
Pakistan many of the weapons that it is using - or will be using against
India in the future - but it also may be quite possible that Beijing
knew in advance of Pakistan’s Kargil plan (in fact Pakistan’s army Chief
was in the Chinese capital at the beginning of hostilities). What Mr
Jaswant Singh does not understand is that it is not China that has to
appeased to contain Pakistan; but rather, ultimately, it should be
Pakistan that has to be appeased (in the true sense of the term = making
peace with) to contain China. Because everything - bar religion - unites
India and Pakistan : customs, languages, culture, ethnic stock, history…
Whereas India and China have very little in common, except Nehru’s
elusive dream of a socialist brotherhood.

It should also be clear that as long as India does not stand-up up to
its responsibility towards Tibet and continues to recognise China’s
unjust suzerainty of it, there will be no peace in Asia. For China needs
space and we have to wake-up to the fact that it has hegemonic
aspirations : it got Tibet, it got Hong Kong, it got part of Ladhak; now
it wants Taiwan, Arunachal Pradesh, the Spratly islands and what not !
Fifty years ago, during the Korean war India’s great Sage, Sri
Aurobindo, had seen clearly in the Chinese game: "the first move in the
Chinese Communist plan of campaign is to dominate and take possession
first of these northern parts and then of South East Asia as a
preliminary to their manoeuvres with regard to the rest of the continent
in passing Tibet as a gate opening to India".

India should also understand that contrary to Indian political leaders,
who keep making statements and not acting upon them, China keeps silent,
but it ACTS - and then denies having acted with a straight face (like it
denies the theft of nuclear secrets from the US). In fact, India should
take a lesson or two from the Chinese communist leadership, which first
decides upon a clear, one track policy (we will keep Tibet, by all
means) - and follows it, regardless of what the world says ! It does not
care about a goody-goody image, like India. The story of the Panchen
lama is a perfect example of that : Beijing decided that one of the ways
of getting rid of the Dalai lama was to provide an alternate source of
spiritual leadership to the Tibetans - hence the choice of another
Panchen lama, overriding the one chosen by the Dalai lama. Now after six
years of indoctrination in Beijing, the counterfeit Panchen lama has
surfaced again in Tibet - and its very presence there is further
jeopardising the possibility of a free Tibet.

What one does not understand is how the BJP, a party which wants to be
different, who has always stressed before coming to power, that it
sympathises with the Tibetan people’s aspiration to regain their
independence, can follow the same old Congress policy of appeasement
towards China ! One should be realistic and learn from Swami Rama
Thirtha, a great sage of the beginning of the century :"The policy of
appeasement is never successful. It increases the demands of the bully
and encourages his unreasonableness. He will never listen to you. On the
contrary, he will further insult you, by heaping imaginary allegations
on you and finding baseless aberrations".

100 years later, India has still not learnt that lesson : the need of
the day is not "hindi-chini bhai-bhai", but "hindi-chini bye-bye".

****

THE GITA AND WAR

The Mahatma Gandhi, as well as many scholars, have seen in Krishna’s
discourse to Arjuna, when the latter throws down his bow and says: "
I–will- not- fight", an exhortation not to a physical war, but to an
*inner* war, against one’s own ego and weaknesses. While there is no
doubt that the Bhagavad Gita is essentially a divine message of *yoga* –
that is of transforming one’s own nature while reaching towards the
Absolute, it is also fundamental to understand that it uniquely
reconciles war with the notion of duty, *dharma*.

Since the beginning of times, war has been an integral part of man’s
quest. Yet, it is the most misunderstood factor of our human history.
And that is but natural, because, as writes Sri Aurobindo in his
remarkable ‘Essays on the Gita’: "*Man’s natural tendency is to worship
Nature as love and life and beauty and good and to turn away from her
grim mask of death".* Thus, war has often baffled or even repelled man.
We saw how Ashoka turned Buddhist after the battle of Kalinga, or in the
previous century how some of the American youth refused to participate
in the Vietnam war; and we are witnessing today massive protests against
the atom bomb.

Yet, what does the Gita say ? That sometimes, when all other means have
failed and it is necessary to protect one’s borders, wives, children and
culture, war can become dharma. That war is a universal principle of our
life, because as says Sri Aurobindo "it is evident that the actual life
of man can make no real step forward without a struggle between what
exists and lives and what seeks to exist". And that humanity
periodically experiences in its history times in which great forces
clash together for a huge destruction, and reconstruction, intellectual,
social, moral, religious, political.

The Gita also stresses that there exists a struggle between
righteousness and unrighteousness, between the self-affirming law of
Good and the forces that oppose its progression. Its message is
therefore addressed to those whose duty in life is that of protecting
those who are at the mercy of the strong and the violent. "It is only a
few religions, writes Sri Aurobindo, which have had the courage, like
the Indian, to lift-up the image of the force that acts in the world in
the figure not only of the beneficent Durga, but also of the terrible
Kali in her blood-stained dance of destruction". And it is significant
that this religion, Hinduism, which had this unflinching honesty and
tremendous courage, has succeeded in creating a profound and widespread
spirituality such as no other can parallel.

Has India understood this great nationalist message of Gita ? Yes and
no. On the one hand you have had Rajputs, Mahrattas, and Sikhs; you have
had a Shivaji, a Rani of Jhansi, or a Sri Aurobindo, who, let us
remember, gave a call as early as 1906 for the eviction of the British –
by force if need be – at a time when the Congress was not even
considering Independence. But on the other hand, apart from these few
heroes, the greater mass of India seems to have been for centuries the
unresisting prey of invaders. Wave after wave of Muslims intruders were
able to loot, rape, kill, raze temples and govern India, because Hindu
chieftains kept betraying each other and no national uprising occurred
against them; the British got India for a song, bled it dry (20 millions
Indians of famine died during British rule), because except for the
Great (misguided) Mutiny, there was no wave of nationalism opposed to
them until very late; we also saw above how in 1962 the Indian army was
routed and humiliated by the Chinese, because Nehru had refused to heed
the warnings posed by the Chinese. In December 99, we also witnessed how
India reacted during the hijack of the IC flight from Kathmandu: instead
of storming the plane when it was in Amritsar, India’s leaders got cowed
down by the prospect of human casualties from their own side and
surrendered to terrorism. But in the process India’s image and
self-esteem suffered a lot and the liberated separatists are now
spitting even more venom and terror.

Why is this great nationalistic message of the Gita forgotten ? There
are two main factors. The first one, as we have already seen, is
Buddhism and the second is the equally rigid non-violent philosophy of
Mahatma Gandhi. There is a lining in the sky, though: the Kargil war has
shown that Hindu, Muslim and Christian soldiers can put their country
above their religion and fight along side each other. We see today a new
wave of nationalism rising not only in India, but also amongst the very
influential expatriate Indian community, particularly in the US. The
nationalist message of the Gita is not only still relevant today, but it
is essential for India’s survival in the face of so many threats: the
"Islamic" Bomb of Pakistan, the hegemonic tendencies of China, or the
globalization and westernization of India, which is another form of war.
One would be tempted thus to address this message to this wonderful,
diverse, and extraordinary country, which has survived so many threats
during her eight thousand years history: ARISE AGAIN O INDIA AND
REMEMBER KRISHNA’S MESSAGE TO ARJUNA : TRUTH IS THE FOUNDATION OF REAL
SPIRITUALITY AND COURAGE ITS SOUL.

****

CRICKET THE VAMPIRE

Here is a game which is a colonial legacy of the British. It is meant to
be played in a cool weather on a green English meadow with a few
spectators who shout "jolly good" from time to time, while sipping
lemonade. It is not a game meant for a tropical country where you stand
for hours under a blistering sun with frenzied fans screaming their
approval or displeasure. Cricket has become an obsession in India

But above all, cricket has totally vampirized all the other sports in
India. There is so much money that sponsors, televisions and even the
Government has concentrated only on cricket at the expense of all the
other sports. For the truth is that India is nowhere on the
international area of sports and its standard is pathetic if not
ridiculous in all sports except for another two British legacies: tennis
and hockey. But look at China, in the early eighties it also could not
compete in any discipline, bare table tennis, but in a span of thirty
years, it has become a sports superpower in all areas, even in some
where it had no natural ability, such as swimming.

Why can’t India, the country which gave to the world hata-yoga, which
has been copied the world over, or even pranayama which is now spreading
like wildfire all over the planet, have a coherent and comprehensive
program which would build world-class athletes in two decades?

Because of cricket! And it is so unfair, athletes such as long distance
runners will train in miserable conditions, get a pittance as
sponsorship and often have to work full or part time in some obscure
Government jobs. Compare this to cricketers who are often spoilt brats,
who stay in five star hotels, get millions of rupees in sponsorship and
advertisement, are often arrogant and. still manage to lose most of the
time!

The INDIAN Government should restrict the number of international
matches played by Indian cricketers happening both within and outside
India. This will ensure automatically that cricketers get less
sponsorship and have to concentrate on home turf. And it should evolve a
bold and clear plan for developing other sports, trying as much as
possible to bypass bureaucracy who stifle and kill all the good plans
(it would maybe make sense to privatize some of the areas such as
training). The only will India become a superpower ports. It has the
manpower in sports and cricket takes its just place as just another
sports where Indian excel.

Luckily, the recent cricket scam, where it has been discovered that
players of international repute – many of them Indians – are in the
habit of fixing matches, has put a bit of a damper on cricket madness.
But it is not enough, as the game of cricket goes on, as if nothing
happened. We need a Government with a clear vision of sports.
Unfortunately, many of India’s leaders are too old to think about
sports…

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
