+++
title = "08 8. The Sangh's anti-intellectualism "

+++
<div class="Section1">

**8. The Sangh's anti-intellectualism**

 

         A very serious flaw which Gandhians and the Sangh have in
common is their anti-intellectualism.  Though Gandhi reputedly rebuked
RSS founder K.B. Hedgewar for not publishing any doctrinal statements,
i.e. for not giving any intellectual articulation to his nationalist
movement, he essentially shared Hedgewar's aversion for an intellectual
job well done.  Both of them made people march many miles, both led
their followers to make great sacrifices, and both failed to
substantially raise their followers' political understanding.  They did
not bother to educate them (and themselves) in analyzing the character
of the different forces in the field, all on the plea that "an ounce of
practice is worth more than a ton of theory".

 

         Instead of developing an analysis and tracing the Hindu-Muslim
conflict to its (Quranic) roots, they chose to work on people's
emotions.  Gandhi practised emotional intimidation on the Hindus with
his ascetic gimmicks, but failed completely before the doctrinal wall of
rejection which Islam had erected against his "Hindu-Muslim unity". 
Gandhi's pleas for this interreligious unity were like the attempt at
air travel by a premodern person: without studying the laws of physics
and applying them through the appropriate technology, all he could
achieve was to jump from a tower and fall to his death.  Calling for the
tearing-down of the wall of hatred between Muslims and non-Muslims
without properly understanding its causes was an anti-rational endeavour
doomed to bitter failure; Gandhi merely banged his own head against the
wall until his skull broke.     

 

         Gandhi's anti-intellectualism was evident in other fields too. 
He refused to make a proper study of the history and doctrines of his
own religion, replacing its complexity and richness with the monolatry
of a single booklet, the Bhagavad-Gita, which he also refused to study
properly, subjecting it to a dogmatic sentimental interpretation
instead.  Thus, Gandhi's reading of the Gita (heavily influenced by the
"Sermon on the Mount" aspect of Christianity) included the untenable
claim that the Gita teaches absolute non-violence.  In reality, one of
the Gita's main themes is *refuting* the typically Gandhian
anti-confrontationist arguments given by Arjuna in the first chapter.

 

         Admittedly, Gandhi was not the first to twist Hindu scripture
to suit his own pet theories, e.g. Shankara, Ramanuja and Madhva managed
to identify each his own version of Vedanta philosophy as the "true"
meaning of the Upanishads.  But these acharyas applied their intellect
and erudition to make their point, while Gandhi haughtily rejected the
importance of intellectual skills in discerning the true meaning of a
text, claiming that moral character was the decisive factor in correctly
understanding scripture.  He was wrong: people of bad character may
understand scripture quite well (an example from Hindu tradition is
Ravana, a well-educated scoundrel), while people of good character may
not understand it at all (e.g. all those good people who are outside the
civilizational ambit of a given scriptural tradition).[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

         The result of Gandhi's anti-intellectualism was that he
conducted his politics like a sleep-walker: wilfully blind to the
character of the forces he was dealing with.  And since people, even
very ordinary people, cannot be satisfied for long with a diet of
exalted emotions and counter-commonsensical activism, his refusal to
address the doctrinal aspect of certain political problems (the Muslim
challenge, the paradoxical situation created in Indian politics by World
War 2, the rising lure of Marxism) made people look for an ideological
framework elsewhere.  Gandhi's focus on emotions was good for
spectacular scenes of millions marching, but it failed to achieve the
political goals which these millions thought they were serving.  The
independence of a united India never came, nor was truncated India in
any sense a Ram Rajya or a realization of any ideal Gandhi ever stood
for.

 

         The Communists, by contrast, worked on people's minds.  They
gave them (not just their card-carrying foot soldiers but nearly the
whole opinion-making and decision-making classes) a framework with which
to analyze political events and cultural trends.  It is quite clear
which approach was more fruitful: soon after Marxism appeared on the
Calcutta scene, it eclipsed the Hindu Renaissance (when Sri Aurobindo
retired from public life, people like Hedgewar failed to take over his
torch), and by the time Gandhi died, Gandhism as a genuine political
movement had been blown away by Marxism.  For several decades after
Independence, non-Communist politicians implemented Communist policies,
because they were mentally trapped in Marxist schemes of analysis; by
contrast, even nominally Gandhian politicians betrayed everything Gandhi
ever stood for (except Muslim appeasement, which Indian Marxists also
promoted).  In the long run, emotions are inconsequential, and the
Communists prospered and could make others implement their own policies
just by promoting their own thought.

 

         Like Gandhi, the RSS and BJP cloak many of their campaigns and
political demands in terms of emotions, and this approach proves as
futile as in Gandhi's case.  Thus, a complaint about the lack of
national consciousness in the school curriculum is titled: "The
education system does not promote national
*sentiments*".[\[2\]](#_edn2)  Patriotic feelings develop naturally on
the basis of a genuinely felt common destiny, but in the case of many
Muslims, this natural process is thwarted by the Islamic ideas in which
they are indoctrinated.  So, the only way to "promote national
sentiments" is a job of intellectual persuasion: remove this doctrinal
hurdle by helping Muslims to discover that the basic doctrine of Islam
is mistaken.  If you are too lazy to study Islam and find out what is
wrong with it, all your efforts to "promote national sentiments" among
youngsters brought up on a diet of anti-Hindu teachings will prove
futile. 

 

         The BJP's statements on Ayodhya are full of calls to "respect
people's sentiments" (the title of the BJP brochure containing L.K.
Advani's historic Lok Sabha speech on Ayodhya dd. 7 August
1989).[\[3\]](#_edn3)  In general, sentiments should be respected, but
not absolutely.  Sometimes, hurting sentiments is the inevitable and
relatively unimportant consequence of a rightful and necessary act, e.g.
there is no doubt that imperialist Muslims felt hurt in their sentiments
when the BJP supported Hindu society's claim to Ayodhya, ignoring the
Muslim community's cherished God-given right to occupy other religions'
sacred places.  At any rate, sentiments cannot be the basis of a
judicially enforceable claim: thieves also develop a sentimental
attachment to some of their stolen goods, yet that doesn't give them a
right to these goods.  The Ayatollahs may have been genuinely hurt in
their sentiments by *The Satanic Verses*, but that gave them no right to
kill its author or even to ban the book.  Even people who feel no
sentimental attachment to the Rama Janmabhoomi site, such as myself, can
find that the site rightfully belongs to Hindu society alone, on
impeccably objective and unsentimental grounds.  The appeal to sentiment
is normally but the last resort of people who have failed in defending
their case on more serious juridical and historical grounds.

 

         Gandhi's experiences should have taught the Sangh that
emotionalism is powerless.  So should its own failures with this
approach.  For seventy years the RSS has been busy inculcating
"patriotic feelings", and this has not made an iota of difference in
preventing the rise of separatism in Panjab, Kashmir and the northeast. 
The result of this approach in the Ayodhya dispute should serve as an
eye-opener: the appeal to sentiment failed to win a single skeptic or
secularist or Muslim over to the Hindu position.  Spreading knowledge is
a far more powerful way of influencing public opinion than these
impotent attempts to promote certain emotions.  Yet the Sangh Parivar
has not adapted its strategy, it simply repeats a strategy which is a
proven failure.  That brings us to another typically Gandhian flaw in
the Sangh: its stubborn refusal to learn from feedback. 

 

         A defining characteristic of all life forms is that, to a
greater or lesser extent, they act upon feedback: they adapt their
behaviour in reaction to its observed effect.  If you put your hand in
boiling water, you feel pain and immediately pull your hand back; by
contrast, a stone falling into this boiling water does not show the
least inclination to pull back.  Higher life forms even develop
feed-forward mechanisms: rather than first undergoing the effects of a
certain behaviour before adapting it, they are capable of foreseeing its
effect and of either aborting or pursuing the intended behaviour
depending on the expected effect.  Once you know enough about boiling
water, you can foresee the effect of putting your hand into it, and
adapt your behaviour accordingly so as to handle boiling water without
letting it touch your skin.  But dead entities do not have these
capacities of adapting to feed-back or feed-forward information.  A
glass falling from the table does not foresee the effect and does not
try to avoid it; even after having fallen to pieces and being glued
together again, it will still not do anything to avoid falling next
time.  Dead entities don't learn.

 

         Going by this criterion, both Gandhi and the Sangh have always
been quite dead.  In the Khilafat movement, Gandhi bent over backwards
to please the Muslim leadership, he gave them a blank cheque, yet they
didn't show any gratitude or sympathy, but rather intensified their
anti-national commitments and their political separatism.  His attempt
to achieve Hindu-Muslim unity by means of all-out appeasement was a
dismal failure.  Yet, he kept on repeating the same approach for
twenty-five years, and even after this had yielded Partition, he still
kept on repeating it.  There is no indication that he ever did any
introspection to correct this disastrous policy on the basis of the
feedback which he was receiving from reality.  Once he had embarked on
this course, he simply continued in the same orbit like any dead object
in space subject to the law of inertia.

 

         Similarly, the Sangh is not learning from its experiences.  For
example, to reassure its bonafide critics (e.g. foreign journalists who
are not part of the secularist coterie but have interiorized its
misinformation for lack of anything better) about the bogey of "Hindu
fundamentalism", RSS and BJP spokesmen always plead that "a Hindu state
cannot be anti-secular, it is a contradiction in terms" or that
"Hinduism and theocracy cannot co-exist".[\[4\]](#_edn4)  They have been
saying this for decades and keep on repeating it quite placidly, but to
my knowledge, they have never ever checked whether the message actually
came across. 

 

         As labels go, it would not be unfair to describe the Arya Samaj
as "Veda fundamentalists", or Swami Karpatri and the Puri Shankaracharya
as "Manuwadi fundamentalists", so India-watchers may have a point when
they do conceive of the notion of "Hindu fundamentalism".  The RSS is
certainly *not* a fundamentalist movement, is definitely not working for
a Scripture-based law system, but the simplistic argumentation usually
given, viz. that its being Hindu by itself excludes the possibility of
fundamentalism, is just not the right one.  At any rate, nobody seems
ever to have changed his mind under the influence of this plea.  The
worst part of it is not that it fails to convince anyone, but that the
Hindutva spokesmen have never even bothered to register this fact, much
less to draw any practical conclusions from it.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  Gandhi's definition that "every good
man is a Hindu" is a related example of Gandhi's propensity to replace
the intellectual subtleties inevitable in a proper definition of
something as complex as Hinduism with vulgar sentimentalism and
simplistic moralism.  It also happens to be incorrect, e.g. Confucius
was a good man but not a Hindu by any definition, while Ravana and
Duryodhana were Hindus by any definition even though they are remembered
as incarnations of evil.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  *Organiser*, 6/10/1996; emphasis
added.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  Remark that the expression avoids
the term "Hindu" (in contrast with *Respect Hindu sentiments*, the
subtitle of the VHP's "Hindu agenda" issued before the 1996 Lok Sabha
election campaign).  In his *The Concept of Hindu Nation* (p.2), Abhas
Chatterjee relates how a "prominent political personage regarded by most
people as a champion of Hindu Rashtra" (meaning L.K. Advani) prohibited
an enthusiastic audience from raising the slogan: "He alone will rule
this country who stands by the Hindu cause", and wanted the latter
expression replaced with "the nation's cause". 

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  Rama Jois: *Supreme Court Judgment
on 'Hindutva'* (Suruchi Prakashan 1996), p.63.

 

   **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section9.html)**

**   [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section7.html)**

</div>

</div>
