+++
title = "04 3. Legal definition of “Hindu”"

+++
**3. Legal definition of “Hindu”**

**3.1. Hindu law**

India’s Constitution does not give a definition of the term *Hindu*, but
it does define to whom the “Hindu Law” applies.  It has to do this
because in spite of its pretence to secularism, the Indian Constitution
allows Muslims, Christians and Parsis a separate Personal Law.  In a
way, this separate treatment of different communities merely continues
the communal autonomy of castes and sects accepted in pre-modern Hindu
states, but it exposes the credibility deficit of Indian secularism.  At
any rate, the situation is that Personal Law is divided on the basis of
religion, and that one of the legal subsystems is called *Hindu Law*.

Article 25 (2)(b) of the Constitution stipulates that “the reference to
Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing
the Sikh, Jain or Buddhist religion”.[¹](#1) The Hindu Marriage Act of
1955 goes in greater detail to define this “legal Hindu”, by stipulating
in Section 2 that the Act applies:

“(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms and
developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the
Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,

“(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion, and

“(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act
extends who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by
religion”.[²](#2)

This definition of the “legal Hindu”, though explicitly not equating him
with the “Hindu by religion”, is exactly coterminous with the original
Islamic use of the term *Hindu*: all Indian Pagans are legally Hindus. 
The Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs are explicitly included in the “Hindus by
law” but separated from the “Hindus by religion”: at this point, the law
follows the usage established by Western scholars, contrary to the
original usage.

Note that the changes in Hindu Law imposed by an Act of Parliament (on
top of the very existence of separate Hindu and Muslim Law regimes)
constitute a further measure of communal inequality.  The secular
government would not dare to touch the other religion-based law systems,
as has repeatedly been shown in the past decades regarding items of
Christian and Muslim Personal Law.  An interference in Hindu Law by a
national legislative body only makes sense in an avowedly Hindu state;
in a sense, therefore, the Hindu Marriage Act constitutes an admission
by Jawaharlal Nehru that ultimately India is a Hindu state.

**3.2. Semi-Hindus**

Separatist Sikhs have at times criticized the inclusion of the Sikhs in
the “legal Hindu” category.  When Law Minister Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar
first introduced the Hindu Code Bill in 1951, Sikh spokesman Sardar
Hukum Singh regarded the Bill as “a dubious attempt on the part of the
Hindus to absorb the Sikhs”.  Dr. Ambedkar replied: “The application of
the Hindu Code to Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains was a historical
development and it would be too late, sociologically, to object to it. 
When the Buddha differed from the Vedic Brahmins, he did so only in
matters of creed, but left the Hindu legal framework intact.  He did not
propound a separate law for his followers.  The same was the case with
Mahavir and the ten Sikh gurus.  The Privy Council had as early as 1830
laid down that the Sikhs were governed by the Hindu law.”[³](#3)

This at once explains why Ambedkar’s neo-Buddhist followers have not
objected to their inclusion in the “legal Hindu” category.  On the
contrary, this inclusion later served to justify their inclusion in
reservation schemes and other benefits for Hindu ex-Untouchables: as
Untouchability was a problem of Hindu society, it was reasonable that
special benefits for this section of Hindu society only apply to
ex-Untouchable members of the Hindu, or at least the “legal Hindu”
category.

When the Ramakrishna Mission went to court to have itself declared a
non-Hindu minority (in order to escape the legal anti-Hindu
discriminations esp. in education), it claimed that its members could
legally still be treated as Hindus in matters of marriage and
inheritance, even while being recognized as non-Hindus in the religious
sense.[⁴](#4) in effect, the Ramakrishnaites wanted to have the same
status as Sikhs and Buddhists: legal recognition as “legal Hindus and
religious non-Hindus”.  They rightly understood that the law has created
a category of semi-Hindus who have no separate traditions of personal
law but have nevertheless a separate religious identity entitling them
to the privileges accorded to the minorities.

The Indian laws make a distinction between what we may call the “Hindu
in the broad sense”, to whom Hindu Law applies, and who is coterminous
with the Hindu of Persian-Islamic usage, viz. every Indian Pagan; and
the “Hindu in the narrow sense”, a category which may not include
Buddhism and Sikhism.  Though the law does not mention them, the tribal
traditions are also taken to fall partly (except for a measure of
accomplished sanskritization) outside this narrow category.  Of course,
the claims by different groups of belonging to this broad-Hindu but
non-narrow-Hindu category should be considered separately and on their
own merits, e.g. Buddhism’s claim to a distinct identity does not imply
an endorsement of Sikhism’s claim to the same.  The debate over whether
certain communities come under the definition of Hinduism is largely a
debate over whether it is the narrow or the broad definition that should
be considered as the “true” definition.

**3.3. The Scheduled Castes**

A contentious point, esp. since the institution and expansion of
caste-based reservation schemes, is the religious factor in defining the
Scheduled Castes, the former Untouchables.  The legal situation is as
follows: “The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 said in so many
words that a non-Hindu could never be a Scheduled Caste (even if
belonging to a particular caste included in the official list of
Scheduled Castes).  By an amendment introduced in 1956, it was provided
that only a Hindu or a Sikh could be a Scheduled Caste.  The Scheduled
Caste law is, thus, clearly religion-based and its religious basis has
generated abundant case law.  The Supreme Court has held that a
Scheduled Caste Hindu on ceasing to be a Hindu also ceases to be a
Scheduled Caste and, should he ever reconvert to Hinduism, he will also
regain forthwith the Scheduled Caste status.”^([5](#5))

Meanwhile, Buddhists have also been explicitly included (and had already
been implicitly treated) as belonging to the Hindu category in this
regard, i.e. entitled to Scheduled Caste status if belonging to such a
caste. Jains need no mention here, as they belong to the Vaishya upper
castes; but the rare Scheduled Caste convert to Jainism would likewise
remain entitled to benefits earmarked for the Scheduled Castes.

In contemporary anti-Hindu polemic, chiefly by Christian missionaries,
and here by the Muslim chairman of the Minorities’ Commission (an
intrinsically anti-Hindu institution), it is frequently claimed
that: “This law has been clearly designed with the object of preventing
low caste Hindus, even if disgruntled with religion-based social
inequalities, from converting to Christianity or Islam.”^([6](#6))

If this seems plausible, and is hence repeated faithfully in most
Western publications, it is nonetheless untrue.  The Government of India
Act (1935), enacted by the British who had other concerns, already
excluded Christian converts from the Scheduled Castes category.[⁷](#7)
This was done after consultation with the missionaries, who were honest
enough to acknowledge this as the obvious implication of their own boast
that conversion brought freedom from caste disabilities.  As long as
Christians and Muslims propagate the notion that their own religion is
egalitarian and caste-free, it is only logical that converts have to
give up their Scheduled Caste status.

Today, all while propagating the necessary connection between Hinduism
and caste disabilities, the Churches are clamouring for the recognition
of their SC converts as “Dalit Christians”.  If they haven’t had their
way so far, it is mainly due to the opposition not from the Hindutva
forces but from the neo-Buddhists and the legitimate Scheduled Castes
themselves.  At the time of writing, the legal position remains that
only followers of Indic religions are classified by caste, with the
concomitant legal benefits in case of low castes.

**3.4. The Scheduled Tribes**

The Scheduled Tribes as such are not mentioned in the context of
defining the borders of the Hindu community, for “tribal” is only
recognized in law as a sociological rather than a religious category.  A
Christian tribal is consequently still entitled to all the special
privileges of Scheduled Tribe status.  Or to put it in Tahir Mahmood’s
partisan language:

“The law on Scheduled Tribes is, on the contrary, wholly free from
religious shackles.  The ‘No non-Hindu please’ clause of the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 has no parallel in the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribe) Order 1950.  Nor is there any judicial
decision saying that all Scheduled Tribes are born Hindus.  Any change
of religion on the part of a member of a Scheduled Tribe does not
legally alter his or her Scheduled Tribe status.  The modem Hindu code
of 1955-56 does not apply to Scheduled Tribes. (…) In respect of several
tribal communities there have been judicial decisions specifically
affirming that the four Hindu law enactments of 1955-56 do not extend to
the Scheduled Tribes.”^([8](#8))

This means, for example, that customary marriage systems including
polygamy (abolished in the Hindu Marriage Act) are condoned in the case
of tribals.  There is undeniably a contradiction here, for the Hindu
Marriage Act had defined the legal Hindu as including (apart from Hindus
in the narrow sense, Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs) “any other person
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a
Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion”.  In spite of that
definition, Indian law in general treats tribals as non-Hindus.

The 1991 census also separated tribal religion from Hinduism.  It
divided the population into eight different categories: Hindus, Muslim,
Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, “Other Religions and Persuasions”,
and “Religion non stated”.  In appendix, the “other religions and
persuasions” are detailed, and about 60 tribal religions are
specified.[⁹](#9) The prevalent academic and mediatic dicourse takes
this line further, e.g. by redefining the sanskritization of the tribals
(the gradual adoption of elements of Sanskritic civilization, which has
been a natural and ongoing process since many centuries) as “conversion
to Hinduism”, on the same footing as “conversion to Christianity”; and
by describing Hindu social activists working in tribal areas as a kind
of missionaries, outsiders propagating a religion that is quite foreign
to the tribals.  So, against the historical definition of “Hindu” which
includes all Indian Pagans, and against the specific definition in the
Hindu Marriage Act, which is coterminous with the historical definition,
official India treats tribal religions as separate from Hinduism.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)P.M. Bakshi: *The Constitution of India*, p.41.

[²](#2a)Discussed in detail in Paras Diwan: *Modern Hindu Law*, Ch.1.
The Prarthana Samaj was a 19th-century reform movement, the
Maharashtrian counterpart of the Brahmo Samaj.

[³](#3a)D. Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.427, with reference to *Times of India*,
7-2-1951.

[⁴](#4a)About this claim of the Ramakrishna Mission, see below, Ch.6, as
well as M.D. McLean: “Are Ramakrishnaites Hindus?  Some implications of
recent litigation on the question”, in *South Asia*, vol. 14, no. 2
(1991); and see also Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission in Search of a New
Identity*, as well as his exchange of arguments with Ram Narayan in
*Indian Express* on 19/20-9-1990 and 15/16-11-1990.

[⁵](#5a)Tahir Mahmood: “Are all Trials Hindus?”, *Hindustan Times*,
28-1-1999.

[⁶](#6a)Tahir Mahmood: “Are all tribals Hindus?”, *Hindustan Times*,
28-1-1999. 

[⁷](#7a)For more detail on how Christian converts came to be excluded
from the SC category, vide K. Elst: *Decolonizing the Hindu Mind*,
p.555-558.

[⁸](#8a)Tahir Mahmood: “Are all tribals Hindus?”, *Hindustan Times*,
28-1-1999.  

[⁹](#9a)Tahir Mahmood: “Are all tribals Hindus?”, *Hindustan Times*,
28-1-1999.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


