+++
title = "12 11. Are neo-Buddhists- Hindus?"

+++
**11. Are neo-Buddhists- Hindus?**

**11.1. The challenge of Ambedkarite neo-Buddhism**

On 2 October 1956, two months before his death, the former Law Minister
Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar led several hundreds of thousands of
followers, mostly belonging to his own ex-untouchable Mahar caste, into
conversion to Buddhism.^([1](#1)) He extracted twenty-two promises from
his followers.  We will list them here with their original numbers but
regrouped in two categories.  The first category consists of positive
expressions of commitment to the Buddhist way:

“7) I will never act against the tenets of Buddhism; 

“11) I will follow the Eight-fold Path of Lord Buddha;

“12) I will follow the ten *Paramitas* of the *Dhamma*;^([2](#2)) 

“13) I will have compassion on all living beings and will try to look
after them;

“14) I will not lie;

“15) I will not commit theft;

“16) I will not indulge in lust or sexual transgression;

“17) I will never take any liquor or drink that causes intoxication;

“18) I will try to mould my life in accordance with the Buddhist
preachings based on Enlightenment, precept and compassion;

“20) I firmly believe that the *Bauddha Dhamma* is the best religion; 

“21) I believe that today I am taking a new birth;

“22) I solemnly take the oath that from today onwards I will act
according to the *Bauddha Dhamma*.”

It is debatable whether the “firm belief that the *Bauddha Dhamma* is
the best religion” was ever part of the formal resolutions taken by the
Buddha’s disciples, but let us not pick on this; we may accept that
these promises by Ambedkar’s followers are just an emphatic expression
of their entry into Buddhism.  It is a different story with those
promises which articulate Ambedkar’s own social and anti-Hindu agenda:

“1) I will not regard Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh as gods nor will I
worship them;

“2) I will not regard Rama and Krishna as gods nor will I worship them;

“3) I will not accept Hindu deities like Gauri, Ganapati etc., nor will
I worship them;

“4) I do not believe that God has taken birth or incarnation in any
form;

“5) I do not believe that Lord Buddha was the incarnation of Vishnu, I
believe this propaganda is mischievous and false;

“6) I will never perform any *Shraddha* nor will I offer any *Pinda*
\[i.e. Brahminical funeral and post-funeral rites\];

“8) I will not have any Samskara \[ritual\] performed by Brahmins;

“9) I believe in the principle that all are equal;

“10) I will try to establish equality;

“11) I embrace today the *Bauddha Dhamma*, discarding the Hindu religion
which is detrimental to the emancipation of human beings and which
believes in inequality and regards human beings other than Brahmins as
low-born.”

This list of promises is unique in the history of Buddhism, in that it
not only professes to follow the Buddhist way, but also attacks a
non-Buddhist tradition and rejects the devotion to a number of Gods
whose worship was propagated outside India by Buddhism itself.  The
Japanese-Buddhist Goddess *Benzai-ten* is none other than Saraswati, the
Chinese-Buddhist God *Shui-tian* is Vedic Varuna, etc., all imported by
Buddhism without the help of a single (non-Buddhist) Brahmin.^([3](#3))
As D.D. Kosambi notes: “Pali records started by making Indra and Brahma
respectful hearers of the original Buddhist discourses.  The Mahayana
admitted a whole new pantheon of gods including Ganesha, Shiva and
Vishnu, all subordinated to the Buddha.”^([4](#4))

Dr. Ambedkar repeated on the occasion of his conversion. what he had
been saying for years: that only conversion could really change the
social status of the lowest castes.  However, unlike many of his
followers, Ambedkar did not convert to Buddhism merely because he found
it socially useful.  He had studied Buddhism and did believe that it was
the most rational and humane religious tradition, the best for all human
beings, untouchables and touchables alike.  He consequently rejected the
“opportunistic” conversions to Islam and Christianity, not merely
because he considered these religions a threat to India (on that point,
the Hindutva spokesmen are entirely on his side), but because he
considered these religions inferior to the humanism and rationalism of
Buddhism.

An additional reason for his choice of Buddhism was his highly unlikely
belief that Buddhism, an elite religion thriving on patronage, had been
the original religion of the Dalits.^([5](#5)) in Ambedkar’s view, the
Dalits should not seek a new religion but return to their original
religion.  This motive is analogous to the approach of the Arya Samaj’s
Shuddhi movement for reconversion of Indian Muslims and Christians to
their ancestral religion: instead of “conversion”, it is advertised as a
“homecoming” or *ghar-wâpasî*, as the Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram calls its
re-conversion ceremonies for christianized tribals.

Today, there are about 6 million neo-Buddhists, most of them from
Ambedkar’s own Mahar caste and related Scheduled Castes.  Occasionally,
local mass conversions to Buddhism still occur in these communities. 
Unlike the Dalai Lama, who emphasizes the closeness of Hinduism and
Buddhism before his Indian hosts, the Ambedkarite tendency in Buddhism
is overtly anti-Hindu and tries to maximize the separateness of
Buddhism.

Nevertheless, Hindutva author M.V. Kamath quotes a testimony by social
scientist Neera Burra, who “found many people who claimed they were
Buddhists but had not taken the vows because they would not be allowed
to eat meat and would have to give up all their gods and goddesses”. 
Burra also observed about neo-Buddhist Mahars who did convert to
Buddhism: “It is not an exaggeration to say that every single household
I visited had Hindu gods and goddesses installed in positions of
respect”, side by side with the Buddha and Babasaheb Ambedkar.^([6](#6))
The clean break with Hinduism has not yet been achieved.

**11.2. Buddhist welcome to Ambedkar**

In a brief critique of the Ambedkarite version of Buddhism, Sita Ram
Goel draws attention to the fact that Dr. Ambedkar candidly admits that
his own Buddhism has little to do with the Buddhist doctrine as laid
down in the Pali Canon.^([7](#7)) When we turn to the indicated passage
in Ambedkar’s book *The Buddha and his Dhamma*, we do come across
statements which are rather surprising under the pen of a convert to
Buddhism.  He writes that the *Nikayas* (the core literary testimony
about the Buddha) are unreliable, and that the story of Siddhartha
Gautama leaving the world at 29 after seeing a dead, a sick and an old
person for the first time, is “absurd”.  He rejects the “four Aryan
Truths”, because they “deny hope to man.  The four Aryan Truths make the
Gospel of the Buddha a gospel of pessimism.  Do they form part of the
original gospel or are they a later accretion by monks?”^([8](#8))

Questioning the historicity of the founding narrative of a religion is
certainly a permissible and even a commendable exercise, but it is hard
to reconcile with being a propagator of that same religion.  Unless, of
course, one chooses to redefine that religion completely, without
reference to its founder’s original intentions.  While the Buddha (at
least the only Buddha we know, the one attested in Buddhist Scripture)
was quite unambiguous about the futility of worldly pursuits, Dr.
Ambedkar would want Buddhism to focus on the pursuit of social reform:

“What was the object of the Buddha in creating the Bhikkhu?  Was the
object to create a perfect man? (…) if the Bhikkhu is only a perfect man
he is of no use to the propagation of Buddhism because though a perfect
man he is a selfish man.  If, on the other hand, he is a social servant
he may prove to be the hope of Buddhism.  This question must be decided
not so much in the interest of doctrinal consistency but in the interest
of the future of Buddhism.”^([9](#9))

Ambedkar’s attempt to turn Buddhism into a philosophy of worldly social
action necessarily implied a departure from the Buddha’s programme of
non-worldly liberation.

Hindu Revivalists like to point out that Ambedkar was seriously
criticized by authentic Buddhists for mixing Buddhism with what
Ambedkar’s book describes as social reform, but what these Buddhists
considered a message of hatred and separatism.  Dhananjay Keer,
biographer and outspoken admirer of Ambedkar but also sympathetic to the
Hindutva movement, reports:

“The *Mahabodhi*, a famous Buddhist journal in India, opined that *The
Buddha and his Dhamma* is a dangerous book.  Ambedkar’s interpretation
of the theory of karma, the theory of *ahimsa* and his theory that
Buddhism was merely a social system, constituted not the correct
interpretation of Buddhism but a new orientation.  Indeed the whole of
the book, observed the reviewer, explained the hatred and aggressiveness
the neo-Buddhists nourished and displayed.  ‘Ambedkar’s Buddhism’, added
the reviewer, ‘is based on hatred, the Buddha’s on compassion’ (…) The
title, pleaded the reviewer, should be changed from *The Buddha and his
Dhamma to that of Ambedkar and his Dhamma*; for Ambedkar preached
non-Dhamma as Dhamma for motives of political and social
reform.”^([10](#10))

Another paper, *The Light of Dhamma* (Rangoon), observed that “although
this was a book by a great man, unfortunately it was not a great book”. 
Dhananjay Keer explains: “The reviewer pointed out that the great Doctor
tampered with the texts and whenever he found views in Buddhism
inconvenient to his own, denounced them as later accretions made by
monks.  The author was nevertheless a great and good man; the tragedy
was that it was neither a great book nor a good book, concluded the
reviewer.”^([11](#11))

Buddhist monk Jivaka wrote: “In India the movement started by Ambedkar
was not Buddhism but a campaign for social reform under the name
Buddhism, and he has promulgated the idea that bhikkhus are for the
purpose of social service.  But his book ‘The Buddha and His Dharma’ is
misnamed for he preaches non-Dharma as Dharma, even sweeping away the
four Aryan Truths as a later addition by scholar-monks, maintaining that
the Buddha distinguished between killing for a good reason and purely
want only, and saying that He did not ban the former; and to cap it all
he writes that the Dharma is a social system and that a man quite alone
would not need it (…) Hence the so-called New Buddhists or better named,
Ambedkarists, surround bhikkhus aggressively and tell them what they
should do and abuse them if they are not actively engaged in social work
or preaching reform.  The result is seen in the acts of violence they
have committed, the rioting that has taken place in Nagpur and Jabbulpur
and other places.  For Ambedkar entered on his new religion with hate in
his heart and his followers are still nourishing and fanning the flames
of hate in the uneducated masses they lead.”^([12](#12))

In a report to his Government in 1992, the Sri Lankan High Commissioner
to India, Mr. Neville Kanakaratne, noted the “regrettable fact” that a
great majority of Indian Buddhists were members of the Scheduled Castes
who converted under Dr. Ambedkar’s leadership in order to assert their
political rights “rather than through honest self-persuasion and
conviction”.  By contrast, the effort by the Mahabodhi Society to spread
Buddhism through proper information and teaching had achieved “very
little”, according to the Sri Lankan High Commissioner.^([13](#13))

If we accept the High Commissioner’s assessment of such purely political
conversion, implying that there is little genuine enthusiasm for the
Buddha’s spiritual message in these Ambedkarite conversions, we must
notice at the same time that in the margin of the politically Buddhist
community, centres of genuine spiritual Buddhism are evolving, to the
dismay of purely political converts.  Thus, the Leftist commentator
Gopal Guru *complains* that Ambedkarite Buddhists are starting to take
an active interest in Theravada Buddhist meditation: “Some of the
Buddhist organizations are busy spiritualising Ambedkar’s Buddhism with
a view to supplanting the need to look at Ambedkar’s Buddhist conversion
movement as an emancipatory, critical concern.”^([14](#14))

For one, the London-based Trailokya Buddha Mahasangha “tries to
disseminate the spiritual content of Buddhism” during “workshops of 3 to
7 days’ duration”, a classical format to introduce interested laymen to
the basic practices of Buddhism.^([15](#15)) This Trailokya Buddha
Mahasangha was founded by Dennis Lingwood (b. 1926), a British-born monk
who took the name Sangharakshita at his initiation in 1949 (by the same
monk who was to initiate Dr. Ambedkar in 1956).  Far from Ambedkar’s
depreciation of Buddhism’s spiritual core in favour of social reform,
Sangharakshita aims at creating “a new society where each individual’s
spiritual development forms the centre of all activity”.^([16](#16))

A Scheduled Caste convert explains: “The Dalit movement lacks the
positive approach of Buddhism.  I no longer call myself a Dalit.  I
consider myself a Buddhist.”^([17](#17)) By contrast, another one
complains: “Sangharakshita came to turn us into good Buddhists.  But the
problem is not becoming a good Buddhist, but a combative Buddhist. (…)
How can one obtain mental peace if there is no peace in
society?”^([18](#18)) To which the Buddha, who lived in an equally
turbulent age, might have said that if you want to wait for peace in the
outside world before starting to make peace inside, you will wait
forever.

A less controversial but essentially similar Buddhist presence is the
Vipassana association of the Burmese master Sayagyi U Ba Khin as
represented by S.N. Goenka.  As I have been able to see for myself, this
tradition of Buddhist meditation has struck firm roots in Ambedkar’s own
Maharashtra, mainly through its Vipassana International Academy in
Dhammagiri near Jalgaon where 10-day courses for laymen are offered. 
This way, a process of rapprochement between traditional Buddhists and
Ambedkarite neo-Buddhists is already visible, so that we are probably
witnessing the genesis of a genuine new Indian Buddhism.

**11.3. Ambedkar on the Hindu roots of Buddhism**

Dr. Ambedkar intended his conversion to Buddhism to be seen, both by his
followers and by outsiders, as a break-away from Hinduism.  Two
generations later, the Ambedkarite neo-Buddhists are finding that those
who have taken up the study and practice of Buddhism in right earnest,
are very close to those Hindus who are serious about their Yogic and
Vedantic paths.  They should have known that this was inevitable: even
Dr. Ambedkar, while generously ascribing unique achievements to the
Buddha, did acknowledge the indebtedness of the Buddha to earlier Hindu
thinkers.

Thus, Ambedkar traces Buddha’s rational approach, which he values so
much, to Kapila, the founder of the Samkhya-Darshana, the “viewpoint”
focusing on cosmology: “Among the ancient philosophers of India the most
preeminent was Kapila (…) The tenets of his philosophy were of a
startling nature.  Truth must be supported by proof.  This is the first
tenet of the Samkhya system.  There is no truth without proof.  For
purposes of proving the truth Kapila allowed only two means of proof-1)
perception, and 2) inference”.^([19](#19))

According to Dr. Ambedkar, Kapila is the source of one of Buddhism’s
most fundamental concepts, causality, and also of the related Buddhist
rejection of the belief in a personal Creator of the universe: “His next
tenet related to causality-creation and its cause.  Kapila denied the
theory that there was a being who created the universe.”^([20](#20))

Kapila’s arguments are listed, and the last one introduces yet another
fundamental concept of Buddhism: suffering (*dukkha*).  It is brought in
from an unusual angle:

“Kapila argued that the process of development of the unevolved is
through the activities of three constituents of which it is made up,
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.  These are called three Gunas. \[Sattva is\]
light in nature, which reveals, which causes pleasure to men; \[Rajas
is\] what impels and moves, what produces activity; \[Tamas is\] what is
heavy and puts under restraint, what produces the state of indifference
or inactivity (…) When the three Gunas are in perfect balance, none
overpowering the other, the universe appears static (*achetan*) and
ceases to evolve.  When the three Gunas are not in balance, one
overpowers the other, the universe becomes dynamic (*sachetan*) and
evolution begins.  Asked why the Gunas become unbalanced, the answer
which Kapila gave was that this disturbance in the balance of the three
Gunas was due to the presence of Dukkha (suffering).”^([21](#21))

Buddhism is quite close to the Samkhya-Yoga viewpoint: to Samkhya for
its philosophical framework, to Yoga for its methods of meditation. 
Yet, sectarian Buddhists claim that the Buddha had first studied with
two yogis, Arada Kalam and Uddaka Ramaputta, and had left them in utter
dissatisfaction to go and invent a totally new system.  This is
typically the talk of “followers”, of people who have never done any
independent seeking themselves: in real life, discarding everything you
have learned and building something totally new from scratch just does
not exist.  In the Pali Canon the Budda leaves the two teachers after
they stated that they could not take him further on the path of
meditation they had already done; they admitted that they knew no more
than they had taught him.

In Dr. Ambedkar’s narrative of the Buddha’s career, we also, read that
one of the practices taught by Arada Kalam in his Dhyana Marga (path of
meditation) was the observation of the breathing-process,
*anapanasati*)^([22](#22)); till today, this is one of the first
practices which a student of Buddhist meditation gets to do.  Alright,
the Buddha thought that their teaching did not go far enough, and so he
went out and took it further.  But all the same, he built on what he had
learned from others, as we all do, and therefore a lot in Buddhism is
older than Buddhism.  The Buddha rejected some of the things he had
learned, such as unnatural breathing exercises and extreme asceticism. 
But then, he adopted so many things that were already quite common, such
as his elementary ethical prescriptions (*pañchasîla*: truthfulness,
non-violence, non-stealing, chastity, non-intoxication).

This, according to Dr. Ambedkar, is what the Buddha was doing under the
Bodhi tree after four weeks of meditation: “Gautama when he sat in
meditation for getting new light was greatly in the grip of the Samkhya
philosophy.  That suffering and unhappiness in the world he thought was
an incontrovertible fact.  Gautama was, however, interested in knowing
how to do away with suffering.  This problem the Samkhya philosophy did
not deal with.”^([23](#23))

This is indeed the way human progress is normally made: your master has
taken you this far, and from here you take another step according to
your own insight.  It is a different matter whether the method of
liberation from suffering which the Buddha developed and taught, was all
that new.  At any rate, Ambedkar was sufficiently willing to acknowledge
the Vedic roots of Buddhist philosophy, and thereby gives a handle to
those Hindu revivalists who insist that Buddhism is but a branch on the
tree of Hinduism.

On the other hand, Ambedkar could also be extremely critical of Hindu
philosophy.  First of all, he thought that it had nothing to offer, on
the contrary.  He approvingly quotes Thomas Huxley describing
Upanishadic asceticism as “reducing the human mind to that condition of
impassive quasi-somnambulism, which, but for its acknowledged holiness,
might run the risk of being confounded with idiocy.”^([24](#24))
Unfortunately, whoever equates the concentrated mental alertness
developed in meditation with “somnambulism” and “idiocy”, can hardly
extol Buddhist meditation which develops a very similar state of mind. 
But the point is precisely that Ambedkar did not see Buddhism as a
system of meditation.

Ambedkar’s most direct attack on Hindu sensibilities was his merciless
pamphlet *Riddles in Hinduism*.^([25](#25)) Its central thesis is the
absolute reduction of Hindu culture to a mere cover for caste and
untouchability.  That part was largely ignored by the public, because it
was the type of thing which so many westernized writers and Christian
missionaries had been saying for some time.  The part which really
caused offence was the chapter *Riddles of Rama and Krishna*, which
contains a lot of ordinary scandal-mongering.  We learn that Rama’s
associates, the Vanaras, are conceived in general debauchery by the gods
with all kinds of nymphs and goddesses and mortal women, and that Rama
himself seems to have been conceived illegitimately by the sage Shrung
on Kaushalya, wife of Dasharatha.  Similar things are explicitly said
about the Pandavas in the Mahabharata, and about many worthies in the
Vedic, Epic and Puranic lore.  Krishna was the greatest lecher of his
age, doing it with whole villages of girls and married women.

All this was taken from Scripture and hard to refute.  However, the
exercise can also be tried on the Buddha.  Indeed, one V.N. Utpat wrote
a booklet *Riddles of Buddha and Ambedkar* in reply.  It points out that
the Buddha’s conception was even more illegitimate than that of Rama and
Krishna: his mother was visited at night by a white elephant.  Heartless
as the Buddha was, he left his wife and child behind without asking
their opinion, to set out on his selfish quest for personal
liberation.  By giving up his throne, he also robbed his own son of the
inheritance of the throne, and when later his son came to ask him for
his rightful inheritance, the Buddha cynically offered him initiation
into his miserable monk order.^([26](#26)) And so on: people (including
the human being Siddhartha Gautama the Shakyamuni) have to make choices
in life, and in their decisions there will always be a dark side
available for foul mouths to pick on.

**11.4. Hindu reaction to Ambedkar’s conversion**

Dr. Ambedkar was an unforgiving critic of Hinduism and the most
prominent among formal converts out of Hinduism in the modern age.  One
might, therefore, expect the Hindu movement to be equally critical of
Dr. Ambedkar.  However, this is not the case, quite the
contrary.  Except for the arch-traditionalist like Swami
Karapatri,^([27](#27)) the predominant approach is to co-opt Ambedkar. 
At Sangh Parivar functions, a picture of Ambedkar is mostly displayed
along with pictures of Maharana Pratap, Shivaji, Guru Govind Singh,
Hedgewar, Golwalkar and other more obvious Hindutva heroes.  During BJP
President L.K. Advani’s flopped Rath Yatra (car procession) before the
1996 Lok Sabha elections, his car carried just two pictures: of freedom
fighter Subhash Chandra Bose and of Dr. Ambedkar.

Before elaborating on this general policy, we will first consider the
handful of exceptions to the rule.  In reaction to the mass conversion,
the traditionalist Swami Karapatri arranged a big meeting in Kanpur to
oppose “Buddhism and materialism”.^([28](#28)) In Maharashtra, the
heartland of both Ambedkarism and Hindutva, violent altercations between
the two movements have taken place, mostly in the agitation for the
renaming of Marathwada University as Dr. Ambedkar University in the late
1980s and early 90s.  This renaming was opposed not by the Sangh Parivar
but by the Shiv Sena; as this is an action movement with no intellectual
dimension at all, it did not bother to back up this agitation with any
reasoned argumentation in writing against Ambedkar.

On the contrary, even the Shiv Sena too has a general policy of
co-opting Dr. Ambedkar.  Thus, V.S. Naipaul testifies about an Shiv Sena
centre in a Mumbai slum area: “There was one portrait.  And
interestingly, it was not of the leader of the Shiv Sena or of Shivaji,
the Sena’s warrior god, but of the long-dead Dr. Ambedkar
(…) Popular-and near-ecstatic-movements like the Shiv Sena ritualize
many different needs.  The Sena here, honouring an angry and (for all
his eminence) defeated man, seemed quite different from the Sena the
newspapers wrote about.”^([29](#29))

Ambedkarites of the Dalit Panther movement have allegedly made two
failed attempts on the life of the late Jeevan Kulkarni, an
amateur-historian belonging to the Hindu Mahasabha.^([30](#30)) His
crime was that he had developed a critique of Dr. Ambedkar’s
understanding of Buddhism, along the same lines as that quoted above
from Buddhist sources.^([31](#31))

The mainstream approach is to neutralize Ambedkar’s attack on Hinduism
by “putting it into context” and emphasizing the nationalist motive of
his conversion to Buddhism rather than a foreign religion.  The
embarrassing fact of his formal break with Hinduism is rendered harmless
by means of the typically Hindu method of incorporation: Buddhism is
defined as simply one of the sects of Hinduism.  Even Veer Savarkar, in
spite of his earlier invective against Buddhism, called Ambedkar’s
conversion “a sure jump into the Hindu fold”, and said that “Buddhist
Ambedkar is Hindu Ambedkar”.^([32](#32)) Fact is that Ambedkar’s choice
of Buddhism, after two decades of suspense starting with his
announcement in 1935 that he would not die as a Hindu, came as a great
relief to the Hindu movement.

One reason for his embracing Buddhism was that he wanted a rational and
humanist religion, for which he thought Christianity and Islam did not
qualify.  This did not evoke much interest in Hindutva circles, but they
showed all the more sympathy for the second reason: that Buddhism was an
indigenous religion which would not bring with it extraterritorial
loyalties.  Ambedkar has explained: “I will choose only the least
harmful way for the country.  And that is the greatest benefit I am
conferring on the country by embracing Buddhism; for Buddhism is a part
and parcel of *Bhâratîya* culture.  I have taken care that my conversion
will not harm the tradition of the culture and history of this
land.”^([33](#33))

Another fact which genuinely endears Dr. Ambedkar to Hindutva activists,
is his sincere patriotism.  He had a lively concern for the well-being
and safety of India, e.g., while Jawaharlal Nehru stopped the army from
reconquering all of Kashmir from Pakistan and allowed the Chinese to
overrun Tibet in his mindless *Hindi-Chini-bhai-bhai* euphoria, Dr.
Ambedkar warned against the danger of Islamic and Communist aggression
and even suggested that India join the pro-Western SEATO
(South-East-Asian Treaty Organization): “The Prime Minister has
practically helped the Chinese to bring their border down to the Indian
border.  Looking at all these things, it would be an act of levity not
to believe that India, if it is not exposed to aggression right now, is
exposed to aggression and that aggression might well be committed by
people who are always in the habit of committing
aggression.”^([34](#34)) During the framing of Indian Constitution, he
advocated and succeeded in providing for a strong centre as he said that
a week centre had invited foreign invasions in the past.

In 1954, when Jawaharlal Nehru was wilfully being fooled by the Chinese
who were silently occupying Aksai Chin, Dr. Ambedkar said in an election
speech in Nagpur that “Nehru’s foreign policy had made India a
friendless country, that Nehru had bungled the Kashmir issue and had
sheltered men who were dishonest, and that India was encircled by a kind
of United States of Islam on one side and on the other side Russia and
China in a combination for the conquest of Asia.”^([35](#35)) He was
proven right on this score in 1962 and 1965.

Dr. Ambedkar’s conversion provoked a few Hindu authors to publish
reflections on Buddhism and its relation with Hinduism.  Thus, Ram
Swarup wrote his *Buddhism vis-à-vis Hinduism* (1958), which is on the
same wavelength as Ananda Coomaraswamy’s approach, already discussed. 
His focus is on the spiritual common ground of the two traditions (or
the Hindu tradition and its Buddhist offshoot), though he acknowledges a
difference in style and atmosphere.

“Buddhism is returning home to India after a long exile of a thousand
years and, like the proverbial prodigal son, is being received with open
arms.  Religious tolerance of the average Hindu partly explains the warm
reception.  But a more important reason is the fact that Buddha and
Buddhism form an intimate part of Hindu consciousness.  Buddha was a
Hindu.  Buddhism is Hindu in its origin and development, in its art and
architecture, iconography, language, beliefs, psychology, names,
nomenclature, religious vows and spiritual discipline. (…) Hinduism is
not all Buddhism, but Buddhism forms part of the ethos which is
essentially Hindu.”^([36](#36))

**11.5. Arun Shourie on Ambedkar**

On 26 February 1996, Ambedkarites roughed up Arun Shourie, literally
tarring his face during a speech of his in Pune.^([37](#37)) In his
weekly syndicated column, published in the *Observer of Business and
Politics* and in thirty provincial newspapers (and now available in book
form)^([38](#38)), he had scrutinized Ambedkar’s record and questioned a
number of now-common notions about him.  He had refuted the popular
description of Dr. Ambedkar as the “father of the Constitution” or
“modern Manu” (in a reference to the ancient patriarch Manu, to whom the
“lawbook” Manava-Dharma-Shastra is attributed) by showing that Dr.
Ambedkar’s contribution to the writing of the Constitution was in fact
very limited, and that Ambedkar himself had never claimed otherwise.

Shourie had also highlighted the fact that Dr. Ambedkar never won an
election, not even when he stood for a seat reserved for Scheduled Caste
members.^([39](#39)) On top of his individual defeat, his Scheduled
Castes Federation in 1945-46, and his Republican Party in 1952, were
utterly routed at the polls.  In the 1937 elections, Ambedkar’s British
sponsors were gravely disappointed to see the landslide victory of
Congress in the reserved constituencies.^([40](#40)) Ambedkar’s
electoral record certainly belies the routine description of him as
“*the* leader of the Untouchables”: during his lifetime, most “Harijans”
looked to Mahatma Gandhi as their benefactor in spite of Ambedkar’s
scathing criticism of the Mahatma’s paternalistic approach.  In respect
of religion, Scheduled Caste people often venerated their own Hindu
Sants rather than awaiting Ambedkar’s (or in the South,
Periyar’s)^([41](#41)) directives on conversion.^([42](#42)) Many of
them are now with the BJP, which follows suit in the glorification of
Ambedkar and has set up its intra-party Scheduled Castes Cell, but which
channels their Ambedkarite enthusiasm away from Ambedkar’s anti-Hindu
position.

What seems to have hurt the Ambedkarites most is Shourie’s highlighting
Dr. Ambedkar’s consistent collaboration with the colonial authorities,
his “opposing the National movement throughout his public career right
up to and including 1946”, the fact that “throughout those vital
years1942 to 1946-while the nationalist leaders languished in prison,
Ambedkar was such a loyal and enthusiastic minister in the Viceroy’s
Council”, and that “as late as April 1946 Ambedkar was telling the
Viceroy, Lord Wavell, that ‘if India became independent, it would be one
of the greatest disasters that could happen’”.^([43](#43)) Eventhough
Shourie’s position is well-documented, he stands practically alone with
his demystification of Ambedkar.

One thing in Ambedkar’s career which Shourie has not criticized, is his
conversion to Buddhism, except to say that Ambedkar had developed a
rather personal version of Buddhism.  Shourie himself is a practitioner
of Buddhist *Vipassana* meditation, and as a crusader for political
morality, he has no inclination to criticize a tradition which teaches a
practical path to self-improvement, and which stresses the need to take
responsibility for one’s own life rather than blaming “society” or “the
other community” for one’s own sufferings.

**11.6. Rajendra Singh on Ambedkar**

In the past decade, the Sangh Parivar has gone all out to applaud
Ambedkar, de-emphasizing the conversion episode except for its
nationalist motivation.  Its publishing-house Suruchi Prakashan
published a laudatory biography in 1991: *Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, an
outstanding Patriot*, by C.S. Bhandari and S.R. Ramaswamy.  BJP lawyer
Rama Jois has dedicated his booklet about social justice, *Our
Fraternity*, to “Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Great Patriot and Social Reformer”. 
Both publications are aimed at incorporating Ambedkar’s egalitarianism
into hoary Hindu tradition, to the extent that they discuss Ambedkar’s
relation with Hinduism at all.  The BJP and RSS party-line is that if
you go back far enough in the Vedic tradition, you reach a point where
the medieval caste relations were not yet attested, so there need be no
incompatibility of a Hinduism fresh from its rediscovered sources with
an Ambedkarite concern for social equality.

During his visit to Europe in 1995, the RSS Sarsanghchalak Prof.
Rajendra Singh spoke at a celebration of Dr. Ambedkar’s 104th birth
anniversary hosted by the Friends of India Society International in
London.  He started by emphasizing that the RSS was quite serious about
propagating the glory of Dr. Ambedkar: “Sangh celebrated the
\[centenary\] of late Dr. Ambedkar four years ago.  In that one year,
many functions were arranged by our Parivar.  We also published a small
life & work sketch of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, outlining his key
achievements.  We could distribute twenty million copies of that small
booklet throughout the country.”^([44](#44))

Rajendra Singh also enlisted Ambedkar in the RSS programme of
“character-building” by presenting Ambedkar’s life story as an inspiring
example: “Dr. Ambedkar never got disappointed with difficult tasks, but
faced the situation with great courage.  I am especially appealing to
the younger generation of students to take a leaf out of Dr. Ambedkar’s
life.  At difficult times, his life can be a great
inspiration.”^([45](#45)) This boy-scout type of appeal to personal
character marks the difference between the RSS and the parties claiming
Dr. Ambedkar’s legacy, such as the Indian Republican Party in
Maharashtra and the Bahujan Samaj Party in North India, which believe in
unsentimental power (and muscle) politics.

After going through Ambedkar’s life story, the Sarsanghchalak does the
usual number of extolling Ambedkar’s role in drafting the
Constitution: “His contribution in drafting the Constitution is
therefore unparalleled and bears the stamp of his erudition and hard
work.”^([46](#46)) Having made this *captatio benevolentiae*, he feels
ready to take on the delicate point of Dr. Ambedkar’s break with
Hinduism:

“In 1935, because of the highly discriminatory treatment meted out to
the Dalits, he announced that though he was born a Hindu, he would never
die as one.  This caused a lot of commotion in the country, and it is
rumoured that he was offered millions of Rupees by the Nizam if he
brought the Dalits to the fold of Islam, and similarly by the Christian
missionaries.  He outright told these group leaders that these religions
were alien to the Indian soil \[and\] these religions would take away
his culture from him. (…) He gave a very important message to the Dalits
before embracing Buddhism.  He said that he was embracing Buddhism
because it promised equality to all and was a path of this very soil
with many common features and thereby not taking the Dalits against the
culture of this country.”^([47](#47))

The RSS supremo enlists Ambedkar as an argument of authority in favour
of his own organization: “He came to the RSS camp in Pune and
appreciated its patriotism, discipline and complete absence of
untouchability.  But he said he was in a hurry and Sangh work appears to
be a little slow.”^([48](#48)) Read: Ambedkar certified that the RSS was
on the right path, the only difference being the speed with which they
intended to get untouchability abolished throughout Hindu society.  The
RSS could only influence its volunteers and their families, not the
recalcitrant traditionalists, whom Ambedkar wanted to force to abandon
the practice of untouchability immediately by political and legal means.

Prof. Rajendra Singh concludes his eulogy: “We salute the Architect of
our Constitution, his erudition and hard work, his great patriotism and
practical outlook.  But it was natural that he could not stomach the
indignities heaped on the Dalits and the attitude of our upper castes in
the Hindu society appeared to change too slowly.  Let us take a vow on
this occasion to make the Hindu society free from aberrations, a society
full of harmony, self-confidence and knowledge, so that it can carry the
message of the great Rishis to the whole world.”^([49](#49)) If
incorporating a declared enemy into your own pantheon is a virtue, a
compliment for being unusually virtuous cannot be denied to the Hindus
in general or to the Sangh Parivar in particular.

**11.7. Savarkar on Buddhism and Untouchability**

For the remainder of this chapter, we will focus on more polemical
contributions, taking on the claim with which Dr. Ambedkar justified his
conversion, viz. that Buddhism is free of caste and untouchability and
even originated as a revolt against these institutions.  This view is
quite popular among the secularists, e.g. Praful Bidwai claims that
Buddhism “drew adherents from those very layers of Hindu society which
lay at the oppressed and underprivileged bottom of the
hierarchy”.^([50](#50)) In 1931 already, a Congress commission had
claimed about “caste restrictions” that “the whole soul of the nation
had rebelled against them in the shape of Buddhism”.^([51](#51))

The first challenge to this view had already been thrown in Veer
Savarkar’s book *Hindutva*.  At least on some points, for at first sight
it seems to confirm the conventional view.  Under the title
“Institutions in favour of Nationality”, Savarkar explains how the caste
system gained in strength as a reaction against Buddhism, and how it
strengthened social and national cohesion:

“The system of four varnas which could not be wiped away even under the
Buddhistic sway grew in popularity to such an extent that kings and
emperors felt it a distinction to be called ‘one who established the
system of four varnas’.  Reaction in favour of this institution grew so
strong that our nationality was almost getting identified with
it.”^([52](#52)) Savarkar thereby accepts and repeats a very commonly
held notion about Buddhism, viz. that Buddhism tried to “wipe away the
system of four varnas”.

The statement is puzzling if one considers *Hindutva* as a mere
pamphlet, for it is at odds with Savarkar’s own anti-caste stand taken
in the very same book (including a plea to physically unify the Hindu
nation by inter-caste marriage).  Either he didn’t think of the
contradiction or he was just being scholarly, subtly differentiating the
positive role which he attributes to the caste system in the post-Maurya
age, from the negative role which he thought caste was playing in modern
India.  The same explanation could be given to the fact that he did not
turn pro-Buddhist after noticing a historical antagonism between
Buddhism and the caste system.  The question is, however, whether this
antagonism is all that historical; we will take that up in the next
section.

After describing Buddhism as antagonistic to caste, Savarkar
surprisingly accuses Buddhism of having promoted and aggravated the
institution of Untouchability.  His reasoning is that Buddhism has
invented ahimsa (*quod non*) and the notion of “right livelihood” (one
item on the Buddhist “eightfold path”, meaning the prohibition on making
a living by sinful means), and has consequently indicted those who make
a living through un-Buddhist occupations:

“Even today not only common people and good many propagandists but even
historians seem to be labouring under the delusion that the Buddhists
did not recognize the principle of u,ntouchability, and that no one was
considered untouchable in the Buddhist regime.  What is laid down in
someone’s religious texts is beside the point.  What the actual practice
was is the most pertinent thing.  One unavoidable result of the violent
way in which the Buddhists tried to establish the principle of ‘Ahimsa’,
and of their declaring animal-hunting and flesh-eating punishable by
death, of their over-enthusiastic and relentless efforts to search out
such offenders and give the harshest capital and other severe
punishments, was that the practice of untouchability instead of being
wiped out became still more firmly rooted, widespread and most
distressing.”^([53](#53))

Reference is apparently to Ashoka, though his decrees against killing
were somewhat less draconic than pictured here by Savarkar.^([54](#54))
Nevertheless, it makes sense to reason that Ashoka’s policy of
discouraging the killing and maiming of animals added to the stigma on
killing animals (as done by tribals who were still at the
hunter-gatherer stage) and on working with dead animal substances (as
done by leatherworkers/Chamars or scavengers/Bhangis).  Incidentally,
even the Shaiva Hindu king Harsha of Kanauj “caused the use of animal
food to cease throughout his dominions and prohibited the taking of
life”^([55](#55)), so the stigma on professions tainted by violence is
certainly not an exclusive contribution of Buddhism.

The analogy with the despised *Burakumin* of Japan could be cited: they
are the progeny of butchers who bear the hereditary stigma of their
ancestors’ disrespect for the Buddhist rule of non-violence and right
livelihood. Indeed, to Indian ex-Untouchables, this should sound
familiar:

“In the Middle Ages (…) Buddhism was responsible for the fact that one
man was put lower than another.  Buddhism prohibits the killing of
sentient beings.  People who killed oxen or horses and skinned them to
work the leather, were looked down upon. (…) Their life was considered
as only one seventh in worth of that of ordinary mortals. (…) They had
to avoid places where others gathered, when they went to other villages
they had to put out their sandals, when they met farmers they had to
throw themselves in the dust.”^([56](#56))

Savarkar tries to prove his point by quoting a Chinese Buddhist
traveller as observing: “whichever caste or community-as for example the
‘Chandalas’-did not give up the violent professions and did not
observe Ahimsa according to the Buddha faith, were banished from the
towns as untouchables; they had to form colonies of their own outside
the towns and cities like those of the lepers.”^([57](#57)) The name of
the traveller is not given, but if we assume that the reference is
accurate, it is still not very strong evidence, for a foreigner may
easily have misinterpreted this institution, particularly a Buddhist
pilgrim who saw India as a Buddhist country and therefore tended to
explain social phenomena in terms of Buddhist influence,

According to Savarkar, Untouchability “in the Buddhist period especially
instead of being weakened it was most scrupulously and mercilessly
observed. (…) Those of the untouchables who are still under the delusion
that the Buddhists gave no quarter to untouchability and so extol that
sect, should do well to remember that the Chandals, the Mahars and other
untouchables were far more miserable under the violently non-violent
Buddhists than under the Vedic people who accepted the principle of
Ahimsa with its limitations.”^([58](#58))

This is interesting speculation, and the topic “the condition of the
Untouchables under Buddhist regimes” ought to be taken up in right
earnest to prove or disprove it.  Until then, we should leave it as just
Savarkar’s opinion.

**11.8. Jeevan Kulkarni on Buddhism and caste**

Dr. Ambedkar’s chief argument for Buddhism was that this was the only
religion that did not in any way encourage or justify social injustice. 
He, along with the majority of modern writers on Buddhism, especially
liked Gautama’s supposed protest against the caste system.  The question
is whether the social-reformist qualities which Ambedkar ascribed to the
Buddha were not in the eye of the beholder.

One Hindutva polemicist who accepted Dr. Ambedkar’s challenge was the
HMS amateur-historian (and veteran of India’s desperate defence of its
northeastern frontier against the Chinese invaders in 1962) Jeevan
Kulkarni.  He argues that the Buddha did pursue a political agenda, but
not an egalitarian one, that “he tried only to establish supremacy of
Kshatriyas over the Brahmins” while “the fate of the two other classes
remained the same”.^([59](#59)) The pro-Kshatriya bias in early Buddhist
literature has been noted by others as well, e.g. linguist Madhav
Deshpande: “On the higher philosophical plane, Buddha totally rejected
hereditary caste rank.  But on the lower social plane, Buddha asserted a
social hierarchy different from that of Brahmanical belief.  He clearly
asserts that Kshatriyas are superior to Brahmanas.”^([60](#60))

Kulkarni argues further, along with many Western students of Buddhist
history, that Gautama’s objectives were not of this world, and that
“Buddha was not a social reformer (…) The theory much trumpeted about
the role of Buddha as a social reformer was discarded by a galaxy of
scholars prior to Dr. Ambedkar’s version (and also of infamous writings
of Laxmi Narsu) of Buddhism.  Most of them have decidedly proved that
Buddha had never discarded caste system”.^([61](#61))

Kulkarni calls Western authorities to the witness stand.  Sir W.W.
Hunter has written: “It would be a mistake to suppose that Buddhism and
Jainism were directed from the outset consciously in opposition to the
caste system.  Caste, in fact, at the time of the rise of Buddhism was
only beginning to develop; and in later days, when Buddhism commenced
its missionary careers, it took caste with it into regions where upto
that time the institution had not penetrated.”^([62](#62))

Hermann Oldenberg is quoted as explaining how Buddha had other concerns
than social reform: “Caste has no value for him, for everything earthly
has ceased to affect his interests, but it never occurs to him to
exercise his influence for the abolition or for the mitigation of the
severity of its rules for those who have lagged behind in the worldly
surroundings.”^([63](#63)) R. Spencer Hardy wrote: “The existence of the
four great tribes is recognized continually in the *Jatakas*, and
inferiority of caste is recognized as giving rise to the same usages and
as being attended with degradation.”^([64](#64)) Prof. T.W. Rhys-Davids
has given details about caste practices in over 100 Buddhist
communities.^([65](#65))

The list of Western supporters of Kulkarni’s critique could easily be
extended, e.g. Alex Wayman writes: “It is generally stated in Western
writings on Buddhism that Buddhism is directly opposed to the caste
system.  While it is true that such distinctions in status perpetuated
by social norms were not the basis for admission into monasterial monk
training, and also true that Buddhist literature contains some sharp
attacks on what are referred to as ‘Brahmin pretensions’, lay Buddhists
had to respect social norms and even Buddhist literature generated by
the monks differs in response to the caste system, usually remaining
silent about it.”^([66](#66))

This is confirmed by the Dutch Buddhologist Prof. Zürcher: “In modem
popularizing writings, one often reads that ‘egalitarian’ Buddhism was
essentially a ‘protest movement’ against the Brahminical caste system. 
It is true that the Buddhist view of caste is different from and more
rational than the religious justification which one finds in
Brahminism.  But neither the Buddha himself, nor any pre-modern Buddhist
teacher after him has combated the caste system.  The explanation of the
egalitarian attitude which we find in the *sangha*, is simple.  Caste is
a social distinction, which belongs in the world of the laity, where it
is completely proper and self-evident.  As soon as someone becomes a
monk, he in principle steps completely out of the world.  He renounces
his family and family ritual, and therefore also the caste to which his
family belongs.  Like all other Indian ascetics inside and outside
Buddhism, he is a complete ‘outsider’: for him, social
distinctions-those of caste included-have not become objectionable, but
meaningless.”^([67](#67))

Kulkarni’s argument against claims of Buddhist egalitarianism even finds
support among Indian Marxists, at least among those of an earlier
generation who had not yet taken to using Buddhism as a stick with which
to beat Hinduism.  The rhetoric about “egalitarian Buddhism vs.
oppressive Hinduism” is now so influential in India’s collective
consciousness that I consider it worthwhile to hear their testimonies
too.  The eminent historian D.D. Kosambi pointed out that in the
recruitment of monks, the candidate’s social position was not entirely
disregarded: “…runaway slaves, savage tribesmen, escaped criminals, the
chronically ill and the indebted as well as aboriginal Nagas were denied
admission into the order.”^([68](#68))

To ensure peace for itself and avoid trouble with society (creditors,
aggrieved slave-owners etc.), it was a logical decision for the Buddhist
Sangha to keep out all those who could attract angry attention.  The
encounter with worldly suffering (typified by an old man, a sick man and
a corpse) had convinced Gautama to turn away from the world and to focus
on spiritual exercises.  The monks did not want to be disturbed with
social problems, and the atmosphere they created for themselves in their
monasteries was meant to focus their attention on their spiritual
practice, not on the social needs of the laymen:

“No rotting half-eaten corpse, no leprous beggar with festering sores
mars the smooth harmony of sumptuous frescoes and reliefs to remind the
monk of the Founder’s doctrine.  Nor does the art portray the normal
hardships of the poorest villager, whose surplus the monk could eat, but
whose misery was easily discounted on the callous theory that the
suffering must have been deserved because of misdeeds in some previous
birth.”^([69](#69))

Not unlike clerics in other religions (including Brahmins), Buddhist
monks tended to develop a certain smugness regarding the privileges
which came with their spiritual prestige.  This is but a general human
failing and cannot be held against Buddhism as such, but it is
nonetheless notable that if Buddhism wasn’t any worse than others in
this respect, it wasn’t any better either.

Where slavery existed, Buddhism did not abolish it.  The Buddha never
ordered the masters to set the slaves free, nor the slaves to revolt
against their masters.  Buddhist monasteries continued the labour
arrangements existing in society at large.  In his study on slavery in
ancient India, the Marxist historian Dev Raj Chanana noticed the stark
contrast between the actual history of Buddhist social practice and the
more “progressive” picture given by modern writers, who fail to register
the existence of serfdom in connection with the Buddhist monasteries:

“On reading the modern works concerning the Buddhist order in India one
gains the impression that no slave labour was employed in the
monasteries.  One would be inclined to believe that all the work, even
in the big monasteries like \[those\] of Kosambi or Rajagriha, was
carried out by the monks themselves.  However, a study of Pali
literature shows clearly that the situation was otherwise.”^([70](#70))

From the beginning, Buddhism shared the disdain for manual labour
expressed by certain Brahminical and ancient Greek sources, which held
that philosophical pursuits required a freedom from labour tasks. 
According to Chanana, this attitude to labour had not always existed in
India to the same extent: “This attitude to manual work as an imposition
is in contrast with the view expressed in an earlier epoch, in the
Rigveda, where there is no expression of any dislike of manual
work.  This is, in part at least, due to the absence of the division of
labour as seen in the well-known verse describing various jobs,
intellectual and manual, undertaken by members of one and the same
family.”^([71](#71)) In the case of Buddhism, however, “we must not
forget that the Buddha, anxious to free his monks of material
preoccupations, had forbidden almost all manual labour to
them.”^([72](#72))

To the slaves, Buddhism gave the same justification of their condition
as is always scornfully attributed to Hinduism.  Chanana summarizes: “On
the other hand he advised the slaves to bear patiently with their lot
and explained the same as follows.  If a person is born a slave, it is
the consequence of some bad acts of an earlier life and the best way for
him is to submit willingly to his lot.  He should submit to all sorts of
treatment at the hands of his master and should never allow any feeling
of revenge to grow within himself, even if the other should try to kill
him.  In such cases, a change of destiny is promised to the slave in the
next birth. (…) In case, however, such a person is lucky enough to
obtain manumission from his master, he may obtain ordination and thus
try to secure salvation from the cycle of transmigration, i.e. release
from the slavery of life and death.”^([73](#73))

So, the same allegation of using the karma doctrine as an opium for the
people to keep them happy in their submission has been levelled against
the Buddha as well as against Puranic Hinduism: “That he derived his
conclusion from the widely accepted belief in the theory of karma, of
the retribution of acts, need not be stressed again and again.  To him
and his followers birth in a particular group was the consequence of
certain good or evil acts.  Since the retribution was believed to be
inexorable, unvarying, like the working of a machine, he could not but
advocate complete submission to one’s destiny (…) we may agree that the
Buddha (from what we learn about him in the Tipitaka) sincerely believed
in \[karma\].  But even from this angle it is clear that disobedience on
the part of a slave or servant was considered as an evil act.  The same
view was held of bad treatment on the part of a master.”^([74](#74))

The Hindutva horizon being typically limited to India, Jeevan Kulkarni
overlooks what could have been one of his strongest arguments: the fact
that Buddhism’s non-interest in social reform is amply demonstrated by
its career outside India.  Everywhere it integrated itself into the
existing social and political set-up, from bureaucratic centralism in
China to feudal militarism in Japan.  There is no known case of any of
these branches of Buddhism calling for social reform, let alone for a
social revolution as far-reaching as the abolition of caste would have
meant in India.  After centuries of profound impact of Buddhism, Tibetan
society was in such a state that the Chinese Communists could claim in
1950 (with exaggeration, but not without a kernel of truth) that 95% of
the Tibetans were living in slavery.  Buddhism does not seem to have
made Tibet’s traditional feudalism any more egalitarian than it had been
in the pre-Buddhist past.

Outside India, a number of sources confirm that Buddhist monasteries
employed slaves: “There are numerous references to prove the existence
of slaves in the Buddhist monasteries in China. (…) These slaves were
normally in charge of the maintenance of the monasteries but could also
be sent to aid the peasants at the time of ploughing, harvesting, etc. 
Public slaves and criminals used to be formed into groups and known as
the ‘families of the Buddha’ .”^([75](#75)) Perhaps “slave” is too
strong a term here, as many slaveholding societies had intermediate
forms of semi-free serfdom; but “egalitarianism” is certainly a
different thing.  Apart from slave-owning, the monasteries also upheld
milder forms of social inequality.  In China, they were feudal
landlords, and under the Tang dynasty (618-907) the Sangha was even the
biggest land-owner in the empire, until it was expropriated (in what has
been mis-termed the “Buddhist persecution”) because its tax-exempt
status disrupted the economy.  It also goes without saying that the
traditional inequality between men and women was fully accepted: nuns
were always lower in rank than monks.^([76](#76)) We may therefore agree
that by and large, Buddhism cannot be considered a pioneer of modern
egalitarianism.

Coming to the specific form of inequality which is the caste system, in
a survey of the Buddhist canon, we do find a number of references to
this subject.  These instances show that Buddhism was not meant as a
social revolution, even when it was critical of caste inequality.  Thus,
in a list of parables from the Pali Canon, we find the well-known
simile: “Whether kindled by a priest, a warrior, a trader or a serf,
from whatsoever type of fuel, a fire will emit light and heat; even so,
all men, regardless of caste, are equally capable of the highest
spiritual attainment.”^([77](#77)) This merely says that the spiritual
dimension is common to all, not that the differentiation of men into
castes or even the secular inequality between these castes should be
abolished.

Another instance is the famous story from the Divyavadana (2nd century
AD?), of the noble monk Ananda and the low-caste girl Prakriti.  The
girl tries to seduce the monk, but through the Buddha’s miraculous
intervention, her efforts are counterproductive, and it is she who
follows the monk into the Sangha: she becomes a nun.  But the public
objects to the ordination of an outcaste, and so the Buddha explains
that caste divisions have no bearing on spiritual life.^([78](#78))  But
he does not say that henceforth, his audience should intermarry with the
lowest castes.  He does just the opposite: he contrasts worldly and
spiritual spheres, and justifies the neglect of caste discrimination in
this case with reference to the girl’s spiritual vocation, thereby
acquiescing in the persistence of caste in lay society.  On the other
hand, even if only for theorical purposes, the text’s demolition of
caste inequality is thorough, e.g. it is said that in a previous life,
the two had already been lovers, though then their castes had been the
opposite.^([79](#79))

Another promising example is where the Buddha grills a Brahmin with
Socrates-type questions to extract from him the insight that to be a
Brahmin, or conversely to be unworthy of the practices of Arya Dharma,
birth is not the criterion.^([80](#80))  The modern editor explains that
the Buddha “vindicates his own universalist outlook and severely
criticizes the whole theoretical basis of the brahminical caste
structure”.^([81](#81)) Here, then, we reach the limit of Savarkar’s and
Kulkarni’s revision of the claim of Buddhist egalitarianism: eventhough
Buddhism did not reform society in an anti-caste sense, some Buddhist
texts did develop a theoretical criticism of caste.  Yes, there was an
anti-caste element in Buddhism, often voiced by Brahmin-born
monks.^([82](#82))

Brahmin writers have not only codified and justified the existing caste
system, and possibly hardened it; in the final editing of many
influential classics of Puranic Hinduism, they have also unnecessarily
extended caste distinction beyond the social sphere, incorporating
spiritual liberation in the calculus of karma and caste duties.  The
crassest example of this tendency is the Shambuka story in what experts
consider the youngest layer of Valmiki’s Ramayana, where Rama “has to”
kill the low-caste ascetic Shambuka because the latter’s spiritual
vocation is contrary to his caste duties and therefore harmful to
society as a whole.^([83](#83))

In anti-Hindu polemic, this episode is always held up as proving the
true and irreducible inhumanity of Hinduism.  However, J.L. Brockington
contrasts this episode of the Ramayana (7:67) with the contrary
evaluation of a similar act in an older layer of the Ramayana, viz. 
Dasharatha’s paying dearly for his killing Shravana, an ascetic of mixed
Vaishya-Shudra descent (2:57): “There has been an enormous shift in
attitudes between the period of the former, among the earlier additions,
and the latter, among the latest parts included in the text”, viz. an
appalling hardening of caste discrimination.^([84](#84)) The harsh caste
discrimination of recent centuries is a vaguely datable *innovation* in
Hindu social history, not an age-old conditions.^([85](#85))

A case could be made that this appropriation of spirituality by the
Brahmin caste is what the Buddha criticizes in the Prakriti story and
elsewhere.  What he objects to is not the existing social system on the
basis of caste, but precisely the improper extension of caste division
to the spiritual sphere, beyond the worldly sphere where social
distinctions belong.  We may add that Sri Lankan Buddhists, who have a
long history of fighting predominantly Hindu Tamils, and hence a strong
sense of separateness from Hinduism, observe their own caste
distinctions.^([86](#86))

Buddhism’s lack of interest in social reform was implicitly admitted by
Dr. Ambedkar himself, when as Law Minister he defended the inclusion of
Buddhists in the category of citizens to whom the Hindu Code Bill would
apply.  He declared: “When the Buddha differed from the Vedic Brahmins,
he did so only in matters of creed, but left the Hindu legal framework
intact.  He did not propound a separate law for his followers.  The same
was the case with Mahavir and the ten Sikh Gurus.”^([87](#87)) That
should clinch the issue.

**11.9. Conclusion**

Neo-Buddhim is based on a mistake.  Dr. Ambedkar opted for Buddhism on
the somewhat contrived assumption that the Buddhist Sangha Councils
provided a native model for modern parliamentary democracy, and mostly
on the wrong assumption that Buddhim was an anti-caste reform movement. 
In Hindutva literature, in a few marginal corners, the latter assumption
has been criticized, sometimes with reference to corroborative Western
research.  However, emanating from upper-caste Hindutva authors and
written in a heated polemical style, this is unlikely to reach let alone
convince the neo-Buddhost audience.

The neo-Buddhists are not Hindus, because they say so.  Indeed, whereas
all the other groups considered developed their identities naturally, in
a pursuit of Liberation or simply in response to natural and cultural
circumstances, only to discover later that this identity might be
described as non-Hindu, the neo-Buddhists were first of all motivated by
the desire to break with Hinduism.  The most politicized among them, all
while flaunting the label “Buddhist”, actually refuse to practise
Buddhism: because it distracts from the political struggle, and perhaps
also because the Buddhist discipline is too obviously similar to the
lifestyle of the hated Brahmins in its religious aspect.  It doesn’t
come naturally to political militants to sit down and shut all activist
concerns from their minds, whether to recite Vedic verses or to focus on
the dependent origination of their mental motions.

Yet, in broad sections of the converted Dalit masses, the practice of
Buddhism is catching on.  From a Hindu or a generally spiritual
viewpoint, this is one of the most hopeful and positive developments of
the post-independence period: many thousands of people who had truly
been a Depressed Class, confined to lowly occupations, suffering
humiliation and low self-esteem, often steeped in superstition and given
to alcoholism, entered the path of the Buddha.  Rather than talk about
the spiritual path and the glories of India’s sages, as anglicized
upper-caste Hindus do, they talk politics but do regularly sit down to
apply the methods taught by the Awakened One

Most thinking Hindus, from Veer Savarkar to Ram Swarup, have welcomed
the conversion of Dr. Ambedkar and his followers to Buddhism.  Rather
than joining hands with the Christians or Muslims, Dr. Ambedkar stayed
within the national mainstream by taking refuge in the Buddha, thus
averting what to Hindus looked like a looming disaster.  That he abjured
the Hindu Gods and the label “Hindu” seemed to matter less, especially
when research shows that many neo-Buddhists still participate in Hindu
forms of worship.

That the neo-Buddhists will move closer to the Hindu mainstream, and
possibly even take a leadership role in future waves of religious
revival, is rendered more likely by the evolution in society.  Thanks to
education, reservations, and the ever-widening impact of modernization
on all Indians regardless of caste, the actual living conditions and
cultural horizons of Dalits and upper castes become ever more similar. 
It is logical, then, that caste animosities will gradually give way to
the increasing realization of common Indian and common human concerns,
in mundane as well as in spiritual matters.

So, from the Hindu viewpoint, the practical conclusion ought to be: let
the neo-Buddhists be non-Hindus.  Their chosen religion will shield them
from maximum exposure to anti-Hindu influences, and will encourage in
them doctrines and practices with which most Hindus are familiar.  The
religious development and deepening of neo-Buddhism and the process of
social reform and psychological modernization in Hindu society ensures
that the two will meet again in the not too distant future.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)This sub-section and stray paragraphs in this chapter re-use
material used in my book *Indigenous Indians: Agastya to Ambedkar*, now
out of print.

[²](#2a)*Paramitas*: ideals of spiritual perfection.

[³](#3a)A set of twelve Hindu Devas and a number of minor Hindu Gods are
listed as Buddhist Gods (with their names in Mongol, Tibetan, Chinese,
Japanese, Thai and Khmer) in Louis Frédéric: *Les dieux du bouddhisme*,
p.258-268.

[⁴](#4a)D.D. Kosambi: *Culture and Civilisation of Ancient India*,
p.179.

[⁵](#5a)Dr. Ambedkar argued this hypothesis of his (not too
convincingly) in his book The Untouchables: *Who Were They and Why They
Became Untouchables?*, reproduced in his *Writings and Speeches* vol.7,
specifically p.315 ff.

[⁶](#6a)Neera Burra: “Buddhism, conversion and identity (a case study of
village Mahars)”, included in M.N. Srinivas: Caste: *Its
Twentieth-Century Avatar*, quoted by M.V. Kamath: “Caste: its
twentieth-century avatar”, Organiser, 9-2-1997.

[⁷](#7a)S R. Goel: *Samyak Sambuddha* (2nd ed.), p.iii-vi.

[⁸](#8a)B.R. Ambedkar: *The Buddha and His Dhamma* (also republished as
vol.11 of Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*), p.xlii.

[⁹](#9a)B. R. Ambedkar: *The Buddha and His Dhamma*, p.xlii.

[¹⁰](#10a)D. Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.521, with reference to *Mahabodhi*,
December 1959.

[¹¹](#11a)D. Keer: *Ambedkar*, with reference to *The Light of Dhamma*,
January 1959.

[¹²](#12a)Jivaka: “Bhikkhus Who Lead Lay Lives”, *The Buddhist* 1959/60,
p.157, quoted in Heinz Bechert: *Buddhismus, Staat und Gesellschaft*,
vol.1, p.57-58.

[¹³](#13a)*Times of India*, 30-6-1992.

[¹⁴](#14a)Gopal Guru: “Hinduisation of Ambedkar in Maharashtra”,
*Economic and Political Weekly*, 16 Feb. 1991, p.339-341.

[¹⁵](#15a)Gopal Guru: “Hinduisation of Ambedkar”, *EPW*, 16 Feb. 1991,
p.339-341.

[¹⁶](#16a)Johannes Beltz: “Spiritualiser le Dhamma?  L’implantation
contestee du Trailokya Bauddha Mahasangha en Inde”, *Asiatische Studien*
(Zurich), 1997/4, p-1059.

[¹⁷](#17a)Interview by Johannes Beltz: “Spiritualiser le Dhamma?”,
*Asiatische Studien*, 1997/4, p.1065.

[¹⁸](#17a)Interview by Johannes Beltz: “Spiritualiser le Dhamma?”,
*Asiatische Studien*, 1997/4, p.1068.

[¹⁹](#19a)Dr. Ambedkar: *The Buddha and his Dhamma*, book 1, part 5,
para 2, in Writings and Speeches, vol.11, p.83-87.

[²⁰](#20a)Ambedkar: *The Buddha and his Dhamma*, 1:5:2.

[²¹](#21a)Ambedkar: *The Buddha and his Dhamma*, 1:5:2.

[²²](#22a)Ambedkar: *The Buddha and His Dhamma* 1:3:3.

[²³](#23a)Ambedkar: *The Buddha and His Dhamma* 1:4:3.

[²⁴](#24a)Ambedkar: *Philosophy of Hinduism*, in *Writings and
Speeches*, vol.3, p.85, with reference to Huxley: Evolution and Ethics,
p.63-64, McMillan & Co., London 1903.

[²⁵](#25a)Republished as Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.4.

[²⁶](#26a)V.N. Utpat: *Riddles of Buddha and Ambedkar*.

[²⁷](#27a)T.C. and R.K. Majupuria: *Sadhus and Saints*, p.305.

[²⁸](#28a)T.C. and R.K. Majupuria: *Sadhus and Saints*, p.305.

[²⁹](#29a)V.S. Naipaul: *A Wounded Civilization*, p.65. The book was
written during the Emergency, well before the all-out deification of
Ambedkar in ca. 1990.

[³⁰](#30a)That at least is what he told me (interview, HMS Delhi office,
1992). He died a natural death of cancer in 1995.

[³¹](#31a)J. Kulkarni: *Historical Truths & Untruths Exposed*, esp.
Ch.1, “Ambedkar and His ‘Dhamma’”, and Ch.2, “False Notions of
Atrocities Committed on Harijans”.

[³²](#32a)Quoted in Dh. Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.503.

[³³](#33a)Quoted in Dh. Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.498.

[³⁴](#34a)Quoted in Dhananjay Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.455.

[³⁵](#35a)Dhananjay Keer: *Ambedkar*, p.453.

[³⁶](#36a)Ram Swarup: *Buddism vis-à-vis Hinduism*, p.1.

[³⁷](#37a)The assault was acclaimed in Dalit Voice, 1-4-1996; Shourie’s
reply can be read in his book *Worshipping False Gods.. Ambedkar, and
the Facts which Have Been Erased*, p.625-639.

[³⁸](#38a)Arun Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*.  Immediately after
being released (May 1997), proposals were in the air to ban the book
(even one by a BJP backbencher, voiced at least inside the BJP
executive; at that time, the BJP wooed the SC constituency and formed a
coalition with the Ambedkarite Bahujan Samaj Party in UP).  However, a
large section of the Leftist Government consisted of Other Backward
Castes representatives (like Mulayam Singh Yadav, who ordered copies of
Shourie’s book in bulk) who were in conflict with the Ambedkarite
parties and annoyed with the proliferation of Ambedkar statues, and they
assured Shourie (their one-time enemy for his fiery opposition to
reservations for OBCs) that no ban would materialize.

[³⁹](#39a)Arun Shourie: “‘It is painful, it is shameful, it is
hateful’”, *Observer of Business and Politics*, 22-11-1996, a reply to
comments on his earlier article: “Is Ambedkar the Manu of our times?”
Remark that in the passage quoted above, V.S. Naipaul (*Wounded
Civilization*, p.65) rightly called Ambedkar “an angry and (for all his
eminence) defeated man”.

[⁴⁰](#40a)In the 1930s and 40s, like other acclaimed heroes of social
reform such as M.N. Roy and “Periyar” Ramaswamy Naicker, Dr. Ambedkar
was literally a paid agent of the British, even becoming the Member for
Labour of the Viceroy’s Council.

[⁴¹](#41a)In ca. 1930-1960, E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker, a.k.a. Periyar, was
the undisputed leader of the anti-Brahmin and separatist movement in
Tamil Nadu.  His movement, the *Dravida Kazhagam* (Tamil Federation),
was soon outgrown by its less radical offshoots, the *Dravida Munnetra
Kazhagam* (Tamil Progressive Federation) and the *Anna Dravida Munnetra
Kazhagam (C. Annadurai’s* Tamil Progressive Federation), which have
jointly dominated Tamil politics for the last three decades.  Periyar
was an atheist and passionate enemy of religion in general, but
supported conversion to Islam rather than to atheism or Buddhism because
it would frighten the Hindus more.

[⁴²](#42a)Bjp Scheduled Caste Morcha president Bangaru Laxman
(*Organiser*, 6-8-1995) accused Congress leader Sitaram Kesri, who had
bracketed the Dalits with the minorities as sufferers of Hindu
oppression, of thereby showing “disrespect to \[Dalit\] saints like
Ravidas, Satyakam Jabali, Sadhna Kasai, Banka Mahar, Dhanna Chamar and
others who protected Hindutva against foreign onslaughts.” (most of
these were Ramanandi saints of the late middle ages)

[⁴³](#43a)A. Shourie: “‘it is painful, it is shameful, it is hateful’”,
*Observer of Business and Politics*, 22-11-1996, now in A. Shourie:
*Worshipping False Gods*, p.607 ff.

[⁴⁴](#44a)Rajendra Singh: “Dr. Ambedkar”, 14 April 1995, *Sarsanghchalak
Goes Abroad*, p.62.

[⁴⁵](#45a)Rajendra Singh: *Abroad*, p.62.

[⁴⁶](#46a)Rajendra Singh: *Abroad*, p.63.

[⁴⁷](#47a)Rajendra Singh: *Abroad*, p.63-64. Nizam: the Muslim ruler of
Hyderabad, a large princely state in Central India, who was extremely
wealthy thanks to the diamond mines there.

[⁴⁸](#48a)Rajendra Singh: *Abroad*, p.64.

[⁴⁹](#49a)Rajendra Singh: *Abroad*, p.64.

[⁵⁰](#50a)Praful Bidwai: “Hindutva's fallacies and fantasies”,
*Frontline*, 21-11-1998.

[⁵¹](#51a)*Repoil of the Congress Committee of Enquiry into the Cawnpore
Riots* (1931), reproduced in N.G. Barrier: *Roots of Communal Politics*,
p.125.

[⁵²](#52a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.27.

[⁵³](#53a)V. D.  Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p. 140.

[⁵⁴](#54a)The exaggerated picture of intense repression against hunting
should be read against the background of the preceding passage (*Six
Glorious Epoch*s, p. 138-139) on “the martyr louse”: the story goes that
a 12th-century Jain king of Gujarat, Kumara Pala, forbade the exercise
of all professions implying any form of killing and even had a man
beheaded because he had knowingly cracked a louse.

[⁵⁵](#55a)R.C. Majumdar, H.C. Raychoudhary, Kali Kumar Datta: *An
Advanced History of India*, p.151.

[⁵⁶](#56a)Akemi Koike & Allessandro Valota: “Het laatste taboe” (Dutch:
“The last taboo”), *Wereldwijd*, May 1992.

[⁵⁷](#57a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p.140; reference is to
Majumdar, Raychoudhary, Datta: *Advanced History of India*, p. 186; but
in (a more recent edition of) this book, I have been unable to find this
quotation.

[⁵⁸](#58a)V.D. Savarkar: *Six Glorious Epochs*, p.141.

[⁵⁹](#59a)J. Kulkarni: *Historical Truths*, p.26.

[⁶⁰](#60a)Madhav Deshpande: “Language and legitimacy: Buddhist and Hindu
techniques”, in V. Subramaniam, ed.: *Buddhist-Hindu Interactions*,
p.27. The focus of his paper is on the resultant language policy in
early Buddhism, viz. the rejection of Brahminical Sanskrit in favour of
the metropolitan Magadhi Prakrit (comparable to the downgrading of
clerical Latin in the late Renaissance period in favour of national
vernaculars promoted by absolute kings and the emerging bourgeoisie).

[⁶¹](#61a)J. Kulkarni: *Historical Truths*, p.26. Prof. P. Laxmi Narsu’s
*Essence of Buddhism* was Dr. Ambedkar’s acknowledged guide on Buddhism;
he helped in getting the book published through Thacker & Co., Mumbai
1948; vide D. Keer: *Dr. Ambedkar*, p.400.

[⁶²](#62a)W.W. Hunter: *Imperial Gazetteer* 1907; quoted in J. Kulkarni:
*Historical Truths*, p.27.

[⁶³](#63a)H. Oldenberg: *Buddha* (republished 1971), p.154, quoted by
Kulkarni: *Historical Truths*, p.27.

[⁶⁴](#64a)R. Spencer Hardy: *Manual of Buddhism* (1853), quoted by
Kulkarni: *Historical Truths*, p.26.

[⁶⁵](#65a)T.W. Rhys-Davids in *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*,
1891-92, quoted by J. Kulkarni: *Historical Truths*, p. 26.

[⁶⁶](#66a)A. Wayman: “The Buddhist attitude toward Hinduism”, *Studia
Missionalia* 1993, p-330.

[⁶⁷](#67a)E. Zürcher: *Boeddhisme*, p.49.

[⁶⁸](#68a)D.D. Kosambi: *The Culture and Civilisation of Ancient India*,
p.179.

[⁶⁹](#69a)D.D. Kosambi: *Ancient India*, p. 179.

[⁷⁰](#70a)Dev Raj Chanana: *Slavery in Ancient India*, p.81.

[⁷¹](#71a)D.R. Chanana: *Slavery*, p.59, with reference to Rgveda
9:112:3.

[⁷²](#72a)D.R. Chanana: *Slavery*, p.82; in footnote, he aptly remarks
the contrast with Christian monasticism, where, in the words of St.
Benedict, “work is prayer”.

[⁷³](#73a)D.R. Chanana: *Slavery*, p.61.

[⁷⁴](#74a)D.R. Chanana: *Slavery*, p.62.

[⁷⁵](#75a)D.R. Chanana: *Slavery*, p.85-86, with reference to J. Gernet
(and to Chinese sources quoted by him): *Aspects économiques du
bouddhisme en Chine*, Paris 1956.

[⁷⁶](#76a)The fact is noted with naive indignation in Tibet by Erik
Bruijn: *Tantra*, p.127 ff.

[⁷⁷](#77a)Sangharakshita: *The Eternal Legacy*, p. 35.

[⁷⁸](#78a)Sangharakshita: *The Eternal Legacy*, p.63.

[⁷⁹](#79a)This scenario, incidentally, shows how the doctrine of
reincarnation can undermine the caste system rather than support it, for
it reduces caste status to something superficial, a coat which is taken
off and exchanged for a new one with every new birth.

[⁸⁰](#80a)*Dhammapada* 26, discussed in Sangharakshita: *Eternal
Legacy*, p.10, and in Alex Wayman: “The Buddhist attitude towards
Hinduism”, *Studia Missionalia* 1993, p-336.

[⁸¹](#81a)Sangharakshita: *Eternal Legacy*, p.63.

[⁸²](#82a)As pointed out by Alex Wayman: “The Buddhist attitude towards
Hinduism”, *Studia Missionalia* 1993, p.333-334.

[⁸³](#83a)Bhagwan Singh, a Marxist yet nationalist historian who joined
the Aryan Invasion debate with his book *The Vedic Harappans*, told me
(interview, December 1996) that he thinks the Shambuka story, part of
the *Uttarakânda* (“final part”, also containing Rama’s controversial
repudiation of Sita) which is widely considered a later addition, is an
interpolation by Buddhists precisely to blacken Brahminism.  But then
how did those Buddhists smuggle it in?  If true, this would also confirm
the anti-caste element in Buddhist polemic.

[⁸⁴](#84a)J. L. Brockington: *Righteous Rama*, p.158.  Reference is to
Shravana

[⁸⁵](#85a)This contrast between less casteism in antiquity and more
casteism in the Christian era is even proven by Buddhist anti-caste
polemic itself.  As Maurice Winternitz (*A History of Indian
Literature*, vol.2, p.265-66) notes about the *Vajrasûchî*, a text
attributed to the Brahmin-born monk Ashvaghosha: “This work refutes the
Brahmanical caste system very cuttingly.  The author (…) seeks to prove
from the Brahmanical texts themselves, by quotations from the Veda, the
*Mahâbhârata* and the law book of Manu, how frail the claims of the
Brahman caste are.”

[⁸⁶](#86a)In his book *Vedda Villages of Anuradhapura*, James Brown
mentions that the Veddas (aboriginal tribals) “fit in the caste
structure of the Sinhalese Buddhist peasantry” (p.3), but that they are
“excluded from Buddhist ceremony” (p.29) and, as the lowest rung in
society, they “receive dropouts” (p.34). On the other hand, while there
is no intermarriage with Muslims (p.139), there is 15% of intermarriage
with Sinhalese Buddhists (P.34).

[⁸⁷](#87a)Quoted from *Times of India*, 7 Feb. 1951, in Dh. Keer:
*Ambedkar*, p.427.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


