+++
title = "HW 1"
+++

## 1
You observe that a population of dragonflies show oscillatory patterns, i.e.  population density is changing roughly periodically with time.  Propose two hypotheses- with a brief reasoning for each of them - for the observed patterns.(5 Marks)

### Response
- Changing seasons could be affecting food availability, leading to alternating increases and decreases.
- An interspecific competition with either species gaining the upper hand for a while before the other adapts.

## 2
What is the interpretation of K in the population equation \\(N_{t+1} = N_t(1-\dfrac{N_t}{k})\\). (2 Marks)

### Response
If k is \\(\infty\\), \\(N_t\\) remains constant. If k is \\(N_t\\), everyone dies.

## 3
We considered the linear decay of R with \\(N_t\\) in the class.  Alternatively, consider \\(R= exp(− \dfrac{N_t−K}{K})\\), i.e.  an exponential decay.  

### 3a
(a) The population model now reads: \\(N_{t+1} = N_t exp(− \dfrac{N_t−K}{K})\\).  What is a possible interpretation of K in this model? 

### 3b
(b) Eliminate one of the parameters without loosing any information and write the resulting simplified model. (5 Marks).

## 4
Bacteria has a generation time of 20 minutes at the end of which it divides to giverise to daughters when sucient resources are around.  A student puts a bacteriumin a container having sufficient resources for reproduction and then she ensuresthat per-capita resource availability never goes down.  If she indeed maintains thatcondition, what will be the number of bacteria and the approximate weight of thebeaker at the end of 24 hours?  For this question:  (a) estimate numbers manuallywithout using  calculators/computers (b)  list any assumptions  you make  clearly. 10 Marks.

### Response


## 5
equired readings:  (1) Read the uploaded book chapter “Modelling Philosophy” by Hanna Kokko.  (2) Strategy of modelling in Ecology by Levins (first two and a half pages).  (a) Write three key criteriayouwould use to evaluate a math-ematical model of a biological system.  (b) Levins talks about the importance of ’robust’ results which are independent of the detailed assumptions.  What do youthink are cons of having such robust results when one tries to interpret real data?
