+++
title = "01 CHAPTER I NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE ON INDIAN HISTORY"

+++
**CHAPTER I**

**NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE ON INDIAN HISTORY**

Mathew Arnold had composed his famous lines with reference to a
particular context. He had the Buddha and similar Hindu sages in mind
when he wrote the following famous lines:

> The East bowed low before the blast,  
> In patient deep disdain;  
> She let the legions thunder past,  
> And plunged in thought again.

Little did the poet suspect that his tribute to Hindu spirituality would
be twisted to embellish an imperialist version of Indian history
according to which the “meek Hindu” had always been preoccupied with
sterile speculations, and seldom stood up in defence of his country and
culture.  
 

PERVERSE VERSION OF INDIAN HISTORY

This version of Indian history was formulated by a few misinformed or
motivated British historians. But many Hindus participated in
popularising this version in the mistaken belief that they were thus
proving the superiority of India’s “spiritual culture” over the
materialistic civilization of the modern West. In due course, this
became the standard lore taught in our schools and colleges under the
system of education sponsored by Christian missionaries and British
bureaucrats. The same system of education has not only continued after
independence but has also multiplied manifold. It has spread this
version of Indian history to larger and larger segments of succeeding
generations. Muslim and Marxist “historians” have promoted it with an
ever increasing zeal. They may not have any use for Hindu spirituality.
But they find this version of Indian history very convenient for
advancing their imperialist causes.

In the process, India’s history has become a history of foreign invaders
- Aryans, Iranians, Greeks, Parthians, Scythians, Kushans, Arabs, Turks,
Persians, Portuguese, Dutch, French, and British - rather than a history
of the greatest civilization which the world has known, and later on of
Hindu heroism which fought and ultimately frustrated all foreign
invaders. India itself has become a sub-continent seething with a mass
of heterogeneous humanity rather than an ancient and indivisible Hindu
homeland. Indian people have become a conglomeration of nationalities,
racial groups and religious communities which are finding it difficult
to co-exist in peace, rather than a national society which is trying to
reform itself and reclaim some of its unfortunate sections alienated
from it by successive waves of Islamic, Christian and modern Western
imperialism. And Indian culture has become a mechanical mixture of odds
and ends, indigenous and imported, rather than a homogeneous whole
created by a vast spiritual vision which is finding itself ill at ease
with incompatible impositions.

It was this version of India’s history which gave a good conscience to
the British imperialist while he pulverised Hindu society, plundered
Hindu wealth and poured undisguised contempt on Hindu culture. It was
this version of India’s history which emasculated Hindu society and
emboldened the residues of Islamic imperialism to stage street riots and
then walk away with precious parts of the Hindu homeland, thus
consolidating an aggression which had not succeeded even though mounted
again and again for more than a thousand years. It is this version of
India’s history which is being invoked by the fifth-columns of Islam,
Christianity, and Communism, each of which looks forward to a final
conquest of this country with the help of foreign finances and, if need
be, foreign firearms. And it is this version of India’s history which is
being promoted by power-hungry politicians who woo the Muslim vote-bank
while they divide Hindu society into mutually hostile camps.  
 

PUTTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT

Hindu society owes it to its own survival in the present and to the
prosperity of its future generations to repudiate this perverse version
of India’s history, and to put the record straight so that no one dares
divorce Hindu spirituality from Hindu heroism, Hindu nation from the
Hindu homeland, and Hindu culture from the national culture of India.
Hindu saints, sages and scholars in general and Hindu historians in
particular have to come forward to do their duty towards their society
and culture and to pay homage to their ancient heritage. Hindu
*Dharmashãstras* have enjoined upon every Hindu to repay according to
his or her capacity the *rishi-riNa*, that is, the debt we owe to our
seers and sages, by passing on to the next generation the Veda and the
Itihãsa-PurãNa, that is, the spiritual and cultural vision of Sanatana
Dharma and the historical tradition of Hindu heroism. In the present
situation, that is perhaps also the best way to repay the *pitri-riNa*,
that is, the debt we owe to our forefathers for the protection,
preservation and perpetuation of our great Hindu society and its
continuously creative culture.

The latest scholar and historian to repay the *rishi-riNa* in an ample
measure is Dr. Ram Gopal Misra whose monograph has been published
recently.^([1](#1))

The book is small in size. But it is packed with painstaking research,
and is thus a solid and substantial contribution to the history of a
comparatively obscure period of Indian history. What is more important
is the perspective. “The present thesis,” writes Dr. Misra in his
Preface, “is an attempt to provide a connected account of the *prolonged
and sustained efforts made by Indians to stem the tide of early Muslim
invaders*. The political and military resistance was spread over more
than five and half centuries till its final collapse in northern India
in the last decade of the 12th Century A.D. For long, historians have
emphasised merely the ultimate collapse of the Indians, ignoring
completely the resistance offered by them. *It is a fact of history that
such sustained resistance as encountered by the Muslim arms in India was
not faced by them in any other land conquered by them…* The Indian
resistance had another facet, which was the outcome of the resolute
determination of the Indians to preserve their religious and cultural
identity. While country after country, from the straits of Gibralter to
the banks of the Indus, witnessed the rapid Islamization of their
individual cultures, even Northern India managed to survive as a
predominantly ‘heathen’ land even after five centuries of Muslim
rule.”^([2](#2))  
 

THE NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

Dr. Misra’s monograph deals with a specific period limited in its
time-span. But the perspective he provides in processing this period is
pertinent to the entire panorama of Indian history. For long, India has
been depicted as a no-man’s-land which invader after invader has claimed
as an easy prize, and into which diverse races, religions, and cultures
have acquired an equal legitimacy. Dr. Misra rejects this perspective
effectively and forcefully when he portrays India as the homeland of an
ancient people who are united by a distinct and deeply spiritual
culture, and who are prepared to fight and defy death in defence of
their patrimony. The national perspective that thus emerges from Dr.
Misra’s monograph is relevant not only to a correct reading of India’s
past but also to a correct appraisal of India’s present-day politics.

This national perspective on India’s history had been alive and active
in our national consciousness all through the long-drawn-out struggle
against Islamic imperialism, though it had expressed itself more as a
religious and cultural idiom than as a political ideology. It had come
into sharp focus in course of the Swadeshi Movement (1905-09) when the
brave resistance offered by the Rajputs and the turning of tables by the
Marathas and the Sikhs, had become a backdrop for the freedom fight
being waged against British imperialism. The residues of Islamic
imperialism like the Aligarh school of Muslim politicians had taken
fright at this re-affirmation of the national perspective, and sought
protection from the British against the rising tide of Indian
nationalism.  
 

POLITICS PERVERTS HISTORY

It was only later on that the national perspective was frowned upon by a
political leadership which was out to seek Muslim support for the
national movement as a short-cut to a quick and peaceful transfer of
power. The Muslim support failed to materialise. Instead, Islamic
imperialism became parasitic on the national movement, and continued to
fatten till it succeeded in partitioning the country. But in the
process, the national perspective on Indian history stood subverted in
all its essentials. We are now paying the price in the from of renewed
aggression from Islamic imperialism, and the growing fissiparous
tendencies within the national fold.

The national perspective had become diluted when some scribes,
patronised by an opportunist or self-alienated political leadership, had
started parading Siraj-ud-Dawla, Hyder Ali, Tipu Sultan and Bahadur
Shah, the last Mughal, as Indian patriots, and pillorying Mir Jafar and
Omichand as traitors. It had become distorted when the Mughal empire had
begun to be depicted as a native political system in which its victims,
the Hindus, were harangued to take as much pride as they had done
earlier in the Maurya, the Andhra, and the Gupta empires. And it had
suffered a total perversion when the Mamluks, the Khaljis, the Tughlaqs,
the Sayyads, the Lodis and the Bahmanis were transformed into indigenous
dynasties on par with the Maukharis, the Rashtrakutas, the Chalukyas,
the Chandellas, the Chauhans, and so on.  In the process, the bulkwarks
of national resistance like Mewar and Vijayanagar were reduced to puny
Hindu principalities on par with provinces ruled by Muslim governors,
and indomitable freedom fighters like Rana Pratap and Shivaji were cut
down to the size of local chieftains on par with Muslim rebels who
frequently ran foul of their imperialist overlords at Delhi or Agra.  
 

INSIDIOUS IMAGE OF HINDU PERSONALITY

Still more serious was the emergence of an insidious image of Hindu
personality as a direct result of this loss of the national perspective
on Indian history. In due course, most Hindus, particularly the
English-educated Hindu elite, have been made to believe that a Hindu is
not true to himself nor to his religion and culture unless he 1) honours
as his own heroes all those invaders and crusaders who demolished his
temples, desecrated the images of his Gods and Goddesses, burnt his
Shãstras, humiliated his holy men, dishonoured his women, pillaged his
property, massacred his countrymen *en masse*, sold his children into
slavery, trampled upon every symbol of his religion and culture, and
coerced his co-religionists to swear by an aggressive and intolerant
dogma glorified as the *Kalima*; 2) shows reverence for an ideology of
calculated and cold-blooded gangesterism masquerading as the only true
religion; 3) pays homage to all those pretenders, scoundrels, and
hoodlums which this ideology presents as its sufis, saints and heroes;
4) practises patience and tolerance towards those who vow openly and
work ceaselessly to destroy his religion and culture, and to take
forcible possession of his homeland; and 5) is always prepared to
surrender everything he possesses or cherishes in order to avoid
violence and bloodshed.  
 

HISTORY OF HINDU HEROISM

Dr. Misra is one of those few historians who have helped Hindu society
not only to recover the national perspective on Indian history but also
to resurrect the heroic image of Hindu personality. In giving a blow by
blow account of how Hindus fought tenaciously and for a long time for
every inch of their homeland in the face of an inveterate enemy inspired
by a diabolical creed, he has brought out in bold relief not only the
fact that Hindus were second to none when it came to making sacrifices
for their motherland but also the fact that Hindus were fighting in
defence of something which they valued above their very lives. “The
early successes of Islam,” he writes, “were against religions which had
lost their hold on the minds of the people. But in India the Hindu way
of life, symbolised by high moral values of tolerance, truthfulness and
justice was very much the part and parcel of the multitude’s mental and
material being. These eternal and moral values of life which constitute
the core of Hinduism were to sustain it in the next five centuries of
Muslim and another two centuries of British rule. *The conclusion,
therefore, seems inescapable that much of the decline in social and
moral values of Hindu society is the result and not the cause of their
foreign subjugation*.”^([3](#3))  
 

INDIGENOUS SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY

His book has 8 chapters besides an Introduction and a Conclusion. The
most important chapter to my mind is Chapter V in which he has
reproduced, with English translation and explanatory comments, a
selection of Sanskrit inscriptions from different places in India
ranging from Hansi in Haryana to Gauhati in Assam, and from Badaun in
Uttar Pradesh to Nagpur in Maharashtra. These inscriptions refer to
significant events which have been either not cited or suppressed by
medieval Muslim historians upon whom modern historians have depended so
far for narration of events in that period. “Exclusive dependence on
Persian and Arabic sources,” observes Dr. Misra, “for an account of
Muslim invasions, is apt to produce an unbalanced view. The basic
prejudices of the Muslim historians, who mostly belonged to the Ulema
class, against other religions, make them reject any other account,
however authentic, if it tends to subvert their basic belief in the
might of Islam. The victories of the arms of Islam have been elaborately
described while the reverses have either been conveniently omitted or
painted as having ended in negotiations and tribute. Even when
described, only minor details are made available.”^([4](#4))

In the articles that follow I will summarise Dr. Misra’s account of
Hindu heroism spread over several centuries.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ram Gopal Misra, Indian Resistance to Early Muslim Invaders
Upto 1206 A.D., Anu Books, Shivaji Road, Meerut city, 1983. The book has
been reprinted in 1992.

[²](#2a) Emphasis added.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 9. Emphasis added.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., p.64.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


