+++
title = "71 Sir Muhammad Iqbal’s 1930 Presidential Address"

+++
Source: *Speeches, Writings, and Statements of Iqbal*, compiled and
edited by Latif Ahmed Sherwani (Lahore: Iqbal Academy, 1977 \[1944\],
2nd ed., revised and enlarged), pp. 3-26. This version has been slightly
edited by FWP for classroom use. Some extremely long paragraphs have
been broken into shorter ones; small errors of punctuation, etc., have
been corrected. All italics are those of the original text. Annotations
in square brackets, and paragraph numbers in double brackets, have been
added by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sir Muhammad Iqbal’s 1930 Presidential Address

to the 25th Session of the All-India Muslim League  
Allahabad, 29 December 1930

\*[\[\[1\]\]](#01)\* Islam and Nationalism  
\*[\[\[2\]\]](#02)\* The Unity of an Indian Nation  
\*[\[\[3\]\]](#03)\* Muslim India Within India  
\*[\[\[4\]\]](#04)\* Federal States  
\*[\[\[5\]\]](#05)\* Federation As Understood in the Simon Report  
\*[\[\[6\]\]](#06)\* Federal Scheme As Discussed in the Round Table
Conference  
\*[\[\[7\]\]](#07)\* The Problem of Defence  
\*[\[\[8\]\]](#08)\* The Alternative  
\*[\[\[9\]\]](#09)\* The Round Table Conference  
\*[\[\[10\]\]](#10)\* The Conclusion

\[\[0\]\] Gentlemen, I am deeply grateful to you for the honour you have
conferred upon me in inviting me to preside over the deliberations of
the All-India Muslim League at one of the most critical moments in the
history of Muslim political thought and activity in India. I have no
doubt that in this great assembly there are men whose political
experience is far more extensive than mine, and for whose knowledge of
affairs I have the highest respect. It will, therefore, be presumptuous
on my part to claim to guide an assembly of such men in the political
decisions which they are called upon to make today. I lead no party; I
follow no leader. I have given the best part of my life to a careful
study of Islam, its law and polity, its culture, its history and its
literature. This constant contact with the spirit of Islam, as it
unfolds itself in time, has, I think, given me a kind of insight into
its significance as a world fact. It is in the light of this insight,
whatever its value, that, while assuming that the Muslims of India are
determined to remain true to the spirit of Islam, I propose not to guide
you in your decisions, but to attempt the humbler task of bringing
clearly to your consciousness the main principle which, in my opinion,
should determine the general character of these decisions.

\[\[1\]\] Islam and Nationalism

\[\[1a\]\] It cannot be denied that Islam, regarded as an ethical ideal
plus a certain kind of polity – by which expression I mean a social
structure regulated by a legal system and animated by a specific ethical
ideal – has been the chief formative factor in the life-history of the
Muslims of India. It has furnished those basic emotions and loyalties
which gradually unify scattered individuals and groups, and finally
transform them into a well-defined people, possessing a moral
consciousness of their own. Indeed it is not an exaggeration to say that
India is perhaps the only country in the world where Islam, as a
people-building force, has worked at its best. In India, as elsewhere,
the structure of Islam as a society is almost entirely due to the
working of Islam as a culture inspired by a specific ethical ideal. What
I mean to say is that Muslim society, with its remarkable homogeneity
and inner unity, has grown to be what it is, under the pressure of the
laws and institutions associated with the culture of Islam.

\[\[1b\]\] The ideas set free by European political thinking, however,
are now rapidly changing the outlook of the present generation of
Muslims both in India and outside India. Our younger men, inspired by
these ideas, are anxious to see them as living forces in their own
countries, without any critical appreciation of the facts which have
determined their evolution in Europe. In Europe Christianity was
understood to be a purely monastic order which gradually developed into
a vast church organisation. The protest of Luther was directed against
this church organisation, not against any system of polity of a secular
nature, for the obvious reason that there was no such polity associated
with Christianity. And Luther was perfectly justified in rising in
revolt against this organisation; though, I think, he did not realise
that in the peculiar conditions which obtained in Europe, his revolt
would eventually mean the complete displacement of \[the\] universal
ethics of Jesus by the growth of a plurality of national and hence
narrower systems of ethics.

\[\[1c\]\] Thus the upshot of the intellectual movement initiated by
such men as Rousseau and Luther was the break-up of the one into \[the\]
mutually ill-adjusted many, the transformation of a human into a
national outlook, requiring a more realistic foundation, such as the
notion of country, and finding expression through varying systems of
polity evolved on national lines, i.e. on lines which recognise
territory as the only principle of political solidarity. If you begin
with the conception of religion as complete other-worldliness, then what
has happened to Christianity in Europe is perfectly natural. The
universal ethics of Jesus is displaced by national systems of ethics and
polity. The conclusion to which Europe is consequently driven is that
religion is a private affair of the individual and has nothing to do
with what is called man's temporal life.

\[\[1d\]\] Islam does not bifurcate the unity of man into an
irreconcilable duality of spirit and matter. In Islam God and the
universe, spirit and matter, Church and State, are organic to each
other. Man is not the citizen of a profane world to be renounced in the
interest of a world of spirit situated elsewhere. To Islam, matter is
spirit realising itself in space and time. Europe uncritically accepted
the duality of spirit and matter, probably from Manichaean thought. Her
best thinkers are realising this initial mistake today, but her
statesmen are indirectly forcing the world to accept it as an
unquestionable dogma. It is, then, this mistaken separation of spiritual
and temporal which has largely influenced European religious and
political thought and has resulted practically in the total exclusion of
Christianity from the life of European States. The result is a set of
mutually ill-adjusted States dominated by interests not human but
national. And these mutually ill-adjusted States, after trampling over
the moral and religious convictions of Christianity, are today feeling
the need of a federated Europe, i.e. the need of a unity which the
Christian church organisation originally gave them, but which, instead
of reconstructing it in the light of Christ's vision of human
brotherhood, they considered fit to destroy under the inspiration of
Luther.

\[\[1e\]\] A Luther in the world of Islam, however, is an impossible
phenomenon; for here there is no church organisation similar to that of
Christianity in the Middle Ages, inviting a destroyer. In the world of
Islam we have a universal polity whose fundamentals are believed to have
been revealed but whose structure, owing to our legists' \[=legal
theorists'\] want of contact with the modern world, today stands in need
of renewed power by fresh adjustments. I do not know what will be the
final fate of the national idea in the world of Islam. Whether Islam
will assimilate and transform it, as it has before assimilated and
transformed many ideas expressive of a different spirit, or allow a
radical transformation of its own structure by the force of this idea,
is hard to predict. Professor Wensinck of Leiden (Holland) wrote to me
the other day: "It seems to me that Islam is entering upon a crisis
through which Christianity has been passing for more than a century. The
great difficulty is how to save the foundations of religion when many
antiquated notions have to be given up. It seems to me scarcely possible
to state what the outcome will be for Christianity, still less what it
will be for Islam." At the present moment the national idea is
racialising the outlook of Muslims, and thus materially counteracting
the humanizing work of Islam. And the growth of racial consciousness may
mean the growth of standards different \[from\] and even opposed to the
standards of Islam.

\[\[1f\]\] I hope you will pardon me for this apparently academic
discussion. To address this session of the All-India Muslim League you
have selected a man who is \[=has\] not despaired of Islam as a living
force for freeing the outlook of man from its geographical limitations,
who believes that religion is a power of the utmost importance in the
life of individuals as well as States, and finally who believes that
*Islam is itself Destiny and will not suffer a destiny*. Such a man
cannot but look at matters from his own point of view. Do not think that
the problem I am indicating is a purely theoretical one. It is a very
living and practical problem calculated to affect the very fabric of
Islam as a system of life and conduct. On a proper solution of it alone
depends your future as a distinct cultural unit in India. Never in our
history has Islam had to stand a greater trial than the one which
confronts it today. It is open to a people to modify, reinterpret or
reject the foundational principles of their social structure; but it is
absolutely necessary for them to see clearly what they are doing before
they undertake to try a fresh experiment. Nor should the way in which I
am approaching this important problem lead anybody to think that I
intend to quarrel with those who happen to think differently. You are a
Muslim assembly and, I suppose, anxious to remain true to the spirit and
ideals of Islam. My sole desire, therefore, is to tell you frankly what
I honestly believe to be the truth about the present situation. In this
way alone it is possible for me to illuminate, according to my light,
the avenues of your political action.

\[\[2\]\] The Unity of an Indian Nation

\[\[2a\]\] What, then, is the problem and its implications? Is religion
a private affair? Would you like to see Islam as a moral and political
ideal, meeting the same fate in the world of Islam as Christianity has
already met in Europe? Is it possible to retain Islam as an ethical
ideal and to reject it as a polity, in favor of national polities in
which \[the\] religious attitude is not permitted to play any part? This
question becomes of special importance in India, where the Muslims
happen to be a minority. The proposition that religion is a private
individual experience is not surprising on the lips of a European. In
Europe the conception of Christianity as a monastic order, renouncing
the world of matter and fixing its gaze entirely on the world of spirit,
led, by a logical process of thought, to the view embodied in this
proposition. The nature of the Prophet's religious experience, as
disclosed in the Quran, however, is wholly different. It is not mere
experience in the sense of a purely biological event, happening inside
the experient and necessitating no reactions on its social environment.
It is individual experience creative of a social order. Its immediate
outcome is the fundamentals of a polity with implicit legal concepts
whose civic significance cannot be belittled merely because their origin
is revelational.

\[\[2b\]\] The religious ideal of Islam, therefore, is organically
related to the social order which it has created. The rejection of the
one will eventually involve the rejection of the other. Therefore the
construction of a polity on national lines, if it means a displacement
of the Islamic principle of solidarity, is simply unthinkable to a
Muslim. This is a matter which at the present moment directly concerns
the Muslims of India. "Man," says Renan, "is enslaved neither by his
race, nor by his religion, nor by the course of rivers, nor by the
direction of mountain ranges. A great aggregation of men, sane of mind
and warm of heart, creates a moral consciousness which is called a
nation." Such a formation is quite possible, though it involves the long
and arduous process of practically remaking men and furnishing them with
a fresh emotional equipment. It might have been a fact in India if the
teaching of Kabir and the Divine Faith of Akbar had seized the
imagination of the masses of this country. Experience, however, shows
that the various caste units and religious units in India have shown no
inclination to sink their respective individualities in a larger whole.
Each group is intensely jealous of its collective existence. The
formation of the kind of moral consciousness which constitutes the
essence of a nation in Renan’s sense demands a price which the peoples
of India are not prepared to pay.

\[\[2c\]\] The unity of an Indian nation, therefore, must be sought not
in the negation, but in the mutual harmony and cooperation, of the many.
True statesmanship cannot ignore facts, however unpleasant they may be.
The only practical course is not to assume the existence of a state of
things which does not exist, but to recognise facts as they are, and to
exploit them to our greatest advantage. And it is on the discovery of
Indian unity in this direction that the fate of India as well as of Asia
really depends. India is Asia in miniature. Part of her people have
cultural affinities with nations of the east, and part with nations in
the middle and west of Asia. If an effective principle of cooperation is
discovered in India, it will bring peace and mutual goodwill to this
ancient land which has suffered so long, more because of her situation
in historic space than because of any inherent incapacity of her people.
And it will at the same time solve the entire political problem of Asia.

\[\[2d\]\] It is, however, painful to observe that our attempts to
discover such a principle of internal harmony have so far failed. Why
have they failed? Perhaps we suspect each other’s intentions and
inwardly aim at dominating each other. Perhaps, in the higher interests
of mutual cooperation, we cannot afford to part with the monopolies
which circumstances have placed in our hands, and \[thus we\] conceal
our egoism under the cloak of nationalism, outwardly simulating a
large-hearted patriotism, but inwardly as narrow-minded as a caste or
tribe. Perhaps we are unwilling to recognise that each group has a right
to free development according to its own cultural traditions. But
whatever may be the causes of our failure, I still feel hopeful. Events
seem to be tending in the direction of some sort of internal harmony.
And as far as I have been able to read the Muslim mind, I have no
hesitation in declaring that if the principle that the Indian Muslim is
entitled to full and free development on the lines of his own culture
and tradition in his own Indian home-lands is recognized as the basis of
a permanent communal settlement, he will be ready to stake his all for
the freedom of India.

\[\[2e\]\] The principle that each group is entitled to its free
development on its own lines is not inspired by any feeling of narrow
communalism. There are communalisms and communalisms. A community which
is inspired by feelings of ill-will towards other communities is low and
ignoble. I entertain the highest respect for the customs, laws,
religious and social institutions of other communities. Nay, it is my
duty, according to the teaching of the Quran, even to defend their
places of worship, if need be. *Yet I love the communal group which is
the source of my life and behaviour; and which has formed me what I am
by giving me its religion, its literature, its thought, its culture, and
thereby recreating its whole past as a living operative factor, in my
present consciousness*. Even the authors of the Nehru Report recognise
the value of this higher aspect of communalism. While discussing the
separation of Sind they say, "To say from the larger viewpoint of
nationalism that no communal provinces should be created, is, in a way,
equivalent to saying from the still wider international viewpoint that
there should be no separate nations. Both these statements have a
measure of truth in them. But the staunchest internationalist recognises
that without the fullest national autonomy it is extraordinarily
difficult to create the international State. *So also without the
fullest cultural autonomy – and communalism in its better aspect is
culture – it will be difficult to create a harmonious nation*."

\[\[3\]\] Muslim India Within India

\[\[3a\]\] Communalism in its higher aspect, then, is indispensable to
the formation of a harmonious whole in a country like India. The units
of Indian society are not territorial as in European countries. India is
a continent of human groups belonging to different races, speaking
different languages, and professing different religions. Their behaviour
is not at all determined by a common race-consciousness. Even the Hindus
do not form a homogeneous group. The principle of European democracy
cannot be applied to India without recognising the fact of communal
groups. The Muslim demand for the creation of a Muslim India within
India is, therefore, perfectly justified. The resolution of the
All-Parties Muslim Conference at Delhi is, to my mind, wholly inspired
by this noble ideal of a harmonious whole which, instead of stifling the
respective individualities of its component wholes, affords them chances
of fully working out the possibilities that may be latent in them. And I
have no doubt that this House will emphatically endorse the Muslim
demands embodied in this resolution.

\[\[3b\]\] Personally, I would go farther than the demands embodied in
it. *I would like to see the Punjab, North-West Frontier Province, Sind
and Baluchistan amalgamated into a single State. Self-government within
the British Empire, or without the British Empire, the formation of a
consolidated North-West Indian Muslim State appears to me to be the
final destiny of the Muslims, at least of North-West India*. The
proposal was put forward before the Nehru Committee. They rejected it on
the ground that, if carried into effect, it would give a very unwieldy
State. This is true in so far as the area is concerned; in point of
population, the State contemplated by the proposal would be much less
than some of the present Indian provinces. The exclusion of Ambala
Division, and perhaps of some districts where non-Muslims predominate,
will make it less extensive and more Muslim in population – so that the
exclusion suggested will enable this consolidated State to give a more
effective protection to non-Muslim minorities within its area. The idea
need not alarm the Hindus or the British. India is the greatest Muslim
country in the world. The life of Islam as a cultural force in the
country very largely depends on its centralisation in a specified
territory. This centralisation of the most living portion of the Muslims
of India, whose military and police service has, notwithstanding unfair
treatment from the British, made the British rule possible in this
country, will eventually solve the problem of India as well as of Asia.
It will intensify their sense of responsibility and deepen their
patriotic feeling.

\[\[3c\]\] Thus, possessing full opportunity of development within the
body politic of India, the North-West Indian Muslims will prove the best
defenders of India against a foreign invasion, be that invasion one of
ideas or of bayonets. The Punjab with 56 percent Muslim population
supplies 54 percent of the total combatant troops in the Indian Army,
and if the 19,000 Gurkhas recruited from the independent State of Nepal
are excluded, the Punjab contingent amounts to 62 percent of the whole
Indian Army. This percentage does not take into account nearly 6,000
combatants supplied to the Indian Army by the North-West Frontier
Province and Baluchistan. From this you can easily calculate the
possibilities of North-West Indian Muslims in regard to the defence of
India against foreign aggression. The Right Hon'ble Mr. Srinivasa Sastri
thinks that the Muslim demand for the creation of autonomous Muslim
states along the north-west border is actuated by a desire "to acquire
means of exerting pressure in emergencies on the Government of India." I
may frankly tell him that the Muslim demand is not actuated by the kind
of motive he imputes to us; it is actuated by a genuine desire for free
development which is practically impossible under the type of unitary
government contemplated by the nationalist Hindu politicians with a view
to secure permanent communal dominance in the whole of India.

\[\[3d\]\] Nor should the Hindus fear that the creation of autonomous
Muslim states will mean the introduction of a kind of religious rule in
such states. I have already indicated to you the meaning of the word
religion, as applied to Islam. The truth is that Islam is not a Church.
It is a State conceived as a contractual organism long before Rousseau
ever thought of such a thing, and animated by an ethical ideal which
regards man not as an earth-rooted creature, defined by this or that
portion of the earth, but as a spiritual being understood in terms of a
social mechanism, and possessing rights and duties as a living factor in
that mechanism. The character of a Muslim State can be judged from what
the *Times of India* pointed out some time ago in a leader \[=front-page
article\] on the Indian Banking Inquiry Committee. "In ancient India,"
the paper points out, "the State framed laws regulating the rates of
interest; but in Muslim times, although Islam clearly forbids the
realisation of interest on money loaned, Indian Muslim States imposed no
restrictions on such rates." I therefore demand the formation of a
consolidated Muslim State in the best interests of India and Islam. For
India, it means security and peace resulting from an internal balance of
power; for Islam, an opportunity to rid itself of the stamp that Arabian
Imperialism was forced to give it, to mobilise its law, its education,
its culture, and to bring them into closer contact with its own original
spirit and with the spirit of modern times.

\[\[4\]\] Federal States

\[\[4a\]\] Thus it is clear that in view of India's infinite variety in
climates, races, languages, creeds and social systems, the creation of
autonomous States, based on the unity of language, race, history,
religion and identity of economic interests, is the only possible way to
secure a stable constitutional structure in India. The conception of
federation underlying the Simon Report necessitates the abolition of the
Central Legislative Assembly as a popular assembly, and makes it an
assembly of the representatives of federal States. It further demands a
redistribution of territory on the lines which I have indicated. And the
Report does recommend both. I give my wholehearted support to this view
of the matter, and venture to suggest that the redistribution
recommended in the Simon Report must fulfill two conditions. It must
precede the introduction of the new constitution, and must be so devised
as to finally solve the communal problem. Proper redistribution will
make the question of joint and separate electorates automatically
disappear from the constitutional controversy of India. It is the
present structure of the provinces that is largely responsible for this
controversy.

\[\[4b\]\] The Hindu thinks that separate electorates are contrary to
the spirit of true nationalism, because he understands the word nation
to mean a kind of universal amalgamation in which no communal entity
ought to retain its private individuality. Such a state of things,
however, does not exist. Nor is it desirable that it should exist. India
is a land of racial and religious variety. Add to this the general
economic inferiority of the Muslims, their enormous debt, especially in
the Punjab, and their insufficient majorities in some of the provinces
as at present constituted, and you will begin to see clearly the meaning
of our anxiety to retain separate electorates. In such a country and in
such circumstances territorial electorates cannot secure adequate
representation of all interests, and must inevitably lead to the
creation of an oligarchy. The Muslims of India can have no objection to
purely territorial electorates if provinces are demarcated so as to
secure comparatively homogeneous communities possessing linguistic,
racial, cultural and religious unity.

\[\[5\]\] Federation As Understood in the Simon Report

\[\[5a\]\] But in so far as the question of the powers of the Central
Federal State is concerned, there is a subtle difference of motive in
the constitutions proposed by the pundits of India and the pundits of
England. The pundits of India do not disturb the Central authority as it
stands at present. All that they desire is that this authority should
become fully responsible to the Central Legislature which they maintain
intact and where their majority will become further reinforced on the
nominated element ceasing to exist. The pundits of England, on the other
hand, realising that democracy in the Centre tends to work contrary to
their interests and is likely to absorb the whole power now in their
hands, in case a further advance is made towards responsible government,
have shifted the experience of democracy from the Centre to the
provinces. No doubt, they introduce the principle of Federation and
appear to have made a beginning by making certain proposals; yet their
evaluation of this principle is determined by considerations wholly
different to those which determine its value in the eyes of Muslim
India. The Muslims demand federation because it is pre-eminently a
solution of India’s most difficult problem, i.e. the communal problem.
The Royal Commissioners' view of federation, though sound in principle,
does not seem to aim at responsible government for federal States.
Indeed it does not go beyond providing means of escape from the
situation which the introduction of democracy in India has created for
the British, and wholly disregards the communal problem by leaving it
where it was.

\[\[5b\]\] Thus it is clear that, in so far as real federation is
concerned, the Simon Report virtually negatives the principle of
federation in its true significance. The Nehru Report, realising \[a\]
Hindu majority in the Central Assembly, reaches a unitary form of
government because such an institution secures Hindu dominance
throughout India; the Simon Report retains the present British dominance
behind the thin veneer of an unreal federation, partly because the
British are naturally unwilling to part with the power they have so long
wielded and partly because it is possible for them, in the absence of an
inter-communal understanding in India, to make out a plausible case for
the retention of that power in their own hands. To my mind a unitary
form of government is simply unthinkable in a self-governing India. What
is called "residuary powers" must be left entirely to self-governing
States, the Central Federal State exercising only those powers which are
expressly vested in it by the free consent of federal States. I would
never advise the Muslims of India to agree to a system, whether of
British or of Indian origin, which virtually negatives the principle of
true federation, or fails to recognise them as a distinct political
entity.

\[\[6\]\] Federal Scheme As Discussed in the Round Table Conference

\[\[6a\]\] The necessity for a structural change in the Central
Government was seen probably long before the British discovered the most
effective means for introducing this change. That is why at rather a
late stage it was announced that the participation of the Indian Princes
in the Round Table Conference was essential. It was a kind of surprise
to the people of India, particularly the minorities, to see the Indian
Princes dramatically expressing their willingness at the Round Table
Conference to join an all-India federation and, as a result of their
declaration, Hindu delegates – uncompromising advocates of a unitary
form of government – quietly agreeing to the evolution of a federal
scheme. Even Mr. Sastri who only a few days before had severely
criticised Sir John Simon for recommending a federal scheme for India,
suddenly became a convert and admitted his conversion in the plenary
session of the Conference – thus offering the Prime Minister of England
an occasion for one of his wittiest observations in his concluding
speech. All this has a meaning both for the British who have sought the
participation of the Indian Princes, and for the Hindus who have
unhesitatingly accepted the evolution of an all-India federation. The
truth is that the participation of the Indian Princes, among whom only a
few are Muslims, in a federation scheme serves a double purpose. On the
one hand, it serves as an all-important factor in maintaining the
British power in India practically as it is; on the other hand, it gives
\[an\] overwhelming majority to the Hindus in an All-India Federal
Assembly.

\[\[6b\]\] It appears to me that the Hindu-Muslim differences regarding
the ultimate form of the Central Government are being cleverly exploited
by British politicians through the agency of the Princes who see in the
scheme prospects of better security for their despotic rule. If the
Muslims silently agree to any such scheme, it will simply hasten their
end as a political entity in India. The policy of the Indian federation
thus created, will be practically controlled by \[the\] Hindu Princes
forming the largest group in the Central Federal Assembly. They will
always lend their support to the Crown in matters of Imperial concern;
and in so far as internal administration of the country is concerned,
they will help in maintaining and strengthening the supremacy of the
Hindus. In other words, the scheme appears to be aiming at a kind of
understanding between Hindu India and British Imperialism – you
perpetuate me in India, and I in return give you a Hindu oligarchy to
keep all other Indian communities in perpetual subjection. If,
therefore, the British Indian provinces are not transformed into really
autonomous States, the Princes' participation in a scheme of Indian
federation will be interpreted only as a dexterous move on the part of
British politicians to satisfy, without parting with any real power, all
parties concerned – Muslims with the *word* federation; Hindus with a
majority in the Centre; the British Imperialists – with the *substance*
of real power.

\[\[6c\]\] The number of Hindu States in India is far greater than
Muslim States; and it remains to be seen how the Muslim demand for 33
percent \[of the\] seats in the Central Federal Assembly is to be met
within a House or Houses constituted of representatives taken from
British India as well as Indian States. I hope the Muslim delegates are
fully aware of the implications of the federal scheme as discussed in
the Round Table Conference. The question of Muslim representation in the
proposed all-India federation has not yet been discussed. "The interim
report," says Reuters' summary, "contemplates two chambers in the
Federal Legislature, each containing representatives both of British
India and States, the proportion of which will be a matter of subsequent
consideration under the heads which have not yet been referred to the
Sub-Committee." In my opinion the question of proportion is of the
utmost importance and ought to have been considered simultaneously with
the main question of the structure of the Assembly.

\[\[6d\]\] The best course, I think, would have been to start with a
British Indian Federation only. A federal scheme born of an unholy union
between democracy and despotism cannot but keep British India in the
same vicious circle of a unitary Central Government. Such a unitary form
may be of the greatest advantage to the British, to the majority
community in British India, and to the Indian Princes; it can be of no
advantage to the Muslims, unless they get majority rights in five out of
eleven Indian provinces with full residuary powers, and one-third share
of seats in the total House of the Federal Assembly. In so far as the
attainment of sovereign powers by the British Indian provinces is
concerned, the position of His Highness the Ruler of Bhopal, Sir Akbar
Hydari, and Mr. Jinnah is unassailable. In view, however, of the
participation of the Princes in the Indian Federation, we must now see
our demand for representation in the British Indian Assembly in a new
light. The questions is not one of \[the\] Muslim share in a British
Indian Assembly, but one which relates to representation of British
Indian Muslims in an All-India Federal Assembly. Our demand for 33 per
cent must now be taken as a demand for the same proportion in the
All-India Federal Assembly, exclusive of the share allotted to the
Muslim states entering the Federation.

\[\[7\]\] The Problem of Defence

\[\[7a\]\] The other difficult problem which confronts the successful
working of a federal system in India is the problem of India's defence.
In their discussion of this problem the Royal Commissioners have
marshalled all the deficiencies of India in order to make out a case for
Imperial administration of the Army. "India and Britain," say the
Commissioners, "are so related that India's defence cannot, *now or in
any future which is within sight*, be regarded as a matter of purely
Indian concern. The control and direction of such an army must rest in
the hands of agents of Imperial Government." Now, does it \[not\]
necessarily follow from this that further progress towards the
realisation of responsible government in British India is barred until
the work of defence can be adequately discharged without the help of
British officers and British troops? *As things are, there is a block on
the line of constitutional advance*. All hopes of evolution in the
Central Government towards the ultimate goal prescribed in the
declaration of 20th August 1917, are in danger of being indefinitely
frustrated, if the attitude illustrated by the Nehru Report is
maintained, that any future change involves the putting of the
administration of the army under the authority of an elected Indian
Legislature. Further to fortify their argument they emphasize the fact
of competing religions and rival races of widely different capacity, and
try to make the problem look insoluble by remarking that "the obvious
fact that India is not, in the ordinary and natural sense, a single
nation is nowhere made more plain than in considering the difference
between the martial races of India and the rest." These features of the
question have been emphasised in order to demonstrate that the British
are not only keeping India secure from foreign menace but are also the
"neutral guardians" of internal security.

\[\[7b\]\] However, in federated India, as I understand federation, the
problem will have only one aspect, i.e. external defence. Apart from
provincial armies necessary for maintaining internal peace, the Indian
Federal Congress can maintain, on the north-west frontier, a strong
Indian Frontier Army, composed of units recruited from all provinces and
officered by efficient and experienced military men taken from all
communities. I know that India is not in possession of efficient
military officers, and this fact is exploited by the Royal Commissioners
in the interest of an argument for Imperial administration. On this
point I cannot but quote another passage from the Report which, to my
mind, furnishes the best argument against the position taken up by the
Commissioners. "At the present moment," says the Report, "no Indian
holding the King's Commission is of higher army rank than a captain.
There are, we believe, 39 captains of whom 25 are in ordinary regimental
employ. Some of them are of an age which would prevent their attaining
much higher rank, even if they passed the necessary examination before
retirement. Most of these have not been through Sandhurst, but got their
Commissions during the Great War." Now, however genuine may be the
desire, and however earnest the endeavour to work for this
transformation, overriding conditions have been so forcibly expressed by
the Skeen Committee (whose members, apart from the Chairman and the Army
Secretary, were Indian gentlemen) in these words: Progress...must be
contingent upon success being secured at each stage and upon military
efficiency being maintained, though it must in any case render such
development measured and slow. A higher command cannot be evolved at
short notice out of existing cadres of Indian officers, all of junior
rank and limited experience. Not until the slender trickle of suitable
Indian recruits for the officer class – and we earnestly desire an
increase in their numbers – flows in much greater volume, not until
sufficient Indians have attained the experience and training requisite
to provide all the officers for, at any rate, some Indian regiments, not
until such units have stood the only test which can possibly determine
their efficiency, and not until Indian officers have qualified by a
successful army career for the high command, will it be possible to
develop the policy of Indianisation to a point which will bring a
completely Indianised army within sight. Even then years must elapse
before the process could be completed."

\[\[7c\]\] Now I venture to ask: who is responsible for the present
state of things? Is it due to some inherent incapacity of our martial
races, or to the slowness of the process of military training? The
military capacity of our martial races is undeniable. The process of
military training may be slow as compared to other processes of human
training. I am no military expert to judge this matter. But as a layman
I feel that the argument, as stated, assumes the process to be
practically endless. This means perpetual bondage for India, and makes
it all the more necessary that the Frontier Army, as suggested by the
Nehru Report, be entrusted to the charge of a committee of defence, the
personnel of which may be settled by mutual understanding.

\[\[7d\]\] Again, it is significant that the Simon Report has given
extraordinary importance to the question of India's land frontier, but
has made only passing references to its naval position. India has
doubtless had to face invasions from her land frontier; but it is
obvious that her present masters took possession of her on account of
her defenceless sea coast. A self-governing and free India will, in
these days, have to take greater care of her sea coast than \[of her\]
land frontiers.

\[\[7e\]\] I have no doubt that if a Federal Government is established,
Muslim federal States will willingly agree, for purposes of India's
defence, to the creation of neutral Indian military and naval forces.
Such a neutral military force for the defence of India was a reality in
the days of Mughal rule. Indeed in the time of Akbar the Indian frontier
was, on the whole, defended by armies officered by Hindu generals. I am
perfectly sure that the scheme for a neutral Indian army, based on a
federated India, will intensify Muslim patriotic feeling, and finally
set at rest the suspicion, if any, of Indian Muslims joining Muslims
from beyond the frontier in the event of an invasion.

\[\[8\]\] The Alternative

\[\[8a\]\] I have thus tried briefly to indicate the way in which the
Muslims of India ought, in my opinion, to look at the two most important
constitutional problems of India. A redistribution of British India,
calculated to secure a permanent solution of the communal problem, is
the main demand of the Muslims of India. If, however, the Muslim demand
of a territorial solution of the communal problem is ignored, then I
support, as emphatically as possible, the Muslim demands repeatedly
urged by the All-India Muslim League and the All-India Muslim
Conference. The Muslims of India cannot agree to any constitutional
changes which affect their majority rights, to be secured by separate
electorates in the Punjab and Bengal, or \[which\] fail to guarantee
them 33 percent representation in any Central Legislature. There were
two pitfalls into which Muslim political leaders fell. The first was the
repudiated Lucknow Pact, which originated in a false view of Indian
nationalism and deprived the Muslims of India of chances of acquiring
any political power in India. The second is the narrow-visioned
sacrifice of Islamic solidarity, in the interests of what may be called
Punjab ruralism, resulting in a proposal which virtually reduces the
Punjab Muslims to a position of minority. It is the duty of the League
to condemn both the Pact and the proposal.

\[\[8b\]\] The Simon Report does great injustice to the Muslims in not
recommending a statutory majority for the Punjab and Bengal. It would
make the Muslims either stick to the Lucknow Pact or agree to a scheme
of joint electorates. The despatch of the Government of India on the
Simon Report admits that since the publication of that document the
Muslim community has not expressed its willingness to accept any of the
alternatives proposed by the Report. The despatch recognises that it may
be a legitimate grievance to deprive the Muslims in the Punjab and
Bengal of representation in the councils in proportion to their
population merely because of weightage allowed to Muslim minorities
elsewhere. But the despatch of the Government of India fails to correct
the injustice of the Simon Report. In so far as the Punjab is concerned
– and this is the most crucial point – it endorses the so-called
"carefully balanced scheme" worked out by the official members of the
Punjab Government which gives the Punjab Muslims a majority of two over
Hindus and Sikhs combined, and a proportion of 49 percent of the House
as a whole. It is obvious that the Punjab Muslims cannot be satisfied
with less than a clear majority in the total House. However, Lord Irwin
and his Government do recognise that the justification for communal
electorates for majority communities would not cease unless and until by
the extension of franchise their voting strength more correctly reflects
their population; and further unless a two-thirds majority of the Muslim
members in a provincial Council unanimously agree to surrender the right
of separate representation. I cannot, however, understand why the
Government of India, having recognised the legitimacy of the Muslim
grievances, have not had the courage to recommend a statutory majority
for the Muslims in the Punjab and Bengal.

\[\[8c\]\] Nor can the Muslims of India agree to any such changes which
fail to create at least Sind as a separate province and treat the
North-West Frontier Province as a province of inferior political status.
I see no reason why Sind should not be united with Baluchistan and
turned into a separate province. It has nothing in common with Bombay
Presidency. In point of life and civilization the Royal Commissioners
find it more akin to Mesopotamia and Arabia than India. The Muslim
geographer Mas'udi noticed this kinship long ago when he said: "Sind is
a country *nearer* to the dominions of Islam." The first Omayyad ruler
is reported to have said of Egypt: "Egypt has her back towards Africa
and face towards Arabia." With necessary alterations the same remark
describes the exact situation of Sind. She has her back towards India
and face towards Central Asia. Considering further the nature of her
agricultural problems which can invoke no sympathy from the Bombay
Government, and her infinite commercial possibilities, dependent on the
inevitable growth of Karachi into a second metropolis of India, it is
unwise to keep her attached to a Presidency which, though friendly
today, is likely to become a rival at no distant period. Financial
difficulties, we are told, stand in the way of separation. I do not know
of any definite authoritative pronouncement on the matter. But assuming
there are any such difficulties, I see no reason why the Government of
India should not give temporary financial help to a promising province
in her struggle for independent progress.

\[\[8d\]\] As to the North-West Frontier Province, it is painful to note
that the Royal Commissioners have practically denied that the people of
this province have any right to reform. They fall far short of the Bray
Committee, and the Council recommended by them is merely a screen to
hide the autocracy of the Chief Commissioner. The inherent right of the
Afghan to light a cigarette is curtailed merely because he happens to be
living in a powder house. The Royal Commissioners' epigrammatic argument
is pleasant enough, but far from convincing. Political reform is light,
not fire; and to light every human being is entitled, whether he happens
to live in a powder house or a coal mine. Brave, shrewd, and determined
to suffer for his legitimate aspirations, the Afghan is sure to resent
any attempt to deprive him of opportunities of full self-development. To
keep such a people contented is in the best interest of both England and
India. What has recently happened in that unfortunate province is the
result of a step-motherly treatment shown to the people since the
introduction of the principle of self-government in the rest of India. I
only hope that British statesmanship will not obscure its view of the
situation by hoodwinking itself into the belief that the present unrest
in the province is due to any extraneous causes.

\[\[8e\]\] The recommendation for the introduction of a measure of
reform in the North-West Frontier Province made in the Government of
India's despatch is also unsatisfactory. No doubt, the despatch goes
farther than the Simon Report in recommending a sort of representative
Council and a semi-representative cabinet, but it fails to treat this
important Muslim province on \[an\] equal footing with other Indian
provinces. Indeed the Afghan is, by instinct, more fitted for democratic
institutions than any other people in India.

\[\[9\]\] The Round Table Conference

\[\[9a\]\] I think I am now called upon to make a few observations on
the Round Table Conference. Personally I do not feel optimistic as to
the results of this Conference. It was hoped that away from the actual
scene of communal strife and in a changed atmosphere, better counsels
would prevail and a genuine settlement of the differences between the
two major communities of India would bring India's freedom within sight.
Actual events, however, tell a different tale. Indeed, the discussion of
the communal question in London has demonstrated more clearly than ever
the essential disparity between the two great cultural units of India.
Yet the Prime Minister of England apparently refuses to see that the
problem of India is international and not national. He is reported to
have said that "his government would find it difficult to submit to
Parliament proposals for the maintenance of separate electorates, since
joint electorates were much more in accordance with British democratic
sentiments." Obviously he does not see that the model of British
democracy cannot be of any use in a land of many nations; and that a
system of separate electorates is only a poor substitute for a
territorial solution of the problem. Nor is the Minorities Sub-Committee
likely to reach a satisfactory settlement. The whole question will have
to go before the British Parliament; and we can only hope that the
keen-sighted representatives of \[the\] British nation, unlike most of
our Indian politicians, will be able to pierce through the surface of
things and see clearly the true fundamentals of peace and security in a
country like India. To base a constitution on the concept of a
homogeneous India, or to apply to India principles dictated by British
democratic sentiments, is unwittingly to prepare her for a civil war. As
far as I can see, there will be no peace in the country until the
various peoples that constitute India are given opportunities of free
self-development on modern lines without abruptly breaking with their
past.

\[\[9b\]\] I am glad to be able to say that our Muslim delegates fully
realise the importance of a proper solution of what I call \[the\]
Indian international problem. They are perfectly justified in pressing
for a solution of the communal question before the question of
responsibility in the Central Government is finally settled. No Muslim
politician should be sensitive to the taunt embodied in that propaganda
word – communalism – expressly devised to exploit what the Prime
Minister calls British democratic sentiments, and to mislead England
into assuming a state of things which does not really exist in India.
Great interests are at stake. We are 70 millions, and far more
homogeneous than any other people in India. Indeed the Muslims of India
are the only Indian people who can fitly be described as a nation in the
modern sense of the word. The Hindus, though ahead of us in almost all
respects, have not yet been able to achieve the kind of homogeneity
which is necessary for a nation, and which Islam has given you as a free
gift. No doubt they are anxious to become a nation, but the process of
becoming a nation is kind of travail, and in the case of Hindu India
involves a complete overhauling of her social structure.

\[\[9c\]\] Nor should the Muslim leaders and politicians allow
themselves to be carried away by the subtle but fallacious argument that
Turkey and Persia and other Muslim countries are progressing on
national, i.e. territorial, lines. The Muslims of India are differently
situated. The countries of Islam outside India are practically wholly
Muslim in population. The minorities there belong, in the language of
the Quran, to the 'people of the Book'. There are no social barriers
between Muslims and the 'people of the Book'. A Jew or a Christian or a
Zoroastrian does not pollute the food of a Muslim by touching it, and
the law of Islam allows intermarriage with the 'people of the Book'.
Indeed the first practical step that Islam took towards the realisation
of a final combination of humanity was to call upon peoples possessing
practically the same ethical ideal to come forward and combind. The
Quran declares: "O people of the Book! Come, let us join together on the
'word' (Unity of God), that is common to us all." The wars of Islam and
Christianity, and later, European aggression in its various forms, could
not allow the infinite meaning of this verse to work itself out in the
world of Islam. Today it is being gradually realised in the countries of
Islam in the shape of what is called Muslim Nationalism.

\[\[9d\]\] It is hardly necessary for me to add that the sole test of
the success of our delegates is the extent to which they are able to get
the non-Muslim delegates of the Conference to agree to our demands as
embodied in the Delhi Resolution. If these demands are not agreed to,
then a question of a very great and far-reaching importance will arise
for the community. Then will arrive the moment for independent and
concerted political action by the Muslims of India. If you are at all
serious about your ideals and aspirations, you must be ready for such an
action. Our leading men have done a good deal of political thinking, and
their thought has certainly made us, more or less, sensitive to the
forces which are now shaping the destinies of peoples in India and
outside India. But, I ask, has this thinking prepared us for the kind of
action demanded by the situation which may arise in the near future?

\[\[9e\]\] Let me tell you frankly that, at the present moment, the
Muslims of India are suffering from two evils. The first is the want of
personalities. Sir Malcolm Hailey and Lord Irwin were perfectly correct
in their diagnosis when they told the Aligarh University that the
community had failed to produce leaders. By leaders I mean men who, by
Divine gift or experience, possess a keen perception of the spirit and
destiny of Islam, along with an equally keen perception of the trend of
modern history. Such men are really the driving forces of a people, but
they are God’s gift and cannot be made to order.

\[\[9f\]\] The second evil from which the Muslims of India are suffering
is that the community is fast losing what is called the herd instinct.
This \[loss\] makes it possible for individuals and groups to start
independent careers without contributing to the general thought and
activity of the community. We are doing today in the domain of politics
what we have been doing for centuries in the domain of religion. But
sectional bickerings in religion do not do much harm to our solidarity.
They at least indicate an interest in what makes the sole principle of
our structure as a people. Moreover, the principle is so broadly
conceived that it is almost impossible for a group to become rebellious
to the extent of wholly detaching itself from the general body of Islam.
But diversity in political action, at a moment when concerted action is
needed in the best interests of the very life of our people, may prove
fatal.

\[\[9g\]\] How shall we, then, remedy these two evils? The remedy of the
first evil is not in our hands. As to the second evil, I think it is
possible to discover a remedy. I have got definite views on the subject;
but I think it is proper to postpone their expression till the
apprehended situation actually arises. In case it does arise, leading
Muslims of all shades of opinion will have to meet together, not to pass
resolutions, but finally to determine the Muslim attitude and to show
the path to tangible achievement. In this address I mention this
alternative only because I wish that you may keep it in mind and give
some serious thought to it in the meantime.

\[\[10\]\] The Conclusion

\[\[10a\]\] Gentlemen, I have finished. In conclusion I cannot but
impress upon you that the present crisis in the history of India demands
complete organisation and unity of will and purpose in the Muslim
community, both in your own interest as a community, and in the interest
of India as a whole. The political bondage of India has been and is a
source of infinite misery to the whole of Asia. It has suppressed the
spirit of the East and wholly deprived her of that joy of
self-expression which once made her the creator of a great and glorious
culture. We have a duty towards India where we are destined to live and
die. We have a duty towards Asia, especially Muslim Asia. And since 70
millions of Muslims in a single country constitute a far more valuable
asset to Islam than all the countries of Muslim Asia put together, we
must look at the Indian problem not only from the Muslim point of view,
but also from the standpoint of the Indian Muslim as such. Our duty
towards Asia and India cannot be loyally performed without an organised
will fixed on a definite purpose. In your own interest, as a political
entity among other political entities of India, such an equipment is an
absolute necessity.

\[\[10b\]\] Our disorganised condition has already confused political
issues vital to the life of the community. I am not hopeless of an
intercommunal understanding, but I cannot conceal from you the feeling
that in the near future our community may be called upon to adopt an
independent line of action to cope with the present crisis. And an
independent line of political action, in such a crisis, is possible only
to a determined people, possessing a will focalised by a single purpose.
Is it possible for you to achieve the organic wholeness of a unified
will? Yes, it is. Rise above sectional interests and private ambitions,
and learn to determine the value of your individual and collective
action, however directed on material ends, in the light of the ideal
which you are supposed to represent. Pass from matter to spirit. Matter
is diversity; spirit is light, life and unity.

\[\[10c\]\] One lesson I have learnt from the history of Muslims. At
critical moments in their history it is Islam that has saved Muslims and
not vice versa. If today you focus your vision on Islam and seek
inspiration from the ever-vitalising idea embodied in it, you will be
only reassembling your scattered forces, regaining your lost integrity,
and thereby saving yourself from total destruction. One of the
profoundest verses in the Holy Quran teaches us that the birth and
rebirth of the whole of humanity is like the birth and rebirth of a
single individual. Why cannot you who, as a people, can well claim to be
the first practical exponents of this superb conception of humanity,
live and move and have your being as a single individual? I do not wish
to mystify anybody when I say that things in India are not what they
appear to be. The meaning of this, however, will dawn upon you only when
you have achieved a real collective ego to look at them. In the words of
the Quran, "Hold fast to yourself; no one who erreth can hurt you,
provided you are well guided" (5:104).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

== [more on Iqbal](../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#iqbal) ==
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) == [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp) ==
