+++
title = "69 'Sir Vidia Gets It Badly Wrong'"

+++
Source:
http://www.outlookindia.com/full.asp?fodname=20040315&fname=Naipaul+%28F%29&sid=1  
(downloaded Mar. 2004)  
The text of this article is also made available here because the OUTLOOK
site, though free, requires a cumbersome sign-in process with which many
users have trouble.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

OUTLOOK India, March 15, 2004  


'Sir Vidia Gets It Badly Wrong'  
William Dalrymple grants Naipaul his eminence, but challenges his
jaundiced notions of Indian history  


WILLIAM DALRYMPLE

There was some surprise when Sir Vidia and Lady Naipaul turned up at the
BJP office last week and gave what many in the press took to be a
pre-election endorsement not just of the party but the entire Sangh
parivar programme. India was indeed shining, the Nobel laureate was
quoted as saying, and yes he was quite happy being "appropriated" by the
BJP.

More striking was the quote attributed to Naipaul about the violent
destruction of the Babri Masjid: "Ayodhya is a sort of passion," he
said. "Any passion is to be encouraged. Passion leads to creativity."
For a man whose work contains many eloquent warnings of the dangers of
misplaced political passions—such as the Islamic Revolution in Iran—this
might appear to be a surprising volte-face. Indeed, it led one
commentator in the Times to wonder if Sir Vidia was not being misquoted
or at least misunderstood.

Yet the quotes, especially Sir Vidia's remarks that Babar's invasion of
India "left a deep wound", are consistent with ideas Naipaul has been
airing for many years now. In 1998, for example, he told The Hindu: "I
think when you see so many Hindu temples of the tenth century or earlier
disfigured, defaced, you realise that something terrible happened. I
feel that the civilisation of that closed world was mortally wounded by
those invasions.... The Old World is destroyed. That has to be
understood. Ancient Hindu India was destroyed."

A few years earlier, following the destruction of the Babri Masjid,
Naipaul told the Times of India: "What is happening in India is a new,
historical awakening.... Only now are the people beginning to understand
that there has been a great vandalising of India. Because of the nature
of the conquest and the nature of Hindu society, such understanding had
eluded Indians before...." Such attitudes form a consistent line of
thought in Naipaul's writing about India from *An Area of Darkness* in
1964 through to the present.

Today few would dispute Sir Vidia's status as probably the greatest
living writer of Indian origin; indeed, many would go further and argue
that he is the greatest living writer of English prose. For good reason,
his views are taken very seriously. He is a writer whose fiction and
non-fiction written over half a century form a body of work of great
brilliance, something the Nobel committee recognised when they awarded
him literature's highest honour.

His credentials as a historian are, however, much less secure, and so
when Sir Vidia gets something badly wrong, it is important that these
errors are challenged.

There is a celebrated opening sequence to Sir Vidia's masterpiece,
*India: A Wounded Civilisation*. It is 1975—a full quarter century
before he won the Nobel—and Naipaul is surveying the shattered ruins of
Vijayanagara.

Naipaul leads the reader through the remains of the once mighty city,
its 24 miles of walls winding through the "brown plateau of rock and
gigantic boulders". These days, he explains, it is just "a peasant
wilderness", but look carefully and you can see scattered everywhere the
crumbling wreckage of former greatness: "palaces and stables, a royal
bath...the leaning granite pillars of what must have been a bridge
across the river". Over the bridge, there is yet more: "a long and very
wide avenue, with a great statue of the bull of Shiva at one end, and at
the other end a miracle: a temple that for some reason was spared
destruction, is still whole, and is still used for worship".

Naipaul goes on to lament the fall of this "great centre of Hindu
civilisation", "then one of the greatest (cities) in the world". It was
pillaged in 1565 "by an alliance of Muslim principalities—and the work
of destruction took five months; some people say a year".It fell,
according to Naipaul, because already the Hindu world it embodied had
become backward-looking and stagnant: it had failed to develop, and in
particular had failed to develop the military means to challenge the
aggressive Muslim sultanates that surrounded it. Instead, Vijayanagara
was "committed from the start to the preservation of a Hinduism that had
already been violated, and culturally and artistically it (only)
preserved and repeated; it hardly innovated.... The Hinduism Vijayanagar
proclaimed had already reached a dead end".

For Naipaul, the Fall of Vijayanagara is a paradigmatic wound on the
psyche of India, part of a long series of failures that he believes
still bruises the country's self-confidence (or from which, according to
some of his more recent statements, the country is only just now
beginning to recover). The wound was created by a fatal combination of
Islamic aggression and Hindu weakness—the tendency to 'retreat', to
withdraw in the face of defeat.

Naipaul first developed the theme in *An Area of Darkness*. The great
Hindu ruins of the South, he writes there, represent "the continuity and
flow of Hindu India, ever shrinking". But the ruins of the North—the
monuments of the Great Mughals—"speak of waste and failure". Even the
Taj and the magnificent garden tombs of the Mughal emperors are to
Naipaul symbols of oppression: "Europe has its monuments of sun-kings,
its Louvres and Versailles. But they are part of the development of the
country's spirit; they express the refining of a nation's sensibility".
In contrast, the monuments of the Mughals speak only of "personal
plunder, and a country with an infinite capacity for being plundered".
Time has not mellowed these views: in an interview Naipaul gave to
*Outlook* ("Christianity didn't damage India like Islam", Nov 15, 1999),
Sir Vidia maintained that "the Taj is so wasteful, so decadent and in
the end so cruel that it is painful to be there for very long. This is
an extravagance that speaks of the blood of the people".

Not many other observers have seen the Taj Mahal—usually perceived as
the world's greatest monument to love ("a tear on the face of eternity,"
according to Tagore, an earlier Indian Nobel laureate)—in quite such
jaundiced terms; indeed it takes an unusual perversity to see one of the
world's most beautiful buildings merely as a piece of cultural
vandalism. Nevertheless, Naipaul's entirely negative understanding of
India's Islamic history has its roots firmly in the mainstream imperial
historiography of Victorian Britain.

For the Muslim invasions of India tended to be seen by historians of the
Raj as a long, brutal sequence of rapine and pillage, in stark
contrast—so 19th century British historians liked to believe—to the law
and order selflessly brought by their own 'Civilising Mission'. In this
context, the Fall of Vijayanagara was written up in elegiac terms by
Robert Sewell, whose 1900 book *Vijayanagar: A Forgotten Empire* first
characterised the kingdom as "a Hindu bulwark against Muhammadan
conquests", a single brave but doomed attempt at resistance to Islamic
aggression. This idea was eagerly elaborated by Hindu nationalists who
wrote of Vijayanagara as a Hindu state dedicated to the preservation of
the traditional, peaceful and 'pure' Hindu culture of southern India.

It is a simple and seductive vision, and one that at first sight looks
plausible. The problem is that such ideas rest on a set of ignorant and
Islamophobic assumptions which recent scholarship has done much to
undermine.

A brilliant essay published in 1996 by the respected American Sanskrit
scholar, Philip B. Wagoner, was an important landmark in this process\*.
The essay, titled 'A Sultan Among Hindu Kings'—a reference to the title
by which the Kings of Vijayanagara referred to themselves—pointed out
the degree to which the elite culture of Vijayanagara was heavily
Islamicised by the 16th century, its civilisation "deeply transformed
through nearly two centuries of intense and creative interaction with
the Islamic world".

By this period, for example, the Hindu kings of Vijayanagara appeared in
public audience, not bare-chested, as had been the tradition in Hindu
India, but instead dressed in quasi-Islamic court costume—the
Islamic-inspired kabayi, a long-sleeved tunic derived from the Arabic
qaba, and the kullayi, a conical cap derived from Perso-Turkic kulah—all
part, according to Wagoner, of "their symbolic participation in the more
universal culture of Islam".

Far from being the stagnant, backward-looking bastion of Hindu
resistance imagined by Naipaul, Vijayanagara had in fact developed in
all sorts of unexpected ways, taking on much of the administrative, tax
collecting and military methods of the Muslim sultanates that surrounded
it—notably stirrups, horseshoes, horse armour and a new type of saddle,
all of which allowed Vijayanagara to put into the field an army of horse
archers who could hold at bay the Delhi Sultanate, then the most
powerful force in India.

A comprehensive survey of Vijayanagara's monuments and archaeology
conducted by George Michell over the last 20 years has come to the same
conclusion as Wagoner. The survey has emphasised the degree to which the
buildings of 16th century Vijayanagara were inspired by the architecture
of the nearby Muslim sultanates, mixing the traditional trabeate
architecture of the Hindu South with the arch and dome of the Islamicate
North.

Moreover, this fruitful interaction between Hindu- and Muslim-ruled
states was very much a two-way traffic. Just as Hindu Vijayanagara was
absorbing Islamic influences, so a similar process of hybridity was
transforming the nominally Islamic sultanate of Bijapur. The landmark
study of this fascinating City State is Richard Eaton's *Sufis of
Bijapur*. The picture revealed by Eaton's work is of a city dominated by
an atmosphere of heterodox intellectual enquiry, with the libraries of
Bijapur swelling with esoteric texts produced on the intellectual
frontier between Islam and Hinduism. One Bijapuri production of the
period, for example, was the Bangab Nama, or the Book of the Pot Smoker:
written by Mahmud Bahri—a sort of medieval Indian Allen Ginsberg. The
book is a long panegyric to the joys of cannabis:

> "Smoke your pot and be happy—  
> Be a dervish and put your heart at peace.  
> Lose your life imbibing this exhilaration."

In the course of this book, Bahri writes: "God's knowledge has no
limit...and there is not just one path to him. Anyone from any community
can find him." This certainly seems to have been the view of Bijapur's
ruler, Ibrahim Adil Shahi II. Early in his reign, Ibrahim gave up
wearing jewels and adopted instead the rudraksha rosary of the sadhu. In
his songs he used highly Sanskritised language to shower equal praise
upon Saraswati, the Prophet Muhammad, and the Sufi saint Gesudaraz of
Gulbarga.

Perhaps the most surprising passage occurs in the 56th song where the
Sultan more or less describes himself as a Hindu God: "He is robed in
saffron dress, his teeth are black, the nails are red...and he loves
all. Ibrahim whose father is Ganesh, whose mother is Saraswati, has a
rosary of crystal round his neck...and an elephant as his vehicle."
According to the art historian Mark Zebrowski, "It is hard to label
Ibrahim either a Muslim or a Hindu; rather he had an aesthete's
admiration for the beauty of both cultures." The same spirit also
animates Bijapuri art whose nominally Islamic miniature portraits show
"girls as voluptuous as the nudes of South Indian sculpture".

This creative coexistence finally fell victim, not to a concerted
communal campaign by Muslim states intent on eradicating Hinduism, but
instead to the shifting alliances of Deccani diplomacy. In 1558, only
seven years before the Deccani sultanates turned on Vijayanagara, the
Empire had been a prominent part of an alliance of mainly Muslim armies
that had sacked the Sultanate of Ahmadnagar. That year, Vijayanagara's
armies stabled their horses in the mosques of the plundered city, and
the Emperor Rama Raya had demanded that the Sultan come to his
headquarters and eat paan from his hand as the price for peace. Before
this Rama Raya had allied with the same Ahmadnagar Sultan in two joint
invasions of Bijapur, then with the new Sultan of Bijapur in two
campaigns against Ahmadnagar. It was only in 1562, when Rama Raya
plundered and seized not just districts belonging to Ahmadnagar and its
ally Golconda, but also those belonging to his own ally Bijapur, that
the different sultanates finally united against their unruly neighbour.

The Fall of Vijayanagara is a subject Naipaul keeps returning to: in an
interview shortly after he had been awarded the Nobel prize, he talked
about how the destruction of the city meant an end to its traditions:
"When Vijayanagar was laid low, all the creative talent would also have
been destroyed. The current has been broken." Yet there is considerable
documentary and artistic evidence that the very opposite was true, and
that the city's craftsmen merely transferred to the patronage of the
Sultans of Bijapur where the result was a major artistic renaissance.

The remarkable fusion of styles that resulted from this rebirth can
still be seen in the tomb of Ibrahim II, completed in 1626. From afar it
looks uncompromisingly Islamic; yet for all its domes and arches, the
closer you draw the more you realise that few Muslim buildings are so
Hindu in their spirit. The usually austere walls of Islamic architecture
in the Deccan here give way to a petrified scrollwork indistinguishable
from Vijayanagaran decoration, the bleak black volcanic granite of
Bijapur manipulated as if it were as soft as plaster, as delicate as a
lace ruff. All around minars suddenly bud into bloom, walls dissolve
into bundles of pillars; fantastically sculptural lotus-bud domes and
cupola drums are almost suffocated by great starbursts of Indic
decoration which curl down from the pendetives like pepper vines,
winding their way up brackets and gripping around the cusps of archways.

This picture of Hindu-Muslim hybridity, of Indo-Islamic intellectual and
artistic fecundity is important, for it comes in such stark contrast to
the RSS-Naipaulian view of Indian medieval history as one long tale of
defeat and destruction. Today most serious historians tend instead to
emphasise the perhaps surprising degree to which Hinduism and Islam
creatively intermingled and 'chutnified' (to use Salman Rushdie's nice
term); and an important book has recently been published which goes a
long way to develop these ideas. Anyone wishing to understand the
complexities and fecund fusions of medieval India would be well advised
to go straight out and buy a copy of *Beyond Turk and Hindu* (edited by
David Gilmartin and Bruce B. Lawrence, published in India by Bahri). The
book shows, from a variety of different articles by all the leading
international scholars of the period, the degree to which the
extraordinary richness of medieval Indian civilisation was the direct
result of its multi-ethnic, multi-religious character and the inspired
interplay and cross-fertilisation of Hindu and Islamic civilisations
that thereby took place.

The historians do not see the two religions as in any way
irreconcilable; instead they tend to take the view that "the actual
history of religious exchange suggests that there have never been
clearly fixed groups, one labelled 'Hindu'—and the other both its
opposite and rival—labelled 'Muslim'." Indeed, as one author points out,
there is not a single medieval Sanskrit inscription that identifies
"Indo-Muslim invaders in terms of their religion, as Muslims", but
instead they refer more generally in terms of "linguistic affiliation,
most typically as Turk, 'Turushka'." The import of this is clear: that
the political groupings we today identify as 'Muslim' were then
"construed as but one ethnic community in India amidst many others".

Of course this sort of approach is not entirely new. From the early
1960s until only a few years ago, Indian history textbooks emphasised
the creation in medieval India of what was referred to as the "composite
culture". This cultural synthesis took many forms. In Urdu and Hindi
were born languages of great beauty that to different extents mixed
Persian and Arabic words with the Sanskrit-derived vernaculars of
northern India. Similarly, just as the cuisine of North India combined
the vegetarian dal and rice of peninsular India with the kebab and roti
of Central Asia, so in music the long-necked Persian lute was combined
with the classical Indian veena to form the sitar, now the Indian
instrument most widely known in the West. In architecture there was a
similar process of hybridity as the great monumental buildings of the
Mughals reconciled the styles of the Hindus with those of Islam, to
produce a fusion more beautiful than either.

These Nehruvian-era textbooks were the work of Left-leaning but
nonetheless internationally regarded scholars such as professors Romila
Thapar, Satish Chandra and Nurul Hasan—none of whom Sir Vidia appears to
think much of. In the same 1993 Times of India interview in which he
defended the destruction of the Babri Masjid, Sir Vidia remarked that
"Romila Thapar's book on Indian history is a Marxist attitude to
history, which in substance says: there is a higher truth behind the
invasions, feudalism and all that. The correct truth is the way the
invaders looked at their actions. They were conquering, they were
subjugating." The new NCERT history textbooks—such as that on Medieval
India by an obscure college lecturer named Meenakshi Jain with its
picture of the period as one long Muslim-led orgy of mass murder and
temple destruction—are no doubt much more to Sir Vidia's taste.

Thanks partly to the influence of the earlier textbooks on generations
of students, there is still a widespread awareness in India of the
positive aspects of medieval Islam—aspects noticeable by their absence
in Naipaul's oeuvre. It is widely known, for example, that Islam in
India was spread much less by the sword than by the Sufis. After all
Sufism with its holy men, visions and miracles, and its emphasis on the
individual's search for union with god, has always borne remarkable
similarities to the mystical side of Hinduism. Under Sufi influence it
was particularly at the level of village folk worship that the two
religions fused into one, with many ordinary Hindus visiting the graves
of Sufi pirs—some of whom are still considered to be incarnations of
Hindu deities—while Muslim villagers would leave offerings at temples to
ensure the birth of children and good harvests. To this day, Sufi
dargahs still attract as many Hindu, Sikh and Christian pilgrims as they
do Muslims.

Yet Sufism, clearly central to any discussion of Medieval India, barely
makes a single appearance in Naipaul's work; indeed he appears to be
entirely ignorant of the term: "Islam is a religion of fixed laws," he
told *Outlook*. "There can be no reconciliation (with other religions)."
In *Beyond Belief* (1998) Naipaul writes of Indian Muslims as slaves to
an imported religion, looking abroad to Arabia for the focus of their
devotions, which they are forced to practice in a foreign
language—Arabic—they rarely understand.He seems to be completely unaware
of the existence of such hugely popular Indian pilgrimage shrines such
as Nizamuddin or Ajmer Sharif, or the vast body of vernacular devotional
literature in Indian Islam, much of it dedicated to the mystical cults
of indigenous saints.

Also notably absent in Naipaul's work is any mention of the religious
tolerance of the Mughals: neither Akbar nor Dara Shikoh make any sort of
appearance in Naipaul's writing, and his readers will learn nothing of
the former's enthusiastic patronage of Hindu temples or the latter's
work translating the Gita into Persian, or writing *The Mingling of Two
Oceans*, a study of Hinduism and Islam which emphasises the
compatibility of the two faiths and speculates that the Upanishads were
the source of all monotheism. Such views were far from exceptional and
most of the great Mughal writers show similar syncretic tendencies:
Ghalib, for example, wrote praising Benares as the Mecca of India,
saying that he sometimes wished that he could "renounce the faith, take
the Hindu rosary in hand, and tie a sacred thread round my waist".

Yet Naipaul, if he is aware of these shared beliefs and overlapping
practices, chooses to ignore it, and continues to envisage medieval
India solely in terms of Islamic vandalism: in the interview to
*Outlook*, for example, Naipaul mentioned Akbar in passing, but only as
the "terrible" conqueror of Orissa, omitting any reference to the
subsequent lifetime of work he put into reconciling India's different
faiths. Likewise, in the face of all the evidence to the contrary, he
continues to talk of Mughal architecture as entirely "foreign...a
carry-over from the architecture of Isfahan", wilfully ignoring all the
fused Hindu elements that do so much to define its profound Indianness:
the jalis, chhajjas and chhattris, quite apart from all the fabulous
Gujarati-Hindu decorative sculpture that is most spectacularly seen at
Fatehpur Sikri. Yet while genuine architectural historians see a
remarkable fusing of civilisations in Mughal buildings, Naipaul, hostile
as ever, thinks "only of everything that was flattened to enable them to
come up".

That destruction of Hindu monuments did take place is undeniable; but in
what circumstances it took place, and on what scale, is now a matter of
intense scholarly debate. Perhaps the single most important essay in
Beyond Turk and Hindu is Richard Eaton's fascinating article on temple
destruction. It is of course a central nostrum of the rss and the Sangh
parivar, bolstered by intellectual fellow-travellers such as Naipaul,
that between the 13th and 18th century Indo-Muslim states, driven by a
combination of greed, intolerance and a fanatical iconoclasm, desecrated
as many as 60,000 Hindu temples. This claim is examined in detail by
Eaton who concludes that "such a picture (simply) cannot be sustained by
evidence from original sources".

Rather than the 60,000 looted temples of RSS myth, Eaton writes that he
can find evidence for around 80 desecrations "whose historicity appears
reasonable certain", and that these demolitions tended to take place in
very particular circumstances: that is, in the context of outright
military defeats of Hindu rulers by one of the Indian sultanates, or
when "Hindu patrons of prominent temples committed acts of disloyalty to
the Indo-Muslim states they served. Otherwise, temples lying within
Indo-Muslim sovereign domains, viewed as protected state property, were
left unmolested".

Indeed Indo-Islamic states involved themselves directly in the running
of their Hindu temples, so that for example "between 1590 and 1735,
Mughal officials oversaw the renewal of Orissa's state cult, that of
Jagannath in Puri. By sitting on a canopied chariot while accompanying
the cult's annual festival, Shah Jehan's officials ritually demonstrated
that it was the Mughal emperor who was the temple's—and hence the
God's—ultimate protector."

Eaton sees the attacks on temples not so much as the introduction to
India of a new spirit of iconoclasm, so much as the continuation of the
existing pre-Islamic practice of destroying or abducting the protecting
state deity whose power was politically linked to the sovereignty of the
defeated ruler: "Early medieval Indian history (of the pre-Muslim
period) abounds in instances of temple desecration that occurred amidst
interdynastic conflicts," he writes. "In AD 642...the Pallava king,
Narasimhavarman I, looted the image of Ganesha from the Chalukyan
capital of Vatapi. Fifty years later, armies from those same Chalukyas
invaded North India and brought back to the Deccan...images of Ganga and
Yamuna, looted from defeated powers there. In the eighth century,
Bengali troops sought revenge on King Lalitaditya's kingdom of Kashmir
by destroying the image of Vishnu Vaikuntha, the state deity."

And so on. Paradoxically, by destroying royal temples intimately linked
with the protection of Hindu kings, and by abducting the tutelary state
deities, Muslim rulers were in fact acting in accordance with Indian
tradition, just as they were when they claimed descent from the Pandava
heroes of the Mahabharata—as did the Muslim ruler of Kashmir—or
portrayed themselves as supporters of the Ramrajya, as was the claim of
the Mughals.

None of this should be read in any way as challenging Naipaul's literary
brilliance, or as an attempt to diminish his importance as a writer: Sir
Vidia's non-fiction about India is arguably the most profound body of
writing about the region in modern times, and it is precisely because of
this that it is important to challenge his errors. In the current
climate, after the pogroms of Gujarat and the continued malevolent and
inaccurate rewriting of textbooks, Sir Vidia's absurdly one-sided and
misleading take on medieval Indian history simply must not be allowed to
go uncorrected. To quote Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya of JNU, writing
recently about the NCERT textbooks: "When history is mobilised for
specific political projects and sectarian conflicts; when political and
community sentiments of the present begin to define how the past has to
be represented; when history is fabricated to constitute a communal
sensibility, and a politics of hatred and violence, then we (historians)
need to sit up and protest. If we do not then the long night of Gujarat
will never end. Its history will reappear again and again, not just as
nightmare but as relived experience, re-enacted in endless cycles of
retribution and revenge, in gory spectacles of blood and death."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
William Dalrymple's *White Mughals* recently won Britain's most
prestigious academic history award, the Wolfson Prize for History.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

