+++
title = "12 "

+++
<div align="right">

**9. Ashoke Dasgupta**

</div>

I am in receipt of the booklet detailing two documents of Dr. Shreerang
Godbole. I am grateful for the same. My response on these two documents
is as under:

It is evident that ‘Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch’ is launched because a new
avenue is being sought in order to frame a policy in respect of the
Muslim question in the Indian polity.

It is rather an approach - an approach to be in touch of the Muslim
community so that the political untouchability towards BJP propagated by
the Secularists can be overcome.

The question is: how far this approach is correct and how much effective
it will be. Dr. Shreerang Godbole has raised some basic questions about
this approach. His points come from the study of Islam. This is why if
his points are not given due weightage, the teaching of history will get
disregarded. The real question for the last one thousand years in India
in respect of the Hindu-Muslim question is not Hindu vs. Muslim; it is
Muslim vs. Islam and thereafter Hindu vs. Islam.

All peoples from Morocco to Afghanistan-Pakistan became Muslim; Islam
swept away all their national cultures, diversities, peculiarities and
moulded all of them into a single pattern, a single creed. Islam washes
away national culture, and inheritance. The agony of Bangladesh under
the heels of Pakistan was primarily due to Islam. The movement in
Bangladesh along the line of culture and language had no appreciation in
Islam. Islam recognizes no nationalism. This becomes vivid in the
Taliban possession of Afghanistan. Had there been a strong bondage of
national spirit, the Afghan people would not be subjected to the
unending horrors of the last decade.

It is Islam, again, which is responsible for the creation of Pakistan
for the Indian Muslims.  Both the Hindus and Muslims had gone through
blood and fire for the sake Islam. The struggles of the Muslims never
record struggles for national causes, but refer to struggles for
personal or group ambition, or inter-religion combat, or sect acrimony
such as Shia or Sunni or other sects of Islam. The contemporary
illustration is the Iraq-Iran War for several years. These insane and
futile killings for years are also due to Islam because it is sect vs.
sect of Islam. History is a witness that the Middle East was the stage
of many ancient civilisations - Egyptian to Persian - but such great
varieties ceased since Islam ascended in the area. Like the last Rasul
of Islam, Islam itself is the last to come. Hence, it has had no
Renaissance. So, the unsolved problem in India for a thousand years is
not Hindu vs. Muslim. The Sangh Parivar may be leaning towards such a
concept that can be visualised in the coinage of ‘Sarva Panth Samãdar’.

The real problem is Muslim vs. Islam. Ninety-five percent of Indian
Muslims are converted Hindus i.e. Islam had them from Hindus but since
their conversion they were alienated from the Hindus i.e. their own
culture and tradition. They had to shift their cultural tradition and
sense of values, in a word, the basic tenets of civilization. It is a
horrible subjugation of Muslims by Islam. And, in the process of
history, this alienation drove them to claim a separate nationhood,
again inspired by Islam, to cause partition of India. Indian Muslims
became Pakistanis and went more into the grip of Islam, lost their
self-identity more grievously, making no nation actually. Pakistan has
not evolved as a nation; it is peoples and groups held under the yoke of
Islam and labouring hard to project Islam as a culture. Thus one has to
reach the conclusion that Islam has caused more pains, outrages and
sufferings to the Muslims in India than to the Hindus because they lost
their culture and heritage which the Hindus did not. Islam has deprived
them of nationhood.

The thousand year old question seen apparently as Hindu vs. Muslim
cannot be answered unless the basic Muslim vs. Islam aspect of the
problem is grasped. This is the basic problem and it requires a basic
approach.

The basic approach cannot be envisaged unless the fear of losing Muslim
vote is given a farewell, till Muslims understand how the dreadful
weight of the Sunnah deprives them from becoming democratic with
national identity. Muslims need really to accomplish the task of coming
out of the stranglehold of the fundamentalist arrogance of the Sunnah
that causes slavery to creed and dogma. The organisations that fear to
lose Muslim votes cannot do real service to Muslims because Muslims are
victims of Islam. Indian Muslims, being liberated from quarters of
Islam, shall regain their Nationhood and then the loathsome speeches of
the priests of fake secularism shall be heard no more.

The slogan of ‘Sarva Panth Samãdar’ is nothing new and it shall fetch no
better dividends than ‘Sarva Dharma Samabhãva’ preached by a section of
pseudo-secularists almost for last seventy-five years. Such slogans have
done no good either for Hindus or for Muslims; they have prevented
Hindus to speak fearlessly for the good of Muslims and, on the other
hand, kept Muslims in increasing alienation as if they are in exile from
their mother culture, tradition and heritage, leading them to cultural
orphanage. Forbearance from having Muslim vote for a period shall be a
bliss for cultural rejuvenation of Indian Muslims to their mother
culture.

The question is: which way, then, the Sangh Parivar should go? Shall it
toil for Muslim votes like others by subscribing to the onslaught of
Islam on Muslims or shall it take up the cause of undoing the
stranglehold of Islam on the Muslim mind? The stranglehold of Quran and
Sunnah on Muslim mind has to be shaken by a democratic process. Unless
it is done, the problem of Muslim vs. Islam that has remained unsolved
for a thousand years and bled the country for centuries, will continue.

And, in this light, the eight points raised by Dr. Shreerang Godbole
acquire relevance. BJP shall suffer in terms of popular support if it
accepts the old Congress line manifested by such forums as Sarva Panth
Samãdar Manch, because people want to see the BJP as a national and not
as an ideological replica of the Congress.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is from Jalpaiguri in West Bengal.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


