+++
title = "20 "

+++
<div align="right">

**17. S. C. Gupta**

</div>

I refer to the pamphlet “TIME FOR STOCK TAKING - A SWAYAMSEVAK SPEAKS.”
which you have sent for my comments. The following pages contain my
comments on Dr. Shreerang Godbole’s two documents, points by point, in
the same order as the points in the pamphlet.  
 

**First Document**

There is a Hindu resurgence but not to the extent it should be.

It is also true that in spite of Hindu resurgence, the Hindu
organisations are becoming softer towards Islam and Muslims. There is no
corresponding change in the Muslim attitude towards Hindus or Hinduism.
These Hindu organisations sometimes take a seemingly harder attitude
towards Islam but the next moment they melt and behave as M.K. Gandhi
behaved towards Muslims and Islam. Such varying attitudes on the part of
Hindu organisations are indeed confusing to the Hindu masses in general.
It seems to me that if such a thing continues repeatedly a few more
times, the Hindu masses will consider the hard attitudes of Hindu
organisations as mere gimmicks having no steadfastness and teeth at all.
This will be also entirely harmful to the Hindu Renaissance we expect in
India.

1\. Jesus, Mohammed and Allah cannot be included in the Hindu divine
hierarchy until they cease to be exclusive. There is no animosity among
the Hindu Divinities (33 crores). But the Christian “God”, Islam’s
“Allah and Allah’s last prophet Mohammed, do not admit any other as
equal to them. They are jealous. The Ule ma in the Madrasas of India
preach this day in and day out. Christians consider Hindus as “Pagans”
and Muslims consider them as “Kafirs”. So there cannot be a meeting
point like including Jesus, the Christian God or Mohammad and his Allah
in the Hindu divine order until there is a radical change in the
attitudes of Christians and Muslims towards Hindus. Christians have
shown a bit of change but Islam and Muslims have done nothing of the
kind.

2\. All religions do not lead to God and Divinity. Those Hindus who
think that they should not criticize other religions are wrong. There
must be a thorough debate and criticism of all religions. Everything
(even the most minor beliefs of all religions) must be open to question
and doubt and the adherents of those religions must reply to objections.
If they keep silent about objections and questions raised about their
beliefs - it will not at all be satisfactory. At present, they are
politically a bit down, but we know from Pakistan and Bangladesh what
happens when they attain majority. There are no spiritual practices in
Islam (at least not in the Quran, the Hadith and the Sunnah).

3\. If Islam is taken out of Muslims, they will probably be better men
and women. Islam has made them fanatic. The whole of Islam needs a
thorough reinterpretation for co-existence with other communities. There
should be a radical reinterpretation of Islam giving it more inner
orientation.

At present, in the thousands of Madrasas of India, the Mullahs
(specially of Deoband and Bareilly) keep on dinning the students’ ears
and minds with the same attitude towards Hindus and Hinduism. If they
could, they would still like to impose Jizia on Hindus and start
treating them as they treat Hindus in Pakistan and Bangladesh.

I hope everyone knows how Hindus are treated in Saudi Arabia and other
Arab countries. They cannot worship in their own individual way even
privately, what to say of publicly. Hindu girls above 10 have to wear
burqa.

In fact, it is Islam which should be thoroughly criticised - each line
of the Quran, each part of the Sunnah and the Hadith - even to the
extent of calling names in order to make fun of them. Muslims should
learn to keep their beliefs (whatever they are) intact even if their
religion is being made fun of, as Hindus have been doing for thousands
of years. This way, if really there is something solid in Islam, all the
fun which is heaped on it will not be able to shake it -just as the
basic structure of Hinduism has not been shaken at all even by a
thousand years attack by Islam and almost 500 years attack by
Christianity.

Translations of the Quran, the Sunnah and the Hadith must be made
available in all Indian languages along with thorough commentaries, so
that people come to know what is their real import. The interpretation
of these texts should not be left only in the hands of Mullahs and the
Ulema but scholars of any hue should study them and freely discuss them.
Sri Ram Swarup has written a small study, *Understanding Islam through
Hadis*, which is banned in India. Bigger and more books of this kind
should be written in all Indian languages. Unless Islam is thoroughly
exposed, people will continue to have a sense of the mystic in Islam,
which there in none.

This is the only of way of taking Islam out of Muslims. It is Islam
which is the main culprit.

4\. If Muslims are told of their common ancestry with the Hindus, it
does not seem to help. The teachings of Mullahs and Islam insist again
and again that the period of a person or a community before conversion
to Islam, was a period of *jahiliya* (ignorance). So after becoming
Muslims, they have left their past of ignorance and now they have the
new enlightenment and the exalted status of superior beings. They
consign all their non-Muslim ancestors to eternal hell fire. They do not
want to have any relationship with them except seeing them as Kafirs.

5\. As pointed out in the pamphlet itself, it is the Muslims who used
Congress and not the other way round. If BJP also treats Muslims as the
Congress and specially Gandhi did, it will be a greater disaster than it
has been so far. Muslims can be treated as human beings all right but
there should not be appeasement of any kind in the name of Islam.

It is true that the aggressive doctrines of Islam are partially kept in
abeyance at the moment in India (because of a mild Hindu resurgence) but
as soon as Muslims gain an upper hand the medieval Muslim history will
be repeated with greater vigour - even a nuclear holocaust is not ruled
out. India and Hindus must be prepared for this.

6\. Among the Sufis exceptionally few can be counted as having peaceful
intentions. Even they did not speak against the atrocities which were
committed by Muslim sultans on Hindus.

The majority of Sufis were fanatic Muslim jihadists. They secretly and
more often openly sided with the armies of Islam in destroying Hindus
and their places of worship. Musa Ashikan was disciple of a Hindu Yogi
in Ayodhya around 1528. The Yogi resided near the Ram Janma Bhumi at
that time. Musa Ashikan used to come to receive instruction from the
Hindu Yogi there. He used to feel the grandeur and power of Ram Janma
Bhumi and had a secret desire to get it converted into a mosque. That he
did, as soon as Babar and Mir Baqi came near Ayodhya - he incited them
to destroy the Ram Janma Bhumi and got a mosque constructed at its
place.

7\. That Muslim leaders are responsible for the ghetto mentality of
Muslims is partly true. But the fact is that the responsibility for this
lies entirely in the teachings of the Quran, the Sunnah and the Hadith,
i.e. the Muslim theology. Muslims are not supposed to mix with Kafirs,
by making friends with them or by living in their neighbourhood. They
should prepare all kinds of ambush for the Kafirs and kill them at the
first opportunity. They should wait for the time when such an
opportunity arises.

8\. This is what Syed Shahabuddin has said in one of his letters to a
newspaper and is plainly meaningless in the light of the teachings of
the Quran and the practice of Islam through these 1000 years. Countless
Hindu temples all over India have been destroyed and mosques erected in
their places.

The Vishwa Hindu Parishad has repeatedly asked the, Muslims to hand over
three sites (Ayodhya, Kashi Vishwa Nath and the Krishna Janma Bhumi) to
the Hindus as a goodwill gesture. Shri L.K. Advani has confined the
demand to only the one at Ayodhya. Knowing full well what the reality
is, Muslims have not shown any gesture of the kind. The recent proposal
in the Parliament to declare December 6, 1992 as a black day, in which
the Muslim members joined wholeheartedly, is an illustration of their
attitude.

No concessions should be made to Muslims now or in future. The prevalent
ethos running the society in India must be and will be Hindu - which
means that religion is a personal affair between the almighty and the
individual. There should be no organized religion. Local Hindu
organisations do celebrate Hindu festivals in small or big groups but
that is a cultural matter and not religious.  
 

**Second Document**

All the religions which have arisen in the Middle East, specially Islam,
Christianity, Judaism etc. are monotheistic, prophet-based religions and
are exclusivistic. Each of them divides humanity in two groups - one,
the believers, and the other, the non-believers. The latter must be
destroyed by the one chosen people. Israel has disowned such
exclusivistic parts in Judaism comparatively recently. I think Jews are
becoming more and more tolerant and so I think Judaism can now be
excluded from the exclusivist theologies. But Christianity and Islam
cannot be excluded because there is essentially no change in their
attitude towards the so-called “Pagans” and “Kafirs”. Marxism, Nazism
and Fascism, though not religions in the older sense are as condemnable.
At present (till there is some perceptible change observed), the Sarva
Panth Samãdar March must include only the panths which have arisen on
the Indian soil, i.e. Sikhism, Hindusim in all its varieties, Buddhism,
Jainism and Indian Tribalism.

There is no sign as yet on the part of Muslims that they are prepared to
be assimilated and that they want to live and coexist harmoniously with
others in India, and even elsewhere in the world at large.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Settled at Roorkee in U.P. at present, the writer had observed the
Muslim behaviour pattern from close quarters while living in Agra from
1942 to 1947.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


