+++
title = "33  II"

+++
<div align="right">

**30. Hem Raj Prabhakar**

</div>

I am replying to the issues raised by your brochure.

1\. The doctrine of Islam is Unity. The Koran say that Allah is one and
alone, without a second. In Christianity, Jesus is the Son of God, which
means he is second to God. Thus other men cannot be sons of God and will
go to Heaven or Hell for ever, not according to their actions but on the
recommendations of Jesus. Muhammad will sit near Allah and similarly
recommend Heaven for Muslims and Hell for Kafirs. He destroyed the idols
in the Kaaba, and killed all persons who persisted in the pre-Islamic
creed. It shows that there is no room for other gods in Islam and
Christianity. Nor can Jesus and Muhammad be accommodated in the Hindu
pantheon.

2\. Hindu preachers proclaim quite frequently that all religions
including Islam and Christianity lead to God. They quote the Gita in
their support. But this is quite contrary to the commands of Allah as
conveyed by Muhammad. A person may be very good, even godly, and engaged
in the service of mankind. But if he does not accept Muhammad as the
last prophet and the Koran as the only true revelation, he is a Kafir
according to Islam. Maulana Muhammad Ali’s statement that even an
immoral Muslim is better than Mahatma Gandhi, supports my argument. Many
verses of the Koran give graphic descriptions of Heaven and Hell. The
merits which lead to Heaven include mass murder of people belonging to
other religions, and abducting of other people’s women. Christianity
says the same.

3\. Dr. Godbole has stated the truth very well. I should like to add
that if Muslims are freed from Islam they may cease to be Muslims but
will certainly become good human beings such as they were before
conversion to Islam. If copper etc. are compounded with gold in more
than the prescribed quantities, gold loses not only its malleability but
also its luster; it becomes a hard metal. But if the proportion of
mixture remains proper, it becomes better gold. The Arabs before the
emergence of Muhammad were civilized people with knowledge of and
devotion to God. It is no more than a fiction that the pre-Islamic Arabs
were ignorant and debauched.

4\. Telling to Muslims that their ancestors were the same as those of
the Hindus, does not get us anywhere. I know it from personal
experience, after having held a dialogue with my Muslim neighbours on
this subject. They told me in so many words that the Koran and the Hadis
do not permit them to join the national mainstream with Hindus. Islam,
they told me, teaches that if an Islamic country attacks India, Muslims
in India must help the invader. Muslims, they said, have to strive
always to convert every Dar al-Harb into a Dar al-Islam with the help of
Muslims from other lands.

5\. The vote-hungry parties like the Congress, the Janata Dal and
others, are always ready to please the Muslims. And the Muslims are not
only fooling these parties for political gains but are also augmenting
their power in India. They view this country as Dar al-Harb.

6\. Adherence to Sufism does not inspire tolerance. Sufis, by and large,
were not tolerant. It is only a few Sufis who exhibited a different
spirit because they came in contact with some outstanding Hindu saint.

7\. The Islamic view of God is really responsible for the ghetto
mentality of Muslims. Muslim leaders have no opinions of their own. They
mouth only what they have learnt from the Koran. The Koran contains no
universal Dharma. That is why its follower committed massacres of people
belonging to other faiths, and made converts by force.

8\. I cannot speak on this subject with knowledge, that is, whether
Namaz offered on disputed places is acceptable to Allah or not.

**II**

Coming to the Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch, the only comment I can offer is
that we should learn from the results of Secularism or Sarva Dharma
Samabhãva as practised by the Congress. The policy has failed to change
the mentality of Muslims. It is my considered opinion that we will do
well by scrapping the Samãdar Manch.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Translated from a letter in Hindi. The writer lives in Phagwara in the
Kapurthala District of Punjab.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


