+++
title = "54 "

+++
<div align="right">

**1. Roll Over, Rushdie**  
Daniel Pipes

</div>

In March 1989, shortly after Ayatollah Khomeini issued his decree
sentencing Salman Rushdie to death for his novel *The Satanic Verses*,
London’s *Observer* newspaper published an anonymous letter from
Pakistan. “Salman Rushdie speaks for me,” wrote its author, who
explained: “Mine is a voice that has not yet found expression in
newspaper columns. It is the voice of those who are born Muslims but
wish to recant in adulthood, yet are not permitted to on pain of death.
Someone who does not live in an Islamic society cannot imagine the
sanctions, both self-imposed and external, that militate against
expressing religious disbelief. ‘I don’t believe in God’ is an
impossible public utterance even among family and friends… So we hold
our tongues, those of us who doubt.”

“Ibn Warraq” has decided no longer to hold his tongue. Identified only
as a man who grew up in a country now called an Islamic republic,
presently living and teaching in Ohio, the Khomeini decree so outraged
him that he wrote a book called *Why I Am Not A Muslim* (Prometheus
Books, 402 pages, $25.95) that transcends *The Satanic Verses* in terms
of sacrilege. Where Rushdie offered an elusive critique in an airy tale
of magical realism, Ibn Warraq brings a scholarly sledge-hammer to the
task of demolishing Islam. Writing a polemic against Islam, especially
for an author of Muslim birth, is an act so incendiary that the author
must write under a pseudonym; not to do so would be an act of suicide.

And what does Ibn Warraq have to show for this act of unheard-of
defiance? A well-researched and quite brilliant, if somewhat
disorganized, indictment of one of the world’s great religions. While
the author disclaims any pretence to originality, he has read widely
enough to write an essay that offers a startlingly novel rendering of
the faith he left.

To begin with, Ibn Warraq draws on current Western scholarship to make
the astonishing claim that Muhammad never existed, or if he did, he had
nothing to do with the Koran. Rather, that holy book was fabricated a
century or two later in, Palestine, then “projected back onto an
invented Arabian point of origin.” If the Koran is a fraud, it’s not
surprising to learn that the author finds little authentic in other
parts of the Islamic tradition. For example, he dispatches Islamic law
as “a fantastic creation founded on forgeries and pious fictions.” The
whole of Islam, in short, he portrays as a concoction of lies.

Having thus dispensed with religion, Ibn Warraq takes up history and
culture. Turning political correctness exactly on its head, he condemns
the early Islamic conquests and condones European colonialism, “Bowing
toward Arabia five times a day,” he writes, “must surely be the ultimate
symbol of… cultural imperialism.” In contrast, European rule, “with all
its shortcomings, ultimately benefited the ruled as much as the rulers.
Despite certain infamous incidents, the European powers conducted
themselves on the whole very humanely.”

To the conventional argument that the achievements of Islamic
civilization in the medieval period are proof of Islam’s greatness, Ibn
Warraq revives the Victorian argument that Islamic civilization came
into existence not because of the Koran and Islamic law but despite
them. The stimulus in science and the arts came from outside the Muslim
world; where Islam reigned, these accomplishments took place only where
the dead hand of Islamic authority could be avoided. Crediting Islam for
the medieval cultural glories, he believes, would be like crediting the
Inquisition for Galileo's discoveries.

Turning to the present, Ibn Warraq argues that Muslims have experienced
great travails trying to modernize because Islam stands foursquare in
their way. Its regressive orientation makes change difficult: “All
innovations are discouraged in Islam - every problem is seen as a
religious problem rather than a social or economic one.” This religion
would seem to have nothing functional to offer. “Islam, in particular
political Islam, has totally failed to cope with the modern world and
all its attendant problems - social, economic, and philosophical.” Nor
does the author hold out hope for improvement. Take the matter of
protecting individuals from the state: “The major obstacle in Islam to
any move toward international human rights is God, or to put it more
precisely… the reverence for the sources, the Koran and the Sunna.”

In a chapter of particular delicacy, given his status as a Muslim living
in the West, Ibn Warraq discusses Muslim emigration to Europe and North
America. He worries about the importation of Islamic ways and advises
the British not to make concessions to immigrant demands but to stick
firmly by their traditional principles. “Unless great vigilance is
exercised, we are all likely to find British society greatly
impoverished morally” by Muslim influence. At the same time, as befits a
liberal and Western-oriented Muslim, Ibn Warraq argues that the key
dividing line is one of personal philosophy and not (as Samuel
Huntington would have it) religious adherence. “\[T\]he final battle
will not necessarily be between Islam and the West, but between those
who value freedom and those who do not.” This argument in fact offers
hope, implying as it does that peoples of divergent faiths can find
common ground.

As a whole, Ibn Warraq’s assessment of Islam is exceptionally severe:
The religion is based on deception; it succeeded through aggression and
intimidation; it holds back progress; and it is a “form of
totalitarianism.” Surveying nearly fourteen centuries of history, he
concludes, “the effects of the teachings of the Koran have been a
disaster for human reason and social, intellectual, and moral progress.”

As if this were not enough, Ibn Warraq tops off his blasphemy with an
assault on what he calls “monotheistic arrogance” and even religion as
such. He asks some interesting questions, the sort that we in the West
seem not to ask each other any more, “If there is a natural evolution
from polytheism to monotheism, then is there not a natural development
from monotheism to atheism?” Instead of God appearing in obscure places
and murky circumstance, “Why can He not reveal Himself to the masses in
a football stadium during the final of the World Cup”? In 1917, rather
than permit a miracle in Fatima, Portugal, why did He not end the
carnage on the Western Front?

It is hard for a non-Muslim fully to appreciate the offense Ibn Warraq
has committed, for his book of deep protest and astonishing provocation
goes beyond anything imaginable in our rough-and-tumble culture. We have
no pieties remotely comparable to Islam’s. In the religious realm, for
example, Joseph Heller turned several Biblical stories into pornographic
fare in his 1984 novel *God Knows*, and no one even noticed.  For his
portrayal of Jesus’ sexual longings in the 1988 film *The Last
Temptation of Christ*, Martin Scorsese faced a few pickets but certainly
no threats to his life. In the political arena, Charles Murray and
Dinesh D’Souza published books on the very most delicate American topic,
the issue of differing racial abilities, and neither had to go into
hiding as a result.

In contrast, blasphemy against Islam leads not only to threats on the
life of Salman Rushdie, but to actual murder - and not just in places
like Egypt and Bangladesh. At least one such execution has taken place
on American soil. Rashad Khalifa, an Egyptian biochemist living in
Tucson, Arizona, analyzed the Koran by computer and concluded from some
other complex numerology that the final two verses of the ninth chapter
do not belong in the holy book. This insight eventually prompted him to
declare himself a prophet, a very serious offense in Islam (which holds
Muhammad to be the last of the prophets). Some months later, on January
31, 1990, unknown assailants - presumably orthodox Muslims angered by
his teachings - stabbed Khalifa to death. While the case remains
unsolved, it sent a clear and chilling message: Even in the United
States, deviancy leads to death.

In this context, Ibn Warraq’s claim of the right to disagree with
Islamic tenets is a shock. And all the more so when he claims even the
Westerner’s right to do so disrespectfully! “This book is first and
foremost an assertion of my right to criticize everything and anything
in Islam - even to blaspheme, to make errors, to satirize, and mock.”
*Why I am Not a Muslim* does have a mocking quality, to be sure, but it
is also a serious and thought-provoking book. It calls not for a wall of
silence, much less a Rushdie-like *fatwa* on the author’s life, but for
an equally compelling response from a believing Muslim.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Daniel Pipes, a Professor at Harvard University, U.S.A., is one of the
world’s foremost historians. He is editor of the *Middle East Quarterly*
and author of *The Rushdie Affair: The Novel, the Ayatollah, and the
West*. This review by him was published in *The Weekly* Standard of New
York, U.S.A., on January 22, 1996.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


