+++
title = "62 "

+++
<div align="right">

*Indian Express*  
New Delhi, 7 April 1995  
**3. BJP promoting a ‘minority-friendly’**  
**image for elections**  
Express New Service

</div>

New Delhi - While declaring that liberation of the Varanasi and Mathura
temples was not on its agenda, the Bharatiya Janata Party has not
entirely foreclosed the potentially emotional issues.

Fashioning an ambivalent strategy ahead of the next year’s general
elections, the BJP after its Panaji session, has sought to don a
“minority-friendly” image, while insisting that its “basic image will
stay intact”.

In other words, the ideological mascot of Hindutva, stays firmly
embedded.

The BJP members, particularly those originally belonging to the banned
Vishwa Hindu Parishad, will take part in the VHP’s forthcoming campaign
for liberation of the Kashi Vishwanath and Krishna Janmabhoomi shrines.

Secondly, the BJP has declared that it will do nothing to persuade other
constituents of the Sangh Parivar to drop the campaign for the two
temples.

In effect, Mr. L.K. Advani’s offer at one point of time, to persuade
these constituents to call off the stir if the Ayodhya tangle was
suitably resolved, now stands withdrawn.

And finally, the party has made clear in unequivocal terms, that there
are no fissures in the Sangh Parivar. This is after the VHP leader, Mr.
Giriraj Kishore, announced plans to intensify the stir and Mr. L.K.
Advani at Panaji, asserted that the two temples were not on the party’s
agenda.

The BJP vice-president, Mr. Krishan Lal Sharma, explaining the party’s
stand said, “We have made it very clear that the two temples are not on
our agenda”.

However, asked if this meant that the issue was closed forever, as far
as the BJP was concerned, he said, “We are talking about it now. Can
anyone talk of what happens in the future? Whatever resolutions etc.,
are passed, are for the present. The question of now or never therefore,
does not arise”.

Which means that the door is still open, albeit by a toe-hold. As the
party comes within striking distance of Delhi, following its success in
the recent round of State elections, the religious element will continue
to be down-played.

In fact, the BJP State units are dispatching workers into the minority
pockets to assure them that no harm shall come to them.

However, should things change dramatically in the build-up to the
general elections, the BJP appears to reserve the option of falling back
on the religion card.

In any case, thanks to the strict code of conduct, the BJP platform
itself will not witness the religious fervour, but the message would go
out of the other constituents of the Sangh Parivar.

Observers here point out the recent campaign in Gujarat where Sadhvi
Rithambra and other VHP leaders, laid the ground for the BJP to mount
its campaign.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


