+++
title = "06 6. The United Front of Hostile Forces"

+++
**6. The United Front of Hostile Forces**

So far we have discussed (1) the significance of Hindu Society as the
last of the ancient societies to survive the invasion of latter-day
ideologies, and (2) the methods and means employed by these ideologies
to finish Hindu society as well.

In this concluding survey we shall take up the United Front which these
ideologies, particularly Islamism and Communism, have forged to malign
Hindu society and keep it on the defensive. This United Front functions
mostly at a psychological level. But it presents itself as a political
alliance also whenever specific issues affecting the welfare of Hindu
society come up before the Parliament or are debated in public.

The United Front between Islamism and Communism has been in existence
and active since the early ‘forties when the Communist Party of India
came out openly in support of the demand for Pakistan. Not many people
remember now that the Communist Party had once directed a large number
of its Muslim members to join the Muslim League to provide intellectual
muscle to the two-nation theory. The “Hindu” Communists were already
inside the Indian National Congress to play the game of Islamism. The
two Communist brigades together did a great job for Islamism by
softening the Hindu intelligentsia and blackening as Hindu communalists
and chauvinists all those who dared oppose Partition. Islamism paid back
the debt of gratitude partially when the Razakars from the erstwhile
State of Hyderabad cooperated whole-heartedly with the Communist Party
of India during the Communist insurrection in Telengana.

This close cooperation between Islamism and Communism continued unabated
after independence. Islamism had come under a shadow and become suspect
in the eyes of most people in this country. But Communism had its
earlier respectability restored to it soon after the death of Sardar
Patel and the eclipse of his following inside the Indian National
Congress. And Communism left no stone unturned to rehabilitate Islamism
under the guise of progressivism. The Aligarh Muslim University which
had been a hot-bed of Islamism in pre-Partition days, now became the
hideout of progressive Muslim professors. Muslim poets and writers who
had once thundered from the Muslim League platform, now flocked to the
Progressive Writers Association and other Communist fronts. These
professors, poets and writers were putting across the age-old slogans of
Islamism in their newly acquired language of progressivism.

This United Front between Islamism and Communism would have suffered a
set-back when Pakistan became a member of the US sponsored CENTO and
SEATO. The Communist Party of India was ranged against Pakistan in
support of India’s foreign policy. But the Front was saved because, at
about the same time, Arab nationalism moved towards the Soviet Union
under the leadership of Nasser. India’s foreign policy became very vocal
in espousing Arab causes in an effort to “isolate Pakistan in the comity
of Muslim nations”. At home also, the Indian National Congress and other
political parties who took pride in parading their Secularism bent over
backwards to woe Islamism in an effort to “wean the Muslims of India
from their loyalty to Pakistan”. Communism was in the vanguard of this
national consensus. Its protege, Islamism, therefore, suffered not the
slightest discomfort.

It is only recently that this United Front between Islamism and
Communism has come under some strain due to the rise of Islamic
Fundamentalism. A patch-up between Pakistan and the Soviet Union over
Afghanistan is not an impossible proposition in spite of American
efforts to keep them at loggerheads. A patch-up between Islamism and
Communism in India will follow in quick succession. The two are
cooperating in support of Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran and in opposition
to President Sadat of Egypt.^([1](#1)) But this is not the place to
hazard guessess whether Islamism and Communism will cooperate or clash
in the near future. Here we want to highlight their achievements during
the days of their cooperation.

The United Front between Islamism and Communism achieved its first great
victory when it effectively blocked the emergence of Hindi as the
national language.

The Founding Fathers of the Constitution had accepted in principle that
Hindi should be recognised and helped to become the national language of
India. In order to be able to play the role of a national language,
Hindi had naturally to fall back upon the store-house of Sanskrit,
particularly for the development of a scholarly vocabulary suited to
modern science and technology. The European languages had also fallen
back upon Greek and Latin in a similar situation. This Sanskritisation
of Hindi was bound to bring it closer to other Indian languages,
including Tamil, which also had the main source of their vocabularies in
Sanskrit. Hindi was also the only language which had translated on a
large-scale and made its own the literary and other output of all other
Indian languages. In the process, idioms and metaphors of many Indian
languages had started finding an honourable place in Hindi.

Communism was the first to unfurl its proletarian flag against the rise
of Hindi as a national language. How many people in Chandni Chowk,
shouted the Communist spokesmen, understand the Hindi spoken by All
India Radio?  Next, it brought forward its theory of India being a
conglomeration of nationalities, each with its distinct language, which
it had first polished up in the ‘forties while pressing the case for
Pakistan. Finally, it recommended the Soviet model for a correct
language policy in India. And to demonstrate its ardour in this
anti-Hindu crusade, it expelled Rahul Sankrityayana from its ranks.
Inspite of his great service to Communist causes in India, Rahulji had
remained an advocate of Hindi as the national language. Advocates of
Hindi were now branded as Hindu chauvinists and Hindi imperialists.

Islamism immediately revived the lost cause of Urdu behind the
smoke-screen of this Communist campaign against Hindi. It lauded loudly
when progressive Urdu poets like Firaq Gorakhpuri lampooned Hindi in a
language which was largely unprintable. Simultaneously, Islamism started
parading Urdu as the great language of culture and refinement which will
be lost to India for good if Urdu was allowed to go under. No Communist
came forward to examine this “culture and refinement as a legacy of
decadent Muslim courts and a frivolous Muslim aristocracy. No Communist
questioned the heavy Persianisation and Arabicisation of Urdu which made
it incomprehensible even to educated people, leave alone the man in
Chandni Chowk. The recognition of Urdu as a second language has today
become a sine qua non of Secularism.

That brings us to the second subject where the United Front between
Islamism and Communism scored a notable victory-the subject of
Secularism. They joined hands to jibe at Secularism till the concept was
totally distorted and became a synonym for Islamic imperialism.

Secularism as a state policy had been evolved in the modern West which
had become sick of the contending theocratic claims of Christian
churches. Theocracy had been as alien to Hindu state and society as it
had been intrinsic to Christian and Islamic state and society.
Secularism was, therefore, nothing new for the Hindus. They had
practised it for long in their socio-political, even private family
life. No Hindu raised an objection to the acceptance of Secularism as a
state policy. But Communism was soon firing its salvos at a Secularism
under which “the Hindus occupied all places of power and prestige and
the poor Muslim minority was denied its rightful place in national
life”. It raised an accusing finger at a President who performed Hindu
religious rites inside the Rashtrapati Bhavan and went to Hindu places
of pilgrimage. It denounced as Hindu communalism and revivalism the
breaking of coconuts and use of garlands at the inauguration of some
public projects and functions. This Secularism, according to Communist
Party resolutions, was a sham and a shame.

Islamism was not slow to jump on this bandwagon as well, and parade its
endless economic, social, political and cultural grievances. Who could
question the legitimacy of these grievances now that they were being
trumpeted not by the Muslim League, which could be branded as communal,
but by “progressive Hindu intellectuals who had no communal axe to
grind?” Political parties were now warned by the Muslim vote-bank that
their claim to Secularism was not sound so long as they did not champion
Islamic causes in domestic as well as international politics. The final
upshot was a revival of the old Islamist demand for reservations for
Muslims in every sphere of national life, including the armed forces.

Another field in which this close cooperation between Islamism and
Communism has achieved remarkable results is the re-interpretation of
Indian history till it has been emptied of all such content as can
nourish a nation. We have already dealt with this subject. The aim of
both Islamism and Communism in this joint effort has been to explode the
“theory” that Hindus have always been a nation, and sabotage the sound
proposition that the non-Hindu communities in India have to seek from
the Hindus and make to the Hindus such legitimate concessions as will
enable them to get integrated into a broad Indian nationalism. In the
new progressive perspective, the “Hindu conglomeration of castes” has to
concede everything to the non-Hindu communities and demand nothing from
them.

There are many other fields, major and minor, in which Islamism and
Communism have marched hand in hand. Christianism has not been an equal
and direct partner in this United Front against Hindu society. But,
indirectly, it has subscribed to and participated in this United Front,
more pronouncedly on the issue of Hindi as a national language and the
character of Secularism as a state policy. This is not the place to
elaborate all the details.

It also needs to be stated that this United Front functions under the
protective umbrella of Macaulayism which never fails to incorporate the
slogans of the Front in its own respectable language. We have already
seen the ideological affinities which Macaulayism has with Communism,
and how these affinities always keep it on the defensive vis-a-vis
Communism. It is, therefore, very easy for Communism to transfer its own
slogans as well as the slogans of its main accomplice, Islamism, on to
the prestigious platform of Macaulayism. Christianism finds a ready
access to Macaulayism because the missionary schools and colleges
provide the main recruiting ground for Macaulayism. We shall, therefore,
further investigate why Macaulayism plays the role it does.

Every society has its normal quota of social evils. The animal in man
spares no society from its depredations. Hindu society is no exception
to this universal rule of Nature. It has always had and will always have
its normal share of social evils. It has perhaps accumulated more than
its normal share because it has suffered a long spell of foreign rule
without losing its identity. Loss of freedom does make a society suffer
from arterio-sclerosis and a dimunition of dynamism. Economic
impoverishment which always follows loss of freedom is also a fertile
field for social vices.

But, after all is said and done, Hindu society remains a very human
society. It still retains and cherishes great spiritual, moral, cultural
and intellectual traditions. It was only the other day that this society
gave to the world a galaxy of great saints, poets, statesmen and
scientists. The heart and mind of Hindu society are still sound and
throb with great aspirations. Its days of creativity are not yet over
and its contributions to the greater good of mankind can still be
counted upon.

The tragedy of a Hindu victim of Macaulayism is that while he is acutely
aware of the evils prevalent in Hindu society, he is not aware of the
Hindu doctrines which provide no sanction for these evils and which can
be depended upon in any endeavour for their eradication. In the process,
he has reduced himself to the status of a Miss Mayo whom Mahatma Gandhi
had aptly described as a drain-inspector.

His tragedy is made doubly dangerous by his ignorance of the evils
prevalent in non-Hindu societies in which he has never lived as an
insider. He also does not know that quite a few of the inequities in
non-Hindu societies have their sanction in the dogmas by which these
societies swear. He is, therefore, easily taken in when Islamism
presents Muslim society as based on brotherhood of men, or Christianism
boasts of Christian society as overflowing with love and charity, or
Communism claims that an equation society exists in the Soviet Union. He
does not know that Islamic brotherhood has always been a brotherhood of
bandits, that Christian love and charity are largely a function of the
riches which Western nations supply to the Christian missions, and that
Communist talk of equalitarianism is nothing more than a doublespeak for
a serfdom unprecedented in the annals of human history.

Who could be more acutely aware of the shortcomings in Hindu society
than Maharshi Dayananda, Swami Vivekananda, Mahatma Gandhi and Dr.
Hedgewar? But that awareness did not inspire them, as it does the
victims of Macaulayism, to join the Nirad Chaudhries of their days. Nor
did they welcome, as our victims of Macaulayism do, the acrimonious
accusations which Islamism and Christianism were advancing against Hindu
society in their days.

Who could be a greater critic and sterner scolder of Hindu society than
these four great thinkers, reformers and leaders of men? But they did
not sit in armchairs in air-conditioned offices gloating morbidly over
the evils in their society, or using those evils as subjects for
spilling ink in the daily and the periodical press, or feeling free from
their duty towards their society after self-righteous pontifications
from political platforms on evils prevalent in Hindu society. Instead,
they gave stirring calls to Hindu society to get rid of the dirt and
dross it had collected in course of time, and revive and reconstruct
itself in the light of the spiritual and moral traditions it had
inherited. More, they themselves entered the field and fought many a
battle against orthodoxy, ignorance, privilege and power, and in defence
of justice and equity.

It is perhaps too much to expect from our Hindu victim of Macaulayism
that he would any day enter the field of social action and reform. He is
at best a scholar who borrows his jargon from abroad and tries to fit
the “jigsaw puzzle” of Hindu society into its strait-jacket At worst he
is a scribe who makes a living by selling whatever verbiage he can
produce at short notice for his paymasters in the press. But he can at
least inform himself better about the shortcomings of non-Hindu
societies so that he is cured of his one-sided animus.

The United Front amongst ideologies hostile to Hindu society will
certainly suffer a set-back the day Macaulayism withdraws its patronage
from it and refuses to function as its transmission belt. Macaulayism is
wedded to Secularism and Democracy. It has to find out for itself as to
who are the enemies of Secularism and Democracy and who their best
friends. This can be done only by looking beyond the United Front of
Islamism, Communism and Christianism.

The nature of this United Front is negative. The participants in the
Front agree that Hindu society should die and disappear. But there is no
agreement among them regarding what sort of a society should replace
Hindu society. We are not sure what model Christianism has in mind. It
never goes beyond saying that India should be the land of Christ, which
may mean many things to many people. But Islamism and Communism leave us
in no doubt. The Islamist model is presently on display in Zia’s
Pakistan and Khomeini’s Iran. The Communist model is being demonstrated
next to our doorstep-in Afghanistan.

The three ideologies have not yet started exchanging blows simply
because their areas of operation have not yet coincided. They have
chosen to feed upon different limbs of the large-sized Hindu society.
Christianism is busy amongst Hindu “tribals” whom Hindu society had
always left undisturbed. Islamism is on the prowl amongst the Harijans
whom a power-hungry leadership is fast preparing for political
blackmail. Communism is spreading its tentacles amongst the upper and
middle classes whom it parades as its “proletarian base”.

Thus Hindu society not only presents itself as a prey to these
exclusive, intolerant and imperialist ideologies but also acts as a
buffer between them. India is secular because India is Hindu. It can be
added as a corollary that India is a democracy also because India is
Hindu. If Hindu society permits this free for all any further, the days
of Secularism and Democracy in this country are numbered. Let the Hindus
unite and save themselves, their democratic polity, their secular state,
and their *Sanãtana Dharma* for a new cycle of civilization, not only
for themselves but also the world.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) This was written before President Sadat was assassinated.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


