+++
title = "Rjrasva on demographics"
+++

## Averages and hidden patterns
Most countries will be in same boat as NE Asia in coming yrs but avg's hide some key underlying patterns. Both Japan & Germany have high rates of childless women but both also have significant % of women (17%) who have 3+ kids, that is 3% more than Russia & 6% more than Spain.

## Replacement fertility
Also keep in mind that replacement TFR is only 2.1 in 1st world countries with natural balance between men & women. In countries with high IMR (India & PRC to some extent) & skewed sex ratio (PRC, India) women need to have more than 2.1 to keep the population from declining.

## Impact on State power 
"The triumph of small nations or armies over large ones are remembered precisely because they are the exception to the rule." - The Human Tide: How Population Shaped the Modern World by Paul Moreland

> Tacitus, the Roman historian and statesman, compared the small families of the Romans unfavourably to the fertile Germans, while Ibn Khaldun, the medieval Arab historian, associated depopulation with the desolation and reversal of civilisation. Vauban, Louis XIV's great military architect, was under no illusion about what ultimately drove power; however innovative the defensive buildings might be, he declared that the greatness of kings... is measured in the number of their subjects'. Clausewitz, a Prussian theorist of war living in the Napoleonic era, considered superiority of numbers to be the most general principle of victory', and it was Voltaire who insisted that God was on the side of the big battalions. Adam Smith declared that the most decisive mark of the prosperity of any country is the increase in the number of its habitants'. Asked which woman he loved most, Napoleon is reported to have replied: 'she who has the largest number of children'.
>
> Of course, a big technological advantage can undoubtedly be decisive. But often such an advantage, whether it be the Maxim gun or the atom bomb, cannot be indefinitely sustained, since it is invariably adopted by the enemy, whereupon population again becomes key. Iraqi and Afghan militants in recent decades were able to deploy devastating weapons against their first world invaders. Russian efforts to dominate Afghanistan in the 1980s and American attempts to dominate both Iraq and Afghanistan in the first decade of the twenty-first century were in large part frustrated by the fact that Afghanistan and Iraq had populations with a median age of under twenty, while those of the USSR and the USA were well over thirty. It could be argued that in the end what was lacking on the part of the Russians and Americans was not sheer numbers but will; but even here, demography has a role to play. A country with a fertility rate of two or less is much more likely to have a culture in which civilian or military losses are unacceptable than a country with a fertility rate of over seven or nearly five, as was the case in Afghanistan and Iraq respectively around the time of the US invasions in 2002 and 2003.+++(5)+++ Each mother in the former case simply has fewer sons to lose. It seems callous to imagine that mothers of large families are any more willing to lose their children in a conflict, but there is compelling evidence to suggest that societies with smaller families are generally less bellicose. 

### France
In 1800, France's population comprised a little under a fifth of the European total, and France could attempt to dominate the whole continent; by 1900, with a population that was less than a tenth of Europe's, France was on the way to becoming a second-rank power. Asked which woman he loved most, Napoleon is reported to have replied: 'she who has the largest number of children'.

More dramatic is demographic inversion between Germany & France, clear factor in emboldening Ger for WW1.


### British kid export
The child migration scheme founded by Annie MacPherson in 1869, under which more than 100,000 children were sent from the United Kingdom to Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa. Canada's best kept historical secrets, the mass immigration of tens of thousands of children to be used as a source of cheap labor. Between 1863 and 1949, over 110,000 children were forcibly removed. 

### Spain vs Britain
> The great cultural historian Fernand Braudel said of the Spaniards that they could conquer but not grasp Central and South America. The suggestion is that although the Spaniards had a vast empire on paper, in practice they had little impact or control over much of it, even before losing most of it early in the nineteenth century. In large part this was because there were simply not enough Spaniards to make a real population impact on the lands they conquered, even if they succeeded-intentionally or otherwise-in wiping out large swathes of the populations who had been there beforehand.
> 
> When the US annexed the northern half of Mexico in 1848 (including what are today the states of California, Arizona and New Mexico) they were able to do so easily because there were hardly any Spaniards or Mexicans there. This is in sharp contrast to the British, who peopled their empire-for which, of course, people were required. And people is what Britain came to have in abundance. The difference between the Spanish and British in this respect depended critically on the fact that Britain was undergoing a population explosion at the time, producing enough people to grow the population dramatically at home while exporting millions to the colonies and beyond. Spain had never been able to do this.
> 
> Great waves of people from the British Isles settled in the imperial territories of Canada, Australia and New Zealand, bringing with them diseases that devastated the indigenous peoples-much as the Spaniards had done in Latin America two or three centuries earlier-while themselves rapidly growing in number.

> ...
> What is noteworthy in all these cases is that although Britain had nominally held colonies in North America since the early seventeenth century and in Australasia since the eighteenth century, it was only once a population boom at home could fuel mass emigration that these territories came under meaningful control of Britain through a process of settlement. Without the population boom there would have been no mass settlement, and without mass settlement Britain's imperial claims to these territories might have remained as insubstantial as those of Spain to most of Latin America.+++(5)+++ Equally, without mass settlement these lands could not have become the great granaries and providers of meat and other essentials to a global trading system of which a newly industrialised Britain was the heart.

> While some European countries were following Britain's demographic take-off, others, for much of the nineteenth century, were not. Italy, Spain and Austria-Hungary were still largely mired in the peasant-dominated misery of large family size but high infant mortality. In 1900 in Spain, for example, life expectancy was still under thirty-five while in England it was over forty-eight. Parts of Austria-Hungary did start to see improvement in the latter part of the nineteenth century and the early twentieth, and its loss of ground against Britain slowed. This was less so for Spain and Italy. 
> 
> Indeed, it is telling that, at the time of the Spanish Armada, Spain had a population twice the size of Britain's, while 300 years later it was half the size.+++(5)+++ Over those years, Britain went from seeing Spain as its most dangerous rival and existential threat to a country barely worthy of strategic attention. Of course, this had much to do with Spain's loss of empire and internal economic decline, and its failure to modernise and industrialise beyond a few very limited areas, but it also had a lot to do with the relative shifts in the population balance. The Britain of Queen Victoria had much less to fear from Spain than had the England of Queen Elizabeth I, to the point where Spain was seen not as the principal global threat but as no more than a hot, dusty backwater. Population explains much of the reason for this change.

### North vs South USA
(Lincoln's) secretary recalled:

> We lost fifty per cent more men than did the enemy, and yet there is sense in the awful arithmetic propounded by Mr. Lincoln.+++(5)+++ He says that if the same battle were to be fought over again, every day, through a week of days, with the same relative results, the army under Lee would be wiped out to its last man, the Army of the Potomac would still be a mighty host, the war would be over, the Confederacy gone, and peace would be won at a smaller cost of life than it will be if the week of lost battles must be dragged out through yet another year of camps and marches, and of deaths in hospitals rather than upon the field. No general yet found can face the arithmetic, but the end of the war will be at hand when he shall be discovered.

> The election has exhibited another fact not less valuable to be known—the fact that we do not approach exhaustion in the most important branch of national resources, that of living men. While it is melancholy to reflect that the war has filled so many graves and carried mourning to so many hearts, it is some relief to know that, compared with the surviving, the fallen have been so few. While corps and divisions and brigades and regiments have formed and fought and dwindled and gone out of existence, a great majority of the men who composed them are still living. The same is true of the naval service. The election returns prove this. So many voters could not else be found. The States regularly holding elections, both now and four years ago, to wit, California, Connecticut Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wisconsin, cast 3,982,011 votes now, against 3,870,222 cast then, showing an aggregate now of 3,982,011. To this is to be added 33,762 cast now in the new States of Kansas and Nevada, which States did not vote in 1860, thus swelling the aggregate to 4,015,773 and the net increase during the three years and a half of war to 145,551. A table is appended showing particulars. To this again should be added the number of all soldiers in the field from Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware, Indiana, Illinois, and California, who by the laws of those States could not vote away from their homes, and which number can not be less than 90,000. Nor yet is this all. The number in organized Territories is triple now what it was four years ago—while thousands, white and black, join us as the national arms press back the insurgent lines. So much is shown, affirmatively and negatively, by the election. It is not material to inquire how the increase has been produced or to show that it would have been greater but for the war, which is probably true. The important fact remains demonstrated that we have more men now than we had when the war began; that we are not exhausted nor in process of exhaustion; that we are gaining strength and may if need be maintain the contest indefinitely.+++(5)+++ [This sentence recognizes the concern of a guerilla war after the main war finished.] This as to men. Material resources are now more complete and abundant than ever. The national resources, then, are unexhausted, and, as we believe, inexhaustible. 

## Disincentives
### 1 child policy impact
Neighbors & many Euro countries also have similarly low TFR's without any 1 child policy & TFR more than halved in 10 yrs before 1 child policy, in 1980 it was 2.32. If there is a crisis it will be felt all over the world except Israel & may be Iceland. Taiwan's TFR in 2020 was 0.99, SK 0.84, neither had 1 kid policy. Japanese are breeding like rabbits in comparison to these 2 at 1.34. Middle income Thailand was 1.18, so < Japan, no 1 kid policy. PRC's true TFR is suspected to be between SK & Taiwan by @fuxianyi.

NE China is rust belt with lowest TFR in world & rapid depop due to lack of jobs
So much for Western fantasy of China conquering Siberia from Rus.

## Incentives
There is some evidence incentives may work like the recent uptick in Hungary's TFR attributed to Orban's pro natal policies but the rises don't seem to sustain themselves + r far from replacement. 

Only 1 1st world country consistently above 2.1 is Israel & that is due to relatively high Arab TFR, Ultra Orthodox Jews (6-7 kids per woman), Orthodox Jews (3 kids per woman), 2-2.2 per woman (secular Jews). So pro natal religiosity plays a big role.+++(5)+++

When a CCP mouthpiece recently published an article exhorting party members to set the e.g. of role models by having 3 kids each, it was widely ridiculed online & quickly pulled. Evidently not enough "state capacity" to keep unpopular articles online. 
