+++
title = "04 CHAPTER IV PERFIDY WINS WHERE VALOUR FAILED"

+++
**CHAPTER IV**

**PERFIDY WINS WHERE VALOUR FAILED**

The theologians of Islam had laid down, in the opening years of this
imperialist ideology, that the *kãfirs* who could not be subdued by
force should be subverted by fraud. The prophet of Islam had himself
initiated the first lessons in this lore when he practised what came to
be known as *Siyãsat-i-Madînah* in later times, that is, to take the
*kãfirs* one by one and that too when they are least expecting an
attack. One of his famous sayings, sanctified as his Sunnah, was that
“war is perfidy”. This *hadîs* came in handy to Muizzuddin Muhammad bin
Sam who is known in Indian history as Muhammad Ghuri.

By the time of Ghori, the Islamic armies of the Arabs and the Turks had
struggled successively for nearly 540 years in order to seize the
heartland of India, and to convert the whole country into a
*Dãr-ul-Islam*. But they had succeeded only in occupying the frontier
areas of Kabul, Zabul, the North-West Frontier Province, Multan, and
parts of Punjab and Sindh. This was small consolation compared to the
victories of Islam elsewhere, and that, too, in a far shorter span of
time.  
 

THE NEW ALIGNMENT OF FORCES

The Yaminis (Ghaznavids) had been overthrown in Afghanistan by the new
dynasty of Shansabanis (Ghurids) around the time that Vigraharaja (also
known as Visaladeva) was consolidating his hold over territories
recovered from the Muslim possessions in the Punjab. Prithiviraja II,
the successor to Vigraharaja, had placed his maternal uncle, Kilhan, in
charge of the fort at Asika (Hansi). His Hansi stone inscription of AD
1168 describes the Hammira (Amir) as a “dagger pointed at the whole
world”. The flag that fluttered at the gateway of this fort, we are
told, “defied the Hammira, as it were”. Another line in this inscription
compares Prithiviraja II to Sri Rama, and Kilhana to Hanumana.^([1](#1))

Besides the Chauhans of Delhi and Ajmer, India at that time had two more
powerful kingdoms arrayed against the Muslim invader - the Chaulukyas
(Solankis) of Gujarat and the Gahadavads of Kanauj. Had these three
Hindu powers joined hands, they would have cleared out the barbarians
not only from the Punjab, Multan, Sindh and the North-West Frontier
Province but also from Afghanistan which had become the launching pad
for Islamic aggression. But this they failed to do because each one of
them was bidding for an empire at the cost of others. It seems that the
earlier vision which had inspired Hindu princes in North India to come
together into a confederacy in the face of a common enemy, had also
vanished by this time. In the event, the Chauhans were defeated by
fraud, and the Gahadavads were taken by surprise. The Chaulukyas also
had a taste of what a Muslim victory would mean, though they survived
for the time being.

Muhammad Ghuri was installed at Ghazni in AD 1173 by his elder brother,
Ghiyasuddin, who had himself ascended the throne at Ghur in AD 1163. The
task of conquering India was assigned to Muhammad Ghuri while his
brother was extending the Ghurid empire towards the west. The Ghaznavids
were still in possession of the provinces they had been able to conquer
in north-western India. “Muhammad Ghori,” writes Dr. Misra, “was fully
alive to the strength of the forces opposing him and, unlike Mahmud of
Ghazni, he relied more on stratagems than on the strength of arms to
gain victories against his adversaries.”^([2](#2))

It would have been logical for him, to start with, to take the
North-West Frontier Province and the Punjab from the Ghaznavids. But
this would have alerted the Chauhans beyond the Sutlej. They, too, could
have advanced further west to contest for the Ghaznavid possessions.
Muhammad Ghuri knew that he could throw out the Ghaznavids whenever he
chose. His problem was the three Hindu kingdoms which were blocking his
way into the heartland of Hindustan.  
 

DEFEAT IN GUJARAT

So Ghuri entered India through the Gomal pass and “wrested Multan from
the Qaramatih chiefs in AD 1175”. Next he “intrigued with the wife of
the Bhatti Rai of Uch and promised to marry her if she poisoned her
husband”. Firishta records that “she declined the honour for herself but
secured it for her daughter, caused her husband to be put to death and
surrendered the fort”.^([3](#3)) Ghuri’s way to Gujarat now lay open by
way of Western Rajasthan. The Chauhans were not likely to mind if the
Chaulukyas went down. Prithviraj III who was to become an inveterate foe
of Ghuri in later years, had ascended the throne of Ajmer only an year
earlier. He was prevailed upon by his Chief Minister, Kadambavasa, not
to interfere. On the other hand Mahmud Ghaznavi’s successful raid on
Somanath, one hundred and fifty years earlier, had encouraged Ghuri to
imagine that Gujarat was an easy prey. He was dreaming of reaching
Somanath, and repeating the ‘pious performance’ of Mahmud. Muslim
historians had been gloating over Mahmud’s raid throughout the long
interval, without remembering the difficulties with which the raider had
subsequently secured his escape.

Muhammad Ghuri advanced upon Gujarat in AD 1178 with a large army.
Merutuñga writes in his *Prabandha-chintãmaNi* that “the mother of young
Mularaja, queen Naikidevi, the daughter of Parmardin of Goa, taking her
son in her lap, led the Chaulukya army against the Turushkas and
defeated them at Gadararaghatta near the foot of Mount Abu”. Mularaja II
was a minor at that time. Firishta records that the king of Gujarat
“advanced with an army to resist the Mohammedans and defeated them with
great slaughter. They suffered many hardships before they reached
Ghazni.” In Sanskrit inscriptions of Gujarat, Mularaja is invariably
mentioned as the “conqueror of Garjanakas \[dwellers of Ghazni\]”. One
inscription states that “during the reign of Mularaja even a woman could
defeat the Hammira \[Amir\]”.

Muhammad Ghuri did not lead another expedition against a Hindu prince
for the next 12 years. His experience in Gujarat was too traumatic to be
forgotten in a fit of megalomania. He employed the interregnum in
occupying the Ghaznavid possessions in India till he reached Lahore in
AD 1186. Now he stood face to face with Prithiviraja III, the famous
Chauhan ruler of Ajmer (AD 1177-1192) whose feudatory, Govindaraja, was
stationed at Delhi. *Prithvirãja-vijaya* tells us that the Chauhan ruler
was fully alive to the rise of a “beef-eating Mlechha named Ghori in the
north-west who had captured Garjani \[Ghazni\]”.^([5](#5))
*Hammîra-mahãkãvya* of Nayachandra Sûri states that Prithviraja defeated
Muhammad Ghuri at least seven times while *Prabandha-chintãmaNi* of
Merutuñga and *Prithvirãjarãso* of Chand Bardai put the number of
Prithviraja’s victories at twenty-one. Muslim historians - Minhaj,
Firishta, and others - on the other hand, mention only two battles
between these two rulers, one in AD 1191 and the other a year
later. “Dasharatha Sharma reconciles these two versions by suggesting
that the Ghorid generals began raiding the Chahmana \[Chauhan\]
territories soon after the occupation of Lahore in AD 1186 but were
beaten back by the Chahmana forces. Muslim historians have ignored them
altogether.”^([6](#6))  
 

DEFEAT AT TARAIN

It was only in AD 1191 that Muhammad Ghuri “caused the forces of Islam
to be organised and advanced against the fortress of Tabarhindah
(Sirhind) and took that stronghold”. This was a frontier fortress held
by a Chauhan feudatory. Prithviraja now advanced with his own army and
met Muhammad Ghuri at Tarain. “Before the onslaught of the Chahmana
army, the right and left flanks of the Muslim army broke down and took
to flight… The Sultan might have fallen off his horse had not a Khalji
youth recognised him and carried him out of the field of battle. The
Muslim army, not seeing their leader, fled headlong from the battlefield
and did not draw rein till they had reached a place considered safe from
pursuit. The Sultan was also brought there in a litter of broken spears.
From there, they returned to their own dominion.”^([7](#7)) The Rajputs
did not press their advantage to a final conclusion. They were satisfied
with Sirhind which was recovered soon after.

Dr. Misra observes: “Prithviraja could have now easily consummated his
victory by chasing and annihilating his routed enemy. But, instead, he
allowed the defeated Muslim army to return unmolested.  This
magnanimity, though in accord with the humane dictums of the Hindu
Shastras, was completely unsuitable against a ruthless enemy who
recognised no moral or ideological scruples in the attainment of
victory. The Hindus lacked the capacity to comprehend the real nature of
their ruthless adversaries and the new tactics needed to encounter their
challenge to Indian independence.”^([8](#8)) The nemesis came next year,
in AD 1192, when Muhammad Ghuri who had made “sleep and rest unlawful to
himself” came back with another army in order to avenge his defeat.
Hindus had permitted his earlier army to escape without suffering much
hurt.  
 

RESORT TO DECEIT

Before he reached Tarain again, Muhammad Ghuri had sent a messenger from
Lahore asking Prithviraja “to embrace the Musalman faith and acknowledge
his supremacy.” Firishta reproduces as follows the letter which
Prithviraja wrote to him from the field of battle: “To the bravery of
our soldiers we believe you are no stranger, and to our great
superiority in numbers which daily increases, your eyes bear witness…
You will repent in time of the rash resolution you have taken, and we
shall permit you to retreat in safety; but if you have determined to
brave your destiny, we have sworn by our gods to advance upon you with
our rank-breaking elephants, our plain-trampling horses, and
blood-thirsty soldiers, early in the morning to crush the army which
your ambition has led to ruin.” The language of this letter is the
typical Rajput language - full of *kShamãbhãva* (forgiveness) emanating
from perfect confidence in one’s own *parãkrama* (prowess).

Now the Sultan tried his stratagem He replied: “I have marched into
India at the command of my brother whose general I am. Both honour and
duty bind me to exert myself to the utmost… but I shall be glad to
obtain a truce till he is informed of the situation and I have received
his answer.” The Hindus fell into the trap. Firishta records “The Sultan
made preparations for battle… and when the Rajputs had left their camp
for purposes of obeying calls of nature, and for the purpose of
performing ablutions, he entered the plain with his ranks marshalled.
Although the unbelievers were amazed and confounded, still in the best
manner they could, they stood the fight.”^([9](#9)) The battle raged
upto afternoon, when the Hindus found themselves tired and exhausted.
They had not eaten even a breakfast. The fight was finished when Ghuri
threw in his reserve division constituted by the flower of his army. The
Rajputs were defeated, and suffered great slaughter.

The Muslims now occupied Delhi and marched into Ajmer. Prithviraja who
had been made captive and who refused to swear submission, was beheaded
and his son was installed as the new king. Rajput resistance was still
continuing in the countryside. Ghuri wanted to mollify the patriots by
means of a showboy. But that was of no avail. Hariraja, the younger
brother of Prithviraja, reoccupied Ajmer in AD 1193.  He also planned to
attack and take Delhi again. The plan failed because Ghuri had assembled
another big army for his march on the Gahadavad kingdom of Kanauj.
Hariraja committed suicide. He was too ashamed to live after so many of
his people had embraced death in defence of their country and culture,
and after he had remained unsuccessful in redeeming his own pledge.  
 

THE GAHADVADS GIVE A GOOD ACCOUNT

Jayachandra, the Gahadavad ruler of Kanauj, had not only kept aloof from
the battles raging to his south and west; he had also rejoiced in the
defeat of the Chauhans, the traditional rivals of the Gahadavads in the
bid for supremacy over North India. It was his turn to stand up and
accept the challenge when Ghuri appeared at the gates of his kingdom
with a re-equipped horde in AD 1194. The armies met at Chandawar. “The
battle was fiercely contested and the Gahadavads led by Jayachandra
almost carried the day when the latter seated on a lofty howdah received
a deadly wound from an arrow and fell from his exalted seat to the
earth.” The Muslims were able to plunder Kanauj and Asni where
Jayachandra had kept his treasure. But Rajput resistance continued till
Jayachandra’s son, Harishchandra, recovered Kanauj, Jaunpur and Mirzapur
in AD 1197. “Kanauj seems to have stayed independent till the reign of
Iltumish who ultimately conquered it from Harish Chandra’s successor,
Adakkamalla.”^([10](#10))

The main centres of Hindu power in North India had thus collapsed after
the defeat of the Chauhans and the Gahadavads. Bihar, which had been a
bone of contention between the Gahadavads and the Senas of Bengal, now
became a no-man’s-land. Bakhtiyar Khalji, a general of Ghuri, swept
through Bihar in AD 1202, and reached Navadvipa, the capital of the
Senas, a year later. This was a lightning raid which took the 80 years
old Lakshmana Sena by surprise. The Muslim squad had entered Navadvipa
in the guise of Muslim merchants to whose visits the Hindus of that city
were used. The Sena Raja fled to Sonargaon in East Bengal.  
 

HINDU RESISTANCE CONTINUES

Hindu resistance, however, did not cease. The Muslims had occupied the
big cities and the fortified towns. But they had no hold on the
countryside which was seething with revolt. The first to deliver a
counter-attack were the Mher Rajputs around Ajmer. They rose in AD 1195
and appealed to the Chaulukya ruler of Gujarat for help. The help came.
Qutbuddin Aibak, another general of Ghuri, was in charge of Ajmer at
that time. According to Hasan Nizami, a contemporary historian, “The
action lasted the whole day and the next morning that immense army of
Naharwala \[Anhilawara, capital of Gujarat\] came to the assistance of
the vanguard, slew many of the Musalmans, wounded their commander,
pursued them to Ajmer and encamped within one parasang of the place.”
Aibak rushed messengers to Ghazni, crying for help. “It was only after a
very large army was despatched to reinforce him, that Aibak could be
rescued.”^([11](#11))

Aibak, in turn, invaded the kingdom of Gujarat in AD 1197. The
Chaulukyan army again faced the Muslims at the foot of Mount Abu where
Ghuri had been defeated in AD 1178. The Muslim army became nervous and
dared not attack. “It is clear from Hasan Nizami’s account that the army
of Islam advanced under the cover of darkness of night and caught the
Chaulukyan army unprepared at dawn.”^([12](#12)) The Hindus were
defeated this time. Anhilawara was occupied and sacked. But the Muslims
could not hold Gujarat for long. In the next four years, Bhimadeva II,
the Chaulukyan king, recovered the whole of his kingdom from the
invaders and was back in Anhilawara in AD 1201. Arnoraja, the Vaghela
feudatory of Bhima Deva, met his death in this campaign. But his son,
Lavanaprasada, won a singular victory at Stambha, modern Cambay.
Sridhara, the governor of Devapattan, inflicted another crushing defeat
on the Muslims. “How and when this army of occupation was driven out of
Gujarat is nowhere mentioned by Muslim historians. It is precisely here
that the two inscriptions of Dabhoi and Verawal refer to the heroic
struggles of two generals of the Chaulukya king, Lavanaprasada and
Sridhara.” Dr. Misra concludes: “For nearly the whole of the next
century, Gujarat remained independent. Perhaps no other Indian dynasty
put up a more sustained or successful resistance against the Muslims for
a longer period.”^([13](#13))  
 

ASSAM STAYS FREE

In the eastern theatre, Bakhtiyar Khalji could not conquer East Bengal.
The Madanpara and Edilpur inscriptions of Visvarupa Sena and Keshava
Sena, the successors of Lakshmana Sena, speak of victories won by them
over the *yavanas*. Hodivala points out that “we possess epigraphic
evidence of Lakshmana Sena’s descendants having ruled for at least three
generations at Vikramapur near Sonargaon in Dacca”.^([14](#14))

Blocked by the Senas from East Bengal, Bakhtiyar Khalji advanced into
Assam. But his army was destroyed by the king of Kamarupa. He was able
to escape with his own life and about a hundred followers. But his army
was slaughtered so that he fell sick due to excessive grief and died or
was murdered in sick bed by a Muslim rival. “The Musalman invasion of
the Brahmaputra valley was repeated on several occasions during the next
five centuries of Muslim rule over north India, but most of these
expeditions ended in disaster and Islam failed to make any inroads into
the valley.” The present plight of the Hindus of Assam at the hands of
Muslim infiltrators is entirely due to that “peaceful penetration” which
was helped in the 20th century, first by the British patrons of the
Muslim League and, later on, by vote-hungry Hindu politicians of the
ruling party in independent India.  
 

THE CORRECT PERSPECTIVE

Dr. Misra concludes the “history of the epic struggle of the Indians
against the attempts of the early Muslim invaders to foist an alien
faith, an alien culture and an alien rule over Indian soil” with the
following words: “Beginning with the first Arab expedition against Thana
near Bombay in A.D. 636 the Muslims only succeeded in establishing the
Delhi Sultanate in AD 1206, that is, after prolonged and relentless
efforts lasting as many as 570 years. The magnitude of the resistance
offered by Indians can be easily comprehended if we remember that the
duration of the effective Muslim rule over northern India, not to speak
of the whole of India which was much less, if ever, lasted only 500
years (upto the death of Aurangzeb in AD 1707).”^([15](#15))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ibid., p. 74-75.

[²](#2a) Ibid., p. 84.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 85.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p. 90.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 91.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 91-92. There are some other Muslim accounts of how
the Sultan escaped death.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p. 92.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 93.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 96.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., p. 87.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., p. 88.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p. 89.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., p. 97.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., p. 101.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


