+++
title = "05 "

+++
****

5\. THE INDIAN MEDIA: AN HOSTILE FORCE

Indian journalists must be held responsible in some degree for the slow
progresses India has made in regaining her self-confidence, shattered by
centuries of colonization. For Indian journalists are often the worst
enemies of India and Indian culture, constantly harping at the negative
sides of India, constantly ignoring the greatness of this country. They
must also be the biggest Hindu-bashers in a nation where there are
already so many Hindu bashers (Marxists, Muslims, Christians,
politicians), having since Independence, made fun in the most belittling
manner of Hindu culture. Finally, they must also be held to some extent
responsible for the negative attitude that the western press has had
since towards India. For towards whom but the Indian journalists will
the newly arrived correspondent turn to understand this vast and
difficult continent ?

  
*INDIAN JOURNALISTS*

Do Indian journalists suffer from an inferiority complex vis à vis the
West ? Do they think theirs is a lesser democracy, afflicted with all
the world's ills ? Does India's media look down upon its own country ?
To a Westerner, it seems very much so. Indian journalists appear to
enjoy India-bashing; nothing seems to find grace in their eyes:
everything is rotten, the system, the government, the politicians, the
bureaucracy. Nothing works, nothing is possible, everything is bleak,
worthless, hopeless.

But the truth is that those Indian journalists who constantly negate
India, are ashamed of their country. They always seem to compare their
democracy to Western standards. Their parameters appear to be set by
what the West thinks about India, by Amnesty International's comments on
their nation. They want to apply to India the same norms which are used
in the industrialised world. And extraordinarily, many of them ridicule
what makes this country unique in the world, what no other nation in the
word possesses: Dharma, true Hinduism; the knowledge passed down by
thousands of sages, saints, yogis, sadhus of the Eternal Truth, that
which gives a meaning to this otherwise senseless life and which the
West has totally lost: the Wheel of Life, the endless rebirths and
ultimately the evolutionary Ascension of man towards the Ultimate Truth.

When the British invaded India, they quickly set upon trying to destroy
what they perceived as paganism, but which was in reality India's
many-sided perception of truth, Hinduism, the Santanam Dharma of the
Vedic sages. Fortunately for India, they never succeeded in their task,
but they did manage to win over a small portion of India's elite
population. These people, were made to feel ashamed of their own ways
and thus tried to become more British than the Britishers, be it in
their dress, in their thinking... or in their Hinduism-bashing – and
Indian journalists soon became the flag-bearers of this
de-Indianisation.

Do not Indian journalists realise that by constantly belittling their
own country and seeing it the way the West wants them to perceive it,
they are handing over India to her enemies, those who wish her ill?
Those who would like to see her humbled, broken, fragmented? Does the
Indian media want to see their country go the way of Yugoslavia? Don't
they realise that they are traitors to their own country, to its
uniqueness, to is unparalleled greatness? That ultimately their
India-bashing is a colonial leftover? An unconscious inferiority
complex, which has been planted in the minds of their ancestors more
than two centuries ago?

They whipped up the Ayodhya controversy, forcing the Congress and the
Muslim leadership to make a stand for the mosque, when actually this
disused, ugly structure, in the midst of a wholly Hindu city had no
relevance for any one who has some common sense. It is they who labelled
Hindus as Nazis fundamentalists, it is they who called Advani a Hitler
–but do they have any knowledge of European history: Hitler killed in
cold blood 6 millions Jews and crores of other people! It is they who in
the aftermath of the destruction shouted themselves hoarse over "the end
of our secularism" or "the mortal blow to our democracy", forgetting in
the heat of their self-righteousness that Ayodhya was a symbol. It is
they who are still at it today, by portraying the Christian community in
India as persecuted, when many of the incidents are the result of
jealousies between converted and non-converted tribals, or are even
engineered by Muslims and forgetting how much harm Christianity has done
to this country for three centuries, converting by devious means,
crucifying Brahmins in Goa, destroying temples in Pondichery…

True, the Indian Press should also be praised for its incredible
diversity, for its inexhaustible reserve of talented writers, for its
investigative journalism which makes sense when it helps uncover
corruption, injustice, or political despotism. But again, it should
learn to look at things NOT through the Western prism, but through the
Indian looking glass, and apply to India standards that are Her own and
of which she has nothing to be ashamed, because they are unique in the
world.

THE INDIAN MEDIA AND GURUS

Westerners have often a deep suspicion of ‘Gurus’ and are wary of
anything which has a "Hindu" flavour. It is true that gurus teaching in
the West can be a mixed lot, and some of them might have brought a bad
name to Hinduism; but is this a reason to clamp them all together under
the same "fake" label ?

Indian journalists unfortunately share sometimes the same resistance to
gurus as their Western counterparts. And one can also understand their
misgivings, given the problems there has been in India with certain
gurus having political connections. But these are the exception to the
rule. Why then brand all gurus as ‘Godmen’, a negative and slightly
cynical term, as many Indian journalists do ? Or why always ask Gurus
the same pointed and devious questions about their opinions on Ayodhya
and "Hindutva" ? Isn’t it also strange that Indian journalists do not
display the same aggressiveness towards Christian bishops or priests,
whom they never call Godmen, but "Holy Father" ? They also like to
question "miraculous" powers of Indian Gurus, as it was done in a recent
issue of India Today targeting Sai Baba. But is it less rational or
Cartesian to think, as the Catholics do, that Mary conceived a child
while remaining a virgin, or that Christ came back from the dead and
ascended physically to heaven ?

Running down Hindu culture and Hindu Gurus is fine - but a huge majority
of the Indian population – which, let us remember, is 85% Hindu – sees
nothing wrong in this culture : ordinary Indians meditate every morning,
do *pujas*, perform *asanas*, chant *bhajans*, or do *pranayama*. There
is no sectarism here, no fake mysticism, no pagan obscure rites. The
irony is that this very spirituality on which Indian intellectuals tend
to look down, is taking root in the West : more and more sportsmen, for
instance, are using pranayama to enhance their performances; ordinary
Americans are meditating by the millions; hata-yoga has long taken
Europe by storm and has been copied by all kinds of gymnastics or
aerobics… Does India need the West to realize what an inconceivable
spiritual inheritance it has in its hands ? A knowledge which once
roamed the shores of the world, from Mesopotamia to Egypt, from Greece
to Babylon, but which today has disappeared in a world peopled by
intolerant churches?

Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, the founder of the Art of Living, who has also
been catalogued as a ‘Godman’ by the Deccan Herald, is doing his bit in
propagating this wonderful knowledge, both in India, where it is under
threat from globalization and westernization - and abroad, where
materialism has often stifled the soul of so many countries. His
disciples are promoting as much the revival of Sanskrit and Vedic
knowledge, as an healthy ecological concern: plastic disposal in their
ashram for instance, or trying to save the centenary trees which are in
danger of being chopped down on the Kanakapura road as it is being
widened. His numerous associations prove that he is not only a "guru of
the rich", as he has been accused: his village schools, for instance, do
so well that children have a 95% rate of success in exams; his Youth
Training Program brings to India’s remotest hamlets in Karnataka or even
in Naxalite infested Bihar, Housing, Hygiene, and Human values. His
volunteers worked recently during 15 days with their own hands in a
village near Allahabad to clear the garbage, clean the sewage infested
roads and generally renovate the place. The Art of Living and the
medically-tested Sudarshan Krya are today taught everywhere: in Tihar
jail, in corporate offices in Bangalore, or Bombay, in California
detention centers, or in far away Mongolia.

It is part of the freedom in the Press to be able to criticize anything
and anybody. And we must acknowledge that Indian journalists have often
played a positive role by highlighting injustice or corruption in public
life. But the spitefulness that they sometimes display towards the
saints, sadhus and gurus of India seems a little bit unfair. For however
much poverty there is in this country, however many problems it is
facing, India’s gift to the world in the 21^(st) century will be its
spirituality, this eternal knowledge which alone She has preserved.

****

AN INDIAN SCHOOL OF JOURNALISM

In a year or so, a unique and revolutionary new INDIAN School of
journalism, which will be Bangalore-based, is going to be inaugurated.
In this school, students will not only be taught the complete art of
journalism - how to develop a piece, the different styles of interviews,
what is a by-line, the usefulness of a box etc. -, but they will also
learn to look at India through an INDIAN perspective, to cast an eye on
the world which will carry some of the knowledge and wisdom of a
civilisation – their own - which is five thousand years old.

They will, for instance, be taught pranayama, the ancient and unique
technique of breathing devised thousand of years ago by Indian sages, so
that they know how to regulate their breath in time of stress and thus
control their emotions; they will be taught the royal art of meditation,
so that they can get their inspiration from a quiet, strong and silent
mind; they will be taught asanas, so that their body is strong and
resilient and can endure any physical situation, in peace or war; they
will be taught a unique cleansing technique called the Sudarshan Krya,
which eliminates toxins and stresses from the mind and body; they will
even be taught to sing and dance, so that there is joy and spontaneity
in their life and not the dry, intellectual pompousness of the
pipe-smoking, Oxford English-speaking journalist, or the chain-smoking
pseudo-Marxist. In short, they will be taught the Art of Living…

Sounds preposterous ? But these methods should be applied to ALL aspects
of education in India, from the kindergarten onwards, so that schools
and universities do not churn out western clones, who have no idea about
the greatness and the immense wealth of their own country, as its is
often the case since Independence. And the FIRST thing which should be
taught to all students, whether they are toddlers, or aspiring
journalists, is that there exists a Knowledge - spiritual, occult, yogic
- still alive in India, which has died all over the world, where only
churches and dogmas survive, although this Knowledge was once prevalent
in ancient civilisations - in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece etc. They
should also understand that if this Knowledge is left to die in India,
it will be gone forever from this world which will slowly drift towards
pralaya.

But at the moment, India is still living under Nehru’s legacy, who had
chosen to turn its back on anything which had a spiritual connection and
had espoused in its stead the Marxist Way of Life, which produced
immense bureaucracy, corruption and the kind of politicians we see
today. It also bred many generations of Indian intellectuals and
journalists, who kept running down the greatness of their own country
and aped anything that came from the West – the good and the bad. Today
still, many of India’s newspapers and magazines do not reflect a true
Indian point of view, but constantly look at India through a Western
Prism which contains none of the wisdom and Knowledge of ancient India
and often plays in the hands of India’s foes.

Take the Pope’s visit for instance. Instead of defending India’s point
of view - as it would have been normal practice in any other country -
by doing some background research on the atrocities committed by the
Portuguese in Goa, or about the economic incentives which missionaries
have used – and are still using - to convert entire chunks of North-East
and Central India, most of the Indian press went on its usual
VHP-RSS-Bhajrang Dal bashing. It is too easy to repeat ad infinitum that
Christians in India are only 3% (a nearly ten years old census), for the
influence which Christians exert in India is tremendous. Not only do
they control the best schools (and hospitals), thus shaping the minds of
India’s future elite, but on top of that, their sometimes alliance with
Marxists make them redoubtable adversaries. Furthermore, very few
newspapers and magazines chose to publish extracts of the Southern
Baptist Church’s prayer books which call Hinduism "satanic" and say that
"Hindus live in the darkness of their hearts, which no lamp can dispel".

Christians in India have thus been able to take full advantage of this
hatred of the Indian Press - which is mostly composed of Hindus –
against any organisation or individual who dares to defend Hindus and
their softness for anybody who attacks Hindus. It is in this way that
the Pope was able to come and lecture India on the "atrocities"
committed against Indian Christians, without mentioning the much greater
atrocities committed against the Hindus who had welcomed so whole
heartedly Christians centuries ago. (Shameful also that the BJP, who not
so long ago was the target of attacks by these very same journalists,
chose to arrest its own people : the leaders of those groups who have
the courage to stand-up for their own ideas. Does the Home Minister, Mr
Advani remember when he was branded a "Nazi" by the Indian Press - and
who stood by him then ?….)

This is not to say that Western journalism is better. On the contrary,
there is today something perverted and near asuric about a journalism
which misuses constantly the enormous power it has, because contemporary
politicians always have an eye on public opinion and need journalists.
As to foreign coverage of India, barring a few exceptions, it is often
discriminatory, condescending, and there is a unanimity of views on
everything from Mother Teresa to Sonia Gandhi, which makes it quite
uninspiring. No wonder the average western man still thinks of India as
a backward country of beggars and fakirs, the abode of the dying people
of Mother Teresa. We, the foreign correspondents in South Asia are all
guilty of compromising under pressure of our editors, who are still
expecting from us a certain negative bias, an anti-Hindu tone…

So what is needed is a new generation of Indian journalists who will be
proud of their country without being chauvinists, who will be brilliant
without being superficial, who will take the best of the West, without
being western clones, who will draw inspiration from the Knowledge alive
in this country, without being bigots… In brief they will be INDIAN
journalists. This is what the Art of Living School of Journalism will
teach them.

****

HOW FOREIGN JOURNALISTS VIEW INDIA

Foreign journalists (and photographers) are generally interested in
three kinds of India :

1.  The macabre and the negative : the widows of Benares, the caste
    system as practised in Bihar, Mother Teresa’s place for the dying,
    kidneys’ traffic in Tamil Nadu, the slums of Calcutta, bride
    burning, etc. These subjects have their own truth and there does
    exist in India terrible slums, unacceptable exploitation of caste,
    dying people left unattended, or bride burning. But by harping only
    on these topics, the foreign press always presents a very *negative*
    image of India. Foreign writers have also tended to exploit that
    vein: Dominique Lapierre in his "City of Joy", which still is a
    world-wide best-seller and has been made into a film, has done
    incalculable damage to India, as it takes a little part of India -
    the Calcutta slums - and gives the impression to the western reader,
    who generally is totally ignorant of the realities of India, that it
    constitutes the whole.
2.  The folklore and the superfluous : maharajas, of whom Westerners are
    avid, although they are totally irrelevant to modern India; the
    palaces of Rajasthan, cherished by the such as Vogue magazine, who
    regularly sends there photographers and lanky models, who have no
    idea of India; festivals :Pushkar, the camel fair, Kumb-melas, dance
    performances in Khajurao… all these have their own beauties, but
    they represent only a small part of this great and vast country.

c\) The politically correct

. There must be at least three hundred foreign correspondents posted in
Delhi, which should vouch for a variety of opinion. But if you give them
a subject to write about - any subject - say Ayodhya, the RSS, fanatic
Hindus, secularism, or Sonia Gandhi, and you will get two hundred and
ninety eight articles which will say more or less the same thing, even
if it is with different styles, different illustrations and various
degrees of professionalism. This is not to say that there are no sincere
western journalists who write serious stories which do homage to India’s
greatness and immense culture; but they are usually the exception. And
at the end, the result is more or less the same : a downgrading of
India, a constant harping on "Hindu fundamentalism", on the "fanatical
khaki-clad RSS members" or "the burning of Christians in India",
conveniently forgetting to mention that Christians have found refuge in
this country for 2000 years and have often taken advantage of this great
Hindu tolerance, witness the crucifying of heretic Hindus in Goa by the
Portugese, or the huge conversion drive today by Pentacostists or
Adventists, who have targeted India as a "pagan country to be brought to
the true Word" (please check their Internet sites:
htpp//www.bethany.com)

These three kinds of reporting about India have been going on for fifty
years and very few Indians have dared - or bothered - to complain. But
the interesting question is WHY ? Why this always harping on the
negative, the folklore, or the politically correct ? Why this uniformity
of views and un-originality in the selection of subjects, in a country
which is so ancient, whose civilisation is so diverse, so profound, so
fascinating, that there are thousands of extraordinary topics, which
could be exploited ?

It seems to me there are two important factors, which are at play in
every foreign correspondent. Firstly, a foreign correspondent

*before* even being posted in Delhi, has already fixed ideas about India
: prejudices, clichés, negative "à-prioris" etc. This is not to say that
it is wilfully done, but it is just something which we pick-up
unconsciously from the concepts on India floating in the West : Tintin’s
stereotyped India - the good maharajas and the bad fakirs; Kipling’s
jungle child ready to embrace the good of the Christian civilisation; or
else it is the poverty, the dirtiness and the squalor of India which is
always over-emphasised in the West and which scares many of us, used to
a clean disinfected (and soulless) world.

More subtly even, we western journalists are influenced by what is said
about India in the "serious" books of distinguished Indologists, who
have got it all wrong : the supposed invasion of India by the Aryans
(which, say more and more archaeologists and linguists, never happened);
the great achievements of Moghol culture (which mostly borrowed from
Hindu genius); the fanaticism of Hindu social and political movements
(which were born in the early twenties after nearly thirteen centuries
of horrendous persecutions by Muslim invaders and shameless European
colonisation); the importance of being "secular" in Modern India and how
Nehru was its great father (forgetting to say that secularism has been
hijacked by the Congress for its own selfish purpose), etc.… These
"wise" historians have unfortunately a very strong hold on the image of
India abroad and they give all the wrong ideas to foreign newspapers
editors, who in turn expect a certain (Hindu fundamentalism) angle from
the stories of their correspondents.

The second factor is simple: India is a vast and complicated country,
often contradictory, full of paradoxes, with many castes, religions,
ethnic groups, political parties…It is thus extremely baffling to the
mind of the foreign correspondent freshly arrived from the United
States, for example, where everything is black and white, good or bad
(the evil Milosevic and the good Kosovars). Thus, naturally, the foreign
correspondent will turn for advice and information to his counterpart :

*the Indian journalist,* who is frequently witty, brilliant and well
informed. And here lies the crux of the matter, because Indian
journalists are often the worst enemies of their own country - they are
more secular than the secular, more anti Indian than its worst
adversaries and often play in the hands of India’s foes (for instance
the magazine Frontline should rightly be called the "Voice of China", as
it often echoes the views of the Chinese communist party, which is
profoundly inimical to India). Another important factor which enhances
the uniformity of views amongst foreign correspondents, is that New
Delhi has become a very superficial and arrogant city, geographically
cut-off from the rest of India (does Delhi have any idea of what is
happening in the South ?); and there, the foreign correspondents always
hear the same stories, whether in the Embassy cocktails, or at
journalists’ parties.

It would be nice to say that even though Indian journalism looks at its
own country in a very negative manner, it is something which is
self-generated and that its opinions are formed independently. But
unfortunately, this debasing self-criticism, this eternal inferiority
complex, this constantly looking at India through a western prism (take
the magazine Outlook, for instance), was born at the beginning of this
century, when the "moderates" of the Congress Party (which, nobody
should forget, was founded by an Englishman, A.O. Hume - strange today
that it is another foreigner, however deserving she may be, who is
leader of the same party), tried to stifle the voices of the real
nationalists : Sri Aurobindo, Tilak, or Bepin Chandra Pal, who already
then, advocated the booting out of the English coloniser - if necessary
by force. Thus when the first real cultural, social and political
movements, which had at heart the defence of India's true heritage
started taking shape, such as the much decried Hindu Mahashaba, which
attempted to counterbalance the Muslim League's influence, or the even
more maligned Rama Rajya Parishad, initiated by Swamy Karpatri, they
were ridiculed by the Congress (read: the British pulling the strings of
the Congress), who utilised to the hilt its English speaking press to
present these Hindu parties as barbaric, fanatical, ridiculous and
amplified the problems of untouchability, castes, or cow worshipping, to
belittle these movements, which after all, were only trying to preserve
India’s cultural and spiritual heritage.

We have then come a full circle: we thought that the western press was
negative about India, out of a personal bias, but we have found that it
is influenced by the Indian press; we thought that the Indian press was
negative about its own country, because of some dark, sceptical,
self-destructive streak in itself, but we found out that it was a
tendency generated by the Congress, which in turn was manipulated by its
British. All along the snake was biting its own tail !

Fine ! But where do we start : is it the western press which must

*first* change its views of India and thus influence the Indian media ?
Or is it the Indian press which must be more lenient towards its own
country and thus influence the western medias ? Fortunately, since a few
years, there is a change in the Indian Press. Magazines such as India
Today, for instance, show an effort to look at India in a different
manner, to strike a distinct note than the usual self-denigration
constantly hammered at by other publications. This is a positive sign -
and there are more: the popularity of songs like Vande Mataram, which
expressed India’s true aspiration and were literally relegated to play
second fiddle by the Congress; the emergence of a Hindu nationalist
party (another expression concocted by the West, which Indian
journalists have blindly accepted), whatever its faults; or the
new-found interest of the Indian Diaspora abroad for its mother country.

We have got to change the image of India amongst industrialised nations,
if only because India needs a lot of foreign investment. Who in the West
wants to do business with a country with a backward image and associated
with slums, Mother Teresa and bureaucratic inefficiency ? The Western
press is not playing its true role of information. But that should not
be a problem - look at China : less than thirty years ago it was
considered in the West as the "Red Devil", a feudal country, totally
closed to the world. But then in 1971 Nixon went there and suddenly it
became acceptable to do business in China; and today it even possesses
in the West an image of a fast, forward, modern nation (although THE
CHINESE killed a million Tibetans, gave Pakistan its nuclear technology
and still claim part of Indian territory). Many of us are trying to
change India’s image abroad: France for instance has seen the creation
of an Indo-French forum under the guidance of Karan Singh and French
ambassador Claude Blanchemaison to promote India’s interests there and
attract French businessmen. But unless the Nehruvian legacy of
bureaucracy and centralisation is discarded, unless India starts looking
at herself

*differently*, unless its people have a little more pride in being
Indian, there is very little we can do.

For there is nothing wrong with a bit of nationalism, which any nation
needs to have a minimum amount of self-respect. We French are proud of
our Revolution, which changed the face of the world for ever; we are
proud of Christianity, which gave us an island of sanity and learning
during the dark and cruel Middle Ages; we are proud of our philosophers,
such as Descartes, who taught us to look at things with a logical and
clear eye. And India herself has nothing to be ashamed off: hers is a
great civilisation infinitely older than any civilisation in the West;
and not only was it great but its inner genius has survived the genocide
of Muslim invasions, a stifling colonisation by the British, and even
Marxism, which incarnated itself in the minds of India’s intellectual
elite and tried to kill the Hindu genius of the land of Bharat.

Isn’t it then time to fulfil the prophecy of Sri Aurobindo, who wrote 70
years ago : "India of the ages is not dead nor has She spoken Her last
creative word; She lives and has still something to do for Herself and
the human peoples. And that which She must seek now to awake, is not an
anglicised oriental people, docile pupil of the West and doomed to
repeat the cycle of the Occident's success and failure, but still the
ancient immemorial Shakti recovering Her deepest self, lifting Her head
higher towards the supreme source of light and strength and turning to
discover the complete meaning and vaster form of Her Dharma.

Then will we, foreign journalists, look at you differently…

AN ANSWER TO SWISS JOURNALIST BERNARD IMHASLY

(who disagreed with the above piece and wrote a counter-article in
Hindustan Times*)*

My dear Bernard

 

In your piece "Role of foreign correspondents", you disagree with me
because I have written that most of the foreign correspondents’ interest
in India is generally for "the macabre and the negative, the folklore,
the superfluous, and the politically correct"…

I stand by that statement ! And I am even surprised that you say that,
"although it is true that much of (foreign) reporting on India is
negative, India is hardly alone in being singled out by journalists" !
Because the naked truth is that when it comes to Europe or the United
States, Western journalists become singularly soft, blind and tolerant.
Take the Gulf war for instance : we mostly printed what the American
military propaganda machine gave us and thus presented a very one-sided
picture of the whole conflict. Or nearer to us, look at Kosovo: the bias
of the Western media there was so blatant,- that at moments it became
laughable ! The BBC, particularly, only reported on the atrocities
committed by the Serbs, and said very little of the centuries of Muslim
genocide on the Serbs, or how the Bosnian Muslims sided with the Nazis
during the Second world war and butchered thousands of innocent Serbs.
There is such a thing as Karma, my dear friend : you, who have been in
India for quite some time, should know about it …

Now compare this with the attitude of the BBC during the Kargil war.
Most of us foreign correspondents know by now that the Pakistanis are
training, arming and financing Kashmiri mujahidins. We also know that
Pakistan is sponsoring international terrorism, whether in New York or
in Sinkiang and is a closed ally of the Taliban, one of the most
fundamentalist and dangerous forces in the world today. Yet, for the
last 10 years, the BBC has kept on with the old refrain : " India SAYS
that Pakistan is training Kashmiri militants, an accusation which
Islamabad refutes". By insisting on mouthing this absurd statement, even
during the Kargil war, when the whole Western intelligence knew that
most of the militants manning the heights were Pakistani soldiers in
civil, the BBC thought that it is practising impartial journalism. But
who are they fooling ? Everybody is aware of the strong Leftist bias of
the BBC (nothing wrong in being Leftist, as long as you don’t pretend to
be impartial), who has always defended Muslims separatists all over the
planet, whether it is the Palestinians, the terrorists in Chechenya, or
the Kashmiri militants. Unfortunately, the BBC has so much of a
reputation in the world (and indeed their documentaries are first
class), that it shapes the opinions of our editors in Paris or Bonn, who
in turn put pressure on us to report on "Hindu fundamentalism", or the
"poor persecuted Kashmiris".

There is something perverted about this so-called impartiality - which
means in effect that you report on both sides of the story, even if you
perceive that one of the sides is quite true and the other entirely
false. Journalism, Mr Imhasly, is about truth. Let us give the readers
at least what we perceive as the truth, even if we are wrong - for who
can say that he is able to grasp pure undiluted truth ? Journalism is
also about idealism - and in extreme cases, when truth is in danger -
journalists could even be compared to soldiers, who fight for what he or
she perceives as right. In the old times, there were great journalists
and writers made of that stuff : André Malraux, who fought against the
fascist forces in Spain; or Saint Exupery, who insisted to fly against
the Germans, even though he was above age.

You say "that our trade is to inform, to make the readers aware of the
dangers that life has in store". Would it be, my dear Bernard, that you
have too high an idea about the profession of journalism ? Because
without any doubt, journalists are playing one of the most baneful and
dangerous roles at the end of the 20^(st) century. We do not report on
news, we MAKE them, and we even fabricate them when there is nothing to
report about. We also manipulate world opinion as we want : when the
West has a certain bias - say against the Serbs - powerful medias like
the BBC or CNN, are able to turn everybody against them. But when we DO
like someone, even if it is for the wrong reasons, then we turn a blind
eye, as we did in Russia, where the West was supporting that drunkard,
empty and dangerous baboon of Yeltsin, who was the best bet of the
United States to enfeeble Russia for decades. In India, the Western
Press, the NGO’s and the so called Human Rights Groups, are also able to
manipulate Indian opinion in favour of secondary things, like the rights
of homosexuals, or Child labour, which, whatever its terrible side, is a
reality of this country that cannot be wished way. But they choose to
ignore much more important issues, such as the killing of Hindus in
Kashmir, or the terrible maiming and torturing of Lieutenant Ahuja by
the Pakistanis, which has barely found mention in the Western Press and
in reports of Human Right organisations. And remember : not only did we,
the Western media, manage to kill Princess Diana, by constantly preying
on her like vultures, for the monetary benefits we took out of it, but
we succeeded even following her death (after exonerating ourselves by
twisting the story) to still make money out of her, by turning Diana
into a saint - which she was not. Shame on us ….

Finally, there is one thing I would like to add : it is true that I
often said that the Indian Media has been the worst enemy of its own
country, because in the last fifty years, it has been heavily influenced
by forces (the communists, the Muslims, the Christian missionaries and
partly the Congress, which needs these minorities to get re-elected)
which are profoundly hostile to the Hindus, who constitute 85% of India.
But since the nation realised that the flower of his youth was dying in
selfless courage for the defence of Indian territory at Kargil, one can
witness for the first time in the Press (and amongst popular opinion) a
bit of nationalism, of being proud of one’s country, even if it
sometimes borders on Jingoism and commercialism (the numerous Kargil
Funds which have even sprouted even in "secular" magazines). And that,
my dear Bernard, is a good and healthy sign, because a country needs to
be proud of itself to bloom, and attain the zenith of its culture. And
you the Swiss, are you not proud of your being a unique nation in Europe
because of your "neutrality" and your prosperity (which it is being
slowly found out, rests in greater part on the money stolen from
dictators all over the world, or the misappropriated funds left by the
Jews who died during the Second World war) ?

And I will say it again, even if you disagree : in spite of all its
present faults, India is a great and ancient civilisation, which gave so
much to the world and has still so much to give. By constantly
perverting its image in our dispatches, by always harping on its
negative sides, by debasing Hinduism, which constitutes the inherent
genius of this country, we show that we are bad journalists, that we are
not able to go beyond the surface, beyond the clichés and the prejudices
and the Untruth.

******

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
