+++
title = "02 "

+++
****

2\. KASHMIR : A DEAD-END AND A SOLUTION

Nothing symbolizes better the absurdity of Partition than Kashmir. Nehru
and Gandhi’s folly of accepting the division of the country on
geographical-religion lines has come back to haunt India with a
vengeance. For, Pakistan, apart from the fact that it was created and
survives on its hatred of ‘Hindu’ India, has a point: if Nehru accepted
that Muslim-dominated parts of India go to Pakistan, why not also the
Valley of Kashmir, which is today in Muslim majority, thanks to decades
of terror to induce the once strong Hindu community to flee ? Thus,
Kashmir is a dead-end, because neither India nor Pakistan are going to
let go, each for obvious reasons. Yet, the state of Kashmir can also be
the springing-board for a trial run of a Confederation of South Asian
Sates: there is no other solution for Pakistan and India than reuniting
the two Kashmirs under a joint authority.

****

THE SHADOW OF A HORSE

Midnight, Manaspal Lake, North-West Kashmir. The powerful diesels of the
20 army lorries roar away, piercing the perfect silence of the night.
Aboard, 400 men of the 22nd Jammu and Kashmir Rifles, one of India's
elite divisions, in full battle dress: helmets, an AK-47 rifle slung
over the shoulder and two grenades tucked in the belt. Colonel Khanna,
division commander, signals with his hand and the convoy starts
ponderously into the night.

Earlier we had met Colonel Khanna's officers, young, bright men, whose
world centres around a field tent, the walls of which are adorned with
pictures of wanted militants, and tallies of wounded and killed
Hizbollah Mujahedins, a true soldier's trophy. Over a glass of beer,
Colonel Khanna had shown us a map of Kashmir and pointed to a village
near Wular Lake, called Banyar. "This village, he said, is known to be a
safe haven for militants, as it is on the route from Kupwara at the Pak
border, to Sopore. It has the uniqueness of being surrounded by water.
So we will have to take two boats with us to cross the river. We shall
walk the whole night and by morning we will have surrounded the entire
village."

Half an hour after having started from the base, the lorries stopped
suddenly, all lights out. Silently the 400 men of the regiment climbed
down and melted into the night. Then the lorries started again. "They
will serve as a decoy for the militants’ watchdogs, who seeing they are
going in an opposite direction, will think that we are going to strike
another village," whispered Khanna. It was a pitch-dark monsoon night.
No lights, no torches, one could barely discern the man in front and
sometimes soldiers would hold each other's shoulders not to get lost.
The silence was total: not a murmur, not a sound of a rolling stone;
only the hiss of the wind in the trees, carrying the smell of men to a
faraway village, whose dogs started barking. But even their sounds
slowly died away. Suddenly, a cantering horse, like a ghost appearing
from nowhere, crossed us; and then it was gone, as in a dream.

At first, the going was smooth enough on a dirt road, but all of a
sudden we had to slither down on all fours to reach the swamp, where one
had now to walk on a high narrow causeway surrounded by water on both
sides. It started raining and a frog, followed by another, then another,
then a hundred, a thousand, began tearing the silence of the night with
their "croaaroaaak". From time to time the man in front would suddenly
stop and the others behind would bump into him, as the soldiers carrying
the heavy wooden boats were replaced by a new team. At 3.30 in the
morning, the river we reached the village. The boats were lowered into
the water without a ripple; and while exhausted men slept on the
embankment, the tedious task of carrying a whole company in two boats
went on smoothly. And as the first hint of a grey, dreary day, pointed
at the horizon, the village of Banyar was totally surrounded.

At 5.15, Lieutenant Tikku and a platoon of soldiers entered the village
from its eastern side. "Militants are usually caught at daylight, he
murmured, it is then that they start shooting. If we don't catch them at
that moment, they go into hiding either in the houses or in the fields;
and we have to flush them out." Shoulders hunched in the expectation of
a grenade thrown from the first floor of a house, or the bullet of an
unseen sniper, eyes darting right and left, fingers on the triggers of
their AK-47s, the soldiers advanced on the village. It was a dreadful
hamlet on the banks of the Jhelum River: dirty, unkempt, whose wooden
and cement houses had an air of never having been finished. By 6 AM, not
a soul had stirred from the shuttered houses, and it became clear that
if the militants were there, they were not going to come out with guns
blazing. An officer went to the mosque and asked on its loudspeakers
that all men between 16 and 60 assemble in the school compound just
outside the village.

Already soldiers had encircled the meadow where a little windowless
house which served as school stood. Machine guns were posted, even a
mortar was set up. Slowly the villagers started filing out of the
village. The older men were put on the right where they sat stoically on
their haunches; and the younger ones grouped on the left. After some
time two men, whose faces were hooded by black cloth and their hand tied
to a soldier, came in and were made to sit in the school, facing the
glassless window. They were "cats" - militants who had been caught and
who had agreed to inform on their brothers, in exchange for some future
leniency.

They were now at least 2,000 Kashmiris in the meadow. On a signal from
the Colonel, young villagers were made to form a file. First they were
searched by a soldier, then one by one they were presented by another
soldier to the cats. One of the informers seemed unwilling or maybe
indifferent; but the other had extraordinary eyes, which were constantly
darting, from the face of the soldier, to the villager. The Kashmiris,
some proud, looking spitefully towards the informers, others humble,
eyes cast down in fear, filed past the cats. When the second informer
would nod negatively the soldier would tap the shoulder of the villager,
who relieved, would go back to sit on his haunches. But suddenly, as a
mullah, well-dressed, apparently educated, looking boldly ahead, was
brought forward, the cat raised his finger and whispered something in
the ear of his watcher. The mullah was then led, protesting, to one
corner and made to cover his face with his shawl. Four men were thus
"recognised" by the second cat and kept apart.

 

Suddenly a shot was heard, followed by a burst of fire. Everybody rushed
towards the place where the sound came from. There, in a field of mature
maze, there was a path of crushed stalks, which led straight to two
cowering militants, one of whom was wounded, surrounded by triumphant
soldiers. Basir Ahmed Pare and Zakir Hussein had just crossed over, from
Pakistan where they had gone for training and had halted overnight in
the village thinking they were safe. But when they realised that the
army had surrounded the village, they hid in the field with their two
Kalashnikov and four grenades. Along with their weapons, coupons were
also recovered from them, which they sold to the villagers to extort
money, as well as the photo of their area commander. The men were then
handed over to the military intelligence for what would probably be a
long spell of rough interrogation.

Exhausted, after a whole night walk, plus a full day in the heat. we
wearily started for the base. On the trip back, a rider-less galloping
horse (the same as in the night?) cast his shadow on our convoy. Was it
the shadow of Kashmir?

****

THE KASHMIRI "FREEDOM" FIGHTERS

Western correspondents (and unfortunately sometimes Indian journalists)
keep lionizing the Kashmiri "freedom fighters" and demonising the
"brutal" Indian army. But nobody bothers to remember Kashmiris were
almost entirely Hindus or Buddhists, before they were converted by the
invading Muslims six centuries ago. True, today these Muslims in Kashmir
have not only accepted as their own a religion which their ancestors had
rejected, but they have also often taken-up the strident cry of Islam.
Does any one remember too, that at the beginning of the century, there
still were 25% Hindus in the Kashmir valley and that today the last
350.000 Kashmiri Pandits are refugees in their own land, they who
originally inhabited the valley, at least 5000 years ago, a much bigger
ethnic cleansing than the one of the Bosnian Muslims or the Albanians in
Yugoslavia ?

It's a common refrain today in most newspapers to say that since
Independence, India alienated Kashmiris through years of wrong policies.
But those who have been in close contact with Kashmir, even in its
heydays of tourism, know for a fact that as a general rule, Kashmiris
**never** liked India. There was only one thing that attached them to
India, it was the marvellous financial gains and state bounties that
they made out of tourism. Even those Kashmiris who are now settled in
India make no bones about where their loyalty lies. Talk to them,
specially if you are a Westerner, and after some time, they'll open
their hearts to you; whether it is the owner of this Kashmir emporium in
a five star hotel in Madras, or the proprietor of that famous travel
agency in Delhi: suddenly, after all the polite talk, they burst out
with their loathing of India and their hope to be attached to Pakistan.

The Government of India has also often the illusion that ordinary
Kashmiris are fed up with the militants after years of fighting,
militants' abuses and the complete dry-up of tourism revenues. The army
might come-up with some disgruntled girl, who has been raped by the
militants and whom they parade to the Indian press; or some family,
whose father and sons have been killed by the Hizbullah because they're
informers, might be willing to mouth their pro-Indian stance; but these
are individual cases. Indeed, if you meet the Kashmiris of today, from
the lowly unemployed sikara boatman, to the retired High Court judge,
you will find that they are all unanimous in their hatred of the Indian
army and their support of the militants. Kashmiris will stick together -
and their family system ensures that they will support each other in
need.

Nowadays Farook Abdullah wants us to believe that with a certain degree
of autonomy, Kashmiris will be appeased. This may be true in most Indian
states, who are often rightly fed-up with Centre’s constant interference
in their internal affairs, but basically, there is only one thing which
Kashmiris are craving for and that is a plebiscite on whether they want
to stay with India or secede...The answer in the Kashmir valley, would
be a massive **"no"** to India (98%?). And as for Farook Abdullah, he
would be quickly eliminated by the militants, who would immediately
seize control of Kashmir and attach it to Pakistan.

The Indian security forces in Kashmir are accused of all kind of
atrocities. But this is war, not a tea party! If India decides to keep
Kashmir, it has to do so according to the rules set by the militants:
violence, death and treachery are the order of the day. And men are men:
after having been ambushed repeatedly, after having seen their comrades
die, after weeks and weeks of waiting in fear, one day, they just
explode in a burst of outrage and excesses. Amnesty International
chooses to highlight "the Indian atrocities" in Kashmir. But Amnesty
which does otherwise wonderful work to keep track of political
atrocities world-wide, can sometimes become a moralistic, somewhat
pompous organisation, which in its comfortable offices in London, judges
on governments and people, the majority of whom happen to be belonging
to the Third World. Its insistence on being granted unlimited access to
Kashmir is a one-sided affair. Did Amnesty bother at all about the
support given by the CIA to the most fundamentalists Mujahidins group in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, support which led to the bleeding of
Afghanistan today and the Pakistani sponsoring of terrorism in India?
(Without mentioning the fact that most of the Western countries which
today sit in judgement of India, raped and colonised the Third World in
the most shameless manner; and after all it happened not so long ago).

And this leads to the next question: should then India surrender to
international pressure and let Kashmiris decide their own fate ? Well it
all depends on the Indian people's determination. Each nation has, or
has had in the past, a separatist problem. Today, the Spanish have the
Basques, the French the Corsicans, or the Turkish, the Kurds. Amnesty
International will continue to lambaste India in its reports about human
rights violations. But has Amnesty the right to decide what is right or
wrong for each nation ? Sometimes double standards are adapted by the
West. Yesterday it colonised the entire Third World. Today; the United
States, under the guise of human rights, is constantly interfering in
other's people's affairs, often by force. It uses the United Nations, as
it does in Iraq, in Somalia and Yugoslavia and is getting away with it.
Can Amnesty International, the United States and the United Nations
decide today what is democratic and what they deem anti-democratic and
use their military might to enforce their views? But this is the trend
today and it is a very dangerous and fascistic trend. Will tomorrow the
United Nations send troops to Kashmir to enforce Pakistan's dreams?
Furthermore, there is today another very dangerous habit, which is to
fragment the world into small bits and parts, thus reverting to a kind
of Middle Age status, whereas small nations were always warring each
other on ethnic grounds. It is the West and particularly the United
States' insistence to dismantle Communism at all costs, thus encouraging
covertly and overtly the breaking up of Russia and Eastern Europe, which
started this fashion. But this is a dangerous game and tomorrow Europe
and indirectly the USA will pay the price for it: wars will bring
instability and refugees to Europe and the United States might have to
get involved militarily.

Can India get herself dragged into this mire? Why should India which
took so long to unite herself and saw at the departure of the British
one third of its land given away to Pakistan, surrender Kashmir? The
evolution of our earth tends towards UNITY, oneness, towards the
breaking up of our terrible borders, the abolishing of passports,
bureaucracies, no man's lands; not towards the building up of new
borders, new customs barriers, new smaller nations. India cannot let
herself be broken up in bits and parts just to satisfy the West's
moralistic concerns, although it does have to improve upon its Human
Rights record, particularly the police atrocities and the corruption. To
preserve her Dharma, India has to remain united, ONE, and even conquer
again whether by force or by peaceful means, what once was part of her
South Asian body . For this she should not surrender Kashmir, it could
be the beginning of the breaking up of India.

****

KASHMIR AND THE FOREIGN JOURNALISTS

SRINAGAR, May 30

, Election Day. It's a small Hindu temple on the banks of the river
Jhelum, lost amongst the hundred and one mosques of Srinagar. Its
entrance is heavily guarded by BSF forces and it is protected by
sandbags on all sides, as it has been hit recently by a rocket fired by
militants. Inside, a handful of Kashmiri Pandits are still trying to
preserve this sacred place, where a natural lingam is said to have
emerged 3000 years ago and where their forefathers have worshipped for
20 generations. "We were once 30,000 in this district of Srinagar,"
remembers Shyam, a Hindu priest, "but today we are only two hundred. All
our brothers and sisters had to flee. Our houses were burnt, our women
raped, our sons killed". Shyam and his friends offer us a cup of tea and
some biscuits and we leave this temple which seems to be doomed,
wondering why nobody ever reports about it.

For we are the only western journalists to have visited this place
today, as all our friends are busy elsewhere. The day before, the
Government has had all the separatist leaders put under house arrest, as
a precautionary measure. But one of them, Yasin Malik, managed to slip
away. His aides called the local stringers to warn them that he would
surface on Election Day, near the Jamma Masjid. Thus, on May 30, a
caravan of about 35 cars with eager, impatient, news-hungry journalists
on board, blasts its way towards the mosque. And there, sure enough, at
10 a.m. Yasin Malik, looking more sickly than ever, appears with about
three to four hundred Kashmiris. The loudspeakers of the mosque begin
blaring slogans and as the BBC team arrives, the Kashmiris get
hysterical, women wail, the men shout and gesticulate. Journalists are
in ecstasy. The BBC cameraman zooms onto the crowd and the foreign
photographers push each other to get a shot of Yasin Malik, who says
something like: "This election will happen only over our dead bodies".
Suddenly, the crowd, which up to now has kept within the mosque's
compound, pours out through the gates and starts throwing stones at the
BSF, which in turn has to lob tear gas and shoots in the air.
Immediately, as if by magic, everyone vanishes. An Indian cameraman
working for a foreign network, is obviously getting scared, and screams:
"I have the BSFon film, shooting. I have them shooting; let's get out of
here". And the 35 cars wind back full speed to the hotels, the
journalists to file their story, the photographers to print their photos
and the cameramen to edit their story. Everybody is happy, because as
one European photographer puts it, "That was good, exciting stuff".

The same night and the next day, BBC, CNN and other networks beamed
world-wide stories of "widespread violence in Kashmir" and of
"intimidation of voters" (which nobody actually saw on that day.) The
BBC footage, which cleverly zoomed right all the time on the
gesticulating Kashmiris makes it appear as if a few thousand
demonstrators were there, when actually they were only a couple of
hundred; and great use is made of the police firing their guns in the
air…

Ultimately, the truth must be said : we foreign journalists come to
Kashmir to get our pound of flesh. Our stories cannot be good and
complete unless we can harp on human rights in Kashmir, speak of
torture, rape, custody killings and generally berate the bad Indian
army, because this is what our Editors expect of us. Thus, most of us
have already, at least subconsciously, decide in our mind to what we are
going to say, even before setting foot in Kashmir. And the same can be
said of most of the western diplomats who come to Kashmir on
fact-finding missions for their government. Often, before they get down
to write their reports, they have already decided what they are going to
say. And even if they haven't, they ultimately will. The reason is
simple, both journalists and diplomats depend on two sources for their
reporting in Kashmir-the first are the stringers of Indian newspapers,
who happen to be mostly Kashmiris. Publicly and in their writings, these
Kashmiri stringers have to be careful about what they say, but
privately, specially in the presence of western journalists, whom they
expect to share their feelings, they usually vent their hatred of India.
And the second source are the taxi drivers of Srinagar, who are
controlled by a handful of operators, who book hotels, get airline
tickets confirmed, arrange meetings with separatist leaders, even with
militants, or bring foreigners to houses where Kashmiri women have been
supposedly raped and generally shape the mind of their proteges.
Needless to say -and that is only fair - they have only one goal: to
show the great sufferings of the Kashmiri people at the hands of the
Indian "imperialists".

Recently, the Number Two of a very important European Embassy based in
Delhi, was in the house of one of these operators, and although he was a
little embarrassed, upon being seen by two foreign correspondents, there
was no doubt that his mind had already been made on what he was going to
report.

But the question is: are Indian journalists better? Well, sometimes they
seem to want to outdo westerners in sensationalism, maybe to show that
they are truly "secular". There is the case of this Indian newspaperman,
whom we shall call 'N', working for a famous Human Rights agency based
in Delhi, which is sponsored by German money. Like a little puppy,
everyday during the elections in Srinagar, he would proudly show us, his
'home work', thinking it would please us: "BSF broke into a house of two
Kashmiris and beat father and son," before faxing it to his office in
Delhi. Good work. But why do none of these human rights organisations
ever bother to meet these Pandits who courageously are staying behind to
guard one of the rare Hindu temples still standing in Kashmir?

True the Kashmiri Muslims have genuine grievances, the Congress once
rigged elections in their State, toppled their elected government,
bought their leaders. But the story is the same everywhere in India. In
fact, Kashmir is and has always been a privileged and pampered place.
Indians are not allowed to buy land in Kashmir, but Kashmiris, who are
very good businessmen, have had no qualms about investing in India and
setting up flourishing business all over the country. The Indian
Government keeps pouring crores of rupees into Kashmir. But if these
people really want their independence, shouldn't they be straightforward
about it and stop using Indian money and utilising the Government of
India's services to export their carpets? it is also true that the 36
per cent participation in elections does not seem quite realistic. But
the situation in Kashmir has become very complex: you have the renegades
who voted, the Kashmiri Pandits who voted by mail; then there are also
those Kashmiris who genuinely wanted to vote, and others who voted out
of fear either of the army, or of the renegades. And after all, this
high percentage of voters might be a sign that some of the people are
getting fed-up with militancy. While India should definitely work on its
human rights record in Kashmir and elsewhere, it should also ignore the
moralising discourse of the West, which stinks of hypocrisy.

Why should India feel guilty about retaining what has been hers for 5000
years? Kashmiris have only themselves to blame for their misery: you do
not fight a counter insurgency movement with flowers and polite talk. It
is hoped that these elections, however flawed they were, will herald a
new reign of peace in the beautiful Valley and that Indian politicians
will not repeat the same mistakes they committed earlier in Kashmir.

****

 

 

****

 

 

****

PAKISTAN AND KASHMIR

When it comes to Kashmir, Pakistan is not fighting, as all Pakistani
politicians claim, "to help grant Kashmiris their right to
self-determination", but to unite with a Muslim kin against the Hindu
infidel. It is a common front against India. Yet, contrary to what many
think, including the BJP, Kashmir may hold the key to India's
reunification with Pakistan, whether by force or by mutual consent. For
that is the crux of the problem: as long as Pakistan and India are
divided there will be other Kashmirs, other Ayodhyas, other wars with
Pakistan - nuclear maybe - and India will 'never be at peace with its
own 'Muslim community, which is a permanent danger to herself. FOR INDIA
AND PAKISTAN .ARE ONE. YET THEY ARE TWO DIFFERENT ENTITIES, EACH ONE
WITH ITS OWN PERSONALITY Remember Sri Aurobindo's words in 1947, "The
old communal division into Hindu and Muslim seems to have hardened into
the figure of a permanent division of the country. It is hoped that the
Congress and the nation will not accept the settled fact as for ever
settled, or as anything more than a temporary expedient. For if it
lasts, India may be seriously weakened, even crippled: civil strife may
remain always possible; possible even a new invasion and foreign
conquest. THE PARTITION OF THE COUNTRY MUST GO."

But unfortunately, neither today's Congress, nor even the other
political parties of India, without speaking of those of Pakistan, look
upon this division as something that has to go. And Kashmir seems to
have become the focus point for this hatred, a symbol of this division.
And the situation in Kashmir is indeed hopeless; neither do the
Kashmiris want to stay with India, nor does India want to surrender
Kashmir, nor does Pakistan want to let go of its claim upon Kashmir.
What then?

Let Pakistan and India sit down and work out a compromise which would
start with a reunification of both Kashmirs, under a joint Indo-Pak
control. This in turn would pave the way for an eventual reunification
of India and Pakistan under a loose confederation, where each would keep
its freedom, its religion and its own identities and culture. This is
the way to evolution of the 21st century, this is the path India should
tread.

Then Ayodhya will only be a word in history books; then there will be no
need to construct a mosque alongside a temple, or devise complicated and
flimsy compromises that satisfy nobody in the end. Then there will be no
more the Great Divide between Muslims and Hindus. Then even the Kashmir
problem will get solved by itself. Then India will once again be the
Greater India, Mother India, spiritual leader of the whole world. **"THE
PARTITION OF THE COUNTRY MUST GO"...**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
