+++
title = "11 "

+++
****

11\. THE ROT OF BOLLYWOOD

It is no coincidence that Pakistan, in connivance with Indian Muslims
and the covert approval of Saudi Arabia, chose Bombay to plant their
deadly bombs after the destruction of the mosque of Ayodhya. For there
has always been a strong connection between the Muslims of Bombay, with
Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, via the film industry (isn’t it, Mr Dilip
Kumar?). We all know how Indian actors and actresses used to be invited
at Dawood Ibrahim’s parties and today we have discovered how black
‘blood’ money is utilized to finance many of Bollywood mega-films. Thus,
some of these films encourage terrorism and secession in subtle and not
so subtle ways. We have chosen three such films: Refugee, Mission
Kashmir and Maachis..

****

REFUGEE, A SECULAR FILM ?

Have you ever heard of a secular film ? If there is such a thing,
Refugee must be the one ! You have the hero, Abishek Bacchan, a selfless
and courageous Indian Muslim, who has a Hindu guru, a very rare
happening today for a Muslim; you have the Bangladeshi Muslim refugees,
who are the real heroes of the film – simple, good-natured folks who
only want to live in peace in the land of their choice; you have the
tough but good-hearted Indian BSF officer, who happens to be played by a
Christian, Jacky Schroff; you have the nice Pakistani Ranger, acted by
Sunil Shetty, a Hindu, as opposed to the bad Pakistani infiltrators…

But Refugee is also a bit of a devious film and whoever wrote the script
knew very well what he was doing, as it takes advantage of the innocence
of the average viewer to put across a few messages which are sometimes
of a very doubtful nature. Firstly notice that the real villains of the
film are not the Pakistani infiltrators – after all, like those who
infiltrated into Kargil In 99, you could term them as "patriotic", as
they believe that their Scriptures preach a jihad unto India and that
dying for that cause will take them straight to heaven. No, no, the real
villain is the Hindu character, who in the very first scene of the film
offers a passage to Pakistan to the hapless Bangladeshis. He is
certainly not patriotic and is ready to betray anybody, including his
own race for dirty money. And notice how he says "Ram-Ram", when he
contacts the Bangladeshis – an allusion to the kar-sevaks who brought
down the Ayodhya mosque and maybe a hint that many worshippers of Ram
could be crooks. And observe how this Hindu criminal is finally justly
killed by a Christian and a Muslim, a not so subtle indication that
Muslims and Christians are united against the scheming Hindus.

Refugee is also full of "symbols" which may look innocuous to the
millions of naïve villagers who have already seen the film, but should
not escape the eye of an attentive viewer. Have you remarked for
instance how the Bangladeshis refugees prostrate themselves on the
ground when they reach the stone which marks the Pakistan border ? Is
Pakistan then the Promised Land ? Or have you noticed how the heroine, a
Muslim, sights her lover from an abandoned Hindu temple during a night
halt in the desert ? It must be one of the very few left by the invading
Muslims, who razed hundred of thousands of Hindu temples, and are still
at it today in Pakistan and Bangladesh. Then there is also the Sufi
festival in Rajasthan, where both Muslims and Hindus pray together.
Fine, but the scene is a bit misleading : it used to happen in the old
times, as Hinduism has always accepted the divinity of other religions
and a Hindu, even today, does not mind praying at a church or a mosque.
It is true also that the Sufis, because of the influence of Advaita, had
softened their brand of Islam. But Harzabal, the last real Sufi shrine
in Kashmir was burnt down at the hands of Pakistani and Afghans
mujahedins and the traditional Sunnis look down on that kind of
mixing-up with Kafir Hindus.

There is one symbol though, which makes a good point, even if it is not
done in a very credible manner, it is when the child of the heroes is
born on No Man’s land, with the help of Pakistani and Hindu improvised
midwifes and under the benevolent guard of the BSF and Pakistani
officers, who have forgotten their enmity. It is certainly true that
Pakistan and Indians are brothers and sisters, as everything unites
them: language, customs, culture, color of their skin, food habits,
music… except their religion. It is also true that many visionaries,
such as Sri Aurobindo, have always said that as long as Pakistan and
India do not reunite, in whatever manner, there will be wars, and
Kashmirs and atom bombs... But it will certainly not happen in a filmy
manner such as depicted in Refugee. First Islam has to give-up its
intolerant credo, accept the reality of India and stop sending its
mujahedins in Kashmir. The rest will then follow naturally.

It is also true that the film is quite brilliant: the photography of the
Ran of Kutch is superb, Kareema Kapoor acts as if it’s her second
nature, the music is enchanting enough and there is something very
endearing about Abishek Bacchan. Nevertheless this cannot hide the fact
that there is something very rotten about Hindi films nowadays. We know
already how many of them were (and are still ?) financed not only by
black money, but also with blood money, which happens to be mostly in
control of the Muslim underworld, both in India, Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia, Dawood Ibrahim being the most known figure, but certainly not
the only one; we know too now that there is a lot of extortion and
blackmail going on inside the industry and crimes have been committed
recently. But on top of that, Hindi cinema is going towards
self-suicide: how long can you go on feeding the masses films that have
hardly any script at all and which always cater to the dramatic side of
the Indian ethos, however many beautifully choreographed songs and
dances in more and more exotic locales they contain ? It is time that
Hindi cinema does a little bit of introspective and that its actors,
scriptwriters, musicians, choreographers, who are all talented people
and often come from Muslim backgrounds, start thinking about creativity,
originality and bringing to the masses a little more than escapism and a
little bit of self-pride in their own country, as they did during the
Kargil war.

****

MISSION KASHMIR

Hindi cinema has a strange habit of oscillating between syrupy
sentimentality and extreme gratuitous violence, the whole process being
punctuated with endless songs and dances, which generally have nothing
to do with the story. Mission Kashmir is no different… Except the film
has a message: it endeavors to show us what went wrong in Kashmir and
implicitly advocates a just solution for the Kashmris‘ woes.

The problem is that it got everything wrong. Firstly, the police in
Kashmir do not perform commando operations, such as the one depicted in
the film : this type of action is left to the reliable army, the BSF,
playing second fiddle, and the police, not fully trusted, because of the
presence of too many Kashmiris, performing the less sensitive type of
services. Secondly, the raid on the houseboat where the militants are
hiding, is today a very unlikely scenario, as the Dal Lake is one of the
most patrolled spots in Kashmir. Thirdly, whatever Human Right
Organizations say, the Indian Army, one of the most restrained armed
bodies in the world, do not shoot unarmed women and children, except
through accidental crossfire.

The film plays a lot on the fact that Sanjay Dutt, a Kashmiri Muslim, is
married to a Hindu. What better example of communal harmony could be
found? Indeed, the movie seems to imply that there lies the ‘secular’
solution for Kashmir (in the end we see the symbolic sinking in the mire
of the triple image of Jesus, the Koran and Laxmi). But what is the
reality? Most Hindu women who have married Muslims (such as Sharmila
Tagore), have converted to Islam – the reverse is rarely true. And what
about the Hindus who lived peacefully with their Muslim brothers for
centuries? There were one million of them in 1900. Today they all have
been made to flee through terror and intimidation. And those few
hundreds who stayed behind, are still massacred episodically.

Furthermore, there are no "evil" Kashmiri militants, as the film wants
us to believe. If you see photos of Muslim separatists killed by the
army or caught, you will notice that most of them are very young, poorly
dressed, and often look scared. Jackie Schroff also makes a ridiculous
caricature of the Pakistani militant who masterminded the burning of the
Shar-e Sharif mosque, the last great Sufi shrine where Hindus and
Muslims used to worship together (which is the scenario which the film
should have copied - and not an hypothetical attempt to blast Harzatbal)

Lastly, and this is a misconception which the film unfortunately shares
with India’s politicians, it is a total folly to think that the
Kashmiris of the Valley only want peace and are ready to become good
Indian citizens, providing their just grievances are met. The truth is
that at least 95% of Muslims in Kashmir, from the retired High Court
Judge to the Shikkara boatman, wish to become part of Pakistan, as they
feel that Islam will assure them of a better deal and protection. In
fact, the problem is not with Muslims, which are as good human beings as
Hindu or Christians, whether in Kashmir, UP, or Kerala, the problem is
with a religion which is alien to India and teaches its devotees to look
westwards towards the Mecca, in a language which is not Indian, towards
a theology which is culturally alien to Indians and teach them to loathe
anything which is not Muslim. As long as the Koran, which was written in
Medieval Times for a medieval mentality, does not care to adapt itself
to modern times and tone down some of its precepts, such as the
injunction of jihad on Infidels, there will ====f that division, which
most Indian political leaders have accepted as a permanent 'fait
accompli'. But the mistake is to think that there exists a solution to
Kashmir. There is NO solution : India righly considers that Kashmir has
been part of its territory since milleniums and will not let go of it –
it could signal the balkanisation of the country ; and Pakistan has a
point when it says that in the (mad) logic of Partition, the Valley of
Kashmir, which has a majority of Muslims, should have reverted to them.

Eeverywhere in the world we see at an attempt at unity, not
fragmentation : the two Germanies have reunited ; so have the two
Vietnams ; and tomorrow the two Koreas will follow suit, in spite of
strong ideological differences. So why not India and Pakistan ? And are
not Pakistan and India part of the same soul? Are not Pakistanis and
Indians of the same colour, culture, ethnic stock? Have they not the
same food habits, the same customs in many ways? In truth, you cannot
really differentiate one Punjabi from the other Punjabi, or one Sindhi
from the other Sindhi, except for his religion. So what if they worship
two different Gods, which are but two names for the same Infinite
Reality... Why should Indian and Pakistan, two developing countries, go
on spending billions and billions of dollars and even risk a nuclear
holocaust ?

When this possiblity will be accepted by both sides, half of the
reunifying work will be over, Indian Muslims will feel at peace and the
problem of Kashmir will solve itself naturally.

 

 

 

****

AN OPEN LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU

Dear Jawaharlal: yesterday went to see the film *Maachis*. I am sure
that from up there you get free screenings and have no hassles of
queuing, bombs scares and body searches, like us poor mortals ! Thus,
like me, you must have been able to appreciate the excellent photography
of the film, which was shot in natural settings with a special attention
for small details; the good acting: the hero does look like a handsome,
well-meaning, law abiding Sikh - at least for a time; and Tabu comes out
as an endearing, courageous and beautiful terrorist - in - spite -of
-herself. Respected Pandit-ji, even though I am a foreigner, I have
lived a long time in your country and I have even married an Indian, a
*sadarni* at that. Yet, there is something which *deeply* disturbed me
in this film, for it implies clearly that Sikh separatism was born out
of police brutality *and not vice versa* as it seems to have been the
case. In fact the whole film seems to me to be a covert exercise in
glorification and justification of terrorism. You just have to replace
the hero by a Bodo lad, a Kashmiri terrorist, or even a Tamil
separatist, and the trick is done: bye India.

But isn’t the reality altogether different ? Take Sikkism for instance,
the indirect subject of this movie: "The Sikh Khalsa, writes Sri
Aurobindo, India’s great revolutionary, poet, philosopher and Sage, was
an astonishingly original and novel creation and its face was turned not
to the past but to the future. Apart and singular in its theocratic head
and democratic soul and structure, its profound spiritual being, the
first attempt to combine the deepest elements of Islam and Vedanta, *it
was a premature drive towards an entrance into the third or spiritual
stage of human society*, but it could not create between the spirit and
the external life the transmitting medium of a rich creative thought and
culture. And thus hampered and deficient it began and ended with narrow
local limits, achieved intensity but no power of expansion..."
Unfortunately, the Sikhs, because they had to defend themselves against
the terrible persecutions wrought by the Muslims, became a **militant**
religion, adopting hawkish habits, which even in time of peace they
kept. Thus, they also retained some of the more negative side of Islam:
intolerance, or feeling of persecution, consequently cutting themselves
from the mainstream spirit of Hindu tolerance and magnitude from which
they anyway came, and where they might ultimately go back.

Sikkism, particularly during your daughter’s tenure as Prime Minister of
India, was on the defensive, or rather displayed – and still does today
in countries like Canada - an aggressive spirit of defence. Why? As Sri
Aurobindo points out, Sikhism was an astonishing attempt at synthesising
Islam and Hinduism, but because the conditions were not right, it
faltered. And today, whatever the loveliness of Sikh rites, the
incredible beauty of the Golden Temple and its wonderful atmosphere;
Sikhism, like Zoroastrianism of the Parsi community, may be a stagnating
religion - whereas Hinduism from which Sikhism sprang in greater part,
is very much alive and remains the Dharma, the source of all religions
in India. It may be this unconscious realisation by the Sikhs that their
religion is being slowly absorbed back into Hinduism, which triggers
their militancy and fundamentalism. And after all, what is
fundamentalism, but going back to the fundamentals, the foundations ?
And Sikhism blossomed *best* when it was militant, when it fought the
Muslims; therefore unconsciously, the separatists of the late seventies
went back to that crease, to that glorious epoch to regain their
identity. That is all what separatism is, a desperate attempt to regain
Sikh identity in the face of the all pervasive and subtle Hindu
onslaught. The fact that the British had planted that seed of separatism
and that later it was fuelled, financed and armed by Pakistan, certainly
did not help. But can the British, or Pakistan, or even Indira Gandhi be
credited with having of FABRICATED Sikh separatism? Your unfortunate
daughter was herself accused of having 'created' Bhrindhrawale and made
thus responsible for the whole Punjab problem. This is going to
extremes; she may have helped politically Bhrindhrawale and thought of
using him later to counterbalance her opponents in Punjab. That's bad
enough; but Bhrindhrawale's fanaticism and violence was his own, he was
just an *embodiment* of Sikh militancy and frustration; if he had not
been there, another Bhrindhrawale would have sprung-up, with or without
your daughter’s help.

The film implies also that Sikhs (and many other « secular » Indians),
have not forgiven your daughter for giving the order of storming the
Golden Temple. History will judge. But think of it this way: would the
French Government have tolerated that for months, Basque separatists,
for instance, be holed up in the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris, one of
the holiest of all Christian shrines, with their weapons, issuing deaths
warrants against politicians, and receiving journalists, as
Bhrindhrawale did? Certainly not. These Basque militants would not have
lasted *three days* in Notre Dame; the army would have been called - and
although great care would have been taken that no harm be done to the
wonderful 1000 year old cathedral, it would have been a fight to the
finish. Remember also what happened to the 350 militants who took over
the Kaba in Mecca in 1989? Most of them were killed when the Saudi
government sent its special forces against what is *the most sacred
place* of worship in the world to all Muslims. It is a credit to Indira
and the inherent Hindou tolerance, that Bhrindhrawale and his followers
were allowed to hole-up for so long in the Golden Temple. No democratic
government in Europe or any Arab state would have allowed such a
situation to continue. It was unfortunate that the Golden Temple got
damaged and so many were killed during the assault; but as the Head of
Government, your daughter took the *correct* decision. It was not her
fault that the Sikhs allowed their most sacred place to become the
shelter of men armed with weapons and with death in their hearts.

You must have noticed pandit-ji that we also get a flashback in the
film, showing us the riots against Sikhs after your daughter’s
assassination. True, it was a ghastly and shameful moment of Indian
history and the culprits should be punished. But is it not also
*shameful* that many Sikhs rejoiced when Indira was murdered in such a
cowardly way by her own Sikh bodyguards, men she had trusted, even
though she had been told earlier to have all Sikhs removed from her
personal security. To kill a woman lying on the ground with bullets,
generates a curse for any race that condones it. Today, Punjab seems to
be on the mend, even though militancy is still there, even though there
are still extremists. But what is asked of Sikhs today is that they
break their silence and come out openly for India. Unfortunately, the
Sikh community, although its majority cherish their country and are
peace-loving, hard-working, good-natured people, never COLLECTIVELY
condemned the murder of Mrs Gandhi, nor stated their desire to stay as
part of the great Indian community. Perhaps this is the curse of the
Sikhs.

What made me saddest dear Jawaharlal, is that when the film finished and
the lights came on, I had the feeling that none of the spectators, even
those amongst my own Indian family, found anything wrong with it. Like
millions of others who have already seen it, they all trooped out
feeling sorry for the poor innocent Sikhs portrayed in the movie and
angry at the brutal policemen and the corrupt, power-hungry politicians.
But policemen in India are no more brutal than their German counterpart,
for instance; and even if Indian politicians may look *apparently* more
openly corrupt than elsewhere, I am sorry to say, dear Mr Nehru, that
your Congress party, which has ruled and shaped Indian politics for so
many years, is greatly responsible for it. What is much more corrupted
in my mind is your « *secular »* legacy which allows a film like that to
go unchallenged, at least on an intellectual plane. For if such a film
had been made, say in Britain, showing how wrong it is to hang on to the
Falkland islands, a tiny territory thousand of miles away from the
British isles, or an American film on the selfish interests which
motivated the US during the Gulf war, and how thousands of innocent
Iraqis still suffer today because of the embargo, you can be sure it
would have triggered a public outcry.

I know that you deeply loved your country and that you did your best to
apply sincerely the ideals you held as most suitable to its problems,
but ultimately the marxist-inspired secularism that you imposed on
India, has done a tremendous harm, because it has perverted the
perception of its citizens. What is wrong, like encouraging separatism
in the name of secularism, appears here to be right. What is right, such
as the requirement that all citizens of India, regardless of their
religion or ethnic origin, observe the same laws, is deemed wrong,
whereas in other countries in the world it seems perfectly logical.
Today this so-called secularism has taken hold amongst the elite of
India, those who fashion the minds of their countrymen, the bureaucrats,
journalists, writers, artists, businessmen, film directors. Thus,
Maachis is a true legacy of yours, as it tries to makes us believe,
however artistically, in an untruth, a falsehood, a deception. Once more
dear Jawarlhal, I apologise for having taken so much of your time and I
hope you didn’t mind my putting across so forcefully my point of view.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
