+++
title = "12 "

+++
****

12\. INDIA: EVERYTHING THAT IT SHOULD NOT BE

India is also the opposite of whatever it should be: so much appears to
have gone wrong in this country, everything has been perverted. And if
we had to name the horror that is India, we would say: the VIP culture;
Delhi an arrogant, superficial and polluted city; tourism where the
foreigner is a cow to be milked by the Government; there are also much
more than one billion human beings in India, whatever the Official
census says; and finally, India might be going towards an ecological
pralaya –a and nobody in this country gives a damn, certainly not the
NGO’s who are too busy making money out of India’s poverty.…

****

VIP SECURITY AND KARMA *(" or what the BJP manifesto forgot to say")*

The other day, at the ceremony marking the unveiling of the BJP’s
election manifesto, we journalists were searched and hassled like never
before. Forget about bringing in our cell phones - we were not even
allowed to take in our electronic organisers, tiny little machines,
which could not even hide a miniaturised bomb ! Today, no leader in the
world, even the President of the United Sates, is as protected as Mr
Vajpayee. France, which has got its fair share of Islamic fundamentalism
- there has been numerous deadly attacks against its railways, shopping
plazas, airlines even, has learnt to cope with security in an efficient
and discreet manner. President Chirac, for instance, does not move
around with an army of rude and brutish security men; and one still
remembers how Francois Mitterrand, the previous President, used to go
out at night to his favourite restaurant with only two bodyguards.

Everything has already been said about the hassles that VIP security has
created in India : the status symbol it has become for people like
Mulayam Singh, who are not particularly targeted by terrorists; how 70%
of the Indian police is tied-up by VIP protection, instead of attending
to the problems of its common citizens; how we all suffer at the hands
of VIP’s, waiting endlessly in our cars, as the Honourable Sonia Gandhi
passes by, or in planes, as the PM’s aircraft is landing; or of being
rudely treated by these arrogant and useless Blacks Cats, who all of
them should be sent to guard Kargil in winter, so they get a taste of
what real security is about. And what about the habit of Indian Prime
Ministers and Presidents of chartering a full jumbo jet from Air India
for their travels abroad? And when a technical snag occurs, the PM finds
it quite normal to requisition another one on the spot, throwing into
disarray hundreds of passengers, including many foreigners, as Air
India’s planes have a round the clock schedule. Cannot the Prime
Minister have his own plane, even if its is more modest than a Jumbo jet
? India after all is a poor country…

Yet we find no mention of the VIP problem in the BJP manifesto, although
many of their leaders, such as Mr Advani, had personally vouched before
coming to power, that their party will address itself to this syndrome,
which it inherited from the Congress.

But what has never been said is this : the BJP, although it has, in its
eagerness to prove itself "secular", muted this aspect, prides itself to
be a party which has Hindu roots, not in the narrow religious sense, but
in the large tolerant tradition of "santana dharma", which has shaped
the lives and psyches of all Indians, regardless of their race or
religion. Then has not the BJP leadership read the Bhagavad Gita, the
supreme work of spiritual revelation in the whole history of our human
planet, which says nearly everything that needs to be known on the
mysteries of human life : why death, why life, why suffering? Don’t they
remember the gist of what Krishna tells Arjuna : "the body is just an
envelope and the soul never dies, but is born and reborn again to
complete its works". Does not Mr Vajpayee know that if he is to die
tomorrow at the hands of an assassin, then it will be his karma, that it
has been written somewhere in the book of Destiny and that there is
nothing that any security in the world, however sophisticated can do
about it ? Remember how Ronald Reagan, the most protected man in the
world was shot; or how the LTTE always manages to get the Sinhalese and
Tamil leaders it targets, although the Sri Lankan, being trained by the
Israelis, have one of the best security in Asia ? However a good and
wise leader Mr Vajpayee is, he is an old man - and India being such a
vast and ancient country, there will always be other "vibhoutis" to
replace him if he is assassinated. So why fear death ? Does India always
have to ape the West, when it has such deep knowledge in itself of the
reality beyond the reality, of the occult truth behind the appearances ?
Does not the BJP understand that if it would address itself seriously to
the problems of VIP security and tone it down DRASTICALLY, including
around the Prime Minister, it would acquire the party tremendous
goodwill from the people and as many votes as wining the Kargil war ?

****

" DELHI : THE SODOM AND GOMORH OF INDIA ? "

Of all the four metropolitan cities, Delhi is the most ancient and
soulful, where one can feel at every corner that seven cities lie buried
below the actual Delhi. In old Delhi, one has the impression of stepping
back into history: burly Sikhs with their colourful turbans, Rajasthani
women, their arms covered with bangles, venerable mullahs and their long
flowing white beards, Maharashtrians with their Gandhi caps… New Delhi
is also one of the most striking capitals, with its wide and tree-shaded
avenues, its numerous gardens, which make it the greenest city in India
and one of the most stunning perspectives of the world, rising from the
Indian "Arc de Triomphe", to the President’s palace, behind which the
suns sets majestically in winter.

Unfortunately, Delhi is also a city of blood and tears and its history
is seeped in treason, murder and genocide. Who remembers today that
Nadir Shah attacked Delhi in 1739 and that for one whole week, his
soldiers massacred everybody, ransacked everything and razed the entire
countryside, so that the survivors would have nothing to eat ? On top of
that, Delhi is also a colonial legacy : it is a city which is totally
decentralised compared to the rest of India and bureaucrats sitting in
Delhi have often little idea of the feelings, of say, the people of
Tamil Nadu - and hence, their decisions are frequently flawed. Most
politicians, even if they start with a little bit of idealism, are
quickly engulfed by the despicable VIP power trip of Delhi : the
bullet-proof white Ambassadors, the palatial bungalows, the peons, the
luxurious - but meaningless Lok Sabha - and they quickly forget that
they were elected by the people and for the people.

Foreign embassies must be held too responsible for what is happening to
Delhi : diplomats posted in India often know precious little of what is
happening in this country, locked up that they are in the luxury ghetto
of Shanti Path and Vasant Vihar, where they only meet between
themselves. Being too highly paid, they have grossly inflated the rents
in Delhi and some of them must still be thinking that they are living in
colonial India, witness the Swedish embassy, which has an unwritten
policy of hiring only Christians for their Indian staff, because "they
feel more comfortable with them" (their application forms even have a
mention asking if you are catholic or protestant). Is it the only
embassy doing so ? It is for Indian journalists to investigate… And even
those embassies which also hire Hindus, grossly underpay them: 18.000 Rs
is the average for a qualified full-time working Indian, whereas his
ferengi colleague gets ten times this amount. Foreign correspondents
often arrive here with prejudices and set ideas. And in Delhi, they also
tend to gravitate in the embassy- journalist cocktail circuit, hearing
the same old clichés about "secularism", "Hindu fundamentalism" etc. It
would be wonderful if they could be enlightened by Indian journalists -
unfortunately it is not always so : Indian journalism, in spite of a
tremendous change in popular opinion, is still partly in the grip of the
old nehruvian spirit.

All this contributes to make of Delhi an arrogant and superficial city,
where stress is so palpable, that you can feel it oozing in you the
moment you get out of the plane. And it is worsening day by day :
unsmiling drivers are becoming more and more aggressive, horning with
impatience; and Delhi youth shows a tendency to become totally
westernised, flashing the symbols of India’s "nouveaux riches" - cell
phones, Hyundai cars , and Gucci shoes - and they have absolutely no
idea about their roots and the greatness of their own civilisation .

Will Delhi become then the "Sodom and Gomorh" of India, this ancient
biblical city which was engulfed by fire, when its inhabitants turned
their back on their dharma ? And indeed, in a case of a nuclear war with
Pakistan or China, Delhi will be the first hit ! Wake-up then Ô Delhi,
remember thy bloody past, and mend thy ways ! Thus, the motto of the
Government should be to decentralise at all costs, as everything is
decided in Delhi and it has triggered separatism and regional angers.
This decentralisation will also help alleviate the pollution of Delhi
which is slowly killing both humans and nature. Foreign correspondents
should be sent out of the capital : the real genius of India lies in its
countryside, where people smile and still know the value of patience.

****

 

TOURISM IN INDIA AS SEEN BY A FOREIGN JOURNALIST

Recent statistics show that India received only 1,2 million tourists
since January, a drop of 40% compared to last year. Compare this to the
3,5 millions tourists who flocked to China during the same period ! The
Indian Government is pointing a finger at the American sanctions imposed
after India’s nuclear tests, but the reality is quite different.

****

Take flying. I have often to shuttle between Madras and Delhi. A return
ticket by Indian Airlines between these two cities costs more than 15500
Rs. But for that price, I can fly from Paris to New York, which is
double the distance. Indian Airlines runs only two flights a day between
New Delhi, the capital of a one billion nation, and Madras, five
millions souls, the gateway to the South; and even these two flights are
not always full (did you know that only 10% of Indian Airlines
passengers actually pay their fare - the rest are bureaucrats, or
executives of state and private companies; thus most of the money goes
from the government to the government !). The French have one flight
***every*** half an hour between Paris, the capital, and Nice, their
gateway to the South; and they are always full, because all kinds of
incentives are offered: return fares, discounts on weekends, off-season
fares.. Try to tell Indian Airlines that they should offer you a
discount because you’re buying a return ticket and they’ll probably give
you a dirty look !

The funniest is that there is sometimes a 15 days waiting list to travel
by train from Madras to Delhi (or the other way) in IId class A/C
sleeper, which costs Rs 3000 and takes 36 hours - that is when the train
is not a few hours late, or is not hit from behind by another train, as
it happened to me and my wife a few years ago. If Indian Airlines had
the intelligence to offer their Chennai/Delhi tickets at 4000 Rs, people
will gladly shell out another 1000 bucks, just to avoid the 36 hours
business. And IA could easily fill up six Airbus 300 a day and make a
handsome profit, instead of hiking-up the prices four times in five
years. It is thus very sad that different governments, including the
present one, have sabotaged theTata proposal for a private airline,
which would have given real competition to Indian Airlines which is the
most staffed airline in the world (and Jet Airways, who are too glad too
align their prices on them). After all, didn’t the Government steal Air
India from the Tatas and turn a proud carrier into the laughing stock of
the aeronautic world (like when Gujral had two 747’s on hold, but
cancelled nevertheless his meeting with the French President in Paris,
because he was too busy trying to topple the BJP government in U.P with
the infamous Bhandari...) .

****

Take hotels. When Jacques Chirac, the French President came to visit
India in January, he stayed at the Taj Bombay and we French journalists
had to tag along. The price of a room in the new wing was more than 300
$, that is nearly 13.000 rupees. The room was nothing extraordinary to
speak off, except the view of India Gate; but the sea there has become
so dirty, with all kind of plastics floating around and there are
hawkers galore, snakes charmer and other con-men, waiting to pounce on
the poor tourist as soon as he dares step out of the hotel. The food at
the Taj and other 5 Star Hotels can’t even compare with a one star
restaurant in a minor French town. Yet the Taj (or the Oberoi) people
make you feel as if they are doing you a favour by letting you stay with
them. But for the same price one can stay in a much better hotel in
Paris, or in Madrid, which will boast better cuisine and service.

****

Take visas. In Sri Lanka, all foreigners are automatically handed a one
month visa upon their landing at the airport. But not in India. One has
to apply to sour faced, underpaid staffers at Indian embassies abroad -
and forget about five year visas, even if you have been visiting India
for 35 years, like Roger Anger, the famous French architect, who
designed the international city of Auroville near Pondichery, and was
recently refused one. Renewing your tourist visa, can also be a
nightmare, although I have a friend of mine who recently bought it to an
« agent » in Nepal for 10.000 rupees and even got a genuine embassy
receipt for it, which means that there must be some heavy racket going
at the embassy.

****

Take banks. 30 years ago, it took half an hour to change 100 $ in the
Pondichery State Bank of India. Today they may have computers, but it
still takes half an hour! Being a resident of India and married to an
Indian, I have an Indian Grindlays Credit Card, on top of my American
Express and Visa international cards, as the Indian Government has a
policy of milking tourists, instead of catering to their needs : one
rate for Indians in rupees at hotels, or for paying air and railway
tickets, one rate for foreigners in dollars, which needless to say is
40% more expensive. To cut a long story short, Grindlays, which charges
outrageous interest rates for this card and debits you a 100 rupees for
clearing cheques (yes you have read well : one hundred rupees !),
cancelled my credit because I was six days late in paying my monthly
instalment. My card was thus refused by Indian Airlines when I tried to
pay my ticket from Bangalore to Chennai and I had to use my Visa card,
which meant 40% extra ! I am thinking to go to a Consumer’s Court...

****

Take the Indian Tourism Department. When I was in Paris some time ago, I
met the Director of Tourism there, a nice and courteous man. However he
told that he spent most of his time showing Paris to Indian Ministers
and their wives and that he had practically no budget to invite French
journalists to India. And when journalists are actually invited by the
Indian Government, it is usually the wrong ones, who instead of
reporting on the positive aspects of this country, often dwell on its
negative and more sensational side, such as Calcutta, poverty, Mother
Teresa, etc., or on the « fanatic » Hindus (like Christophe Jaffrelot,
who just wrote « the BJP and the compulsion of politics in India »)
because that is what foreigners want to hear. A few months ago I was
thrown out of his office by the Gentleman who happens to be India’s
Director of Tourism, because I dared to tell him exactly that.

****

However, it may very well be that all these politicians who are stalling
privatising of India’s airlines, these obscure bureaucrats who make
absurd visas rules, the arrogant hoteliers, and bankers who are
inflating prices, are all doing a great service to India. ***Because
Tourism kills the soul of a country***. We have seen it in Sri Lanka, in
Thailand, or in Nepal. India is a vast country, thank God; and it lives
for itself, within itself - Its festivals, its dances, its ways of life
are not (yet) custom-tailored to please the ignorant and arrogant
tourist.. As for myself, I am quite ready to suffer for the rest of my
life at the hands of Indian Airlines, if it helps India keeps its soul
which makes it such a unique country in the world.

****

ONE BILLION INDIANS ?

Officially India’s population crossed the one billion mark last week. It
may be remembered that some UN agency had unilaterally declared that
this landmark was recahed last Agust. Of course, they made it very
conveniently coincincide with the 15^(th) August. The story was fist
taken-up by the New York Times - and of course the whole of the foreign
correspondents’ corps, which is affliected by what the French call
"mouton, de Panurge" instinct - which means that the whole herd follows
the herd leader; even if it jumps from the cliff - followed suit. And
all the major European newspapers, including France’s Figaro (I was
holidaying in Almora to the displeasure of my editor) Le Monde, and
Libéraion did full page stories on how "India already poor and aflicted
with debilitating problems (corruption the unibiquous caste systeml
French love to talk about etc) had even more mouths to feed. The usual
negative, superior-minded and condesecending talk about India which
sells so well abroad.

I have read most of the stories published at that time. And I have read
most of the stories published last week in Indian newspaperes. All the
reason,s of why India’s population, have been paraded: the failure of
India’s successive family priogrammes, the corruption and inreria of the
bureaucracy, the baskwardness of its peolple, the underpriviledgeed
contion of women in Idia (althoçugh Indian women must be amongst the
most intelloigent and ressourcful in the world and had under ancient
Hinduism unparalled freedom) etc. But nobody and I reapt nobody bothered
to mention that one of the reaso,ns that India crossed so quickly the
billin ma\*rk is that there is according to offcially - but secter
recors compiled by governments which were non BJP, at meast eighteen
million (1,8 crore) Bangalsfesdhis, most of them illegal but many of
them having acquired fraudulous papers throrugh faudulkous means - and
even soemtimes with the connivance of the local admisnistation like in
West Bengal where the communist government wants at all cost to ptovce
his secularnbess.

Did you know for instance that India shares 4096 kms of border with
Banglasdesh, this frak nation, which has no natual ressources except
juet, born out of the madness of parttion ? I is an impossible bnorder
to guard: it cost one crore per km to guard (metalled roads so that
patrols can quickly survey, barbed wire, miradors etc). There are 41
battalions of BSF, precious manposer, which is teid down along the
Bangaldeshi bvordere. The famous fencing project has only manages to
fence 788 kms ou of 4000 and 1500 crores are spent everfy year on
garding the Bagldesh borderThat Banglesdeshis inflitrators come-up upto
Bombay ort even Delhi where they form imùportant communisites which have
voting power, hence their woing by pliticians and the silence that
differndt governmenst (even, the BJP, apart from the courageous Assam
Governor, who was imediately brabded a "nationalistr by the Press). And
of xourse, even thought rhe BSF manageed to catch 60.000 illgeal
Bangaldeshis last year very few Banglasdehis are ever sent back ,as
officially the BV,nagladesh government, which enclurages it says that
there is no ilegal immigration to India. Is I over ? Not at all
Banglasdeh may lmose 20% of its land in the few yars because of erosion
and constant flooding. And wheer will these people which has no
poppulation contyro go it may be asked ?

 

It would be nice to say that the process is recerse and that Hindus in
Bangladesh are porpsering . But it is the recerse which ahs hhapend:
there were 28% Hindus in Bangaldesh in 1941, 10,5 in 91 and less than 9%
today, progroms ,burning of temples after Ayodhay (see Taslima Nasreen’
book Lalja) have all ensured that Hidnus flee Bangaldsh. What is the
solution to the illgeal immigration of Banglasdfesh ? Ot is true that it
is not done in a bad will: most of these immirant ome to India in search
of better salaries and contionosn of life . It has been a process
thouhout hiostory. Ultimately the Indjan and Bangladeshi Government
(which owes its freedom to India it often forgets) shoulld reflect on
the stupidity pof parttion. If tjhere is cooperation between Banglasdesh
and Indiaz quotas for work permits can be iisued with identity cars and
proper census so as to corol at least in some maesures illegal
immiragtion

 

There is another factor which has been kept under silence by the Press,
both wesern and Indian: most of Hindus - even the poorest in today’s
remore Tamil villages, which I kopwn well - have understoof that it is
beter to have children. Many women have operation after three or four
children. The christains of xourse, have been the irst to embrace family
planning in Idnia, because they are amongst the best- deucatesd, eve,n
though the Opoe nd Mother Teresa are so against abortion and family
planning, in a coutry which cannot even feed probably a thrid of its
poupaltio The same thing cannot ve said about h Muslim of India the
great majority of which are poor. The Coran not olny recommends having
many children but it makes it a colinising poilcy so that eventyualmly
Muslims come to outnumber the original inhabitats. Thus muslims of
village sin Uttar Pradesh or Bihar, have six or sencen children. Of
course, if you dare say tha Ind India or abroad, yi are immediately tawe
of being anti-mlislim ior ahindu lover. But let me be clear: the
refi,ement and hospialmity of many Muslims in ndia is often uparalled.
The roblem is not witht he muslims as human beings, the problem is with
their Scriptyture whihwas devsied 1400 years ago for consitions and
people which did not applu any more and has bnecver been reviosed and
adapeted ifor odernb times.

So next time someoi,e tells you that Indiua’s ppulation has reached the
billion marck tell tjem: no there are 982 Indians and 18 millins illgeal
Bangelsdeshis.

****

 

 

INDIA : AN ECOLOGICAL PRALAYA ?

We can understand that during the just collapsed WTO negotiations in
Seattle, India wanted to delink child labour from trade issues. Because,
although the West is right in pointing out that there is indeed a
terrible exploitation of child labour India, by people who make shameful
money out of them: beedie factories owners, carpet makers, cracker
factories etc., at the same time, child labour is a reality of India,
which cannot be wished away, as many poor families depend on the
earnings of their children to survive. And it is anyway not for the
West, which is itself disgracefully exploiting cheap labour in Third
World countries, to give lessons to India.

On the other hand, one is a little surprised to hear India’s Commerce
protest against the West’s insistence to link trade with environmental
safeguards and norms. It would be all right for the honorable Minister
to ride on the high horse of offended honor if India’s ecology was in a
good state. But the simple truth is that it is near the point of no
return - and no government, be it the Congress or the BJP, has ever
given a hoot about India’s environment, except to pay some lip service.
We have since seen for instance how the BJP made a political appointment
out of the Ministry of Environment, showing how low India’s ecology is
on its agenda. But did they think for a moment that the Ministry of
Environment may be as important as the Defense Ministry, because two
nuclear bombs dropped by Pakistan on India will not do as much harm as
India as fifty years of greedy saw-mill owners in league with corrupt
politicians and forest officers have done to India’s environment ?

Does the Commerce Minister Minister (who is otherwise very competent in
his own field) know that by the middle of next century there will be no
more forests cover left in India ? That its population will have long
crossed the billion mark and will overflow everywhere, stifling any
progress, annihilating all efforts ? That India's cities will be so
polluted by their millions of cars that it will be impossible to breathe
any more ? That India's rivers will be so poisoned by industries, that
all living life will long have disappeared from it (and that there will
be no drinking water left, except imported mineral water) ? And that
India will be littered with so much plastic (bags, bottles, buckets,
etc.), that it will be materially impossible to ever get rid of them
(indeed the land of Bharat should be renamed « the civilisation of
plastic »...) This is 21st century India for you.

Many experts have already pointed out that hardly 11% of India's
classified forests have adequate density. In 1950, 1/3 of India's area
was still forested; each year India loses through deforesting a
territory bigger than France, that is nearly two million hectares. And
of these, only 3% is protected... And even that 3% is in deep distress,
because of population pressure, big dams (like the Narmada), and
industries. The main culprits of the deforestation are the contractors,
the ones with big money, particularly the saw mill owners and the Forest
Department, although it claims that it does selective tree felling, has
absolutely no understanding of ecological balance.

But without doubt, the greatest culprits of the massive deforestation,
the dwindling of animal life, the thinning of underwater tables and the
increasing desertification of India, are the politicians, in connivance
with the contractors, who in turn bribe the forest officers, witness how
Veerapan was able to plunder the forests of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka for
ten years. The Konkan railway, the Narmada Dam, or the increase of the
prawn farms, are all examples of these criminal wrongdoing. And
unfortunately, bare for Maneka Gandhi, who was the only serious
Environment Minister India ever had, there have never been as many
harmful projects to ecology as lately. Fortunately, there is a growing
ecological awareness in India, and movements led by Medha Patkar, Shri
Baghuna, or the lawyer Mehta, who are doing wonderful work. But they
often stand alone, because as long as the people of India will not be
educated, their work is doom.

But ultimately, is it fair to blame only the politicians, or even the
British, who started the massive deforestation for their railways and
killed hundreds of thousands of tigers ? Is there not something else in
the Indian psyche that is to blame? Where is the root of this massive
unconcern for one's environment; this total disregard for beauty,
whether it is the terrible ugliness of the cities in Punjab, or the
appalling filthiness in Tamil Nadu ?...

And, maybe, for once, the Hindus are to blame. The Ganges seems to be
the perfect illustration of a religion which enjoins a thousand
purification rites and yet has allowed her own Mother earth to be
defiled. Here is a river that Hindus have held most sacred for
centuries, nay millenniums; to bathe in it is to purify oneself of all
bad karma; to die here is to be reborn in Light. Yet what do all Hindus
do with their sacred Ganges? They defecate in it; they throw in all
their refuse; they let their dead float down the mighty river, AS IF
THEY THOUGHT THAT THE SPIRITUAL PURITY OF THE WATER CAN NEVER BE
OBLITERATED BY MATERIAL DIRTINESS. But ask any scientist what is the
degree of pollution in the Ganges today and he will also tell you that
it is near the point of return. What will happen to India if it loses
the Ganges, which is its very soul?

So, Mr. Minister, for once, use the West, let them have their own way,
however hypocrite and moralistic it is. Use them for the good of India,
so that a little bit of ecological concern is drilled in this country,
which allows its very body to go wasted. Because we have already seen
how India has been forced to adopt certain environmental measures just
out of greed, when European countries refused for instance to accept any
textile export which was not azo free, or leather which was not
chemically poisoned. The West has grown an ecological consciousness and
knowledge which India totally lacks and we should learn from them.

****

THE BIG SCAM OF NGO’ S

You think that the most corrupt organizations in India belong to the
Government? But you may be wrong, because some of the biggest scammers
in this country could be the Non Governmental Organizations, or NGO’s,
and it is all done in the name of the poor of India.

In the old times, the leaders of NGO’s used to be working in the field,
dressed simply, lived in humble dwellings, and had minimal salaries,
sufficient for their most essential needs. But nowadays, the new breed
of NGOs you meet in Delhi, or Bombay, is smartly dressed in jeans, he or
she usually comes from India’s upper elite class, carry the latest
laptop and often travel around in a/c cars. These NGO’s spend half of
their time abroad, in London, Paris, or New York, doing smart
presentations, with mesmerizing slides and Excel spreadsheets, in front
of gullible westerners, always ready to shed a tear for the poor
"downtrodden Indians", so as to convince them to grant more funds.

And what is usually all about? 70% of the time "woman empowerment", or
"uplifting" the villagers. It is nowadays fashionable in India to always
highlight the downtrodden condition of Indian women and their
underprivileged place in Indian society. But no country in the world has
granted such an important place to women in its spirituality and social
ethos. And even today, behind all appearances – arranged marriages,
submission to men, preference of male children in some rural areas (but
girls are loved in India like nowhere in the world) - it can be safely
said that very often, from the poorest to the richest classes, women
control –even if behind the scenes – a lot of the family affairs: the
education of their children (men in India are often "mama’s boys"),
monetary concerns, and husbands often refer to them for important
decisions. Countries such as France or the United States, who are often
preaching India on "women’s rights" never had a woman as their top
leader, whereas India had Indira Gandhi ruling with an iron hand for
nearly twenty years; and proportionately they have less MP’s than India,
which is considering earmarking 33% of seats in Parliament for women, a
revolution in human history!

But this obsession of NGO’s with women and village empowerment (usually
they take one village and make it like a showcase, for the benefit of
visiting donors from abroad) has completely eclipsed the burning issue
that would require NGO’s attention with the tremendous amount of funds
they attract from abroad : afforestation, as there are hardly any forest
worth the name left today in India. Take the Himalayas for instance, and
a region like the lovely Kumaon hills. Less than forty years ago, people
in Almora, the ancient capital of the Kumaons, still remember the
beautiful blue cedars forests. Today, there are no forests left around
Almora - they were cut down in the early 70’s by contractors from the
plains with the full knowledge of the Government - except commercial
pine forests, which impoverish the soil and do not hold it properly.
Yet, there is terrible shortage of water in Almora, the climate has
warmed-up considerably in the last twenty years and wood is fearfully
expensive.

There are literally hundreds of NGO’s in the Kumaon hills, who are doing
lots of women empowerment, lots of village uplifting, lots of weaving
this and weaving that… but absolutely no tree planting. Why? "Because
the others do not do it", is the usual answer, when you ask some of the
NGO’s or :"because it is too hard work". But the beauty of the Kumaon
hills around Almora is fast going: more and more hotels are coming up,
cutting more trees, like near the Kassar Devi temple, above Almora,
where Vivekananda is supposed to have meditated and which has been
bought to make into a resort by a non- resident Muslim who is suspected
to have links with Ibrahim Dawood.

Most of the big NGO’s are funded by Western countries; but what is not
always known is that they often get the bulk of their budgets from big
Christian organizations, such as Christian Aid, or Oxfam. There is no
doubt that Christians are doing selfless work in India and that they
still provide the best in health care and education (work which Hindus
should do themselves). But it may so happen – more in the case of
American Protestants than European Catholics, who are more tolerant -
that there is a slight catch, a string attached to the money donated,
not only because there is always that western obsession with "woman
empowerment" and the "exploited" low caste Indian (by the Brahmins, of
course), but often also, these charitable organizations have a downright
bias against Hindus and even towards the BJP ! Some of them even had
posters advising people not to vote for the BJP in the last elections.
Can you imagine an Indian NGO asking Indians settled in France not to
vote for some pro-catholic party? They would be immediately kicked out!

This is not to say that there are no selfless NGO’s who are not
fattening themselves on money meant for the poor. Some of them do bring
drinking water to remote villages in the Himalayas, or like the Young
India Group, teach villagers to stand for their own rights. But there
has to be a shift *away* from empowerment, to fight the real burning
issues which are affecting India such as afforestation and water
collection (there is no Government policy for collecting the tremendous
amounts of water India gets from monsoons, which would save millions of
gallons of precious ground water which is fast depleting). And the
Government, while leaving to NGO’s the freedom of expression they
already have, should make it mandatory that they have a certain
percentage of their activities dedicated to these two areas.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
