+++
title = "04 Rebellion's Roots: Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence in Yunnan"

+++
Converting Yunnan At the beginning of the Qing dynasty in 1651, Yongli, the last known surviving grandson of the Ming emperor, found himself pursued by Qing forces who had overthrown the Ming court in Beijing and who were now consolidating their control across the empire. He and his dwindling group of loyalists swept into Yunnan, where they established a government-inexile that lasted for nearly eight years before they were forced by Qing troops to flee into Burma. The Burmese king, likely realizing there was little to be gained from such an arrangement, switched his allegiance from the ousted Ming to the emergent Manchu and took the prince and his family hostage. He placed them under virtual house arrest and executed many of their retainers. Yongli's dismal existence ended in 1662, when the Burmese court handed him over to the Qing general, Wu Sangui, who escorted him back into Yunnan. There the prince and his son were executed by strangulation.1 The death of the last Ming heir quelled the Qing court's fears of a Ming restoration led by a blood descendent. However, a new danger soon arose, from General Wu Sangui, the same general who had helped the Manchu overthrow the Ming. Wu Sangui was growing increasingly dissatisfied with his subordinate role to the Qing throne and was not content to be even nominally under Qing control, so he dissolved his allegiance to the Qing and in 1678 declared himself emperor of a new dynasty. Only months after this, however, he died of dysentery. Later that same year, Qing forces recaptured Kunming (although remnants of Wu's forces would remain in Yunnan until 1681). Nearly four decades after the Qing dynasty was founded in 1644, Yunnan became the last of the Chinese provinces to be formally brought under Qing authority. This inauspicious beginning of Qing dominion over Yunnan did little to ameliorate the region's already dodgy reputation as a dangerous frontier province. During the four centuries between Yunnan's reintegration into Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 49 
China by Mongol forces in 1253 and the rise of the Qing in 1644, Yunnan was of peripheral concern to both the central court and Chinese society. Ming emperors viewed Yunnan as a dangerously unstable multiethnic backwater and handed much of it over to non-Han native chieftains (tusi). In the early eighteenth century, partly because the populace had collaborated with the administrations of Yongli and General Wu, the Qing court began to rethink the non-Han administrative institutions it had inherited from the Ming. Court worries over imperial control of the southwest came to a head during the reign of the Yongzheng emperor (r. 1723-35), who launched a program of administrative consolidation (gaitu guiliu). The main purpose of the Yongzheng emperor's consolidation scheme was to end the self-governance of the hereditary tusi and establish direct rule by regularly appointed state officials. Ostensibly, the emperor was seeking to free the non-Han people from rule by the tusi in order "to make their lives safe and happy."2 The real reason was more likely that by "removing the non-Han officials, the Qing can appraise the property and land and thus increase [the income from] the land tax."3 To accomplish this, the Qing assigned each tusi a rank in the administrative hierarchy, complete with a seal of office. Given the long-established power of the tusi, the conversion was not without opposition-indeed, it was often violent. Those tusi who resisted conversion were dealt with summarily by E'ertai, a trusted Manchu official dispatched to the province by the Yongzheng emperor. Many battles were fought; an account described the carnage from one of these as covering "more than ten miles [with] bodies suspended among the trees and stones dripping flesh and blood."4 More than a century and a half later, gazetteers writing about the consolidation would rank it one of the province's six great military campaigns, alongside Qianlong's Burma campaign and the Panthay Rebellion.5 The conversion was an attempt to alter Yunnan's political landscape so as to enhance the Qing's capacity to directly administer Yunnan's multiethnic frontier. Yet the weakening of indigenous rule and the growing presence of the Qing state in Yunnan society (as well as the subsequent increase in the flow of migrants to the province) generated new tensions in Yunnan. In his study of the consolidation process, John Herman concluded that the "reform policies ostensibly designed to bring order and stability to China's southwestern frontier instead brought instability and violence" as the indigenous population resisted the cultural, political, and economic repercussions of consolidation.6 By the late eighteenth century, as a result of these dramatic changes, Qing officials were facing serious obstacles to bringing peace and stability to Yunnan. More and more Han were flowing into Yunnan from the overpopulated provinces of the Chinese interior. As their numbers grew, they pushed 50 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE progressively deeper into the non-Han lands that had once been populated solely by indigenous peoples. At the same time, having removed the tusi administrative framework with great violence, Qing local officials were faced with a dilemma: How were they to govern such a large area, especially one with a culturally and politically alienated populace? To complicate this picture, many tusi remained in the province and retained a high degree of autonomy over large areas of Yunnan. As late as the 1840s, a French missionary in western Yunnan remarked on the highly independent nature of the tusi: "The small tusi in Yunnan have a certain degree of sovereignty, with fortresses, large homes, and even their own prisons. The only thing they do not have is an army. . . . Because of these aspects in many areas the indigenous tribes still possess something of a society apart, of a distinct nationalité."7 So the predicament confronting Qing local officials in the first decades of the nineteenth century was how to protect the interests of the state and the Han Chinese when those interests were in conflict with the interests of the non-Han populace (be they under tusi jurisdiction or not), and at the same time strengthen the state commercially and militarily.8 During this same period, Yunnan experienced a long string of natural disasters. In a little over fifty years Kunming suffered five severe earthquakes, six calamitous floods, three epidemics, two famines, two droughts, and a major windstorm. In the 1833 Kunming earthquake alone, more than six thousand people were killed and another eighty thousand displaced. Kunming's experience was not unique in the province; in this period every area of Yunnan was struck by a devastating array of natural disasters, extreme weather, and epidemics. Contemporary records state that only in 1818 were there bountiful harvests everywhere in the province." Man-made disturbances were just as numerous. During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Yunnan suffered elevated levels of conflict. Documents indicate that between 1796 and 1851 there were over seventy local disturbances, which touched every region of Yunnan and unsettled its society almost continuously. It is difficult to pinpoint the cause of this growing interethnic hostility. However, it seems that the growing state presence resulting from the conversion process, the ever-escalating numbers of Han migrants moving into non-Han areas, and the unrelenting succession of natural calamities combined to exacerbate divisions that already existed between the long-term residents (including long-settled local Han as well as the Hui and the nonHan) and the newly arriving settler Han. Yet these conflicts in the early decades of the nineteenth century do not seem to have been the result of rigidly defined ethnic identities and decades-long grudges, as was the case in other parts of China during the same period. Typically, they were deHanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 51 
scribed as far more random and spontaneous. A minor official referred to them as clashes between groups who "seeing something they want, banding together; then when they have what they want, disbanding."10 TRAITORS IN THE BORDERLANDS Yunnan's turbulent transition from Ming to Qing authority and the central court's violent usurpation of administrative control over non-Han areas is an often forgotten prelude to the influx of Han settlers in the eighteenth century. Imperial records of the ethnographic, commercial, and political landscapes of this transition era indicate the ongoing political integration of the province into the Chinese empire. What is often omitted is the deep suspicion of the Qing court and the new settler Han toward the nonHan and those who associated with them. To fully understand the broader implications of Yunnan's integration—and the subsequent violence—it is useful to heed Philip Kuhn when he tells us in his innovative study of the soulstealers that "perceptions matter."11 At the turn of the nineteenth century, in memorials to the throne, apprehension over some of the inevitable interactions between Han and non-Han began to appear with more and more frequency. In particular, officials posted to Yunnan increasingly referred to what for them was a worrisome issue: Han Chinese were taking up the causes of the non-Han against the Qing. Some reports described Han involvement in petty disputes or illicit trading. Others pointed to individual Han engaged in efforts to undermine the Qing's carefully laid state-building policies. By the late eighteenth century the Qing court, Qing officials, and many recent Han settlers were beginning to express alarm at the actions of those Han who were associating with non-Han and acting against the state's interests. In the contemporary records, such Han were increasingly branded as traitors to the Han (hanjian). Was this panethnic opposition to Qing governance more than isolated acts of opportunism by a small number of Han? If so, perhaps it meant that the benefits of adopting the transregional and multiethnic model of traditional Yunnan society outweighed any benefits of adopting the sinocentric orientation demanded by the Qing. And in turn, if that was so, then as the Qing's political and military infrastructure in non-Han areas grew stronger, the threat of discontented Han and non-Han joining forces against the Qing would grow apace. This is not completely self-evident, and furthermore, it raises knotty questions: Can the apparent rise in hanjianism be explained by such factors as the Qing authorities' fears that they would fail to integrate Yunnan into the Chinese polity? Or was the rise more properly viewed as a result of the worrisome power of the non-Han to convert Han to their perspective? 52 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE Accusations of hanjianism arose most often along the external Burmese and Tibetan borders of Yunnan as well as within internal zones dominated by non-Han. In one of the better-documented cases, a former Buddhist monk named Zhang Fuguo settled in southwestern Yunnan near Mianning in the last years of the eighteenth century. Han immigrants had been settling in this part of Yunnan since the mid-1700s, attracted by the gem and mineral mines. By 1800 they had developed their own enclaves complete with city god temples (imported from their distant hometowns) and merchant associations.12 Zhang did not take up the same pursuits as his fellow Han; instead he began to associate with the local non-Han in ways that directly contravened the wishes of the state—and that would become increasingly typical across Yunnan. Early in 1800 Zhang was captured, tried, and punished for his role in a variety of illicit activities. Yunnan officials later petitioned the throne, asking that Zhang be pardoned and indicating that he had admitted the errors of his past and was promising to work with instead of against the imperial government. The Jiaqing emperor well realized how disruptive a Han monk with a troubled past could be in such a distant region, and only reluctantly accepted the recommendation of his provincial officials. Finally, in 1803, he granted Zhang the title of local head (tumu), ordering him "to control the [non-Han] and not cause trouble."13 In 1811, Zhang returned to his wayward habits. He organized a band of several thousand non-Han, who burned and looted villages, occupied the land of a local tusi, and "secretly recruited other hanjian."14 Clearly chagrined over the whole affair, the Yun-Gui governor-general, Bolin, ordered three local tusi to organize a multipronged attack on the villages occupied by Zhang. Zhang was finally arrested in 1813, sentenced for his crimes, and publicly executed to “clearly show the power of the law" to the area's residents. 15 The Qing court now sought to declare actions such as Zhang's as the work of hanjian-an indication of the Qing's awareness of their precarious position in Yunnan. The use of the term hanjian in the context of late imperial Yunnan is striking for its seemingly broad and inconsistent application. In other areas of China it was applied to any Han Chinese who collaborated with non-Han (including Westerners) against Qing interests. In areas of China where Chinese were beginning to work with Westerners (as translators, middlemen, and so on), some Qing officials, including Lin Zexu, who was famous for his role in the Opium War, argued that the key to managing foreigners lay in suppressing the hanjian.16 Especially in the southeastern province of Guangdong, "the assumption was that these people betrayed their national interest to the foreigners, and as they were of Han Chinese descent, they were therefore termed hanjian."17 Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 53 
Hanjianism in nineteenth-century Yunnan seems to have been somewhat different in nature. Most significant is that the non-Han were in the eyes of the central court all Qing subjects. Equally significant is that hanjian were perceived as more than simply bandits active in non-Han areas. 18 Han collaborating with non-Han were beginning to be regarded by the Qing court and by many recent Han settlers as no better than traitors. It is important to note that during the rise of hanjianism the distinction between banditry and hanjianism continued to be maintained. Banditry in these border areas was common enough, and participants in such illicit activity were labeled, as they were elsewhere in the empire, as just that-bandits (fei). Indeed, banditry was so common in Yunnan that different categories of bandits abounded; there were "roving bandits" (youfei), "local bandits" (tufei), "seditious rebels" (jiaofei), and "non-Han bandits" (yifei), to name but a few. Clearly, the Qing government feared the consequences of unscrupulous Han bandits interacting with Yunnanese indigenous groups. Indeed, concern about this prompted Yunnan's military commander in 1821 to post notices "forbidding Han to recklessly kill non-Han."19 However, those Han labeled as hanjian in early-nineteenth-century Yunnan seem to have been, in the eyes of the state, something very different from those who betrayed the state by interacting with foreigners, or those who were bandits. Treason, in the Yunnan context, came to be interpreted not broadly as acts against people but more specifically as Han carrying out acts against the state. Intentions and the court's interpretations of those intentions came to be a significant factor in defining hanjianism. As became increasingly apparent in the first decades of the nineteenth century, hanjian were seen by the state to be those Han who acted in the interests of local non-Han and against the Qing. Significantly, there seems to have been no strong correlation between hanjianism and any specific ethnic group or region of Yunnan. In 1812, two Han, Kuang Lao and Kuang Hun, were labeled as hanjian, arrested by Qing troops in a Jingpo (yeyi) village in southwestern Yunnan, and accused of aiding the non-Han.20 In 1817, in a case that will be examined in more depth later, hanjian were linked to an uprising in southern Yunnan; they were accused of orchestrating the revolt by hoodwinking its Woni (Hani) leaders.21 In March 1821, Governor-General Qingbao blamed hanjian in northwestern Yunnan for provoking problems and asked that they be "tried and executed accordingly. "22 These cases suggest that behavior which led to someone being labeled a hanjian involved more than simply a Han flouting the Qing legal code in a predominantly non-Han area; more than that, it involved Han actively supporting non-Han Qing subjects in subversive behavior against state authority. Yet it is clear from the historical record that a correlation existed between 54 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE the increasing frequency of contact between non-Han and Han communities and the rise in hanjianism. These contacts provoked spirited reactions among those Chinese who were accustomed to the cultural and political mores of interior China, and they often led to misunderstandings, hostility, and violence. These outbreaks, however, rarely fell along strictly ethnic lines. There was considerable solidarity between Yunnan's diverse non-Han ethnic groups and long-time Han residents whose families had lived in Yunnan for many generations. These were the Han who, by allying themselves with the non-Han, were labeled as hanjian by the Qing government. Non-Han Uprisings and Resistance Between 1796 and 1856 there were at least seventy documented local disturbances involving non-Han and Hui peoples (see Map 4.1). Some of these lasted only one or two days, others well over a year. These clashes tended to occur between long-time residents and newcomers rather than between rival ethnic groups.23 Although some incidents involved Hui, it was only after 1839 that the violence became increasingly Han-instigated and specifically directed against the Hui. Sow-Theng Leong's illuminating study of the Hakka in southeastern China offers many parallels to the multiethnic tensions present in Yunnan. In particular, Leong highlights the issues that arose between "natives" and "newcomers." Perhaps some of the issues that triggered the violence in Yunnan had been present for a considerable time; that said, the changing circumstances caused by in-migration seem to have triggered many of the disruptions. The effects of this in-migration into Yunnan in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were very similar to those in other parts of China, where migration was becoming the "particular context in which ethnic consciousness and conflict emerged in terms of a contradiction between 'natives' and 'newcomers.""24 During the five years on either side of 1800, there were fourteen outbreaks of violence between Qing government forces and Yunnan's multiethnic population. A closer examination of these often overlooked events will bring into sharper relief the nature of these smaller-scale incidents and of Qing attempts to manage a rapidly changing demographic landscape. The non-Han incidents examined next will reveal not only the instability of Yunnan's border society during this period but also the strategies the state followed to address that instability-strategies that differed markedly from those employed later on by Qing officials when handling the Hui. The following three uprisings occurred within a span of two decades, between 1817 and 1833, in three distinct parts of Yunnan, and were led by people from three different ethnic groups: the Lin'an Uprising of 1817-18, Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence Tibet Lijiang Sichuan Zhaotong Dongchuan Tangdan M 
Dali Guizhou +Yaozhou 1845 Tengyue MEW 1848 + Midu 1847 Baoshan M 
W 
1848 Chuxiong Kunming Qujing Mengting+ M 
+Yunzhou 1846 M 
O 
1847 Bhamo N 
Burma 0 
200 Kilometers Lin'an +Talang 1850 Puer Z 
Vietnam 55 
Prefectural Capital Provincial Capital MAP 4.1. Mid-Nineteenth-Century Uprisings in Yunnan the Lisu Uprising of 1821, and the Dao Shengwu Tusi Affair of 1833. The pattern that emerges from these three insurrections does not reflect ethnic rivalries but rather the animosity felt by long-time multiethnic residents toward Han settlers who were moving into the province in large numbers. THE LIN'AN UPRISING OF 1817-1818 In the spring of 1817 a Woni chieftain named Gao Luoyi "attracted over 10,000 people to his cause and proclaimed himself Woni King while conferring titles on his supporters."25 At first the rebels contented themselves with raids on neighboring non-Han villages and native chieftains. Then, after several months of successful forays, they crossed the Yuan River and threatened the prefectural seat of Lin❜an. This uprising was similar to other Yunnan uprisings of the time in that its causes and events did not reflect ethnic polarization.26 In 1817, GovernorGeneral Bolin identified Gao Luoyi as a non-Han but also indicated that his followers and high-level supporters included many Han.27 The uprising is noteworthy because written accounts of it do not describe the events as mere banditry and looting of the sort so often mentioned in official reports of the time. From the outset, this uprising had a clear leader and sought to establish rebel authority over a large area. Bolin promptly ordered troops to the area and set about overwhelming Gao's forces through superior firepower and organization. Within several 56 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE months he had dispatched two generals with troops to Lin'an; there, they soon defeated the rebels and executed the principal leaders. The state here was employing a standard Qing tactic relying heavily on a rapid and substantial response to contain resistance early. Such an approach prevented small-scale violence from escalating and garnering widespread support. Bolin's efficient handling of the affair earned him the honorary title Junior Guardian of the Heir Apparent (taizi shaobao),28 But in this instance the Qing strategy was not entirely effective. A report written less than a year after Bolin's apparent triumph indicates that the local Yunnanese were still committed to a rebellion and that the rebel leadership had been inherited by Gao Luoyi's nephew, Gao Laowu. The official account of the nephew's subsequent actions reads remarkably like that of Gao Luoyi's revolt the previous year. Noteworthy are Bolin's indications that, far from diminishing, rebel support had actually increased in the intervening months: "The Woni from beyond the [Yuanjiang] river led by the nephew of Gao Luoyi, Gao Laowu, again rebelled, and Gao proclaimed himself king.... He also coerced and attracted even more people [than the previous year] and gave titles to his followers in resistance against the government. They plundered the region then crossed the river [into the jiangnei region] and threatened the prefectural capital, Lin'an."29 Such sustained resistance, which had been rare in Yunnan, leads one to ask: What motivated a second insurgency after the overwhelming defeat of the first one? It is directly relevant to the earlier discussion of hanjianism that Bolin at first blamed recent Han immigrants for inciting the rebellions, suggesting that "Han Chinese from Jiangxi, Hunan, and Guangdong were carrying out trade thus taking the profits away from locals and causing hardships. "30 These acts, he added, necessitated "that we more strictly combat the illegal entry of Han Chinese privately entering the border region. By rigorously governing such entry and punishing the illegal immigrants there will not be any further disturbances."31 Bolin then went on to indicate that hanjian were largely to blame for "teaching" Gao Luoyi how to rebel. The Han he was referring to here were apparently not recent immigrants; in fact they had lived in Yunnan for many generations and had adapted to non-Han ways. The governor-general's evaluation is striking at several levels. To begin with, the Han were playing two seemingly contradictory roles: as rebel advisors and as catalysts for Woni discontent. Implicit here is that although both groups were Han Chinese, those aiding and abetting the Woni were those who had lived in Yunnan for many years or whose families had immigrated generations earlier. Those who were sparking the unrest were new immigrants whose recent arrival in Yunnan had generated a variety of economic tensions. Bolin's denunciation of the Han for their complicity in the uprising re-Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 57 
veals the prevalent belief among Qing officials posted to Yunnan that the non-Han were passive groups who lacked the capacity to revolt against the state. Thus the state's responsibility was to protect the non-Han by fighting the predatory Han. In this way, provincial officials cast the Han as both the cause and the enablers of the disturbances. Bolin attempted to bolster this line of reasoning by suggesting the "non-Han were dim-witted [ yuchun]" and thus incapable of carrying out an insurgency without Han assistance.32 The non-Han were hardly as obtuse as Bolin portrays them; however, it is equally true that Han old-timers had a hand in the violence. It is likely that Yunnan's long-term Han residents had adopted the local non-Han orientation toward trade (illicit and otherwise) and had forged bonds with the non-Han against the government regulation of trade. This bond would have developed over many generations prior to the actual uprising. This suggests that the Lin'an Uprising was not a matter of non-Han fighting Han.33 Rather, it was a troubling sign that immigrant Han were playing an increasingly prominent role as instigators of violence. In a memorial dated February 16, 1819, Bolin offered a twelve-point strategy for addressing what he saw as the causes of the disturbances in Lin'an prefecture.34 This plan to eradicate undesirables focused on creating a modified mutual surveillance (baojia) system for tusi areas. In the standard baojia system, households were organized into decimal divisions; the purpose of these was to provide an added layer of security through mutual surveillance.35 Instead of the standard baojia system, Bolin envisioned one that would promote "interlinking responsibility between neighboring villages and hamlets-coupling together like a chain, to create stability."36 The registration system was largely a preventive measure. To supplement it, Bolin wanted to implement a proactive check on Han who had illegally entered the region and who were potential hanjian. To control these Han, he proposed a more stringent enforcement of the special pass system (yaopai). His rationale for this program is significant both for the activities he was ascribing to the hanjian and for how he was seeking to limit those activities. It is worth quoting in full: These measures are critical because the non-Han disturbances are always caused by Han traitors fleecing (panbo) [the non-Han] and always inserting themselves in the middle spreading rumors [bonong]. ... From this time forth Han are not allowed to privately enter non-Han areas for trade. Those traders [given official permission] should be given a special pass [ yaopai] and are required to return within a specified time. If they fail to return within the proscribed time, it will be considered a crime and punished.37 In other words, Bolin wanted to limit the time any Han could trade in a nonHan region and to dictate how many traders could pass into any non-Han 58 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE area. He specifically identified hanjian bandits as the targets for such a program, believing this policy would "soothe the non-Han groups. "38 This account of the Lin'an Uprising of 1817-18 points to two factors that were present in most disturbances of the early nineteenth century. First, the hostilities tended to break out between long-term Han residents and Han newcomers, and not as a result of ethnic conflict. Second, the provincial authorities perceived these uprisings as acts of political subversion fomented by hanjian and pursued military solutions. In particular, Qing officials viewed Han immigration and unscrupulous native officials as the main sources of the instability. But although Bolin's fifteen-year tenure as governorgeneral lent him considerable insight into the trouble caused by the massive influx of immigrants into peripheral areas, he disregarded the way in which Han immigration was altering forever the delicate balance between the indigenous peoples and their land.39 THE LISU UPRISING OF 1821 Bolin had concluded that the Lin'an hostilities were caused by unscrupulous Han as well as by Han immigration. In 1821, the year after he left the province, another outbreak of violence occurred between in-migrating Han and indigenous non-Han peoples. This time, however, the fighting was in northern Yunnan, due east of Lijiang along the border with Sichuan, and involved the Lisu community living there.40 This uprising began early in 1821 when several thousand Lisu, demanding the return of their land, looted and burned several Han villages and killed many Han living around Yongbei.41 From there the violence spread south to Dayao County, where Lahu and Yi joined the attack on several more Han settlements. According to government estimates more than eight thousand Lisu, Lahu, and Yi killed more than five hundred Han settlers.42 Investigations by the new governor-general, Qingbao, in the Yongbei and Dayao areas focused on the practice of dian, or conditional sales of land. As Huang has pointed out in his study of Qing legal practices, dian was neither an outright sale nor a rental; rather, it "was above all a conditional sale subject to redemption."43 Dian titles gave the holder the use of the land and even the right to "sub-dian" (zhuandian) the property (that is, for example, to pass the conditional ownership for a specified time to a third party). The use of dian in Yunnan came about largely because non-Han lands (under tusi jurisdiction) could not legally be sold outright to Han commoners. To circumvent the letter of the law, the tusi and Han settlers colluded by portraying such transactions as dian.44 The result, as Qingbao described it, was devastating: "Within the tusi administered non-Han lands there were those who had authorized dian transactions with the Han. From 1756 until the Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 59 
present, some have dian-ed seventy to eighty percent [of the non-Han lands] to Han [settlers] . . . the non-Han do not have enough land to cultivate and thus have a deep-seated hatred towards the Han."45 As a direct result of this practice, in 1821 "the indigenous people murdered many of the Han."46 The incident was exacerbated by the hesitation of the provincial military commander to dispatch soldiers to the area.47 The actual uprising lasted a relatively short time-only about four months from beginning to end. The Lisu Uprising of 1821 is exceptional in several ways. First, Chinese accounts of it are among the few that show an understanding of non-Han motives. Second, these government accounts indicate that there was not only tension between indigenous residents and newcomers but also anger over the environmental devastation that had been triggered by the flood of Han settlers. Third, the accounts call attention to an often overlooked dimension of the period: the complicity of the tusi and other native leaders in the Han settlers' actions. Christian Daniels and Takeuchi Fusaji, environmental historians, have argued separately that the loss of land in the lowlands was not the only cause of the uprising. Both contend that another cause was the massive destruction of the hill lands-destruction brought about by the intensive cultivation of mushrooms by Han settlers.48 This thesis is substantiated by the fact that the Lisu rarely lived on the valley floors, preferring to inhabit small settlements along the mountain ridges. The Han did not simply gather mushrooms from the wild; they cultivated them, and for that purpose denuded entire hillsides. Dayao xianzhi (1845) described the process this way: trees were cut down and "twenty to thirty holes [were filled with] fine ash and a small quantity of a powder of ground stipes of old mushrooms."49 After four to five years the mushrooms grew in profusion all over the downed trees. Unfortunately, "after ten years or so, the trees decayed and the mountains were left bare."50 Governor-General Qingbao acted on a rather different set of assumptions from those of Bolin, whose overriding concern had been to keep the nonHan and Han separate by raising barriers to interaction. Qingbao sought first of all to establish the foundations for peaceful coexistence between Han and non-Han. He did this by allocating funds to house rebuilding and to food allowances for lost crops, and also by investigating those Han who illegally dianed land.51 However, Qingbao was not immune from cultural stereotypes. He prefaced his action plan by contending that the underlying problem was that "the non-Han do not know how to make a living from hard work so have often sold or leased their land to Han."52 Qingbao's policy struck a careful balance between the unavoidable consequences of migration and the persistent need to maintain some separation 60 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE between the indigenous and Han populations. Like his predecessor, he believed the Han were provoking the non-Han insurrections by engaging in a variety of illicit and unscrupulous practices. Qing officials felt that the nonHan who actually carried out the attacks were not the main problem, and they sought to identify and address the root causes of the violence. 53 THE DAO SHENGWU TUSI AFFAIR OF 1833 In 1833, sixteen years after the Woni uprising, on Yunnan's southern border, a native chieftain of the Dai ethnic group, Dao Shengwu, organized a militia of several thousand men to carry out local raids. Dao was the tusi of Cheli and thus was the area's ranking Qing administrator. Official accounts state that the raids began after Dao fell in with rogues who persuaded him, unwisely, to attack his uncle, a native leader (tushe). After that attack was repulsed, he returned to his home district but continued to cause further disturbances. After several reversals, he established an army and offered military positions to those willing to join his band. With this large force, he enriched himself by robbing caravans that were transporting salt, cotton, and other goods. 54 Dispatches from local authorities reported that he had recruited hanjian, indigenous traitors (yijian), and non-Han outsiders (waiyi) as well. After refusing to surrender to a superior government force, he fled with the seals of his office. The government responded by revoking his status as tusi.55 Most likely, Dao was motivated by a desire to reestablish a local system of commercial and political autonomy, one that reflected southern Yunnan's powerful ties to the Southeast Asian highlands. Communications between Beijing and Yunnan provincial officials in the wake of this incident reveal that the central court very much intended to preserve the hereditary system of local Dai leadership. The state wanted to replace Dao rather than attempt to consolidate the area with the empire. This attitude reflected a mature understanding of local politics on the part of Ruan Yuan, the Yun-Gui governor-general, and the Manchu governor of Yunnan, Yilibu; between them, these two men had more than twenty-five years of service in Yunnan. Perhaps their administrative experience is what enabled them to balance the needs of the Qing state with those of Yunnan's non-Han society. Or perhaps this restraint on the part of the Qing simply reflected the provincial authorities' preoccupation at the time with the destruction caused by recent earthquakes, which had destroyed more than one-third of the province." 56 
Ruan Yuan stated that provincial officials, in selecting a new Cheli tusi, had sought a candidate who fell into the patriarchal hereditary line: The local heads of Cheli's thirteen indigenous districts [banmeng] have been ordered to deliberate and equitably select a replacement. Dao Taikang [Dao Shengwu's paHanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 61 
ternal uncle] has two sons. The public meeting discussed and selected Dao Taikang's elder son, Dao Zhengzong, who is old enough, to take over Dao Taihe's hereditary office. All were direct descendants of Dao Shiwan [Dao Shengwu's paternal grandfather]. The 'indigenous populace' all received this decision happily and enthusiastically. All agreed to submit to his authority.57 This conspicuous effort to involve the community in the selection process had a twofold purpose. The native chieftain's jurisdiction was only nominally under Qing control. By ensuring local support for the Qing government's candidate, the provincial officials were not only ending the discord manifested in the uprising but also establishing a basis for future cooperation with the local population. By having local headmen elect him, they were also legitimizing imperial authority in the region. Yilibu had ordered local troops to pursue Dao Shengwu. After Dao escaped "far across the border" and stopped disturbing the area, he called off the pursuit,58 although he ordered provincial officials to remain on the alert for him and posted a reward for his capture. Accounts strongly suggest that since Dao had been divested of his office, Yilibu and other officials no longer considered him a threat to the region's order. The nature of Dao's resistance merits comment. Most likely, he did not feel compelled to adopt a personal title, as Gao had done during the Woni incident, since he held seals of office and a high rank within the Qing power structure. His followers included Han, Dai, and a third indeterminate group referred to as "luo-yi." Official accounts suggest that Dao wanted to build a power base along the border, one that would be unfettered by but not necessarily independent of state control.59 In his study of the early modern state of Xishuangbanna Hsieh Shi-chung describes a pattern of resistance that Dao's activities seem to have paralleled. This pattern suited nineteenth-century Sipsongpanna, a region comprising many small kingdoms, allied villages, and local Dai tribes in various galactic orbits. "If an indigenous leader raised armies for purposes such as expanding territories, or avenging a blood feud," Hsieh contends, "he stood only about a fifty percent or smaller chance of causing China to send a punitive expedition."60 Moreover, because of the very real danger of malaria, Chinese troops rarely remained in tropical southern Yunnan for extended periods. This almost guaranteed that local rebel groups would not face outright extermination. Dao had first affected deference to the Chinese state and then pursued his own ends. Similar tactics that had been employed by local Dai leaders for centuries. Although Qing officials always suppressed outright sedition, in cases involving native chieftains along remote borders they were mindful of the buffer role that indigenous leaders might play. What the Qing could not accept was Dao's pursuit of power above and beyond what was ascribed 62 HANJIANISM, HAN NEWCOMERS, AND NON-HAN VIOLENCE to his office-in particular, his attempts to subvert Qing administrative and military authority. As in the Woni uprising in Lin'an, at least some Han Chinese joined Dao. Predictably, the accounts labeled these men hanjian. Not so predictable was the appearance in these same accounts of the term "indigenous traitors" (yijian). The implications of this term are far-reaching, and suggest that even in the not yet fully incorporated Yunnan borderlands a non-Han Dai could, in the eyes of the state, be a "traitor" to the empire (since it seems the imperial court would hardly express concern if a non-Han was acting against his own people). This term in this context implies that besides being marginalized as ignorant savages under the tutelage of local rulers, the Dai were being cast as Qing subjects who knowingly chose to oppose imperial rule. From this time on, all of the indigenous non-Han peoples were generally considered Qing subjects and, as such, bound to baojia regulations and taxation. Furthermore, state officials were delineating precisely the ethnic differences between Han traitors and non-Han traitors. This reminds us that ethnicity was not absent from their analyses of these situations; however, it was rarely the determining factor. The state was adhering to a policy in which ethnicity was not the main determinant of the actions taken; this typified not only the three uprisings discussed here but also the large majority of government responses to conflicts involving non-Han. A valid interpretation of the tempered response to Dao Shengwu's rebellion is that the Qing wanted to control indigenous peoples by maintaining order strategically, but not necessarily territorially. Shifting Concerns Throughout the first three decades of the nineteenth century, Qing officials consistently blamed non-Han violence on the Han. In 1822, Yin Peifen, an imperial censor and a native of Yunnan, filed a report on the general situation in the province: "In the areas along the border, Han are few and non-Han peoples are numerous and diverse. There are also many hanjian who come from central China and dupe the indigenous peoples, making it very easy for problems to arise."61 Four years later, in 1826, another censor listed hanjianism as one of the three main problems facing Qing governance in Yunnan.62 At the same time, officials fretted over the impact of the overwhelming numbers of migrant Han, many of whom had eluded registration in local baojia systems. In 1836 one local official noted that several prefectures in southeastern Yunnan each had more than twenty thousand unregistered immigrants; most of them were "cutting down the trees and burning the mountainsides [bare] ... generally in remote and secluded areas." Almost identical factors had led to the Lisu Uprising of 1822.63 Hanjianism, Han Newcomers, and Non-Han Violence 63 
It was quite common for Qing officials posted to Yunnan to perceive Han Chinese as both the cause of and the catalyst for the province's instability. From the uprisings described earlier, it is clear that the non-Han were a concern to the Qing authorities mainly because of the danger that they would fall prey to immigrant Han or come under the spell of devious hanjian. The flaw in this explanation was that it denied any agency to the non-Han and ignored the growing signs of multiethnic resistance to the project of reorienting Yunnan politically and culturally. All of this seems to suggest that Qing authorities were becoming concerned about Han contact with non-Han but not the non-Han themselves. The emphasis on hanjianism perhaps reflected these officials' profound anxieties over how the new Han residents would cope with Yunnan's alien environment-with its diseases, transnational commerce, and cultural differences. These anxieties were reflected in the way the central authorities focused on those Han Chinese who were seeking to defend traditional Yunnanese ways against the assimilationist projects promoted by the Qing court and commonly supported by the new Han immigrants. Tensions rose during the early decades of the nineteenth century. Logic would suggest that the cause was escalating hanjianism. Yet around this time, without explanation, reports of hanjian activity begin to disappear from official records, until by the late 1830s they have almost vanished. In their place one group stands out more and more as a focus of anxiety for both the state and the newly settled Han. That group is the Muslim Yunnanese. They are different enough from the Han to be identifiable; they are successful enough to be resented; and they tend as a group to support Yunnan's multiethnic and multiregional orientation. In the years to follow, the state's concern shifts from a category of people to a single ethnic group, and from proactive suppression to outright extermination. 

