+++
title = "05 Spiraling Violence: The Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities"

+++

CHAPTER 5 Spiraling Violence: The Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities The Xiyi Mine Incident of 1800 Early in the spring of 1800, at a small silver mine in Shunning County on the far western border of Yunnan, a quarrel broke out between a Han migrant from Hunan and a Muslim Yunnanese. The exact circumstances are unclear, but according to confessions in the official records, the argument between the two men-a Hui and a Han-quickly led to a street brawl during which Hui damaged several Hunanese shops.1 In retaliation, more than 180 Hunanese Han formed a band and over the next several days carried out extended attacks on the Hui community, killing a Hui team boss and at least eighteen other Hui. Several Hunanese were wounded in the fighting, but none were killed.2 Remarkably, the Han from other provinces never joined the fray; they stayed on the sidelines in groups based on their native provinces (Jiangxi and so on).3 At the time the clash occurred, the Xiyi mine had been open "officially" for less than two decades (it had been operating outside Qing oversight since at least the early eighteenth century). In 1800, several thousand miners, workers, and merchants were working in or near the mine and living close by. Because of its remote location near upland Southeast Asia, the local population included Yi, Han, and Hui.6 From the perspective of Qing officials, mining populations were innately unstable and those on the empire's periphery especially so. One official in Yunnan bemoaned that the Yunnan mines were difficult to control: "Everywhere there are covert bandits and hanjian establishing gangs and miners predisposed to fight and rob.... What is the method to repress and govern [such behavior]? How can that be easily changed when the majority of the gold, silver, and iron mines are all like this?"7 The Xiyi mine was distant from Yunnan's administrative center, yet it had experienced the full impact of Han in-migration. The result was an unstable mixture of lawlessness, ethnic tension, and greed. The incident was [[65]] similar to many other ethnic flare-ups in Yunnan during this period, and thus seemed like nothing out of the ordinary, so officials were little concerned and took no action.

BAIYANG MINE INCIDENT OF 1821 Twenty years passed before the next recorded outbreak of violence between Han and Hui in Yunnan. In May 1821 at the Baiyang mine, several days' travel northwest of Dali, a conflict erupted between the Han and Hui miners. The mine population included many Han from outside Yunnan as well as both Han and Hui from within the province. In the communities around the mine the various groups had established Buddhist temples, native place societies (huiguan), and mosques. These buildings were central meeting places for their respective groups. Like the hostilities at Xiyi, the Baiyang incident began as a dispute between several Han and Hui miners and quickly degenerated into a series of running street battles between roving bands of more than two hundred Han and Hui. After more than a week of fighting, nearly one hundred people lay dead. Almost 90 percent of them were Muslim Yunnanese." It is significant that in their later descriptions of the event, both the Han and the Hui repeatedly alluded to the Xiyi incident as a factor in the bloodshed. Put simply, Baiyang was partly about payback. One Han from southern Yunnan recounted that the team boss, "playing on lingering memories of the Xiyi Incident ... sought to use this animosity to enlist the support of the Hunanese Han by fabricating the rumor that the Hui [strategy] was to first kill those Han from Lin'an and then those [Han] from Hunan and Guangdong to revenge the Xiyi Incident."10 These comments tell us two important things. First, even as the violence at Xiyi receded from view in the reports filed by the steady stream of officials posted there, it lingered in the memory of the Han and Hui communities. Second, the Han miner's comment, noted above, indicates an unambiguous attempt to forge a new transprovincial identity vis-à-vis the Hui. This was an ominous turn from the earlier tactics of Xiyi.

The Qing authorities responded very differently to the Baiyang incident. At Xiyi, a local magistrate had captured and tried two Han Chinese for their part in the killings. He had sentenced one to death by slicing and beheading (lingchi) and the other to one hundred strokes.11 The resolution of the Baiyang case was not so straightforward. Zhang Zhixue, the magistrate for Dali district, was ordered by the governor-general to investigate the case. Zhang, aged and ill, delegated the task to the prefectural magistrate, Lei Wenmei. Lei traveled to the mine, where he carried out a purely perfunctory investigation. He would base his account solely on what the local Han Chi66 THE RISE OF ANTI-HUI HOSTILITIES nese told him. His report, which was filed quickly, concluded that "in the Han-Hui conflict, after my investigation only 5 Han and 23 Hui died."12 Had the Baiyang investigation ended there, the meager documentation would have suggested that it, like Xiyi, was a minor affair. However, one of the Hui mine owners, Ma Xingyun, distressed by the death of his relatives, the damage to his mine, and the lack of a serious investigation, traveled to Beijing to present his case before the Qing court. This, even though he had been away in Dali during the violence. As a result of his efforts, the original investigators were demoted one grade and the provincial officials were compelled by imperial edict to reopen the investigation, interview scores of eyewitnesses, and attempt to mediate any remaining disputes.13 Surprisingly, Baiyang's Hui did not universally approve of Ma Xingyun's actions. Apparently Ma, in his appeal to the throne, exaggerated both the number of deaths and the amount of property damage. In his statement to the new team of investigators, the mine's Muslim Yunnanese team boss, Zhang Zihong, actually tried to mitigate the acts of the Han: "After the altercation between the Han and the Hui, I carefully investigated [the accusations] and found there were no incidents of looting silver or [mining] materials.... If there had actually been incidents of looting by Qin Xianzhong and his group, why would the Hui team boss aid them to conceal it?"14 If we are to believe Zhang Zihong, despite the lopsided number of deaths and the apparently biased official investigation, the Hui involved in the violence at Baiyang were not intent on bringing down retribution on their fellow Han miners, even though they now had the opportunity. Some Hui even tried to follow official avenues of resolution and willingly testified on the Han miners' behalf to prevent them from being punished.

Ma Xingyun's petition and the government's timely and evenhanded response suggest that at the provincial and court levels, anti-Hui violence was treated in much the same way as violence against other non-Han people (and, for that matter, Han-versus-Han violence). Thus the Baiyang incident is not especially conspicuous amidst a host of other hostilities recorded in correspondence with the court-although the imperial court's attentiveness to redressing bureaucratic malfeasance is noteworthy. Nowhere are there any indications that Qing officials at any level considered the Muslim Yunnanese any more or less violent than any other group in Yunnan.

This last point is significant. Late nineteenth and early twentieth century analyses of the Han-Hui violence prior to the Panthay Rebellion inevitably point to the Xiyi and Baiyang incidents as irrefutable proof that as far back as 1800, the Muslim Yunnanese had a predilection for committing violence against the Han.15 A Dali County gazetteer from early in the twentieth century, under the section "The Causes for Hui Provocation of the Rebellion," explicitly linked the 1800 and 1821 incidents with ethnic strife in theThe Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities 67 1850s.16 Because these incidents have been misrepresented as the origins of some unstoppable Muslim juggernaut increasingly intent on rebellion, other factors such as the changing stance of local Qing officials, the growing influence of Han brotherhoods, and repeated efforts by the Hui to cooperate with the Qing state have been either ignored or dismissed entirely.

In light of the many non-Han outbreaks of violence examined in the previous chapter, it is highly significant that the Xiyi and Baiyang incidents, although noteworthy for the role the Hui played in them, were hardly different from numerous other uprisings that were occurring throughout the province in the first decades of the nineteenth century. The two incidents were radically different in tenor and scope, however, from those involving Hui which followed.

THE MIANNING MASSACRE OF 1839 The small walled town of Mianning lies 130 miles south of Shunning, the prefectural capital. Shunning and its surrounding region had come under direct Chinese administration only in 1746; until then it had been ruled indirectly through a local tusi.17 Hui and a variety of ethnic groups lived in the area. However, in the early decades of the nineteenth century, more and more Han Chinese were settling there, mainly in the town and the surrounding fertile valley.

In December 1838 a dispute arose between several members of the Muslim Yunnanese and Han communities. It began when a local Hui, Ma Wanju, sought repayment of a debt of a few taels of silver from Zhang Xunzheng, the subprefectural magistrate.18 Zhang felt insulted by the request and demanded a vacant plot of land opposite a mosque, ostensibly to erect a pavilion commemorating an imperial edict (shengyu ting).19 The Muslim community maintained that there were many other tracts of land within the city walls that were larger and more appropriate, since the mosque would dwarf even the largest shengyu ting.20 Believing that official channels for resolving this dispute were being obstructed, they tried to block Zhang's project by building a decorative wall (zhaobi) on the land in question.21 Incensed, local officials allied with Zhang ordered construction of the wall halted immediately.

Shortly after this, two local gentry, Yang Yaodou and Zhao Shizhi, solicited the Muslim community for a donation of forty taels toward a ceremonial umbrella to honor the assistant regional commander, Rui Lin.22 The Muslim Yunnanese balked at such an expensive show of support for an official they scorned. In retaliation for this refusal, local officials alleged that the mosque encroached on the public road and brought the case before the magistrate.

68 THE RISE OF ANTI-HUI HOSTILITIES The Muslim Yunnanese showed the magistrate municipal records proving that the ground in question was in fact waqf23 land (property held communally by the mosque) and that they held basic land-owning rights to it. The Hui were exonerated, and Yang and Zhao were publicly humiliated. The latter responded by fomenting anti-Hui sentiment in Mianning. On July 5, 1839, they secretly organized a meeting with the leaders of recent Han immigrants from Sichuan, Hunan, and other Chinese provinces. All who attended "agreed to join forces to destroy the Muslim Yunnanese."24 The Hui heard about this and approached Rui Lin to try to diffuse the situation. Rui Lin acknowledged that such a plot existed and suggested they "go and collect two thousand strings of cash to be forfeited to Yang Yaodou and the others who will use it to disperse the people."25 However, when they returned with the cash, Rui Lin told them that forces were already gathering against them and that he could do nothing to prevent it. Terrified, the Muslim Yunnanese sent local Hui to the prefect in Shunning for assistance. Those who remained fled into hiding with their families.26 On July 17, the local magistrate, professing concern for their safety, ordered the Muslim families living outside the city wall into the town. The next day at dawn the company commander, Zhu Zhanchun, silently led the Han militia into the city, where they waited for Rui Lin to give the predetermined signal-the firing of two cannons and the blowing of conch shells from the city walls. On hearing the signal the local militia struck from all sides, massacring more than seven hundred Hui. Later that same day other Han bands moved beyond the city into nearby Hui villages, where the slaughter continued.27 In the two weeks that followed more than 1,700 Muslim Yunnanese in and around Mianning were murdered. Their houses and mosques were razed.28 Almost immediately, Ma Wenzhao, a prominent local Hui, set off for Beijing to petition for an investigation. By the time he reached Beijing several months later, Governor-General Yilibu-the same Manchu official who had been involved in the Dao Shengwu incident described in chapter 4-had heard about the attack. Yilibu recommended that Zhang Jingyi and Rui Lin be dismissed from their posts for their "failure to use soldiers to disperse the disturbances [against the Hui]."29 The Daoguang emperor immediately took Yilibu's advice and dismissed both. Ma Wenzhao's additional accusation that officials were shielding ringleaders of the massacre prompted the emperor to order Yilibu's successor, Gui Liang, to investigate further. In this way, local officials were brought under intense scrutiny.30 The complicity of the local officials with the Han Chinese residents in the Mianning Massacre marked a sea change in the nature of hostilities between ethnic groups. Before Mianning, officials had never sided so openly or actively with one group against another. Moreover, when indigenous peoples [[69]] had rebelled in the past (see chapter 4), many local Han had sided with the insurgents. The Mianning Massacre was a new development in two critical ways. First, it signaled a shift in the violence from isolated, rural, and often predominantly non-Han areas to urban centers dominated by immigrant Han. Second, local officials were siding with the perpetrators of the violence. In the earlier incidents, these officials had sometimes been inefficient, corrupt, and even prejudiced against the non-Han, but they had never promoted or joined in the violence against either Hui or non-Han. Third, Mianning was the first instance of patently premeditated violence against a single group, the Muslim Yunnanese.

Things Happen: Notions of Communal Violence At first glance, the massacre at Mianning might seem the end result of a community feud (xiedou). In the nineteenth century such feuds were most common in the southeastern provinces of Guangdong and Fujian, where competition for land was intense and lineage rivalry was commonplace.31 However, there is little evidence that the violence in Mianning was of the same variety.

Was xiedou at the root of the violence in Mianning? The question is far from academic. In trying to close the case, the Mianning officials-the very ones who had launched the attack-claimed that it had been a case of xiedou violence. These efforts by officials to conceal their own participation in the massacre by calling it xiedou are what drove Ma Wenzhao to travel to Beijing. In his multipage description of the acts committed by Rui Lin and other officials, Ma refuted point by point their untenable claims. In his petition he stated adamantly that he was not arguing that Hui were "incapable of burning and looting"; he was, however, saying that the nature of the violence in Mianning was quite different from xiedou: But if it were xiedou, why was it that young boys and pregnant women were killed.... Why did the Hui ask repeatedly for assistance from the government officials?... Why was it that only the Hui homes and villages were demolished while the Han houses and temples of east Mianning escaped any damage?... Why did the Western Intendant give relief assistance only to the Muslim Yunnanese? . . . Why was it that Hui men and women, young and old were wounded and killed in the fighting, but not a single Han? Judging from this evidence, it could not have been xiedou.3 32 As Ma was pointing out, the Mianning Massacre was singular because there was no evidence that any Han were killed and no evidence that any Han property had been damaged or destroyed. Just as significant is that the local officials were claiming that the massacre was the result of a feud, yet nowhere in their accounts did they suggest that there had been long-term [[70]]  feuding or even that either side was trying to link the Mianning Massacre with earlier hostilities at the mines.

The central court made immediate inquiries into the massacre but forgot about it soon afterwards; the Opium War and events in other parts of the empire had captured its attention. In hindsight, the Mianning bloodshed marked a profound change in the nature of hostilities in Yunnan and in the state's responses to them. State records indicate that fewer and fewer incidents of indigenous resistance were reported after this time. In fact, only a handful of revolts were noted after 1839, and most of these involved only Muslim Yunnanese and Han Chinese. More and more often, local and provincial reports were casting the Muslim Yunnanese not as victims but as a group predisposed to seditious acts.

The coordinated attempt by the Mianning Han in 1839 to eradicate the local Hui was the first sign that Yunnan's growing Han population was becoming intolerant of the Muslim Yunnanese. It has long been thought that Han-Hui violence grew out of a long history of friction; in fact, the historical record offers little evidence for such a conclusion. Instead, the records indicate a surging intolerance and resentment of the Hui among the Han— an intolerance increasingly encouraged by local Qing officials.

THE BAOSHAN MASSACRE OF 1845 The Baoshan Massacre arose out of a complex web of Han-Hui animosities and mutual resentments. This mutual ill feeling led to specific incidents that sparked the massacre in the spring of 1845.

The first incident was rather minor, and took place near the village of Banqiao, in the broad valley that surrounded the prefectural capital of Baoshan. Specifically, it took place in a rice paddy during the labor-intensive planting season.33 It was common while planting for workers to sing impromptu rhyming couplets (duichang); one person would sing a line and the other would respond, back and forth, each trying to outdo the other in cleverness. On this occasion, a Muslim Yunnanese sang: "Rice straw binds the seedlings, young next to old." To this a Han responded: "The Hui leads his pig, an old man guiding his grandson."34 This was a highly public insult against the Hui community and a calculated affront to the Muslim Yunnanese, whose religion forbade the eating of pork. Another verse, also said to have been given in response, was just as incendiary: "Pork being sold in front of the mosque/ Seeing it, the Hui buys half a pound."35 Imperial records indicate than Han and Hui exchanged taunts in public on a daily basis.36 Ditties, jokes, and off-color comments aimed at other ethnic groups were hardly new to the multiethnic society of Yunnan; such teasing often served to release tensions before they could brew into large-scale [[71]] violence. However, official records indicate that from April 1845 onwards, "songs, other trivial jests, and teasing" were becoming increasingly commonplace.37 In the spring of 1845 such exchanges between Han and Hui in the Baoshan valley began to take on a far more menacing tone.38 Early every spring, a local festival celebrating the birthdays of the Five Sacred Mountain Temple gods was held. This festival began at the Wanshou Temple and culminated two days later at the Temple of the East Mountain God outside the city's southern gate.39 A local Baoshan Han described how this annual event heightened tensions between the Han and Hui communities: Every year on the 29th day of the third lunar month, there is a festival celebrating the meeting of the Five Great Mountain Gods. [On the 27th] two days prior to the festival eight people would bring a sedan chair to welcome the statues of the Five Gods. They then would carry the five gods to Wanshou Temple. Many [Buddhist] monks and Daoists collect alms, chant and prostrate themselves for two days. 

On the third day (the 29th), they carry the statues to East Mountain Temple, south of the town, to celebrate. The procession has to traverse the town via Tongfeng Street which passes in front of the mosque gate. . . . +++(5)+++   
Every time this occurs, there are often several dozen [Hui] students who come out and watch-not paying respect to the Han religion [hanjiao]. The rowdy ones laugh and taunt the procession, taking whatever they are chewing (orange peel, sugar cane) and throwing it at the people in front of the sedan and jeering.  
[This behavior] angers both the Han participants and bystanders who often start quarreling and fighting.[^40] Such heated exchanges and brawls had been a fact of life in Baoshan for many years. 

In the summer of 1845, however, the minor outbreaks began to escalate into armed confrontations involving one thousand or more participants.[^41] A major contributing factor to this rise in violence, and its tendency to spill out onto the streets of Baoshan, was the increasingly dominant role played by local Han brotherhoods in the Baoshan area. These brotherhoods appeared under a variety of guises ranging from "cattle protection associations" (niucong)[^42] to "Incense Brotherhoods" (xiangba hui).[^43] The origins of these brotherhoods in Baoshan are obscure, although they appear in reports of local officials as far back as 1808.[^44] The societies were officially scorned; imperial sources described their members as primarily "young brawlers, local bullies, and low grade scholars."[^45] Other accounts suggest that their members were Han newcomers who were either farmers or smalltime merchants. Like many throughout the empire at this time, these newcomers were seeking ways to survive in a world grown complicated because of bureaucratic inefficiencies, population pressure on limited resources, and ethnic rivalries.[^46] The term Incense Brotherhood, uncommon in other parts of Yunnan, re72 THE RISE OF ANTI-HUI HOSTILITIES ferred to the burning of incense prior to the oath-taking ritual during the initiation rite. The following description survives of this particular brotherhood's initiation rites, which were likely similar to those of other societies around Baoshan: In March of this year, Wan Lingui [the Banqiao head] conspired to draw up an agreement with his Incense brothers to unite in order to control the [Banqiao] village. ... On April 8 they gathered twenty-nine of their brothers in Zunguang Temple and burned incense before the gods, swearing a pledge of mutual support.47 Because Wan Lingui was young and strong, they selected him as the head and swore their allegiance to him.... At the temple they set up instruments of punishment and vowed that all affairs of Banqiao must be decided and arbitrated by them. They then drank wine and dispersed.48 The Incense Brotherhoods had branches in each of Baoshan County's townships (xiang). Each "branch" was referred to as one stick of incense (ba). Since each of the eight townships had a local branch, they were collectively referred to as the Eight-Incense (baba) Brotherhood.49 The local branches of the Incense Brotherhoods resembled brotherhoods common elsewhere in China, such as the Tiandihui and Gelao Hui; however, there is no indication they had direct ties outside of the Baoshan Valley,[^50] According to official investigations, the incense societies first appeared as cattle protection societies in small communities; they guarded against rustlers. In the 1830s, however, they began to evolve into more powerful organizations that often, instead of killing in defense, "killed out of revenge" or murdered those who opposed their leadership.51 The brotherhoods do not seem to have been exclusively anti-Hui; that said, the Hui had clearly become the principal target of their activities by the 1840s. They also assaulted Han who failed to follow their lead.52 By the mid-1840s, the power, status, and wealth of these societies had grown dramatically throughout the Baoshan Valley. In each village an elder (daye) was appointed. 53 The largest of the branches of the brotherhood was in Banqiao village. It was said that when the head of the brotherhood went out, he was carried in a sedan chair by eight men and escorted by an armed guard. In scale and style, these processions surpassed those of any local official and were said to rival even those of the governor-general. The daye were so powerful that local officials avoided contact with them for fear of creating an incident.54 Besides being more powerful, the brotherhoods were often more ambitious than the local authorities.

In the early 1840s, an acting district magistrate noted that the Incense Brotherhood's leaders were perceived as more effective than local officials at settling disputes.55 A formal investigation conducted later on would have this to say about the organization: "Western Yunnan has the evil practice of [[73]] forming Incense Brotherhoods that frequently use their sheer numbers to tyrannize the region. Not only do they oppress the common people, committing robbery and murder, but they defy arrest and assault officials, making the people become daily more angry and disdainful of government officials."56 Hui were not the only victims of the Incense Societies. Many Han also feared them. The authority these brotherhoods wielded was increasingly pervasive. One Han was hounded by them for failing to pay a fine and committed suicide in order to avoid appearing before an Incense Brotherhood tribunal.57 Many local officials acknowledged the rising power of the brotherhoods. It is far from clear, though, just how much they bowed to their power or even facilitated their rise.58 Many officials lacked sufficient resources to counter the brotherhoods, and those seeking promotion were easily coerced by the brotherhoods into delaying investigations and overlooking illicit activities. Only when it was absolutely unavoidable did these officials arrest brotherhood members. 59 Even less clear is the degree to which officials came to agree with the brotherhoods' aims and support their means.60 Evidence from the early 1840s suggests that the local bureaucracy was at best ambivalent about the Incense Brotherhoods. Later investigations noted that through displays of force, these groups were able to enforce their will on villagers and officials alike: "For more than ten years [they] have intimidated their rivals and murdered the people-with none of it reported. If an official comes to investigate, there will immediately be a signal given for a crowd to gather, which will then surround and abuse him."61 By early 1845 the Han brotherhoods had succeeded in intimidating the local authorities, who depended more and more on them to maintain the peace. The brotherhoods could just as easily choose to destabilize the area, in which case the officials might well be dismissed from office.

The Hui were clearly not part of these secret societies and felt the full brunt of this new power structure. At the same time, they were not entirely blameless in the spiraling violence. In the mid-1840s large numbers of Hui from northwestern China were immigrating to the Baoshan region, albeit never on the same scale as the Han. Tensions grew between the Han and the Hui; the violence that followed was largely between Han newcomers and Hui newcomers.

If an incident from May 1845 is any indication, these two groups of recent immigrants hated each other. In the spring of that year four Hui immigrants arrived in Banqiao village from Shaanxi Hui. The four men, "Ma Da, Ma Laoshaan, Hai Laosha'an, and Qin Erlaosha'an entered the village singing songs and then laughed at a group of Han. Enraged, the Han told the Hui they were going to drive them out of town."62 Ma Da angrily [[74]]  replied: "Having only just arrived and we are already insulted by Han, it will be difficult in the future to live here."63 It is unclear whether a scuffle ensued or whether the two groups went their separate ways, although certainly neither side was willing to let the matter end there.64 Ma Da and several other Hui began teaching martial arts at a local mosque in a neighboring Hui village. The county magistrate, Li Zhengrong, ostensibly enforcing the law forbidding illicit teachings, ordered their arrest, but all escaped except one.65 Wan Lingui, head of the Banqiao brotherhood, was angry at the state's "incompetence" and decided to take matters into his own hands. The following day, at the head of a band of compatriots, he vandalized the mosque. When the magistrate failed to arrest the Han for the resulting damage, the Hui concluded that the government was applying a double standard in dealing with Han and Hui and began forming their own self-defense corps.66 What happened next is difficult to piece together. It seems that the local Hui solicited help from other Hui communities in Mianning, Yunzhou, and Shunning to seek revenge for the Han's actions. They had concluded that the government was powerless to act, or perhaps they were seeking ways to protect themselves against the powerful local societies.67 In response to their appeal, a band of largely Hui criminal elements from the northwest established a camp in Banqiao village close to Baoshan and began making forays against nearby Han villages.68 Throughout the month of May, rumors raced through each community about atrocities being committed by the other. One rumor had it that the Hui had captured, killed, skinned, roasted, and eaten the heart of a Han who had warned a village of an impending attack.69 The outsider Hui continued to stir up dissent, yet the local Hui's initial concerns seem to have disappeared in the face of escalating tensions. Hui leaders in the area began cooperating with the local officials, who were trying to eradicate the outsider Hui and bring an end to the violence. In their reports to their provincial superiors, these local officials consistently differentiated between the local and northwestern Hui communities, referring to the latter as "wai-Hui"--that is, Hui from outside the province. They also praised the local Hui for their efforts to encourage the outsider Hui to return to their homes in the northwest.70 The joint efforts of the local officials and Baoshan Hui compelled the northwestern Yunnan Hui-now identified by their leader, Ma Da-to retreat to Mengting, a small village three days from Baoshan. There, they attempted to regroup.71 On September 30, after a period of calm, Ma Da's band, in a bold and unexpected strike, marched on Bingma, an isolated government outpost thirty miles from Baoshan. Only one Qing officer was killed in that raid; the Qing soldiers inflicted considerable damage in return, "wounding or killing [[75]] two hundred and seventy of his [Ma Da's] bandits."72 Instead of falling back to Mengting, Ma Da's band mounted a surprise attack on a small military encampment at Yangyi. There they overwhelmed the Qing troops left to defend the isolated outpost.

The northwestern Hui never exceeded several hundred men whereas the Qing forces numbered more than one thousand.74 After they put down the Linʼan Uprising in 1818, Qing fortunes changed dramatically; indicative of this is that in 1845 Yunnan officials hesitated to send an overwhelming military force to pursue and crush Ma Da; that, or they were no longer able to do so. Instead, local officials adopted an alternative strategy: they turned to the leaders of the local societies.

Apprehension (whether real or contrived-it is difficult to tell) over Ma Da's attacks quickly coalesced around fears of a "fifth column" of Ma Da supporters among Hui residents of Baoshan. Rumors began to swirl that several Hui from Ma Da's band had made their way into the city undetected and were collaborating with Mu Ruhe, the abong (iman, or head religious leader) of the main mosque, to set a time and date for a joint attack against the Han from both inside and outside the city. On the agreed-upon date, once all was prepared, Mu Ruhe was to fire a shot from the top of the mosque as a signal for Ma Da to attack from outside the city wall.75 In a series of hasty gatherings, local civil and military officials met with the local brotherhoods to devise a plan to exterminate the city's Hui populace.76 No formal authorization for this from either the governor or the governorgeneral was ever requested (or at least recorded).

In the early hours of October 2, 1845, the local brotherhoods of the surrounding villages organized themselves into militias and marched into Baoshan under the pretext of protecting the city. There, over the next seventytwo hours, they meticulously carried out a massacre of the city's Hui population-men and women, young and old."7 Local witnesses estimated that by the time the killing ended upwards of eight thousand Hui lay dead.78 The first memorial to the court from the newly appointed governorgeneral, He Changling, sent more than seven weeks after the massacre, was a version of events provided to him by local officials.79 In it, these officials justified their actions as a response to rumors of a coming attack; they claimed they were simply taking precautions by allowing militia into the city and that when the Hui sounded their signal, they quickly subdued the revolt. They provided a vague account of the carnage, suggesting only that a few "people were killed, burned, or crushed."80 He Changling summarized the events for the emperor and recommended that for their prescient and preemptive action, the local officials be considered for an imperial commendation.81 [[76]]  Then in December 1845, He sent another memorial, one that offered a dramatically different version of events. In this one he rebuked Western Intendant Luo for failing to verify the rumors of a Hui conspiracy before launching an attack on the city. Yet the governor-general continued to maintain that the attack had been justified; his contention was that Luo and the others had failed to distinguish between good and bad Hui.82 In light of all this, he asked the court to rescind the commendations for Luo and the rest. Adhering to the administrative code, he then requested that he himself be punished as well for his errors in the matter.83 He granted that the incident had been mishandled but never admitted that a massacre had been carried out. The closest he came to this was when he stated that "last year Baoshan Han and Hui fought against each other [budou]."84 The court never thoroughly investigated official collusion in the massacre but did censure the governor-general for his lack of oversight and quickly transferred him to a lesser post.85 He's most glaring error in his handling of the massacre was to maintain the dogged belief that a Hui conspiracy existed. This, even though no evidence was ever produced to substantiate that Hui within the city had carried out violent acts or that Hui living in Baoshan had been in contact with those in surrounding areas. Nor does the historical record offer any information on the alleged key Hui conspirator, Mu Ruhe. Official reports never mention his name again, let alone whether he was dead, alive, or missing. Most critically, the rationale for allowing Han militias into the city rested entirely on the alleged threat that local Hui and the non-Yunnan Hui led by Ma Da were planning a synchronized attack on Baoshan. In later accounts there was no mention of any Hui attack on Baoshan by Ma Da; not only that, but the only concentration of Hui bandits was nearly thirty miles from Baoshan, and at the time these were being pursued by Qing troops and militia.86 CREATING A "PLACE FREE FROM SORROW": EFFORTS TO RESTORE PEACE Soon after the massacre, Hui proclamations appeared that offered a clearer version of the events. These openly accused local officials of collusion and called for revenge: In the city there were more than eight thousand peaceful Hui residents-functionaries, soldiers, scholars, merchants-all peacefully fulfilling their role in society. . . . Local officials indulged in beautiful women, and coveted expensive items. Initially, they deceived us with posted declarations which read: If one Hui is killed, three [Han] will pay with their own lives. That was until early on the morning of October 2, when militia were loosed upon the city to commit wholesale slaughter. . . . If we Hui do not revenge the violence it will everywhere be repeated until every lastThe Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities 77 Hui is killed. . . . The fact that officials and soldiers aided the Han to exterminate the Hui, with dead piled as high as the mountain and blood as deep as the sea the suffering cannot have been in vain.87 Almost immediately on his arrival in 1846, the newly appointed governorgeneral, Li Xingyuan, expressed concern that the massacre and lack of any official investigation would "strike a chill into the hearts of the [average] Hui, while furnishing the pretext for wicked Hui to create disturbances."88 Precisely as he feared, Hui reaction throughout western Yunnan was swift.89 In 1846 a Hui from northern Shaanxi Province, Huang Baba, led an abortive uprising in Mengting south of Baoshan.90 A charismatic ahong who was "extremely well-versed in the Islamic scriptures, Huang attracted followers by promising to regain their Baoshan lands."91 Later that same year in Yunzhou, Ma Guoxiang and another group of Hui carried out a series of raids against adjacent Han villages."2 Official reports submitted to the emperor described these raids, accurately or not, as small and disorganized and as gaining little support from local Hui.93 Prior to his departure, He Changling noted that local Hui in many areas of western Yunnan welcomed his efforts to block the influx of Shaanxi and Sichuan Hui into the region.94 According to another account, a wandering Sichuan Hui who tried to incite fellow Hui to attack a nearby Han village was reported to local officials by the mosque ahongs.95 Yet very often, cooperative acts such as these did little to garner aid from Qing officials.

95 All of the violent acts by Hui after the Baoshan Massacre were instigated by Hui from outside Yunnan. Meanwhile, the Muslim Yunnanese continued to rely on the Qing system to rectify the misconduct and barbarity of its own officials. In early 1846, four Hui traversed nearly the entire breadth of the empire at their own expense to file a grievance petition. This petition asked for an investigation of the Baoshan massacre as well as proper compensation for its victims.96 As a direct result of this, the Daoguang emperor appointed a famous veteran of the Opium War, Lin Zexu, as the new governorgeneral. Lin was told to investigate the situation; the emperor warned him sternly that "it would not be enough to simply report that the case has already been dealt with, or dawdle and simply try to avoid responsibility." Lin had been handed the unenviable task of investigating the massacre even while restoring calm to western Yunnan.97 The new governor-general quickly began piecing together the sequence of events of the massacre. Just a preliminary investigation made it clear to him that He Changling had made drastic errors in his account. Lin offered the court a revised account of the massacre that placed the blame squarely on the Han brotherhoods and that revealed the calculating nature of the entire affair: [[78]]  Han Chinese spread rumors that Hui rebels were scheming to enter Baoshan and kill all the Han, and that the rebels had secretly conspired with Hui inside the city to rise up simultaneously thereby delivering the city to the Hui. . . . As a result, on the second day of the ninth lunar month [October 2, 1845] the militia heads of Jinji, Banqiao and each village [shao] under the pretext of protecting themselves from the rebels, marched in a disorderly manner into the city, proclaimed they were there to save the city, and proceeded to slaughter all of the Hui within the city-regardless of age or sex. The [Baoshan] massacre resulted in the death of more than 4,000 Hui. The events all happened so quickly the military and civil officials in the city were unable to prevent them.98 Lin was the first to call the incident a massacre; that said, his version of events was imperfect at best.

Lin's account is suspect at several levels. His estimate of Hui killed understates that of most other accounts by nearly half. Local witnesses contended that well over four thousand Hui were slain; others suggested it was double that.99 But Lin's biggest lapse was that he failed to mention the participation of local officials in the massacre. He even contended that the officials could not have prevented it. He probably knew this was far from true: the petition-supported by local rumors-had hinted that there had been official malfeasance. One member of the Han gentry stated that "Shen Jucheng [a prominent Incense Brotherhood leader] and the other [organizers] of the massacre originally believed that because [the massacre] was agreed upon by the officials within Baoshan, and certified by documents with the seals of the civil and military officials, as well as by a letter from all of the gentry in the county expressing the general support [of the plan], they were shielded from blame."100 Indeed, Lin had captured Shen and was holding him for his role in the bloodshed. When it became apparent to Shen and the other members of the Incense Brotherhoods who had been arrested that their former allies among the local officials were neither coming to their aid nor being arrested themselves, they committed suicide rather than face trial. Perhaps Lin was hesitating to investigate Qing officials because he believed that doing so would serve little purpose and would only further undermine the state's position. At the time, Lin was having to employ every available resource simply to wrest control of the Baoshan area from the Han brotherhoods.

The reassertion of state authority in the area after the Baoshan Massacre, unlike interventions by the government earlier in the century, was not welcomed by the local Han community. The power of the informal Han organizations over the area continued unchecked after the massacre of 1845. In the autumn of 1847, Lin ordered the arrest of nine prominent members of the Incense Brotherhood who were suspected of organizing the massacre. On January 5, 1848, under armed escort, these prisoners left Baoshan for [[79]] the provincial capital, where they would face trial. On that same day's afternoon the convoy was passing a village stronghold of the local Incense Brotherhood when a horn sounded. On that signal, villagers streamed out to surround the escort and demand the release of their Incense brothers.101 The following day the leaders of the brotherhood, apparently to display their contempt for Qing authority, organized their private militias and once again made their way into Baoshan. On January 6, 1847, the Han brotherhoods carried out a second massacre of the the remaining Baoshan Hui.102 In their efforts to wipe out the Hui, these roaming groups seemed indifferent to the lingering vestiges of the Qing state. The Han mob slew two Hui in the western intendant's residence and set fire to the district magistrate's yamen, where more than one hundred Muslim Yunnanese had sought refuge. 103 Lin reacted quickly. Showing the mettle of a veteran official, he mobilized nearly ten thousand soldiers and personally led them to Baoshan. As word of Lin's approach spread, the resolve of those Han involved in the second massacre melted away and the principal leaders were meekly handed over to the local authorities. When Lin arrived in the city he found more than 329 prisoners awaiting trial.104 He immediately ordered the summary execution of the nine Incense Society leaders; another 137 were sentenced to lesser punishment: flogging, followed by banishment to the northwestern frontier, 105 Immediately after ending the lawlessness of the Incense Brotherhoods in Baoshan, Lin began addressing the grievances of the Baoshan Hui, who wanted their land returned and their property losses compensated. At the end of 1845, while still governor-general, He Changling had ordered that the lands of the Hui victims be rigorously protected and that absent owners be invited to return and reclaim them. 106 He was sympathetic to the Hui; however, competing claims of ownership and fears that Hui from outside the province would appropriate unclaimed lands discouraged him from resolving this matter during his tenure.107 When Lin arrived in Yunnan, he realized quickly that resolving land claims would be crucial to diffusing Hui discontent and creating some semblance of order. 108 However, from the beginning he felt that Hui estimates of deaths were excessively high and that many Hui were falsely claiming to be relatives of victims in the hope of benefiting from the government's compensation.109 Perhaps this skepticism explains why he pursued an expedient but blatantly one-sided solution to the problem. Instead of seeking to return to the Hui the lands the Han had seized, he tried to implement a landexchange program: the Baoshan Hui would be given land one hundred miles to the west along the upper Salween River.

Lin's description to the emperor of this area suggested that it was a fertile valley with "fruit trees and ripening grain," one that would offer the Hui [[80]]  a "place free from sorrow."110 In fact, the upper Salween ran through a malarial zone of extreme western Yunnan. In effect, Lin was pursing a policy of ethnically based banishment. He hoped to send the Hui to a place where they would have little or no contact with Han Chinese, but his decision would have the unambiguous result of rewarding the Baoshan Han for their part in the massacre.

From the perspective of the Baoshan Hui, Lin's settlement left them doubly victimized. It would not only transfer their homes and lands to the Han but also cost them their economic well-being. The upper Salween Valley could be farmed, but it was of very poor quality compared to the fertile and highly coveted land of the Baoshan Valley.111 Furthermore, Baoshan lay on one of the most lucrative trading routes between China and Southeast Asia, so the move would cost the Hui lucrative trading opportunities. 112 Lin himself acknowledged that the proposed region had proven unsuitable to earlier Han settlers; even so, he tried to pass it off to the Hui.113 His policy of ethnic separation had been tried by others in the past, but rarely in a way that would have benefited the Han so one-sidedly.114 Lin's policy of separation lacked even the facade of parity; it came across as a bald attempt to get rid of the Hui.

Seeking the Proper Response: Government Perceptions of the Hui, 1845-1848 The three Yun-Gui governors-general who served from 1845 to 1849 in the wake of the Baoshan Massacre all contended that their policies for handling the Hui were impartial and accommodating. Indeed, the terminology each of these men employed was remarkably similar: He Changling advocated "maintaining justice and equality” (binggong chiping),115 Li Xingyuan sought to "implement the law equitably" (zhifa chiping),116 and Lin Zexu endeavored to "distinguish between good and bad, not between Han and Hui" (danfen liangyou, bulun Han Hui).117 The tone of these policies was neutral, the manner in which they were implemented far less so.

All three programs reflected efforts to revitalize the baojia system of mutual surveillance. After the Baoshan massacre, the governors-general ordered all cattle protection associations (niucong) to disband and sought to strengthen the baojia household registration system so that it would be harder for non-Yunnanese to gain access to and taint local communities. Furthermore, He Changling advocated the reinstitution the xiangyue-public lectures on the Sacred Edicts, given to raise the community's moral tone.118 The problem with this approach was that the baojia system in Yunnan was in a lamentable state. One magistrate noted on his arrival in Yunnan in 1844 that the baojia placards were "no more than sheets of paper with fugiThe Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities 81 tives and criminals able to hide without fear of being detected."119 Even at its most effective, baojia was of little use as a preventive tool during times of discord; it was especially poor at responding to ethnic unrest. 120 In the first decades of the century, Bolin, Qingbao, and Ruan Yuan had adopted it in non-Han areas as a means of bolstering the existing ban on Han entering non-Han lands; then it had been only one of several proactive measures for thwarting future recurrences. It had not been seen as the primary solution. The drawbacks of baojia and xiangyue can be gleaned from a close examination of the conflicts that arose after the Baoshan Massacre. In Baoshan in the late 1840s, baojia would have relied on the cooperation of the same community leaders who had instigated the Han-Hui violence. The ringleaders had included a Muslim ahong, a baojia unit leader (jiazhang), and several xiangyue leaders. 121 As Sow-Theng Leong found in his study of Hakka-Punti rivalries in southeastern China, baojia and xiangyue units tended to be split along ethnic lines; as a consequence, these institutions only bolstered community divisions and ethnic differences. Put simply, xiangyue often fostered ethnic conflict instead of dampening it. 122 An even deeper problem plagued the three governors-general in their search for effective solutions to the violence. Permeating every level of Qing officialdom was an overriding concern with the Hui response to Han aggression, not the Han aggression itself. In their memorials, He Changling, Li Xingyuan, and Lin Zexu all acknowledged that the Han Chinese wanted to exterminate the Hui; yet they also insinuated repeatedly that were it not for the Hui there would be no Han Brotherhoods and thus-in a distinctly circular logic-no Han-Hui violence. 123 Li Xingyuan typified this attitude in his memorial to the emperor; he indicated that the first step in solving the problem lay in controlling the Hui: "In order to control the Hui, one must first control the bandits. If the bandits are not controlled, then the Hui cannot be controlled, and subsequently the Han Chinese especially cannot be controlled." 124 This made sense only if it was assumed that the Hui as a class were prone to violence, and Li clearly endorsed the centuries-old stereotype that they were: "The Hui display a strong sense of solidarity and their character is fierce. Year after year they harbor grudges and seek revenge. The Han Chinese are not strong enough to stop it."125 To suggest this only months after thousands of Hui had been massacred at the hands of Han Chinese-not once but twice-reveals the extraordinary extent to which anti-Hui biases had begun to saturate even the highest levels of Qing administration.

Over the next three decades, Lin Zexu's ethnically blind policy of "not discriminating between Han and Hui but between good and bad" would often be praised for its impartiality. Yet almost every time he voiced this policy he also intimated his own general distrust of the Muslim Yunnanese, [[82]]  qualifying his stance by playing on Hui stereotypes: "In Yunnan there is not a single location where there are no Hui, with law-abiding Hui few and wayward Hui numerous.

Lin's bias is perhaps most visible in his efforts to adjudicate the backlog of cases from the broader Han-Hui violence that followed the massacre. In the department of Yaozhou, Lin estimated that the Han had suffered "eight times as many casualties as the Hui, . . . [and] lost nine times as many buildings"-an estimate that pushes the boundaries of plausibility, given the much larger Han population. 127 Whether Lin's numbers were accurate or not, in trying the cases of the more than 236 prisoners, he executed 138. Of these, no fewer than 101 were Hui. 128 Even if Lin was correct that the imbalance in death and damage merited the ethnic imbalance in his sentencing, the fact that the vast numbers of Han involved in the original Baoshan Massacre were never brought to justice, let alone executed, caused considerable resentment among the Hui.

Yet it would be unfair to suggest that this bias was Lin's alone. Unfortunately, Lin-like most late Qing officials-rarely explained how he arrived at his conclusions; thus we cannot today see the assumptions on which he based his legal decisions. However, with regard to one of the rare Han-Hui incidents to occur in eastern Yunnan, Lin suggested that he believed in harsher sentencing and that his bias against the Hui was legally upheld. In this particular case, which involved a Han attack on Hui miners, he ordered that the Han criminals be "immediately executed... in order to put the Hui community's hearts at ease." Yet when it came to dealing with the few Hui involved in retaliatory violence, he invoked a specific clause of the penal code to justify his sentence: “When three or more Hui are involved together in a criminal altercation, with at least one person using a weapon, regardless of who is the leader, [all] shall be sentenced to military service in the pestilential border areas of Yunnan, Guizhou, Guangxi or Guangzhou." "129 This statute, created in the 1770s in response to rising suspicion that Muslims were involved in violence, reveals the customary belief among officials (and encoded in law) that the Hui deserved more severe punishment than other Qing subjects.130 In his memorial Lin noted that although the Han and Hui were both to blame, "the Hui are particularly fierce so we should set an example for other Hui."131 His invocation of the statute sent another clear message to the Muslim Yunnanese: in the eyes of the Qing, a Hui was more than a Chinese subject who happened to believe in the tenets of Islam. 132 Despite the trials and executions, and despite other efforts to restore peace, the government never absolved the Hui of their alleged role as instigators of the Baoshan Massacre in particular and of the unrest in general.133 Lin Zexu and Li Xingyuan, two of the empire's most respected administraThe Rise of Anti-Hui Hostilities 83 tors, had a propensity to characterize the Hui as a problematic people. This reflects a disturbing trend in policy and crisis management in Yunnan. The Daoguang emperor obviously encouraged this trend, since both Lin and Li received the title of Grand Guardian of the Heir Apparent (in 1847 and 1848 respectively) for their quick and competent handling of the Baoshan Massacre. 134 Conclusion The departure of Lin Zexu in 1849 marks the end of a distinctively proactive period in Yunnanese administration. Each of the three governorsgeneral had traveled to the sites of ethnic violence and left an indelible imprint on the province as a whole. They had attempted to satisfy many of the basic demands of the Baoshan Muslims who had petitioned the court. Lin in particular had crushed the widespread violence. Yet the emphasis on military solutions marked an ominous turn for Yunnan.

Ethnic violence in Yunnan had long been accompanied by strong political and moral overtones; these were mirrored in the policies of He Changling, Li Xingyuan, and Lin Zexu. In the Lin'an and Dao Shengwu conflicts, however, it was those Han who dared oppose the interests of the state who were labeled as traitors. 135 This perspective allowed the state to portray its crisis management as equitable and to represent its interventions as morally and politically correct. The same approach also allowed the Qing to circumvent the treacherous issue of ethnic bias by portraying those Han, by virtue of their attack on non-Han subjects, as anti-Qing. With the rise of anti-Hui violence, the actions of the three governors-general took on a decisively less neutral tenor.

It is commonly accepted that the Baoshan Massacre indicated a heightened antagonism toward the Hui at the local level. Yet the attitudes expressed and actions taken by the court in its responses to the violence reveal that anti-Hui bias was becoming a much broader phenomenon. In this new environment, Muslim Yunnanese subjects of the Qing received neither the special consideration extended to the non-Han nor the tacit benefits extended to the Han. The obvious consequence of this was a continuation of anti-Hui violence. Much less detected at the time was the accelerated erosion of Qing authority precisely because the government was willing to tolerate anti-Hui sentiment. Indeed, as informal local Han power structures and Qing officials posted to Yunnan increasingly became of one mind with regard to the menace of the Muslim Yunnanese, the likelihood of an even greater wave of anti-Hui violence grew apace.