+++
title = "06 \"All the Fish in the Pond\": The Kunming Massacre and the Rise of the Panthay Rebellion"

+++
Governor-General Lin Zexu, in departing to serve in a new post in 1849, claimed that as a result of his efforts Yunnan would be secure for ten more years.1 This was optimistic of him, given the uncertain times. During his two short years he had barely secured peace in Baoshan, let alone the whole of Yunnan. Lin was leaving Yunnan believing the Hui were at the root of the province's violence. All of his solutions to the unrest focused on the Hui and ignored the strong anti-Hui bias among the Han. Lin's actions had only alleviated the symptoms; the deeper problem of Han chauvinism was as potent as when he arrived. The consequences of Lin's approach to the problems besetting Yunnan were most visible in Talang, a mining settlement in the south of the province where fighting had broken out between rival (and often illegal) gangs of miners. In the closing months of Lin's tenure, the acting prefect, Cui Shaozhong, arrested 112 bandits, including 46 non-Yunnanese (wai fei), 21 Lin'anese (lin'an fei), and 11 indigenous bandits (yi fei).2 Despite the broad range of ethnic groups involved, Lin chose to differentiate this Talang violence from the anti-Hui hostilities occurring throughout Yunnan. In a memorial to the throne, he characterized the hostilities in Talang as largely a result of avarice and the rise in value of silver; nowhere did he refer to the interethnic animosities that were raging in the area.3 Although anti-Hui violence persisted in all three regions of the province, nowhere in his appraisal of Talang did Lin allude to possible anti-Hui motives. By the time he left the province in the autumn of 1849, the court believed firmly that the problems in Yunnan had been resolved. Yet only months later, violence erupted again at the Talang mine. The Talang mine was well known in the province for two things: its many deposits of silver and gold, and its miners, who spent their income "as if it was dirt."4 This combination had fostered a class of idlers who "never panned for gold, [but] day and night went about gambling... with the strong losing but never paying and the weak winning but never collecting."5 The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 85 
The hostilities of late 1849 began when a Han Chinese gambled and lost a considerable sum to a Hui. Instead of paying his debt, the Han conspired with several compatriots to kill the Hui. Worried about their ability to handle the inevitable reprisals, the Talang Han traveled to Xizhuang, a village near Lin'an, to solicit further reinforcements and gain the support of the local gentry. There they made a tantalizing offer: easy wealth for those who joined them, with the added satisfaction of dealing a debilitating blow to the Hui. "If we were to drive the Hui from the mine," they contended, "then Lin'an would become a city of gold." The Xizhuang gentry offered their backing and organized a band of five hundred Han to march on the mine. The local magistrate at Talang, hearing rumors of their plot, notified his superiors and requested military reinforcements to fend off the impending attack. Several weeks and repeated entreaties later, support was still not forthcoming. With the Xizhuang toughs flowing into Talang, the remaining Han and Hui miners struck a hasty agreement, pledging to help one another defend their mines in the event of an attack.7 On October 14, 1850, the Xizhuang bands murdered a prominent Hui. The local Han, observing that they were not the main target of Han hostility, quickly withdrew their earlier offer of support and turned a blind eye to the ensuing bloodshed. Within several days, more than one hundred of their Hui neighbors were dead in what the local magistrate called the "largest case of murder and destruction the area had ever seen. "8 All Hui attempts to resist or retaliate were crushed. The Xizhuang bands remained in the area, looting the mines, terrorizing the remaining populace, and generally extracting everything of value from the mines—an amount the magistrate estimated at more than 100,000 taels.9 Worried about reports of escalating violence, provincial officials dispatched a small detachment of soldiers to the area. The Talang magistrate, frustrated at this small and belated show of support, lamented: “Earlier it was already clear the situation here was urgent . . . and [now] only ten soldiers were dispatched while the brigands can be counted by the thousands. It is just like throwing a glass of water on a burning cart of wood."10 It is unclear exactly why the higher officials did not respond more forcefully to the Talang incident. Two prominent Hui who survived the attack spent the next two years seeking retribution from all levels of the provincial government, to no avail.11 In fact, no one was ever charged, arrested, or convicted; the offenders were left free to continue their violent ways. The disturbing absence of state authority in Talang and officials' reluctance to check the challenges to their prerogatives suggest that the state was losing its effectiveness in the absence of veteran officials like Lin Zexu. Talang exemplified a problem that was growing throughout the province. 86 
THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Between 1849 and 1855 five different governors-general had been appointed to Yunnan, two of whom never assumed office. The remaining three served an average of one year each. Yunnan's governors did only slightly better, averaging around twenty months each. The central court was shuffling its administrative personnel so rapidly in part because it was focusing more and more on a new threat: the Taiping Rebellion, which was already ravaging the lower Yangtze region. Given the increasingly desperate need for experienced officials to respond to the Taiping rebels, the court was quickly transferring Yunnan's top officials to Hunan, Hubei, and Zhejiang.1 12 
The deterioration of government authority in Yunnan is corroborated by accounts from half a dozen French Catholic missionaries in the province at the time. These men had been in Yunnan since the late 1840s-longer than many of the officials themselves—and discussed the broader trends affecting Yunnan society. In the early 1850s they painted a bleak picture of the province, hinting at the ethnic tensions there and at the difficulty appointed officials were having in remaining neutral: "Yunnan is consumed by turmoil and confusion. The Muslims want to kill the officials, the Chinese want to kill the Muslims, and the officials want to kill the Muslims and the Chinese."13 In an analysis eerily reminiscent of the difficulties besetting Baoshan prior to the 1845 Massacre, another missionary contended that the root of the problem was the Han "from Sichuan and other provinces, with the Mandarins not having enough power to stop them."14 Given their vocationwhich was to proselytize-it is somewhat surprising that none of the missionaries in their reports back to France depicted the Hui as the principal antagonists in the violence. Given the rising political aspirations of the Taiping to the east, the almost complete absence of any political agenda in Yunnan's violence is rather conspicuous. Father Chauveau, who lived in Yunnan in the early 1850s, was struck by the apparent differences: "[The Taiping Rebellion] in Guangxi is attempting to cleanse the political system; in Yunnan the question is of a different nature and is derived from, in what we would call in our modern scientific style, a social question. Each [of the ethnic] peoples is attempting to imprint their ideals on the society, with the Muslims, Chinese and natives each pulling from their own side."15 Despite this apparent lack of ideological motivation-or perhaps because of it-the extermination of the Muslim Yunnanese in the years after Lin's departure gradually became the primary objective of the Han Chinese. MINING INCIDENTS AND REPRISALS, 1854-1856 By 1854, broad areas of Yunnan verged on anarchy. In late April the same band of Han Chinese that had preyed on the Talang mine for severalThe Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 87 
16 
years marched unimpeded to the wealthy Shiyang mine in central Yunnan. During the fighting the Han militias that had been assigned to protect the mine joined the assailants. This combined force turned on the Hui, killing several hundred of them and burning all their dwellings and their mosque. Bloody encounters like these took place mainly at mines. What fueled them was not economic rivalry so much as ethnic resentment. In the months following the initial attack at Shiyang, skirmishes between Han and Hui bands escalated. Then in January 1855, Ma Rulong, a Hui from Lin'an prefecture whose brother had been among the first victims of the Han assault on Shiyang, led a group of Lin'an Hui in one last attempt to clear the mines of the Xizhuang bandits so that mining could be resumed.17 By early February it had became apparent that the Hui could not work and defend themselves at the same time. Ma Rulong and his followers decided to block the entrances to their mines, divert the waterways, collect everything of value in the area, and return to Lin'an.18 The Xizhuang band was now more than one thousand strong. When they found the Shiyang mines abandoned, with no miners remaining to extract the silver from the ore and few provisions available, they became enraged. The band launched what would become a two-year campaign by methodically attacking six Hui villages in succession, looting and burning property and slaughtering all the Hui they encountered (see Map 6.1).19 In May the Xizhuang band attacked the Malong mine, which was defended by an ethnically mixed group of miners. Although several years had passed since the Talang incident, the attackers' primary goal remained the extermination of the Hui. Just before launching their assault on Malong, the leaders called out to those defending the mine: "We only want to kill the Hui; it has nothing to do with Han and non-Han! Those of you who are able to kill the Hui and offer proof will be rewarded!"20 By the time the killing was over, more than eighty Hui miners lay dead. The campaign against Muslim Yunnanese continued through the summer of 1855. In July the Xizhuang band moved on to the town of Laotian in Guangtong Department, where they pillaged thirteen Hui villages and massacred the inhabitants.21 In all, they burned eleven mosques to the ground and murdered several thousand Hui.22 In November the same band traveled to Zhennan Department, where it attacked eight villages, destroyed eight mosques, and killed more than one thousand Hui. The following February, they attacked Chuxiong, a transportation hub in central Yunnan, and massacred several thousand Hui in and around the city.23 Over three years, then, the Xizhuang band alone cut a swath of destruction through three departments (Nan'an, Guangtong, Zhennan). By conservative estimates, more than eight thousand Hui were killed during this period. Most of the victims had been Hui villagers who died for no other reason than their ethnicity.24 88 
THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Sichuan ⚫Dongchuan Guizhou Anning May 1856 Qujing Chuxiong Feb. 1856 OKunming A-xiong Nov.1855 Luochuan July 1855 May 19, 1856 Shiyang Mine May 1854 E-Jia March 1855 Malong Mine May 1855 Lin'an N 
Talang May 1855 Pu'er 0 
100 Kilometers Prefectural Capital O Provincial Capital MAP 6.1. Han Attacks on Hui, 1854-1856 Vietnam Word of the massacres spread throughout the province. The French missionaries kept one another informed of the violence. In the spring of 1856 Father Chauveau wrote to a fellow missionary: "The people here have suffered considerably because of all the small attacks, but the Muslims have suffered more than anyone. In some areas they were massacred to the last person, even women and children. In particular, a month ago, on the plain where I am, all who were Muslim were burned alive. Our Christians, grace to god, did not suffer. "25 Around this time, another of Chauveau's colleagues, Father Leguilcher, who had been posted to a mission in western Yunnan near Dali, indicated that the attacks in his area were very often anti-Hui: "That which is certain is that under the directions of a low-ranking military official and sworn enemy of the Muslims several thousand Chinese profited from the celebrations of the Chinese New Year to organize a vast plot against the 'pilgrims of Mecca.""26 These attacks were occurring in many parts of the province over a prolonged period of time, yet no level of government was taking steps to end the violence. The ranking official in Chuxiong Prefecture, the magistrate Cui Shaozhong, seems to have actually promoted the attacks, for the purpose of inflaming the hatred so as to encourage the Han to exterminate the Hui: The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 89 
"[If] seeing that the Xizhuang side was strong, he then would help them kill Hui; if seeing the Hui were strong, he would then come to their 'aid' and help them kill the Lin'anese."27 It was Cui who had failed to send aid to quell the attacks at Talang several years earlier. This suggests that his anti-Hui views perhaps constituted support for the Xizhuang attacks.28 Whatever his intentions, in the spring of 1856 new reports appeared in Kunming of the Chuxiong massacres. It was rumored that the Xizhuang band was on its way to Anning, several dozen miles from Kunming, to "kill all those Chuxiong Hui who had escaped."29 The Kunming Massacre In the spring of 1856, Yunnan's top provincial officials included the governor-general, Hengchun, the governor, Shuxing'a, the provincial judge, Qingsheng, and the newly promoted provincial treasurer, Sangchunrong. Hengchun, a Manchu, had served extensively in northern China in Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces before being appointed to Yunnan. In May 1856, however, he was away in Guizhou trying to quell the Miao Rebellion, which had begun the previous year.30 In his absence, Shuxing'a was the ranking official in the provincial capital. Shuxing'a was a Manchu and had served in the northwest. Unlike his superior, he had acquired an intense dislike of Muslims during his time in the northwest. According to one account, his antipathy had its roots in an 1853 incident. Ordered to lead a relief force to a town besieged by Muslim insurgents, he collapsed and fled in fear. The town fell to the rebels. "Angry and bitter [over the loss]," a mob composed of local Hui attacked him, "stripped him of all his clothes, and began to [carry out acts intended to] humiliate him."31 Only the quick thinking of his servant, Chen Xi, who whisked him away to safety, kept Shuxing'a from what had all the ingredients of a horrible death. After this attack, Shuxing'a began to suffer from neurasthenia (zhengchong), an ailment characterized by heart palpitations, melancholia, fatigue, and other physical ailments. In the years following this incident, Shuxing'a cultivated a deep hatred of all Muslim Chinese; he blamed them for his lingering sense of humiliation and for his deteriorating mental and physical health. On arriving in Yunnan he appointed his servant, Chen Xi, gatekeeper to the governor's yamen. Chen Xi quickly garnered considerable influence by restricting Shuxing'a's visitors to those who shared the governor's anti-Hui stance.32 As a consequence of Hengchun's absence in Guizhou and Shuxing'a's mental deterioration, the bulk of administrative duties devolved to the provincial judge, Qingsheng, and the provincial treasurer, Sangchunrong. 90 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Little is known about Qingsheng; that said, his anti-Hui beliefs were apparent to most people. On one occasion he offered this chilling assessment: "The Hui bandits' hearts are evil. If we do not deal with them early on, then they will spread like a disease from the inside out."33 Another source suggests that he used "extreme torture" when dealing with Muslim Yunnanese whom he considered criminal.34 Sangchunrong's beliefs are even less clear. Like many young officials during the Daoguang reign, he began his career as a magistrate. He was appointed to the southern Yunnan district of Lin'an in 1844, and rose quickly from there until by 1855 he was Yunnan's provincial treasurer. His rapid rise illustrates yet another facet of 1850s Yunnan: the central court, distracted by the Taiping Rebellion and other matters, was increasingly promoting from within the province. Still other factors would affect the coming conflict. By early 1856 the Kunming gentry were playing an increasingly influential role in tipping popular and official opinion against the Hui. Two members of the gentry, He Tongyun and Huang Cong, would be especially prominent in the events that were beginning to unfold in and around the provincial capital. Both these men had served high in the Qing bureaucracy and still had direct access to the court. He Tongyun, a senior official in the revenue ministry and a native of Yunnan, had returned to the province in 1857 for the obligatory mourning period after the death of his father.35 Little is known about his particular views; however, in the aftermath of the massacre he wrote several memorials to the throne that masked not only the depth of anti-Hui sentiment among the provincial elite but also the horrible atrocities being carried out under their instructions. Huang Cong was born and raised in Kunming and had just retired there after many years as a high official in the war ministry. Now he quickly became a powerful individual in formal and informal Han Chinese circles, both in Kunming and throughout the province.36 His previous high ministerial rank gave him considerable influence. It was said that he was "mistrustful of Hui and actively plotted ways to harm them."37 He was to become a guiding force in the project of ridding Yunnan of what he referred to as "this despicable race."38 All seven men-Hengchun, Shuxing'a, Chen Xi, Qingsheng, Sangchunrong, He Tongyun, and Huang Cong-played critical roles facilitating the events that led to the Panthay Rebellion. The boundaries between officials and nonofficials, gentry and commoners, were becoming blurred as the anti-Hui atmosphere began to permeate Kunming as high as the most senior levels of governance. The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 91 
THE MASSACRE In early 1856, several things happened that altered the nature of the violence that had been unfolding across Yunnan for several years-that changed that violence from largely unstructured actions to unequivocally premeditated acts. In the spring of 1856 the fighting that had begun in Talang and moved to Chuxiong now flared up near Kunming. The first skirmishes were in the village of Xiaobanqiao, about ten miles from the walled capital, between Xizhuang Han and a group of Hui. Shuxing'a, Huang Cong, and the anti-Hui faction quickly seized on this incident as a means to further their anti-Hui projects. Shuxing'a immediately began to portray this minor incident as a serious threat to the provincial capital. Several days before the attack, a circular was "secretly transmitted to every prefecture, sub-prefecture, department, and district... within an eight hundred li radius [of the capital]." It ordered militias to form and kill the Hui.39 Qingsheng then authorized an order allowing Han militia to "slay all [offenders] without being held accountable" (gesha wulun). Many interpreted this order as a government endorsement to massacre the Hui.40 The killing began on May 19, 1856, and continued for three days.41 No Hui were spared. Eyewitnesses told Frenchman Émile Rocher: "The Muslims were massacred without pity. . . . The old and the young for whom escape was impossible did not find mercy before the butchers."42 Women were raped and children were slain. According to one account, "a fetus [was left] still writhing and moving in the middle of the road."43 The Muslim quarter was looted and the city's mosques were razed.44 One report has it that the massacre ended only when Qingsheng's mother confronted her son and demanded that he halt the butchery of innocent people.45 By the time the attacks stopped on May 21, 1856, at least eight thousand Hui lay dead.46 The slaughter of the Hui did not end there. The circular that authorized attacks on Muslim Yunnanese, and the government's apparent endorsement of the Kunming Massacre, spawned massacres throughout the province led by settler Han who needed little encouragement to act on their ethnic hatreds.47 Over the next several months, uprisings erupted across the province "in places such as Chengjiang, Zhaotong, Lin'an and Qujing... with the attacks in Tengyue and Wuding being especially cold-blooded. "48 In the central Yunnan town of Wuding some two thousand Hui were massacred.49 In western Yunnan, in the cities of Heqing, Jianchuan, and Lijiang, the slaughter was especially horrific.50 When local officials attempted to prevent the violence, "the Han complained that pacifying the Hui was not Heaven's intent" and continued their efforts to exterminate the Hui.51 As violence washed over the region, more and more Qing officials abandoned their pol92 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION icy of outwardly "punishing the bad and protecting the good" and began actively promoting "attacking the Hui in order to exterminate the Hui."52 Remarkably, Shuxing'a mentioned none of this to the emperor for many weeks. When he finally memorialized the throne on June 20, more than a month after the butchery in Kunming, his report contained no mention of a massacre. Taking a page from Baoshan, he instead cast the Han massacre of the Hui as a Hui conspiracy against the state. He wrote to the emperor that only his preventative measures, "resulting in the arrest of sixty-four Hui," had averted an imminent Hui attack.53 In this entirely fabricated rendering, thirty Hui were said to have been carrying nitrate to make incendiary devices. Another fourteen had allegedly admitted to "plotting to act as a fifth column within the city by starting fires and then opening the city gates. Shuxing'a went on to claim that several Hui had burned down their own mosques and committed suicide rather than be arrested—an act he presented as a clear indication of their guilt.55 He concluded his memorial by assuring the emperor that government forces had killed "only seventy Hui" and thus maintained the peace.56 "54 Shuxing'a's next memorial, a month after the first, was not nearly so sanguine. Clearly distraught over the forces he had unleashed, he began to suggest that the Hui "threat" was widespread in Yunnan. Yet he still sought to lay the blame on the Hui: "There is nowhere in Yunnan that there are not Hui. Though their numbers are not large, only ten or twenty percent of the Han, they make up for it in their strength. They are suspicious and fierce by nature. . . . Now throughout Lin'an and Dongchuan prefectures there are Hui bandits burning and looting villages."57 On August 31, Shuxing'a filed his third memorial in as many months. Only now did he finally allow that the violence had spread to almost every corner of the province. Yet he continued to imply that the Hui, dangerous and fierce, had been the cause of the violence from its inception.58 In the six months left in his tenure, Shuxing'a never alluded to the massacre of any Hui in Yunnan. Whether he could admit it or not, by sanctioning the Kunming Massacre, he had ignited the Panthay Rebellion. THE PRETENSE OF CONTROL It took more than half a year for the first official admission of any government culpability in the Kunming Massacre to surface. A memorial authored by Hengchun dated February 9, 1857, finally divulged that the provincial judge, Qingsheng, had issued a proclamation ordering militias to form with the right to slay any lawbreakers they encountered. His memorial continued: "But unlawful hanjian took advantage of this order to incite violence with Han killing many law-abiding Hui within the provincial capThe Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 93 
ital."59 In his rescript the emperor told Hengchun that while he should maintain the policy of "not distinguishing between Han and Hui and pacify them uniformly," the Hui should be suppressed.60 Nowhere did the emperor call for any action to be taken against the Han for their role in inciting the violence. Hengchun and the Qing court were approaching Yunnan's problems from sharply different directions. The emperor was clearly more concerned that yet another corner of his empire was falling into chaos. Instead of focusing on the growing evidence that several of his Qing officials had orchestrated a full-scale Hui massacre in the provincial capital, he advocated a strong military response against the rebelling Hui. Hengchun perceived Yunnan's problems quite differently. Believing that the Hui violence stemmed directly from the original massacre and the ongoing Han attacks, he sought to develop a strategy for minimizing acts that might further incite the Hui and for exercising control of the Han militias, whose attacks on Muslim Yunnanese communities were fueling the hostilities. These strategies did not meet with the emperor's approval. "After half a year of dealing with the Hui rebels," the emperor admonished him, "there has not been the slightest progress."61 Hengchun persevered, pointing out that further violence against the Hui was not the answer to Yunnan's current woes. "If the extermination of the Hui is the only purpose [of the Han]," he reasoned, "not only will the Hui never yield, but it will only further the Han's suffering."62 Hengchun's assessment, by playing to the court's concern over the province's Han subjects, unintentionally offered the most unembellished account of the postmassacre situation. In the months following the Kunming Massacre, the Hui were not solely responsible for the escalating violence. In many areas of the province, Han were enthusiastically pursuing extermination campaigns against the them. Indeed, the Han hoped the rising violence would pressure the central court, in the name of stability, to sanction their anti-Hui crusade. With little understanding of how the rebellion had started, the court vacillated: Should it pursue a strong military resolution to the violence, or should it attempt to negotiate a more peaceful resolution? This wavering is reflected in many early communications to Yunnan from the court, which offered little substantive guidance for provincial officials. The emperor's tone tended toward impractical platitudes: "There are good and bad Muslim Yunnanese. If you do not suppress the bad leaders not only will the Han suffer but the good Hui will also languish."63 The court was expressing an overriding concern for the Han, which it perceived as the true victims of the rebellion. But such a sentiment did not translate into any concrete plan of action for Hengchun. Nor did Beijing offer any substantial financial or military assistance. 94 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Hengchun settled on a strategy of nonengagement. He was predisposed to a passive approach and assumed that if the military threat were removed, the violence would end. Yet this approach greatly underestimated just how strongly the Han, the Hui, and the non-Han had committed themselves to an extended conflict. Nor did it recognize that the main hostilities were not caused by his imperial troops, but rather by Han militias intent on purging Yunnan of the Hui-militias over which he had absolutely no control. As a consequence of his policy, in the spring of 1857 one prefecture after another fell into violent anarchy. The court was still adamant that the Hui were the cause of the rebellion and quickly lost patience with Hengchun's wait-and-see approach. Official misgivings about the Hui had by now become rampant. Since the late eighteenth century, Hui insurgency in the northwest had grown into one of the imperial government's greatest concerns, and the court had become increasingly distrustful of the Hui.64 In an insightful study about government treatment of Muslim violence, Jonathan Lipman points out that the Qing Board of Punishments "equated Muslims with the most violent, uncontrollable bandits within Chinese society and recommended severe penalties.. when they violated the law."65 As Lin Zexu's actions in 1849 indicate, although this bias against the Hui had its roots in the northwest, the prejudice had already been transferred to Yunnan. By 1857 the court's engrained distrust of the Hui had combined with a deep impatience over the state of affairs in Yunnan. The court knew about Shuxing'a's mental instability and Hengchun's inaction and was deeply suspicious of their contradictory representations of the situation. It increasingly suspected that Hengchun's inaction was simply a stalling tactic on his part to conceal earlier Muslim Yunnanese offenses out of fear of being censured. Reports from the war ministry official, He Tongyun, and the censor, Li Peihu-both in Yunnan at this time-fueled these suspicions. It is very likely that He Tongyun actively participated in the Kunming Massacre, yet the court considered him a neutral observer, since he had only just returned to Kunming to begin his obligatory three-year mourning period after the death of his father. In his account to the throne, He Tongyun painted the Hui as inherently violent and supported Shuxing'a's fabrication that Hui had attacked Kunming.66 In a separate report, censor Li Peihu fueled the court's distrust of "pro-Hui" officials by placing the blame on local magistrates who "did not report the facts, but instead secretly meet with the Hui" and thus permitted Hui to gain the upper hand over law enforcement efforts by local and provincial officials.67 These accusations--along with other reports-corroborated the court's view that Hengchun's indecisive and permissive behavior had allowed the Hui to loot and burn property and kill The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 95 
Han without restraint.68 The court felt that illicit actions such as these required a forceful five-point response. The emperor's instructions to Yunnan officials, although decisive, reveal just how woefully ignorant of Yunnan affairs the court had become. First, he ordered the gentry in western Yunnan to form militias to augment the Qing military. Second, tusi militias were to be used in Yunzhou and Tengyue because they were "fast, mobile, and familiar with the area." Third, Hengchun was to seek the assistance of several retired officials now residing in Yunnan (such as He Tongyun, Li Peihu, and Huang Cong). Fourth, Hengchun was to enlist tusi like Zuo Daxiong, because he "is clear of right and wrong, good at fighting and the Hui are afraid of him."69 Fifth, Zhang Liangji-who had been dismissed as governor of Shandong in 1854-was to return to service in Yunnan "because he had previously dealt with the Yongchang Hui (in 1845], and was familiar with the situation in Yunnan."70 The emperor's instructions revealed a profound misunderstanding of the situation in Yunnan. First, in many areas the gentry had already organized and fielded militias, which were attacking all Hui indiscriminately-not just those the state perceived as “rebels.”71 Second, it is clear that the emperor had interpreted the problem as primarily a Hui insurrection and did not wish to acknowledge that the Han were fomenting the violence through their ongoing efforts to eradicate Hui populations. Third, he either did not know or did not consider that many long-term Yunnanese-Han, non-Han, and Hui-did not side with the Han, who often treated them with contempt. In many areas where non-Han outnumbered Hui, the non-Han were not supportive of the Qing. Finally, in bringing Zhang Liangji back to Yunnan, with the suggestion that his experience in Baoshan would be an asset, the emperor was showing a profound insensitivity to the suffering of the Hui over the preceding decade. Zhang Liangji had considerable administrative experience in Yunnan, having served as provincial judge, provincial treasurer, and governor; but in that province he was remembered primarily as Lin Zexu's front man in the land trade proposal that had been foisted on the Baoshan Hui after the 1845 Massacre.72 From the perspective of the Yunnan Hui, the court's decision to bring back Zhang Liangji signaled that the Qing intended to end the current violence by siding with the Han, just like Lin Zexu had in Baoshan.73 This last point should not be taken lightly. Up to this point, every time the Han had launched organized attacks and carried out massacres on their communities, the Muslim Yunnanese had resisted the temptation to openly rebel. They had consistently appealed to Beijing for assistance, despite the open involvement of Qing officials in the attacks. The way many Muslim Yunnanese saw it, the government's actions after the Kunming Massacre in96 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION dicated that they had again misplaced their trust. The court was so distracted by the Taiping Rebellion in the lower Yangtze and so ready to believe that the Muslim Yunnanese were the main instigators of the violence that it failed to notice that the events of 1856 were almost an exact repetition of the Hui massacres of 1839, 1845, and 1849, which local and provincial officials had attempted to conceal. This time, however, the Yunnan Hui felt they had given the government enough chances. After the earlier massacres they had appealed repeatedly to higher authorities; after the Kunming Massacre no Yunnan Hui representative traveled to Beijing to plead for imperial intervention. If the court was aware of this, it showed no sign of it. Nor did the court ever order the provincial officials to discern between good and bad Han-only between "good and bad Hui." It was clear from the outset that the court was acting on the strongly held assumption that the Hui were at the root of the violence. The Qing court was displeased with Hengchun's inaction in the spring of 1857, yet it was reluctant to remove him from his post as governor-general. Instead, in March 1857, the emperor chose the more expedient action of reprimanding him for his ineffectiveness and demoting him one rank. As a final warning, the emperor reproached him for "protecting the provincial capital while doing nothing else."74 Thus shamed into action, Hengchun began launching his limited military forces against the insurgents. For a time, military action seemed to improve the situation. Around the capital, government troops had retaken the small but strategically important towns of Yiliang, Haikou, and Yanglin; this allowed much-needed grain supplies to reach the capital. In the west there were reports of imperial victories in Zhennan and Yaozhou; in the east two important cities, Qujing and Dongchuan, were retaken. But the situation was far from settled. In western and southern Yunnan, the largest urban centers-Dali, Lin'an, and Tengyue-were out of government control; in all three, the city authorities had fled with their official seals to Kunming.75 To make matters worse, in early July 1857 the calm around Kunming was broken when a multiethnic force of several thousand rebels marched unexpectedly and unchallenged to the city walls. The rebel siege succeeded largely because Hengchun had dispatched his forces to other parts of the province, thinking that the area around the capital was secure from rebel attack. The siege underscored the extent to which wishful thinking had carried away those in charge.76 Hengchun had always hoped for a peaceful resolution and was utterly unprepared to withstand a rebel offensive. He had not stored any extra supplies within the capital's city walls or kept military forces in reserve to defend it. In addition to this failure of vision on his part, the recent string ofThe Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 97 
minor government victories had lulled the civilian population into a false sense of security. In the months prior to the rebel attack, many residents had again begun working their land on the plain surrounding the city. Thus, when insurgent forces marched on the capital, Hengchun was forced to shut the city gates, leaving thousands of civilians defenseless before the advancing rebels. On July 21, 1857, he and Sangchunrong watched from the city walls as the rebels razed the suburbs of Kunming and killed the civilians they found." Emotionally broken, militarily overwhelmed, and intellectually unable to resolve the situation, he and his wife hanged themselves.78 Hengchun's death ended the last hope for a resolution that would be good for both the province and the empire. The Battle of Yaozhou: Qing Military Organization and Response The Kunming Massacre of 1856 was the culmination of mounting state involvement in anti-Hui campaigns. Its aftermath did not, however, result in an entirely cohesive provincewide campaign against the Hui. Events during the summer and autumn of 1856 in the wake of the massacre reveal a clear pattern of provincial government sponsorship of anti-Hui attacks. Several key Qing officials posted in Yunnan worried about the newly forming Han militias. But these officials, much like Hengchun, tended to adopt passive and ultimately ineffectual strategies when confronted with violent acts by either Hui or Han. If the situation was confused within the Qing bureaucracy, it was even more so among the populace. After the 1856 Massacre at Kunming, more and more Han embraced the project of exterminating the Hui. They were encouraged to do so by official circulars and the lack of official oversight. As Han attacks increased, Hui responses became far more organized and aggressive. To understand the profound consequences of official involvement in the early stages of the rebellion, it is crucial to look beyond the senior officials' motives and methods and consider the government's muddled early response to the rising violence. In early June 1856, only weeks after the Kunming Massacre, one of the first organized outbreaks of Hui hostilities erupted in Yaozhou, an urban center midway between Dali and Chuxiong. In response, Governor Shuxing'a ordered the province's military commander, Wen Xiang, to lead several hundred soldiers from Dali to quell the uprising.79 Wen Xiang, uncertain of the military opposition he would face, decided to mobilize nearly his entire garrison and leave behind a negligible defensive force. He also ordered the commander at Yongbei to lead reinforcements from the smaller garrisons at Heqing, Jianchuan, Lijiang, and Baoshan to rendezvous with 98 
THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION him near Yaozhou. All of this left western Yunnan exposed.80 Wen Xiang's choices would turn out to be among the most momentous of the entire first year of the rebellion. Wen's reasons for leaving so few soldiers in the two main garrisons of western Yunnan were based on his past military experience in Yunnan as well as on certain assumptions he was making about the Hui rebels. The Qing military, especially in Yunnan, consistently relied on sheer numbers to overwhelm opposition and dissent. Some contend that besides this, Wen brought as many troops as he could so that he could help exterminate the Hui.81 It is likely that Wen viewed Yaozhou and Chuxiong as strategically important supply centers and communication posts linking the grain-rich areas of western Yunnan with central Yunnan; thus a full and rapid show of force was required.82 In addition, Wen did not know the exact size of the Hui forces at Yaozhou. He would have deduced that the Hui were numerous enough to capture and hold a large walled town with relative ease. He would also have been aware of the intermittent Han-Hui violence that had arisen in past years in the Yaozhou area. These assumptions would have led him to mount a force large enough to guarantee victory. After arriving in Yaozhou in early August, Wen took almost a month to besiege the walled city. This was a common tactic during that era in that region; so far, most insurgencies had been isolated and easy to defeat in this way.83 Just after achieving the encirclement, Wen received word of a Hui attack on Dali.84 Unsure of the nature of the threat there, he was unwilling to lift his siege of Yaozhou and sent only a small force to help relieve the city. 85 On October 14, his tactics at Yaozhou bore fruit: the Hui leaders surrendered. Wen entered the city on October 26 and “pacified" the Hui.86 His exhilaration was not to last; several days later he learned that Dali, a far more significant prize, had fallen into rebel hands.87 There are contradictory accounts of Wen's actions after the fall of Yaozhou. Official histories state that he executed some thirty Hui ringleaders; other accounts suggest that the top leaders escaped to join in the fighting at Dali.88 An unofficial account by Li Yuzhen, a Han from Dali, indicates that Wen was so disgusted with the Han militias who had rushed to aid the Qing attack that he immediately ordered them to return to their homes. This order was not received well by the Han: "Wen Xiang, afraid the Lin❜anese militia might become too arrogant and willful, allowed [the surrender of the Hui]. The gathered Lin'anese resentfully said: 'We exerted considerable effort and expense to arrive at this point. Now that we almost have them, you want to negotiate peace with them. This is exactly like encouraging the tiger's strength. If this comes to pass, do not come to us for help.""89 The direct manner in which the Lin'an local militia challenged Wen Xiang, the highest military commander in Yunnan, indicates that pro-Hui The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 99 
officials were rapidly losing the support of the populace. It also highlights the increasingly forthright manner in which Han militants were challenging all who opposed their anti-Hui stance. On December 5, 1856, Shuxing'a sent a memorial to the emperor conveying the basic sequence of events of the Yaozhou campaign. Eager to bear good news during a difficult time for the court, he greatly embellished his account of Wen Xiang's victory.90 He stated that Wen's attack on the city had left two thousand rebels dead and that another four hundred had been killed the following day."1 The "good" Hui of Yaozhou, together with the besieged Han, had chosen to surrender and had delivered one of the Hui rebels to the garrison as an indication of their honorable intentions. Wen relied on his military skills and the support of these Yaozhou residents to enter the city on October 26 and pacify the people. He captured four of the Hui leaders and took thirty-one more into custody. All of these rebels were put to death by slicing or decapitation.92 The remaining Hui he released and allowed to return to their respective villages. So claimed Shuxing'a. If the numbers in Shuxing'a's memorial were not an exaggeration, Wen might have been justified in remaining in Yaozhou. Yet no other document corroborates Shuxing'a's estimates. More to the point, if Wen's victory had been as clear as Shuxing'a suggested, why did Wen return to Kunming afterwards instead of continuing on to Dali, western Yunnan's most strategic military and commercial center, where his wife and children were prisoners of the Hui rebels? In fact, Wen did not venture out again from the walls of the provincial capital for several months, and only then because Hengchun ordered him to pacify the areas around Tonghai and Hexi to the south and east of Kunming.93 Shuxing'a's hyperbole aside, the Yaozhou campaign was of critical significance. Most contemporary accounts emphasize the strategic consequences of Wen's decisions: first, to empty the Dali garrison for his Yaozhou campaign; and second, to release a large number of the Hui he had captured after his victory there.94 Yet to focus on these two elements omits perhaps the most significant aspect of 1856-the ongoing division of opinion among Qing officials regarding the increasingly active role of Han militias in the fighting. The Han militias, including the ones present at Yaozhou, had been formed hastily throughout Yunnan in the wake of the Kunming Massacre and were intent on perpetuating the anti-Hui violence. They were often ill trained and poorly led and completely outside imperial control. An example was the militia formed by assistant brigade commander Zhang Zhengtai in the northwestern town of Heqing (near Lijiang) to carry out the order “exterminate the Hui." He had just returned the previous year from leading a group of Yunnan volunteers to fight the Taiping rebels in Anhui. Han 100 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION throughout northwestern Yunnan flocked to his banner. His militia carried out successive massacres in Heqing, Lijiang, and Jianchuan, greatly increasing fears among Hui communities throughout western Yunnan.95 His aggressive anti-Hui campaign-largely against Hui communities that had made no open signs of aggression themselves-intensified the very fears that Wen and other provincial officials were attempting to assuage. 96 The conflicting strategies of Wen and Zhang attest to the divided and often heated differences among Qing officials as to how best to deal with the Hui. The prejudice of the government perspective is reflected in the fact that although many officials condemned Wen for his shortsightedness in releasing the Hui, none condemned the anti-Hui violence carried out under Qing auspices and by Qing officials throughout the province.97 Prior to the Kunming Massacre the atrocities committed by the Han in Baoshan and other locales had generally been confined to a single prefecture at any one time. In 1856 the widespread nature of Han attacks elicited an equally broad Hui response-one that caught both the aggressors and the Qing authorities off guard. Because the Panthay Rebellion did not emanate from an inherent Muslim desire for violence or from deep-seated antiManchu sentiment, the rebellion from its outset was notable for its lack of unity. Put another way, although the widespread attacks on the Muslim Yunnanese offered the Hui-and other non-Han groups—a common course of action, each rebel force gave precedence to its own specific goals. In the months immediately after the Kunming Massacre, the Hui leaders in all three regions of Yunnan followed remarkably similar strategies: they emphasized their Islamic beliefs, sought non-Han support, and defended their core territories. At the same time, strong interregional tensions often thwarted hopes of unifying the various rebel centers. The complex cultural, ethnic, and regional divides among the various rebel groups would harden slowly until they came to define the framework of the rebellion. The Regional Roots of Resistance As noted in earlier chapters, Yunnan's administrative structure mirrored the province's natural triadic division into eastern, western, and southern Yunnan. This influenced how the rebellion was perceived by the Muslim Yunnanese and how strategies were developed to address the violence. Memorials to the emperor reflected this division by habitually discussing the rebellion and its leaders in terms of regions.98 Even when speaking in general terms of the disturbances, officials often invoked a threeregion terminology to emphasize the widespread nature of the violence or to indicate its general location.99 From the rebellion's outset in 1856, this reThe Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion IOI gionalized perspective deeply affected its course-as the violence increased, as provincial officials responded, and as the rebel leaders came together. None of the three regions escaped the fury unleashed across Yunnan by the Kunming Massacre of 1856. The Hui's vehement response stunned those Han communities whose actions had provoked it. The Muslim Yunnanese reaction was so swift and intense in large part because Ma DexinYunnan's preeminent ahong—quickly communicated the news of the massacre to other Hui communities throughout Yunnan. In addition, word of the death and destruction falling on Hui in the province was quickly spread by refugees fleeing the largest of the early massacres: Kunming, Chuxiong, and Heqing. 100 Fueling this violent Hui reaction were the actions of Han communities as they continued to follow the directive giving local officials permission to attack the Hui.101 The three regions reacted in unison but in qualitatively different ways. These early differences would have a dramatic impact on the rebellion's course. THE CONTEST FOR DALI Dali had been the economic, political, and social nexus of western Yunnan as far back as the seventh century, when it was the capital of the Nanzhao and Dali kingdoms. The city was in the middle of an idyllic valley, at the center of broad, fertile plain sloping gently from the snowcapped Cangshan Mountains down to Erhai Lake. The valley narrowed to the north and south, forming defiles, which were guarded by two imposing fortresses. Properly defended, the valley could withstand even the most determined siege. In 1856 Qing officials noted that "if the rebels united, attacked, and occupied [Dali], it would be a disaster beyond words."102 By the end of May 1856, Hui communities in and around Dali had heard about the massacre in Kunming. From refugees of the attacks in and around Kunming and from proclamations, they also knew about the circulars calling for the formation of Han militias. 103 Their sense of foreboding was heightened by Wen Xiang's ambiguous intentions toward the Yaozhou Hui and by Heqing assistant brigade commander Zhang Zhengtai's campaign of extermination against Hui communities north of Dali. When the violence broke out in August 1856 the civil officials stationed in Dali consisted of the western intendant, Lin Tingxi, the Dali prefect, Tang Dunpei, and the Taihe County magistrate, Mao Yucheng. Lin Tingxi and Tang Dunpei clashed over the correct course of action. According to one account, Tang pressed Lin to act aggressively: "allocating funds [for the defense of Dali], organizing the home garrison [lianyong], reorganizing the militia (mintuan), distributing weapons to the city soldiers, and quickly summoning Zhang Zhengtai to help defend the city and to consolidate the plan." 104 102 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION In an intriguing example of how local officials in a single place could diverge in their perceptions of the Hui, Lin refused to request aid from Zhang precisely because he feared Zhang's rabid anti-Hui stance. Instead he pursued a more conciliatory approach, making public proclamations to the local Hui that the presence of the Han militias posed no great danger.105 The fact that Han militias and Hui mobs were fighting pitched battles in the streets and that the markets had all been closed by his decree put the lie to his pretense of calm. The Hui of Dali had little faith that the city's Qing officials would protect them. In Mianning, Baoshan, and Kunming, officials had pledged to protect the Hui only to aid the Han in their attacks. The Hui remembered this all too well and felt compelled to preempt what they fully expected would be an all-out Han attack on their community. Their fears were confirmed in late August, when local Han militias entered the city and took up positions at key intersections. 106 On September 3 the Hui struck back, attacking and occupying the upperpass fort at Shangguan to prevent Zhang Zhengtai and his forces from coming to the aid of the Han militias.107 By September 6 there were armed skirmishes almost every day in the southern suburbs. Lin, in an attempt to prevent Han militias arming themselves with government weapons, ordered a seal to be placed on the regional commander's yamen, where the armory was located. On September 9, Hui groups in Dali, reinforced by Hui from neighboring villages, attacked the yamen and discovered the large cache of weapons.108 Just before the armory fell, the assistant regional commander, Huai Tang'a, poisoned himself rather than face death at the hands the rebels.109 The following day, sensing that the Hui were quickly gaining the upper hand, the provincial commander and western intendant ordered the remaining troops and militias to form protective rings around their respective yamens. But it was too late: the day after that, September 11, a large contingent of Hui from Menghua (a city southeast of Dali), having heard about the fighting, traversed the mountain pass separating the two cities to reinforce the Hui in Dali.110 Late that night, Hui rebels forced their way into the Lin's compound and killed him and his family. Early the next morning their severed heads appeared over the Hui-controlled West Gate.111 For the next seven days the city hung in the balance as the Hui pressed their advantage. The Han forces were slowly pressed back from their positions. In one last attempt to turn the tide, magistrate Mao Yucheng divided his remaining forces into two groups-one fighting toward the north, the other toward the south. He hoped one of these groups would draw the bulk of the Hui forces to itself, allowing the other to seize control of one of the Hui-controlled strongpoints at the city gates. Mao's sortie was a calculated gamble that failed disastrously. Neither of the two Han forces made it out The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 103 of the city alive.112 On September 16 the last top Qing official in the city, the prefect Tang Dunpei, slipped away with an armed escort, fleeing east for the provincial capital. Already over seventy and of frail health, Tang would never reach Kunming; he died several days later from physical and mental stress. In the final estimate "several tens of thousands" of Han and Hui perished in the battle for Dali.1 5 113 A NEW BEGINNING The battle for Dali constituted a sea change in Hui tactics: Hui from a number of localities had acted together in a way never seen during earlier outbreaks of violence in Mianning, Baoshan, and Chuxiong. After the Dali Hui started the fighting, Hui from other places had come to their aid in substantial numbers. Through this alliance, the Hui had been able to overcome the Han and Qing forces, which until now had used their superior numbers to overwhelm isolated Hui communities. But far more momentous than even this was the decision the Hui made, after gaining control of Dali, to form a political structure that would allow them to secure and extend their initial gains and establish an independent state. The Hui military attacks in Dali, although well coordinated, had lacked a unified leadership. Throughout the battle, most Hui had fought in hometown groups. The result was serious fragmentation among the victors, with each group feeling it had been pivotal to the victory.114 "Each [of the leaders] were proud of their own efforts, each unwilling to step down, but instead coveting the chance to become the leader and to achieve dominant command."115 The day the Hui gathered to select a new leader, each candidate was given an opportunity to express why he should be chosen. Accounts of this meeting state that most of these men emphasized their bravery and military prowess; only one, a man named Du Wenxiu, stressed the future importance of nonmilitary matters. "If you want to do great things," he asserted, "winning over people's hearts and minds is far more difficult than forcefully occupying their city."116 Even more remarkable, given the ethnic tensions that must have been coursing through the Hui community, he argued that the uprising could not be limited solely to the Hui and must include the Han and non-Han because they "are numerous and the Hui few; it is particularly important that we include Han [in our plans]."117 In the end, Du Wenxiu was chosen as the new leader after several others shifted their support to him. Ostensibly, this was because all the competing groups had a high regard for him. It is also likely that he was perceived as a leader with broad support in western Yunnan who would not favor the interests of a single area.118 104 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION On October 23, 1856, on the Dali parade ground, Du Wenxiu was invested with the office of generalissimo (zongtong bingma dayuanshuai) and "Leader of All Muslims."119 The imperial court would not ascertain his name until five years later. 120 Du was an inspired choice. Born in Baoshan in 1823, he was extremely intelligent, having earned his xiucai degree at the age of sixteen.121 He was one of the three Hui who had traveled to Beijing to petition the imperial court for compensation after the Baoshan Massacre of 1845.122 That petition had prompted the court to launch an investigation, but the resulting land swap (see chapter 5) had been far from satisfactory to Du, who never accepted the compromise. Having failed to secure a satisfactory settlement, he returned to western Yunnan, where he plied the region's trading routes for his family's caravan business. It seems that during these years he familiarized himself with Yunnan's economic, political, and multiethnic landscape.123 Du Wenxiu displayed a rare mixture of charisma, vision, and cosmopolitanism. His formal education in the Chinese classics had endowed him with a working fluency in classical Chinese as well as a familiarity with Chinese history, law, and bureaucracy. This did not make him unique among Yunnanese Hui. However, these attributes were coupled with a deft ability to challenge local and imperial authorities through officially recognized channels, and this is what distinguished him from both the ahongs and the militant Hui (many of whom were not Yunnanese). The Yunnan Hui had produced a number of individuals over the centuries who excelled at navigating the Chinese, Hui, and non-Han worlds of Yunnan; Du Wenxiu was a supreme example. Southern Rebels: Ma Rulong and Ma Dexin Within narratives of the Panthay Rebellion, the insurrection in Dali is privileged to the exclusion of the disturbances in southern and eastern Yunnan. Most Chinese treatments refer to the rebellion as the "Du Wenxiu Uprising" and dismiss the strong and essential role played by Hui leaders in these other areas. 124 Although the Hui in southern and eastern Yunnan never captured a city of equivalent importance to Dali, they shaped the rebellion's course in fundamental ways. Specifically, rebel forces in southern and eastern Yunnan consistently posed the most direct threat to Kunming— the Qing's primary administrative presence in the province-and so bore the brunt of the Qing military pressure. Initially, many of the uprisings in southern Yunnan paralleled what was occurring elsewhere in the province. However, they differed in three aspects from the fighting in Yunnan's other regions. First, much of the violence that had precipitated the rebellion, although it took place around Chuxiong and The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 105 Kunming, involved disproportionately large numbers of Lin'anese Han and Hui. This made the fighting in southern Yunnan especially fierce-a consequence of the running attacks that had been ongoing since the early 1850s. Second, Yunnan Hui and Yi partisans had attacked and secured several of western Yunnan's largest urban centers during the first several months of fighting; in contrast, the Hui of southern Yunnan never achieved unifying victories of this nature. As a consequence, the southern Hui leadership remained in a far more precarious position militarily and politically. At the same time, though, they were threatening the provincial capital, so from the perspective of the imperial provincial leadership, they were a powerful presence. Third, the Hui communities in southern Yunnan were far more dispersed. This gave rise to multiple centers of insurgency, each with an independent leader but all competing for a common vision. In the months immediately following the Kunming Massacre, Hui responses to that atrocity erupted in four distinct areas in southern Yunnan: Haikou, Chengjiang, Xinxing, and Lin'an (from north to south).125 The violence was fiercest in Lin'an with sustained attacks and counterattacks between Han militia and the multiethnic rebel forces. The fighting in Lin'an started after the May 19 massacre in Kunming. Relations between the Lin'an Han and Hui had been strained for many years. After the Hui heard about the proclamation encouraging the formation of Han militias, they circulated their own appeal asking the Han to end the killings. 126 In late June a Xizhuang Han militia entered the prefectural capital of Lin'an and slaughtered a large number of Hui within the city walls. After this they turned their attack to the surrounding Hui villages. 127 Despite their intensity these militia attacks failed to exterminate the Hui, and in the aftermath spawned a large number of independent Hui bands, each intent on leading the Hui response. The largest of these early rebel groups was composed of Hui from Chengjiang, a city two days southeast of Kunming. This band stood out from the others mainly because of the prestige of its leader, Xu Yuanji, a prominent ahong with close ties with Yunnan's preeminent Muslim leader, Ma Dexin. Quite early in the fighting, Xu Yuanji called for the Hui of Chuxiong, Zhennan, and Chenggong, and other Hui from central Yunnan, to mount an attack on the Western Hills. This region was a strategically positioned ridge overlooking Dianchi Lake, within striking distance of the provincial capital. Xu's troops threatened Kunming in the summer of 1856, but Qing forces immediately dispersed them.128 Even so, Xu's military skills and strong backing from Ma Dexin made him an important leader among the early insurrectionists. Ma Dexin was Yunnan's most important Hui scholar and religious leader. He was born in 1794 in Dali and was sixty-four years old in 1856. His 106 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION prominence was derived almost entirely from his impeccable Islamic credentials.129 His family claimed to be descendants of Sayyid 'Ajall (which made them descendants of Muhammad) and had produced a long line of distinguished religious scholars. His early education was primarily Islamic in its orientation, although some who knew him suggest that he was quite conversant with the Chinese classics. 130 By seventeen he had attained the title of ahong and had left Yunnan to continue his Islamic studies in Shaanxi. After four years there he returned to Yunnan to teach in local religious schools (madrasas). 131 In December 1841, when he was forty-eight, he set out for Mecca. After completing his pilgrimage he traveled widely in the Middle East, visiting Egypt, Istanbul, and Jerusalem before returning to Yunnan in early 1849 by way of Singapore and Guangzhou. 132 Soon after, he was invited to establish a madrasa in Huilong, which quickly became the most important Muslim educational center in southwest China. As Yunnan's preeminent religious leader, Ma Dexin was the only Hui whose prestige extended throughout the province; thus he emerged as a mediator between the competing Hui regional leaders. The final southern Hui military leader to carve out a position right after the Kunming Massacre was Ma Rulong. He was the only Hui leader who had played an important role in the violence that led to the rebellion. Details of his life prior to the rebellion are sketchy. It is known that he was born and raised in a Hui village near Lin'an. In 1854 he organized a group of Lin'an Hui to avenge the murder of his brother by the Han at the Shiyang mine.133 By the time the insurrection began he had already obtained a military licentiate (wusheng), and he claimed that an uncle of his had served as a brigade general for the Qing. 134 Several years earlier he had been working as an overseer (kezhang) while Han and Hui bands were fighting at the Shiyang mine, and he had led a band of local Hui to defend their fellow villagers. 135 Ma Rulong and Ma Dexin seem to have been on familiar terms before the rebellion. According to one acquaintance, "Ma [Rulong] learned Arabic under the guidance of Ma Dexin, but as a student showed little disposition for his studies, and so his family allowed him to pursue his more natural preferences of physical exercise."136 His lack of aptitude for formal studies did not diminish his faith. Louis de Carné, the French traveler, met Ma while traversing Yunnan in search of the source of the Mekong. It surprised him that beneath the man who "was covered with wounds, and [who] stripped off his clothes to show us his scars" there was a "fervent disciple of Muhammad."137 In their first encounter, de Carné indicated that "as soon as Ma [Rulong] joined us, he began to question us about Medina and Mecca."138 Postrebellion accounts would often downplay his role in the re-The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 107 bellion, yet while it was raging his unwavering adherence to Islamic principles and his strong ties to the Hui religious community would garner him much support among the Hui of southern and eastern Yunnan. Ma Rulong enjoyed some military success in the uprising's early months but was unable to take Lin'an, the largest city in southern Yunnan. After several failed attempts, he established a sphere of control around Guanyi,139 roughly halfway between Kunming and Lin'an. That region's harsh terrain offered a convenient and easily defended base for his operations.140 Few documents survive from this early period, but it can be surmised that Ma's forces were the most multiethnic in the province.141 Hengchun noted that "Qujiang Hui from Lin'an prefecture linked up with Hui and Yi from Chengjiang and other areas."142 In the spring of 1857, Xu Yuanji and Ma Rulong began, independently, to mount fresh offensives against the Qing forces. Xu Yuanji linked up with the Xinxing Hui and captured Chengjiang, Ningzhou, Chenggong, and Jiangchuan. Ma Rulong stormed Lin'an but once again failed to capture it. Recognizing the drawbacks of fighting independently, he approached Xu Yuanji and Ma Dexin with a proposal to combine their forces and attack Kunming. 143 So it was that on June 13, 1857, Ma Rulong, "leading a force of Hui and non-Han (Hui-yi) several tens of thousands strong, suddenly attacked the provincial capital burning and looting the southern pass [area]. The city gates were closed abruptly because of the rebels' assault and killing. They attacked [the Kunming suburbs of] Dianchi and Panlongjia killing countless numbers in their attack."144 The siege lasted nearly a year and resulted in severe famine and countless deaths in the capital-including that of Hengchun, whose suicide was described in the opening pages of this study. 145 Xu Yuanji and Ma Rulong stopped all attempts by the Qing to break the siege but were unable to storm the battlements and seize the city. 146 After Hengchun's suicide, the central court replaced him with Wu Zhenyu, Sichuan's governor-general. Soon after his arrival, Wu pursued a negotiated peace, promising the Hui their lands would be returned and that the Han most responsible for the massacre would be punished. In December 1857, in a memorial, he told the throne that a truce had been worked out and that the Hui would be returning to their home districts and occupations.147 From Wu's reports of other incidents, however, it is clear that neither side had completely set aside its resentment. "On March 7th, disbanded [Han] militia formed roving bands declaring they had not been paid their salaries... [they] entered the capital and attacked several officials and killed four Hui."148 Wu noted that they were paid and ordered to disperse. If Wu Zhenyu was able to buy off the Han, it is less clear how he placated the Hui. 108 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Wu at first only hinted at how he had convinced the Hui to end the siege. Several months later, perhaps worried about how the court would react to his lenient approach, he reported that Ma Dexin had been granted the grade of fourth rank and officially recognized as the head of all Muslim Yunnanese and Yunnan's Muslim affairs. 149 Wu's memorials mention neither Ma Rulong nor Xu Yuanji. If he offered them offices, they were probably of low rank and insufficient to quench their thirst for distinction and wealth.150 Perhaps the truce was enough incentive to convince both men to return to their respective bases, but it was not enough for them to give up their status as rebel leaders against the Qing. The Hui rebels' failure to take Kunming would be a significant factor in the rebellion's outcome. It deprived them of a much-needed consolidating victory of the sort Du enjoyed when he captured Dali. It also seems that without a unifying victory, the eastern and southern rebel forces continued to resist forming a common army or strategy. Instead, in the wake of the failed siege, the leaders returned to their bases to strengthen their own positions. 151 By early summer, Ma Rulong controlled about thirty-five small towns and county seats and had around five thousand men under his command. 152 Wellington Chan, in his study of Ma Rulong, is probably correct in asserting that "Ma's campaign to the south and southeast in 1858 must be looked upon as an attempt not only to replenish his supplies and gain more yi [nonHan] and other aboriginal followers, but also to bring the uncoordinated local bands of Moslem forces under his control."153 Although Ma Rulong would later gloss over this phase in his own account of the period, it is clear he had not yet achieved his personal aspirations, for he redoubled his efforts. 154 By June 1858 he had adopted the unambiguously seditious title of grand commander (da yuan shuai), established control over large areas of southern Yunnan, and attracted great numbers of soldiers to his cause. 155 A growing consolidation of power among the most powerful of the southern rebels ushered in a period of harmonious relations.156 Ma Dexin seems to have played a key role in these rapprochements. He acted as a mediator between regions; as a respected religious figure throughout Yunnan, he helped orient and validate the insurgency provincewide. 157 As a result of this new cooperation, by early 1859 the southern rebels had emerged again as a powerful military force. Perhaps the Qing court hoped that the surrender of the Hui after the 1857-58 siege of Kunming would end the rebellion; if so, Hui rebel activities in eastern and southern Yunnan in 1859 dispelled such expectations. If anything, the situation was worse. There were more and more reports that the insurrection was no longer simply a "Hui rebellion" but included growThe Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 109 ing numbers of non-Han combatants. On January 1, 1859, Yunnan governor Zhang Liangji reported that the Qujiang rebels (almost certainly Ma Rulong's forces) had "linked up with Hui and yi bandits to the south of the capital and had occupied ten or more towns."158 A short time later, another Hui force joined with Han forces to take the city of Anning to the west of Kunming. 159 In March the governor wrote that the Hui leader Ma Linghan had linked up with Tian Qingyu and Yang Zhenpeng and launched a surprise attack on Kunyang. Immediately after taking that city, Yang split off and attacked Haikou, occupying it on April 23. The sphere of rebel control was edging closer and closer to the walls of Kunming.160 The precise role Ma Rulong played in these various attacks is unclear. Whether he was merely biding his time in southern Yunnan or actively participating in these attacks is unknown. What is known is that he was competing with others on the informal rebel pecking order. In the spring of 1859 several events dramatically aided his quest for advancement. In March, Xinxing's ranking rebel leader, Ma Linghan, died from a wound received during the battle for Kunyang. Ma Rulong benefited from Ma Linghan's death and emerged as the ascendant rebel leader in the Lin'an and Pu'er prefectures. Through the latter half of 1859 and into early 1860, he attacked and "seized Tonghai, Kunyang, Anning, ... Lufeng, and Guangtong."161 By the end of the year, only the prefectural seat of Lin'an had eluded his control.162 As 1859 came to an end, the territory under Ma's nominal power stretched from Simao and Ami in the south to Guangtong and Lufeng in the north-a vast sphere of influence that would have taken several days' march to cross. 163 Although he had failed to secure a major urban center, he now controlled a territory almost as large as that of the Dali regime and was the most important rebel leader in southern Yunnan. Eastern Yunnan: The Search for Order In the summer following the Kunming Massacre, provincial officials were most concerned about events in eastern Yunnan.164 That region had the richest mines in the province, which provided the financially desperate central government with much-needed income. Of even more significance for Qing officials in Kunming, all communications, military reinforcements, and vital supplies had to cross eastern Yunnan, either northeastward through Zhaotong to Sichuan or due east through Qujing to Guizhou. Early government assessments of the situation in eastern Yunnan tended to parallel those for the other two regions: they blamed the Hui for the violence. Typical is a memorial written to the emperor in September 1856: The acting Dongchuan prefect, Wang Zhixu, in retaliation for violence caused by Hui at the nearby mines, burned and killed over one hundred villages outside of the IIO THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION city.... While establishing peace, it resulted in an increase in the Hui bandits' potency. The previous Eastern Intendant Pan Jie went to considerable effort to give them improper protection, and so the Hui grew even stronger. The Han of Dongchuan, Ludian, Zhanyi, Malong, Qujing, and Nanning are dangerously close to being overwhelmed with the violence and killing.165 The strong anti-Hui bias of these officials is clear in this memorial's portrayal of the Han Chinese as victims and of officials who were trying to stop the violence as collaborators. The reporting officials did not mention that the attacks on the Hui had been sanctioned by provincial leaders; nor did they mention that they were raising to positions of authority Han who were notorious among the Hui for the atrocities they had committed.166 The most flagrant of these appointments was that of military licentiate Huang Diankui, whose Lin❜anese militias had taken part in the Chuxiong and Kunming massacres. 167 Given the importance of eastern Yunnan's mines, it is not surprising that eastern Yunnan saw the bloodiest fighting in the months immediately following the Kunming Massacre. From the autumn of 1856 to the spring of 1857, there were small-scale Hui uprisings throughout the region. 168 Within two months of the Kunming Massacre, Hui rebels had seized the communication hub of Yanglin, thus severing Kunming from interior China and blocking vital grain shipments from outside the province. Shuxing'a sent out Huang Diankui to retake Yanglin. In May 1856, Huang marched his government forces eastward toward Yanglin, quelling minor Hui hostilities along the way. Approaching what seemed to be just another Hui-held village, he and his troops were lured into a marshy field. There they quickly found themselves surrounded by Hui partisans, and the boggy ground made a quick retreat impossible. In the bloody fighting that ensued, the Qing forces were routed and Huang brutally killed. It was a major defeat for the Qing, 169 The capture of Yanglin and the defeat of Huang Diankui were firm proof that the Hui of eastern Yunnan were as effective as their counterparts in the other regions of the province. What they lacked was a prominent figure like Ma Dexin or a key target like Dali to rally the Hui. As a consequence, eastern Yunnan, far more than the other two regions, was characterized by a multitude of small insurgent groups that often overextended themselves and that repeatedly found themselves facing numerically stronger government forces. Yet they persevered. In the summer of 1857 two formidable leaders emerged from these assorted groups: Ma Rong and Ma Liansheng. Ma Rong was from Dongchuan. In the months following the Kunming Massacre he established a sphere of control around the medium-sized town of Xundian. Although he would never achieve the success of Xu Yuanji or Ma Rulong, he was able to maintain a strong rebel presence in the region. The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion III His erratic but steady raids on government outposts and transportation centers tied up the Qing's limited resources, which indirectly aided other Hui forces throughout the province. Ma Liansheng was from the eastern Hui center of Ludian. Early in the rebellion he organized a band of Hui, who occupied a series of small towns directly north of eastern Yunnan's main administrative center, Qujing.170 In early 1857 he finally captured the department seat of Zhanyi and declared himself "chief commander."171 Having done so, he sent a representative to Dali deferring to the newly established leadership there. In return, the Dali regime conferred on him a seal of office and official rank. Ma's gesture was significant, given that he dominated the rebel leadership in his region. According to a later biography of Ma Liansheng, it was around this time that he claimed that nowhere in "the seven prefectures, [and all the] departments and counties in eastern Yunnan, is there anyone who dares to challenge me."172 There is apparently some truth to this boast: by late 1858 Ma Rong and other prominent Hui rebels in eastern Yunnan had begun fighting under his banner. Ma Liansheng was undoubtedly the most powerful eastern Hui leader but was never able to establish a firm foothold in the region or a clear military organization. The Qing campaigns against his bases, first in Zhanyi and later in Xuanwei, were much better organized and equipped. The insurrections that followed the Kunming Massacre were not limited to Yunnan. The best-documented indications of this involve Hui communities in several counties in western Guizhou Province, which had been the site of almost constant violence since the beginning of the Miao Rebellion in 1854. These communities joined the insurrection after the anti-Hui violence erupted in Yunnan. For example, Zhang Lingxiang, a Guizhou Hui, organized and secretly sent three hundred men from Pu'an subprefecture to Yunnan in 1856.173 The following year, Hui in the western Guizhou towns of Xingyi and Zhenfeng carried out a series of strikes against government forces and outposts. Clearly, in the months following the Kunming Massacre the Hui were uniting against those forces intent on exterminating them. That said, the rebellion would not have continued past its early outbreaks without the support of non-Han groups and-in many cases-Han Chinese sympathizers. Multiethnic Involvement In 1858 a French missionary, Father Ponsot, wrote that "throughout this province, complete anarchy reigns. . . . Every province is left to itself, without any regular army, nor money with which to pay them, with brigands multiplying more and more."174 The Catholic missionaries posted to Yunnan initially feared the religious enmity of the Hui rebels; soon, though, 112 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION they realized they had "much more to fear from [the Han] brigands than the Muslims."175 They shared this fear of Han bandits with much of the nonHan populace. Another Catholic missionary, Father Chauveau, suggested in a letter from that same period that "the indigenes have united with the Muslims in very large numbers because [they] prefer the yoke of the Muslims to the masses of Chinese bandits that the Mandarins have in their services."176 In a comment that reminds us of the division between old-timers and newcomers, Ponsot noted that "the hordes [of brigands] to a large extent are comprised of Sichuanese."177 Yunnan's non-Han population, however, tended to perceive the Hui rebels as far more than the lesser of two evils. Over the years the Hui had worked to establish links with local indigenous communities. Now that Han militias and bandits were attacking them, they realized that they would need the support of these communities in order to survive. 178 After the Hui took Dali in western Yunnan, Du Wenxiu asserted that for their cause to succeed, it would have to attract a multiethnic following.179 In the south, Ma Rulong, Xu Yuanji, and Ma Dexin were just as intent on forging alliances with both Han and non-Han. 180 This strategy succeeded: all the large non-Han ethnic groups seem to have participated in the rebellion in all three regions of the province. These groups included (but were not limited to) the Yi in northern Yunnan and the Zhuang and Dai in the south; the insurgents also garnered strong support from the Bai, Jingpo, and Tibetans. 181 Note well that the multiethnic rebel forces also included large numbers of Hanspecifically, those whose families had settled in the province generations earlier and who, like the Hui, had adopted a more Yunnanese-centered perspective. 182 At first, the top provincial officials played to the central court's perceptions that the non-Han were naive and easily duped. Thus in their memorials they declared that the Hui were "seducing the yi peoples" and tricking them into joining their rebel armies. 183 One such account even accused Ma Dexin of "changing the Hui character [in the circulars] to yi, and then showing it to the non-Han leaders who could read." 184 The same official went on to contend that at the beginning of the rebellion "Han, unable to see the advantages [of allying with the yi], happily massacred the yi. 185 Notwithstanding the flawed assessments of many Qing officials and Han newcomers in 1856, ties between Hui and non-Han were nothing new. Dispatches dating back to the Baoshan incident indicate that local Qing officials were growing worried that the Hui and the indigenous groups might begin to forge alliances. 186 In the 1850s the emperor and high court officials were steering more and more of the empire's resources toward defeating the Taiping Rebellion; in this climate, they brushed aside the possibility of a The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 113 multiethnic alliance in Yunnan as too preposterous to take seriously. As reflected in the emperor's five-point instruction to Hengchun, the Qing court had persuaded itself that the non-Han, if they involved themselves at all, would stay loyal to the government.187 The swiftness with which Hui and other Yi elements banded together quickly punctured the court's optimism.188 By the autumn of 1856 it was being reported that Hui in southern Yunnan had "linked up with non-Han and occupied, burned and seized property."189 Officials in western Yunnan were beginning to report that Hui and Yi were joining forces, with one such band "numbering more than 3,000."190 And in eastern Yunnan-more than in the other two regions-the uprisings were gaining the strong support of non-Han. In and around Dongchuan in northeastern Yunnan, many Yi were flocking to the rebel banner; in the southeast, thousands of Zhuang were joining the Hui in numerous centers of resistance. 191 In neighboring Guizhou Province, the Miao had apparently allied themselves with the Hui.192 In fact, there are no records of any substantial pro-Qing support anywhere in the province in the early months of the rebellion. Some indigenous leaders became major forces in the rebellion, above and beyond their role as allies to the major Hui centers of insurrection. In the Ailao Mountains in the southwest, the Yi leader Li Wenxue had raised a multiethnic force several thousand strong by early June. By year's end he commanded more than ten thousand fighters and controlled territory in four counties.193 According to eyewitness accounts, Li took the title "Grand Commander of the Yi" (yijia bingma dayuanshuai) and adopted a white flag with his surname and title.194 Li Wenxue was relatively quick to accept an official title and lead his armies to fight under the auspices of the Dali regime. Even after the fall of Dali in 1872, the Ailao region would remain loyal to him and continue to fight under him.195 This early multiethnic involvement is important for two reasons. First, from the outset the multiethnic inhabitants of Yunnan never perceived the rebellion simply as a Hui-versus-Han conflict.19% Second, even though the Yi had not been the specific targets of the Han violence, Yi resentment against Qing and Han inroads into their lands was strong. Past narratives of the rebellion, in an effort to lay blame on the Hui, have often perpetuated the false notion that the insurrection was predominantly a Han-Hui conflict. Ironically, it was only the Han who had such a singular focus for their aggression, and that focus was the Hui. 197 The non-Han fervently supported the rebellion, which suggests that in deciding to revolt against the Qing, they were comfortable crossing ethnic lines. Perhaps their motivation was as Du Wenxiu would later characterize it once the violence erupted: "All of the fish in the pond were affected [chiyu jieyang]." "198 114 THE KUNMING MASSACRE AND THE PANTHAY REBELLION Conclusion Any meaningful analysis of the Panthay Rebellion must begin by considering the virulent nature of the Han attacks on the Hui populations in Kunming and the spontaneous and dispersed nature of the insurrection that followed. It is exceedingly difficult to understand why Qing officials and Han participants hated the Hui so much that they tried to eradicate them and thereby ignited the rebellion. It seems unbelievable that Qingsheng's proclamation "slay without being held accountable" could have been interpreted as "kill them one and all." But as Inga Clendinnen cautions in her eloquent study of the Holocaust: "Tone matters as well as text. It is necessary to understand how such extravagant sentences were spoken and such sentiments normalized."199 In other words, in examining the days, weeks, and months immediately following the Kunming Massacre, one must not forget how formalized and engrained anti-Hui sentiment had become among certain segments of the new settler Han and-over time-among imperial officials appointed to Yunnan. These sentiments strongly influenced the central government's perceptions of events in the region-perceptions that dictated their directives to Yunnan officials. The forces behind the large-scale and long-term violence that led to the massacres were quite complex. State and Han accounts-and histories of the rebellion ever since—contend that the massacres of the Hui were triggered by fears of Hui attacks on Han communities. Later investigations proved they were not: reports that the Hui were threatening Han communities were complete fabrications.200 Tragic as it may seem, the Han were motivated mainly by an irrational and overwhelming resentment of the Hui, as evidenced in the Han Chinese determination "to rid Yunnan of this cursed race."201 Such statements must not be treated as hyperbole. Even government sources suggest that by 1839 anti-Hui sentiment was commonplace among the newly arrived Han. By the 1850s, large segments of the population tacitly approved the Han attacks on the Hui. And local and provincial officials were willing to weave an elaborate web of falsehoods to prevent detection of these attacks. The violence that resulted from the widespread acceptance of this behavior far exceeded the more mundane multiethnic violence seen in feuds or short-term hostilities of the sort that occurred in the first decades of the nineteenth century. Not until 1862, almost eight years after the Kunming Massacre, was the court finally informed-in a memorial from Yun-Gui governor-general Pan Duo-of the deep-rooted anti-Hui attitudes at play in the region and their corrupting effects on many of the state officials: "It first originated under Yongchang Prefect Luo Tianchi then continued under Governor-General Hengchun, Governor Shuxing'a, and Provincial Judge Qingsheng who all The Kunming Massacre and the Panthay Rebellion 115 mistakenly listened to rumors and hearsay, and were deceived by 'demons and gods.""202 But who were these "demons and gods" of which Pan spoke? They took many shapes and forms, including the Incense Brotherhoods, the local gentry, and in the case of the Kunming attack, Huang Cong, a retired official from the Board of War. However, the "demons and gods" cannot be explained by any single entity. More and more newly arrived Han and imperial officials had convinced themselves that the Hui needed to be eradicated. Han-Hui tensions became the axis around which local violence revolved, and state policy often unintentionally conformed to this bipolar perspective by accepting the Han-Hui division as a legitimate construct around which to organize pacification efforts. There was no single, mutually agreed upon rationale for the attacks, murders, and massacres other than to kill as many Hui as possible. Seen in this light, the source of the Panthay Rebellion lies less with the rebellious actions of the Hui, and more with fact that killing all Hui had come to be perceived as acceptable behavior and thus beyond questioning. 

