+++
title = "08 Rebellious Visions: Du Wenxiu and the Creation"

+++
of the Dali Sultanate Defending the Yunnan World For the Beijing court, Ma Rulong had been the face of the rebellion in the years following the Kunming Massacre. But for those experiencing the rebellion firsthand, the key political, ideological, and military leader of the rebels was Du Wenxiu. After he captured Dali and was selected as Generalissimo, Sultan, and Leader of all Muslims, Du guided the rise of the independent Dali sultanate in western Yunnan. Throughout his eighteen-year tenure, he worked to establish a style of government that reflected Yunnan's ethnic and religious diversity. Du never saw the insurrection as simply a Han-Hui conflict. From the start, his regime promoted a political vision that reflected each of the region's three ethnic spheres (Han, Hui, Yi); it never sought retribution against Han who had attacked Yi. Thus the Dali state reflected a broad ethnic alliance, one based on anti-Qing rhetoric and on a desire to halt the reorientation of Yunnan that had been triggered by the recent Han migration. To this end, the Dali state often juxtaposed imagery from the Chinese, Islamic, and non-Han traditions; it also made a point of selecting civil and military officials from ethnically diverse backgrounds. Except for Yakub Beg's insurrection in Xinjiang and the Taiping Rebellion in eastern China, the Panthay Rebellion was the only uprising in midnineteenth-century China that succeeded in establishing an independent government.1 To achieve this end, Du Wenxiu and his fellow officials had to put in place an effective and popular system of rule that would attract support from all of Yunnan's diverse ethnic groups. But even before this, the fledging government had to deal with the military threats arising from the Kunming Massacre of 1856. 140 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE MAINTAINING THE VISION The Dali regime faced its strongest challenges in the first years of the rebellion as it struggled to establish solid political and military foundations. On October 11, 1856, less than a month after the rebels secured Dali, Zhang Zhengtai, the Heqing-Lijiang assistant brigade commander, attacked the city with his militia. Zhang had fought his way southward from Lijiang, slaughtering Hui communities at Heqing, Jianchuan, Langqiong, and Dengchuan, before arriving at Dali.2 His inexperienced volunteers were organized well enough to massacre vulnerable Hui communities, but they were no match for the well-prepared and battle-hardened Hui veterans. Zhang was repulsed by Hui forces on all sides and forced to retreat north to his bases in the northwest.3 The following year the Dali forces faced the first formal challenge from the provincial capital. Hoping to crush the rebellion by striking at its core, Shuxing'a ordered Wen Xiang, the provincial military commander, to attack Dali from the east. This attack succeeded at first (see chapter 7) but was disrupted when Ma Rulong's first siege of Kunming broke Wen's supply lines. The following month, while the imperial forces were busy defending the capital, Dali troops marched north in an attempt to overpower Zhang Zhengtai and take Heqing and Lijiang. This attempt failed. Six months later, after a series of strategic errors, the Dali troops found themselves once again defending the northern pass of Shangguan.4 The Dali regime had survived these early challenges but had yet to make any strategically significant territorial gains. Its forces dominated much of western Yunnan, but there were still pockets of resistance controlled by Han militias intent on carrying out the 1856 call to exterminate the Hui. In the spring of 1859 the leader of one of the most dangerous of these pockets, the Han militia commander Dong Jialan, launched a surprise attack from neighboring Binchuan across Lake Erhai. He landed with his troops below Dali and made his way to the city. Using explosives, he breeched the city's outer wall. His troops charged through the opening, catching the city's defenders by surprise, and pressed quickly toward the city center. After several hours, the attack's reinforcements failed to arrive and Dong and his vanguard were forced to retreat.6 Enemy forces would not infiltrate the Dali plain again until the city fell fourteen years later. Later that same spring the Dali regime's luck began to turn: two of the strongest threats to it were eliminated. Zhang Zhengtai, who controlled the wealthy northwestern towns of Lijiang and Heqing, had alienated many of his original supporters by assassinating opponents, practicing open extortion, and generally acting like a tyrant. In April 1859 a militia band several hundred strong and organized by the local gentry entered Heqing and asThe Creation of the Dali Sultanate 141 sassinated Zhang.7 On hearing this, many of his fighters dispersed, which effectively gutted the last major pro-Qing force in northwestern Yunnan. Soon after Zhang's death, Du Wenxiu captured Binchuan, killing the Han militia leader, Dong Jialan.8 Thus within three months, the two men in western Yunnan most likely to threaten the Dali regime were dead." In the spring of 1860, the provincial government launched a threepronged attack against Dali, which Ma Rulong deftly cut from the east, and Cai Fachun attacked in the west (see chapter 6). In early September, Cai Chunfa captured Binchuan (to the west of Dali), decimating the remaining Qing troops there and executing Zhu Kechang. It would be nearly a decade before Dali faced another direct military threat. By the end of 1860, a loose alliance among Ma Rulong, Ma Dexin, and Du Wenxiu controlled broad swathes of Yunnan; the imperial forces controlled only the city of Kunming and pockets of northeastern Yunnan. With provincial officials now concentrating on holding and expanding these areas, Du's military forces began to consolidate and establish functional control over much of western Yunnan. Reassured by the victory over Zhu, Du turned his attention and troops northward. By mid-October, Pingnan armies were in control of northwestern Yunnan's three major urban centers: Jianchuan, Heqing, and Lijiang. 10 A year later, in 1861, key victories in the southwest consolidated the Dali regime's control of western Yunnan. From Tengyue in the southwest to Zhongdian in the north and Chuxiong in the east, Du Wenxiu was now indisputably the ranking political leader in the province. He and his fellow officials could now implement their political vision. With the uprising now in its fifth year, many Yunnanese began to sense that a rebel victory was inevitable. French missionary Chauveau's evaluation of the situation was typical: "The Muslim victories are not solely in the west [xidao] but throughout the entire province... and the Muslim themselves do not hide the fact that their intentions are to conquer the whole of Yunnan and to establish an independent kingdom."11 As these events unfolded, the Qing court remained woefully uninformed about the Dali regime. The earliest detailed information Beijing received about it came in 1857 from the censor Li Peihu. His report was the first official communication to the emperor that the rebels "had established their own seditious state and appointed officials." But he then added incorrectly that "the head rebel who has now proclaimed himself king is the military licentiate Ma Mingkui."12 It would be four more years before Du Wenxiu's full name appeared in a memorial to the emperor. Despite this early obscurity, Du Wenxiu was making great strides in forming a viable political alternative to the Qing in western Yunnan-an alternative based on the province's unique ethnic, cultural, and commercial context. 142 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE Pingnan Government It is a challenge to present a coherent picture of Du Wenxiu's government, given that few documents survived Dali's fall in 1873. The records still extant-lists of officers, lists of regulations, a few personal accounts of imperial envoys who had been sent to Dali-convey more the ideal that informed Du's authority than the manner in which the laws and regulations were implemented. What is clear from those documents is that the sultanate was by and large a military government. Du Wenxiu was the only ruler the independent state would ever know. For that entire period he held the Chinese title "Generalissimo of All Armed Forces and Calvary [zongtong bingma dayuanshuai]," rendered in Arabic as "Leader of All Muslims [Qa'id jami' al-muslimin]."13 Both titles highlighted the role Du sought to play at the beginning of the rebellion. Less clear is whether he began to develop political aspirations as the rebellion ground on. Details about the manner in which the regime's ideology and methods of governance manifested itself come from several European eyewitnesses who were either living in or traveling through rebel-occupied Yunnan at the height of the Dali regime's control. Most tantalizing is the consistency with which the different accounts indicate that Du adopted titles reflecting his de facto position as ruler of the Dali Sultanate. Thomas Cooper, after interviewing Dali rebels in the northwestern Yunnan town of Weixi, stated that Du Wenxiu "had been made Emperor" several years after the founding of the Dali regime.14 In 1866, Father Fenouil, a Catholic missionary in Yunnan, asserted that “Du Wenxiu had now taken the title of the ancient kings of Dali."15 Several years later his superior, Father Ponsot, referred to Du as the "king of the state [roi d'etat]."16 Finally, Francis Garnier, the leader of the French Mekong Expedition, which traveled through Yunnan in 1868, noted in his memoirs that Du Wenxiu "took the title of king on the first day of the Chinese New Year (February 5, 1867)."17 These European reportseach garnering their information from highly disparate sources-tell us consistently that Du had adopted some political titles, yet no document from the Dali government survives that explicitly uses the title of king.18 Some of the confusion may arise from the fact that they may have been attempting to render Du Wenxiu's Islamic title into Chinese.19 Louis de Carné, a member of the Mekong Expedition, noted that "the Muslims call him Sulaiman while the Chinese append to his [Chinese] name the title Yuanshuai [Generalissimo]."20 The strongest confirmation that Du often used the official title Sulaiman is found on the seals of office given to the Dali Sultanate's civil and military The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 143 officials. Typically, the official seals of the Dali regime were divided into two halves. Along one side of the seal the title of office was inscribed in Chinese. Along the other was-in highly stylized Arabic-Du's Islamic name, Sulaiman.21 Du Wenxiu also used this title in an Arabic communication sent to England in 1872.22 The prominent Muslim Yunnanese scholar Ma Lianyuan, who was fluent in both Arabic and Chinese, noted in his account of growing up in Yunnan that "in western Yunnan, Sulaiman, Du Wenxiu, became the ruler in Dali."23 Whatever his title, ultimate decision-making power was entirely in Du's hands. But he did not rule unaided. Helping him make decisions was an executive council of eight civil and ten military ministers. This council brought issues before Du Wenxiu, debated matters of state, and discussed military strategies. All official pronouncements, however, came from Du Wenxiu himself. At the local level, the Dali regime retained the Qing administrative framework of prefectures, departments, and counties. However, these local governments were not headed by prefects or magistrates, as they would have been under the Qing; instead, the Dali administration drew its civil officials from the officer ranks at local military garrisons.24 Other local officials were selected from among the local elites. Besides selecting civil officials, Du plotted out a network of military garrisons early in his reign, even for areas still under Qing administrative control such as eastern Yunnan.25 Within a few years the regime had established a fully functioning network of military and civil officials numbering more than one thousand. Each office had its own seal, which was made of gold, silver, bronze, or wood depending on its ranking within the administration.26 Du Wenxiu's pledge to make the new government as multiethnic as possible would be honored as the Dali regime took shape. A list of ranking officers and officials from around 1867 tells us that more than twenty of these people were of indigenous origin; moreover, there was a ministry devoted entirely to non-Han affairs.27 Among the more powerful of these officials was Li Wenxue (also called Li Zhengxue), an Yi from the Ailao Mountains south of Dali, who had supported the Dali regime from its early days. He was awarded the office of Commander of non-Han Affairs (dasi fan).28 Members of the Bai, Yi, Dai, Hani, Lisu, and Manchu ethnic groups served as either civil or military officials, reflecting Du's stated intention to "spread the offices among the three cultures."29 Securing non-Han support was a key part of Du's strategy, yet it was his regime's capacity to introduce visible and meaningful change to the region that distinguished its rule from the Qing's and that secured the favor of the Yunnanese.30 Du's strategy of pursuing non-Han allies was meant to sever the long-standing tributary ties between Beijing and many of Yunnan's eth144 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE nic groups. In 1863, Dali troops marched into Xishuangbanna and persuaded the local ruler to transfer his allegiance and resources to the Dali regime.31 Along the Burmese border, the local headmen were paying a "tribute of five thousand bushels of rice to the Panthays" by the mid-1860s.32 Captain Bowers, who accompanied a British team into southwestern Yunnan from Burma, noted in reference to those non-Chinese ethnic groups in the Southeast Asian highlands along the Yunnanese border that "all these tribes excepting the Singp'os and Paloungs, are subject to the Panthays, or give them such allegiance as they did their former rulers."33 Du Wenxiu's leadership and his regime's goals attracted support from beyond the former Qing boundaries of western Yunnan. A French official stationed in northern Indochina in the 1880s indicated that by 1863 "the Muslim Chinese that formed an independent state controlled from Dali by the Sultan Sulaiman, had sent to Xien-long, in the upper Mekong, a deputation of 250 individuals to secure the support of the Lao against the Chinese."34 During the rebellion, Europeans reported that the Pingnan regime had won the allegiance of the innumerable small polities all along Yunnan's borders. One of these men indicated that except for one or two, "all these tribes... are subject to the Panthays, or give them such allegiance as they did their former rulers."35 The popularity of the Pingnan regime among the various ethnic groups in eastern Yunnan and western Guizhou indicates that there were equally strong links among far-flung Hui and non-Han communities in the two provinces. As noted earlier, the Yunnanese Hui had formed close military and political alliances with Yi, Zhuang, and other groups. 36 What is rarely acknowledged, however, is the presence of powerful Miao-Hui armies. By 1862, imperial officials in western Guizhou-especially in those counties bordering Yunnan-were expressing growing concern about how easily the various ethnic groups were linking together and taking formal control of all but one or two cities. According to one, imperial officials tried "to pacify the indigenous people, including the Miao and the Yi, but were ineffective [since] they had their own opinions on the state of affairs. . . . The Hui and the yi both are aiding [the Miao] and thus refuse to surrender... resulting in Xinyi alone remaining under imperial control."37 Three days after this official wrote his memorial, Xinyi fell to the multiethnic rebels. For the next decade, many of the ethnically mixed regions of western Guizhou were aligned politically with the concerns and goals of the Dali regime. As Dali's influence grew, there emerged a growing willingness among the Yi to join forces under the Hui. By 1857, Yi from southeast of Kunming had joined with the Hui to form an army of more than ten thousand men.38 This support was vital to the Hui in the early years of the Pingnan regime. The Yi leader Li Wenxue and his army played a crucial role in the rise of the Dali The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 145 sultanate as a political power. Such actions did not go unnoticed or unrewarded by the Hui leaders as they sought to forge their new state. MULTIPLE VISIONS: ISLAMIC, CHINESE, AND NON-HAN IMAGERY IN THE DALI SULTANATE Central to the effort of establishing a viable government as the transformation of Dali into a symbolic center for the newly established Pingnan state. This center was to be imbued with a sense of imperial authority and legitimacy. Du selected terminology from the Islamic and Chinese traditions in creating the Pingnan state's symbolic structure. Symbols from a variety of traditions enabled Du to weave together a seamless mosaic of ideological justifications for the founding of the Pingnan State-a state that would fuse various political, religious, and ethnic symbols into a single coherent denunciation of the Qing court.39 Despite the presence of different symbolic traditions, the Pingnan ideology should not be interpreted as syncretic. Under the new government, all of Yunnan's various cultures retained their identities and continued to be free to articulate shifting local and regional experiences. The regime reorganized Islamic, indigenous, and Chinese forms into a new cultural system heavily colored by the transnational Yunnan context. Understanding this complex mix is fundamental to making any sense of the Panthay Rebellion. In this historical circumstance, Islamic influences coexisted with and sometimes dominated the nascent regime's efforts to establish an independent kingdom-never, though, to the exclusion of the other pan-ethnic and antiQing dimensions. The regime's very public interweaving of these traditions into visible signs of the Dali State reveals the leadership's commitment to inclusivity. The Dali State, from its inception, saw indigenous support as vital, both politically and militarily. A Catholic priest stationed in Yunnan reported that "the indigenous people joined the Muslims because the marauding by the Chinese had, in their minds, rendered all of the [Chinese] odious."40 Qing officials dismissed early reports of Yi animosity toward the state, and many administrators, such as Shuxing'a in a memorial the emperor, deluded themselves that the Hui were simply "seducing the yi peoples."41 The swiftness with which the non-Han united behind the Hui in the months following the Kunming Massacre quickly disabused Qing officials of that idea. In southern Yunnan, a local official reported that Hui "had linked up with non-Han [and] occupied and seized property."42 In western Yunnan, Hui and Yi forces numbered "more than 3,000." Another government document stated that in the eastern part of province "the Muslims united with yi and Nong who all had old grudges against the Chinese."43 This unity reflected 146 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE the close ties that had been formed over centuries. The rapid crystallization of the Hui-Yi alliance highlights the fact that the Qing had allied themselves largely with a segment of the population who were out of touch with Yunnan's multiethnic culture. This group (primarily settler Han and anti-Hui officials) deluded themselves into believing the Hui were the aggressors and the Han the victims and as such that the non-Han populace would come to their aid.44 Both assumptions proved to be tragically incorrect. The Pingnan regime, far from marginalizing non-Han, made a point of incorporating them into its administration.45 According to Chinese scholar Jing Dexin, members of the Bai, Yi, Dai, Hani, Lisu, and Manchu ethnic groups served as civil or military officials—a reflection of Du's stated intention to "spread the offices among the three cultures [Han, Hui, and Yi], since each has their own origins and behaves in their own way." Throughout his reign, Du Wenxiu displayed a genuine appreciation of the role played by non-Han in Yunnan society, both past and present. At one point, before an important military offensive, he alluded to the legacy of the Nanzhao Kingdom-a powerful state that along with Tibet had rivaled Tang China for supremacy in East Asia: "Even if we cannot realize farreaching permanent victory, we can still achieve a smaller more remote success like that of the Nanzhao Kingdom which lasted eight hundred years." By invoking the Nanzhao Kingdom, he was adroitly highlighting Yunnan's history of indigenous rule independent of Chinese control; at the same time he was emphasizing the importance of non-Han groups to the Pingnan State.48 "47 The Pingnan state was clearly multiethnic, but it also had an undeniably strong Islamic hue. Within weeks of his investiture, Du ordered renovations to Dali's central mosque, which had been heavily damaged in the fighting. He followed this with a campaign of mosque construction and restoration that did not end until there were "five or six mosques" in Dali alone.49 British visitors to Tengyue remarked that the Panthay official there paid a similar amount of attention to the city's main mosque; it was "under repair at present, [with] new wings having recently [been] added to it."50 Given the multitude of demands on their time and resources, it is striking that top Pingnan officials paid so much attention to mosques. Besides building and rebuilding mosques, Du established a hierarchy of religious offices charged with overseeing religious affairs. These offices evolved into one of the three administrative divisions of the government, the other two being civil and military.51 In the early years of Du's rule the Pingnan leadership sought to revitalize Islamic learning and culture by establishing Islamic schools (madrasas), by printing the first Quran in China, and by encouraging the use of Arabic among educated Hui.52 The use of Arabic-always a key marker of Islam for the Hui in China-The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 147 became especially significant in the Pingnan state. The Pingnan bureaucracy and the Hui elite employed Arabic whenever possible. It is difficult to measure the degree to which Arabic displaced Chinese, but it is highly unlikely that, as some have suggested, Chinese language and Chinese characters were forbidden. Descriptions of the Pingnan yamen often mention both Arabic and Chinese calligraphy.53 In Du Wenxiu's main hall "the walls were inlaid with marble and white marble slabs with quotations from the Quran, in gold, hung about the place."54 That said, Arabic at the very least became the preferred language for external and diplomatic relations. The first British envoys seeking contact with the Dali regime found this out when they crossed into Pingnan territory from Burma and were presented with documents entirely in Arabic; they were compelled to wait several days until a Chinese translation could be obtained.55 56 
This promotion of Arabic was only one dimension of the Pingnan State's efforts to position itself in the Islamic world. A powerful example of the Dali State embracing Arabic in order to further Islam is found in a proclamation carried to the Muslims of Lhasa by Hui caravaneers in the early 1860s.5 Written in Arabic, the Tibet Proclamation casts the rebellion as a righteous response to treachery by idolaters. It employs Quranic and Islamic metaphors almost exclusively and carefully places the insurgency within an Islamic framework: The cause of the dispute was that the Idolaters and their chiefs assembled together to kill the Muslims and began to insult their religion.... Having abandoned every hope of life, we fought with the Idolaters and God gave us the victory. . . . [The ruler's] name is Sadik, otherwise called Suleiman. He has now established Islamic Law. He administers justice according to the dictates of the Quran and their traditions. Since we have made him our Imam we have been by the decree of God, very victorious.... The Ministers and chiefs under our Imam are as single-hearted as Abu Bakr and as bold as Ali. No one can face them in battle. They are imperious to the Infidel but meek to the Muslim. The metropolis of Infidelity has become a city of Islam!$7 The Tibet Proclamation captures the new state's Islamic tone-a tone that without doubt was important to the Pingnan regime. Yet the Pingnan leaders never let their Muslim beliefs overwhelm the multiethnic character of their state. Indeed, attempts to characterize the Pingnan State as either Islamic or Chinese miss the point entirely. The state was Hui-led, and the Hui never saw being Chinese and being Muslim as mutually exclusive. The most obvious evidence of this inclusive identity was Du's own seal [Fig. 8.1]. On one side was his Chinese title, "Generalissimo [zongtong bingma dayuanshuail," on the other his Islamic title, "Leader of all Muslims [qa'id jami' al-muslimin]." This Islamic title was included in every official chop distributed to the lower civil and military offices.58 148 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE FIGURE 8.1. Du Wenxiu's Seal This inclusiveness permeated Dali's political culture, which consistently employed distinctly Chinese imperial symbols side by side with Islamic ones. In his efforts to transform Dali into the capital of a new state, Du coopted Qing symbols while at the same time challenging their authority with imagery from the previous Ming dynasty and the contemporaneous Taiping rebels. 59 He selected these symbols with meticulous care, choosing ones that would resonate with all groups in Yunnan; he also made sure the seditious meanings of these symbols could not possibly be lost on the new state's subjects. Li Yuzhen, who interviewed long-term Dali residents in the late nineteenth century, noted that Du "set into action a series of building programs based on the Qing imperial institutions in Beijing, including [the construction of] an imperial Forbidden City-[with the walls] a kilometer in circumference. At both the upper and lower passes, he had 'Great Walls' built with only one entrance, which ran from high in the [Cangshan] mountains, and deep into [Erhai] Lake making the valley impenetrable."60 Although he adopted those symbols from the Chinese imperial court, Du highlighted the "foreign" nature of Manchu rule by borrowing titles and styles of dress (including his own imperial robes) from the Ming dynasty— the last "Chinese" dynasty to rule China.61 SIGNS OF DISSENT Historical descriptions of the era make careful note of the sultanate's broad range of political symbols deployed by Du. These symbols helped define and express the state's goals but do not convey which types of popular symbols were adopted by the residents of the newly established state. Among the population at large, perhaps the most common symbol of support for the Dali leaders and Pingnan rule was to cease shaving the forehead The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 149 and pulling back the hair into a queue. Tonsure had been instituted by the Manchu Qing, who required it of all their Chinese subjects as a sign of submission to the new dynasty. Those who did not conform could be sentenced to death and often were. To grow out one's hair was a mark of support for Dali and an act of sedition against Manchu rule.62 Given the traitorous implications, it is not surprising that imperial sources regularly refer to the Dali rebels as "long-haired rebels [changfa Huifei]." Western observers, however, reveal to a much greater extent the degree to which Yunnanese living under rebel control adopted the practice.63 Louis de Carné indicated that Du Wenxiu, "never one to overlook the details," had authorized his subjects "to wear the queue but under the condition that they did not shave their foreheads."64 Thomas Cooper reported that in the Yunnan-Tibet border town of Weixi-which at the time of his visit was under Qing control-"there were a great many Mahomedans in town wearing their long hair, the Mahomedan badge, living in apparent indifference and security."65 Cooper asked one Dali supporter "how it was that they lived in Imperial territory with long hair?"66 The Hui "smiled a little scornfully, and observed that Mahomedan subjects had been well received in Weixi for [the] past two years [under Qing control], and there had been no restriction on the intercourse between Dali and Weixi."67 The Pingnan regime, keen to assert its distinctive political identity, issued an array of elaborate uniforms. As a British mission approached the Dalicontrolled town of Tengyue in southwestern Yunnan, its leader, Edward Sladen, discerned a wide range of "Panthay officers of all grades and in full uniform."68 On arriving in Tengyue he found the Panthay governor, Dasi Kong, wearing “a gray felt hat, somewhat resembling a helmet placed sideways, the front half of the rim being turned up and the back downwards. A gold rosette, set with large precious stones, formed a handsome ornament in front, and a blue silk top-knot fell down behind his back as a long tail. A richly figured, pale blue silk coat reaching to the ankles, and overlapping on the right side, completed his costume."69 Sketches published by another member of the Sladen expedition reveal that many of the soldiers tucked their long queues into elaborate turbans. The uniforms seem to have quickly become potent symbols of the state. Before leaving Burma, Sladen had sent two non-Han Karen escorts ahead to contact the Dali regime. Several weeks later, with the expedition nearing the Yunnan border, the Karen escorts returned bearing letters but dressed in clothes so different from their original outfits that Sladen almost did not recognize them: "The two men were got up most gorgeously in blue jackets and Mahomedan skull-caps, richly braided with silver and gold, and below the former they wore yellow silk coats reaching below the knee, and, sus150 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE pended from the upper button-hole of their jackets, one had a pink and the other a blue, square piece of cloth, like a pocket handkerchief, with an embroidered square at the attached corner. "70 The Dali representatives had dressed the two messengers in clothing that would facilitate their return through a precarious border area—an indication of how familiar and respected their government's official uniforms now were among the general populace. The acceptance of the rebels' long hair and attire-both within and outside the Dali regime's direct sphere of control-tells us that the rebel government was growing in stature in the neighboring regions. It also strongly suggests that the Dali government was seeking to put behind it the conflicts that had ignited the rebellion. Instead, it sought to emphasize the strong multiethnic dimension and vision for the newly founded state. TRADING ON THE MARGINS The caravan trade had long been vital to western Yunnan's economy, and it loomed large in Du Wenxiu's vision of his new state. Initially, trade between western Yunnan and its partners suffered as a result of the rebellion. No clear military front had been established between the imperial and rebel forces, and many towns traded hands four and five times before finally coming under Dali control. By the early 1860s, with territorial boundaries becoming more stable, the Dali government had taken measures to encourage the resumption of trade. The Dali regime promoted trade by promising to protect those traders who crossed into Dali-controlled territory. To this end, it instructed its local magistrates "to indemnify traders for any robberies that might be committed on them in his territory."71 In other words, any goods lost through theft were to be reimbursed by local officials and the inhabitants of the area. This would encourage the local people to safeguard all caravans. The same officials were to post guards at the main passes linking Yunnan to the neighboring regions and offer free lodging to traders.72 Implementing this program at a time of fluctuating borders must have been a sisyphean task. Yet European eyewitnesses suggest that the government succeeded very well in its efforts to promote the caravan trade. Thomas Cooper wrote that local people attributed the considerable level of trade to Du Wenxiu's efforts to foster "trade as much as possible, both by the imposition of light duties and a rigorous administration of justice."73 He added that the traders he encountered all "lauded the security of the White banner [Dali-controlled] territory."74 Indeed, among the Yunnanese, the Dalicontrolled areas had a reputation for being far safer and less corrupt than areas under imperial control. Han and non-Han traders told John AnderThe Creation of the Dali Sultanate 151 son that "in all cases [the Panthay] officers protected the passage of merchants, and dealt much more justly by them than the [imperial] mandarins had been accustomed to do[ing]. "75 Nor were the Dali laws relating to caravans mere idle guidelines. During their six weeks in Tengyue, the Sladen mission witnessed sixteen public executions of those who had broken the caravan laws. These were carried out with a pageantry that astonished them: "The criminal was led to the outskirts of the bazaar by a small escort, with music and banners flying, and, with his hands tied behind his back, was made to kneel by the side of the road. The executioner chopped off the head usually at one blow; the body was buried on the spot, and the ghastly head hung up by the gate of the town."76 Clearly, this was not arbitrary violence, and it indicates how far the Dali Kingdom was willing to go to revive Yunnan's cross-border trade. It was their belief that prosperity would follow stability.77 To help restore the cross-border trade, Du Wenxiu himself established a trading company in Burma.78 He also opened two cotton-trading bureaus in Ava, one of them supervised by his younger sister.79 In Tengyue, the Sladen mission noted the results of these efforts. Anderson, who was the mission's doctor, described the bazaar there as having stalls and shops selling a wide assortment of dry goods, jade, and gold, both for domestic consumption and for trade with Burma.80 The government imposed light duties-far less inflated than in the past-on goods that crossed its borders, and it collected them uniformly. The first official contact a French expedition had with the regime on its way to Dali was a "customs post established on the left bank of the river collecting the duty on the commercial caravans who were traveling towards Dali. "81 Francis Garnier, a member of this expedition, spoke with several Dali officials and learned that in trade with Tibet, "the traders pay at Weixi a duty of onetenth tael per pack-animal." "82 Salt wells were also vital to Dali's economy.83 In an agreement with Ma Rulong after he seized Chuxiong in 1860, the Dali government assumed control of three of the five main salt works in Yunnan. In 1864, Jia Hongzhao memorialized that the Baiyanjing and Heiyanjing salt wells "were all under the control of western Yunnan [Hui] forces and were completely monopolized by the Hui rebels."84 The Qing made efforts to reclaim these wells, but given the substantial revenue earned from them, the Dali government went to considerable effort and expense to retain control.85 The Dali government also invested in improvements to the existing wells, such as one in Qiaohou north of Dali, which was among the most productive of all during the rebellion.86 Du Wenxiu's pragmatic approach allowed Dali to stabilize itself relatively quickly and to extend that stability throughout the territory it con152 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE trolled. Contrast this with conditions in eastern Yunnan and in neighboring Guizhou, where the Miao Rebellion was still raging. Indeed, life under the sultanate offered greater protection from bandits and rogue officials than those areas of Yunnan under nominal imperial control.87 In general, firsthand accounts of the Pingnan State point to an overwhelming concern for political and commercial stability.88 Divided We Stand: Reconfiguring Notions of Hui-ness Despite all the progress the Dali Sultanate had made in its first years, it was forced to reappraise its goals and strategies after Ma Rulong abruptly surrendered to the Qing in 1862 and returned Kunming to imperial control the following year. Ma Rulong's decision to aid the Qing rattled the Pingnan regime and the Qing as well. Obviously, Ma's decision was going to impede Dali's aspirations to control Yunnan completely. Less obvious was the emperor's concern over Ma's abrupt display of loyalty to the Qing. The emperor's advisors were split, with one group advocating that the court continue to follow the recently implemented policy of using Hui to control Hui. They argued that because few resources were available, the emperor had little choice but to use the tools available to him within Yunnan. A second group cautioned that to allow Ma Rulong and officials who had risen through the ranks only after the rebellion started (and who were thus untrustworthy) to fight the rebellion for the Qing would be taking a huge risk. In their view, this policy would reduce Yunnan to a pulp and "Cen [Yuying] and Ma [Rulong] would become the tail that wagged the dog."89 What neither side realized was that Ma Rulong held far less power than both his supporters and detractors imagined. In casting his lot with the Qing, Ma Rulong was gambling that he would be able to negotiate with Du Wenxiu and bring the conflict to a peaceful end. Yet to accomplish this he needed the resources and backing of the Qing. Those in Beijing who hoped to implement "using-Hui-to-control-Hui" favored such a strategy. This scenario perhaps seemed plausible to a court that had few feasible alternatives, but few understood that for every action Ma Rulong took to demonstrate his loyalty to the Qing, he was undermining his standing among the Yunnan Hui. In foiling Ma Rong's 1863 coup attempt, he had made himself look more reliable to the Qing court, but he had also undercut his position among those whose help he needed desperately to convince Du Wenxiu to accept the Qing court's conditions of surrender. At another level, Ma Rulong's defection to the Qing only made the situation worse for the court. The Panthay Rebellion up until 1863 had never The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 153 been wholly unified. As so clearly illustrated during the 1860 Chuxiong campaign, the rebel forces despite their common opposition to the Qing remained divided. Ma Rulong's capitulation fundamentally changed this. Faced with the prospect of Ma Rulong aiding the Qing, his hitherto supporters immediately recognized the need to rally under the Pingnan banner and recognize Du Wenxiu's leadership if they hoped to prevent Yunnan from falling back under Qing dominion. Even without firm Qing support, Ma Rulong did succeed in opening lines of communication between the Pingnan regime and provincial representatives stationed in Kunming. By August 1862, only months after Ma Rulong entered Kunming, Governor Xu Zhiming could report to the emperor that "Ma Dexin's niece and her daughter came from Dali to visit... in order to see the positive results of peace."90 This was the first of many documented cases of Hui traveling between Dali and Kunming in an effort to bring about a negotiated peace. These missions marked a new phase of relations between Dali and Kunming and indicated, far more clearly than before, just what was fueling the rebellion and blocking a peaceful resolution. In 1863, only months after Pan Duo's assassination, Ma Rulong dispatched his first mission to persuade Du Wenxiu to surrender. To seek a settlement, he sent to Dali a team of ten respected Hui headed by Ma Futu.91 At first the negotiations were ineffectual, with each side attempting to convince the other that they alone were the true protectors of the faith in Yunnan.92 Realizing the futility of further debate, Ma Futu admonished Du that his "actions were self-seeking and thus harmful to Muslims (jiaomen), so I will take my leave."93 On the eve of Ma Futu's scheduled departure, when all hope of a resolution seemed lost, a massive earthquake rocked Dali. The Chinese had long seen earthquakes as physical manifestations of Heaven's displeasure over worldly transgressions. Du and his top advisors feared that the earthquake represented just that. Their confidence shaken, several of Du's officials hurried over to Ma Futu's lodgings and implored him to stay another two days. He agreed, and was quickly escorted to an audience with Du, who proposed that the two of them sign three pacts. The first outlined the terms of his surrender to the Qing court; the second indicated in detail how the deeply divided regions of Yunnan would be reunited; the third proposed a marriage agreement between the children of Du Wenxiu and Ma Futu.94 The following day, Ma Futu set out for Kunming with the agreements in hand and Du's promise that if they were satisfactory to Ma Rulong, he would travel to Kunming to surrender. Du and his council began to regret their decision almost immediately. They wavered for several days and then slowly regained their composure as 154 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE well as their determination to fight on.95 Du composed a message to Ma Futu stating that he would abide by the agreements only if Ma Rulong would first accept a post in the Dali government-an option Du knew Ma Rulong could not accept and that would effectively abrogate the agreements. If Ma Rulong failed to agree to Du's condition, the emissaries were to return the signed agreements by messenger. Ma refused Du's demand and returned the agreements. His displeasure was evident in his ominous warning to Du that "even good medicine cannot cure a difficult disease. Western Yunnan will sooner or later be defeated."96 Less than a year later, Yang Zhenpeng, a Hui general who had only recently gone over to the Qing, arrived in Dali asking for an audience with Du Wenxiu. It is unclear why he traveled to Dali, on whose orders, and what his intentions were; the accounts of his visit are tangled and often contradictory. His detractors suggest that after helping capture Yaozhou for the imperial forces, Yang spent his days in drink and lascivious activities. It is alleged that during this time he hatched a plot to assassinate Du.97 He recruited two Hui officers, who were to travel separately to Dali. They agreed to rendezvous with Yang on February 1, 1864, in order to assassinate Du.98 On the appointed day, Yang was able to procure an audience with Du. During that meeting his accomplices tried to force their way into the inner court. Du's guards immediately locked the palace's massive doors, thwarting the attack.99 The two attackers realized their plot had failed and attempted to flee Dali, but the sentinels guarding the lower pass had been alerted and caught them. They were marched back to Dali and brought before Du, who quickly ordered them executed.100 Yang Zhenpeng pleaded ignorance of the entire affair. Many Pingnan officials doubted this; even so, he was pardoned by Du. Around this time, in 1864, Ma Dexin traveled to Dali to make a last formal attempt to negotiate with Du Wenxiu. 101 This would be the only documented occasion during the rebellion that the two met face to face. Ma was sympathetic to Du's cause; even so, he tried to convince Du that by continuing the rebellion he was doing the Qing's bidding. If the fighting continued, Hui would simply be killing Hui. "We should have the [Qing] government fall into a Hui plan," Ma argued, "[and] not let the Hui fall into the government's [plan]." 102 Other accounts indicate that Ma also warned Du that as soon as the Qing court defeated the Taipings (which by 1864 was practically assured), they would begin diverting money, troops, and weaponry into Yunnan, making a Pingnan victory impossible. Despite Ma's foresight-this is precisely what would happen-Du refused to change his position and instead beseeched Ma to accept a position in Dali, one far "more splendid than that which he held in Kunming."103 The negotiations ended in the spring of 1864 with Ma returning to Kunming empty-handed. 104 The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 155 BRIDGING THE MUSLIM-HUI DIVIDE The chasm between the two groups of Hui rebels, as evidenced by these failed negotiations and by Ma Rulong's earlier refusal to join Du's government, indicates that the imperial court was mistaken to view the Hui as a static or monolithic body and as synonymous with Islam. That the Hui did not respond to Han aggression in a uniform or unified manner is consistent with the multiethnic dynamic of Yunnan in general and of the Yunnan Hui in particular. The rift between Ma Rulong and Du Wenxiu is visible not only in the three missions to Dali just described but also in letters the two leaders exchanged over more than five years. These letters vividly illustrate how the Hui in southwestern China perceived their ethnoreligious identity at the time. With regard to other areas of the Muslim world, Dale Eickelman and James Piscatori have suggested that being a Muslim is often less significant than how that role is configured in relation to other customs, identities, and shared "imaginings."105 Ma Rulong, Du Wenxiu, and other Hui expressed themselves with a self-awareness that was narrowly religious but at the same time, and far more broadly, ethnoreligious. Han chroniclers of the rebellion era consistently used several terms to identify the Hui, which were sharply different from the ones the Hui applied to themselves. Throughout the nineteenth century, Qing government documents employed four terms when referring to the Yunnan Hui: Huimin, Huiren, Huizhong, and Huizi. Each contained the Hui ideogram in combination with a second ideogram that indicated "people" or "group of people." The four resulting compound characters had subtle differences; even so, Qing officials and the Han elite used them interchangeably. As noted in chapter 3, Yunnan Hui tended to refer to themselves as either Muslims (mumin) or Hui. Although being Hui meant also being Muslim, the relationship between "Muslim-ness" and other identities (such as local, regional, and occupational) allowed for shifting notions of what it meant to be Hui. The two terms were not synonymous although they did overlap to a degree: Hui were almost certainly Muslims, yet the term mumin had a more restricted meaning. Moreover, neither the Hui loyal to the Pingnan regime nor those allied with the Qing government seemed to have considered their actions inconsistent with their identity as Muslims, Hui, or Chinese. They were able to differentiate between these complementary identities. A good illustration of this relates to how Du Wenxiu and Ma Rulong used the terms Huimin, Huijiao, and mumin in their correspondence between 1862 and 1868. After Ma Rulong's mysterious decision to capitulate to Qing forces in 1862, he and Du vied for the position of leader of the Yunnan Hui. A recurring point of contention in the correspondence between the two leaders— one that persisted for the remaining ten years of the rebellion-related to 156 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE the tension each felt between being a Hui leader and being a Muslim leader. A mumin was part of "one Muslim family"; yet at the same time, a Huimin, Huijiao, or Hui was part of the three peoples (Han, Hui, Yi) that constituted the world of Yunnan. It is difficult to assign meanings to these terms oneand-a-half centuries later: Did this terminology indicate a nested relationship between the two identities or a bifurcated one? A close reading of the documents from this period of unprecedented Hui ascendancy offers a rare glimpse of what this relationship was. In their letters to each other during the rebellion, Du Wenxiu and Ma Rulong seem to have employed mumin when the context was relations between Muslims; in contrast, they more often invoked the terms Hui, Huimin, and Huijiao when writing about the Hui as an ethnic group. Nor was this usage limited to Ma Rulong and Du Wenxiu. In 1862, one year before accepting a commission under Du, Ma Liansheng adopted the title of "Leader of Eastern Yunnan's san jiao Military Affairs" (zongtong yidong sanjiao junfu). 106 A few months after defecting to the Qing, Ma Rulong wrote to Du Wenxiu to persuade him to end his resistance. He began this letter by justifying his actions: Looking back at all the past dynasties, the Qing has treated its people [min] benevolently. . . . The violence [against the Hui] in Yunnan, was clearly not at the court's instigation. Just think, if the Hui [Huimin] of each province can have peace, why would [the court] want to wipe out only those of Yunnan? It was all because the [local] officials were not honorable, [instead] stirring up problems and reporting it as Han-Hui violence. Local officials have now clarified that the uprising was a result of Han massacring Hui [han mie hui] so the court has decreed that a strategy of peaceful resolution be followed and all officials are now peacefully complying.107 Ma was portraying the earlier conflicts and rebellion in ethnic terms as Han versus Hui. Yet having just defected to the Qing, he could hardly emphasize his ethnic allegiance as a Hui in this letter. So instead, in the next paragraph, he repeatedly used the term mumin in an effort to highlight the religious beliefs he shared with Du: "Given that all Muslims [mumin] are one family and that now two-thirds of Yunnan has negotiated peace the one [Muslim] family is the most important point. . . . Peace is really for the good of Muslims [Mumin] as a whole, with absolutely no desire to harm the intentions of the Western Yunnan [Muslims]." 108 What is striking about this letter, aside from Ma's considerable bravado, is his effort to tack back and forth: he discusses the Hui in religious terms, and then he discusses them in ethnic terms, always distinguishing between the two identities, never conflating them. In the above extracts Ma carefully uses the term Hui when describing the Muslim Yunnanese as the victims of the early violence; yet in the second part of the letter he exclusively employs the term mumin. He deftly broaches this division between an ethnic HuiThe Creation of the Dali Sultanate 157 identity and a religious Muslim identity when explaining to Du why the Hui have thus far succeeded in their rebellion: "The reason we, the Hui, are winning all our battles is that we as mumin soldiers 109 are not fighting for [personal] reputation and money, but for Islam [jiaomen], therefore, God [zhenzhu] is protecting us."110 Ma Rulong's letter points to a disconnect between the terms Hui (Huimin) and Muslim (mumin), with the former referring to a group of distinct people and the latter to a community of believers. It is likely that in using mumin, Ma was hoping to persuade Du as a fellow Muslim to join him in a common action. Yet he employed Huimin when describing objectively the treatment of the Hui as an ethnic group at the hands of the Qing government. Du Wenxiu replied less than a week after receiving Ma's letter. He categorically refuted each of Ma's appeals and amplified the rigid distinction between Huimin and mumin. In a direct rejoinder to Ma's plea for the two of them to act as "one Muslim family," he wrote: "[Obviously] all Muslims [mumin] under Heaven are one family, so why do we need to differentiate between different groups [within Islam]? Now [the Pingnan regime] is setting up the posts of governor, general, officers, commanders, etc., and although they are outwardly only titles, inwardly they are supporting all believers [jiaomen] so friends and families near and far all happily follow."111 Du then indicated that although he and Ma were part of one family as fellow Muslims, Ma's defection to the Qing was the reason why the Yunnan Hui were divided. To summarize, the correspondence between Ma and Du indicates clearly that both men distinguished between mumin and Huimin; this in turn sheds light on an important aspect of Hui identity in late imperial Yunnan. It does not, however, fully explain the ambiguity of the terminology they used-terminology that is still used today. An example of this ambiguity relates to the term Huijiao. The Hui rarely use this term among themselves to refer to Islam. During his fieldwork among Muslim Chinese communities in the 1980s, Gladney "rarely heard Hui refer to themselves as Hui jiao tu [Hui religion disciples] and only occasionally as Hui jiao."112 This parallels what we see in Hui documents written during the rebellion-again, Huijiao rarely appears. The question is, "Why not?" Part of the answer is that for the Yunnan Hui the term had a highly specific meaning. It did not simply refer to their religious beliefs; instead, it pointed to something entirely different from Islam-to a broader set of ethnic markers, traditions, and occupational tendencies that defined what it meant to be Hui. Several years after this initial exchange of letters, during the peak of the Pingnan offensive in 1868, Ma Rulong wrote a letter to a senior Pingnan official in which he elucidated the distinction between being Hui and being Muslim. Besides restating his earlier arguments, he rather disingenuously 158 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE called on the common religious beliefs of the Yunnan Hui past and present, hoping to persuade the Pingnan regime to give up its resistance: Our ancestors were all subjects of the Qing, how could our generation try and change it? Would that not lead us to adopting a position of no loyalty or filial duty? More to the point, the Hui [huizhong] of every province are already obeying [the Qing], so that even if the whole of Yunnan were to rebel we are simply putting ourselves on the outside [of the Qing]. How could that hurt the court? What good will that achieve for my kind (wo jiao)?... That the religion of my fellow Hui [wo Hui zhijiao] have become more known since the Qing... we cannot say that the court is not treating our kind [wojiao] graciously.113 Throughout his appeal, Ma repeatedly invokes terms such as coreligionists (tongjiao), Muslims (mumin), and Hui people (Huizhong, Huimin). Especially revealing is Ma's use of wojiao and "the religion of my fellow Hui [wo Hui zhijiao]." Clearly, Ma was seeking to distinguish "my kind [wojiao]”— a phrase that in the traditional context would undoubtedly be translated as Islam-from "the religion of my fellow Hui [wo Hui zhijiao]." This somewhat clumsy turn of phrase is also significant in that grammatically speaking, it upholds the distinction between being Hui and being Muslim while indicating the strong links between the two. Finally, Ma, several paragraphs later, reinforces this ethnoreligious division when he chides the Pingnan Hui by stating: "How can I not know that the Hui of Western Yunnan are [part of] the Muslim family [mumin yijia]?"114 Untangling Du Wenxiu's and Ma Rulong's usage of the terms mumin and Hui may on the surface appear overly complicated. There are, however, several reasons why Hui probably does not simply refer to a Chinese subset within the larger global Muslim community. If Hui were simply Han Chinese who practiced Islam, one would expect this to be self-evident. At the very least, it hardly seems to merit Ma's sharp reply to Du that he obviously knew that the Hui of western Yunnan were part of the Muslim family (mumin yijia).115 Plainly stated, the Panthay Rebellion either exposed or accentuated the gap between being Hui and being Muslim—a gap that Ma Rulong tried desperately to paper over in order to bring about the surrender of Du and his Pingnan regime. This in turn raises a quite different question: If Ma Rulong and (as we will see) Du Wenxiu did not mean Islam when they used the term Huijiao, what did they mean? Present in all of the letters examined above is the Chinese term jiao. Often glossed as "religion" in modern Chinese and as "teachings" in the early modern era, it was apparently employed in the multiethnic context of nineteenth-century Yunnan as shorthand for the broad cultural customs of a particular ethnic group. 116 During the rebellion, jiao assumed a meaning The Creation of the Dali Sultanate 159 closer to what today might be referred to as "culture." This meaning of jiao appeared most unambiguously in the commonly used term san jiao, which served as an abbreviated or alternative way to denote Yunnan's "three cultures." Within Yunnan the use of jiao in conjunction with an ethnonym tended to be employed, not pejoratively in distinguishing one group's beliefs from those of others, but rather as an open acknowledgment of the salient cultural and ethnic aspects of each ethnic grouping present in Yunnan. This meaning is most visible in the phrase san jiao, which was often used in China proper to denote the three main religions of the Han ChineseConfucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism. In Yunnan it served as a formulaic reference denoting the "three cultures" (e.g., Han, Hui, Yi) of the region. Indeed, it seems that the term san jiao was applied along ethnic lines denoting all of the ethnic groups in Yunnan in the same manner that sanyi, or the three regions, referred to all of Yunnan. Ma Rulong and Du Wenxiu both employed the term san jiao in their correspondence in an attempt to situate their actions as Hui within Yunnan's broader ethnic context and to justify their decisions as serving the interests of all Yunnanese regardless of their ethnicity. In his 1868 letter to Du, in emphasizing his desire for peace, Ma used san jiao when rationalizing his surrender to the Qing: "In 1862, I saw the peoples of the three cultures [san jiao] suffering great misery and killing [one another] and was afraid it would offend God. So I led the South and Eastern Hui [Huijiao] into the provincial capital to be pacified."117 Du, in his Declaration of War, a document posted throughout the Pingnan State in 1867, eloquently employed san jiao to promote the regime's multiethnic agenda in its battle against the Qing: "Ponder for a moment that in Yunnan province, the three cultures [san jiao] of the Han, Hui and yi [were peacefully] coexisting for [the past] one thousand years. . . . [But] ever since the Manchu Qing dynasty was founded my people have been mistreated for two hundred years."118 Du's formulation explicitly designated the groups constituting the "three cultures" as Han, Hui, and Yi while implying that these three groupswhich formed the san jiao-represented a distinctive Yunnanese culture. In this context, it makes no sense to interpret san jiao as the "three religions"; when understood in the triadic ethnic formulation of Yunnan society, the term becomes far more intelligible.1 119 LINES IN THE SAND The debate between Du Wenxiu and Ma Rulong and the terms they employed highlight the complex formation of religious, ethnic, and politi160 THE CREATION OF THE DALI SULTANATE cal consciousness in China's late imperial period. Various labels did overlap and were often used to refer to the same people; furthermore, these terms were often referents for quite distinct identities. In any analysis of nineteenthcentury Yunnan, an awareness of these distinctions is critical. With regard to the Hui, the Han Chinese often employed terms in ways that erased all distinctions among religious, ethnic, and regional identities. To equate the Han's refusal to differentiate these identities with an absence of Hui ethnic identity is to perpetuate that Han bias today. These conflicting conceptions of ethnicity and religion were not simply a war of words. For the Dali regime to sustain itself as a political entity outside Qing authority, it would require more than a carefully constructed ideology. Du Wenxiu, his multiethnic followers, and the Dali Sultanate itself were always aware that their fate would depend in large part on events outside their independent realm. After the Taiping Rebellion was defeated they realized they could no longer sit back in western Yunnan and let other powers decide their fate. By now, Ma Rulong and Du Wenxiu knew that one was bound to vanquish the other. But who would it be? 

