+++
title = "10 Epilogue: The Aftermath of Rebellion"

+++

CHAPTER IO Epilogue: The Aftermath of Rebellion 

The static, two-dimensional, and-for the imperial court-convenient portrayal of the Panthay Rebellion as simply a "Muslim rebellion" has endured until the present day. It was the last of the mid-nineteenth-century rebellions in China to be suppressed, and this narrative of the rebellion meshed nicely with the court's efforts to portray itself as a powerful government that was not morally bankrupt. It is notable that representations of the Yunnan Hui in Western and Chinese scholarship have barely changed since the Hui were assigned an ethnic classification separate from the Han and the Yi in the nineteenth century.

Few earlier or present-day accounts of the rebellion refer to the increasingly violent Han massacres of the Hui in 1839, 1845, and 1856. Nor do these accounts, which are rooted in Han-Hui dualism, point out that the Dali regime had strong multiethnic support. Because these biased accounts have been perpetuated, the Yunnan Hui are still reified today, just as they were 150 years ago, and the interactive nature of Yunnan society continues to be ignored. The schema does tell us how the Han Chinese and the Qing framed the rebellion; but it does little to shed light on how the Hui and other ethnic groups living in Yunnan (including some Han) perceived the rebellion and why they resisted the violence against them so strongly and for so many decades. Nor does this incomplete historical record show how the diverse groups making up the Dali State constructed a new political framework reflecting their multiethnic perspective.

The Panthay Rebellion devastated Yunnan. In a memorial to the throne, Governor-General Cen Yuying estimated that "the total population of the province was not fifty percent of what it had been prior to the rebellion."1 If that is accurate, and if James Lee's estimate of ten million people for Yunnan's population before the rebellion is correct, fewer than five million people remained in the province in 1874.2 However, the dramatic drop in population cannot be attributed entirely to the rebellion itself. As French explorer Louis de Carné suggested, it was the rebellion together with "epi186 EPILOGUE: THE AFTERMATH OF REBELLION demics, a scarcity of goods, and emigration that had reduced... the population of Yunnan by nearly half."3 Western Yunnan was hit especially hard by the rebellion. The city of Chuxiong, which changed hands at least six times during the rebellion, was said to have lost 90 percent of its original population by the time it was retaken by the Qing in 1869.4 Baoshan had been one of the largest and wealthiest cities in western Yunnan; it emerged from the rebellion with "barely ten to twenty percent of its former population remaining."5 Jingdong in southwestern Yunnan went from a registered population of more than five hundred households to fewer than fifty. When the Scottish traveler Archibald Colquhoun visited there a decade later, he found a city of "half-ruined outer walls, yamens, gateways and buildings of various sorts.

It is often overlooked how many Hui fled to highland Southeast Asia— to northern Burma, Laos, and Thailand-in the mid-nineteenth century. Local accounts of this population movement talk of a Ho (or Haw) invasion. Given the likelihood that Hui should be included in this broad ethnic category, it is fair to suggest that many former Pingnan rebels fled south to escape the Qing armies.

With the withdrawal of the Pingnan regime, Chinese imperial oversight returned quickly. In a fascinating description of the return of Chinese influence, one European reported that "these excellent Shans... were troubled in mind by a Proclamation just issued by the Governor-General Cen, ordering them, or, rather their wives and daughters to adopt the Chinese dress. They were of the opinion, they said, that everyone should be allowed to follow his own culture ("jiao"), theirs was that women should dress in tunics and skirts, not sacks and trousers."7 In this book I have contended that the Pingnan regime tolerated other ethnic groups or at the very least benignly neglected them; I have also highlighted the role that culture (jiao) played in the Yunnanese world view. The defeat of the Dali-centered rebel movement marked the beginning of renewed efforts by the imperial government to control its border regions and influence the cultures of those who lived in those regions.

In its aftermath, the Panthay Rebellion (like the Pingnan regime itself) affected an area much broader than what had fallen under its direct control. In his study of border history, violence, and myth, Proschan posits that the highlands of Southeast Asia were overwhelmed in the mid-nineteenth century by a southward-moving wave of Chinese irregular troops known as the Yellow, Red, or Black Flags (the banners under which the different groups massed). Furthermore, "during the course of their penetration, the Ho were allied from time to time with local Tai-Lao groups (including most notably, the Tai chief of the Sip Song Chau Tai, Cam-Houm or Deo Van Tri) and, most importantly from our perspective, with the Kmhmu."8 Significantly,Epilogue: The Aftermath of Rebellion 187 Proschan's data indicate that most of these outbreaks of violence occurred in the years immediately after the Panthay Rebellion—many years after the end of the Taiping Rebellion, which many have long considered the catalyst. A French official traveling through the region several years later suggested that "throughout the era [of the rebellion]... Tongkin [northern Vietnam] served as a refuge for the defeated and troubled almost without interruption." In what is likely a reflection of their involvement, there are Muslim Chinese settlements throughout this same region to the present day. This is not to suggest that former Taiping rebels were not involved; rather, I am suggesting that the Pingnan regime's emphasis on Southeast Asia led to this population movement in the years after its fall.

Whichever ethnic group dominated these "Chinese" groups from the north, within Yunnan no single group suffered more than the Muslim Yunnanese after the rebellion ended. When the rebellion began, around one million Hui lived in the province; by 1874, only a small fraction remained. Yunnan's Hui population still has not recovered to its prerebellion level. Because they led most of the rebel activities, they died during the final campaigns far out of proportion to their numbers. Thousands of Hui were slaughtered as the Qing armies moved westward, taking one rebel city after the next.

Quite often, besieged populations preferred death to capture. In early 1873 the residents of Menghua, a day south of Dali, unable to find ways to continue resistance and intent on depriving their enemies of the satisfaction of killing them, committed mass suicide. According to one account: "They assembled all the precious objects [of the city] into one group of houses and lit it on fire. When the flames were almost out, poison was distributed to the women, children and elderly, and when the men who had been manning the defenses against the imperial forces were all but alone, they lit the city on fire and only then opened the city gates to their assailants." 10 Almost certainly, actions like these were a response to the practice of Qing armies (except that of Ma Rulong) to promise to spare those Hui who surrendered only to slaughter them after they laid down their arms.

The Qing forces commonly treated any Hui who survived-usually women and children-as part of the spoils. The French adventurer Jean Dupuis traveled throughout the province in the years immediately after the fall of Dali. "I see still even now in Kunming," he noted, "soldiers in possession of vast sums [of money] followed by the [captured] women and children who they sell here."11 In cities where Hui did survive, Qing officials often forbade them to rebuild their mosques. A traveler to Yunnan more than twenty years after the rebellion's end discovered in the southwestern city of Tengyue that "the Muslims were not authorized to rebuild a mosque that would allow them to freely pray to God. They had succeeded, a little clandestinely, in a private 188 EPILOGUE: THE AFTERMATH OF REBELLION home to carry out their Friday prayers and, in this same home, slaughter, according to the proper rites, the cows and sheep." 12 In Dali, two of the four surviving mosques had been converted into Buddhist temples; the other two remained closed.13 Anti-Hui attitudes, reminiscent of those prevalent in prerebellion Yunnan, were common in all public and private interactions between Hui and Han. Nothing was more indicative of the renewed official acceptance of anti-Hui bias than the actions of Cen Yuying in the years after the rebellion. A task made much easier when the emperor promoted him to governorgeneral as an acknowledgment of his actions during the rebellion. For his greatest act of revenge, he waited until Ma Rulong had been promoted to a new post outside Yunnan; then, in April 1874 he ordered an investigation into the recent activities of Ma Dexin, the most revered Muslim leader in the province. Charging Ma Dexin and his associates with attempting to foment unrest, the investigating official had three prominent local Hui killed immediately and Ma Dexin arrested. "I then sent Yunnan Prefect Mao Qinglin [to bring Ma Dexin back to the capital]," Cen wrote in a memorial to the emperor, "but when they reached Anjiang village Ma Dexin went on a hunger strike and was near death. So I ordered that he be summarily executed."14 Few Hui in the province were deceived by Cen's words; they knew full well that if such a prominent Hui leader could be openly assassinated, there was little hope for those Hui who hoped to begin life anew.

As a result of Qing brutality and official bias, many Muslim Yunnanese simply moved away, establishing communities in the highlands of Burma and Thailand.15 In these new settlements they continued to participate in cross-border trade and to practice their religious beliefs without fear of retribution. Not all of these groups sought peace, however; some seem to have been active as bandits along Yunnan's southern frontier. 16 There was no official discussion of the rebellion and no effort to address the reasons for it so as to prevent a recurrence. When the rebellion ended, Cen Yuying focused on returning Yunnan to stability and normalcy. He requested—and was granted—a suspension of taxes, an increase in permanent scholarships for holders of military and civil degrees, and a permanent increase in the provincial degree quota.17 This last point was particularly significant for Yunnan's elite. The rebellion had prevented provincial exams from being held in 1858, 1861, 1864, and 1867 (besides putting a stop to special exams in 1859 and 1862), and those exam quotas now needed to be made up. It had also resulted in a diminished pool of qualified degree candidates. It would be many years before Yunnan again began producing enough scholars to fill the higher quotas that had been granted.

In his attempts to restore order, Cen barely acknowledged the rebellion's causes. His focus on Yunnan's immediate needs at the end of the rebellion Epilogue: The Aftermath of Rebellion 189 is understandable, yet it can be argued that this lack of reflection by Cen and other Han officials contributed to the myth that the Muslim Yunnanese were the main instigators of the Panthay Rebellion. Absent from Cen's actions are investigations in response to calls for reform by provincial officials such as Wu Zhenyu, Sang Chunrong, and Lao Chongguang. Thus, ironically, the seventeen-year-long Panthay Rebellion had been quelled by officials who had far more in common with those who began the anti-Hui violence than with those few individuals who attempted to stop it. This generation of officials depicted the rebellion as almost entirely a result of Hui violence against the Qing.

This lack of reflection on the rebellion's causes is also rooted in the fact that in the years immediately following the rebellion, new and urgent challenges from British and French interests were demanding the full attention of provincial leaders and the Qing court. In the south, the French were beginning to examine the possibility of opening the Red River to trade with Yunnan. In the west, the British were renewing their efforts to restore commerce between Burma and China. While Cen Yuying tried to meet these challenges, unresolved issues between Yunnan's non-Han and Hui populations continued to fester, disrupting any sense of normalcy.

Cen's dismissive attitude toward the enduring unrest among the nonHan led to Yunnan's first major diplomatic incident: in early 1875, British interpreter Augustus Margary was killed by remnant non-Han rebels while trying to help the Browne Expedition cross from Burma into Yunnan. The ensuing diplomatic fray ended with the Qing court agreeing to a new set of concessions and the payment of a large indemnity.1 18 An often overlooked dimension of the rebellion is the complex impact it had on Yunnan's multiethnic population. Both the Qing court and the new provincial elite well realized that the Hui's many non-Han allies had played a pivotal role in the Panthay Rebellion. Throughout the rebellion, local and provincial officials reported on this multiethnic involvement.19 The Qing government tended to conceptualize the non-Han as monolithic entity, like the non-Han category (yi) itself, and this points to a fundamental flaw in the court's interpretation of the rebellion. Like the Hui, the non-Han were highly fractured along regional and ethnic lines, to the point that ethnic groups sometimes fought both the Chinese and the Hui.20 What held the alliance together was that most of the groups involved were unified in their opposition to the Qing and new Han immigrants.

The Yi's general support of the Hui rebels is what had given the rebellion its potency. Initially this Yi support had been specifically against local Han and local authorities, with the range of any given ethnic group largely restricted to one area. One can make the case that Ma Rulong's range of operations was delimited in the same manner. It is worth noting here that the 190 EPILOGUE: THE AFTERMATH OF REBELLION indigenous ethnic groups' resistance to the Qing presence-whether in the form of new Han immigrants, increased taxes or banditry, or problems relating to tusi governance and baojia policies-did not end with the defeat of Du Wenxiu.

Indeed, even after the rebellion ended, Yunnan continued to be wracked by many of the same problems that had plagued the region prior to 1856. Relations between Han and the various other ethnic groups were still contentious, and violence continued to break out. In the summer of 1875, Father Ponsot wrote about a new rebellion among a non-Han group in southwestern Yunnan, which "no longer under Muslim rule sought to revolt and liberate themselves from Chinese authority."21 In another incident along Yunnan's border with Vietnam, insurgent groups composed of former rebels and non-Han bandits grabbed control of commerce along the Red River and created a zone of authority that imperial troops dared not enter.22 The sustained presence of non-Hui resistance-well after the rebellion was supposedly suppressed—contradicts the claims of Cen Yuying and others that the rebellion had been entirely a Han-Hui affair. Rather, the Panthay Rebellion in many ways was the final battle in a centuries-long process to formally and firmly orient Yunnan toward central China.

The violence perpetrated under the rubric "Panthay Rebellion" requires more than the superficial rendering that too often has been given by historians. To focus solely on the Muslim Yunnanese insurrection is to overlook the impact of the Han aggression that did so much to ignite this conflict. Those groups who found an initial source of unity in the face of Han aggression gave the rebellion its form. Yet these groups, even though they were linked by opposition to economic exploitation and religious discrimination and by a yearning for ethnic survival, lacked a long-term unifying force strong enough to overcome their diversity. In the end, the government was able to crush the multiethnic resistance, but it never did answer for itself the complex question of how to sustain imperial rule in an ethnically complex region. Only by understanding the many ethnic, religious, and political actions that precipitated the Panthay Rebellion can we begin to see that it was more—much more-than simply a conflict between Han and Hui.