+++
title = "03  Chapter          3         Buddhism vis-a-vis Hinduism1"

+++
Chapter 3  
Buddhism vis-a-vis Hinduism[1](#1)

Buddhism is returning home to India after a long exile of a thousand
years and, like the proverbial prodigal son, is being received with open
arms. Religious tolerance of the average Hindu partly explains the warm
reception. But a very important reason is the fact that Buddha and
Buddhism form an intimate part of Hindu consciousness. Buddha was a
Hindu. Buddhism is Hindu in its origin and development, in its art and
architecture, iconography, language, beliefs, psychology, names,
nomenclature, religious vows and spiritual discipline. Though living in
distant lands for so long, it remains essentially Hindu, at least, in
the expression of its religious ideals and spiritual experience at the
highest level. Hinduism is not all Buddhism, but Buddhism forms part of
the ethos which is essentially Hindu.

Though that is the general reaction of an average Hindu who carries
within him the memories of a distant past, academic scholarship, dealing
in views and schools of thought as self-sufficient entities and
discussing religious systems of thought divorced from the living
tradition of religion, has reached quite a different conclusion.
According to these scholars and translators, Buddhism was a revolt
against Hinduism, not only against certain prevalent sacrificial cults
and certain rigidities in caste organization, but also against the whole
spiritual tradition and premises of the age.

In fact, certain intellectuals and groups of materialist-secularist
persuasion are extending a warm welcome to Buddhism because in it they
see a timely corrective to the "supernatural prejudices" of Hinduism
regarding God and Soul, "superstitions which weaken a nation". According
to them, Buddha was rather a clever student of logical positivism, a
thorough-going rationalist and empiricist. Endowed with healthy
scepticism, he saw through the so-called established truths of religion,
but being also discreet he refrained from expressing his *real* opinions
on religious questions too fully and openly. Thus observing tactical
silence over religious questions he taught people a *rational morality*
called his three *Sîlas*, in this way lopping off by means of an Occam's
razor the whole mystical superstructure.

Thus Buddhism is being recommended as a school of rationality and social
morality without the superfluous adjuncts of religion: morality without
God or Soul.[2](#2)  
  
A deeper study does not support these evaluations of Buddhism. True,
Buddha was a great mind whose eyes pierced through the show of things to
their core, but he was no rationalist in the modern sense of the term.
Instead, he had a healthy contempt for intellectual systems and theories
so popular with rationalists of all ages. On more than one occasion (in
Aggi-vacchagotta sutta, Majjhima Nikâya, for example), he called these
theories "a net of sophistry (*diTThi-jâla*), a web of tangle
(*diTThi-ganthi*), a jungle (*diTThi-gahana*), a wilderness
(*diTThi-kântâra*), a thorn or puppet-show (*diTThi-visûka*), a writhing
(*diTThi-vipphandita*), a fetter (*diTThi-saMyojana*), and an intoxicant
(*diTThi-âsava*)... coupled with misery, ruin, despair and agony
(*dukkha, vighâta, daurmanasya, upayâsa*)". For arriving at truth, he
did not adopt the method of classification, comparison, verification,
deduction, experimentation which is what rational approach means, but
the method of moral purification, meditation, intuition, passive waiting
combined with alert watchfulness, steady and sustained aspiration, all
leading to transcendental illumination, progressive or sudden - the
method of going beyond discursive mind for the light of the Truth.

Nor do we agree with the other view which equates Buddhism with a moral
discipline alone. Buddha himself rejected this view of his teachings in
no uncertain terms. He affirmed that his teachings on moral conduct were
"not significant" and were only of "secondary, importance." He declared
that his teachings regarding meditation (*samâdhi*) and transcendental
knowledge (*prajñâ*) were the most important. Those who admired him for
his moral teachings alone were, according to him, "witlings", men of
ordinary intelligence (*puthujjana*).[3](#3)

So Buddha's rationality and morality had a transcendental base above.
This transcendence is the highlight and essence of Buddha's teachings,
the justification of his claim to be a great world teacher and guide.

Similarly, Buddha's compassion was not merely secular or even
humanistic; rather it was a deep and living concern of the "Enlightened
One" for worldly creatures caught in the wheel of existence, birth,
disease, decay, old age, death. The peace he taught was Upanishadic
"peace beyond understanding", not merely civic and political truce
amongst men and nations. The joy he taught was not just a physical
release of tension or a physical sense of well-being or even some
psychological euphoria; on the other hand, it was the joy of
emancipation from the web of repeated births.

After this brief digression, we come back to the point from where we
started, namely, the relationship of Buddhism with Hinduism.

A discussion of this relationship is important for various reasons.
Firstly, because it will help us to understand the deeper ideas and
ideals of half the world which owes allegiance to the two religions.
Secondly, because it will be interesting and instructive to see how the
world's two most ancient, most mystical, most abiding, most creative
religions have expressed their intuition of the Transcendent. Thirdly,
because, it may help all spiritual seekers in their inner exploration,
illumine their paths and give voice to their own experiences. To
understand the two religions is to understand some of the deepest
questions relating to spiritual theology, a whole gamut of yogic
practices and spiritual disciplines.

  
Buddha's Silence

The nature of relationship between Hinduism and Buddhism is clouded and
misunderstood and its intimacy minimized for two reasons.

One reason is Buddha's silence over such fundamental questions as
*Brahma*, God and soul, questions which occupy the centre of interest in
the Upanishadic literature. The other reason is Buddha's individual
nuances and emphases. These nuances are not lacking in the Upanishads;
but there they form only a part of a larger whole, and, therefore, do
not create the same one-sided impression of escapism and painfulness of
existence.

First, we shall discuss Buddha's silence. The reasons why he refrained
from discussions relating to God and soul are two. He refused to answer
all questions that did not lead to an individual's practical spiritual
benefit. Spirituality tends to be very practical. It avoids all idle
preoccupation with intellectual systems.

It was eminently necessary in the days of Buddha. From the Buddhist
accounts of those days one finds that the country was reeking with
innumerable soul-losing systems of thought, a bewildering maze of
opinions in which the mind was irretrievably lost. There prevailed 62
systems of philosophy, 18 theories regarding the origin of the world, 44
theories regarding its end. There were 23 methods of penance in food, 12
in clothing. There were interminable discussions regarding the state of
the soul after death. There were *akriyâvâdins, daivavâdins, jaDavâdins,
akritavâdins, aniSchitavâdins*, dialecticians and intellectuals of all
varieties. There were big halls in every city where intellectuals
foregathered and discussed theories regarding God, soul, time and space.
No wonder the soul got lost in these intellectual exercises. Mentation
became a perfect substitute for God-seeking. For a spiritualist, this
atmosphere is truly uninviting. Right effort is more important than idle
cerebration. No wonder Buddha refused to entertain these questions.
Clever people would come to him and put the same question in several
forms (mostly in the form of the quadrilemma), but Buddha responded to
them with silence.

That the interests of Buddha were fully practical is very well brought
out by a dialogue the Blessed One had with a monk named Venerable
MâluNkyaputta. The monk said to himself: "These theories which the
Blessed One has left unelucidated, has set aside and rejected - that the
world is eternal, that the world is not eternal, that the world is
finite, that the world is infinite, that the soul and the body are
identical, that the soul is one thing and the body another, that the
saint exists after death, that the saint does not exist after death,
that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after death - these the
Blessed One does not elucidate to me." He therefore decided that if the
Blessed One did not do that he would abandon religious discipleship.

The Blessed One called him dull and silly (*mogha-purusha*) and answered
his doubts with the help of an inimitable illustration. He began by
saying: "It is as if, MâluNkyaputta, a man had been wounded by an arrow
thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and companions, his
relatives and kinsfolk, were to procure for him a physician or surgeon;
and the sick man was to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
1 have learnt whether the man who wounded me belonged to the warrior
caste, or to the Brahmin caste, or to the agricultural caste, or to the
menial caste; learnt his name and the clan he belonged to; learnt
whether he was tall, short, or of the middle height; was black, dusky or
of a yellow skin; was from this or that village or town or city; whether
the bow which wounded me was a *châpa* or a *kodaNDa*; whether the
bowstring was made from swallow-wort or bamboo or sinew or *mârava* or
from wilk-weed; whether the shaft was a *kaccha* or a *repima*; whether
it was feathered from the wings of a vulture, a heron, a falcon, a
peacock, or a *sithilahanu*; whether it was wound round with the sinews
of an ox, a buffalo, a ruru dear or of a monkey; whether it was an
ordinary arrow, or a claw-headed arrow, or a *vekaNDa*, or an iron
arrow, or a calf-tooth arrow, or a *karavîrapaTTa*'. That man would die
MâluNkyaputta, without ever having learnt this."

"In exactly the same way," Lord Buddha added, "MâluNkyaputta, any one
who should say, 'I will not lead the religious life under the Blessed
Once until the Blessed One shall elucidate to me either that the world
is eternal, or that the world is not eternal ... or that the saint
neither exists nor does not exist after death;' - that person would die,
MâluNkyaputta, before the Tathâgata had ever elucidated to him."

The teacher further concluded: "The religious life, MâluNkyaputta, does
not depend on the dogma that the world is eternal, infinite or finite,
that the soul and the body are identical or different, or the dogma that
the saint exists or does not exist after death." The elucidation of
these points is bootless. It "profits not, nor has it to do with the
fundamentals of religion, nor tends to aversion, absence of passion,
cessation, quiescence, the supernatural faculties, supreme wisdom, and
Nirvâna." (Chulla-MâluNkya-sutta, Majjhima Nikâya 2.2.3)

  
Ineffability of Transcendental Experience

There was another reason why Buddha refused to discuss metaphysical
questions. It was not only the futility of these questions, but the
impossibility of answering them in a language intelligible to the mind.
The *Kena Upanishad* says: "There the eye goes not; speech goes not, nor
the mind. We know not, we understand not. How one would teach it?"
Buddha found himself in the same predicament. Things which according to
all spiritual literature lie beyond mind cannot be rendered into mental
concepts. Any answer made to these questions therefore "does not fit the
case", as Buddha emphasized repeatedly.

Buddha illustrated this point with the help of a very apt analogy which,
incidentally, also indicated his view of the question of the real status
of a liberated soul. If a fire were to burn in front of you, you would
be aware of this fact. You would also be aware of the fact that the fire
depended on fuel of grass and wood for its burning. Further, if this
fire were to become extinct, you would also be aware of this fact. "But,
Vaccha \[a mendicant of *vats gotra*\], if some one were to ask you, 'In
which direction has that fire gone, - east, or west or south?' - what
would you say, O Vaccha?" asked the great teacher.

"The question would not fit the case, Gautama. For the fire which
depended on fuel of grass and wood, when that fuel has all gone, and it
can get no other, being thus without nutriment, is said to be extinct,"
Vaccha replied.

Buddha concluded: "In exactly the same way, Vaccha, all form, all
consciousness by which one could predicate the existence of the saint,
when that form and consciousness have been abandoned, uprooted, pulled
out of the ground like a palmyra-tree, and become non-existent and not
liable to spring up again in the future. The saint, O Vaccha, who has
been released from what is styled as form and consciousness is deep,
immeasurable, unfathomable (*gambhîra, appameyya, duppariyogaho*) like
the mighty ocean. To say that he is reborn would not fit the case. To
say that he is not reborn would not fit the case. To say that he is both
reborn and not reborn would not fit the case. To say that he is neither
reborn nor yet reborn would not fit the case." (Agg-vaccha sutta,
Majjhima Nikâya 2.3.2).

In a parallel passage, the *MuNDaka Upanishad* says:

As the flowing rivers in the ocean

Disappear, quitting name and form,

So the Knower, being liberated from name and form,

Goes unto the Heavenly Person, higher than the high.

Indeed, what could be said about the status of the freed Soul or Self?
Can it be called individual, or universal, or transcendental? Can this
state be described or measured? Can it be called existence, or
non-existence in our sense of the terms? The state is deep,
immeasurable, unfathomable.

The Vedânta has not given a different answer. True, its language has
been more positive, but the answer has not been dissimilar. According to
the *MâNDûkya Upanishad* the transcendental reality is *a-driSTa*
(unseen), *a-grâhya* (ungraspable), *a-cintya* (non-thinkable),
*a-lakshaNa* (non-distinctional), *a-vyapadeSya* (undesignable).

When the soul or self is enthralled in matter, in the relativity of
things, in names and forms, what "one" knows (or rather what is known)
is change, flux, pain, bondage, a cluster of sensation-groups which one
regards as one's self. But when the knot of existence has been loosened,
when the world of names and forms dissolves, vanishes, the saint or the
freed soul enters into a state which is "deep, immeasurable,
unfathomable like a mighty ocean" and which is, as we shall see,
characterized by the attributes of freedom, peace, bliss and
consciousness.

  
The Nature of Buddha's Experience of NirvâNa

There are two methods of dealing with a problem: practical and
theoretical; psychological and metaphysical. For example, the SâMkhya
discusses *tattvas*, principles; the Yoga assuming those principles,
discusses methodology, the processes. Similarly, while the Vedânta
discusses principles, the nature of the Supreme Reality, Buddhism
discusses methods, the moral and meditational disciplines leading to
supernatural experiences whose nature Buddha refused to describe. True,
Buddha also speaks of *prajñâ*, the four noble truths, but these too are
offered in the first instance for practical purposes, for the purpose of
fixing one's mind on them, for creating a state of *vairâgya* in the
aspirant, for turning him away from the world of names and forms. Their
full transcendental meaning is revealed only at the end. And when that
happens, that is Buddhahood, Enlightenment, NirvâNa whose nature he
refused to discuss.

But can we guess, in the face of Buddha's silence, the meaning of what
he meant? By guessing, I do not mean arriving at and knowing the truths
as he knew them. That is not given to intellect at all. By guessing, I
mean, can we place him in the spiritual tradition? That is - was Buddha
just a freak in the sense that what happened to him happened to none
else before and to none else after him except of course to some of his
bright disciples? Or was he a mighty representative, a leader of a
well-authenticated spiritual tradition such as is so highly developed in
the Upanishads and confirmed by great teachers and seers of ancient
times ? In short, did he belong to a spiritual tradition which is
timeless; or was he a freak, an accident in the spiritual tradition of
his country?

I believe that posed thus the question is not difficult to answer. His
spiritual experience could not be a freak, arbitrary and personal. It
must have been of a character universal and necessary. There is reason
to believe that his spiritual experience was wholly in the Vedantic
tradition. This conclusion is inescapable as one studies Buddha's
teachings. Buddha himself claims no more. He only claims to have "seen
an ancient way, an ancient road followed by the wholly awakened ones of
olden times". In Buddhism as in the Vedânta, self-abnegation was to
precede a transcendental experience. One has to discover the voidness of
the seeming full before one can discover the fullness of the seeming
void. "Not by speech, not by mind, not by sight can He be apprehended."
Desire has to go. All mental constructions, imagination and fancy have
to go. "When cease the five sense knowledge, together with the mind and
the intellect stirs not," "When are cut all the knots of the heart on
earth," then begins the dawn of the spiritual knowledge and freedom.
Buddha confirms the Upanishadic truth above. He says, "The Tathâgata, O
Vaccha, is free from all theories; but this, Vaccha, does the Tathâgata
know, - the nature of form (*rûpa*), and how form arises, and how form
perishes; the nature of sensation (vedanâ), and how sensation arises,
and how sensation perishes; the nature of perception (*saMjñâ*), and how
perception arises, and how perception perishes; the nature of the
predispositions (*saMskâra*), and how the predispositions arise, and how
the predispositions finish; the nature of consciousness (*vijñâna*), and
how consciousness arises, and how consciousness perishes. Therefore say
I that the Tathâgata has attained deliverance and is free from
attachment, in as much as all imaginings, or agitations, or false
notions concerning an Ego or anything pertaining to an Ego, have
perished, have faded away, have been given up and relinquished." The
seeming self, the vital as well as the mental, which is mistaken for the
permanent and the eternal has to fall silent.

Not only in the self-noughting of the phenomenal but also in the
characterization of the transcendental, Buddha follows the Upanishads.
The nihilistic rendering by which Buddhism is known today is caused by
some of his future followers but there is nothing in the teachings of
the Master himself to support this negativism.[4](#4) "The Deathless has
been found by me," declared Buddha after his enlightenment. Nirvâna was
described as a state "in which there is neither old age, nor fear, nor
disease, nor birth, nor death, nor anxiety". In Udâna (SuttapiTaka), it
is called *abhûta, ajâta, akaTa*, asaNkhata (unbecome, unborn, unmade,
uncompound). This is almost the language of the Vedânta, the THAT of the
Upanishads, declared to be imperishable, deathless, free, unborn,
self-existent (*svayambhû*), uncompassing (*paribhû*) by *ÎSa
Upanishad*; resplendent (*divya*), formless (*a-mûrta*), pure (*Subhra*)
by *MuNDaka Upanishad*; timeless (*a-kâla*), without parts (*a-kala*),
great glory (*mahad yaSas*) by *SvetâSvatara Upanishad*. In this state
which is called Nirvanic by Buddha and Brahmic by the Vedânta, there is
a complete cessation of diminution or development; it is the state of
*prapañcho-paSama* as the *MâNDûkya Upanishad* declares. It is
*self-same eternally* and "deep, immeasurable and unfathomable".

The interesting account of Buddha's spiritual experience of
enlightenment confirms and closely agrees with the Upanishadic teaching
regarding the nature of the Ultimate Reality.

"At that time The Buddha, The Blessed One, was dwelling at Uruvela at
the foot of the Bo-tree on the banks of the river Nerañjarâ, having just
attained the Buddhaship. Then the Blessed one sat cross-legged for seven
days together at the foot of the Bo-tree experiencing the bliss of
emancipation...

Then the Blessed One after the lapse of seven days, arose from that
state of exalted calm, and leaving the foot of the Botree ... sat
cross-legged at the foot of the Ajapâla banyan tree for seven days
together, experiencing the bliss of emancipation."

Thus he kept enjoying this supernatural calm and bliss for 49 days at a
stretch moving from tree to tree every seven days.

Here the experience of NirvâNa is not couched in the language of
"nothingness", "emptiness", but is constituted of "exalted calm, bliss,
emancipation, bodhihood". It is just as the Upanishads speak, *Sânti*,
peace that passeth understanding, *sat, chit, ânanda*, knowledge,
freedom, light.[5](#5) In the spiritual tradition this state has been
called both void as well as *all* and *full*.

  
Nothingness of the Phenomenal World

So, at the time of enlightenment, Gautama not only entered a state which
was "deep, immeasurable, unfathomable", not only saw a reality full of
"calm", "bliss," "liberation" and quite indescribable as the Upanishads
assert, but was also vouchsafed the vision of the true status of the
phenomenal world. This vision was not different from the Vedantic
characterization of this world. Buddha saw in a moment the entire
process which constitutes this *saMsâra*, this world-cycle, this
fleeting stream of life. He saw that which causes births and rebirths
without end, which frames the edifice of repeated births, decay,
dissolution and death. He saw the mighty Law of Karma, the Law of
Dependent Origination (*pratîtya samutpâda*): he saw the twelve links in
the chain that constitutes the "wheel of life". He saw that the root of
all existence is *avidyâ* (nescience, ignorance); from this arises
*saMskâra* (predispositions, or unshakable volitions or chetanâ, the
compelling *kamma* which produces rebirth); from this comes *vijñâna*
(the rebirth or relink consciousness); it is the basic consciousness
with which one is born; in it reside all the past impressions,
characteristics and tendencies of the individual life. Corresponding to
this consciousness arises a psycho-physical individuality called
*nâma-rûpa*. Suitable to this individuality follow the six organs of
sense and their six-fold spheres, *shadDâyatana*. Then follows *sparSa*
(contact of the subjective with the objective world); then come
successively *vedanâ* (feeling, sensation), *trishNâ* (craving, or
thirst for life), *upâdâna* (grasping and clinging to life; it gives
birth to a false notion of "I" and "mine"); *bhava* (renewed existence,
or those active and passive psychological forces which condition future
birth); *jâti* (rebirth), followed by *jarâ-maraNa* (old age and death),
*Soka-parideva, daurmanasya-upayâsa* (tribulation, grief, sorrow,
distress and despair). Round and round. The doctrine is deep and the
meanings of the terms describing the process have to be fixed internally
through sâdhanâ.

Buddha saw the law forward and backward. He saw how it gave rise to the
entire aggregate of misery. He also saw how on the complete fading out
and cessation of the last term or link, the whole chain snaps and the
entire aggregation of misery ceases. And as he saw the law of the
phenomenal world, he was also released from its bondage. He sang:

O builder! I have discovered thee!

This fabric thou shalt never rebuild!

Thy rafters are all broken now,

And pointed roof demolished lies!

The mind has demolition reached,

And seen the last of all desire!

What Buddha experienced was the vision, celebrated in the Upanishads,
that the world of man divorced from Brahma, the phenomenal world
conceived independently of the transcendental principle is nothing, is
less than nothing. Conceived as such it is an illusion, *mâyâ*, an
imposition, a house of cards, a castle of sand, mere saw-dust, dry-rot,
a sagging, sinking, stinking garbage-heap. They build in vain who build
without *That*.

This "builder" who weaves the fabric of existence is everywhere. Its
power is found to be so flimsy when the true knowledge comes, but before
that it is so nightsmarishly real. Having no support anywhere *in
essence*, it is yet so ubiquitous in its external expression. It
surrounds one on all sides. It seeps through every pore. It is laid
thick layer upon layer. It is gross as well as subtle. Its empire is
vast. Its sovereignty is everywhere. It lives not only in the grosser
acts and thoughts of men, it lives in their righteousness, ideals and
good too. No wonder sages who have seen its universal sway have tried to
describe it by different images and names. They call it *lîlâ, mâyâ,
avidyâ*, Inconscience. This power is the author of the whole realm of
names and forms, good as well as bad. So *mâyâ* or *avidyâ* is not just
like wrong perception or an error of judgement; it is a basic category
which imposes itself at the very source of all phenomenal perceptions
and judgements, enters into the very constitution and fibre of our
empirical knowledge, effort and will.

Though so compelling and powerful, yet when the transcendental light
dawns, it is either completely transfigured or it completely disappears
like mist before the sun. Men and women of a deeper seeking have found
the phenomenal world joyless and unfulfilling, and they have sought
release from its insufficiency, and yearned with all their heart to be
granted refuge at the feet of the Divine. There are beautiful poems by
Kabir, Surdas, Ramaprasad and Mira on the subject which echo the cry of
the human soul in bondage and exile for freedom and re-union in and with
the Divine from whom they came.

The dying-to-self, inner purification, transcendence from the world of
mind and desires are normal things that happen to any saint of stature,
but the process is generally silent. It is rare that the knowledge of
the origin and the dissolution of the whole world of all names and forms
is revealed so powerfully and intimately as it was to Buddha. Again, in
other saints sufficient deepening or silencing of the surface mind and
being is enough for higher spiritual experience to pour in. But in
Buddha it is obvious that what happened was not mere silencing and
deepening and detachment at the surface, but a complete cessation and
annihilation of all that could give rise to the world of names and
forms, a veritable "seedless" (*nirbîja*) *samâdhi*. His dialogues (and
also his statues and pictures) exude peace, self-recollectedness,
detachment and yet compassion, all with a powerful transcendental
impress.

Though rare, yet the experience is not an isolated phenomenon. We find
this in Vedantic literature and in other developed spiritualities,
though the terms and images of the form-creating power or principle need
not be the same in all expereinces. Some have seen Godhead creating the
worlds, oceans, stars, nights and days from his status of plenitude and
self-sufficiency, by the creative power of his Word, or *chit-Sakti*. We
have Platonic and neo-Platonic images of the process of creation or
manifestation. Others have seen God pouring Himself out in multitudinous
forms and yet remaining essentially unaffected by His creation. In the
Gita, we find Sri Krishna revealing his mighty Form to Arjuna: time and
space, high gods and noble warriors, everything in the three worlds
rising from and rushing headlong into his "gaping mouth;
tremendous-toothed and terrible to see".

There are other experiences less theistic though not less
transcendental. Some have seen the world of relative forms appearing and
disappearing according to the laws of karma. SâMkhya provides another
account. In it we see Prakriti, moved forward by its three *guNas*,
giving rise to the whole world of names and forms. At the time of
dissolution the Prakriti in equilibrium withdraws unto itself all the
forms and forces it created and goes out of manifestation. Buddha's
experience is akin to the above in the sense that the process of
creation or manifestation is not referred to a conscious principle, to a
Purusha or the God, but to a Law as immanent and absolute as the former.
In Buddha, the terms of the Law of Dependent Origination on which hangs
all the world of names and forms, sound like ordinary facts of life, but
the knowledge of their operation as revealed to him was transcendental.

Quite in keeping with the practical approach of Buddha, the terms of his
Law are rather individualized: Karma, contact, consciousness, desire,
etc. On the other hand, SâMkhya talks in the language of principles
*tattvas: prakriti, mahat, ahaMkâra, manas, tanmâtras*, etc.

  
II

We have discussed the similarity and even the sameness of Buddhistic
experience of NirvâNa with the Upanishadic experience of the Ultimate
Reality. We must now also account for some of the differences, both
primary as well as secondary. As one reads the literatures of Hinduism
and Buddhism, one cannot help being impressed by the fact that the two
create very different atmospheres or ethos. All transcendental
experiences are incommunicable and inexpressible in the language of the
mind, but the fact that one uses one particular language rather than
another in reporting its mental impression of the transcendental
experience is not accidental. It does convey, however imperfectly,
something to the nature of that experience. The difference in language
also conveys a difference in the nature of the spiritual experiences.
But the differences do not invalidate the truth of One spiritual life,
or One spiritual reality.

The Divine is capable of and permits multiple contacts which when
expressed in human language may even seem, to an external view, to
exclude each other, but which in reality indicate the fact that the
Ultimate Reality which is One in essence is multiple in its expression
and experience.

  
Dryness of Buddhism: its 'Abstract' Approach

As one studies the early Buddhist literature, one encounters a certain
atmosphere of dryness, of narrow and laborious self-culture, of
strenuousness. One misses the atmosphere of effortlessness, fullness,
ease and self-abandonment, which one comes across, say, in reading
Chaitanya, Mira, and Alvar saints etc. In Buddhism, though one comes
into intimate contact with the transcendental realm, one is particularly
struck by the omission of any reference to God or soul, those mighty
facts of spiritual experience which, except for illusionist monism of
Shankara, the philosopher (who is very different from Shankara, the
*bhakta*), and scholastic renderings of SâMkhya, figure so much in the
Upanishads, the Gita, the Mahabharata and in the religious consciousness
of the country in general.

Regarding the nature of the Ultimate Reality, there are two traditions
in India. One tradition images It impersonally as a featureless Brahma,
as a formless, relationless Absolute. As one abstracted from the lesser
and more mixed expressions and forms of the Ultimate Reality, one
contacted Its highest attributes of *Sânti, sat, chit*, and *ânanda*.
The Supreme Reality could be experienced as peace or liberation, but It
could also be experienced as Bliss and Consciousness. Further it was
possible to abstract even from these attributes. Bliss, Peace,
Liberation and Consciousness would recede and one would be left aware of
One *Presence* alone, One *Isness*, Something ever-present without a
"name and habitation". One could possibly abstract even from this
Presence and might experience the Ultimate Reality as some Blank or
Sûnya or even a Nihil, asat.

Buddha, it would appear, was in line with this too abstractive approach
to the Divine. A Buddhist NirvâNa, therefore, came to mean two things:

1\. A rather too complete emptying out of the world and the mind of all
forms and relations and a complete dying out of all phenomenal
consciousness; and

2\. A rather too full abstraction from all the forms, attributes and
planes of the Divine - even from the attributes of sat chit, and
*ânanda*.

In the first sense, NirvâNa acquired several names all meaning more or
less the same thing; emptying out the mind of all thought-forms and
desire-complexes and even of all substantiality. It was called a letting
go, a loosing hold, complete cessation, complete fading out, a
relinquishment, the perishing of passion, the perishing of hatred, the
perishing of infatuation etc. In this sense, NirvâNa was the beginning
as well as the consummation of the Buddhist Way. It began with the
practice of Buddhist *Sîla* and ended in the dawn of Buddhist *prajñâ*,
the supernatural knowledge regarding the unsubstantiality and
painfulness of earthly life and earthly goods and the way out of it.

The process of progressive abstraction is carried all along the line in
order to eliminate all that is less than NirvâNa. The point is well
brought out in the Buddhist accounts of a deepening trance. The first
trance is characterized by *vitakka* and *vichâra* (reasoning and
reflection), *pîti* (exaltation), *sukha* (joy). In the second trance,
*vitakka* and *vichâra* cease. In the third trance, pîti also ceases and
one acquires *upekkhâ* (indifference). In the fourth trance, even
*sukha* ceases and only *ekâggata* (one-pointedness) and supreme
*upekkhâ* remain. As the *samâdhi* deepens, the process of negation and
abstraction continues and one enters the region of the four kinds of the
boundless and the vast. Of one who has entered the realm of the infinity
of space, the perception of form has stopped; of one who has entered the
realm of the infinity of consciousness the perception of the realm of
the infinity of space has ceased; of one who has entered the realm of
nothingness the perception of the realm of infinity of consciousness has
ceased; of one who has entered the realm of neither perception nor yet
non-perception, the perception of the realm of nothingness has ceased;
of one who has entered the cessation of perception and sensation,
perception and sensation have ceased. Beyond the four "infinities" lies
the region of NirvâNa, the *asamprajñâna* of Pâtañjala Yoga.

  
SaguNa Brahma: *Bhakti*[6](#6)

But this Ultimate Reality can be experienced not only as a featureless
absolute, but also as the lord, a friend, a sustainer, a lover, a
personal God to whom the secret aspirant in man gives his all, his mind,
his soul, his strength, his heart. There is nothing petty or small or
limited about this way of experiencing God. It is as vast, deep, sweet
and total. It is the *purushottama* to the Gita Who can be experienced
without any form or attribute, but Who also comes to His devotee in the
Form in which he Worships Him - and comes quite as fully and wholly. He
is *param-ânanda, sanâtana, pûrNa*. He is not only transcendent, but
immanent too. He is the sole Godhead Who also becomes the *jîvas* and
the world. As Sri Chaitanya would say the Ultimate Reality is Sri
Krishna, Who also becomes the Gopis, above all, Sri Radha, to taste and
relish His own love-in-separation of Himself. Through Radha alone He
knows how sweet, heart-ravishing and mind-and-soul-captivating He is.

Christianity and Islam charge that Hindus do not have a personal God.
The charge is true in the sense that their God is not anthropomorphic
and anthropopathic; nor is he a monolith, nor an aloof and
incommunicable being who reveals himself only to a favoured individual
called his Only Son or his Last Prophet. Hinduism conceives God
differently, as an indwelling spirit seated in the heart of every
seeker. Again, he is conceived not merely as a Judge or Father but also
as a mother, a friend, a counsellor, a playmate, a consort, a lover and
in hundred other ways. Sometimes some Christian saints and Muslim sufis
too have done the same but their experiences went beyond the theological
bounds of their own religions. The fact is that spiritual theism, like
spiritual monism and spiritual polytheism - all have found their most
profound expression in Hinduism. God is transcendent and Immanent; He is
Impersonal and Personal; He is One and Many; He is Formless and yet He
has his divine Form or Forms; He is Nameless, yet He has his Name or
Names. In his personal manifestations, He indulges in His divine
*lîlâs*, his divine Play and Pastimes; He has his divine Associates and
divine Abodes (*dhâmas*). VaikuNTha, Vrindâvana, Golok, KailâSa are not
mere images but transcendental realities of the highest order. Thus, the
personalizing consciousness, like the impersonalizing one, has found its
fullest play in Hinduism.

  
Anâtta[7](#7) (not-Self)

Another peculiarity of Buddhism is its denial of or rather silence
regarding the individual human soul. Some hold that Buddha never denied
the soul-principle; that what he denied was the ego, the
human-personality or individual human mind which is generally mistaken
for the human soul.[8](#8) Plucking a handful of leaves from the tree
under which he was sitting, he told Ananda that as there were many more
leaves on the tree than in his palm, similarly the truths which he had
withheld were more numerous than those he had revealed (SiMpsapa sutta,
SaMyutta Nikâya). "Soul" was one of these withheld truths. Revealing it
would not have meant much. For, in the first instance, the truth of the
soul cannot be described in human language. For another reason, because
the affirmation of soul or any permanent self, either individual or
cosmic, did not help the individual in arriving at those truths. That
could only be done by a strenuous individual effort by negating all that
was mutable, all that belonged to the phenomenal world. All
thought-clusters, all sensation-groups, all form-constellations mistaken
for permanent entities or abiding realities have to be negated.

On the other hand, affirmation of a permanent soul-principle
(*sâssata-diTThi*) would probably have been harmful. Aspirants tend to
confuse or identify it with their body or mind; at least, almost
invariably with the subtle and *sâttvika* modifications or states of
their mind, when in fact even in its highest reaches, it is merely a
*pudgala*, a *skandha*, a concatenation of various principles and
therefore subject to change and destruction, and empty and
*anâtma*.[9](#9)

Whatever be the truth, denial or silence, the lack of affirmation of the
soul-principle in the Buddhist literature will have to be accounted for.
For, the soul occupies a central position in the religious thinking of
all mankind in different ages. The "person of the measure of a thumb",
the "dwarf seated in the middle", in the language of the Upanishads, is
a recurring experience of those attracted by the Divine call and life.

At a first glance, the absence of the soul in Buddha seems to agree with
at least one interpretation of the Vedânta which denies any permanent
individual soul in man. But this view neither agrees with other views of
the Vedânta nor with the general religious intuition of man.

Apart from practical reasons we have discussed above there could be two
other reasons of a spiritual nature for the denial of or silence about
the question of the soul. One is that in a deep trance, all sense of
individuality - even of spiritual individuality - is lost and one is
immersed in a Nameless, Cosmic or Transcendental, Incommunicable
Consciousness, in a Limitless *Sûnya* or in an Ocean of Self-Existence.
Here the testimony of Sri Aurobindo would be very interesting. According
to him it is not possible to situate Nirvâna as a world or plane for the
NirvâNa push is to a withdrawal from the world and world values: it,
therefore, is a state of consciousness and rather super-consciousness
without habitation or level. It is an absolute silence of mind and
cessation of activities, constructions, representations, which can be so
complete that not only to the silent mind but also to the passive sense
the whole world is emptied of its stability and reality and things
appear as only unsubstantial forms without any real habitation or else
floating in something that is a nameless infinite. This infinite or else
something still beyond is That which alone is real; an absolute calm,
peace, liberation is the resulting state. In his own experience of
Nirvâna, Sri Aurobindo lost all sense of the individual soul, any trace
of the Self, individual or cosmic. He says, "I myself had my experience
of Nirvana and silence in the Brahman ... ; it came first simply by an
absolute stillness and blotting out as it were of all mental, emotional
and other inner activities... 1 did not become aware of any pure '1' nor
even of any self, impersonal or other - there was only an awareness of
That as the sole Reality, all else being quite unsubstantial, void,
non-real. As to what realized that reality, it was a nameless
consciousness which was not other than that; one could perhaps say this,
though hardly even so much as this, since there was no mental concept of
it, but not more.... Consciousness (not this or that part of
consciousness or an 'I' of any kind) suddenly emptied itself of all
inner contents and remained aware only of unreal surroundings and of
Something real but ineffable" (*Sri Aurobindo on Himself and on the
Mother*, 1953, pp. 178-79).

So one need not discover one's soul or one's permanent individual
principle, nor one need find the universal Self, the unchangeable
principle behind the flux of things in order to make contact with the
transcendental realm. One could begin by unloosening and dissolving that
knot called the mind or the ego and directly seek and find release in
some transcendence, in some nameless, formless, consciousness, which can
neither be defined as Self, nor not-Self, which is aloof, incommunicable
and without any *nâma* or *dhâma*. It could be the NirvâNa of Buddha, or
the *Sûnya* or Nihil of the later-day Buddhists, or the "supreme Eternal
Brahma which can be called neither being nor non-being" of the Gita.

  
Transitoriness and Painfulness of Existence

Besides the above, there are other differences of nuances and emphases.
These generally relate to the emphasis on the misery and transitoriness
of this life. The Vedânta too has stressed the fleeting character of
world's goods, but that is more than balanced by its emphasis on the
bliss, peace, and freedom of the transcendental experience. That is why
a reading of Hindu and Buddhist literatures leaves two distinctly
different impressions on the mind.

The Vedânta has declared as much as Buddha did the impossibility of
describing the transcendental experience in the language of the mind,
but it did not shirk the responsibility of evoking it, conjuring it up,
suggesting it by expressive ,images, symbols and parables. True, Buddha
was a mastermind in the use of parables, but he used these to illustrate
his discourses on morals and meditation, and on the "vanity" of all
things, on the law of suffering and change which characterizes
everything. On the other hand, the Vedânta used these parables and
suggestive terminology to suggest, however imperfectly, something of the
beauty and joy and freedom of the transcendental experience. This
explains why Buddhism leaves an impression of emptiness and transience,
while the Vedânta leaves an impression of joy and freedom.

In Buddhism, the bifurcation or divorce between the phenomenal and the
transcendental worlds is rather too complete, too trenchant. There is no
point of contact or interchange between the two. The phenomenal world is
all misery and flux while the world beyond the realm of birth and death
is aloof and incommunicable. The two worlds completely exclude each
other. There are no reflections, no echoes, no responses of the one in
the other.

In the Vedânta it is different. Even in the interpretations most akin to
Buddhism, the world and the jîvas derive their existence from the
*mâyâSakti* of the Divine. In the more affirmative interpretations, the
world acquires a status of the fullest reality for the first time - a
reality infinitely more full than the one given by materialists, if
indeed their "reality" could be called by that name at all. True, the
world is "nothing" without God, but there is no such world. Everything
is derived from God, moves and has its being in God. God is behind,
above, beneath and in the heart of everything. The human soul looks back
to its Divine origin, and looks forward to its Divine destiny. It
hungers for the Divine truth, its "pasturage" as Plato calls it, beholds
it and in gazing upon it is "replenished and made glad", and fulfilled.
In the language of the Gita and the *KaTha Upanishad*, the tree of life
has its "*roots above*". The world and its existence is grounded in God:
"On it all the worlds do rest." What could be a surer, more solid
foundation for human life on earth? According to the Upanishads, *this*
is full with the fullness of That and what is above is also below. The
terrestrial reflects the celestial. This teaching finds its echo in the
Egyptian-Greek Hermetic tradition too.

We have not only the phenomenon of the *jîvas* aspiring and ascending to
Godhead, we find God coming down to the earth, putting on the
limitations of our earthly life in order to save beings and help them in
their spiritual evolution. So there is a loving interchange, and "open
sesame" between Gods and men, between the Universal and the individual,
between the Transcendental and the phenomenal. There is a relationship
of antiphony between BhagvAn and His Bhakta. They live and move with
their centres in each other. Each finds his perfect response,
reflection, image and echo in the other. The Gita says that Gods and men
are nourishers of each other.

Flowing from the above, there is another difference in the method of
*sâdhanâ*. There being no loving God, in Buddhism one has to work out
one's salvation alone and with diligence. In the Vedânta there is no
lack of call on the personal effort of the aspirant, but this must very
soon give place to a complete call on the Divine, complete surrender to
the Divine will. "Abandoning all duties, all methods, all techniques of
meditation, come unto Me alone for shelter. I will liberate thee from
all sins," is the message of Sri Krishna in the Gita. The personal
effort of the *sâdhaka*, when it is sincere and persistent, evokes
Divine help. The heavenly waters of Divine Grace fill him, inundate him,
drown him. This difference in approach again makes Buddhism look dry,
ascetic and arduous. While methods of *sâdhanâ* developed on the basis
of the Upanishads are joyous and effortless.

But let us not stress the differences too far. As we have seen there is
an important tradition of the Vedânta which is akin to the negating
trends in Buddhism. Similarly, there are many schools of Buddhist
philosophy and Buddhist methods of *sâdhanâ* which are akin to the more
affirmative tradition of Hinduism. In these schools, one does not pass
into a void or *Sûnya* effected through negation of all thought-forms or
thought-complexes and through detachment from the world (the process
called *ashtâNgayoga* by the Hindus), but takes refuge in the
"compassionate Buddha". Buddhism in these developments is no longer dry
or flat, but rich and even luxuriant. But we have purposely refrained
from a discussion of these powerful developments in Buddhism. For, we
wanted to concentrate on those elements alone that are found in their
earliest records and are agreed upon by all schools and determine where
these elements stood in relation to Hinduism.

The nature of Buddhist *Nothingness* should not be misunderstood. In
fact there is nothing peculiarly Buddhist about this *Nothingness*. It
is the process of *self-noughting* enjoined by all religions and all
mystic disciplines. For going into spiritual regions above it is
necessary to pass through the doors of Nothingness. Therefore, an
*arhat* has been defined as one in whom all *outflows*, all desires,
sense-life have dried up.

Moreover *ceasing-to-be* is not a dry or life-denying process as many
people outside the Mystic Way think. As useless sensations, mental
constructions and idealizings, vital desires and sentimentalizings fall
away from one's true being, one feels lighter, freer, happier. Life
which was otherwise cluttered, dark, divided, painful, anxious and weary
knows for the first time its true status of joy, freedom, light and
power.

Nor the true nature of *dukkha* in Buddha which figures so much in his
teachings and which prejudices people's thinking on Buddhism has been
rightly understood. The status of *dukkha* is not psychological but
metaphysical. At the level of duality and phenomenality, there can only
be *dukkha* whether psychologically so manifested or not, or even when
psychologically speaking, agreeable and pleasant sensations accompany
the life at this plane. Indeed the basicality and universality of
suffering is difficult to grasp and comprehend for a mind given to its
usual life of sensations, pleasant or unpleasant. Buddha says, "It is
difficult to shoot from a distance arrow after arrow through a narrow
keyhole, and miss not once. It is more difficult to shoot and penetrate
with the tip of a hair split a hundred times a piece of hair similarly
split. it is still more difficult to penetrate to the fact that 'all
this is suffering'."

The views of Hinduism and Buddhism on *dukkha* and *ânanda* are
complementary, not contradictory. Looked at from below, from the
viewpoint of duality and multiplicity, in divorce from the divine, the
world is true to the Buddhist picture of suffering, misery, change and
sorrow. But looked at from above, through the all-comprehensive view of
the One or That, all is seeped in *ânanda*, everything is the ecstatic
play of the Divine Mother, or the loving and rapturous *lîlâ* of Sri
Krishna or Shiva - to use traditional Hindu images. As the *Taittirîya
Upanishad* says: "Out of joy all this life came forth; by joy all this
is sustained and into that joy all this will merge. *ânanda* is Brahma."

Where is the contradiction?

  
Concluding Remarks

In the above discussion we found that Buddha, his spiritual experiences
and teachings formed part of a Hindu tradition. He belonged to the
Upanishadic heritage. He cannot be understood in any other sense. The
attempt to understand him in isolation divorced from that tradition
which he confirmed, enriched and represented, has only led to
misunderstanding and distortion of his teachings. He himself claimed no
originality. He claimed to have "seen an ancient way," followed an
"ancient road." Those who claim to love Buddha should also love and
cherish that tradition, which was his cradle, foster-mother, guide and
inner inspiration. A good Buddhist has perforce to be a good Hindu too.
But some self-styled, latter-day admirers of Buddha go out of their way
to denounce and malign that tradition. It only shows lack of
understanding on their part.

Like Buddha and later on Ashoka, let an Indian lover of Buddha learn to
represent India again.[10](#10) But let him also realize that India is
the land not only of Buddha but also of Rama, Krishna, Yajnavalkya, and
mighty Vyasa. Hinduism is not a one-book or one-prophet religion; it is
the repository of man's nameless spiritual tradition and knowledge
nourished by countless sages and seers. It does not give a neatly
worked-out scheme of theological ideas; on the other hand, it tries to
name the Nameless, express the Inexpressible, to give language to man's
intuition of the Beyond with which he has tried to establish contact in
many ways at different times, according to his capacity and preparation.

Hinduism is like a great reservoir of water from which many streams take
their rise and to which they again repair after passing through many
strange and fair lands. It is a great, creative matrix giving birth to
many beautiful and living forms. Itself a historical, it has given birth
to many sects and branches with interesting, chequered histories. Paying
sole allegiance to the Guide within seated in the cave of the heart, it
has put forward from time to time many teachers and sages of
incomparable power and vision, incarnating the very Gods above and
within.

Brahma-vâda, Advaita, SâMkhya, Buddhism, Jainism, Shkta-ism,
Vaishnava-ism are noble children of the same mother. Each could be
completely satisfying to its individual devotees so long as it does not
forget its common heritage and common source. Accepted in a sectarian,
exclusive sense, in forgetfulness of the whole, it becomes one-sided and
even distorted. Hinduism is a lute yielding many sweet notes each
deriving its meaning from its place in the total symphony. The Vedas say
that there is one God but the wise call Him by different Names.
Similarly, there is one Religion, one Perennial Philosophy, one Sanatana
Dharma, the old name for Hinduism, which means the ever-living Law; but
it is expressed in different ways. Different religions and sects that
come and go in history are facets of the same Religion, different
attempts to reach the Inaccessible. All are noble attempts and all bring
their heart's offerings to the same altar.

Recapturing their lost consciousness of identity, regaining their sense
of the divine and the transcendent, and uniting into a mighty force of
living spirituality, let Hinduism and Buddhism, the two
sister-religions, come forward and offer their healing message to a
troubled world. In the absence of this message inferior religious and
secular ideologies and life-philosophies are having a field day and are
doing immense damage to humanity. Having conquered Europe, they have
also made deep inroads into Asia. China is already under their cruel
domain. But China's cultural and spiritual roots are deep and her people
are patient and long-suffering; so she will undoubtedly survive the
vandalism of her own rulers; and the gentler and nobler qualities of her
people will again triumph after the current fever is over and the
present iconoclastic wave has exhausted itself. In fact, the signs of
self-revival are already there.

Indian people, too, are not above the attraction of these ideologies.
New India looks upon her spiritual inheritance as a reactionary and
undesirable burden. The class that now controls the political, cultural
and intellectual life of the country proudly and openly proclaims
atheistic beliefs and positivistic values. Today, India prides herself
in being a "secular" State, a secularity which is more anti-spiritual
than anti-communal in its temper. \[In fact, anti-Hindu than
anti-communal\]. In order to qualify for Government grants, Shanti
Niketan, the famous institution found by the great Rabindra Nath Tagore,
the poet of the soul's Godward aspiration and a great representative of
undying India, had to give up its Upanishadic motto: *satyam, Sivam,
sundaram*. These figures represent the deepest and loftiest that
spirituality has conceived about man, his aspirations and destiny, his
hopes and possibilities. But to the modern secular ears of the
present-day rulers, these terms sound communal and antiquated.

These rulers have little understanding of, or sympathy or patience with
Indias's age-old values. But there is no doubt that they would fail and
India would again regain her *svadharma* in not too distant future.

Western imperialism has destroyed many parts of the globe not only
economically but also culturally. The indigenous religions of the
countries of the two Americas have been completely overwhelmed. In the
African continent, the local religions are under a systematic attack
from Islamic and Christian ideologies. Economic imperialism is
withdrawing but religious and spiritual aggression continues to operate
unchecked with unprecedented ferocity and zeal. This continuing
onslaught is more destructive than the old-style imperialism.

The dominant ideologies of the day bear many names and appear in many
forms. Some of them are secular; others don religious garbs. But they
have certain common characteristics: they are dogmatic, narrow,
self-regarding, pretentious and megalomaniac. They claim to know the
truth and they presume to impose it on others too. They lack inwardness,
deeper charity and larger humanism. They are all based on a partial
definition of man or on a distorted vision of Godhead.

Not taking up the religious variety for the time being, let us consider,
for the sake of illustration, two dominant secular forms: Communism and
Liberal Democracy. Apparently, they are at loggerheads but in some ways
they are also complementary forms and forces subserving the same psyche.
For example, Soviet Communism is more aggressively atheistic but Liberal
Democracy, as we find it in its manifestations in different countries,
is more thoroughly hedonistic and individualistic. It increasingly
understands and defines Truth and Ethics in pragmatic, positivistic and
utilitarian terms. The sense of holiness, transcendence, and
interconnectedness of things is fast going out of life. So the cults of
emptiness and meaninglessness rule. Truth is merely that which is soft,
odd and interesting. The sensation-seeking of this culture has already
so weakened its people that this freer brand of materialism, so full of
amusing dissipation, levity and casualness, may go down before Soviet
Russia's more mechanistic and militant but also more austere and
regimented variety.

On the other hand, while liberal democratic countries may lose
politically, their current cultural values may win, particularly in the
long run. Consumerism and hedonism are seductive and it is difficult to
resist them. Their working is subtle and insidious. They seep, permeate,
corrode like water. They undermine from within, with the willing
co-operation of the victim. The frowning tyrant is no match for a
smiling plutocrat. Where a stick fails, the carrot succeeds. The Brave
New World scores over 1984.

This, of course, assumes that the present industrial culture will last
indefinitely. But there are already signs of decay and exhaustion. The
best minds of the day are prophesying doom. Psychologically, the system
is already a failure. It no longer fulfills the deeper needs of man. The
young men feel trapped and they are already in revolt. Knowing no
better, it often takes them into undesirable directions.

In this confusion and crisis of values, in this general failure and
forgetfulness, could some one re-awaken humanity, make it conscious of
its spiritual heritage, conscious of its God-life and soul-journey? What
part could India play in this re-awakening, re-affirmation - India that
has been the priest of things belonging to the Spirit from very ancient
times?

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) \[This essay was first written and published in July, 195 8. It
subsequently saw two more editions published with minor changes here and
there. It is being included in this volume too with small changes and
addition of a few footnotes placed in brackets. It was read by Sri C.
Rajagopalachari. We reproduce his comments from *Swarajya*, dated May
21, 1966: "I read with great interest Sri Rain Swarup's scholarly paper
on the intimate connection, amounting almost to identity, between
Buddhistic philosophy, and the Vedanta of the Upanishads. Hindu
conformism sensed the danger lurking in a close identity with a school
of thought which may well be misunderstood to be a denial of God and
soul. Consequently Hinduism kept Buddhism rigidly out of the pale. Sri
Ram Swarup's paper explains how Hinduism saved itself from the dangers
of its own philosophical dialectics through the cult of Bhakti and
surrender. The concluding passage from Sri Ram Swarup's paper takes us
to out own time:

"New India looks upon her spiritual inheritance as a reactionary and
undesirable burden. The class that now controls the political, cultural
and intellectual life of the country proudly and openly proclaims
atheistic beliefs and positivistic values. Today India prides herself in
being a 'secular' State, a secularity which is more anti-spiritual than
anti-communal in its temper.

"Mere is a beautiful dialogue of Lord Buddha with a disciple monk who
was dissatisfied with the Buddha's non-discussion of the nature of God
and the Soul... then is reproduced the long dialogue with Venerable
Malunkyaputta given in this essay."\]  

[2](#2a) Even Dr. Radhakrishnan, no foreigner to religious thought, has
made statements which strengthen this positivistic interpretation of
Buddhism. He says of Buddha that "he is a rationalist, since he wished
to study reality or experience without any reference to supernatural
revelation. He wished to lead men by mere force of logic to his views...
He wanted to establish a religion within the bounds of pure reason. He
is a dialectician, arguing with his opponents to lead them to
liberation." On another occasion, he turns Buddha into a modern
agnostic. He declares: "Suspended judgment was Buddha's attitude."

[3](#3a) We have refrained from mentioning here a third rendering of
Buddhism which is existentialist. "Being trapped", "nothingness",
"emptiness", "meaninglessness", the usuals Sartrian fare, constitute,
according to this rendering, the basic motifs of Buddhism.

[4](#4a) According to Edward Conze, a great scholar of Buddhism, the
term *Empty* (*Sûnya*) though known to the Abhidharmists, occurs only on
a few occasions in the Pali Canon, the earliest Buddhist literature.

[5](#5a) \[In most ancient Buddhistic literature, the Nirvanic state has
been described in most positive terms and it has taken on almost the
same epithets as the Brahmic state in the Upanishads and the Puranas.
Rhys Davids tells us that NirvâNa has been called "the harbour of
refuge, the cool cave, the island amidst the floods, the place of bliss,
emancipation, liberation, safety, the supreme, the transcendental, the
uncreated, the transquil, the home of ease, the calm, the end of
suffering, the medicine for all evil, the unshaken, the ambrosia, the
immaterial, the imperishable, the abiding, the further shore, the
unending, the bliss of effort, the supreme joy, the ineffable, the
detachment, the holy city, and many others" (*Early Buddhism*).\]

[6](#6a) \[We have already reproduced Sri Rajagopalachari's comments on
this essay. He was a sage and a great spokesman of Hinduism. His views
command our greatest respect. But I beg to make one clarification. Sri
Rajagopalacharya agrees that there was a great affinity between the
Vedanta and the Buddhist philosophy, but according to him Hinduism saw
in it a danger of being misunderstood and identified with a school which
denied God and soul; and it met the danger by developing the school of
*bhakti* and surrender. I believe Hinduism sensed no such danger and it
did not panic into *bhakti* and surrender because of any such danger.
The fact is Bhakti and surrender even as a "school" are older than
Buddhism. They are great truths of the Spirit and, as is to be expected,
they found their great expression in a comprehensive religion like
Hinduism as did other great truths of the Spirit. At no stage, there was
any intention of keeping Buddhism "out of the pale". Hindus regarded
Buddha as a great teacher; many of them joined Buddhism, preached and
propagated it; they built Buddhist monasteries, stupas and temples and
fed Buddhist monks; they protected Buddhism and defended it when it was
threatened; they gave refuge to Buddhists when they were persecuted in
Persia, Khurasan, Iraq, Mosul by king Gushtasp and his descendents - in
the same manner as they are doing it at present to Buddhist Chakmas
fleeing from persecution in Bangladesh; they put Buddha in the pantheon
of their avatâras. In this decade, in Kerala two idols of Buddha were
found buried; they were recovered and consecrated. One was placed in the
temple at Kamapuram and has found the highest place along with the main
deities of the temple; the other was placed in the Sree Krishna Temple
in Mavelikara town. Both are worshipped by hundreds of devotees daily.\]

[7](#7a) There are definite statements by Buddha which clearly prove
that he rejected theories which preached annihilation of Self
altogether. Explaining why he refused to answer a certain monk in a
simple yes or no, he said, "If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk
Vacchagotta asked me 'Is there not the ego?' had answered: 'The ego is
not,' then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctrine of the
Samanas and the Brahmanas who believe in annihilation
(*uchchheda-diTThi*)."

On another occasion, complaining against those who called him "an
unbeliever" preaching "the real entity's destruction, annihilation,
dying away" he said, "what I am not, what is not my doctrine, that I am
accused of."  

[8](#8a) \[Buddha's *anâtma* is at heart Vedantic *neti, neti*. In
dozens of places, Buddha repeatedly teaches that man's body or his mind,
his psycho-physical being, is not his true self. In Chulla-sachchaka
suttanta (Majjhima Nikâya), in Panchavaggîya sutta, in Sappaya
(*sampreya*) sutta, Chakkhu-sutta, Rûpa-sutta, Na Tumhaka sutta (all of
Samyutta Nikâya), he preaches that man's eye or his ear, and the
material form they reveal (*rûpa*), and also his more subjective
(*ajjhattâ*) existence - *vedanâ, saMjñâ, saMskâra, vijñâna* - in short
all, *dharmas* pertaining to him are anâtma, are not his. They do not
belong to him, nor does he belong to them; they are not *he* nor *his*.
*They are all changeful* (anicca *or* anitya) *and sorrowful* (dukkha)
*and it is better they are disowned. In Sappaya sutta, he asks whether
it is proper to regard these things so transient and painful as, in
anyway, yours or you or your âtman?*

\[In the Upanishads, the *âtman* represents the principle of
consciousness and *freedom*. But Buddha limited his discussion to man's
"conditioned" life and release from it; therefore, there is no wonder
that in him and the *anâtma* principle has found prominence and the
atmic principle remains in the background. In Andha-bhuta sutta, Buddha
found that everything related to man's conditioned life is blind - his
eye, his ear, the material forms they reveal, his feeling, his
perception, his ego, etc., all are blind. Similarly in the Kukkul sutta
and Upchala sutta, and again in the Aditta sutta, he saw all forms
(*rûpa*), all the worlds (*lokas*), and everything in and about man on
fire - his eye, his ear, his sensations, perceptions, his mind; they are
all burning with desire, burning with hatred, burning with infatuation,
burning with ego, etc. Buddha repeatedly warned his disciples not to
confuse their "conditioned" self - their psycho-physical aggregate -
with themselves, with their true, liberated status in *nirvâNa*, with
*âtman*, about which nothing can be said. But he knew that men are prone
to this delusion and easily confuse the two; in DiTThi saMyutta, he
tells us how men make this double mistake: how while they think of the
*âtman* having material form, they regard their material form as their
*âtman*.\]  

[9](#9a) That these *skandhas*, or sensation-complexes, or
material-pyschic aggregates have no permanent reality or self is all the
Emptiness Buddha avowed. This point is well brought out in a dialogue in
the SaMyutta Nikâya:

"To what extent is the world called 'empty', Lord?"

"Because it is empty of self or of what belongs to self, it is therefore
said: 'The world is empty'. And what is empty of self and what belongs
to self? The eye - all these are empty of self and of what belongs to
self So too are ear, nose, tongue, body and mind (and their appropriate
sense-data, appropriate consciousness and the impression on them of
their appropriate sense-data) they are all empty of self and of what
belongs to self. Also that feeling which arises, conditioned by
impression on the eye, car nose, tongue, body, mind, whether it be
pleasant or painful or neither painful nor pleasant that too is empty of
self and of what belongs to self. Wherefore is the world called empty
because it is empty of self and of what belongs to self."  

[10](#10a) Probably, in its world excursion, Buddhism followed the trail
of Hinduism. It went where Hinduism was already, known and honoured.
There it made a permanent niche in the affections of the people and
destroyed nothing. Nourished by their psyche, it acquired a new wealth
and became thoroughly indigenous. It was not governed by a distant
mother-church. On the other hand, it drew is sustenance from the soil of
its adoption. This prevented it from becoming the handmaid of
Imperialism exploiting from afar. Its centre and authority was always
local. Therefore, it became the genuine voice of the people who lived by
it.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
