+++
title = "05  Chapter 5         Development in Huxley's Thought: Hindu-Buddhist Influences"

+++
Chapter 5  
Development in Huxley's Thought: Hindu-Buddhist Influences

Hinduism-Buddhism has been making a great impact on the West's religious
thinking. C.E.M. Joad even called it a "counter-attack from the East".
This is a kind of impact however which cannot be measured in terms of
"converts". The influence remains even unacknowledged. But it works
nonetheless unconsciously and at a deeper level. "Karma", "Yoga",
"Experience", "Consciousness", "Meditation" and other such intimately
Indian concepts are very much current. Fully 23% American young adults
believe in Reincarnation. Under this influence, there is less belief in
dogmas and official Saviours, but there is more emphasis on an
experimental approach, on personal experience and on finding for
oneself. The Church is no longer regarded as the sole vehicle of grace
except in die-hard circles; on the other hand, there is a new awareness
of the spiritual wealth of non-European and non-Christian nations and
cultures, a thought quite new to the West's traditional religion. This
new universality and wider appreciation are the best gifts of
Hinduism-Buddhism to the West since it discovered the East.

This broadening did not take place in a day. It took more than two
hundred years and it began in developments whose results were unforeseen
at that time. The initial contact of India with the West was not happy.
The Europeans were not curious visitors. They came as conquerors; and
soon they developed a contempt proper to their status for the culture
and religion of the conquered people. It worked further to the
disadvantage of Hinduism when they adopted the views of the preceding
Muslim invaders regarding it. Hinduism was idolatrous, polytheist and
out of grace with God.

In this mood, the new rulers began to translate Indian religious,
philosophical and legal texts. The initial motive was political and
administrative, though some scholars did come to their task with genuine
curiosity and open-mindedness. The Missionaries had their own approach
which is illustrated by William Carey who wanted these translations so
that they could show that the Hindu Sanskrit texts are "in reality
filled with nothing but pebbles and trash".

But once these translations were available, they went beyond intended
results. They won admirers amongst some of the best minds of Europe. In
some cases, they even turned the Christian apple-cart. After reading
them, Schopenhauer found them the "solace" of his life and death, and
also found his mind "washed clean of an early engrafted Jewish
superstitions". Kant found that the Hindus were "gentle", that "all
nations are tolerated amongst them". This fact also explained to him why
they were "subdued by the Tartars". These texts in translations won the
admiration of Emerson, Thoreau, Walt Whitman, Tolstoy, Victor Hugo,
Romain Rolland, Hermann Hesse, Henrich Zimmer, Sir Edwin Arnold, Yeats,
Jung, Toynbee and many others.

The Indian influence was not restricted to some outstanding individuals
alone; through Theosophy, it become a popular movement. Theosophy spoke
of "ancient wisdom" by which it meant mainly the wisdom of ancient
India.

In post-World War II Europe and America, Transcendental Meditation (TM)
of Mahesh Yogi has attracted wide attention, and literally hundreds of
thousands have attended some kinds of meditation-camps. The two other
more important movements are the Krishna Consciousness and the Saiva
Siddhanta Church. They offer more than some selected or edited ideas of
Hinduism; they represent its mainstream sects in their flesh and blood,
in their full-fledged philosophy, symbolism, modes of worship *sâdhanâ*
and even their rituals. The Saiva Siddhanta Church even brings out a
monthly journal, *Hinduism Today* (Hawaii), the first of its kind, which
is doing an important work in consolidating international Hinduism.

  
Aldous Huxley

Aldous Huxley is one of those who enriched the West greatly with the
wisdom of the East. Though he came late on the scene, his influence was
nonetheless real and deep. Himself a great intellectual, he spoke to the
intellect of the West its most effective medium of communication.

Huxley's initial reaction to India was far from being warm. In fact, he
started by rejecting its spirituality altogether and finding it no good
to anyone and even to itself. During 1925-26, he visited India but left
it quite dissatisfied. He landed at Bombay "hot, muggy and expensive" on
2nd October and left India in early February the following year, "rather
glad to escape". In *Jesting Pilate*, his travelogue, he says that "one
is all for religion until one visits a really religious country". But he
does admit that there are some admirers of Indian 'spirituality', whose
"admiration actually survives a visit to India". Elaborating on the
theme, he further says: "Admirers of India are unanimous in praising
Hindu 'spirituality'. I cannot agree with them. To my mind
'spirituality' is the primal curse of India and the cause of all her
misfortune." He felt that religion is a "luxury", which India, at least,
in its present condition, "cannot possibly afford". He added that if he
were an Indian millionaire, he would leave all his money for an
"endowment of an Atheist Mission". Perhaps discouraged by India's
material problems, he says that "Ford seems a greater man than Buddha".

Three years later, he repeats his rejection of Indian spirituality
through a character in his novel *Point Counter Point*. "What a comfort
it will be to be back in Europe again! And to think there was a time
when I read books about Yoga and did breathing exercises and tried to
persuade myself that I didn't really exist! What a fool."

In due course, Huxley was more than reconciled to India's spirituality,
but physical or geographic India still disappointed him. He visited it
briefly in 1961 at the invitation of the Tagore Centenary Celebration,
and he found it "almost infinitely depressing". During mid-twenties,
Huxley put the word Indian "spirituality" under quotes to indicate that
it was suspect in his eyes and that it needed being warned against. A
decade had to pass before he adopted it himself and became its warm
admirer and able exponent. The new influence radically changed his views
on metaphysics and morality, on life and death, on man and his universe
and his norms of conduct and excellence.

  
Rational World

What accounts for this transformation? It has to do with Huxley's own
deeper seeking. From his early youth he was a collector of
"psychological varieties" ("the only things I have ever thought it worth
while to collect", he says in one of his essays in his *Music At
Night*), world-views and life-views; he was also a critical analyzer and
earnest explorer and seeker. He sought to find man's place, purpose and
significance in the universe. In this search, he passed through many
terrains and reviewed many philosophies, paths and creeds.

In this search, the first guidance came from the intellectual world in
which he lived. This world subscribed to materialism in philosophy; it
was positivist in outlook and relativist in morals. It was shaped by
Rationalism of the 17th and 18th centuries as reinforced by evolutionary
and historical theories of the late 19th century. Freud and Pavlov made
important contributions. The net result was that the age denied God; it
denied the "other world"; it denied any higher purpose and destiny for
man. Not excellence or self-exceeding but Benthamite happiness was the
Highest Good; not the heightening of the Consciousness to contact a
higher order of reality but an adjustment with the sense-world was the
admired, scientifically approved and sanctified goal or ideal.

These movements provided powerful influences and they find eloquent
formulation in Huxley's writings of the early period. Their impact was
reinforced by his own precocity and the stimulation he received from his
immediate intellectual quarters. As a young man, he had occasions to
spend considerable time at Garsington, six miles from, Oxford, at the
Elizabethan manor, maintained by Lady Ottoline, wife of Philip Morrell,
a liberal M.P. The place provided retreat and hospitality to many
intellectuals and *avant-gardists* in moral fashions. It was here that
Huxley first met Bertrand Russell, John Maynard Keynes, Lytton Strachey,
D.H. Lawrence, T.S. Eliot and many others. It was here that Russell had
his well-known affairs with Lady Ottoline. Sybille Bedford, Huxley's
biographer, tells us that the atmosphere of the place was permissive and
"constancy and the loyalties of the heart were looked upon as philistine
and a bit ridiculous".

  
Indian Influence

Huxley's earlier writings are powerfully coloured by the prevailing
intellectual atmosphere. But increasingly he began to find them
unsatisfying. The materialist philosophy denied the spiritual dimension;
his growing mind refused to take it as the final explanation. He began
to reject Freudianism and Behaviourism which made man's mind a prisoner
of its own lower powers. He felt that vague intimations of "another
world" could not all be illusory. It was at this stage of his
intellectual questioning and seeking that Indian philosophy and religion
came to him. In a vague way, they were known to him already, but at this
stage they came with a new impact. They opened up new vistas; in them he
found answers to his intellectual and spiritual seeking. They provided
not only answers but also a *method*, a *praxis*. They became interwoven
with and part and parcel of his spiritual quest.

Can one trace their course satisfactorily in his life? At what stage did
he change from a rational truth-seeker to a seeker of the mystic truth
and at what stage did this seeking take on a decidedly Indian turn? In
short, when did he become a mystic, become an *advaitin*? Was the change
accompanied by inner conflicts?

Huxley provides no direct answer. He wrote no autobiography. He was
reticent and he hated to speak about himself. Even his biography written
by Sybille Bedford does not throw much light on this subject in this
form. The biographer does give events in Huxley's life in their
chronological sequence, but she undertakes no specific study of
Hindu-Buddhist influences as such on Huxley.

However, this omission proves no great handicap. Huxley's best life
consisted in his thoughts and they are lucidly expressed in his novels,
essays and letters. If we study them, we find in them an "increasing
purpose", a trend progressively expressing Hindu-Buddhist influences.

Under these influences Huxley's views on man's most intimate concerns
changed fundamentally. He began to look at the world through different
eyes. His ideas on man, morals, life and death were transformed. The
subject is large, but we shall take up some illustrations to make the
point clear.

  
Love-making

Following the new usage of his time, Huxley's early novels abound in
philandering and love-making. He explores, mainly intellectually,
sexuality in its various facets: committed and open-ended, dogmatic and
experimental, prosaic and romantic, illicit and open, guilty and
remorseless, critical and passionate. One does not know where his own
sympathy lay for while describing the one he also knew the other. In one
of his essays of the period, "Fashions in Love", he brings out the
relativity of love and says that love has its styles, schools and
influences. But his aesthetic restraint makes him describe only a few of
these fashions in his novels. Each school is an idea on legs; each
offers its intellectual justification, the permissive often making a
better case for itself.

In his *Those Barren Leaves*, published in 1925, Huxley depicts the
"love of the parallels"; different pairs make love on different terraces
of a large villa, each in its own style, the more philosophical types
using their philososphies, as birds use their plumage, to attract their
mates. A moralist does not like the permissive atmosphere, but Mr.
Cardan, a philosopher, counters that "everyone has his own favourite
vice". Another regards love-making as "the best indoor game".

His *Brave New World*, published in 1932, leans on Freudian wisdom and
makes love-making free, plentiful and compulsory for its citizens in
order to create a people who have no knots, no complexes, no emotional
and spiritual conflicts, and, therefore, are happy and sociable, and
docile and easily governed.

In another novel, *Point Counter Point*, belonging to the same period,
sexual exploration continues. But in his writings of the War and
post-War period when he had come under the influence of Hindu-Buddhist
tradition where *brahmacharya* (abstinence) holds a high position, there
is less interest in the subject and it takes a different direction.
Sexual encounters are retained but they belong to the mundane world,
*saMsâra* as it were, and are depicted on the outer walls of the shrine
and are kept out of the inner sanctum. In his *Ends* and *Means*, he
came to regard chastity as a "necessary precondition to any kind of
moral life superior to that of the animal"; he began to think of it as
"one of the major virtues" for without it, "societies lack energy and
individuals are condemned to perpetual unawareness, attachment and
animality". But he also distrusted it if it did not serve the major
virtues of charity and intelligence. Associated with and in the service
of a lower spiritual ideology, it became merely puritanism which was
historically associated with "militarism and capitalism, with war and
persecution and economic exploitation".

In Island,[1](#1) Huxley's last novel published in 1962, we find that
love-making does not cease but it is done under and as a spiritual
discipline. It is done with awareness, and "awareness transfigures it,
turns love-making into the Yoga of lovemaking."

  
Meaninglessness

There was a phase when Huxley believed like so many other thinkers and
philosophers of the day that the world was purely physical and had no
spiritual dimension. He had no use for "airy assertions" about God and
such like things. "God, we psychologists know, is a sensation in the pit
of the stomach, hypostasised," he said. Similarly, he held, in the same
vein, that the "Other World" was merely an "invention of the human
fancy". It took him much time, influences of a very different kind and
much self-reflection before he changed his views and concluded that the
Other World was neither a human invention, nor *other* or *alien* but
was one's true home and shelter, but that these truths have to be
discovered by each person for himself.

This purely physical and chemical view of the world also gave birth to
its own kind of sociology and ethics; it gave us a world which had no
meaning, no significance, no morality, no value.[2](#2) "It is obvious,
there are no moral laws; there are only social customs," says one of
Huxley's characters. But his ideas changed radically when he embraced
Upanishadic thought. In this new phase he asked the question again
whether the world as a whole possesses the value and meaning we often
attribute to certain parts of it (such as human beings and their works).
And his answer is very different. He says that this is a "question
which, a few years ago, I should not even have posed. For, like so many
of my contemporaries, I took it for granted that there was no meaning."
He gives two reasons for holding this view. One was because he shared
the common belief that the scientific picture of an abstraction from
reality was a true picture of reality as a whole. But he also confesses
to some "non-intellectual reasons". He says he had "motives for not
wanting the world to have a meaning". Explaining these motives and these
non-intellectual reasons a few pages away, he says that for himself, as
no doubt, for most of his contemporaries, "the philosophy of
meaninglessness was essentially an instrument of liberation". They
objected to morality because it "interfered with our sexual freedom", he
explains. He expounds that similar tactics were adopted during the
eighteenth century and for the same reason when many thinkers went
'philosophical'. They preached that people should be "free from
prejudices - above all, prejudices of a sexual nature".[3](#3)

Now in the new phase, he came to regard the world as supremely good and
meaningful and in the process of realizing it he became a regular mystic
philosopher. The ultimate reality is "the peace of God which passeth all
understanding", he said and "goodness is the way by which it can be
approached". To realize that the world is good one had himself to be
good. "Virtue (Buddhist *Sîla* or *yama* and *niyama* of the Pâtañjala
Yoga) is the essential preliminary to the mystical experience," he said.

  
Bridge-Building

But to arrive at this conclusion, Huxley had to traverse a long road.
First he had to overcome, in his own, thinking the powerful bias of the
age: world's essential materiality and meaninglessness. He took the
first step by recognizing a plurality of dimensions; he thought that the
world exists on many planes and in many modes, each on its own, and the
problems was to bring these different planes in some sort of unity or at
least relationship. In *Those Barren Leaves*, Calamy, a philosophical
character, reflects on his own hands, of course while in bed with Miss
Thriplow - perhaps a novelist's device to make philosophy living and
even loving; he speculates that his hand exists in many modes:
electromagnetically as a structure of molecules; biologically as part of
a larger living organism; amorously as at that moment with power to
excite and exhilarate; ethically when it does good and executes evil.
"Universe on top of universe, layer after layer, distinct and separate."
In these early novels, Huxley, through his characters, is very much
occupied with "bridge-building", in synthesizing these multifarious
universes in one grand philosophy.

After he came under the Indian influence, he saw his universes and his
task differently. He saw two orders, *saMsâra* and *nirvâNa*, as being
different and yet the same. There is a Godhead, Brahman, Clear Light of
the Void which is the Unmanifest principle of all manifestations, which
is at once transcendent and immanent. Both are held together in a mystic
vision, in the unity of consciousness, in an act of unitive knowledge.
Both are at heart the same. This is also That. The soul is akin to God
and it can grow into his likeness.

  
Passionate Life

In his early writings, Huxley had no use for thinkers and moralists who
talked of "true" selves and 'true' Gods, who preached that men should
shape their lives in their image. He opposed the "stoic's brutal
sacrifice of the physical, instinctive and passionate life" and "the
ascetic's self-castration". He said that aspiration for a "consistent
perfection" was "aspiring towards annihilation". And then praising the
Hindus where the praise was not due, he said that they "had the wit to
see and the courage to proclaim the fact" that "Nirvana, the goal of
their striving is nothingness". Later on, he had a different view of
NirvâNa.

At this time, he held the current scientific view that man was no more
than a physical-biological being and the spiritual dimension tended to
be neglected or it was equated with the intellectual and artistic
faculty. Therefore he came to the eminently reasonable view that a man
should be what he really is and should not try to be different. If man
was a worm in reality, he should not try to be a butterfly. "Fate has
decreed that we shall be worms; so let us resign ourselves to being
worms; nay... let us be worms with gusto, strenuously; let us make up
our minds to be the best of all possible worms. For, after all, a good
worm is better than that nondescript creature we become when we try to
live above our station, in the world of wings. No amount of trying can
convert a worm into even the worst of butterflies."

Partly at least, this view was a revolt against so many theologians,
moralists and utopians who were around and, who in the name of a
"consistent perfection" and an "ideal" society and an "ideal" man,
exercised great tyranny. The theologians taught that there was no good
in man and yet he should do good[4](#4) and then dictated what that good
was. Huxley's ideas on human goodness, aspiration and perfection changed
when his view of man changed, when he realized that man is secretly good
and divine.

  
Multiple Selves

In his earlier novels, Huxley teaches the gospel of "noble savagery"; he
wants man to be a "life-worshipper". Man should learn to live not only
mentally but also "viscerally"; he should admit not only the claims of
his heart and mind but also claims of "the bowels, the loins, the bones
and skins and muscles".

Huxley's own constitution was highly intellectual and ascetic. In his
essay Squeak and Gibber (*Music at Night*), he says that he finds the
life of pleasure boring and painful, that it has do with his
temperament, not any ethical theory. Probably pretty girls attracted
him, but he found them boring - nothing wrong morally but spiritually
raw, bothersome and uninteresting.[5](#5)

Therefore, many of his characters even while in the midst of a
passionate love-affair find it a "dreary and fatiguing routine". They
remain also aware of another dimension, the dimension of the spirit
which they would like to plumb if they were free from their present
obsession. However the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. Weak in
pain but still weaker in pleasure, they reflect.

Therefore, he developed an ethical theory which had room both for
instincts as well as the intellect. He said that man is not one but
multiple; He is not one self, but a colony of selves. He must live all
his selves and all his parts, and live them not moderately but fully. In
his essays on *Pascal* and *Spinoza's Worm* both included in his
anthology, *Do What You Will*, published in 1929, he developed the
theory of "balanced excess". He preached that the life-worshipper of his
conception would be "at times a positivist and at times a mystic;
derisively sceptical and full of faith"; he will be "by turns
excessively passionate and excessively chaste"; he held that "all the
manifestations of life are godlike, and every element of human nature
has a right - a divine right, even - to exist and find expression." He
said, quoting Pausanias in the *Symposium* of Plato, that "all the Gods
ought to have praise given to them."

Plato had also described such a man who was sensualist and ascetic
alternately, who fasted one day and gormandized the other. But according
to him, this life was chaotic and it belonged to one who had no
metaphysical and moral standards left, and whose soul was heading for a
tyrannical life.

Under the influence of Indian religion and philosophy, Huxley also
radically changed his view-point. He gave up the doctrine of the
"multiple man" and embraced the one of the "higher man". Probably he
still remained a "life-worshipper", but under a very different
definition. Life now meant life of the soul, higher life, immortal life.
He came to believe that "enlightenment is the supreme end of man", the
highest *purushârtha* of Hindu thought. In *Ends* and *Means*, an early
work written under Hindu-Buddhist influence, he said that "the ideal man
is the *non-attached* man. Non-attached to his bodily sensations and
lusts. Non-attached to his craving for power and possession.
Non-attached to the objects of these various desires. Non-attached to
his anger and hatred; non-attached to his exclusive loves. Non-attached
to wealth, fame, social position..."

  
Spirit and Body

On purely materialist principles, a life even when lived "fully" - as
the word is understood - has little meaning. Its best accomplishments
are a mere vanity and vexation of the spirit. There is even less to
justify the lives of the poor. Huxley once shared these views. Like the
rest of his intellectual community, he believed in one life. No
after-life, no rebirth, no resurrection. While in India in the
mid-twenties, he asked himself the question - to what end millions upon
millions of people are born and painfully live? He was honest enough to
admit that it is hard enough to find a reason anywhere, West or East.
But in India, he thought, there was no conceivable answer to the
question, at any rate in terms of the present existence. And therefore,
he added, "Metempsychosis had to be invented, and the doctrine of
*karma* elaborated with a frightful logic, before the serried,
innumerable miseries of India could be satisfactorily accounted for."
The explanation was in the spirit of sciences of the day.[6](#6)

Huxley was never a thorough denier. He recognized the Spirit and its
life, but he identified it with Intellect, or with aesthetic or with
art. It was also thought to be at the mercy of the body. "Sooner or
later every soul is stifled by the sick body; sooner or later there are
no thoughts, but only pain and vomiting and stupor.. The Spirit has no
significance; there is only the body," says a philosophical character in
*Those Barren Leaves*.

Here again, Huxley follows the lead of Western Science. In it, the fact
of pain and death is used to deny immortality, the body is used to deny
the soul; but in India, the facts of human sickness, old age and death
led its sages to seek a status of the soul where "there is no old age,
no death, no sorrow" (*vijro vimrityurviSoko*), to put it in the
language of the Upanishads.

  
Dying

In Western thought, the body holds the soul; in Indian thought, the soul
holds the body. After Huxley adopted the Indian view, the body and its
death lost their primacy. They were seen as *accidents* in the larger
life of the soul. In 1955 when Maria, his wife and companion of
thirty-five years, was dying, he was guiding her on her next journey
according to the teachings of *Bardo Thodol, The Tibetan Book of the
Dead*. He continued whispering into her ears that her essence was love
and light, that she should now forget her body and the time in which
that body had lived, that she should leave her old memories behind, that
regrets, remorses, apprehensions - all these were barriers between her
and the Light. "Peace, Joy, Love", he kept on whispering into her ears.
In 1963, when Huxley was himself dying, Laura, his second wife, provided
him similar guidance.

In Hinduism, dying is an art. In the higher reaches of Yoga, one can
choose at will when to quit and where to go. Under certain
circumstances, voluntary death - *prâyopaveSaNa, sallekhana* or
*santhârâ* - is admitted. The art of dying however is the same as the
art of living. Noble life and noble death go together. In the
*Mahâbhârata*, Arishtanemî, a *tapasvin*, sings; "Death holds no sway
over us, for we have lived a noble life."

One conquers death by ceasing to cling to life. In *Island*, the
inhabitants, who are "Buddhists or Shivaites" when they are not "Tantrik
agnostics", are taught, among many other sciences, the science of
thanatology, "the ultimate science"; it consists in dying in
*awareness*. It is different from the ordinary, modern-day dying which
is described by Huxley in his *Time Must Have A Stop*: "Ignore death up
to the last moment; then, when it can't be ignored any longer, have
yourself squirted full of morphia and shuffle off in a coma. Thoroughly
sensible, humane and scientific, eh?" It is this kind of dying, in its
still more scientifically organized form, that takes place at the "Park
Lane Hospital for the Dying", described in the 14th chapter of the
*Brave New World*, the scientific utopia.

The premise of the new mode of dying - dying in awareness is different.
It is based on the vision of an "immortal" life. In Hinduism,
Immortality has its own connotations; here it does not mean prolongation
of an unregenerate life in time but rather a life lived in *Gods* and in
*eternity*. Huxley adopted this view and presented it ably in his After
Many A Summer, published in 1939. In another still later novel, he says
that man's problem is not Black Death but the Grey Life - a life without
aspiration and experience of divine life.[7](#7)

  
Monotheism

Huxley always distrusted monotheism from the earliest days of his
intellectual life. And even when his views changed radically, monotheism
was no beneficiary of this changed outlook. In an article 'One And Many'
written in an early phase he says that "monotheism, as we know it in the
West, was invented by the Jews". Living in a desert, they found nothing
in the surrounding bareness to make them suppose that the world was
richly diverse. And their belief in monotheism "prevented them from
having any art, any philosophy, any political life", and that "except
for a little literature, the Jews and Arabs produced nothing valuable
until they left their deserts, and came into contact with the
polytheistic races and absorbed their culture". He said that Christian
God was a "magnified and somewhat flattering portrait of Tiberius and
Caligula".

When Huxley accepted the spiritual view of life, his opposition to
monotheism remained and in fact deepened. He could not be reconciled
with the Christian God, the Father and a habitual whipping father too -
the wholly other. He sees sadism in this God. In *Island*, a very late
work, one of his character says: "Somebody ought to make a historical
study of the relations between theology and corporal punishment in
childhood. I have a theory that, wherever little boys and girls are
systematically flagellated, the victims grow up to think of God as -
'Wholly Other'... A people's theology reflects the state of its
children's bottoms. Look at the Hebrews - enthusiastic child-beaters.
And so were all good Christians in the Age of Faith.[8](#8) Hence
Jehovah, hence Original Sin and the infinitely offended Father of Roman
and Protestant orthodoxy. Whereas among Buddhists and Hindus education
has always been nonviolent. No laceration of little buttocks - therefore
*Tat tvam asi*, thou art That, mind from Mind is not divided."
Continuing he mentions Augustine and Martin Luther, as the "two most
relentlessly flagellated bottoms in the whole history of Christian
thought"; and how their flagellation-theology is carried to its logical
conclusion by Calvin and others. "Major premise: God is Wholly Other.
Minor premise: man is totally depraved. Conclusion: Do to your
children's bottoms what was done to yours, what your Heavenly Father has
been doing to the collective bottom of humanity ever since the Fall:
whip, whip, whip!"

  
No Sudden Conversion

All these changes took a period of gestation to mature. Even at an early
stage, Huxley had read Jakob Boehme and William Blake (who had read
Charles Wilkin's translation of the *Bhagvadgîtâ*) with "fascinated
interest", though also with a "good deal of scepticism".[9](#9) He was
also aware in a broad way that to receive intimations from the higher
world, one must have the mind wide and open. He knew that our sublime
thoughts are "gracious visitants", but our intellect uses its "rattling"
and "noisy cleverness" to scare away these "wide-winged birds from
settling in the mind".

But at this stage all this was tentative and experimental. The spiritual
view was one of many views, and unlikely to be a true one in the
scientific sense. At best, he was neutral between these many views and
entertained them all as philosophical and literary occasions demanded.
But when the Hindu-Buddhist influence matured, the spiritual view became
the foremost and he became its ardent champion. The change came without
any dramatic conversion, accompanied by no apocalyptical vision. The new
influence worked silently, benignly, by suggestions and hints as it
were. At no stage was there a sudden, offensive and unwanted intrusion,
no taking of heaven by force,

One notices a definitive turn in Eyeless In Gaza, published in 1936, the
change becoming irrevocable in *After Many A Summer*, published three
years later. Here Huxley begins to speak of the need to get beyond
personality, "beyond this piddling twopenny-halfpenny personality, with
its wretched little virtues and vices, all its silly cravings and silly
pretensions"; he begins to see "I am not my body, I am not my
sensations, I am not even my mind"; his God also "is not absent from
anything, and yet is separated from all things".

In these works, he also quotes Buddha's repeated instructions on
Mindfulness for an aspirant for higher life: "Constantly retain
alertness of consciousness in walking, in sitting, in eating, in
sleeping". It is a variant of the Gita's instruction on the same
subject: "Seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, moving, sleeping,
breathing, one should remember that I am not the doer." In *Grey
Eminence*, a work of great erudition, published in 1941, when Huxley's
spiritual thoughts had greatly deepened, he tells us that a "totally
unmystical world would be a world totally blind and insane".

  
Self-Understanding

Huxley wrote all his future works under this new influence, which gave
him a new orientation, a new power and purpose. *Time Must Have A Stop*,
which belongs to this period, is probably his best novel and certainly
the one which, as he himself says, he "most enjoyed doing". Here he
depicts a character, Bruno, who is the most moving and transforming. He
is compassionate and understanding and speaks of the "unutterable
weariness, the silly and degraded horror, of being merely yourself, of
being only human". He teaches impersonality and believes that man is
more than human.

He also teaches self-understanding. The lower life too has its unity.
According to the Pâtañjala Yoga, attachment, anger, craving, Ego and
Nescience go together and support each other. Following this teaching,
Bruno says that the "shortest distance between two cravings is
violence", that the "square on lust is equal, so to speak, to the sum of
the squares on vanity and idleness".

Therefore when someone commits an offence, it is useful to draw up not
so much its balance-sheet of merits and demerits, but its "genealogy",
its family tree. One should trace its ancestors, its collaterals and its
descendants, its antecedents and its necessary consequences. An
eminently Yogic way of dealing with moral problems.

In this novel, Huxley reestablishes God and says that Humanism is not
enough. "To the surprise of Humanists," he says, "the abolition of God
left a perceptible void. But Nature abhors vacuums. Nation, Class and
Party, Culture and Art have rushed in to fill the empty niche." He had
already learnt to see that "painting, music, literature, thought -
they're not enough". They may take you for a time to the "other world"
as he says in *Eyeless in Gaza*, but it "isn't other enough"; he now
wants something still "heavenlier, something less human".

  
The Perennial Philosophy

During the same period, came *The Perennial Philosophy*, the Sanatana
Dharma of the Hindus. It is an important book on an important subject
with an important message and, therefore, needs a special mention. In
this book, Huxley discusses the "minimum working hypothesis" of a truly
spiritual and tolerant philosophy and its various supporting ideas. The
very first chapter is on the Upanishadic message: That Thou Art; other
chapters discuss Immortality and Survival, Non-attachment (*anâsakti*),
Self-Knowledge (*âtma-jñâna*), Religion and Temperament (*svadharma*),
all peculiarly Hindu concepts.

It is a fashion to think that the Perennial Philosophy has no form and
face (*svarûpa*) of it own, that it is compatible with all kinds of
dogmas, belief-systems and practices, that it rejects nothing and makes
no spiritual demands and calls for no change in belief or orientation
and nobody need to give up anything in order to follow the tenets of
Perennial Philosophy. But Huxley does not seem to agree; he thinks that
the Perennial Philosophy has quite a face of its own and it makes great
demands and is incompatible with many belief-systems. Discussing the
problem concretely, he finds that both in its spirit and deeper
conceptualization, the Perennial Philosophy is opposed to and is also
opposed by the so-called "revealed religions" which make salvation and
God's truth dependent on a unique and single revelation in history,
dependent on an authorized mediator, and makes it a privilege of a
particular church or *ummah*. Perennial Philosophy recognizes no such
historical fatality, no priviledged intermediaries, no surrogates, no
authorized proxies. Spiritual life is a lawful process, not a lucky
accident or piece of history, a happenstance. Salvation is man's
assussured possession, not a chance windfall. God is not a pie in the
sky who appeared from nowhere at a particular time and became operative
in human affairs; he has been active from the beginning. The great
spiritual life resides in the heart and its truths are open to all
sincere seekers. Man has known, possessed and lived those truths long
before "revealed religions" were heard of.

  
Mysticism

However, Huxley tries his best and closely looks at Christianity and
Islam for elements of Perennial Philosophy. In the process, he discovers
that it is difficult to reconcile them with any developed form of
mysticism. According to him, the difficulty arises, taking Christianity
as an example, "because so much Roman and Protestant thinking was done
by those very lawyers whom Christ regarded as being peculiarly incapable
of understanding the True Nature of Things". So under the circumstances,
what does Huxley do? He meets the situation partly by leaving out these
lawyers altogether; which has meant leaving out almost all the Popes,
the Church Fathers, the Church Councils and most Church theologians. He
has also to leave out all the Church dogmas: Sin, the historical Jesus,
the Vicarious Atonement, the Missionary Vocation of the Church, and many
such things. He quotes Paul but to prove the 'not-1' of Jesus, that is,
for opposing the claims of a historical Jesus, which is unpardonable
heresy according to all branches of mainstream Christianity.

The other expedient Huxley adopts is that he quotes from
unrepresentative mystics like Eckhart or he quote the unrepresentative
statements of orthodox mystics like St. John of the Cross.[10](#10)
Eckhart, for example, is the most quoted Christian mystic (32 times).
But it is well known that his death saved him from the clutches of the
Inquisition and that Pope John XXII had condemned him after his death
for many of his sermons which contained "error or the blot of heresy".
We are assured by A. Pouplain, a Catholic theologian and author of *The
Graces of Interior Prayer*, that the Church never reckoned Eckhart
"amongst her mystics, or even amongst the mystics".

Huxley realizes his difficulty. He knows that mysticism is not native to
Christianity and has been an uneasy implant from outside. In his *Grey
Eminence*, he shows how through "neo-platonism and along with it, at
several removes, the most valuable elements of Hindu religion,[11](#11)
entered Christianity and became incorporated, as one of a number of
oddly heterogeneous elements, into its scheme of thought and devotion".
In a lecture, *Man and Religion*, delivered in 1959 at the University of
California at Santa Barbara, he goes over the subject again and shows
the incompatibility of Christianity with mysticism. He says that
religion as a system of beliefs is a profoundly different kind of
religion, and it is the one which has been the most important in the
West. He adds that the two types of religion - the religion of direct
acquaintance with the divine and the religion of a system of beliefs -
have coexisted in the West, but mystics have always formed a mino-rity
in the midest of the official symbol-manipulating religions, and the
relationship has been a rather uneasy symbiosis. The members of the
official religion have tended to look upon the mystics as difficult,
trouble-making people. They have made even puns about the name, calling
mysticism 'mystischism' - a foggy, antinomian doctrine, which doesn't
conform easily to authority. He also quotes from a letter of Abbot John
Chapman, a well-known Benedictine monk, in which he speaks on the "great
difficulty of reconciling - not merely uniting - mysticism with
Christianity".

In this lecture, Huxley also relates how mysticism acquired a "tolerated
position" in Western Christianity by an early "pious fraud". About the
sixth century, a Neoplatonic writer, a convert to Christianity, wrote a
book on Mystical Theology under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite,
who was mistaken for one Dionysius who was the first disciple of St.
Paul in Athens. Under this mistaken identity, the book was well
received. In the ninth century, it was translated by John Scotus
Erigena[12](#12) and thereafter it entered into the tradition of the
Western Church. It was not until recent times that the fraud was
recognized for what it was, but by then it was too late.

Huxley says that "in one of the odd, ironical quirks of history, this
curious bit of forgery played a very important and very beneficent part
in the Western Christian tradition".

According to Huxley, St. John of the Cross was the last great
representative of the Dionysian tradition of mysticism who was also
orthodox.

Huxley faces the same difficulty with Islam. It is strange that in a
book containing hundreds of quotations ("about 40% is not written by
me," says Huxley about this book), there is not a single quotation from
the Quran in support of the Perennial Philosophy. He only quotes from
Rabia, Bayazid, Abu Sa'id and Rumi who do not properly represent even
the sufi silsilas, the mainstream Islamic Sufism.

  
Are All Religions the Same?

Huxley was looking for elements of Perennial Philosophy and he
acknowledged them wherever he found them. But in all his wide-faring and
conscientious research, he found nothing to lead him to conclude that
all religions are expressions of a Perennial Philosophy and therefore
they are basically one.[13](#13)

On the other hand while discussing Christianity and Islam, he found in
them a great deal which was opposed to Perennial Philosophy, and he said
so in so many words on many occasions.[14](#14)

He finds these religions exclusive and dogmatic; he finds their
cosmology and theology unsatisfactory and God-eclipsing. He finds that
they are obsessed with time and events and values of the time and there
is very little of the eternity-principle in them. This makes them
intolerant and violent and Huxley is forced to refer on many occasions
to the spirit of persecution that characterizes them. He observes that
while historical religions have been violent, eternity-philosophies like
"Hinduism and Buddhism have never been persecuting faiths, have preached
almost no holy wars and have refrained from that proselytizing religious
imperialism, which has gone hand in hand with the political and economic
oppression of the coloured peoples."

Huxley tells us how the time-worshipping Catholicism institutes
Inquisition and how it "bums and tortures in order to perpetuate a
creed, a ritual and an ecclesiastico-politico-financial organization
regarded as necessary to men's eternal salvation"; he tells us how
"Bible-worshipping Protestants fight long and savage wars, in order to
make the world safe for what they fondly imagine to be the genuinely
antique Christianity of apostolic times".

In his *Grey Eminence*, Huxley wishes that Catholicism knew Buddhism
properly for in its teachings it "would have found the most salutary
correctives for its strangely arbitrary theology, for its strain of
primitive savagery inherited from the less desirable parts of Old
Testament, for its incessant and dangerous preoccupations with torture
and death, for its elaborately justified beliefs in the magic efficacy
of rites and sacraments. But, alas, so far as the West was concerned,
the Enlightened One was destined, until very recent times, to remain no
more than the hero of an edifying fairy tale" - the reference is to the
story of *Barlaam and Josaphat*, a garbled version of the life of Buddha
in the person of a legendary Barlaam who becomes a Christian saint.

Huxley also notices "Islam's black record of holy wars and persecution -
a record comparable to that of later Chidstianity".[15](#15)

  
Personal God

Huxley continues to speculate on reasons that made Christianity and
Islam violent and persecutory. One reason of course is because they are
time-philosophies; another reason often mentioned by him is their belief
in a personal God who is considered as "the Lord of hosts", or a
"commander-in-chief". Illustrating the point he says: "The Moslems who
invaded India brought with them the idea of a God who was not the order
of the army of being, but its general. *Bhakti* towards this despotic
person was associated with wholesale slaughter of Buddhists and Hindus.
Similarly *bhakti* towards the personal God of Christianity has been
associated, throughout the history of that religion, with the wholesale
slaughter of pagans and the retail torture and murder of heretics."
Huxley adds "that it is the business of the rational idealist to harp
continually upon this all-important fact", so that "the evil tendencies
which history shows to be inherent" in "belief in a personal deity"
could be mitigated.

Huxley repeats this idea often enough in his writings. At one place he
says that much of the "folly and wickedness" of those who follow the
Bible can be traced back to its "mistaken view of the world". He says
that "The Hebrews of the Bronze Age thought that the integrating
principle of the universe was a kind of magnified human person, with all
the feelings and passions of a human person. He was wrathful, for
example, he was jealous, he was vindictive. This being so, there was no
reason why his devotees should not be wrathful, jealous and vindictive.
Among the Christians this primitive cosmology led to the burning of
heretics and witches, the wholesale massacre of Albigensians,
Catharists, Protestants, Catholics and a hundred other sects."[16](#16)

  
The Book

Huxley finds that it is no good to anybody to have Religions of the
Book. -Writing to his brother, Julian Huxley he says: "One sees the
immense good fortune of Buddhists in not being cursed with a sacred book
or an impossible dogma".

A sole sacred book is undesirable for two reasons. First it sets up an
external authority when the real authority is man's reason and his own
deeper spiritual intuition. Secondly these so-called holy books contain
much that is undesirable. Huxley says that the early Christians made the
enormous mistake of burdening themselves with the Old Testament, which
contains, along with much fine poetry and sound morality, the history of
the cruelties and treacheries of a Bronze-Age people, fighting for a
place in the sun under the protection of its anthropomorphic tribal
deity... Ancient ignorance had been sanctified as a revelation... Those
whom it suited to be ignorant ... could find in this treasure house of
barbarous stupidity justifications for every crime and folly. Texts to
justify such abominations as religious wars, the persecution of
heretics, breaking of faith with unbelievers, could be found in the
sacred books and were in fact used again and again throughout the whole
history of the Christian Church..."

  
Pluralist View

Another reason advanced is that they lack a pluralist view of God, man
and his nature or what the Hindus call the "doctrine of vocation". This
makes all the difference. According to this doctrine, "the Indians admit
the right of individuals with different *dharmas* to worship different
aspects or conceptions of the divine. Hence the almost total absence,
among Hindus and Buddhists, of bloody persecutions, religious wars and
proselytizing imperialism."

  
Animal World

Huxley notices the same difference in the treatment of the animal
kingdom by the two philsophies. He says that while great
eternity-philosophies like Hinduism and Buddhism have taught a morality
inculcating kindness to animals, time-philosophies like "Judaism and
orthodox Christianity taught that animals might be used as things, for
the realization of man's temporal ends. Even St. Francis' attitude
towards the brute creation was not entirely unequivocal. True, he
converted a wolf and preached sermons to birds; but when brother
Juniper, a beloved disciple of his, hacked the feet off a living pig in
order to satisfy a man's craving for fried trotters, the saint merely
blamed his disciple's intemperate zeal in damaging a valuable
property.[17](#17) It was not until the nineteenth century, when
orthodox Christianity had lost much of its power over European minds,
that the idea that it might be a good thing to behave humanely towards
animals began to make headway.[18](#18) This new morality was correlated
with the new interest in nature which had been stimulated by the
romantic poets and the men of science. Because it was not founded upon
an eternity-philosophy, a doctrine of divinity dwelling in all living
creatures, the modern movement in favour of kindness to animals was and
is perfectly compatible with intolerance, persecution and systematic
cruelty towards human being. Young Nazis are taught to be gentle with
dogs and cats, ruthless with Jews. That is because Nazism is a typical
time-philosophy, which regards the ultimate good as existing, not in
eternity, but in the future. Jews are, *ex hypothesi*, obstacles in the
way of the realization of the supreme good; dogs and cats are not."

  
Vegetarian Diet

Some may regard the dietic question too lowly and think that it should
not rub shoulders with such sublime concepts as *brahman, Sûnya*, God
and Soul. But in Indian spirituality, it holds a high place. Dietary is
more than gastronomy; it involves fundamental attitudes and views.
Vegetarianism also represents a great cultural and religious value of
India and it has found emphasis wherever Indian religious influence has
gone. "Vegetarianism is one of the priceless gifts of Hinduism," as
Mahatma Gandhi says. Today under this influence, it is already making an
appeal in the West on more than health grounds. It stands high in the
spiritual discipline of all those movements which follow Indian
inspiration.

Following the Indian lead, Huxley finds a "correlation between religion
and diet". He even sees a close link between the Semitic "personal God"
and what His followers cat. In his *Eyeless In Gaza*, Huxley says:
"Christians eat meat, drink alcohol, smoke tobacco; and Christianity
exalts personality... teaches that God feels anger and approves the
persecution of heretics. It's the same with Jews and the Moslems. Kosher
and an indignant Jehovah. Mutton and beef and personal survival among
the houris, avenging Allah and holy wars. Now look at the Buddhists.
Vegetables and water... They don't exalt personality; they try to
transcend it... What worlds away from Jehovah... ! The fact is, of
course, that we think as we eat."

Huxley says through the mouth of a doctor of Buddhist persuasion that
frozen meat, by being widely available, has become the "greatest enemy
of Christianity". It has filled the Christians with "scepticism and
despair", so that only "the most violent stimuli will rouse them to
purposive activity, and what's worse, the only activity they undertake
is diabolic". The doctor tells Anthony Beavis, his meat-eating patient,
that the latter's "intestines are ripe for fascism".

  
Art

Hindu art has been incomprehensible to most Western critics,
particularly of the colonial era and they often used harsh epithets like
'barbarous', 'ugly', etc., to describe it. But it was not so with
Huxley. He found much in Indian art to appreciate even while he used
Western standards of judgement. He could also see though obscurely that
Indian art was in some radical way different and it was trying to
express another feeling, another dimension. But at this stage, he had no
proper comprehension of this dimension and also no intellectual sympathy
with it. Therefore, after going about in India, it confirmed him even
further in his European standards. He tells us with great
self-satisfaction that a visit to India "makes one realize how
fortunate, so far at any rate as the arts are concerned, our Europe has
been in its religions". He said that while in its Pagan traditions, the
Olympian deities were men made gods, in its Christian tradition, the
Saviour was God made man. But in neither the artist was asked to go
beyond the boundaries of real and actual human life. However, it was
different in Hinduism, which though it permitted the representation of
the human, thought that "the human is not enough". Hinduism, he said
tried to represent the superhuman and the metaphysical and, as a result,
"Hindus have evolved a system of art full of metaphysical monsters and
grotesques". Carrying on the discussion, he concluded that the "Hindus
are too much interested in metaphysics and ultimate reality to make good
artists. Art is not the discovery of Reality - whatever reality may
be... It is the organization of chaotic appearance into an orderly and
human universe".

But all this was changed when he accepted the spiritual dimension. His
definition of "Reality" changed; his understanding of what is "human"
changed. He developed different standards and different criterions of
judgement. He developed a new eye for Hindu-Buddhist art. He also began
to look at European art, music, and literature from a new angle; for
example, now he began to notice the absence of a "detached character" in
Shakespeare. Similarly, he began to see that the higher transcendental
dimension which he had now begun so much to value was either missing or
was at least very inadequately expressed in European art tradition. This
point becomes clear when we read, for example, his essays on 'Variations
on a Baroque Tomb', or 'Variations on El Greco' contained in his *Themes
And Variations* published in 1950. Discussing baroque art of the
seventeenth century, he speaks of its failure to find an adequate
artistic expression for the mystical experience, even when its artists
were rendering saints in ecstasy who were often shown gesticulating and
swooning under an epileptic fit; they were often represented not with
God, but with their physiology in a state hardly distinguishable from
that of sexual enjoyment. He points to Berini's statues of Blessed
Ludovica Albertoni and the more celebrated St. Teresa in ecstasy and his
failure to deal with the subject.[19](#19) At the end, he concludes that
"no fully adequate rendering of the contemplative life was ever achieved
in the plastic arts of Christendom".

According to Huxley one great symbol through which, in the past, the
spiritual life has been most clearly and powerfully expressed is
landscape painting. He observes that from time immemorial deity has been
associated with the boundlessness of earth and sky, with the longevity
of trees, rivers and mountains, and space and time on the cosmic scale
have been symbols of the infinity and eternity of Spirit. He points out
that the first artists to concern themselves with the spiritual
significance of Nature were the Taoist landscape painters of China, and
that when long after landscape painting was discovered in Europe, the
artists had no philosophy to explain and justify what they were doing -
that work was left to poets like Wordsworth, Shelley and Whitman. To
show the contrast between the Western and the Far Eastern approach to
nature, he quotes from the handbook on painting by Cennino Cennini whose
recipe for mountains is: take some large jagged stones, arrange them on
a table, draw them and, lo and behold, you will have a range of Alps or
Apennines good enough for all the practical purposes of art. Huxley
observes that in China and Japan mountains were taken more seriously.
The aspiring artist was advised to go and live among them, to make
himself alertly passive in their presence, to contemplate them lovingly
until he could understand the mode of their being and feel within them
the workings of the immanent and transcendent Tao.

Huxley also says that another form in which man has expressed his deep
spiritual vision is a human figure. In fact, a human figure in response
is the best symbol of life in God or even of God himself. But this
presupposes a very different understanding of man and divinity than the
one found in Semitic religions. In this approach man in his innermost
being is divine (not sinful as in Christianity), and Indian art has
tried to express this being, this inner divinity as best as it could.
This however presupposes a great science of contemplation and a
developed art of inner exploration. In Indian art-tradition, when Gods
are rendered into visual art-forms, they must first be contacted on
subtle planes through meditation. The sculptor undergoes a strict
regimen of fasting and meditation until he is ready to "receive" their
transcendental-form or forms; the forms thus revealed in meditation
(*dhyâna-rûpâNi*) are then translated into visible forms
(*vyakta-rûpâNi*). Christianity has no idea of an inner-man, or of man's
inner depths; and therefore there is nothing to search or find there. As
a result, in the Western art-tradition, the problem has been very much
simpler and it hardly caused any complication. According to John P.
Lundy, author of *Mounumental Christianity*, God the Creator is often
represented by Jesus; in Venetian Mosaics, a young and beardless young
man is breathing into man the breath of life, or handing to Adam a
little spirit with butterfly wings; in illumined Bibles of the fifteenth
century, he is shown with cruciform nimbus creating the world. In these
representations he is often shows with a beard and about thirty years
old. In the sixteenth century, he is often replaced by the figure of
Pope. The Pope is shown in full canonicals creating Eve or appearing to
Job seated in clouds and holding the globe in his hands and also
embodying the Trinity. W.E.H. Lecky tells us that in Christian art, when
the Father began to be painted, in "Italy, Spain, and the ultramontane
monasteries of France, He was usually represented as a Pope; in Germany,
as an Emperor; in England, and, for the most part, in France, as a
King".

Christianity treated its other 'pious' subjects with no greater vision.
The depiction of Jesus passed through many artistic styles and followed
many fashions into which we need not to go here, but a few salient facts
may be mentioned. In early representations, Jesus was sometimes rendered
as a chubby and sunny youth in imitation of Greek Gods who had beautiful
forms. But precisely for that very reason in order to oppose and spite
them, Jesus was also painted ugly and deformed. Many important Christian
theologians taught that Jesus was "the ugliest of the sons of men";
others taught that Jesus was a "man of sorrow", a man who never laughed.
Even so, however, inadequate in conception, some of these early
depictions were devout and succeeded in expressing piety and solemnity
of a sort. But, eventually, Christian art settled for expressing
suffering, cruelty, horror and loathsomeness. It specialized in
portraying the legends of martyrs, the agonies of the lost, the hot
fires in which the heretics burned. Jesus himself was often shown as a
tortured figure hanging on a cross with a crown of thorns pressing on
his brow and the wounds on his side dripping blood. All this had little
spirituality in it but it appealed to a perverse imagination and a
morbid mind.[20](#20)

According to Huxley, though peace that passes all understanding was
often sung and spoken in the writings of such mystics as Eckhart, Tauler
and Ruysbroeck, but it failed to find expression in Christian art. He
notices that nowhere there are "equivalents of those Far Eastern Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas who incarnate, in stone and print, the experience of
ultimate reality".

Is this omission accidental or has it deeper causes? Huxley does not
discuss this question directly, but, I think, his answer is clear. In
one sense and on its own plane, Christian artistic performance was not
unimpressive. Christian artists were talented and innovative; they
performed all the tasks set for them by their religion and fulfilled all
its needs for what they were worth. They portrayed a sky-god, thrones,
clouds and winged angles; and with equal profusion they portrayed devils
who had their own iconography; they portrayed the Virgin and the
Apostles; they portrayed the Day of Judgement and the resurrection of
the martyrs clamouring for revenge; they painted hell-fire with great
conviction and fervour; they portrayed the blessed and the damned and
the joys of the former at the sight of the agonies of the latter. That
there is little spirituality in all this is another matter. Similarly,
they discovered important techniques like perspective and foreshortening
by which they could portray the third dimension, and render horizons and
depths in space. But this did not help them to render the spiritual
dimension, the spiritual horizons and depths of man's being. That
required a different kind of preparation and Christianity gave them no
guidance in that direction.

The fact is that Christian art failed at a deeper level. It failed not
in execution but in conception and vision, and this failure was at
bottom failure of Christian theology in which mysticism is rudimentary
and peripheral. Christian theology has no concept of transcendence,
non-attachment, recollectedness, equality (*samatâ*), liberation
(*moksha*), the vast (*bhûmâ*) and the infinite (*ananta*), compassion
(*kuruNâ*), of cosmic action emanating from restfulness at the centre;
therefore, it felt no call to try to convey them in its art-forms. A
deeper iconography needed the support of a deeper theology and vision.

This explains why Christian art has no equivalents of Far Eastern
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas as Huxley notices. The Eastern tradition was
shaped by Hindu religious thinking and sensibility. Hindu art tried to
portray the inner man: the Man behind the man, the Eye behind the eye,
the Seeing behind the seeing, man's inner *prâNika* or life-currents,
the nodal points in his subtle body where the individual meets the
cosmic. It portrayed man's inner physiognomy. Christian theology knew
nothing of this inner physiognomy, and it remained unportryed in its
art. Christian artists were often great anatomists and they painted
attractive figures of lovely curves with draperies tastefully arranged;
they studied and understood the structure of human body and rendered it
in various postures and motions with their muscles and sinews. But they
portrayed the external man; there was no portrayal of the inner man, the
luminous man, the transcendental man.

The idea behind Hindu-Buddhist art was to convey inner realities through
figures and symbols. The underlying idea of Christian art was to narrate
Biblical stories or to propagate a creed or dogma through picture-forms.
In this task, it succeeded very well.

Very little can be said about Muslim art, at least in the sense in which
we understand the word. Much of it is funerary art. In India, Huxley saw
many specimens of Muslim architecture and he thought that as a whole
"Mohammedan art tends ... to be dry, empty, barren, and monotonous".
Huxley also visited the Taj at Agra and he was much disappointed. He
found the building expensive and picturesque but architecturally
uninteresting. He thought that it was elegant but its elegance was of a
"very dry and negative kind", and its classicism came not from an
"intellectual restraint imposed on an exuberant fancy", but from "an
actual deficiency of fancy, a poverty of imagination". He compared it
with contemporary European buildings in the neo-classical style of the
High Renaissance, and he found it inferior in comparison. Comparing it
with Hindu architecture, he said: "The Hindu architects produced
buildings incomparably more rich and interesting as works of art. I have
not visited Southern India, where, it is said, the finest specimen of
Hindu architecture are to be found. But I have seen enough of the art in
Rajputana to convince me of its enormous superiority to any work of the
Mohammedans. The temples at Chitor, for example, are specimens of true
classicism". According to him, its fabulous "costliness is what most
people seem to like about the Taj", and that because it is made of
marble. But "marble", he say, "covers a multitude of sins".[21](#21) Its
costliness makes up for its lack of architectural merit.

It could be said that art is not Islam's forte as it repudiates it and,
therefore, it has not developed it. But there is a another and even more
important side of the question. The fact is that Islam also did not need
much in the way of art. It had little to convey or communicate in the
way of deeper spiritual truths. Its God was best satisfied with
demolition of the shrines of "other Gods", and it was in that direction
that Islam found its best self-expression, both religious and artistic.
In this, it was not alone. It shared this passion of demolition with
other iconoclastic religions including Christianity - we forget what it
did in its heyday. But the facts cannot be kept under the carpet for all
time. The question is opening up again and the iconoclastic ideologies
are under interrogation.

  
Chemical Doors

For more than a decade, Huxley had been preaching a mystical view, the
presence of another world beyond the veil of the mind. But his empirical
mind still sought verification of the world of which his deeper
intellect was already assured. This came in 1953 when he took mescalin.
It brought to him some wonderful visionary experiences.[22](#22) Later,
he experimented with LSD and Marijuana (about ten times in all). In the
experiences induced by them, a deeper dimension was added. He saw the
"togetherness" of all things and their essential "alrightness". He
described his visionary experiences in his *The Doors of Perception*,
and discussed the problem of visions in a larger theoretical framework
in his *Heaven And Hell*. Unfortunately, these books provided
intellectual support to the psychedelic drug movement that enveloped
America and Europe in the sixties. Drugs could not have done much harm
to Huxley, for he was already internally prepared; but the story was
different with thousands of young men who came under the sway of the
drug movement.

Huxley had always some use for drugs in influencing the mind. In his
*Brave New World*, citizens use Soma to suppress any suggestions of a
higher reality and ideal; in his *Island*, Moksha-medicine is used to
provide occasional glimpses into higher reality, "an hour or two, every
now and then, of enlightening and liberating grace". The rest depends on
you whether you choose to "cooperate with the grace", or continue to
behave like "silly delinquents". Habitual meditation is one of the ways
in which one cooperates with those gratuitous graces. It helps in
cultivating a state of mind where dazzling ecstatic insights become a
permanent and assured possession. It helps man to know himself to the
point that one is not "compelled by one's unconscious to do all the
ugly, absurd, self-stultifying things that one so often finds oneself
doing".[23](#23)

That Huxley held to this view till the end becomes obvious from his
posthumous work, *Moksha*, edited by M. Horowitz and C. Palmer, where
the story is told through his letters, extracts from his previous works,
his addresses to learned societies, and his articles in journals, both
scientific and popular.

In many cultures, some people do resort to drugs for heightened and
out-of-the-way experiences, but higher Indian spirituality disfavours
it. It prescribes only the method of *yama, niyama, Sîla, tapas, samâdhi
and prajñâ for higher aims of liberation. Godly life is holy ground;
there should be no gate-crashing here, no short-circuiting. The path has
it own lessons and beauties and the destination itself is in the path.*

  
East and West

European soldiers, traders, missionaries - later on ably assisted by its
colonial ideologies and scholars - opened up the East to the influences
of the West. But Huxley belonged to that small group of European
thinkers and seekers who opened up the West to the influence of the East
- a more arduous task and in the long run perhaps more important too. He
did not seek this role, it was merely a bye-product of his search for
truth.

Huxley was one of the finest products of Europe - of a new Europe
seeking its old roots, of a Europe no longer satisfied with mere
technology and science and rationality but seeking a new dimension of
the spirit, a Europe self-critical and in search. He was also a profound
student of Europe's various traditions, religious, literary and
artistic, and he discusses them with great knowledge, insights,
authority and intimacy. In his hands, cultural Europe becomes alive. A
critical discussion of Europe by such a sympathetic insider is meant to
help, to fecundate; it can do no harm but will only help Europe in its
spiritual rediscovery. In opening up to India and China, it would merely
be opening up to an ancient tradition which was lost by her but
preserved and developed in India and China.

  
Mahabharata and Ramayana

Though Huxley came late but his name stands high on the list of those
who have opened up the West to the philosophies of the East. He however
spoke to a highly intellectualized audience. Perhaps it was necessary at
that stage; Europe had to be approached through its intellect. But now a
different channel of communication is needed. The message too has to
have a more vital clothing.

I believe that the Ramayana and the Mahabharata fill the bill. They
represent embodied spirituality and reveal the higher dimension when it
becomes dynamic in life; they give us "life-creations" of the Vedânta
philosophy on which Huxley wrote so much (sixteen articles for *Vedanta
for the Western World* and ten for *Vedanta for Modern Man*).

We all, whether in the East or the West, need their message. Not only do
they offer the highest yogas, and the highest spiritual wisdom, they
also offer the great social ideals, which we need badly today. At
present, our social relations - filial, parental, fraternal, conjugal,
civic - are tending to become empty. They revolve round a mere
utilitarian nexus and have lost the higher dimension and therefore, they
bring no fulfilment. The Ramayana and the Mahabharata can help in
restoring this lost dimension.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) It is Huxley's Utopia situated in an island in South-East Asia
and called Pala by him. It had the luck of never having been a colony.
It had no harbour, and therefore it escaped "an Arab invasion in the
Middle Ages", and its people could stay "Buddhists or Shivaites". Later
on, it escaped the "infestations" of the Portuguese, the Dutch, the
English. "No Dutch, no English, and therefore no planters, no coolie
labour, no cash crops, no systematic exhaustion of our soil. Also no
whisky, no Calvinism, no syphillis, no foreign administrators. We were
left to go our own way and take responsibility for our own affairs,"
explains one inhabitant of the island.  

[2](#2a) The philosophy of meaninglessness did not embody one single
idea; it was made up of many ideas all psychologically interlinked.
Generally those ideas went together but each idea had also its special
appeal and one could choose and reject according to one's temperament.
Huxley roughly summarizes them in the following language: that life is
without significance, that values are illusory and ideals merely the
inventions of cunning priests and kings, that sensations and animal
pleasures alone possessed reality and were alone worth living, that
there was no reason why anyone should have the slightest consideration
for anyone else, that those who find rape and murder amusing, rape and
murder are legitimate activities for them.

[3](#3a) He also explains that in some ways the philosophy of
meaningless was a reaction to Christian ethics which found meaning in
most abominable things they did. "Christian philosophers have found no
difficulty in justifying imperialism, war, the capitalist system, the
use of torture, the censorship of the press and ecclesiastical tyrannies
of every sort, from the tyranny of Rome to the tyrannies of Geneva and
New England. In all these cases they have shown that the meaning of the
world was such as to he compatible with, or actually most completely
expressed by, the iniquities I have mentioned above... In due course
there arose philosophers who denied not only the right of these
Christian special pleaders to justify iniquity by an appeal to the
meaning of the world, but even their right of find any such meaning
whatsoever... One unscrupulous distortion of the truth tends to beget
other and opposite distortions."

[4](#4a) There are other variations on this theme. For example, Albert
Schweitzer holds that though from the view-point of scientific thought,
there is no good in the universe yet man should do good by an act of
self-will. In his *My Life and Thought* he says: "My knowledge is
pessimistic, but my willing and hoping are optimistic." He was lucky.
Not many can live with their mind and heart so irreconciled and be good
on their own without invoking some principle of godliness and goodness
in man and the world.

[5](#5a) Some yogic practices prescribe that to keep a woman at bay one
should meditate on her body (and also on one's own) as heap of bones, as
a bag of impurities. Perhaps, Huxley had already practised some of these
meditations in his previous life. Even before he turned to Indian Yoga,
he thought of women under some other general ideas though not of the
same old type but some modern and sociological ones which were equally
effective and kept him away from them. For example, in the twenties,
after a bout of illness, he visited a sea-side resort in the
Mediterranean and went into a hotel to stop there "for weeks, if
necessary". In the evening, at dinner, he found at the table perhaps
forty guests - all English, and all except himself and an English
clergyman, women. He saw spinsters and widows, widows with daughters who
had been once pretty but were now fading into a definite
unmarriageableness, widows with daughters who had never been pretty at
any time Huxley contemplated the scene and found the spectacle of so
much age and virtue and ugliness, so much frustration and refinement, so
much middle-class pride on such small fixed incomes, so much ennui and
self-sacrifice.. painfully distressing and grotesque. And then suddenly
it occurred to him that the whole Riviera, from Marseilles to Spezia,
was teeming with such women. "In a single appalling intuition I realized
all their existences. At that very moment, I reflected, in all the cheap
hotels and pensions of the Mediterranean littoral, thousands upon
thousands of them were eating their fish with that excessive
middle-class refinement which makes one long, in the Maison Lyons, for
the loud bad manners of provincial France or Belgium. Thousands upon
thousands of them trying to keep warm, trying to keep well through the
winter, trying to find in foreign parts distraction and novelty and
cheapness... The only distraction is the chat of other women of their
kind. The only novelties are the latest things in semi-evening dresses
and semi-precious beads... Income remains irrevocably fixed - and so do
morals and intellectual interests, so do prejudice, manners, and
habits." In the midst of this contemplation, the Anglican chaplain, the
only other man around, tried to get into conversation with him.
"Beautiful evening," he said to him. "Beautiful," Huxley agreed.
"Staying long?" he asked. "To-morrow. Have to make a very early start,"
Huxley said.

[6](#6a) He was not so indifferent to the question of life after death
as it would appear here. He took interest in the findings of Psychical
researches like C.E. Broad and M. Rene Sudre who believed in the
survival of a "Psychic factor". In one of his essays, Sqeak and Gibber,
published in 1931, he says that probably the dead survive "but only
fragmentarily, feebly, as mere wisps of floating memories." In *Time
Must Have A Stop*, published in 1944, he describes the "after-death
experiences" of Eustace Barnack in terms of these floating memories. His
drama *The World of Light* published in 1931 deals with the same subject
though in a somewhat different way.

But his interest in "survival" or even of repeated incarnations ceased
when his spiritual interest deepened. He was now interested in
liberation, in immortality, in "participation in the eternal now, not
persistence in one of the forms of time." In his *The Perennial
Philosophy*, he quotes *Yoga VâSishTha* which says: "Troubled or still,
water is still water. What difference can an embodiment or disembodiment
make to the liberated? Whether clam or in tempest, the sameness of the
ocean suffers no change"  

[7](#7a) Here one may also mention Huxley's idea of modern medicine. He
says that it has marvellous antibiotics but absolutely no method for
increasing resistance. Similarly, fantastic operations but nothing in
the way of teaching people the way of going through life without having
to be chopped up. Good for patching up when one is falling apart, but
bad for keeping him healthy. And of course it knows nothing of
integrated treatment as it knows nothing of integrated life. It knows
nothing of the higher and positive consciousness and therefore there is
no attempt to help a man to "open himself up to the life force or the
Buddha nature".

[8](#8a) When Europeans reached the American continent, the Red Indians
were astonished to find that white people whipped their little children.
They thought it cruel. Not long ago, London had shops where parents who
could not themselves whip their children could go and hire professionals
to do it for them. Guprun Dimmbla Hangantysdottir, sagely author of
*Odsmal*, tells us that after Iceland was taken over by Christianity,
kids began to be regularly whipped on Good Fridays, that they were so
terrified by this threat that "some went off and hid, only to be found
dead later on".  

[9](#9a) Of these sentiment, "fascinated interest" was the more
important and seminal; scepticism, and even suspicion, were expected at
this stage as something had yet to open up in Huxley before the Gita
became a great scripture for him. The two negative attitudes were pretty
visible when during his tour of India he visited the Ghats of the Ganges
at Benares. There he also saw, among many other things, men in
meditation, men sitting cross-legged with closed eyes, with their hands
dropped limply and palm upwards communing with their deity. There was
nothing unusual in the sight or the posture; it is a traditional and
quite common way of worship practised in private as well as in public by
many in India as a daily routine. But to Huxley at this stage the sight
was incomprehensible and he saw in those worshippers merely
"nose-gazers", contemplating "the brown and sweating tips of their
noses". However, as he had read his Gita with care, he easily recalled
that this "mystic squint" is prescribed by it (5.27 and 8.10); and his
reaction not unexpectedly was characteristic of the stage of his
spiritual development at that time. He said that "Lord Krishna... knew
all that there is to be known about the art of self-hypnotism". It was
only later on when he had reflected more deeply and developed a new
insight that he began to look at these things in a new light.  

[10](#10a) Huxley often quotes St. John of the Cross (1 9 times) whom he
regards as the last great representative of the Dionysian tradition of
mysticism and who is also orthodox. But about him Abbot John Chapman, a
Benedictine monk and a spiritual director of the early part of this
century, says that he "is like a sponge full of Christianity: you can
squeeze it all out and the full mystical theory remains. Consequently,
for fifteen years or so I hated St. John of the Cross and called him a
Buddhist. I loved St. Theresa and read her again and again. She is first
a Christian, only secondarily a mystic. Then I found that I had wasted
fifteen years so far as prayer was concerned."

[11](#11a) E. Hermann says that the Neo-Platonic doctrine of *via
negativa* "from Dionysius onwards took an Asiatic rather than a Greek
from". She does not explain what its Greek form was and how it differed
from its "Asiatic" (Indian) form.  

[12](#12a) He was born between 810-815. He is reputed to have travelled
to Greece, Asia and Egypt. When he becomes first known, he was at the
court of king Charles the Bald. He translated *On the Heavely Hierarchy*
and other works of pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite. They were
Neo-Platonist in approach and considered bad influences. He wrote a book
on *Eucharist* in which he denied the real presence of Jesus Christ.
Another work of his, *Divisions of Nature*, earned for him the
accusation of pantheism. Pope Nicholas I complained to the king in 867
and Erigena had to leave his court. He retired to a monastery in England
where, it is said, he was "pieced with the iron-pens of the boys" and
died. Though he died in disgrace, he left behind important influences
which lasted for many centuries. Four hundred years later, during the
Albigensian crusades, Pope Honorius III condemned his works and ordered
them to be burned publicly (1255).

[13](#13a) "Unity of all religions" has been a special infirmity of the
Hindu mind. It has its doctrinal and historical reasons. Brought up in
his own religious tradition, a Hindu could not even conceive that a
religion could teach persecution. And though its continuing victim for a
thousand years, he thought there was a mistake somewhere and its
perpetrators had not understood their own religions. In this state of
mind, he began to paint for himself and for those who would take him
seriously a picture of these religions quite different from the one
which their own followers knew and practised. It was a self-deceiving
picture but it satisfied him and he wanted to go no further into the
matter.

There is also a historical reason. Christianity and Islam have been
great and systematic attackers and persecutors of various cultures and
religions in various parts of world. In Greece, in Rome, in Egypt, in
Europe, in Syria, in Persia, in Central Asia, old cultures and religions
were almost completely wiped out. The Hindu culture too has been under a
similar attack but it withstood it. However, though it survived, its
body and psyche were badly damaged. It survived by lying low, by
submission, by deference, even by self-denial and self-repudiation, by
having no word to say about itself, by making no claims for itself - in
fact it made all the claims for its persecutors and their religious
ideologies. The old habit continues and has become a part of the Hindu
psyche.  

[14](#14a) Huxley rejected some of the most cherished dogmas and fondest
rites of Christianity. He rejected the Biblical God and the Biblical
Saviour; he rejected as violent and even "obscene" the Christian
doctrine of man's redemption by the death and blood of Jesus. He notices
that there is no blood in Buddhism. Gautama lived till eighty and died
from being too courteous to refuse bad food. Violent death always seems
to call for more violent death. "If you won't believe that you're
redeemed by my redeemer's blood, I'll drown you in your own."

Similarly, he had already rejected the Catholic Eucharist even during
his rational days. He had written how the "Holy Ghost comes sliding
down", and how "His hosts infect Him as they rot; the victims taking
their just revenge". When he accepted a spiritual view of life, he felt
no need to revise his older view and rehabilitate the Eucharist.

In the same way, he also rejected the Protestant doctrines of the man's
total depravity, predestination and salvation by faith and grace alone.
He has a lot to say about Luther and Calvin in his novels and essays.  

[15](#15a) At one place in his *Ends and Means*, Huxley says: "It is an
extremely significant fact that, before the coming of the Mohammedans,
there was virtually no persecution in India. The Chinese pilgrim Hiuen
Tsang, who visited India in the first half of the seventh century and
has left a circumstantial account of his fourteen-years stay in the
country, makes it clear that Hindus and Buddhists lived side by side
without any show of violence. Each party attempted the conversion of the
other; but the methods used were those of persuasion and argument, not
those of force. Neither Hinduism nor Buddhism is disgraced by anything
corresponding to the Inquisition; neither was ever guilty of such
iniquities as the Albigensian crusade or such criminal lunacies as the
religious wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries."

[16](#16a) Huxley is unnecessarily harsh on a "Personal God". There is
nothing wrong with this concept as such but it becomes mischievous like
any other concept when it represents an inadequate spirituality, when
the Personal God is non-yogic and is projected by an impure psyche, when
he forms part of a fanatic theology, or is himself a fanatic idea rather
than a spiritual being. According to the Upanishads, self-purity is the
first requirement. A God who does not represent the purity of the Self
becomes a Moloch and his worshippers become his sacrificial and draught
animals. Huxley is aware of this and, at one place quoting William Law,
he speaks of the mischief of those who turn to God without turning away
from themselves. Such people, he says, perpetrate abominations "which
nature, left to itself, would be ashamed to own". Huxley sees the
continuity between these religious crusaders and the modern secular
ones. In the past, they committed their wickedness in the name of their
'God' or 'the Church', or 'the True Faith'; today they kill and torture
and exploit in the name of 'the Revolution', or simply 'the Future'.

[17](#17a) In his essay 'Francis and Grigory', Huxley gives a fuller
version quoted from Francis' biographies. On the request of a sick
Brother who wanted a pig's trotter to eat, one Brother Juniper, highly
thought of by Francis, went out, took a knife, fell upon a feeding pig,
cut off its foot leaving it maimed, cooked it and gave it to the sick
man who ate it greedily. When the owner of the pig protested, Juniper
did not understand "why should he be so disquieted, seeing that this
pig, whose foot I cut off, is rather God's than his". St. Francis'
objection was why Brother Juniper should have given "so great a
scandal". Huxley adds that the "fact that Francis called donkeys his
brothers and bull-finches his sisters is not enough in itself to prove
that he lived in any kind of fraternal communion with his adopted
family".

[18](#18a) W.E.H. Lecky reaches the same conclusion. Discussing the
problem in his *History of European Morals*, he finds that while the
ancient Greek and even the classical and late Roman world had great
teachers life Pythagoras, Empedocles, Xenocrates, Apollonius of Tyna,
Virgil, Ovid, Lucretius, Juvenal, Epictetus, Porphyry, Plutarch and many
others who practised and taught kindness to animals, there is "no
adequate parallel ... in the Christian writings for at least seventeen
hundred years". Man was too special to his creator and any notion of
duty to animals was "dismissed somewhat contemptuously, as an idle
sentimentalism".  

[19](#19a) He repeats this idea on several occasions in his writings.
For example, in his *Ends and Means*, he says that in rendering the
ecstasies of the saints "baroque art is hysterical, almost epileptic in
the violence if its emotionality", that these ecstasies "are represented
... as being frankly sexual", and that from "this orgy of emotionalism
and sensationalism Catholic Christianity seems never completely to have
recovered".  

[20](#20a) Similarly, Mary's portrayal too passed through many phases
and expressed various theological ideas. From quite early days of its
power, Christianity gave her an assured official status as a *Virgin as
the Mother of God* - though quite significantly never as *God the
Mother*. Therefore, during many, many centuries of Christian art, Mary
was often portrayed as madonna with a child, or as a sorrowing mother -
her statues and images are often shedding tears. The portrayal was often
sentimental, but it did not offend good taste and revealed a religious
feeling at work. But in later times, Virgin was completely secularized
and she frankly became a voluptuous figure, the artist not unoften
painting his mistress as Madonna. Lippi (1406-1469), famous painter and
Chaplain to the nuns of Santa Margherita at Prato, used Lucrezia Buti, a
nun and his mistress as his model for Madonna and later on simply
abducted her from the nunnery. Savonarola thundered week after week
against artists who "painted prostitutes in the character of the
Virgin". It is said that his invectives gave bad conscience to many
artists. Betticelli gave up his pencil altogether; Fra Bartolomeo
retired into a monastry; the poems of Michelangeto reveal that he was
troubled by doubts if his art had been sinful.

[21](#21a) It seems that these remarks on Taj wounded the *national*
sentiment of some Indians - that is the only kind of national sentiment
many have; and when he briefly came to India again after thirty-five
years in 1961, he was made to visit the Taj again in the hope he might
revise his old opinion. But he saw no reason for doing it.  

[22](#22a) It seems that Huxley was not altogether unaware of these
visions. In *Eyeless in Gaza*, he describes one such vision of one of
his characters which is likely his own. It says: "That last glass of
champagne had made him the inhabitant of a new world, extraordinarily
beautiful and precious and significant. The apples and oranges in the
silver bowl were like enormous gems. Each glass, under the candles,
contained, not wine, but a great yellow beryl, solid and translucent ...
Even sound was frozen and crystalline."

[23](#23a) Meditation for Huxley did not have this kind of significance
before. It acquired this significance when a shift came in his
fundamental viewpoint. Earlier meditation for him was no more than navel
or nose-gazing as we have already seen; or even a form of dozing, "the
doze's first cousin", as he described it. He said that people who are
"insufficiently nourished" or are "reduced to an Indian diet" meditate
willy-nilly. But when he embraced the spiritual view of life, meditation
for him became the food of the soul, the method of self-discovery and if
contacting higher reality.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
