+++
title = "2 The Diffusion of Sultanate Systems, 1200–1400"

+++





## IMPERIAL EXPANSION ACROSS THE VINDHYAS

With their tallest peaks barely exceeding 700 metres, the Vindhya Mountains that span west-central India are hardly imposing. They certainly cannot compete with the Sulaiman Mountains on South Asia’s north-west frontier with Afghanistan, which reach 3,800 metres, much less the snow-capped Himalayas on India’s frontier with Tibet, with peaks at 8,800 metres. Rather, the importance of this 1,000-kilometre-long discontinuous range, which runs east to west just north of the Narmada River, lies in its historic role of demarcating the Indo-Gangetic plain – or ‘Hindustan’, in early Arabic and Persian sources – from the Deccan plateau to the south. Its craggy ravines, dense forests and reputedly fierce tribes rendered the terrain inaccessible, or even impassable. Historically, few states straddled both sides of these mountains, and few invasions were launched from one side to the other.1

Despite the topographical barriers, rulers of the early Delhi sultanate were well aware of the rich states lying to the Vindhyas’ south. Occupying the north-western plateau was the Yadava dynasty of kings \(1175–1318\), with their capital located in Devagiri, a formidable natural stronghold. The eastern Deccan was dominated by the Kakatiya kings \(1163–1323\), who ruled from Warangal, a classically designed capital encircled by three concentric walls. In the Kannada-speaking country further south, kings of the Hoysala dynasty \(1190–1346\) ruled over the south-western plateau from their capital, Dwarasamudra \(modern Halebid\). Already in the mid thirteenth century, officials in Delhi coveted these wealthy states. Before becoming sultan himself, Balban had urged Sultan Nasir al-Din to undertake military campaigns deep into India’s interior – not out of greed, nor with a view to annexing territory, but to use its wealth to finance the defence of north India from Mongol invasions.2 For the threat of Mongol attacks did not end with Genghis Khan’s initial invasions of India in the 1220s; they continued throughout the thirteenth and deep into the fourteenth centuries. Balban well understood the importance of stationing garrisons in the frontier towns of the Punjab and in the passes leading from the Afghan highlands to the Indus plain below. It would be the court’s far-sighted geopolitical vision that spared India from the devastation sustained by the peoples of China, Central Asia, Russia and the Middle East.

Delhi’s expansion into the Deccan, however, did not commence with Balban’s reign. After his death in 1286, Balban’s short-lived dynasty succumbed to a *coup d’état* led by the Khalajis. Their leader, the mild-mannered Jalal al-Din Khalaji, had already reached his late seventies when his kinsmen seized power in 1290. But he was soon overwhelmed by the rapid ascent of his own nephew and son-in law, ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji \(r. 1296–1316\). Ambitious and talented, ‘Ala al-Din used his *iqta‘* in Kara – near Allahabad in the central Ganges region – as a power base for launching a series of unauthorized raids to the south, in lands hitherto untouched by Delhi’s influence. In 1292, just two years after the Khalajis had come to power, he led a contingent of swift cavalry that raided Malwa, the region located immediately north of the Vindhya Mountains. His appetite whetted by this success, two years later his cavalry made a daring, lightning raid still further south. Passing over the Vindhya Mountains, he crossed the Narmada and surprised Devagiri, the Yadava capital. After extorting an immense booty from the city’s unsuspecting rulers, the Khalaji prince returned to Delhi and used the plundered wealth to win the military services of numerous freelance soldiers. By now, though, he also had royal ambitions of his own. In July 1296 ‘Ala al-Din treacherously murdered his father-in-law, crowned himself sultan and promptly appeased Delhi’s stunned population with the loot he had hauled back from Devagiri.

Having opened the door to peninsular India, between 1297 and 1311 Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji launched repeated raids on the Deccan, most of them led by his African slave eunuch, Malik Kafur. Like Mahmud of Ghazni’s raids on north India two centuries earlier, these were aimed at plunder, not the annexation of territory. But whereas Mahmud’s booty was used to finance conquests far to the west, ‘Ala al-Din’s Deccan raids were aimed at financing north India’s defence from Mongol invasions, just as Balban had recommended. Like Mahmud’s raids, too, those of ‘Ala al-Din were launched nearly every other year over the span of a decade, penetrating ever deeper into the peninsula: Gujarat in 1297, northern Rajasthan in 1299–1301, southern Rajasthan in 1302–03, Malwa in 1305, Maharashtra in 1307, Andhra in 1309 and both Karnataka and Madurai in 1311. In these campaigns Khalaji armies pressed their military advantages to the hilt. Their cavalries of mounted archers were supplied with powerful war-horses imported from Central Asia, and their engineers possessed the world’s most advanced siege technology: trebuchets, smaller siege engines \(tension-powered ballistas\), wooden parapets and long earthen ramps for filling up moats, enabling besiegers to breach a fort’s curtain walls.

Sultan ‘Ala al-din Khalaji’s reign stands out not only for its aggressive raids in peninsular India, but also for its equally aggressive domestic policies. All matters that the state could conceivably touch – administrative, economic, social – were carefully monitored and controlled to a degree perhaps never before seen in India. Disguised as ‘news reporters’, spies apprised the royal court of the activities of state servants throughout the realm, including even market transactions. The sultan prohibited the consumption and sale of wine and liquors. He abolished tax-free land grants and charitable endowments, transferring the management of lands that had supported such grants to the central government. He banned extravagant banqueting among noble families and took measures to control marital relations between them. He increased his land revenue to 50 per cent of the harvest, the legal maximum in Islamic law. Unlike any of his predecessors in Delhi, the sultan based these taxes on the actual measurement of cultivated fields. He fixed the price of grain and established royal granaries. He required that cultivators sell their grain only to licensed merchants, and that grain carriers be licensed and registered with the state. As a result of such stringent reforms, the price of grain remained stable during the whole of his twenty-five-year reign, whether or not the monsoon rains arrived in any given season.3 The sultan justified these sweeping measures on the grounds that only a stable and prosperous economy could defend the country from the Mongol armies that periodically broke through the Afghan hills and threatened the Indo-Gangetic plain. Notably, no rural rebellions were recorded during his reign.4

‘Ala al-Din Khalaji’s death in 1316 again raised the question of whether the sultanate would continue to be run by a succession of slaves, or by the sultan’s blood descendants. The late sultan’s favourite slave general, Malik Kafur, enthroned ‘Ala al-Din’s child and for a month ruled as regent before being slain by another of ‘Ala al-Din’s sons, Mubarak Khan, who crowned himself as Sultan Qutb al-Din Mubarak Khalaji \(r. 1316–20\). Meanwhile, the Deccan states previously humbled by ‘Ala al-Din took advantage of the turmoil in Delhi by withholding their annual tribute. In response, the new sultan personally marched south in 1318 and, departing from his father’s policy of transforming defeated monarchs into tribute-paying vassals, overthrew the Yadava dynasty and annexed its territories to the sultanate. Governors were appointed throughout former Yadava territory, strategic forts were garrisoned, Delhi’s revenue system was established, and the sultanate’s coinage was minted at Devagiri, now made the provincial capital.

Qutb al-Din Mubarak also built a grand congregational mosque in Devagiri, the Deccan’s earliest surviving Islamic monument. Consisting of a spacious courtyard with colonnades on three sides and a prayer hall on its western side, the mosque comprised 177 columns that were stripped from nearby Jain and Hindu temples, brought to the site and stacked end on end, giving the interior its great height. Apart from serving as a house of worship, the monument projected Delhi’s political presence in this distant province by replicating the metropolitan style of mosques that earlier sultans of Delhi had built in the north: Ajmer, Kaman, Khatu and Delhi. All these structures featured spacious central courtyards encircled by pillared aisles on three sides, a monumental projecting entrance, and a corbelled dome over the prayer hall, supported by reused pillars similarly stacked. In addition, the engaged corner towers of Devagiri’s mosque resembled miniaturized replicas of the most iconic symbol of contemporary Delhi – the famous Qutb Minar – giving visual evidence of Delhi’s imperial presence in the Deccan plateau.

In 1320, Khalaji forces annexed the provincial town of Bijapur, some 350 kilometres south of Devagiri, and raised a mosque there named after its new governor, Karim al-Din. Built under the supervision of a local Hindu architect, this mosque closely engaged with the local culture, as the placement of its reused columns adhered to long-established principles of Hindu temple design. Stone-cutters visually connected the new, Khalaji era with the former Yadava age by continuing the same diamond motif on the upper half of the mosque’s Mecca-facing prayer niche as was found on the niche’s lower half, a reused door jamb of a temple sanctum. The prayer niche’s upper half also contains the Arabic verse, ‘let there be no compulsion in religion’ \(Qur’an 2:256\), suggesting the new regime’s non-coercive public posture vis-à-vis the region’s non-Muslim population. The Devagiri and Bijapur mosques thus reflect two distinct faces of Khalaji authority in the Deccan: whereas the former projected an image of Delhi’s imperial power and grandeur, the latter conveyed a desire to connect the new regime with local elites and their cultural traditions.5

In north India, meanwhile, Qutb al-Din Mubarak’s style of governance diverged sharply from that of his father. Brittle and uncompromising, ‘Ala al-Din’s nearly totalitarian regime was followed by laxity in all respects. Qutb al-Din reportedly opened the jails, gave his army six months’ pay, abolished many taxes, restored to rural elites the land grants his father had resumed, allowed merchants to return to their former corrupt practices and relaxed his father’s price controls, which in turn led to consumer price inflation. The sultan himself grew ever more vainglorious and debauched. Ultimately his favourite slave, a Gujarati convert to Islam named Khusrau Khan, assassinated him and usurped the throne under the title Nasir al-Din Khusrau Shah. But the new ruler’s prohibition of cow slaughter alienated many Muslim nobles, who after just four months transferred their loyalty to Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq, a popular and experienced commander who had repulsed several Mongol invasions in the Punjab.6 In 1320 Ghiyath al-Din, his Turkish kinsmen and his battle-hardened army invaded Delhi and swept the usurper from power. Finding no surviving sons of ‘Ala al-Din to place on the throne, Khusrau Shah having massacred them all, the army proclaimed the septuagenarian Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq the new sultan.

The kingdom the Tughluqs inherited was far from unified. Although the Punjab was firmly under their control, the sultanate’s presence in Gujarat was limited to just a few garrisons. Bengal, still ruled by Balban’s descendants, was virtually independent. Across Rajasthan powerful chieftains had reasserted their independence. Delhi’s grip on the Deccan was minimal at best. Maharashtra remained nominally part of the sultanate, but to the east the Kakatiya raja had ceased paying tribute. Moreover, the continuing Mongol threat created a demand for more treasure to defend the north-west frontier. Accordingly, one of the new sultan’s first initiatives was to send his son, Ulugh Khan, on a two-year expedition across the Vindhya Mountains in an effort to reassert the sultanate’s political presence there. His mission was twofold: to shore up the sultanate’s shaky grip on Devagiri and the western plateau, and to punish the eastern plateau’s Kakatiya rulers for allowing their tribute to fall in arrears. The prince’s expedition, however, was to end with the annexation of the entire northern half of the Deccan.

In 1321 Prince Ulugh Khan marched out of Delhi and headed south. After joining forces with Turkish troops already garrisoned in Devagiri, he proceeded east into Andhra to confront Pratapa Rudra, the Kakatiya maharaja. From the Tughluq perspective the expedition was completely successful: the Kakatiya kingdom was extinguished, its territory annexed to Delhi, and its former capital of Warangal renamed ‘Sultanpur’. Defeated and dethroned, Pratapa Rudra was to be escorted to north India to appear in the newly built capital of Tughluqabad, located in the southern quarters of modern Delhi. There he would personally submit to Sultan Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq. But he never reached the capital; in fact, he never left the Deccan. Rather than face the humiliation of attending Ghiyath al-Din’s court, the proud Kakatiya maharaja committed suicide by the banks of the Narmada.7

Ulugh Khan, meanwhile, occupied himself with asserting Delhi’s presence in the Kakatiyas’ former capital. Seeing the great Svayambhu Śiva temple in the heart of the citadel, the most imposing in the Kakatiya realm, the prince would have understood that the icon of the god was also the emblem of the Kakatiya state and the source of its authority. Aiming to eradicate that authority, he dismantled the edifice to its foundations. But because he planned to redefine the temple plaza’s purpose, he scrupulously preserved its four majestic *torana*s, or ritual gateways, which, standing at the four cardinal directions just beyond the plaza, gave that zone a clear and emphatic focus. Near the plaza’s centre he raised a large congregational mosque, using materials from the destroyed temple, and not far to the west he built a royal audience hall. Locally known as the Khush Mahal, this structure’s battered, heavy walls and horseshoe interior arches reveal a distinctively Tughluq aesthetic \[see Fig. 3\]. Indeed, it remains the best-preserved Tughluq palace in India, asserting Delhi’s presence in the eastern Deccan just as Devagiri’s congregational mosque did in the western plateau.

While Ulugh Khan was preoccupied with his Deccan campaign, Sultan Ghiyath al-Din had marched down the Gangetic valley to reassert Delhi’s grip on Bengal, whose rulers had also seized on the Khalaji–Tughluq transition to assert their autonomy. With that mission accomplished, the king began his return march to Delhi. By that time Ulugh Khan, having already returned to the capital from his Deccan campaigns, arranged for a triumphal reception to celebrate his father’s successful mission in Bengal. However, the canopy that had been specially arranged for the royal reception collapsed just as the sultan passed beneath it, killing him instantly. For several centuries gossip lingered in Delhi that the fatal mishap had been arranged by the ambitious and impatient Ulugh Khan, thus facilitating his own accession to Delhi’s throne as Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq \(r. 1325–51\).8

The new sultan’s reign was filled with contradictions that astonished contemporary observers and have continued to perplex historians down to modern times. In 1326, just three years after he had so purposefully demolished the great Śiva temple in Warangal, the sultan issued an inscription authorizing the restoration of public worship in another Śiva temple in Kalyana, a town located in the heart of the Deccan, within the sultanate’s administered territory. Owing to damages the temple had sustained in an unspecified local disturbance, the governor there, Khwaja Ahmad, conferred with the temple trustees and arranged for its repair and the formal reinstallation of its image. Everything about the inscription regarding this temple shows how thoroughly Muhammad bin Tughluq’s government sought to accommodate local society. Written in Sanskrit and dated according to the Hindu \(Śaka\) calendar, the inscription referred to the sultan by the classical Indian title *maharajadhiraja śri-suratana*, ‘great king of kings and prosperous sultan’, and to the Tughluq governor of the Deccan as *mahapradhana*, ‘great minister’.9 Such imperial titles had been used in this city for centuries, for Kalyana had formerly been the capital of one of the mightiest empires in the Deccan’s history: the Chalukya \(974–1190\). Muhammad bin Tughluq’s destruction of the Warangal temple while prince and his patronage of the Kalyana temple while sultan did not, however, reflect his alleged bipolar personality. Rather, the two cases indicate how a temple’s political environment dictated official policy towards it. Temples associated with enemy kings whose territories lay in the path of the advancing Tughluq army were liable to be destroyed, as happened at Warangal. But any structure brought within the orbit of sovereign territory, such as Kalyana’s Śiva temple, was understood as state property and therefore subject to government protection, provided its local patrons remained loyal to the state.




  IMAGE India in the time of Muhammad bin Tughluq, 1325–51


Although the Delhi sultanate under Muhammad bin Tughluq attained a territorial extent greater than any Indian state prior to his day, by the time he died in 1351 nearly all his territorial gains had been lost. To contemporary observers the rebellions in major provinces such as Malwa, Gujarat, Bengal and the Deccan had been provoked by his quixotic and rash behaviour. Other measures he took would seem to support such an assessment. For example, the sultan harboured grandiose schemes of foreign conquest, which included sending huge expeditions to conquer unspecified lands beyond the Khyber. On one such expedition, an entire army perished in the snows of a lofty mountain range – a debacle that most likely gave to posterity the name of Afghanistan’s greatest mountain range, the Hindu Kush, Persian for ‘killer of Indians’.10 In order to pay for his extravagant coronation and to finance his domestic and foreign conquests, he raised the land revenue in the richest lands near the capital. But such measures only reduced villagers to flight or beggary, leading to uncultivated fields, lower grain harvests and even famine. Infuriated that cultivators would simply abandon their lands without contributing to the public welfare, the sultan resorted to hunting down peasants like animals.

The sultan’s bold initiative in currency manipulation similarly resulted in failure. Having heard that the Chinese under Mongol rule had experimented with a token currency, using paper backed up by precious metal, he launched a similar initiative. Needing silver to pay his sizeable army of 370,000, in 1330–32 he ordered his mint to issue brass or copper coins that were nominally equivalent in value to silver ones. But as Gresham’s Law would have predicted, people paid their taxes in the cheaper coins, while merchants demanded payments in silver, which they then hoarded, driving silver coinage out of circulation. All this impoverished the state treasury, enriched the merchant and banking classes and infuriated the sultan.

There were still more failures. In 1327, having remodelled the old Yadava capital of Devagiri, the sultan ordered a tenth of Delhi’s population to migrate south and settle in that city, which he renamed Daulatabad and proclaimed the state’s new co-capital. He evidently reasoned that creating a co-capital for governing an enormous state straddling both sides of the Vindhyas would be administratively efficient. But implementing the scheme proved disastrous. Although rest houses and shade trees were established along a new road connecting the two cities, many died making the arduous, forty-day, thousand-kilometre trek south. The political fallout of this initiative ultimately proved fatal, as most of the transplanted migrants bitterly resented their forced removal from north India. After only several decades, this resentment would erupt into outright rebellion against a ruler whom many saw as a tyrant.

In 1334 Ibn Battuta \(d. 1377\), the Moroccan globetrotter whose journeys would take him through much of Eurasia and Africa, reached Delhi. On hearing reports of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq’s lavish generosity, the newcomer prudently borrowed a considerable sum from moneylenders so that he could present the sultan with an assortment of gifts. True to his reputation, the sultan returned the favour with gifts of far greater value, including several thousand silver dinars, fully furnished living quarters in Delhi and the post of a judgeship that carried a handsome annual salary of 5,000 dinars. Such generosity also extended to the wider public. Six years after Ibn Battuta’s arrival, he abolished all taxes beyond legal alms and distributed food to the people of Delhi for six months. At court he would patiently hear the complaints of distressed people. The Moroccan recorded flamboyant displays of the sultan’s devotion to justice, a cherished Persianate ideal. On one occasion, the son of a noble filed a complaint that he had been unjustly struck by the sultan. The *qazi* \(judge\) hearing this case decreed that the sultan should either give the boy monetary compensation or allow the youth to retaliate in kind. Ibn Battuta reports: ‘That day I saw that the sultan came back to his court, sent for the boy and gave him a cane saying, “I call upon you by my head, you must strike me just as I struck you.” The boy took hold of the stick and struck the emperor twenty-one strokes so that his cap \[*kulah*\] flew off.’11

Yet the sultan could also act with astonishing brutality. ‘Of all the people,’ continues Ibn Battuta, ‘this king loves most to make presents and also to shed blood. His door is never free from an indigent person who is to be enriched and from a living person who is to be killed. Stories of his generosity and bravery as well as his cruelty and severity towards the offenders have obtained great currency among the people.’12 Although conversant in several languages, famously intelligent and fond of debating the finer points of law with learned courtiers, the sultan also rushed impetuously into new projects. Then, when his advisers or the wider public would not or could not catch up with his ideas, he would react with outbursts of terrible cruelty. Having spent eight years in the sultan’s service at Delhi, and sensing the danger of attending such an unpredictable patron any longer, in 1342 Ibn Battuta seized an opportunity to escape.

As it turned out, Ibn Battuta left Delhi just in time, as opposition to the sultan’s daring policies was mounting throughout the realm. With some provinces seething in discontent, or already in open revolt, the Moroccan traveller’s hasty departure – first from Delhi, then from India altogether – resembled a man escaping a house on fire.



## SETTLERS, SHAIKHS AND THE DIFFUSION OF SULTANATE INSTITUTIONS

Two outstanding themes of fourteenth-century India were the expansion and contraction of the Delhi sultanate’s political frontiers and, more quietly, the diffusion of institutions, norms and tastes informed by the circulation of Persian texts. The two processes were not unrelated. The spread of Persianate culture accompanied the establishment of new urban centres, which in turn followed the sultanate’s annexation of new territories.

Sizeable settlements to the south and east of Delhi began to appear in the second half of the thirteenth century after Sultan Balban’s punitive raids against rebels in those regions. In the course of these raids, Balban cleared the jungles of present-day Rohilkhand, enlarging the agrarian base that could support both migrants from north India and refugees arriving from beyond the Khyber Pass displaced by Mongol invasions. In the more arid Punjab to the west of Delhi, it was a technological innovation that helped increase agricultural production. Already by the twelfth century, and possibly earlier, the Punjab had seen the introduction of the Persian wheel, a mechanical device for raising water from open wells. Powered by draught animals and using wheels, gears, a crankshaft and buckets, the device could raise water from depths of ten to twenty metres, distributing it over the land through troughs and channels. The technology considerably expanded the production of the Punjab’s primary grain crop, wheat, which in turn sustained growing urban settlements in Delhi’s western and southern hinterlands.

Called *qasbah*s in the original sources, settlements established in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century north India were typically walled towns garrisoned by troops sent out from Delhi and placed under the control of trusted governors. Such a site was Chanderi, in present-day northern Madhya Pradesh. Established in the fourteenth century and defended by several hundred soldiers supported by light cavalry, this walled and fortified town guarded the routes from Delhi leading south to Gujarat and the Deccan.13 In nearby Gwalior, another such frontier *qasbah*, some 600 cavalry were deployed.14 Among the most strategically significant of such frontier towns was Kara. Located at the intersection of both overland and riverine routes in the central Ganges valley, this town served as a staging point for operations directed east into the Bengal delta or south into central India. It was also a major gathering point for tribute in the form of elephants sent to Delhi from Bengal or Orissa.15

The sultanate’s authority beyond Delhi was further deepened by the *iqta‘* institution. Although intended to decentralize government by allowing *iqta‘dar*s to collect their salaries from their land assignments, thereby sparing central authorities from sending cash salaries across dangerous roads to reach provincial officers, the practice had a more subtle consequence. Whereas *iqta‘*s in older regions near Delhi were generally given to trusted men from families with generations of service to the sultanate, those on the political frontier were often awarded to Indian officials who had served defeated regimes. Politically and culturally, then, the institution helped indigenize the sultanate, since it assimilated local elites as petty *iqta‘dar*s. This not only accommodated Indians to a ruling power whose historical roots lay beyond the Khyber Pass: it also exposed them to sensibilities carried by the circulation of Persian texts at the local, *qasbah* level. The influx of Persianized Turks from Central Asia and the Iranian plateau further contributed to the diffusion of Persianate culture and the sultanate’s authority. These included literati, engineers, artisans of all sorts, soldiers and administrators already familiar with Persianate governance. The arrival of such immigrants proved a boon for Delhi’s rulers, who made every effort to welcome them, as is suggested by the lavish gifts with which Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq welcomed Ibn Battuta to his court.

Finally, in nearly every provincial centre of the sultanate there resided a Sufi shaikh who belonged to one or another spiritual order, each order cultivating a distinctive regimen of spiritual techniques or exercises aimed at attaining a heightened awareness of the divine presence. Literature composed by these provincial shaikhs suggests the presence of small, distant and sometimes beleaguered rural communities of Muslims engaged in small-town life or farming.16 Yet shaikhs residing in such *qasbah*s were very much connected to metropolitan Delhi. Just as the sultanate’s central administration sent governors to provincial towns, so too did prominent Sufis in Delhi send their leading disciples; there they were often patronized by those same governors. In this way, networks of Sufi shaikhs overlapped those of the sultanate’s government.

In the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, during the Delhi sultanate’s most expansive phase, the capital’s leading Sufi was Shaikh Nizam al-Din Auliya, a renowned and highly revered figure whose tomb-shrine in Delhi continues to be a central focus for Sufi practices today. His followers included not only adherents of the Chishti path of spiritual discipline, as supervised by the shaikh himself, but also the cream of Delhi’s intellectual elite. His *khanaqah* – a Sufi’s residence and locus of teaching – thus emerged as a major hub from which his disciples were sent to the sultanate’s far-flung provinces. During Qutb al-Din Mubarak Khalaji’s reign, for example, the shaikh sent his disciple Maulana Yusuf down to Chanderi; subsequently, the soldiers garrisoned there became loyal followers of Yusuf’s Sufi master in Delhi.17 Nizam al-Din also extended Chishti networks by sending his own cloaks \(*khirqa*s\) to designated followers living in the frontier town of Kara, further down the Ganges valley. Having been worn by the shaikh himself, a *khirqa* conveyed to its recipient the authority, prestige and charisma of a Sufi master. The passing of such robes from shaikhs to disciples thereby strengthened spiritual networks across space and spiritual lineages across time.

Among Nizam al-Din Auliya’s most prominent disciples were the two principal Persian poets in India at the time, Amir Hasan and Amir Khusrau, and the leading historian, Ziya al-Din Barani. As writers whose works enjoyed wide circulation, the three men were in effect publicists for Shaikh Nizam al-Din and his order and, indirectly, for the policies and ideology of the sultanate that patronized them. This implicit alliance between Sufis and the sultanate in the fourteenth century contrasts with the situation prior to Balban’s reign \(1266–87\), when the court in Delhi marginalized or even coerced Sufi shaikhs and their institutions. The court’s informal affiliation with the Chishti order, in particular, had a further effect of indigenizing the sultanate since the major shrines of that order were all located *within* India, unlike the foundational shrines of most other orders in India, which were located in Central Asia or the Middle East. This made India itself the spiritual home of Chishti Sufism. Seeking to establish their legitimacy both as Muslims and as Indians, Delhi’s rulers consequently turned to prominent Chishti shaikhs for blessings and support.

The charismatic authority of eminent Sufi shaikhs, however, was a double-edged sword. Just as Sufis could help transmit Delhi’s political authority to its far-flung provinces, Sufis patronized by provincial authorities could be enlisted to bless their patrons’ rebellions *against* Delhi. Such revolts, after all, were integral to the nature of a sultanate, since any powerful governor or *iqta‘dar* could, under the right circumstances, turn his province or land assignment into the nucleus of a new sultanate. Everybody knew that India’s first sultanate, the Ghaznavids, had been launched in eastern Afghanistan by a powerful *iqta‘dar* of the Samanid state who had declared his independence from his overlord in Bukhara. It was now India’s turn to experience such splintering, notably in Bengal and the Deccan.



## THE EARLY BENGAL SULTANATE

Bengal is a low-lying floodplain laced with numerous rivers and channels, making overland communication and transportation extremely difficult. By the eighth century large, regionally based imperial systems had emerged in the greater delta region, some of them, such as the Palas \(750–1161\) and Chandras \(*c*.825–1035\), patronizing Buddhism and others a revitalized Brahmanism, in particular the Senas \(*c*.1097–1223\). The latter, after wresting their independence from their Pala overlords, consolidated their base in western Bengal and then moved into the eastern hinterland. By the early thirteenth century, the centre of civilization and social power in eastern India had moved from Bihar to Bengal, while royal patronage had shifted from a mainly Buddhist to a mainly Hindu orientation. By this time, too, the granting of land to Brahmins who officiated at court rituals had become a kingly duty. As elsewhere in India, kings of the Sena dynasty sought to replicate cosmic order by building monumental stone temples housing an image of their patron overlord.

In 1204, amidst the rapid rise of Ghurid power in upper India, Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khalaji, a client of Muhammad Ghuri, overthrew Bengal’s last Sena monarch. The invader’s 10,000 horsemen had overwhelmed the local population, while his propaganda left little doubt regarding the basis of his power. Upon establishing his capital in Lakhnauti, Bakhtiyar Khalaji struck a gold coin in the name of Muhammad Ghuri that depicted a Turkish cavalryman charging at full gallop and holding a mace in his hand. It bore the Sanskrit phrase, ‘On the conquest of Gaur’ \(i.e. Bengal\). Silver coins struck over the next decade bore a similar horseman image, communicating to the local population a message of brute force. Imposing monuments in the south-western delta dating to the late thirteenth century, such as the Minar of Chhota Pandua or the mosque of Zafar Khan, also announced the presence of Bengal’s new rulers, making no concessions to the aesthetic sensibilities of the delta’s conquered population. In the decades immediately following Bakhtiyar Khalaji’s conquest, Bengal’s provincial masters sought to reproduce in this distant, forested delta the political and cultural vision of north India’s new rulers.

Aided by the delta’s great distance from Delhi, however, the sultanate’s governors in Bengal repeatedly asserted their independence from their north Indian overlords. As early as 1213, Delhi’s governor in Bengal not only proclaimed his autonomy from north India, but even declared himself the right-hand defender of the caliph in Baghdad. In response, Sultan Iltutmish invaded and re-annexed the province. To drive home his own superior claims to association with the caliph the sultan, while still in Bengal, arranged to receive from the caliph in Baghdad a robe of honour, which arrived under a red canopy of state. But Mongol invasions from beyond the Khyber kept the sultans of Delhi preoccupied with defending their north-western flank, enabling subsequent rulers of Bengal repeatedly to assert their independence. As this happened, they adopted ever more exalted titles on their coins and public monuments. In 1281 Balban ruthlessly stamped out one revolt, hunting down and publicly executing his rebel governor in Bengal. Yet within a week of Balban’s death in 1287, his own son, who had been left behind to govern the turbulent province, declared his independence from Delhi. And when the latter’s son rose to the Bengal throne in 1291 as Sultan Rukn al-Din Kaikaus \(r. 1291–1300\), the new ruler emphatically defied Delhi’s claims to authority by assuming the inflated title of ‘the great Sultan, master of the necks of nations, the king of the kings of Turks and Persians, the lord of the crown, and the seal’, as well as ‘the right hand of the viceregent of God’. He even styled himself ‘the shadow of God’, an honorific derived from ancient Persian imperial usage.

Exasperated with its wayward province, Delhi temporarily ceased mounting costly operations to keep it within its grip. Indeed, the founder of Delhi’s Khalaji dynasty, Sultan Jalal al-Din \(r. 1290–96\), indicated his disdain for the delta by rounding up 1,000 criminals from the Delhi region, loading them on to boats and floating them down to the Ganges delta where they could be set free.18 Within a century of its conquest, then, Bengal had passed from being a prized possession of the Delhi sultanate, whose capture had occasioned the minting of gold commemorative coins, to a dumping ground for the capital’s social undesirables. We also see in this incident an early manifestation of the sort of north Indian, or, more precisely, Punjabi chauvinism towards the Bengal delta that would be echoed in the aftermath of the Mughal conquest of the region in the late sixteenth century.

During the earlier part of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq’s reign, however, Bengal was once again brought under Delhi’s control, governed from the delta’s three major cities: Lakhnauti in the north-west, Satgaon in the south-west and Sonargaon in the east. But midway through the sultan’s turbulent reign, local rulers in the delta again managed to assert their independence from Delhi. A key player in this drama, Shams al-Din Ilyas, had begun his career in Delhi, but after running foul of the mercurial sultan he fled to Bengal where he took up service with the Tughluq governor of Satgaon. When that governor died in 1338, Ilyas seized power and declared his independence. Four years later, after defeating his rivals in the delta’s other major cities, he proclaimed himself sultan of the whole delta, which he ruled until his death in 1357.

Just as Sufi shaikhs associated with Shaikh Nizam al-Din Auliya had helped plant Delhi’s authority in Bengal, disciples of those same shaikhs helped legitimate Ilyas Shah’s rebellion against Delhi. As a young man, the Bengal-born Akhi Siraj al-Din \(d. 1357\) had travelled to Delhi where he studied with Nizam al-Din Auliya, returning periodically to his homeland with other servants of his master in Delhi, thereby strengthening the spiritual links between the capital and Bengal. When Nizam al-Din died in 1325, Siraj al-Din returned to the delta, where he inducted others into the Chishti order. Among these was another native Bengali, Shaikh ‘Ala al-Haq \(d. 1398\), who developed close ties with Sultan Shams al-Din Ilyas Shah soon after the latter had severed his political ties with Delhi.19 From this point on, the sultan and the Sufi formed a mutually supportive relationship. The latter’s son, Nur Qutb-i ‘Alam \(d. 1459\), attached his fortunes even more firmly to the fate of the Bengal sultanate, seeing himself as its principal spiritual adviser.

One of Ilyas Shah’s first acts as sultan was to move his capital from the old provincial capital of Lakhnauti to the new site of Pandua. Though only thirty kilometres from Lakhnauti, the new capital symbolized his determination to sever all ties with his former overlords in Delhi. Twice in the 1350s Delhi tried but failed to reconquer the delta. Then, for the next two centuries, Bengal was at last left undisturbed by north Indian armies. This long period of political independence contributed to the growth of a distinct Bengali regional identity. Already in the late thirteenth century, Marco Polo had mentioned ‘Bangala’, a place he had apparently heard of from his informants and which he understood as being distinct from India, for he described it as ‘tolerably close to India’, and its people as speaking ‘a peculiar language’.20 An historian of the mid fourteenth century referred to Shams al-Din Ilyas Shah as the ‘sultan of the Bengalis’ and as ‘king of Bengal’.21

Through the medium of architecture, Sikandar Shah \(r. 1357–89\), the son and successor of the dynasty’s founder, made the most dramatic statement defying Delhi. Completed in 1375 in the capital of Pandua, the Adina mosque signalled both the delta’s political distance from its former masters in Delhi and its patron’s imperial pretensions. With its immense courtyard surrounded by a screen of arches, and bearing no fewer than 370 domed bays, this structure surpassed in size any edifice built in Delhi. It also broke from Delhi’s architectural tradition by asserting its indigenous character. The motifs of its many prayer niches reveal a successful adaptation, and appreciation, of the aesthetic traditions of the delta’s former Pala and Sena rulers.22 On the other hand, it went over the heads of Delhi stylistically, conveying an imperial aura that recalls the grand style of pre-Islamic Persia. The shadowing effect produced by the alternating recesses and projections on the exterior of the multi-storeyed western wall resembles the external façade of the Taq-i Kisra palace of Iran’s Sasanian dynasty \(AD 225–641\), located in Ctesiphon near modern Baghdad. The mosque’s central nave, moreover, was covered with a huge barrel vault, an unusual feature having no antecedent in India, but which had also been used in the Taq-i Kisra. Finally, whereas Bengal’s earlier rulers had been content with being merely first among ‘kings of the East’, Sultan Sikandar Shah – whose very name, ‘Alexander’, associated him with imperialism – portrayed himself in the mosque’s inscription as the most perfect among the kings of Arabia and Iran, without even mentioning the kings of South Asia, where he was actually ruling.23



## SULTANATES OF THE DECCAN: THE BAHMANIS AND VIJAYANAGARA

The Deccan in the fourteenth century witnessed a pattern similar to that of Bengal: the political expansion of the Delhi sultanate, the diffusion of Persianate culture, and rebellion followed by the establishment of not one but two independent regional sultanates.

In 1342, as his caravan lumbered southwards from Delhi to the Tughluqs’ co-capital of Daulatabad, Ibn Battuta described the road he was using as ‘bordered with willow trees and others in such a manner that a man going along it imagines he is walking through a garden; and at every mile there are three postal stations … At every station \[*dawa*\] is to be found all that a traveller needs.’24 Such a description indicates Muhammad bin Tughluq’s earnest attempts to link north India politically with the Deccan. But the Moroccan also recorded that those roads were infested with bandits, armed tribal groups and other miscreants, suggesting the sultan’s failure to build the sort of transport and communication infrastructure that is essential for any large state. The ever-resilient world traveller did manage to wriggle out of dangerous encounters with bandits on the road to Daulatabad, as he did many other times in his global travels. But there is no doubting the fragility of the lifeline that linked the Deccan to Delhi, suggesting that the sultanate’s attempt to annex the plateau was doomed from the start.

The Tughluq rulers inherited from their Khalaji predecessors two distinct ways of governing newly conquered regions: direct rule and indirect rule – a strategy not unlike nineteenth-century India, where British imperialists divided conquered territory into directly administered provinces and indirectly ruled ‘princely states’. In the annexed regions of the northern Deccan, stretching from the Vindhya Mountains down to the Krishna River, Muhammad bin Tughluq imposed a colonial idea – that is, a tightly controlled direct rule, symbolized by the name-change of the Deccan’s provincial capital from Devagiri to Daulatabad, meaning ‘city of government’. The idea was to plant colonies of northern immigrants, establish mints and strike coins on the same standard as those of Delhi, and partition the land into revenue parcels assigned to trusted *iqta‘dar*s. Whereas many of these men were colonists from the north, administrators co-opted local society wherever possible by redefining as *iqta‘dar*s those native chieftains who already occupied the land.

To the south of the Krishna, by contrast, the Tughluqs established an imperial idea, a system of indirect rule. Here they planted no colonists, appointed no governors, established no mints and made no effort to reach the base of the agrarian society, remaining content to identify powerful figures at the top of local political hierarchies and redefine them as tribute-paying chiefs, designated by the Perso-Arabic term *amir*, ‘commander’. Annual tribute, not regular taxes, was what they expected from territories south of the Krishna. By the end of Muhammad bin Tughluq’s reign, however, some tributary states were teetering on the verge of collapse. This was true of the Hoysala rajas, who had been conquered by Malik Kafur in 1311. But their capital, Dwarasamudra, lay some 650 kilometres south of Daulatabad, putting them practically beyond the Tughluqs’ reach. What is more, Malik Kafur’s looting of the Hoysala capital had so crippled the dynasty’s credibility across the south-western Deccan that its client-chieftains were soon commanding their own armies and carving out autonomous regions of effective control.25

Among the strongmen who emerged in this politically volatile environment were the five sons of Sangama, an obscure chieftain who seems to have been in Hoysala service in south-eastern Karnataka in the early fourteenth century. Already in 1313 one of his sons had emerged in the records as a politically active chieftain. By 1327, the same year the Tughluqs established direct administration in the northern Deccan, another of his sons, Muddamma, asserted his authority in the present Mysore District. In the next decade, both the Sangama brothers and the Tughluqs were picking up the pieces of the disintegrating Hoysala state, with Muhammad bin Tughluq co-opting chieftains formerly subordinate to the Hoysalas and installing them over their territories as Tughluq *amir*s. Ibn Battuta met three sons of one of those chieftains who had died resisting Delhi’s authority. The sultan had made all of them imperial *amir*s, the Moroccan reported, ‘in consideration of their good descent and \[the\] noble conduct of their father’.26 Sometime in the 1320s another of Sangama’s sons, Harihara, was enlisted in Tughluq imperial service as an *amir*, at least nominally. Although a contemporary observer called him a ‘renegade’ \(*murtadd*\), referring to his subsequent renunciation of former association with Tughluq authority,27 his loyal service in the Delhi sultanate persisted in folk memory. A Sanskrit chronicle composed around 1580 states that Muhammad bin Tughluq had ‘bestowed’ the entire Karnataka country \(i.e. the south-western Deccan\) on Harihara and his brother Bukka because the sultan, in his wisdom, had recognized the two men as eminently trustworthy and deserving of imperial patronage.28

However, the entire edifice of Tughluq authority south of the Vindhyas, both direct and indirect, began to crumble in 1336 when a Telugu-speaking chieftain of obscure origins led a successful uprising in Sultanpur, the Kakatiyas’ former capital of Warangal, which Prince Ulugh Khan had seized only thirteen years earlier. The imperial governor of the city was forced to flee, which permanently ended the sultanate’s control over the eastern Deccan, while other rebellions arose across the rest of the plateau. In that same year, Bukka asserted his autonomous control over parts of modern Kolar District. By 1339 Harihara had begun styling himself ‘Lord of the Oceans of East and West’, referring to his control over widely dispersed regions of the southern plateau between the Coromandel and Malabar coasts.29 In 1342 Ibn Battuta identified him as the overlord of the port of Honavar in northern Malabar. Significantly, he made no reference to Harihara’s former loyalty to the Tughluqs.30

By early 1344 most of Karnataka had accepted the Sangamas’ rule amidst the continued crumbling of both Hoysala and Tughluq authority. In February 1346 all Sangama’s sons gathered at the important Śaiva centre of Śringeri \(in modern Chikmagalur District\), where they celebrated Harihara’s coast-to-coast conquests. This meeting anticipated the final collapse of Tughluq authority on the plateau, the disappearance of the Hoysala house altogether – their last inscriptions were issued just two months later – and the formation of a new state, Vijayanagara, which would have an illustrious place in Indian history. Finally, in February 1347 one of the brothers, Marappa, declared the Sangama family’s principal deity to be Virupaksha, a form of Śiva. He also publicly presented himself as, among other titles, ‘sultan’, or in its Kannada formulation, ‘Sultan among Indian kings’ \(*hindu-raya-suratalah*\).31 In 1352, his brother Bukka adopted the same title, as did Harihara two years later, in an apparent arrangement of joint rule. In 1354 Bukka reaffirmed Virupaksha as the Sangama family deity, implicitly making that god the fledgling kingdom’s state deity. In 1355 he styled himself simply as ‘sultan’, instead of the earlier ‘Sultan among Indian kings’.32 When Harihara died in 1357, Bukka became the sole ruler of the new kingdom, now identified as Vijayanagara, ‘City of Victory’. The next year he added grandiose Sanskrit imperial titles to his name; in 1374 he even sent an ambassador to Ming China.33 Such was the meteoric rise of Vijayanagara, a hybridized sultanate-like state that would soon sprawl over nearly the entire southern half of the peninsula, and whose four dynasties, the Sangamas being the first, would survive down to the mid seventeenth century.

Meanwhile, a similar drama was playing out to the north of the Krishna. Although the Tughluq revolution of 1320 had overthrown the Khalaji rulers in Delhi, many former Khalajis remained entrenched as local administrators in Tughluq service. This was especially true in the Deccan, where such officers viewed the new dynastic house as usurpers. Among these was one Zafar Khan and his three brothers, who were nephews of a former high official in the deposed Khalaji court. In 1339, just when Harihara and his brothers emerged as dominant players amidst the chaos of the crumbling Hoysala dynasty further south, Zafar Khan and his brothers joined an anti-Tughluq uprising in which the forts of Gulbarga, Bidar and Sagar were all briefly seized. In addition to former Khalaji officers, Daulatabad’s settler-colonists who had migrated from north India since 1327 – many of them forced to move against their will – felt increasingly alienated by Muhammad bin Tughluq’s high-handed governance of his Deccan province. In 1344 the sultan dismissed Daulatabad’s popular governor, to whom Deccanis had looked to defend them against the sultan’s increasingly erratic and arbitrary actions. Things came to a head the next year, when 1,500 cavalrymen and a large number of commanders were ordered to be transferred from Daulatabad to Gujarat. Aware that the transfer amounted to a death penalty, given what the sultan had done under similar circumstances in the neighbouring Tughluq province of Malwa, these cavalrymen and officers openly rebelled, seizing and executing those government officers who had been sent to investigate them. The year 1345 was also the last that imperial coins were minted anywhere in the Deccan, indicating the demise of Tughluq rule across the entire plateau. Two years later Zafar Khan triumphantly strode into Daulatabad’s great mosque, where he was crowned Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Hasan Bahman Shah.

In short, in 1347 two independent kingdoms had emerged on either side of the Krishna, each founded by a family of obscure origins. The realm of ‘Ala al-Din Bahman, known eponymously as the Bahmani kingdom, covered the northern Deccan, where the Tughluqs had exercised a direct colonial rule. To the south of the river, the Sangama brothers based themselves in the new capital of Vijayanagara and ruled over territory vacated first by the Hoysalas and then by the Tughluqs. In the brief span of just eight years, between 1339 and 1347, the founders of these two dynasties had radically redrawn the plateau’s political map. Upon expelling Tughluq power from the Deccan, the Sangamas and the Bahmanis both established new, transregional states that sprawled across the plateau’s three vernacular zones: the Marathi, the Telugu and the Kannada. The two ruling families also styled themselves ‘sultans’. By using this title, which denoted supreme power in Persianate political discourse, the dynasties expressed not only their claims to political independence and supremacy but also their aim to participate in the wider Persianate world.

If these two states shared similar political origins, having arisen from simultaneous rebellions against their Tughluq overlords in Delhi, they differed vastly in how they legitimized their claims to rule. For the Bahmanis, as with other former provinces of the Delhi sultanate, the blessings of a Sufi shaikh were considered essential for ensuring a new state’s prosperity and legitimacy. According to Deccani sources, Shaikh Nizam al-Din Auliya himself had implicitly lent his blessings to the Bahmani enterprise, even though the state would not emerge until several decades after his death. In an anecdote current in the Deccan in the late 1500s, the great Chishti shaikh of Delhi had just finished a meeting with Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq at his *khanaqah* in Delhi when he found Zafar Khan, the future founder of the Deccan’s Bahmani sultanate, waiting outside. ‘One sultan has left my door,’ the shaikh is reported to have remarked, ‘another is waiting there.’34 The anecdote illustrates the theme of an eminent shaikh predicting future kingship for some man, with that ‘prediction’ serving as a veiled form of appointment to royal power. For in the discourse of Sufism, sovereign authority was in fact held by these spiritually powerful shaikhs. In the words of ‘Isami, a contemporary chronicler who witnessed the launching of the Bahmani state, ‘Although there might be a monarch in every country, yet it is actually under the protection of a fakir \[i.e. a Sufi\].’35 By this logic, such shaikhs effectively leased political sovereignty to kings and charged them with the messy business of worldly governance while they themselves withdrew to a life of austerity, spiritual discipline and teaching.

However, a shaikh’s prediction of kingship was no guarantee of a sultanate’s well-being. As in Bengal, independent rulers in the Deccan needed the continuing legitimacy underwritten by a resident Chishti shaikh spiritually descended from Shaikh Nizam al-Din Auliya. ‘Isami recorded that with the latter’s death in 1325, the city and empire of Delhi had sunk to desolation, tyranny and turmoil. But the Deccan, he maintained, suffered no such fate. Because one of Nizam al-Din’s leading disciples, Burhan al-Din Gharib, had migrated down to Daulatabad in 1329, the city prospered thanks to the shaikh’s radiant, beneficent presence.36 When Burhan al-Din died in 1337, that protective presence passed to his leading disciple, Shaikh Zain al-Din Shirazi \(d. 1369\), by whose actions the newly launched Bahmani state was transformed from a rebel movement into a legitimate Indo-Islamic kingdom. The very robe worn by the Prophet Muhammad on the night he ascended into Paradise – a robe subsequently passed on through twenty-three generations of holy men until finally received by Zain al-Din – was allegedly bestowed upon Zafar Khan when he was crowned sultan in 1347.37

Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Bahman Shah’s earliest successors to the throne sought the support of other Sufi shaikhs, one of whom, Shaikh Siraj al-Din Junaidi \(d. 1379/80\), shifted his residence from Daulatabad to Gulbarga when the Bahmani capital moved there. The shaikh presented a robe and turban to each of the first three Bahmani sultans during their respective coronations. Sufi shaikhs thus played roles fundamental to the diffusion of sultanate systems in the Deccan, as elsewhere in India. Whereas Khalaji and early Tughluq invasions beyond the Vindhya Mountains had lacked any moral basis, being undertaken simply for booty or tribute, the extension of the Sufis’ notion of spiritual sovereignty lent moral legitimacy to the planting of a sultanate’s political authority. No longer available for plunder with impunity, such land – its people, its produce and its fixed assets \(including Hindu temples\) – now merited state protection. In classical Islamic discourse, the presence and blessings of great Sufi shaikhs could transform yesterday’s Abode of War \(*Dar al-Harb*\) into today’s Abode of Peace \(*Dar al-Islam*\), thereby legitimizing the transplantation of Indo-Muslim rulership from one region to another within South Asia. As vessels into which divine favour was believed to have been poured, great shaikhs thus exercised a quasi-political dominion over the lands in which they resided. If Shaikh Burhan al-Din Gharib’s arrival in colonial Daulatabad had inaugurated Delhi’s legitimate rule of the Deccan, legitimate independent rule there began when Shaikh Zain al-Din Shirazi bestowed the mantle of the Prophet on ‘Ala al-Din Hasan Bahman Shah in 1347.

To the south of the Krishna, meanwhile, the new state of Vijayanagara asserted very different claims to legitimate rule. Its authority was based on a goddess cult that had emerged as early as the seventh century on the southern banks of the Tungabhadra River, a major tributary of the Krishna. At that time the site was known simply as Pampa’s *tirtha* – or the ‘crossing’ of the river goddess Pampa – where passing chieftains would halt and make votive offerings during military campaigns. By the ninth century the first stone temple had appeared at the site, dedicated evidently to this goddess. By the early eleventh century, donations were being made to the male deity Mahakala Deva, the violent aspect of Śiva. By the twelfth century, a temple complex dedicated to Virupaksha, who represented Śiva’s more universal and benign aspect, had emerged. Unlike the earlier phase, when she was merely protected by Mahakala Deva, to whom she was in no way subordinate, the river goddess Pampa was now reduced to a subordinate status as Virupaksha’s consort. Moreover, south Indian texts had begun describing Pampa’s marriage to Virupaksha in terms paralleling the all-Indian story of Śiva’s marriage to the goddess Parvati.38

In this way, over the course of 500 years a regional shrine had gradually become Sanskritized, as a local river goddess was pulled up into, and transformed by, the big world of pan-Indian Śiva-worship. At the same time, the site grew ever more important as a pilgrimage centre. From the thirteenth century on, politically ambitious or already dominant rulers in the area had begun cultivating closer ties with the shrine and its deities, whereas in earlier days only passing chieftains had done so. In the early fourteenth century, the short-lived kingdom of Kampili tried to reap the ritual and political benefits of an expanding goddess-cum-Śiva shrine by building a state near the site. But in 1327 Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq crushed that fledgling kingdom. Soon thereafter, though, the Sangama brothers proclaimed themselves to be the site’s ‘protectors’. And when those chieftains established their capital at the site, by then called Vijayanagara, their family deity Virupaksha was elevated to the status of state deity. Important state documents now bore the ‘signature’ of this deity, while the Sangama kings heaped lavish architectural patronage on his temple complex by the banks of the Tungabhadra \[see Fig. 4\]. Hundreds of copper-plate inscriptions recording land grants state that the donation was carried out ‘in the presence of Virupaksha on the banks of the Tungabhadra River’ and conclude with a large ‘signature’ of the god ‘Śri Virupaksha’, written in Kannada script. As owner of all state land within his kingdom, the deity in this way participated in formal transactions and attested to their validity.

From the moment of its launching, then, Vijayanagara was a culturally hybridized kingdom. Its religious origins and legal foundations were embedded in a state cult focused on a local form of the great god Śiva, just as the Kakatiya kingdom had been grounded on one devoted to another form of that deity. On the other hand, the kingdom’s ruling institutions, architecture and its wider, transregional posture suggest a desire to assimilate the ideals and idioms of the Persianate world. Vijayanagara’s system of land revenue assignments, called *nayamkara*, required high-ranking officials, or *nayaka*s, to combine military and tax-collecting duties. Having no known precedent in earlier kingdoms of the Deccan, the *nayamkara* institution was apparently modelled on that of the *iqta‘* used by the Tughluqs and their political descendants in the Deccan, the Bahmani sultans. Vijayanagara also incorporated and lavishly displayed Persianate architectural motifs – arches, domes, vaulted arcades, squinches, and so on – together with the image of the sultan as a supreme king of kings.39 Paralleling Turko-Mongol political traditions, claims to sovereignty at Vijayanagara were extended to all male members of the ruling family, meaning that royal successions were marked by tensions and sometimes violent conflict.40



## THE EARLY KASHMIR SULTANATE

Directly north of Delhi, protected by massive walls of snowcapped mountains, lies the fertile and densely populated valley of Kashmir, an oval-shaped plain approximately 145 kilometres long and forty wide. For centuries, the valley’s physical properties have enchanted its visitors: ‘A garden of perpetual spring’ is how the Mughal administrator Abu’l-fazl characterized it. Surrounded on all sides by towering mountains attaining 5,500 metres in height, the valley – 1,800 metres above sea level – is watered by the Jhelum River, which springs from the valley floor and flows gently westwards until it plunges through a narrow gorge in the Pir Panjal Mountains, which form the valley’s western edge. After cutting through this range, the river turns abruptly south, eventually forming the westernmost of the five rivers that flow over the Punjab; in all, it drops over 1,000 metres from its headwaters in the Kashmir valley to the plains of the Punjab.

These topographical features helped shape the course of Kashmiri culture and history. For centuries, Hindu rulers in the secluded valley had enjoyed freedom from outside invaders; formidable mountains to the south, east or north could block incursions from those sides. Incursions were rare and logistically difficult even from the valley’s western side, where the Jhelum cuts through a narrow defile at Baramulla, the so-called ‘gateway to the Kashmir valley’. In the eighth century Arabs tried to invade the valley at least once, possibly twice, but failed. Mahmud of Ghazni attacked Kashmir twice – in 1015 and 1021 – but turned back both times owing to severe snowstorms. Muhammad Ghuri and his slave commanders made no attempt to conquer Kashmir when they swept over the Indo-Gangetic plain in the late twelfth century. After the Delhi sultanate was established at the beginning of the thirteenth century, sultans never attacked the valley, focusing instead on the flat, physically accessible Indo-Gangetic plain.

The same isolation that protected Kashmir from repeated invasions also made it a secure haven for refugees fleeing other regions. Among these was a Tibetan Buddhist prince, Rinchana, who reached the valley in 1320 after fleeing nearby Ladakh, where he had led a failed rebellion against his royal uncle. This was shortly after a Mongol chieftain, Zulju, had successfully invaded and devastated Kashmir – a notable exception to the string of failed attempts to penetrate the valley. In the chaos following the Mongol invasion and the flight of the Hindu raja Suhadeva \(r. 1301–20\), Rinchana seized power and declared himself king \(r. 1320–23\). Soon thereafter the latter appointed as his chief minister another outsider to the valley, Shah Mir; probably of Iranian origin, Shah Mir had migrated to Kashmir in 1313 and risen to high office in Suhadeva’s government. In 1339 he attained sovereign power after winning a palace struggle, thereby launching Kashmir’s first dynasty of Muslim sultans. With his reign, a more definitive Iranian influence took hold in the valley, as seen, for example, in the sultan’s replacing the Hindu Śaka calendar with a Zoroastrian one that had been launched in Iran by the last Sasanian emperor in AD 632.41 Shah Mir also fixed the state’s land revenue demand at just one-sixth of the annual harvest, while abolishing various other taxes. Since Rinchana and Shah Mir had broken the influence of powerful feudatories, the valley’s Brahmins acquiesced in such measures. Nor did Brahmins view the sultans as threatening their own status, especially when Kashmir’s new rulers married into the families of neighbouring rajas and – more importantly – made Brahmins their partners in governance.42

The mid fourteenth century saw a burst of the dynasty’s territorial expansion, as Shah Mir’s grandson, Shihab al-Din \(r. 1355–73\), became the first Kashmiri ruler since the eighth century to launch military campaigns beyond the valley, annexing Baltistan to the north, Ladakh to the east and Jammu to the south. But these campaigns came at great cost to the state’s treasury. The sultan’s Hindu finance minister even suggested increasing the state’s coinage by melting down a brass image of the Buddha – a measure that Shihab al-Din, shocked at the proposal, refused.43 Meanwhile, Persian culture continued to flow into the valley, as seen in the state’s increasing patronage of Persian literature relative to Sanskrit works, whether produced at the court or beyond. Through it all, the actual management of the sultanate’s governance remained firmly in the hands of Brahmin ministers and administrators.

Sultan Shihab al-Din was succeeded by his brother Qutb al-Din \(r. 1373–89\), in whose reign another prominent migrant reached Kashmir, Saiyid ‘Ali Hamadani \(d. 1384\). Though brief, this Sufi’s stay in the valley would have far-reaching consequences. Like Shah Mir, ‘Ali Hamadani had come from Iran, and, like Rinchana, he arrived as a refugee – in his case, as a consequence of the rise of Timur, the great Central Asian warlord who between 1360 and 1405 would conquer most of the eastern Muslim world. Fearing sectarian persecution from Timur’s army, which campaigned across the Iranian plateau between 1380 and 1386, ‘Ali Hamadani left western Iran accompanied by a host of *saiyid*s, men claiming descent from the Prophet Muhammad. In 1381 he found refuge in Kashmir, where Sultan Qutb al-Din warmly greeted him and his companions, allegedly numbering some 700. These men then set up a network of intercommunicating *khanaqah*s throughout the valley. ‘Ali Hamadani also maintained close ties with the sultan, giving him his own headgear \(*kulah-i mubarak*\) to wear underneath his crown.44 Although the shaikh left the valley only several years after his arrival, he had established Kashmir as a place of refuge for other Sufis coming from Central Asia or Iran. As Timur’s assaults across western Asia continued during the reign of Qutb al-Din’s successor Sultan Sikandar \(r. 1389–1413\), still more waves of immigrants reached the valley, including ‘Ali Hamadani’s son, Muhammad Hamadani. Towards the end of the fourteenth century Sultan Sikandar patronized the construction of a shrine for Saiyid ‘Ali Hamadani, known as the Khanaqah-i Mu‘alla, which stands on the banks of the Jhelum in Srinagar’s old city. Although rebuilt several times over the centuries, this elegant structure, with its sloping pyramidal roofs made of cedar and its delicately carved eaves, is a superb example of traditional Kashmiri architecture.

In Kashmir’s volatile fourteenth century, the valley kingdom thus saw the end of the indigenous Lohara dynasty \(1003–1320\), Mongol invasion, and the fitful beginnings of the Kashmir sultanate. The latter part of that century also saw a remarkable female poet, Lalla \(also called Laleshwari, or Lal Ded, d. 1392\), who further unsettled Kashmir’s existing socio-religious order. Following a pattern of Indian religious reformers going back at least to the time of the Buddha, Lalla severed social ties with her marital family and wandered for extended periods of time in a quest for truth. An ardent devotee of Śiva, she described achieving liberation from the endless cycle of reincarnation that underlies much of Indian thought:

I, Lalla, entered by the garden-gate of mine own mind,

And there \(O joy\!\) saw Siva with Shakti sealed in one;

And there itself I merged in the Lake of Immortal Bliss.

Now while alive I am unchained from the wheel of birth and death,

What can the world do unto me?45

She also boldly challenged the norms of conventional religion. Declaring that images and temples are only stone, Lalla – though herself born into a Brahmin household – threw down the challenge: ‘Whom will you worship, O stubborn Pandit?’46 For centuries, Lalla’s poems were cherished, committed to memory and handed down orally among the masses of Kashmir’s rural society.47 Indeed, her verses comprise the earliest specimens of vernacular Kashmiri language and literature.48 Moreover, like other devotional poets who began to appear throughout South Asia from the fourteenth century on, Lalla sought, found and preached a social reality lying beyond conventionally understood religious communities.49

Several points stand out regarding the growth of sultanate institutions in fourteenth-century Kashmir. First, such institutions did not derive from any political connection with the Delhi sultanate, as was the case in regions such as Bengal, Gujarat or the Deccan. Consequently, the Kashmir sultanate did not inherit a tradition of military slavery or of slave rulers, as did some other Indian sultanates. Nor did it mint the kind of coinage that appeared in the Delhi sultanate from its earliest days. Brahmins continued to run government affairs after the valley’s transition to a sultanate form of rulership, and Sanskrit – not Persian – remained the official language. Although Kashmir’s fourteenth century had opened with a Hindu dynasty and closed with a Muslim one, the valley experienced no serious rupture in its governing institutions during this transition. It would pioneer its own style of Indian sultanate.



## THE DECLINE OF THE TUGHLUQ EMPIRE

Although the Delhi sultanate was still in its ascendency of wealth and power at the turn of the fourteenth century, by mid-century the state was on the wane. On nearly all its frontiers Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq’s patchwork empire experienced rebellions, most dramatically in Gujarat. Topographically, this region is far less uniform than the Bengal delta, the valley of Kashmir, or even the Deccan plateau. Gujarat’s long coastline jutting into the Arabian Sea for centuries exposed the region to outsiders who came as invaders, settlers and, especially, merchants. The latter integrated Gujarat with wider Indian Ocean networks of trade, making it one of the most globalized regions in the world – in contrast to the nearly hermetically sealed Kashmir. Unlike Gujarat’s coastal areas, the hinterland of the Saurashtra peninsula is an arid and hilly mix of desert and scrubland, and hence a mainly pastoral region. Historically, nomadic herding communities moved in from Rajasthan to the north-east and from Sind to the north-west. Eastern Gujarat features a fertile north–south corridor of rich farmland, capable of producing surplus food and cash crops, especially cotton. These geographical differences engendered distinctive occupational specialists: cosmopolitan merchants along the coasts, pastoral nomads in Saurashtra, and grain-producing agriculturalists in the eastern corridor. Yet despite their differences, Gujarat’s subregions were historically interdependent. Rulers in the eastern corridor, for example, took measures to enhance region-wide security with a view to promoting coastal trade.50

From the mid tenth to the mid thirteenth centuries, kings of the Solanki dynasty ruled over most of the region from their capital, Anahilapataka, in eastern Gujarat. Theirs was a period of unprecedented prosperity for the many seaports that dotted the coastline along Saurashtra and both sides of the Gulf of Cambay. Already in 916 the port of Chaul, just south of modern Mumbai, had a community of 10,000 people descended from mixed marriages of Arab merchants and local women.51 As early as 971, a congregational mosque was built to accommodate the many foreign merchants who had taken up residence in the great commercial entrepôt of Cambay.52 The cosmopolitan nature of coastal Gujarat is captured in a thirteenth-century inscription at Veraval, the site of the temple of Somnath and one of the more important pilgrimage centres in western India. As noted in the preceding chapter, contemporary Sanskrit inscriptions convey a business-as-usual atmosphere at this commercially important site, notwithstanding Mahmud of Ghazni’s plundering the temple in 1026. More than two centuries later, in 1264, a Sanskrit and Arabic bilingual inscription at the same site records the construction of a mosque patronized by an Iranian merchant from the Persian Gulf named Nur al-Din Firuz. The Arabic text refers to the deity worshipped in the mosque as Allah, and describes Nur al-Din as ‘the king \[*sultan*\] of sea-men, the king of the kings of traders’ and ‘the sun of Islam and the Muslims’. By contrast, the Sanskrit text identifies the deity worshiped in the mosque as Viśvanatha \(‘lord of the universe’\), Śunyarupa \(‘one whose form is of the void’\) and Viśvarupa \(‘having various forms’\). It identifies the prophet of Islam as a *bodhaka* – that is, ‘preceptor’, ‘elder’ or ‘wise man’, and the mosque’s patron, Nur al-Din Firuz, as a *dharma-bhandaya*, or ‘supporter of *dharma*’ – that is, cosmic/social order as understood in classical Indian thought.53

While the inscription’s Arabic text reflects the perspective of the mosque’s Muslim patron, its Sanskrit counterpart reveals that of the proximate Hindu population, which identified the supreme deity of Islam with Viśvanatha, the prophet of Islam with an Indian *bodhaka*, and Nur al-Din Firuz with a ‘supporter of *dharma*’. Informing these theological representations was the context in which the inscription appeared. In order to build the mosque, Nur al-Din needed the approval of the temple’s trustees, who apparently controlled the land he acquired. Since merchants and customs houses paid taxes to the temple, both the temple priests and the town’s governing classes would have approved the project. They all had a shared interest in attracting long-distance merchants such as Nur al-Din to trade, settle and worship in the town. The particulars of Hindu and Muslim theology were accordingly adjusted to ensure that cash kept moving and that all would profit.

Of course, wealthy commercial or pilgrimage centres such as Veraval also attracted outside invaders. In 1216, the Solanki overlords of Somnath had to fortify the temple to protect it from attacks by Hindu rulers in neighbouring Malwa. In 1243, when the Solanki rulers were overthrown by one of their own former vassal clans, the Vaghelas, these new rulers moved quickly to ensure the security of routes leading to and between prosperous coastal towns such as Veraval. But by the early fourteenth century, outsiders more distant than Malwa had cast their eyes on those towns. From Delhi, ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji’s generals launched their first invasion of Gujarat in 1297, and by 1306 they had swept away the Vaghela dynasty altogether. Revealing their intention not to plunder but to govern the region, the Khalajis replaced the topmost layer of the former Vaghela rulers with their own governor, renamed the former Vaghela capital Patan, built a large congregational mosque there, and garrisoned strategic forts with mainly Afghan soldiers. They also allowed native landholders to retain their former positions, so long as they paid taxes to their new overlords. Finally, they made conciliatory gestures toward the Jains, one of Gujarat’s largest and most prosperous trading communities, by restoring and patronizing their temples.

When Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq rose to power in 1325, however, Delhi took steps to impose a more direct rule over Gujarat. In Patan, the sultan replaced the province’s single governor with two chief officers, one for the army and another for finance, and took several major land assignments \(*iqta‘*\) under his personal control. Architecturally, the clearest statement of the regime’s presence was its patronage of one of India’s most imposing mosques built in this period – the congregational mosque of Cambay, the most commercially vibrant of Gujarat’s seaports in the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries. Located at the head of the gulf bearing its name, Cambay directly linked the maritime world of the Indian Ocean with Gujarat’s rich, eastern agricultural zone, and beyond that with overland routes leading up to Delhi. Given that Tughluq power was based on its cavalries, and that Cambay was the principal seaport through which Delhi imported its war-horses – thousands arrived annually from across the Arabian Sea – the city was also of vital strategic importance. At one point, the Tughluq officer who patronized the city’s congregational mosque had held the post of Superintendent of the Royal Stable,54 suggesting the overlap of Tughluq imperial power, commerce, access to war-horses and piety. Visually projecting that nexus, the mosque loomed over the city’s bustling harbour, architecturally imposing itself on its visitors. Ibn Battuta praised the seaport as ‘one of the most beautiful cities as regards the artistic architecture of its houses and the construction of its mosques’.55

By the 1330s, however, Muhammad bin Tughluq’s seemingly arbitrary policies of reshuffling his appointees, which involved the dismissal of even experienced officers, created an atmosphere of insecurity throughout the realm. In peripheral provinces, where sheer distance from Delhi worked against the government’s ability to impose its will, rebellion always threatened. As new territories were annexed by the Khalajis and Tughluqs, large numbers of Afghans were garrisoned in frontier forts as high-ranking officers and ordinary soldiers. But by the late 1330s, when these elements threatened sedition – not only in Gujarat, but also in Malwa and the Deccan – the sultan sent in Indian and older, Turkish, regiments to stabilize matters.56 In Gujarat a group of Afghans challenged and defeated an imperial army in Baroda in 1344 and then marched directly on Cambay, which also fell under its control. At this moment a certain Taghi, a former high-ranking officer whom the sultan had capriciously dismissed from his court, was being held in Cambay, about to be exiled to Yemen. But when the rebels seized control of the city, they liberated Taghi and went on to declare an independent sultanate in central Gujarat.

Resolving to take matters into his own hands, in January 1345 the sultan left Delhi for good, destined to spend his last six years tirelessly suppressing rebellions in both Gujarat and the Deccan. After first recovering Cambay and making Broach his headquarters, he moved on Daulatabad in an unsuccessful effort to quash the Deccan uprising. While still there, in early 1346 he received the news that Taghi and a large force of rebels had seized Gujarat’s provincial capital of Patan and were on their way to Cambay. By the time the sultan returned to Gujarat, Taghi had already seized Cambay and was besieging Broach. But on the sultan’s arrival, Taghi retreated into the Gujarat hinterland and defiantly executed the Tughluq provincial governor, whom he had been holding hostage after seizing Patan. For the next year the sultan pursued Taghi, who continued to elude imperial troops in both eastern Gujarat and Saurashtra. In September 1347, the sultan received the grim tidings that his army in the Deccan had been completely routed. This only stiffened his resolve to capture Taghi, who soon joined forces with rebellious chiefs at the fort of Junagadh, in central Saurashtra. Although the chieftains holding that fort submitted to the sultan in 1349, Taghi once again escaped, this time fleeing westwards to Sind. Since that region had never been annexed to the Delhi sultanate, the sultan hoped both to capture the fugitive rebel and to return to Delhi having added a new province to his realm, compensating for the loss of the Deccan.

But this was not to happen. In mid 1350, just as his officers were drawing up plans to cross the desolate Rann of Kutch – the huge salt marsh separating the Saurashtra peninsula from the mouth of the Indus – the sultan was stricken with a violent fever. By December he had recovered sufficiently to start moving his army towards Thatta, the capital of the Samma chieftain then ruling lower Sind. But in March 1351, with his army within just forty kilometres of the Sindi capital whose fort he was about to besiege, the sultan died. Tughluq fortunes had reached a low point from which they never fully recovered. As the late sultan’s army hastily returned to Delhi, the rebel Taghi was still at large, Sind remained unconquered, Gujarat slipped into a state of semi-autonomy and the Deccan had achieved complete independence.



## CONCLUSION

Although Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq ruled the Delhi sultanate for only twenty-six years, the spectre of this towering and complex figure loomed over the entire fourteenth century. When he came to power in 1325, the sultanate had reached the height of its might, prestige and cultural florescence. By that time, the state no longer relied on recruiting luminaries from beyond the Khyber, since a class of India-born intellectuals had emerged within the Delhi sultanate. The most famous of these, the brilliant poet Amir Khusrau, was just as proud of his Indian heritage as he was skilled at turning a Persian verse. Nor were the Khalaji or Tughluq courts the sole foci of intellectual talent: men of letters attached themselves to the *khanaqah*s of charismatic Sufi shaikhs across all of north India.

Underlying the prosperity and power of the Khalajis and Tughluqs in the fourteenth century was the minting of precious metals that had been plundered from Indian capitals in the preceding century – first under the Ghurids, and then under Iltutmish, Balban and their respective successors. The entire period from 1192 to 1325 had seen a self-sustaining cycle whereby plundered specie was converted to minted money to purchase foreign war-horses, pay troops and defend the north-west frontier from Mongol incursions. But by the 1340s, when the peak of Tughluq power coincided with the middle of Muhammad bin Tughluq’s extravagant reign, that treasure had become exhausted. Regions once well integrated into the Tughluqs’ revenue system rose in open rebellion against central authority and would soon emerge as independent sultanates. The first of these secessions occurred in Bengal, led by Shams al-Din Ilyas Shah in 1342. This was followed just five years later by the loss of the sultanate’s Deccan dependencies and the appearance of the independent Bahmani and Vijayanagara kingdoms. Fiscally, the sultanate’s loss of Bengal and the Deccan led to a silver famine that hindered its ability to purchase war-horses or pay its troops at the same levels as previously.57

But even as former provinces such as Bengal, the Deccan and ultimately Gujarat pulled away from Delhi’s direct rule, the ideology and institutions of the sultanate form of polity, which had crystallized in Central Asia under Samanid monarchs in the tenth century, continued to flourish in these regions. These included, most importantly, a Persianized conception of the universal monarch, the sultan, assisted by a salaried class of intermediaries standing between the primary producers of agrarian wealth and a centralized state apparatus; the division of sovereign territory into units of land whose revenues were used by those intermediaries to recruit, train and command designated numbers of cavalry; and a commitment to the idea and ideal of justice \(*‘adl*, *‘adalat*\) as the fundamental justification for wielding worldly power.

Elaborating such core ideas, together with the aesthetic and moral order that underpinned them, was a growing canon of Persian texts that circulated widely across South Asia. Some of the genres and representative authors comprising the canon at this time included works of epic poetry \(Firdausi\), Sufism \(Sana’i, ‘Attar, Rumi, Hujwiri\), morality \(Hafez, Sa‘di, Tusi, Amir Khusrau\), romance literature \(Nizami\), science \(Ibn Sina\), history \(Ibn Balkhi, Bayhaqi\) and politics \(Nizam al-Mulk\). Transmitted through ever-widening networks of literati, Sufi shaikhs, mercenaries, artists, merchants and so on, these texts moved within the sovereign territories of established sultanates, as well as, increasingly, lands that had never been exposed to direct sultanate rule. Yet across South Asia, one can see the uneven penetration of the core ideas that constituted the Persianate world. Kashmir, landlocked and secluded in its mountain fastness, had never been conquered by a Persianized state such as the Delhi sultanate. Yet, in the course of the fourteenth century, it assimilated many of the ideas that informed those states.

Towards the very end of the fourteenth century, however, much of South Asia would be subjected to dramatic changes after the destruction of Delhi and the virtual decapitation of the sultanate owing to the devastating invasion by the Central Asian warlord Timur. Although the state had been in decline ever since the 1340s, its near-collapse, catalysed by Timur’s invasion, set in motion a new series of historical forces that altered the course of India’s history for ever.




