+++
title = "3 Timur’s Invasion and Legacy, 1400–1550"

+++





From jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits,

And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,

We’ll lead you to the stately tent of war,

Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine

Threatening the world with high astounding terms,

And scourging kingdoms with his conquering sword.

View but his picture in this tragic glass,

And then applaud his fortunes as you please.



## OVERVIEW

Above is the brief prologue that, in late 1587, introduced an audience in Elizabethan London to the first performance of *Tamburlaine*, Christopher Marlowe’s bold new play. No audience in England had heard anything like it before. In point of form, its author had broken radically with literary convention, and he knew it. The play’s very first lines airily dismiss the entire legacy of Renaissance drama – its ‘jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits’ – as mere clowning. Now, for the first time, audiences would hear blank verse, freed from rhymes, in the very iambic pentameter that William Shakespeare would soon deploy in his own plays.

*Tamburlaine* was so popular – the 1594–5 season saw fourteen performances – that Marlowe had to write a sequel to it. But its significance lies not just in its vivid language, its blank verse, or its complex character development. Most striking was the larger-than-life ‘Tamburlaine’ himself, whom Marlowe presented as a cold-blooded Machiavellian warrior. Exulting in his barbarism and cruelty, Marlowe’s hero is determined to crush, subdue or win over any and all opponents in his singular quest to conquer the world. We thus see him feeding scraps to a defeated king placed in a cage, or using the king’s live body as a footstool, or driving a chariot pulled by a team of defeated monarchs, harnessed like horses in their traces. In his unchecked excess, Marlowe’s Tamburlaine must defy and master not just men, but also the gods, as at one point he even burns a copy of the Qur’an. Indeed, this hubristic figure, depicted by Rembrandt in the mid seventeenth century \[see Fig. 5\], probably planted in Europe’s collective subconscious the archetypal Asian tyrant that emerged in nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholarship as the ‘Oriental despot’ anticipated by Marx or Weber and elaborated by Karl Wittfogel. Later, in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, that same archetype – violent, authoritarian and above all, Muslim – would be incarnated in some Euro-American quarters in figures such as Ayatollah Khomeini, Muammar Gaddafi or Saddam Husain.

Marlowe’s outrageous protagonist is very loosely based on the historical Timur \(1336–1405\), a remarkably successful warlord and one of history’s most astonishing figures. ‘Tamerlane’ is a European corruption of the Persian *Timur-i lang*, or ‘Timur the lame’, in reference to a limp acquired from a crippling wound suffered in his youth. Like Marlowe’s character, the historical Timur rose from humble beginnings in a clan of pastoral nomads in Central Asia. He happened to reach adulthood in the mid fourteenth century just as the last successor states to the Mongol empire in Iran and Central Asia had crumbled into a collection of feuding principalities. Timur sought to unify this politically fragmented region by creating, in effect, a neo-Mongol empire. Although himself an ethnic Turk unrelated to Genghis Khan, he married a princess descended from the great Mongol empire-builder and on this basis proudly titled himself *gurkan*, or ‘imperial son-in-law’.

Politically, Timur emerged around 1360 as the head of a minor tribe in the region of Samarqand, then a vibrant oasis town on the Silk Road between China and the Mediterranean basin, surrounded by semi-arid lands ideally suited for pastoral nomadism. Rich oasis towns such as Samarqand were inhabited mainly by Persian-speaking communities of Sunni Muslims – artisans, merchants, officials, religious clerics, scholars – while their surrounding hinterlands were populated chiefly by Persianized Turks. Recently integrated into Muslim life, these clans of nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists had mastered horse warfare, and as such were powerful players in Central Asian politics. Timur’s career began by negotiating the balance between peoples inhabiting these two mutually interdependent ecological and cultural niches: the pastoral and the sedentary. In the 1360s he manoeuvred his way through a maze of local tribal politics, forging alliances with other clans while expanding both commercial and political linkages within Central Asia. A natural leader endowed with personal charisma and military genius, he repeatedly transformed rivals and would-be enemies into allies, thereby building up formidable armies of mounted archers.

By 1370 Timur dominated Samarqand, which he ruled through a Mongol puppet khan by exploiting his ‘imperial son-in-law’ status. Several years later he annexed the rich and fabled Ferghana valley in present-day Tajikistan \[see Maps 1 or 5\]. In 1383 he marched southwards in a series of campaigns that over the next decade ravaged the entire Iranian plateau, either destroying or subjugating such centres of high Persian culture as Herat, Zaranj, Tabriz, Isfahan and Shiraz. While systematically using terror tactics against recalcitrant urban populations, Timur spared cities that submitted to his armies, sending literati, artisans and artists back to Samarqand to adorn his capital with spectacular works of architecture. In the 1390s he campaigned across western Iran and Iraq, sacking Baghdad in 1393. His armies then turned north to the Caucasus, subduing chieftains and destroying cities of the Golden Horde in Crimea and the Don and Volga valleys, briefly occupying Moscow in 1395. In 1400 he seized Tiflis, reducing the Georgian monarch to a vassal. From there he pressed south to Syria, capturing Aleppo and Damascus. In 1402 he marched on Anatolia, defeating the main army of the fledgling Ottoman state near Ankara, where he captured the hapless Sultan Bayazid I. By this time Timur had acquired such a fearsome reputation that he secured the submission of both the Byzantine emperor and Egypt’s Mamluk sultan without investing either Constantinople or Cairo. In 1404 he returned in triumph to his capital at Samarqand, where he received a host of foreign emissaries while preparing for what would have been the capstone to his grandiose plan of recreating Genghis Khan’s Mongol imperium – the conquest of China. In early 1405 his armies had barely left Samarqand, however, when he was overtaken by a brief sickness and died.

His failure to conquer China notwithstanding, in one important respect Timur accomplished what the Mongols themselves had repeatedly attempted but failed to do – namely, invade India and sack Delhi. In the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries the sultans of Delhi had prudently garrisoned soldiers in the mountain passes leading from Afghanistan to the Punjab, thereby thwarting Mongol attempts to invade India. But by the end of the fourteenth century the sovereign territory of the Tughluqs had shrunk drastically following numerous mid-century rebellions. In 1351 Muhammad bin Tughluq was succeeded by his cousin Firuz Shah Tughluq \(r. 1351–88\), who led several failed expeditions to reconquer Bengal, although he did reduce both Orissa and Sind to tributary states in 1361 and 1363 respectively. He also managed to stabilize what little remained of the Delhi sultanate. To enhance irrigation and expand cultivation in Delhi’s immediate hinterland, he oversaw the construction of a number of major canals in the Punjab; he promoted education by building *madrasa*s in Delhi; he established hospitals to provide treatment for the poor; and he adorned Delhi with rest-houses, gardens, water tanks and wells. But he also relaxed some of the sounder administrative practices of the system he had inherited. Whereas revenue assignments \(*iqta‘*s\) had formerly reverted to the crown upon the death of their holders, under Firuz they became inheritable by their holders’ descendants, thereby creating a powerful landed gentry with vested interests in permanent holdings in the countryside. This policy, accompanied by a decline in land-tax collection, considerably weakened the state’s central power. Worse, the ten years following Firuz’s death in 1388 saw a rapid succession of five weak sultans, putting the city and the sultanate in a fatally vulnerable state. The fifth of these rulers, one of Firuz’s grandsons, would prove no match for Timur, a world-conqueror who had already swept over many of the most populous and fabled cities on earth.

In the late summer of 1398, having conquered the Iranian plateau and placed loyal governors in its principal cities, Timur marched through Afghanistan and, bypassing Kashmir, crossed the Indus that September. Encountering little resistance, his cavalry rolled across the Punjab to Panipat, some sixty-five kilometres north of the capital, where he met and crushed a Tughluq cavalry of 10,000, only a quarter the size of the sultanate’s army of just several decades earlier. For about a month Timur plundered Delhi with impunity, massacring a reported 80,000 inhabitants and so thoroughly ruining the built landscape that it took the city nearly a century to recover. Unlike Muhammad Ghuri and his slave generals two centuries earlier, however, Timur had no intention of remaining in India, or of integrating the remnants of the sultanate’s territories into his sprawling empire. Instead, like a violent storm that disappears as suddenly as it appears, in January 1399 he quit India, hauling back to Samarqand an immense amount of booty; elephants taken from this expedition were used to transport quarried stone for his ambitious construction projects there.

Although the Delhi sultanate survived Timur’s destructive onslaught, and even experienced something of a revival in the late 1400s, it would never regain the power or prestige it had enjoyed in the days of Muhammad bin Tughluq. In reality, Timur’s invasion inaugurated what has been called India’s ‘long fifteenth century’, that is, the period bracketed on the front end by Timur’s invasion in 1398–9, and on the back end by the advent of Mughal rule \(1526–1858\). The founder of the Mughal dynasty, Babur \(r. 1526–30\), was a direct descendant of Timur and claimed the right to govern north India as his legal patrimony. One might therefore think of the period 1398–1526 as a long interregnum between the planting of the idea of Timurid rule in India by Timur himself, and its eventual realization by Babur.

There are good reasons to regard this as a coherent era in India’s history. Although the Delhi sultanate had unified much of South Asia by the early fourteenth century, Timur’s invasion at the end of that century shattered the sultanate as a stable political or cultural entity – even if such status had only ever been imperfectly realized. By 1400 the northern two-thirds of the subcontinent had become a patchwork quilt of independent kingdoms, as former Tughluq governors, or their sons, rebranded themselves as independent sultans ruling sovereign states. Politically, then, Timur’s invasion accelerated a process of devolution that had already begun in the mid fourteenth century with the breakaway of former provinces such as Bengal or the Deccan. As ever more former Tughluq provinces became independent sultanates, horizons were lowered, and a wider, pan-Indian world, at least in a political sense, vanished.

Much conventional historiography portrays the long fifteenth century as a dreary period when the stage lights in the theatre of history seem to have dimmed while onlookers are forced to sit in darkness, waiting for the curtain to rise to reveal the dazzling dawn of the Mughal era, when India would once again see a large, centralized empire. But in fact it was one of India’s most vibrant and creative eras. The fragmentation of northern India catalysed by Timur’s invasion meant, among other things, increasing demands for literary and military specialists, as throngs of competing chieftains and warlords sought to fill power vacuums created by the collapse of Delhi’s authority. Instead of a single, centralized locus of patronage, dozens of smaller such centres now mushroomed across north India’s landscape, each headed by an aspiring state-builder.

The present chapter therefore explores three interconnected themes that characterize India’s long fifteenth century: the emergence of regional courts in territories formerly under the Delhi sultanate’s rule; the emerging idea of ‘Rajput’ as a social category; and the rise of vernacular literatures and its significance.



## UPPER INDIA

Nowhere were the effects of Timur’s invasion more acutely felt than in the heartland of the former Tughluq domain – the wide, densely populated Indo-Gangetic plain that extended from the Punjab through the upper and mid-Gangetic basin to the Bengal delta. The career of Khizr Khan, a Punjabi chieftain belonging to the Khokar clan, illustrates the transition to an increasingly polycentric north India. Sultan Firuz Tughluq \(r. 1351–88\) had earlier appointed this chieftain as his governor of Multan. But when Timur’s army sacked Delhi in 1398–9, Khizr Khan shrewdly ingratiated himself with the Central Asian warlord. His efforts paid off. Before leaving India, Timur made the Khokar chieftain governor of the Punjabi cities of Lahore, Multan and Dipalpur. Khizr Khan also visited Timur’s capital at Samarqand to negotiate the annual tribute that he would send to his treasury. Then in 1414, shortly after the death of the last Tughluq monarch and nearly a decade after Timur’s death, he managed to wrest control of Delhi itself and launch his own dynasty of monarchs, the so-called Saiyid dynasty \(1414–51\). Yet even then he refrained from using sovereign titles, preferring instead to rule as the viceroy of Timur’s son and successor, Shah Rukh of Herat \(r. 1405–47\), to whom he regularly sent tribute. This was one way that Timur’s legacy lingered on in northern India.




  IMAGE Fifteenth-century north India


In the early fifteenth century, however, the danger to Delhi no longer came from the west, but from the newly formed sultanate of Jaunpur to the east. Lying in present-day Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, between the rump Delhi sultanate under Khizr Khan’s successors and Bengal, the kingdom of Jaunpur emerged from a former Tughluq province that attained independence soon after Timur had left India. It was founded by of one of Sultan Firuz Tughluq’s eunuch slaves, the Ethiopia-born Malik Sarwar, whom the sultan had sent to quell rebels in the Jaunpur region. By 1394, however, after his master’s death but before Timur’s invasion, Sarwar had already established virtual independence from Delhi. Then, soon after Timur left India, Sarwar’s adopted son and successor declared his formal independence, thereby establishing the Sharqi dynasty of Jaunpur \(1399–1483\), so-called because Malik Sarwar had been titled *malik-i sharq*, ‘king of the East’. The new state was an immediate beneficiary of Timur’s invasion, absorbing many of Delhi’s traumatized scholars, artisans, artists and craftsmen who had managed to escape likely enslavement by fleeing eastwards. This explains why the Tughluqs’ architectural style – a robust, militaristic vocabulary of battered walls, scant ornamentation, engaged corner towers and monumental gateways – figures so prominently in Jaunpur’s early structures, such as the city’s grand Atala mosque \(1408\).

The sovereigns of Jaunpur, which straddles the middle Ganges and its tributaries, enjoyed ready access to war-elephants, large herds of which roamed the jungles of Bihar and Bengal. Moreover, because the central Gangetic plain was being rapidly converted from forest to rice paddy, the Sharqis’ sovereign territory could support a growing population. The region was therefore something of a frontier zone, with small colonies of Muslim farmers surrounded by larger populations of non-Muslims. The sultanate’s strategic weakness, however, was that it lay far from the great trade routes that brought war-horses from Central Asia to India. Jaunpur therefore lacked easy access to the most important military commodity in premodern South Asia, since war-horses were generally more reliable and efficacious in combat than elephants, even if less fearsome. Partly for this reason Jaunpur’s rulers sought to take over what remained of the Delhi sultanate, for Delhi, unlike Jaunpur, was well positioned to acquire the long strings of war-horses that wound their way from beyond the Khyber Pass to Indian markets. By the mid fifteenth century, moreover, the tiny kingdom of Delhi ruled by the Saiyid sultans had shrunk to but a shadow of its former self. As was wittily said of the dynasty’s last monarch, Sultan ‘Alam Shah \(r. 1445–51\), ‘the kingdom of the king of the world \[*shah-i ‘alam*, i.e. ‘Alam Shah\] extends from Delhi to Palam’.1 Since the latter is located near New Delhi’s international airport, the dictum refers to an area spanning a mere thirteen kilometres\! What little remained of Sultan Muhammad Tughluq’s once-mighty empire had literally become a joke, and Delhi itself a minor but tempting target for ambitious neighbours.

But after ‘Alam Shah, Delhi saw a new dynasty of sultans, the Lodi rulers \(1451–1526\), under whose reign the old Delhi sultanate experienced something of a renewed lease of life. Moreover, the rise of this dynasty in the heart of the broad Delhi plain – historically, north India’s geopolitical cockpit – reveals a prominent feature of the long fifteenth century: the immigration and settlement of ethnic Afghans across the breadth of upper India. For centuries, Afghans had played a central role as merchants and transporters, responding to the subcontinent’s insatiable demand for Central Asian war-horses. Throughout those centuries, caravans had moved horses from Bukhara and other collection points south and east across the rugged Afghan mountains and through the several passes in the Sulaiman range that led down to the Punjab plains, thence to north India’s horse markets. These caravans were necessarily well armed, for reasons made clear by the English scholar Simon Digby. Recalling his days as a youth in India in the late 1930s and early 1940s, Digby writes:

I saw the last survivors of these horse caravans, great processions with thousands of men, with women and children marching beside their Bactrian camels, when I was a young man, though by that time the route had changed to the Khyber further north \[rather than the Gomal Pass further south\], and they mainly engaged in the trade of dry fruit from Gilgit. They were still a formidable armed entity on the march, with very small boys carrying rifles, women unveiled and sometimes also armed – altogether several thousand people. The caravans going into the north Indian plains in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries had to be sufficiently powerful in their arms and their fighting tactics to be able to defeat any local ruler who would rather confiscate their horses and other goods than pay for them.2

Having once settled down in upper India, many Afghan horse-merchants parlayed their commercial connections – and their access to Afghan warriors – into power, a process facilitated by north India’s fragmented, post-Timurid political landscape. Throughout the first half of the fifteenth century, rulers of the Saiyid dynasty relied on the support of well-connected Afghans to fend off attacks from the sultans of Jaunpur. This inevitably drew Afghans deeper into north India’s political affairs, giving them secure footholds on an unstable geo-political chessboard. The founder of the Lodi dynasty, Bahlul Lodi \(r. 1451–89\), first reached India from Afghanistan with a long caravan of horses, for which the Saiyid government paid him with a land assignment instead of cash. That land soon became his political base. Later he was appointed governor of the Punjabi city of Sirhind. In 1451, with the abdication of the last Saiyid ruler, Sultan ‘Alam Shah \(the ‘king of the world’\), Bahlul emerged well positioned to become sultan himself. Then, as sovereign of Delhi, he recruited more Afghans as commanders and cavalrymen to defend the city from its hostile neighbours, in particular the sultans of Jaunpur. One of those sultans, Jaunpur’s Husain Shah Sharqi \(r. 1458–83\), repeatedly challenged Bahlul Lodi for the control of Delhi. But in 1483 Bahlul counter-attacted, seized Jaunpur and drove Husain Shah into exile in Bihar.

Notwithstanding the strategic advantage of their relative proximity to Afghanistan and its horse-suppliers, Bahlul Lodi and his successors, Sikandar \(r. 1489–1517\) and Ibrahim \(r. 1517–26\), had constantly to cut deals with other Afghan clans. Since all Afghans were bound by codes of honour obliging them to take revenge on perceived infringements to their dignity, Lodi chieftains were constrained in their efforts to create a hierarchically ordered monarchy of the sort set up by their Khalaji or Tughluq predecessors. Once established in Delhi, Bahlul Lodi appealed to Pashtun chiefs back in Afghanistan to migrate with their men to India in order to provide manpower for his fledgling kingdom, promising to share his possessions with them as brothers. In response, his kinsmen reportedly descended from the Afghan mountains ‘like ants and locusts’, according to one chronicler, and were rewarded with *iqta‘*s over which they enjoyed considerable autonomy. Nor did the sultan have a throne erected for himself; rather, so we are told, he ‘shared the carpet with his peers’.3 Bahlul’s successors did try to centralize power somewhat: his son Sikandar arrogated the right to choose which son of a deceased *iqta‘dar*’s progeny might inherit land and soldiers. And Ibrahim, the dynasty’s third and last sultan, went further by requiring his Afghan kinsmen in the sultanate to observe proper court ceremonies. But such measures threatened the cohesion of the Lodi state, which in Bahlul’s day had been governed as a confederation of loosely aligned chieftains with only tenuous loyalty to Delhi.

Although Bahlul Lodi had invoked Afghan sentiment and culture to attract his kinsmen to India, and although the Lodi regime was dominated by ethnic Afghans, calling the Lodis an ‘Afghan’ dynasty is not fully accurate. None of the three Lodi sultans enjoyed a monopoly of Afghan talent in India, since Afghan immigrants had settled across the entire Indo-Gangetic plain, especially in the Sharqi sultanate of Jaunpur. The Lodis even employed non-Afghans to check their Afghan rivals. Some Afghans residing within Lodi territory and theoretically loyal to the Lodi cause actually opposed the regime. In fact, the fateful 1526 invasion of India by Babur – the event that would overthrow the Lodis and establish the Mughal empire – was launched after Afghan chieftains in Lodi-administered Punjab had invited that Central Asian prince, then ruler of Kabul, to intervene in Delhi’s affairs.



## BENGAL

Apart from catalysing the emergence of new states, Timur’s invasion also gave rise to regional cultures in former Tughluq provinces. But in the case of Bengal, a former Tughluq governor, Shams al-Din Ilyas Shah, had established the delta’s first independent dynasty nearly sixty years before Timur sacked Delhi. During this prolonged period of autonomy, which covered the latter half of the fourteenth century, Bengal’s ancient class of Hindu aristocrats rose to prominence in the state’s government. By the end of that century, elements of the delta’s native ruling class had gained so much authority as to unsettle the Bengal sultanate’s elite Sufi shaikhs, champions of a reformed and purified Islam.4 The most important of these native nobles was Raja Ganesh, a powerful Bengali landholder whose family had enjoyed prominent status in the delta for four centuries. In 1410 the high-born patrician audaciously usurped power and for five years governed the kingdom through a succession of Muslim puppet-sultans. In 1415 he went so far as to enthrone his own son, a lad of only twelve years named Jadu, while continuing to govern as regent. But Ganesh never sought to revive the Brahmanically defined model of kingship of classical Indian tradition. Rather, a compromise formula was worked out between political brokers for the court’s Muslim and non-Muslim factions, whereby young Jadu was allowed to rule on condition that he convert to Islam, which he did, reigning as Sultan Jalal al-Din Muhammad \(r. 1415–32\). Soon after his enthronement, coins bearing his name were simultaneously issued from Bengal’s principal urban centres – Pandua, Chittagong, Sonargaon and Satgaon – suggesting a calculated attempt by Raja Ganesh to ensure the acceptance of his son’s accession throughout the delta.5

Yet this arrangement only infuriated elite Sufis attached to Bengal’s royal court. One of them, Shaikh Nur Qutb-i ‘Alam, even wrote to the Sharqi sultan of neighbouring Jaunpur, imploring him to invade the kingdom and ‘liberate’ Bengal for ‘Islam’. Although the sultan did send an army towards Bengal, it seems to have turned back when placated with gold. Amidst the chaos in the sultanate’s capital at Pandua, meanwhile, things remained far from settled in Bengal’s hinterland, where remnants of pre-sultanate ruling houses on the eastern frontier seized the moment to assert their independence. For a single year, 1417–18, no sultanate coins appeared anywhere in the delta, while in the extreme eastern and south-eastern sectors two successive Hindu kings rose in rebellion. But in the following two years the sultanate, now firmly under seventeen-year-old Jalal al-Din’s rule, with his father still acting as regent, managed to suppress this rebellion and reassert its authority across the delta.6

The Raja Ganesh episode showed that, despite the vigorous objections of conservative sections of the Muslim elite, Bengali Hindus would henceforth be assimilated in the sultanate’s ruling structure. Raja Ganesh refused to support the restoration of an explicitly Hindu polity anywhere in the delta. Of course, he operated under severe restraints, being able to retain his considerable influence only by merging his interests with those of the existing state, and by conciliating powerful Muslim classes at the capital. In the following years, as Jalal al-Din Muhammad grew to maturity, the sultan became ever bolder in asserting his claims to a specifically Islamic ruling ideology. He became a devoted follower of Shaikh Nur Qutb al-‘Alam, Pandua’s leading Chishti shaikh and the same man who had so strenuously opposed Raja Ganesh’s coup. The sultan also rebuilt mosques demolished by his father, patronized a religious college in Mecca, obtained recognition from the Mamluk sultan of Egypt \(the most prestigious ruler in the Middle East since the destruction of Baghdad in 1258\), and stamped the Islamic confession of faith on his coins, a custom that had disappeared from Bengal several centuries earlier.7 In 1427, after ruling for a dozen years, he went so far as to proclaim himself the ‘caliph of Allah in the universe’.8 One can only marvel at the audacity of a convert to the religion claiming the loftiest title in the Sunni world, second only to that of the Prophet himself.

Even while strenuously posturing as a correct Muslim, Sultan Jalal al-Din grounded himself and his regime in Bengali culture. He minted silver coins depicting the image of a lion, an animal possessing a wide symbolic range that included not only Persian imperial kingship, but also the cosmic vehicle of the goddess popularly manifested as Chandi, in whose name anti-sultanate rebellions had been waged in eastern Bengal shortly after Jalal al-Din came to power. A contemporary Chinese traveller reported that, although Persian was understood by some in the court, the language in universal use there was Bengali – an observation indicating the triumph of the local vernacular at the highest level of officialdom.9 And, as with the Adina mosque, architecture again suggests the state’s nativist orientation. Starting with Jalal al-Din’s reign, Bengali mosques adopted local structural elements and motifs: single-domed brick buildings with engaged corner towers, curved cornices and extensive terracotta ornamentation. The last feature was a throwback to Bengali Buddhist shrines dating to at least the eighth century, such as that seen at Somapura \(Paharpur\) in present-day northern Bangladesh. The curved cornice appeared in Bengali architecture for the first time in what is believed to be Jalal al-Din’s own tomb, the Eklakhi Mausoleum \(1432\), which was inspired by the familiar thatched bamboo hut found throughout rural Bengal. The curved roofs of these ordinary dwellings, formed by the natural bend of a bamboo structure under the weight of thatching, allow water to drain from their upper surfaces in a part of India notorious for its heavy rainfall. This Bengali folk motif was now translated from bamboo and thatching into brick, used for both temples and mosques.

This nativist trend became even more pronounced in the reigns of Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Husain Shah \(1493–1519\) and his son Nasir al-Din Nusrat Shah \(1519–32\). Under the former monarch, Hindus pervaded the state’s government, serving in such important posts as chief minister, chief of bodyguards, master of the mint, private physician and private secretary to the sultan. State-sponsored brick and stone mosques built in native styles proliferated throughout the delta – more than 100 of them appearing between 1450 and 1550, far more than in any other period in Bengal’s premodern history. At the same time, the court lent vigorous support to literature written in vernacular Bengali. Sultan Rukn al-Din Barbak \(r. 1459–74\) patronized the writing of the *Śri Krsna-Vijaya* by Maladhara Basu, and the courts of ‘Ala al-Din Husain Shah and Nasir al-Din Nusrat Shah patronized the writing of the *Manasa-Vijaya* by Vipra Das, the *Padma-Purana* by Vijaya Gupta, the *Krsna-Mangala* by Yasoraj Khan and translations \(from Sanskrit\) of portions of the great epic *Mahabharata*, made by Vijaya Pandita and Kavindra Parameśvara.10 The state’s patronage of local culture stemmed partly from strategic assessments made in the wake of the upheavals of the Raja Ganesh period, and partly from the delta’s protracted political and cultural isolation from north India.

Yet royal patronage was also selective. With the apparent aim of deepening the roots of their political authority, the sultans of Bengal patronized folk architecture as opposed to classical Indian styles, popular Bengali literature rather than Sanskrit treatises, and Vaishnava Bengali officials instead of Śakta Brahmins. This was doubtless due to the long association of Śiva worship with Hindu kingship, not just in Bengal but throughout India. Prior to the advent of Persianate sultanates in India, many Hindu kings had patronized one or another manifestation of Śiva, understood as the Cosmic Overlord protecting a maharaja’s sovereign domain. This prior association made Persianate courts in Bengal and elsewhere wary of Śaiva culture, which would explain why the above-mentioned Bengali works were mainly Vaishnava in orientation. At the same time, royal coinage dispensed with the bombast of earlier periods, when Bengali sultans associated themselves with Alexander the Great or Arab caliphs. As is clear from the writing on his coins, Sultan Nasir al-Din Nusrat Shah was sultan simply because his father had been one; no further justification seemed necessary. Secure in their power, and with domination by far-off Delhi but a hazy memory, the sultans of Bengal confidently fashioned themselves as Bengali kings.

This sort of interaction between Persianate and Sanskritic cultures was in some ways unique to the delta. We find a very different variation on this same theme in the isolated valley of Kashmir.



## KASHMIR

Like many conquerors before him, Timur bypassed the Kashmir valley during his invasion of India, fixing his sights on the Tughluq capital of Delhi. In the autumn of 1398 his army had already marched across Afghanistan and was moving through the passes leading to the upper Indus valley. Yet his reputation for wholesale massacres of great cities had preceded his arrival in India, which is why Kashmir’s Sultan Sikandar \(r. 1389-1413\), on hearing that the Central Asian warlord was nearing his neighbourhood, rushed envoys to Timur’s camp bearing gifts and fervent pledges of loyalty. Although Timur only wanted Sikandar’s formal appearance, and no cash, his unscrupulous envoys caused the Kashmiri court to understand that it would have to furnish horses and a large sum of money. Puritanical and influential Muslims in Srinagar seized this moment to advance their religious agenda. One of these was Saiyid Muhammad Hamadani, a revered shaikh who, like his father ‘Ali Hamadani, had migrated from Iran. Also influential was a group of Muslim clerics, the Baihaqi saiyids. In order to meet Timur’s alleged financial demands, the latter urged the sultan to demolish Hindu temples and convert their images to bullion. The sultan’s chief minister, Suha Bhatta, himself a zealous convert to Islam, persuaded Sikandar to destroy at least four major temple complexes in the valley – Parihaspura, Bijbehara, Tripureśvara and Martand – which earned the sultan the title *butshikan*, ‘temple-destroyer’.11 Sikandar also undermined the influence of the valley’s powerful class of Brahmins by revoking their tax-free holdings and destroying their Sanskrit books.12 Owing to such coercive measures, plus his imposition of the discriminatory *jizya* tax on non-Muslims, the charge of anti-Hindu bigotry has ever since clung to Sikandar’s memory.13 But not to that of his son.

There is a proverb that an apple never falls far from the tree; that is, a son tends to inherit his father’s character. But in the case of Sikandar’s son Zain al-‘Abidin \(r. 1420–70\), the apple fell nowhere near the tree. After a brief period when his weak-willed elder brother ruled the valley, Zain al-‘Abidin deposed his sibling and in 1420, with military help from allies in the Punjab, rose to power in Srinagar. His fifty-year reign, unlike Sikandar’s fractious, intolerant rule, has been remembered as a golden age in Kashmir. The sultan’s love of the valley’s land, its literary heritage and its religious traditions comes through very clearly in contemporary literary works. One of his court poets, the Sanskrit scholar Śrivara, recorded an instance in which he and the sultan climbed high in the Pir Panjal Mountains to visit a lake sacred to the god Vishnu. After being rowed to the centre of the lake, the sultan asked the poet to relate the legends associated with it. As snow began to fall, the sultan reclined in the boat and listened as the poet recited verses from a famous Vaishnava Sanskrit work. ‘Hearing the songs from the Gitagovinda from me,’ recalled the poet:

a wondrous sentiment raining down the devotion of Visnu Govinda arose for the king. The melodious tune struck up by both our voices echoed from the thickets \[on the bank\] as if repeated in refrain by the *gandharvas* \[heavenly beings\] staying there out of veneration to the king. Suddenly, gods showered forth flowers in the form of snowfall upon the king as he moved about on the lake, as if pleased at his devotion.14

As in Bengal, Kashmir’s sultans showed a clear affinity for Vaishnava Hinduism. In both sultanates Muslim rulers patronized Vaishnava literature, admired Vaishnava poetry and consorted with Vaishnava personalities.

There are other reasons why Zain al-‘Abidin’s reign has been treasured in subsequent memory. The sultan recovered neighbouring territories that, though annexed by his grandfather Shihab al-Din, had asserted de facto independence in the intervening years. These included Baltistan and Ladakh to the north and east of the valley, and the upper Indus region to the west. He exchanged embassies or gifts with potentates beyond Kashmir, both in India and the Middle East. He improved the state’s infrastructure by building bridges and digging irrigation canals. He encouraged villagers to settle in urban centres and take up a range of handicraft industries – for example, glasswork, woodwork, carpets and shawls – that have made Kashmir world-famous ever since. He gave encouragement to foreign architects such as Sadr al-Din Khurasani, who developed the design of wooden buildings that thereafter defined Kashmir’s built landscape.15 He regulated commodity prices, and was the valley’s first sultan to inscribe his name on coins certain to have been minted in Kashmir. He was also the first local sultan to mint silver coins, suggesting his regime’s economic stability and administrative centralization.16 Finally, he eased taxes on the rural classes and, by abolishing the poll tax on non-Muslims, reversed one of his father’s most contentious policies.

Zain al-‘Abidin’s most interesting initiatives, however, lay in his court’s patronage of literature. It was in Kashmir, especially during this king’s reign, that the Sanskrit and Persian literary worlds engaged with one another with an intensity not seen in India before. The sultan patronized not only literary production in both languages, but also bi-directional translation projects between them. Modern scholars have marvelled at how a small and isolated valley in the Himalaya range so far from India’s main political centres had become such an important cultural hub for the entire subcontinent. For more than four centuries Sanskrit scholars there dominated the discourse on poetics while making unique contributions in the disciplines of Sanskrit grammar and logic.17 Sanskrit also served as the language used both for everyday government administration and for literary expression. Zain al-‘Abidin continued the Kashmir court’s tradition of patronizing Sanskrit literature by commissioning the poets Jonaraja \(d. 1459\) and his student Śrivara \(fl. 1459–86\) to write supplements to the *Rajatarangini*, the renowned Sanskrit text chronicling Kashmir’s history composed in the mid twelfth century by the poet Kalhana. In his reign, too, a manuscript of one of the earliest works of India’s sacred literature, the *Atharvaveda*, was brought from Karnataka to Kashmir and recited by Brahmin priests.18

Sultan Zain al-‘Abidin’s court also patronized the translation of numerous Sanskrit classics into Persian, as well as Persian classics into Sanskrit. The *Mahabharata*, the *Kathasaritsagara* by Somadeva, the *Da*ś*avatara* by Ksemendra, the *Rajatarangini* \(possibly only Kalhana’s\), the *Hatakeśvara Samhita* and the *Prthviraj-vijaya* by Jayanaka were all translated from Sanskrit to Persian.19 In the opposite direction, the Sanskrit scholar Bhattavarta used Firdausi’s great epic poem the *Shah-nama* as a model for his Sanskrit *Jainavilasa*, which also contains the sayings of Sultan Zain al-‘Abidin.20 And the court poet Śrivara translated from Persian into Sanskrit the immensely popular *Yusuf va Zuleikha*, composed by the Persian mystical poet ‘Abd al-Rahman Jami in 1483.21 Śrivara’s Sanskrit version of this Persian classic, his *Katha-kautuka*, appeared in the Kashmir court in 1505, just a few decades after Jami had composed the Persian original in Herat, some 1,100 kilometres to the west. This indicates, notes the literary historian David Shulman, ‘both the astonishing rapidity of cultural transmission in fifteenth-century Kashmir and the intricate interpenetration there of parallel linguistic cultures’.22 Nor was this sort of Sanskrit–Persian bilingualism confined to the Kashmir court. Both languages were used in manuscripts found in regional Sufi shrines and in inscriptions inscribed on fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Muslim gravestones.23

Zain al-‘Abidin’s reign thus witnessed a singular moment in the braided history of the Sanskrit and Persian worlds. While cultivating both literary traditions, this sultan’s long reign also bridged the transition from an era of Sanskrit literary dominance to one of sustained production of original Persian literature, promoted both at the state level and in the hinterland. Much of it pertained to the life and career of Saiyid ‘Ali Hamadani, the renowned shaikh whose memory became more hallowed with each passing decade. By the time of Zain al-‘Abidin’s reign there had emerged an integrated network of Sufi shrines in the valley’s countryside, most of them focused on Sufi migrants from Iran or Central Asia who considered Shaikh Hamadani their spiritual head. From this time on, Sufi shaikhs or minor members of Kashmir’s rural gentry authored many saintly biographies and local histories in Persian.24

Finally, Zain al-‘Abidin was the first Kashmiri ruler to establish Persian as the state’s official language, which it would remain until the end of the nineteenth century. Brahmins, long accustomed to serving both Hindu and Muslim rulers in the medium of Sanskrit, quickly switched to using India’s other transregional language, which they avidly cultivated for the next five centuries. Many of them formed the main body of Kashmir’s *karkun*s, later known as the Kashmir Pandits, who formed the class of secretaries, clerks and accountants and retained their prominent position in government and letters up to the mid twentieth century.25 Meanwhile, generations of Kashmiri-speakers memorized and passed on orally the Kashmiri poetry of revered religious figures such as the mystics Lalla or Shaikh Nur al-Din \(d. 1440\). But except for a short period during Zain al-‘Abidin’s reign, ordinary Kashmiri was never patronized by the court, either in pre-sultanate or in sultanate times.26 Instead, Persian acquired a certain double persona. Like Sanskrit, it possessed high status as a transregional and prestigious language. Brahmins read the classics of Persian literature – the works of Rumi, Firdausi, Nizami, etc. – in local schools or *maktab*s, which they often ran.27 At the same time, from Zain al-‘Abidin’s day Persian, not Kashmiri, attained the status of the valley’s regional written language.28 In discussing the literary productions of his fifteenth-century contemporaries, the poet Śrivara referenced a type of locally written literature that he characterized as *de*ś*a*, or ‘regional’. He was not referring to works composed in Kashmiri, far less in Sanskrit, but to those in Persian.29 Elsewhere in India it was the local vernacular tongue that emerged as a region’s written medium, whether for documentary or for literary purposes. Only in Kashmir did Persian function both as a prestigious, transregional medium and as the valley’s written medium.



## GUJARAT

Unlike Kashmir or Bengal, Gujarat had been politically well integrated with the Tughluq empire ever since Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji annexed this commercially rich region in the early fourteenth century. Basing themselves in the province’s eastern corridor that leads to upper India, the Delhi sultanate’s governors were well positioned to profit from the caravans transiting from the seaports to India’s interior, and courtiers paid substantial bribes to be appointed provincial governors or commanders of strategic Gujarati forts.30 Merchants and rulers, moreover, were mutually dependent. The former needed the security, the stable currency and the predictable taxation that the state could provide, while rulers required the silver, the horses and the arms that could be obtained from merchants. By the late fourteenth century, though, Tughluq rulers had become displeased with their governor in Gujarat over his failure to remit taxes to the central administration. They also feared that he had set down local roots and had built up a provincial army composed mainly of local soldiers. Keeping provincial rulers loyal to the political centre being a perennial metropolitan anxiety, in 1392 Zafar Khan, the son of a peasant convert to Islam and a former confident of Sultan Firuz Tughluq, was sent down to restore central rule in the wayward province. After confronting and defeating the former governor, the khan managed to pacify the province’s strategically important eastern corridor leading to the sea, though he spent the rest of his life battling recalcitrant chieftains both in the mountains to the east and in the Saurashtra peninsula to the west.31

Only a few years after Zafar Khan had taken up office in Gujarat, however, Timur invaded India, weakening – or even wrecking – Delhi’s grip on its remaining provinces. After a period of uncertainty, in 1407 Zafar Khan declared his independence from Delhi and titled himself Muzaffar Shah \(r. 1407–11\), sultan of the new sovereign state of Gujarat. Independence from Delhi now led to many of the same consequences in Gujarat as it had in Bengal. When Timur invaded India the region had been mainly pastoral, punctuated by scattered, commercially rich towns. Ensconced in well-defended forts or within walled, commercially active towns, merchant-princes had made ad hoc alliances with pastoral chieftains. But with the appearance of Muzaffar Shah’s independent sultanate, a fully developed court society evolved in which the regional sultan presided over a host of petty chieftains.32 Yet Gujarat was slow to emerge as a self-conscious, coherent region. The new state was not truly consolidated until the reign of Muzaffar Shah’s successor and grandson Ahmad Shah \(r. 1411–42\), who in his first year as sovereign built Ahmedabad. Named after himself, the new capital lay in the heart of the busy corridor that connected the maritime hub of Cambay with routes leading north to the Indian interior. With Delhi no longer draining wealth from the province, coast and hinterland became even more mutually dependent, to the advantage of each. Agriculture was intensified in the more prosperous eastern districts, which soon became some of the leading engines of textile manufacturing in the world. Although Gujarati block-printed cotton goods exported to markets in Egypt can be dated to at least as early as the eleventh century, under the sultans the volume of these exports increased exponentially. The exports also facilitated the importation of silver and war-horses, which in turn enabled the sultans to maintain a standing army at a time when most Indian states were raising mercenary armies on an ad hoc basis.

Dominating the second half of the fifteenth century in Gujarat was the sultanate’s sixth ruler, Mahmud Begada \(r. 1458–1511\), who established centralized control over all the province’s subregions. Several strategic objectives guided his policies. The first was to protect and extend trade between the commercially active coastal cities and the agrarian hinterland. This he did by ensuring safe overland trade routes, imposing uniform and stable rates of taxation, establishing a standard silver coin, the *mahmudi*, and maintaining a formidable navy. The *mahmudi*, which became one of the most stable currencies in fifteenth-century India, is by far the most common coin that survives from Gujarat’s sultanate period, largely because so many merchants invested their trust in it. As for his navy, Mahmud built some of the largest ships then plying the Arabian Sea. In a 1508 naval engagement off the port of Chaul, his ships meted out to the Portuguese their first defeat in the Indian Ocean.33

Another of Mahmud Begada’s objectives was to colonize forested regions and bring undeveloped land into cultivation. To pacify the Sabarmati valley – the strategic north–south corridor connecting Rajasthan with the Gulf of Cambay – he settled charismatic religious figures among refractory Kanbi and Koli communities. To stabilize the province’s turbulent eastern flank, in 1483 he built and made as his new capital the fort of Champaner, which abutted the mountains that had provided refuge for state rebels. Here the sultan granted courtiers permanent land holdings to encourage their long-term interest in clearing and developing the land for agricultural purposes. To the west, the Saurashtra peninsula and Kutch remained frontier zones, populated by pastoral communities that had been immigrating from Rajasthan or Sind. In 1472 he annexed the stronghold of Junagadh in Saurashtra, which even before the rise of the Gujarat sultanate had held out against Delhi’s repeated attempts to subdue the region.34 In all these subregions, Mahmud Begada aimed to control, or at least pacify, the various clans of armed pastoralists that for centuries had been migrating into Gujarat from the north and north-west. Some, arriving with their cattle and their martial traditions, had been driven out of Sind in the thirteenth century by famine. Others had been drawn to western Gujarat by the sultanate’s offers of tax relief to clear scrublands. However they arrived, the regime sought to play one group off against another by offering protection to some if they would suppress threats from others. Meanwhile, the clans and their chiefs redefined themselves in ways that disguised their obscure origins. To this end they built fortified settlements and set up petty courts where their chiefs patronized Brahmins and poets, who in turn provided their patrons with respectable genealogies or even royal pedigree, thereby masking their former identity as livestock-herding chieftains.35

Mahmud Begada’s attempts to ensure the security of pilgrimage routes led to the flourishing of different religious traditions in what has been called a ‘religious marketplace’ in fifteenth-century Gujarat.36 Pilgrimage sites such as Girnar hill in Saurashtra hosted multiple religious institutions side by side – Jain, Sufi, Nath, Śaiva and Vaishnava. Merchants were especially prominent among followers of popular forms of Vaishnava devotion, to which ruling authorities in Gujarat, like those in Bengal and Kashmir, were favourably disposed. Jain communities, which had been active in Gujarat since the fourth century, thrived from the earliest days of the Delhi sultanate’s rule in the province, undertaking such critical tasks as managing the mint for the sultans.37 The atmosphere of cultural pluralism promoted by Mahmud Begada is reflected in some remarkable works of contemporary literature. In his panegyric *Rajavinodamahakavya*, the fifteenth-century Sanskrit poet Udayaraja portrayed the sultan as an ideal warrior of the *kshatriya* class, even a *chakravartin* \(‘universal conqueror’\). Never referred to as Muslim, the sultan was seamlessly woven into classical Indian tropes of kingship, such as his descent from a long line of Indian rulers traceable to the Solar dynasty of *kshatriya* warriors. Mahmud Begada’s court, writes Udayaraja, was blessed both by Saraswati, the goddess of learning, and by Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.38



## MALWA

In 1391, just seven years before Timur launched his India campaign, four governors were sent out from Delhi to bring order to the provinces of an unsteady Tughluq empire. Each would establish an independent sultanate soon after the Turkish warlord sacked Delhi. Khizr Khan founded the Saiyid dynasty of rulers in Delhi, Malik Sarwar the Sharqi sultanate of Jaunpur and Zafar Khan the Gujarat sultanate. The fourth governor, Dilawar Khan Ghuri, was posted to Malwa, the rich though landlocked tableland in west-central India north of the Narmada. When Timur began sacking Delhi in December 1398, the last Tughluq sultan, not a paragon of courage, quietly slipped out of Tughluqabad fort and fled to Gujarat. He had hoped that Zafar Khan would help him reclaim his capital. When such assistance was not forthcoming, the fugitive king moved on to Malwa, where Dilawar Khan hosted him for several years. So long as the royal exile was his guest, Dilawar Khan tactfully refrained from declaring his independence. But as soon as the erstwhile sultan had taken his leave, Dilawar declared himself sovereign and built congregational mosques in what would be the core cities of the Malwa sultanate: Ujjain, Lalitpur, Mandu and Dhar. Meanwhile his son, Alp Khan, busied himself strengthening the fort of Mandu. Situated in a spectacular natural setting some thirty-five kilometres south of Dhar, this would soon become one of the architectural gems of medieval India. Jutting out from the Vindhya Mountains, its southern side sharply dropping 400 metres to the Nimar plain below, the city stretches along a jagged-edged plateau about twenty-five kilometres north of the Narmada. This would be Alp Khan’s new capital when he succeeded to his father’s throne as Sultan Hoshang Shah \(r. 1406–35\).

The new sultan, however, was challenged by Zafar Khan of Gujarat, now reigning as Sultan Muzaffar, who not only invaded Malwa but captured and held Hoshang Shah prisoner for a year. When finally released, the humiliated sovereign vowed revenge, as would his successors, making Gujarat the lasting enemy of Malwa. To defend his kingdom from Gujarat, Hoshang made several strategic moves. First, although Malwa, like Jaunpur, did not have ready access to war-horses, it was well positioned to acquire elephants that roamed the heavily forested jungles to the east. In 1420 Hoshang seized the fort of Kherla, located some 300 kilometres east of Mandu, and installed as its chieftain a vassal who would pay an annual tribute in elephants. Second, he began recruiting soldiers from the eastern Gangetic valley, or Purbiya. Later known as ‘Purbiya Rajputs’, these men would form a central component of Malwa’s army. They also settled undeveloped tracts of the Nimar plain, south of Mandu.

On Hoshang Shah’s death in 1435, his son briefly occupied the throne but was outmanoeuvred by the son of Hoshang’s *vazir* \(chief minister\), who in 1436 was crowned Sultan Mahmud Shah Khalaji \(r. 1436–69\). Descended from the Khalaji rulers of Delhi, Mahmud Shah continued his predecessor’s policies of strengthening the state with mercenaries and war-elephants. In 1440 he marched some 600 kilometres east from Mandu to Bandhavgarh, a major entrepôt for elephants in present-day Umaria District, Madhya Pradesh. From there he moved into the Surguja region of northern Chattisgarh, which remained a permanent source of the sultanate’s war-elephants. These he deployed to exert Malwa’s control over much of Rajasthan.

Meanwhile, the affairs of the Saiyid dynasty in Delhi had reached such a pitiful state that a delegation of disgruntled clerics invited Mahmud Shah to invade their capital and even take the throne for himself. In 1442 Malwa’s sultan accepted the challenge and, although his battle with Delhi’s army was inconclusive, along the way he demonstrated sufficient power and largesse to attract the leaders of prominent clans to his vassalage, including those of Nagaur, Ajmer and the guardians of a number of forts in Mewar. When the powerful raja of Chittor, Rana Kumbha, expelled his younger stepbrother owing to a conflict between their households, the latter sought and was given refuge by Mahmud Shah, who granted him land assignments near Malwa’s border with Mewar. By exploiting such internal dissensions, the sultan was able to assert Malwa’s authority across much of Rajasthan. In the 1440s he seized Bayana and Ajmer, reinforced his grip on Ranthambhor, conquered Mandalgarh and regained his kingdom’s control over Gagraun \(in Jhalawar District, Rajasthan\).39

Malwa’s history highlights three interconnected themes of India’s long fifteenth century: the strategic importance of elephants in inter-state warfare; the exploitation of inter-household conflicts by outside powers as a strategy of territorial expansion; and the importance of India’s vast military labour market. All three helped Mahmud Shah create what amounted to a classic Circle of Kings, or *mandala*. Surrounding his political core \(Mandu and Dhar\) was a ring of inner provinces governed by his own courtiers \(Ujjain, Sarangpur, Bhilsa, Hoshangabad\), which were encircled in turn by a belt of states governed by allies \(Ranthambhor, Mandasor, Gagraun, Chanderi and Kherla\), beyond which lay a distant circle of tributary states \(Ajmer, Bayana, Kalpi, Raipur, Ratanpur, Bairagarh, Baglana\).40 This elegantly constructed geopolitical system suggests how far a Tughluq successor state had succumbed to Indian understandings of inter-state politics. Instead of a centralized polity in which a sultan enjoyed uniform authority throughout his realm, assisted by a cadre of personally loyal nobles, Malwa under Mahmud Shah Khalaji approximated to the classical Indian model of a polycentric state in which power and authority, being distributed unevenly among semi-sovereign allies, gradually diminished the further one moved from the core.

And yet, even while acting according to traditionally Indian political norms, the ruling class avidly participated in the Persianate cultural sphere. The language of the sultanate’s civil administration was Persian, and three of the four Persian dictionaries compiled in fifteenth-century India were composed in Malwa.41 It was by producing such normative texts that this isolated regional court asserted its claims to literary and linguistic status within the larger Persianate world.42 Sultan Mahmud Shah Khalaji certainly imagined himself a major player in that world – and even beyond. An inscription in Dhar dated 1455 described him as:

A king of graceful countenance, Sultan of the world,

Visitors bowing at his door step were the Great Khan and the Emperor of China.

‘Ala al-Din va’l-Dunya Abu’l-Muzaffar

Triumphed over his enemies with the help of God,

So in that era, with Mahmud as the king of the world,

The world flourished like heaven, thanks to his justice \[*‘adl*\].43

This was not entirely hyberbole. In early 1466 the sultan actually did receive a mission from a claimant to the office of caliph of Islam residing in Cairo. The envoy brought a black robe of investiture representing the sultan’s formal ‘appointment’ as a legitimate ruler in the eyes of Islam. Two years later, the visit of another foreign mission linked Mahmud Shah directly with the legacy of Timur. In January 1468 he received an emissary from Abu Sa‘id Mirza \(r. 1424–69\), Timur’s great-grandson, who then ruled the heartland of his ancestor’s former empire. The gifts Mahmud Shah presented to the envoy projected an image not of a great conqueror, but of a connoisseur of high Persianate culture: a book of wisdom, a ruby cup, a carnelian plate, a turquoise dish, an alabaster basin, a crystal tray, fine silks and cottons, amber, musk, talking birds and some horses and slaves.44

Mahmud Shah’s architectural projects at Mandu also suggest his desire to participate in Timur’s resplendent world, especially when contrasted with those in nearby Dhar, which had been patronized by governors of the Delhi sultanate. In the early fourteenth century Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji’s first governor in Dhar had built a structure known today as the ‘Kamal Maula’ mosque.45 Stylistically mimicking Delhi’s iconic Qutb mosque, it symbolized Dhar’s inclusion in the Delhi sultanate’s political orbit. A century later, in 1405, the last Tughluq governor in Dhar installed an iron pillar in a nearby mosque known as the ‘Lat Masjid’, making visual reference to a similar pillar that Sultan Iltutmish had placed before Delhi’s Qutb mosque.46 Mahmud Shah, on the other hand, looked westwards. Near Samarqand, one of Timur’s inscriptions boldly proclaims: ‘If you challenge our power, look at our buildings.’47 Timurid architecture was characterized by imposing, free-standing structures meant to be seen from afar, complex vaulting techniques supporting large dome chambers on high drums, exterior surfaces richly decorated with glazed and unglazed brick, and geometric patterning using interlocking star and polygon patterns \[see Fig. 7\]. The style also featured ensembles of buildings, made by grouping together such features as a *madrasa*, a tomb, a mosque, a Sufi hospice, a palace or a garden. The effect was an integrated complex of monuments and open space. Established by Timur and elaborated by his successors in Central Asia and Iran, this aesthetic vision diffused across India with the quickening circulation of diplomats, pilgrims, merchants, adventurers, literati and artisans throughout the Persianate world.

In the heart of Mandu, Mahmud Shah Khalaji constructed precisely such an integrated complex, the first to be seen in India. Consisting of three monuments and an open square, all of them set in a single row in similarly sized square units, the ensemble asserted Mandu’s transformation from a provincial backwater to a world-class centre of Timurid-style power. The first in the ensemble is a large congregational mosque that Hoshang Shah had begun shortly before his death in 1435, and which Mahmud Shah spent the first eighteen years of his reign completing. To its west is an elegant tomb made entirely of white marble that he built for Hoshang Shah. To the east of the mosque, separated by a spacious square, is the ensemble’s most ambitious and imposing structure. Known as the ‘Ashrafi Mahal’, this is a *madrasa*-cum-dynastic tomb complex that was begun in 1441 and was still under construction twenty-seven years later. Although nearly entirely ruined today, its design can be reconstructed from notices by visitors and a resident chronicler. Its ground level incorporated a *madrasa* and a *khanaqah* with cells built into all four sides of its base. Standing on one part of the base was a tomb for three royal graves, its large dome rising to a height of twenty-seven metres above ground level, and its walls richly decorated by Iranian craftsmen working with green- and cobalt-striped jasper, red cornelian, agate, white alabaster and black marble. It also contained a great hall in white marble with carved doorways, windows and cornices decorated in mosaics of precious stones and friezes of blue and yellow glazed tiles. On all four corners stood circular structures, the most imposing being a seven-storeyed tower measuring fifteen metres in diameter at its base and rising to a height of forty-five metres, or two-thirds the height of Delhi’s Qutb Minar.48 In short, unlike the sultanates of Bengal or Gujarat, where patrons continued or revived indigenous building traditions, Malwa’s architects experimented with forms having no local precedents.49 If Timur had taken Indian architects with him to Samarqand, where he developed his distinctive style, a generation later architects from Khurasan had brought that style to the heart of India.50

Following Mahmud Shah’s reign, however, the kingdom began a steady decline. His son and successor, the eccentric Sultan Ghiyath al-Din Shah \(r. 1469–1501\), withdrew altogether from politics and governance. Protected by a palace guard of 500 Ethiopian slave women dressed in men’s attire, the sultan ardently devoted himself to the pursuit of pleasure. He is best known for patronizing a remarkable cookbook, the *Ni‘mat-nama* \(‘Book of Delights’\), which is not just a catalogue of Mandu’s culinary traditions, but an epicurean’s digest of pleasures, including detailed instructions for preparing perfumes, medical remedies, aphrodisiacs, betel nut and so on.51 Depicted in paintings wearing dainty slippers and a formidable moustache, the *bon vivant* Ghiyath al-Din neglected his father’s shrewd policy of constructing and maintaining an outer belt of tributary states. To the west, he failed to challenge the annexation of Champaner by Gujarat’s Mahmud Begada, and to the north he left uncontested the occupation of the forts of Kalpi and Bayana by Delhi’s Bahlul Lodi. The kingdom’s core, meanwhile, fell under the domination of powerful chiefs who recruited ever-larger numbers of soldiers from the east, the so-called Purbiya Rajputs, on whom the kingdom had become militarily dependent.

Malwa thus presents a curious hybrid, inhabiting several worlds simultaneously. Important Sanskrit literature was produced during Mahmud Khalaji’s reign, including a copy of the *Kalpa Sutra*, a revered work on Jain rituals that maps a path for crossing life’s river of rebirths. Completed at Mandu in 1439, the *Kalpa Sutra* is also one of India’s earliest manuscripts bearing dated miniature paintings.52 In fact, most of the styles of Rajasthan’s famous miniature tradition evolved from copies of this text that were produced either in Mandu or in the state’s hinterland.53 This was probably due to the prominent role that powerful warrior chiefs linked to courts in Rajasthan played in Malwa’s political system. In 1463, while accompanying the sultan on a military campaign, Mahmud Khalaji’s chief treasurer, also a Jain, composed another important Sanskrit work, the *Buddhi Sagar.*54 Because Jains were so prominent in managing the government’s accounting and revenue departments, and because the government relied so heavily on wealthy Jain merchants for financing its projects, the state actively supported its Jain community. It was similarly invested in indigenous military systems. Lacking access both to war-horses and to Turko-Iranian military labour, rulers recruited war-elephants from the forests to the east and military labour from Rajasthan and the eastern Gangetic plain. By the time of the sultanate’s last dynast, Sultan Mahmud II \(r. 1511–31\), 40,000 men later identified as Rajputs were in state service, most of them recruited from the eastern Gangetic plain, or Purbiya.



## EMERGING IDENTITIES: THE IDEA OF ‘RAJPUT’

It was only from the sixteenth century that the word ‘Rajput’ became securely associated with territorially based, closed clans claiming deep genealogical roots and nurturing a warrior ethos of heroism and martyrdom.55 In inscriptions from western and central India dating from the eleventh to the fourteenth centuries, the Sanskrit term *rajaputra*, ‘a king’s son’, appears simply as a title indicating a rank or official position, but not one that was inheritable by subsequent generations or associated with martial heroism.56 In those earlier centuries, kings received military service from subordinate chieftains, called *ranaka*s or *thakura*s, in return for gifts of land that the latter gave to their own cavalry commanders, called *rauta*s, a term derived from *rajaputra.* In Persian sources dating to the early thirteenth century these commanders are called *rawat*, also derived from *rajaputra*.57 In the early fifteenth century, the label ‘Rajput’ was still associated with successful military service performed by men who had taken up soldiering on behalf of a deserving king. But by the end of that century, the word was well on the way to referencing entire aristocratic lineages bearing a martial ethos of courage, heroism and martyrdom. Such lineages included the Chauhans of Ajmer, the Tomaras of Delhi, the Gahadavalas of Kanauj and the Chandelas of Kalinjar.

An early phase in the crystallization of Rajput identities is seen in the career of a fourteenth-century soldier known as Muhammad Shah in Persian sources and Mahimasahi in Sanskrit sources.58 Revealing the fluidity of social categories and the ease with which men could move between them, an early-fifteenth-century Sanskrit text, the *Hammira-Mahakavya*, portrays Muhammad Shah/Mahimasahi as transitioning from an ethnic Mongol, to an Indian Muslim, and finally to a *kshatriya* warrior. Recruited from Central Asia, he joined the Delhi sultanate service in the late thirteenth century and participated in that state’s successful invasion of Gujarat in 1299. But when he and other Mongol retainers unsuccessfully rebelled against their commanding officers in the course of this campaign, they took refuge in the fabled fort of Ranthambhor in eastern Rajasthan, then controlled by Hammira, the last ruler of the Chauhan lineage. In March 1301 the sultan of Delhi, ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji, besieged this fort, and when its defenders foresaw their inevitable doom Muhammad Shah entered his quarters inside the fort, massacred his entire family, and gallantly sallied forth against the sultan’s forces with the intent of sacrificing his life in one final, desperate struggle. Afterwards, ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji discovered his former retainer lying wounded on the battlefield. Although the sultan offered to have his wounds healed if he would once again pledge loyalty to Delhi, Muhammad Shah refused, declaring instead his devotion to the Chauhan cause, whereupon he was executed.

Although the Sanskrit text identifies Muhammad Shah as a *kshatriya* and not a Rajput, his actions – exhibiting loyalty, courage and heroic martyrdom – were those that would later be acknowledged as characteristically Rajput. By killing off his own family when the defenders at Ranthambhor found their cause to be doomed, Muhammad Shah engaged in the ritual of *jauhar* – the destruction of elite women in order to prevent their falling into enemy hands. Only then did he hurl himself before the Delhi sultanate’s overwhelming force, expecting certain death. Composed in the early fifteenth century, about a century after the events it describes, the *Hammira-Mahakavya* thus appears to capture a moment when the idea of Rajput was evolving. The early-modern and modern ideology of martial heroism and martyrdom was clearly already in place, even if the term *rajaputra* was still an open social category, accessible even to an outsider such as Muhammad Shah, and not yet a closed, kin-based one. The career of Muhammad Shah as related in the *Hammira-Mahakavya* typifies the sort of accounts that circulated orally in fifteenth-century western India and celebrated the heroic exploits of single individuals. In the following century bards patronized by chieftains aspiring to be kings would weave such personal stories into connected narratives and genealogies that served to bind together members of whole clans. When such clans were mapped on to territory as kingdoms, those genealogies provided historical depth for ruling houses that could then trace their origins back to common founder-heroes. At that point, the ideology of martial prowess and martyrdom associated with earlier warrior-heroes such as Muhammad Shah was projected on to the entire clan, which in turn would self-identify as Rajput.

Several factors appear to have shaped this development, one of which was military in nature. After Timur left India, intensified conflict on India’s fragmented political chessboard created greater demands for military labour. Such demands were met by the emergence of an India-wide military labour market, which became a prominent feature of South Asia’s social landscape from at least the fifteenth century until the early nineteenth, when British colonial rulers demilitarized Indian society.59 Since no state during India’s long fifteenth century could ever achieve a monopoly of armed force, rulers were uneasily aware that armed villagers were as free to become rebels as they were to be recruited into their own military forces.60 Consequently, states and warlords alike competed for access to the countryside’s vast reservoir of armed peasants.61 They were normally recruited on an ad hoc, seasonal basis, with warrior–villagers typically spending part of the year in military service and the remainder working the fields in their home villages. Middlemen or entrepreneurs called *jama‘dar*s negotiated deals that were agreeable both to those who hired the mercenaries and to the local chiefs, or *zamindar*s, who had access to those labour pools. From the standpoint of the recruits themselves – especially those living along the economic margins – serving a distant warlord or sovereign seasonally was a prudent survival strategy, since such service provided income, if only a meagre one, for themselves and their families. Pre-colonial India thus teemed with armed recruits roaming the countryside with their middlemen or commanders, responding to the shifting supply and demand of the military labour market.

From the late fifteenth century rulers of the Jaunpur sultanate \(1394–1483\) had taken many peasant-soldiers of the eastern Gangetic plain into their armed forces. But in 1483, when the Lodi sultans of Delhi extinguished the Jaunpur regime and annexed its former territory, Jaunpur’s former recruits were forced to find military service further afield and deeper in India’s interior, especially in Malwa. These men were employed by warlords who, based in strongholds such as Raisen \(near Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh\), supplied them to emergent states or existing kingdoms in Rajasthan or Malwa. There they were known as ‘Purbiya Rajputs’, a name indicating their origins in the eastern Gangetic plain, or ‘Purbiya’. Notably, in the fluid social context of India’s long fifteenth century, terms such as ‘Rajput’ or ‘Afghan’ had not yet become fixed ethnic identities, but merely indicated one’s military affiliation. Men adopted the cultural identity associated with the particular military tradition into which they had been integrated, so that, in this instance, ‘Purbiyas’ recruited by brokers and employers who identified themselves as Rajputs became ‘Purbiya Rajputs’. In this way, the military labour market itself was a major generator of ethnic identities.62

Rajput status was also claimed by martial clans of pastoral nomads in northern and western India as those clans evolved into royal lineages and became displaced on to territories as petty states. This could be a very long process, taking several centuries to complete. Between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries, nomadic clans steadily moved within proximity of settled and socially stratified agrarian realms with a large class of peasant cultivators at their base, and royal courts, Brahmin priests and state-sponsored temples at their apex. In northern Gujarat and Saurashtra martial pastoralists migrating from the north and west settled down and carved out agrarian territories over which they claimed sovereign authority. Their pastoralist kinship organization then weakened as their chiefs shed aspects of their pastoralist pasts, adopted prestigious titles, acquired courts, styled themselves kings and claimed patrilineal lines of descent linked to prestigious lineages.

In Gujarat, as in Rajasthan, genealogy proved essential for making such claims. To this end, local bards composed ballads or chronicles that presented their patrons as ideal warriors who protected Brahmins, cows and vassals, as opposed to the livestock-herding chieftains that they actually were, or had once been. As people who created and preserved the genealogies, local bards therefore played critical roles in brokering for their clients socio-cultural transitions to a claimed Rajput status.63 A similar thing was happening in the Thar Desert region, where from the fourteenth century onwards mobile pastoral groups gradually evolved into landed, sedentary and agrarian clans. Once again, it was bards and poets, patronized by little kings, who transformed a clan’s ancestors from celebrated cattle-herders or cattle-rustlers to celebrated protectors of cattle-herding communities.64 The difference was subtle but critical, since such revised narratives retained an echo of a pastoral nomadic past while repositioning a clan’s dynastic founder from pastoralist to non-pastoralist. The term ‘Rajput’, in short, had become a prestigious title available for adoption by upwardly mobile clans in the process of becoming sedentary.65

By one mechanism or another, a process of ‘Rajputization’ occurred in new states that emerged from the turmoil following Timur’s invasion of 1398, especially in Gujarat, Malwa and Rajasthan.



## WRITING IN VERNACULAR LANGUAGES

It was also in the long fifteenth century that across much of South Asia vernacular, spoken languages appeared in written form, for both documentary and expressive purposes. This ‘vernacular revolution’, however, did not displace India’s older, transregional literary traditions, Sanskrit and Persian, but occurred alongside and in dialogue with them.

Like the emergence of regional and Rajput identities, the appearance of vernacular literatures was associated with the Delhi sultanate’s diminished status following Timur’s invasion. As Delhi’s authority receded, former imperial governors, lesser regional chiefs and local warlords all asserted themselves politically. Larger players such as the sultans of Bengal, Jaunpur, Gujarat or Malwa could do this by patronizing imposing works of architecture or by maintaining substantial numbers of armed retainers. But smaller chiefs or warlords, possessing fewer resources, had fewer options. Just to survive amidst a patchwork of mutually hostile states meant spending much of their limited resources on recruiting mercenaries from India’s military labour market. On the other hand, what small but ambitious warlords could feasibly manage was to build up large households and attain local renown by patronizing the best and the brightest literati they could find. These would be poets, singers or bards who composed and propagated literary works intended for as wide a circulation as possible within their patron’s realm. But because such states might be of modest size, the literature was likely to be composed in the spoken language and dialect specific to a state’s sovereign domain. These could be songs extolling their patron’s generosity or power, genealogies, biographies, hagiographies, popular narratives dedicated to a political patron or, most commonly, vernacular adaptations either of Persian classical genres such as romance literature, or of Sanskrit classical genres such as courtly epics. In creative ways, then, India’s two transregional literary traditions were effectively reinvented in ways that could be intelligible in the more fragmented political and social world that had emerged in the wake of Timur’s invasion.66

As an illustration of this process, ever since 1394 north India’s Tomar lineage had controlled the fort of Gwalior, 320 kilometres south of Delhi. But by the fifteenth century that fort’s ruler, Dungar Singh Tomar \(r. 1427–59\), had to face pressure from two Tughluq successor states that coveted this strategically located fort – the Saiyid sultans of Delhi to the north, and the Khalaji sultans of Malwa to the south. The beleaguered Dungar Singh managed to keep the two powers at bay by paying tribute to them both. He also patronized abridged and modified vernacular versions of India’s great Sanskrit epics, the *Mahabharata* and the *Ramayana –* the former in 1435 and the latter in 1443. These were the first extant versions of the great epics to appear in the dialect of Hindavi later known as Brajbhasha, referring to the dialect of Braj, that is, the region of the upper Ganges in western Uttar Pradesh associated with the hero and Hindu god Krishna.67 Composed by the poet Vishnudas, the epics appear to have been originally sung at Dungar Singh’s court, where they were written down and, like other vernacular works of the period, tailored to suit the values and ambitions of their patron. Thus, the hero of Vishnudas’s *Mahabharata* is not Arjuna or Yudhishthira as in the Sanskrit epic, but the muscular Bhima – an appropriate model for an aspiring but hard-pressed king. Similarly, in his version of the *Ramayana*, abridged to only a sixth of the Sanskrit original, Vishnudas narrates episodes that stress royal splendour, courageous combat, and one of the most common themes of fifteenth century north India: renewing or breaking former alliances and forging new ones.68

Another illustration of India’s literary vitality in the long fifteenth century is seen in the Hindavi Sufi romance, or *premakhyan* \(love story\).69 Composed in eastern India between the late fourteenth and mid sixteenth centuries, these stories narrate a princely hero’s quest for romantic love, a metaphor for the quest for union with God.70 Although the poets of this genre were thoroughly familiar with classic Persian romance literature by poets such as Nizami Ganjavi \(d. 1209\), they were also immersed in local Hindavi culture and its own traditions of storytelling. For a poet such as Muhammad Jayasi \(d. 1542\), India was home, and his references to stepwells, temples, yogis, Jains, white-clad sadhus, Śiva-worshippers and so on all served to valorize that home.71 The patrons of this literature, moreover, were Turkish or Afghan local rulers or regional warlords who had become transformed by the Indian culture that surrounded them.72 Herein lies the contrast between a *premakhyan* like Jayasi’s *Padmavat* \(1540\) and courtly narratives of the early Delhi sultanate era. Whereas poets of that time had represented north India as a stage for enacting triumphal narratives of conquest, and indigenous warrior clans as infidels to be conquered and subdued, Jayasi reverses this opposition. In narrating ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji’s conquest of the fort of Chittor \(1303\), the poet identifies himself not with the victorious sultan but with the doomed Indians who resisted the invading Turks. For him, the Indians’ annihilation at Chittor becomes a metaphor for the Sufis’ ultimate mystical quest, namely annihilation of the self \(*fana’*\) by way of achieving an abiding presence of God.73

Owing to their need for official records, regional courts also stimulated the use of written vernacular languages. In 1513 the sultan of Malwa was issuing public decrees in Hindavi. In some states, local administration was conducted on a bilingual basis, with records kept in both Persian and the local vernacular, which in north India might be Hindavi, written in *nagari*, the script of Sanskrit. By the early 1500s, the Lodi Afghans of Delhi were issuing bilingual documents in Persian and Hindavi.74 In the Deccan \(see Chapter Four\), ruling authorities of the sultanates of Golconda \(1497–1687\) and Bijapur \(1490–1686\) realized that the most efficient way of managing their judicial and revenue bureaucracies was to employ the same class of skilled, literate administrators that had been serving the Deccan’s ruling authorities for centuries. In Golconda these were mostly Brahmins. Whereas that state’s royal edicts of the sixteenth century had been issued in Persian only, by the early seventeenth century such documents were typically issued in both Persian and Telugu. By the end of the seventeenth century, they were issued entirely in Telugu, with brief Persian summaries appearing only on their reverse sides.75 Moreover, because the state’s sovereign territory roughly coincided with Telugu-speaking Telangana and the Andhra coast, the kingdom’s ruling classes tended to imagine their sovereign realm as a Telugu one, and the rulers themselves as Telugu sultans.76 Consequently, they vigorously patronized the production of Telugu literature, just as the sultans of Bengal, whose sovereign territory likewise coincided roughly with a Bengali-speaking region, did the production of Bengali literature. Sultan Ibrahim Qutb Shah \(r. 1550–80\) was known in Telugu sources as *Ibharama cakravarti* \(‘emperor Ibrahim’\), a ruler so thoroughly steeped in Telugu aesthetics that he would sit, as one court poet put it, ‘floating on waves of bliss’ listening to the *Mahabharata* recited to him in its classical Telugu version.77

The same was true in the western Deccan. Early in their history, the sultans of Bijapur began collecting revenue and administering justice in written Marathi, not Persian. The change came abruptly in 1535, when Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I \(r. 1534–58\) ordered that all public revenue and judicial records, formerly recorded in Persian, be kept in Marathi and placed under Brahmin management.78 Royal decrees \(*farman*s\) were still written in Persian, but vernacular Marathi was used for orders \(*khurdkhat*s\) issued by crown bureaucrats or landholders, letters \(*misali*s\) issued by mid-level bureaucrats or police chiefs, letters of assurance \(*qaul-nama*s\) issued by higher authorities to lower ones, and judgments \(*mahzar*s\) issued by judicial assemblies.79 In particular, courts administered or acknowledged by the state became arenas for repeated face-to-face disputations. A single case might be taken from court to court, from locale to locale and from level to level along the socio-political spectrum, in each case involving diverse peoples of various castes, classes and religions. Since the language in which local cases were litigated was vernacular Marathi, the very act of engaging in public disputation had the deeper effect of forging a larger, discursive community around that language, both as spoken in the courts and as recorded by them.80 Regional states such as the sultanate of Bijapur thus created a political and judicial framework that in turn allowed for the emergence of a public, vernacular space.

Further contributing to the creation of such a space was the spread of paper-making technology, which Persianized Turks had introduced to north India from Central Asia in the thirteenth century; with the growth of the Delhi sultanate in the fourteenth century it diffused across South Asia. By the time that Timur sacked Delhi in 1398–9, it had already reached that sultanate’s provinces, so that in the fifteenth century, when they had become regional states, this revolutionary technology was already available for use. Around 1590 the Bengali poet Mukundaram noted the presence of whole communities of Muslim paper-makers \(*kagaji*\) in Bengali cities.81 The link between paper production and Indo-Persianate governance is suggested by the name of an ancient town called Kaghdhipura \(‘paper town’\), located very near Daulatabad, the oldest centre of Persianate government in the Deccan.82 Almost everywhere it went, paper-making technology gradually displaced other media such as copperplate, palm leaf or stone. It is true that earlier courts such as the Chalukyas \(974–1190\) and the Yadavas \(1175–1318\) had patronized the writing of vernacular Marathi and Kannada inscriptions and expository treatises, and that as early as the tenth century both languages were used for documentary purposes.83 But given the cumbersome and expensive technology of communication in those earlier, pre-paper centuries, such texts – even when committed to memory and transmitted orally – did not circulate far beyond elite groups.84 Paper, by contrast, being cheaper to produce and easier to handle, enjoyed a much greater velocity of movement and a far wider circulation than any other media then in use. This allowed it to penetrate deeper in the social order and bring greater numbers of people belonging to different social classes into closer communication both with each other and with the state. It is revealing that the ordinary words for ‘paper’ and ‘pen’ in many South Asian vernacular tongues are derived from two Perso-Arabic words, *kaghaz* and *qalam* respectively, suggesting not only the new technology’s path of transmission from Central Asia to South Asia, but also the deep impact that it had made on the peoples of India.

If the emergence of a public, vernacular space was stimulated by the diffusion of paper-technology and the use of local languages in regional administration, both revenue and judicial, that space also expanded as a result of forces coming ‘from below’, in the form of popular devotional movements. Although powerful waves of popular religiosity, or *bhakti*, can be traced as far back as sixth-century south India, in the long fifteenth century they swept across the whole of India. Because it entailed a direct encounter with the divine – unmediated by ritual, learning or priests – *bhakti* presented a formidable challenge to the more ritually oriented Vedic traditions preserved by Brahmin elites. Privileging personal experience over ritual, *bhakti* celebrated mutual companionship among fellow devotees, including both sexes and all social strata. Moved by a direct engagement with divine reality, people turned to both poetry and song, the natural vehicles of *bhakti*, which invariably appeared in the spoken tongues of India’s various subregions, composed by poets popularly venerated as saints.85 Writing in Hindavi, these included such powerful voices as Kabir \(d. *c*.1518\), Raidas \(d. *c*.1520\), Mirabai \(d. 1557\) and Surdas \(d. 1573\); in Bengali, Chaitanya \(d. 1533\); in Punjabi, Nanak \(d. 1539\); in Gujarati, Narsinh Mehta \(d. 1488\); and in Marathi, Namdev \(d. 1350\) and Eknath \(d. 1599\).86

In different ways, then, regional courts, the advent of paper-technology and the ‘*bhakti* public sphere’ all served to stimulate the spate of vernacular works that appeared in India’s long fifteenth century. This momentous outcome compares with a nearly simultaneous development in Europe, where vernacular literatures were beginning to displace the hegemony of Latin for both documentary and discursive purposes.



## CONCLUSION

Persian chronicles compiled in the fourteenth century convey the impression of the Delhi sultanate’s sovereign territory as a politically uniform terrain. Even if reality never did match such a monolithic vision, it was at least possible to imagine the sultanate in such terms. But Timur’s sack of Delhi upended all that, setting off a chain reaction of processes that would define the long fifteenth century.

First, Timur’s invasion was followed by former Tughluq governors declaring their independence from Delhi and setting down roots in their respective regions, a process already begun in Bengal and the Deccan when those regions were lost to Delhi in the mid fourteenth century. Second, the shrinking of Delhi’s political authority disrupted overland trade routes that carried caravans of war-horses from Central Asia to north India. As a result, independent rulers were forced to rely less on cavalry and more on war-elephants, to which they had ready access, together with manpower recruited not from upper India or points west, but from India’s own military labour markets, especially the lower Ganges region, or Purbiya.

Third, new groups were staking claims to high social or political status. In the late fifteenth century, when Jaunpur was conquered by a partially revived Delhi sultanate under the Lodi sultans, Purbiya’s military manpower was contracted by brokers in central India for labour further west, in particular in Malwa. As soldiers from eastern India serving in Rajasthan and Malwa, these men acquired the identity of Purbiya Rajputs, and finally of Rajputs, a process suggesting how the military labour market itself enabled the assimilation of new groups into this emerging ethnic category. In Gujarat, as tribal and pastoral communities migrated into or near more hierarchical, agrarian societies, they too claimed Rajput identities, seeking valorization for their claims to aristocratic, or even royal, status. Bardic poets facilitated these efforts by celebrating the warrior ideals of those communities and by linking the ancestors of their chiefs with prestigious *kshatriya* lineages.

Fourth, the post-Timur era saw ceaseless alliance-building and alliance-shifting at multiple levels – between households, between chieftains and between states. In a world made less secure by the loss of an imperial centre, many were left to their own devices politically. Clients sought patrons, patrons sought allies. Political capital was measured by the cash in one’s treasury, the size of one’s household and the number of women serving as collateral in negotiating alliances with other parties. No alliance was iron-clad, and no agreement final; anything could be negotiated or renegotiated. This made for a volatile political environment, for neither allies nor enemies were permanent. Military service was often no more than a temporary arrangement made on a face-to-face basis, with no stabilizing mechanism that might guarantee contractual agreements. With political loyalties so thin on the ground, patrons and clients alike were constantly forging and abandoning alliances. The flow of troops from one contractor to another could make or break a kingdom.87

Fifth, the era witnessed an extraordinary spurt in the use of written vernacular languages, both for literature and for governmental record-keeping. In the politically fragmented world of post-Timur north India, newly formed sovereign states and politically emergent communities patronized literary works in the tongue of their immediate locale. Vernacular literatures also channelled the torrent of devotional poetry that swept over the land, composed by *bhakti* poets who exuberantly celebrated an unmediated presence of the divine. Yet the emergence of written vernaculars did not displace Sanskrit or Persian. Upwardly mobile chieftains, aspiring to claw their way into the world of classical Indian kingship, sought the prestige associated with Sanskrit.88 In Gujarat, Sanskrit texts were patronized both by the sultan and by chieftains challenging him. In the 1460s the Sanskrit poet Udayaraja produced a lengthy panegyric of Sultan Mahmud Begada, the *Rajavinoda*.89 Yet at about the same time, the poet Gangadhara wrote Sanskrit plays at the courts of two chieftains – one in Champaner, the other in Junagadh – whom he lionized as mighty *kshatriya* warriors, even while advising them to submit to the sultan’s greater power.90 Further north, the Rajput chieftain of Gwalior, Dungar Singh Tomar, sent two Sanskrit treatises on music to Sultan Zain al-‘Abidin of Kashmir, who famously patronized both Sanskrit and Persian literary works, and even bidirectional translations between the two cosmopolitan traditions.91 Operating across the whole of western India, Jain merchants or high-ranking administrators commissioned the production of Sanskrit texts and biographies.

Persian also flourished in this age of growing vernacularism, but, as with Sanskrit, it was put to new uses. Although the age of grand, pan-Indian chronicles had ended with Timur’s invasion, Sufi shaikhs everywhere continued to produce treatises and biographies in Persian, and provincial courts from Kashmir to the Deccan to patronize provincial histories in the language. In fact, as Persian grew progressively provincialized in the decades following Timur, it also became more firmly rooted in India’s linguistic landscape. Considerable Persian vocabulary entered regional Indian languages at the very time that those languages were achieving literary status.92 More Persian dictionaries were produced in India in the fifteenth century than in Iran, or for that matter in the entire world outside India. Although multilingual, these dictionaries used Persian as their medium, that is, the language to which others were made to relate. The large number of Persian dictionaries produced at India’s provincial courts suggests a need for some pan-Indian cultural centre of reference that might fill the void created by the loss of Delhi as a political one.93

Finally, the sort of restless movement that was occurring at the linguistic level – the appearance of written vernaculars, the translations of Sanskrit texts into regional tongues, the new roles played by both Sanskrit and Persian – reflect what was simultaneously happening at the social level. Jains had become well integrated into sultanate courts as administrators, financiers and mint-masters.94 Fifteenth-century Sanskrit texts reveal the normality of Hindu princes, even those of the *kshatriya* class, serving Muslim rulers and fighting non-Muslim antagonists in performing that service.95 Conversely, Sufi romance stories of the *premakhyan* genre show the extent to which Persianate society in post-Timur upper India had absorbed Indian sensibilities.

Developments in Bengal epitomize the growing fluidity between the Sanskrit and Persianate worlds. In his *Sri Caitanya Bhagavat*, a popular Bengali Vaishnava work composed in the 1540s, the poet Vrindavan Das referred to the Bengal king as *raja*, not sultan. Another Vaishnava poet, Jayananda, referred in his *Caitanya-Mangala* to the sultan not only as *raja* but as *iśvara* \(‘god’\), and even as Indra, the Vedic king of gods.96 During their installation ceremonies, the sultans of Bengal sent for water from Ganga Sagar, the ancient holy site where the old Ganges River emptied into the Bay of Bengal; they then washed themselves in that holy water in the manner of earlier Hindu sovereigns.97 And in their public architecture, those sultans yielded so much to local conceptions of form and medium that, as one art historian observes, ‘the country, originally possessed by the invaders, now possessed them’.98




