+++
title = "4 The Deccan and the South, 1400–1650"

+++





## LINKS TO THE PERSIANATE WORLD

When Timur raided north India in mid December 1398, Delhi’s poorer classes had little choice but to remain and face the devastation. But many of the city’s elites, well aware of the warlord’s prior conquests and possessing sufficient resources, hastily packed their things and escaped before the storm broke. Among these was Muhammad Gisudaraz \(d. 1422\), who would become the most famous Sufi shaikh of the Deccan plateau. His tomb in Gulbarga, then the Bahmani sultanate’s capital, remains today the Deccan’s most popular Sufi shrine.1

Gisudaraz had actually grown up in the Deccan, as his family migrated there around 1327 when Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq transferred a large part of Delhi’s population to the new imperial co-capital of Daulatabad. Seven years later, while still in his teens, he returned to Delhi with his mother and elder brother, his father having died in Daulatabad. In the Tughluq capital he gained stature as a public figure and a prominent shaikh in the Chishti tradition. But just as Timur was about to capture Delhi, he and more than seventy of his disciples and camp-followers abandoned the city and headed south. It had been sixty-three years since he left the Deccan for Delhi. Now a venerable shaikh acclaimed throughout north India, he was returning with the immediate aim of visiting his father’s grave site in Daulatabad, the city of his boyhood.2 He and his considerable entourage finally reached the Deccan in the summer of 1399.

Considering it a boon that such a distinguished shaikh had fallen into his lap, the Bahmani ruler, Sultan Firuz \(r. 1397–1422\), personally rode up to Daulatabad to greet the newcomer and invite him to settle near his palace in Gulbarga. The shaikh agreed, but over time their relationship soured. Following a bitter falling-out, Gisudaraz was finally obliged to shift his residence to a site at a considerable distance from the Bahmani citadel, ostensibly because the large crowds attending his *khanaqah* had caused a security threat to the capital. Firuz also considered the shaikh deficient in the very branches of knowledge in which he claimed to excel, such as rhetoric and geometry.




  IMAGE Peninsular India, 1565


The rift between the Sufi and the court widened further when it was learnt that Gisudaraz had been teaching lessons on a highly controversial text, the *Fusus al-hikam*, authored by the Spanish-Arab mystic Ibn al-‘Arabi \(d. 1240\). The sultan sent a secretary to the shaikh’s *khanaqah* to investigate and report on how Gisudaraz was using this text. But upon attending the discourses, the secretary became spellbound himself and enrolled as one of the shaikh’s disciples, much to the court’s dismay. Matters became political, however, when the shaikh refused to support Firuz’s plan to be succeeded by his son, widely considered a weak and dissipated prince. In fact, the shaikh predicted that Firuz would be succeeded by his own brother, Ahmad, a mystically inclined prince who had shown personal veneration for the shaikh. Ultimately, Firuz accepted the political reality that the kingdom’s *amir*s preferred such an outcome, and in late 1422 Ahmad was crowned sultan. Ten days later Firuz died, as did Gisudaraz a month afterwards.

The tortuous relationship between Gisudaraz and Firuz Bahmani points to a fundamental conflict between spiritual and royal authority. Having founded or inherited dominion over newly conquered territory, sultans sought the support of men whose blessings were thought to lend moral legitimacy to their rule. However, Sufis were popularly regarded as ocupying a moral plane above the sultan’s world of glitter, corruption and violence, making it problematic for them to consort with royal courts. Indeed, the greater a shaikh’s popular esteem, the more obliged he might feel to reject courtly patronage. Further complicating matters, sultans could be deeply jealous of a Sufi’s popularity, as is suggested by Firuz’s demand that Gisudaraz relocate his residence on the pretext that the throngs of people attending the shaikh’s musical and teaching sessions posed a security threat. Relations between Sufis and royal courts could be vexed, to say the least.

Firuz Bahmani’s relations with Timur were another matter altogether. Like other Indian monarchs, the Deccani sultan held in awe his towering contemporary, at that time the world’s most powerful ruler and most lavish patron of Persian arts. From Bengal to the Balkans, Timur’s dazzling court at Samarqand had set a transregional standard for imperial splendour. Shortly after Timur sacked Delhi, Firuz prudently rushed ambassadors and gifts to the Turkish conqueror, enlisting himself as the warlord’s most faithful servant, doubtless hoping that he would not put the Deccan on his to-do list. In response, Timur addressed Firuz as ‘son’ and sent him a belt, a gilded sword, four royal robes, a Turkish slave and four splendid horses, items typical of the material gifts that circulated within, and helped constitute, the Persianate world.3 In a gratuitous gesture, Timur also offered Firuz sovereignty over Gujarat and Malwa, two former Tughluq provinces and now independent sultanates that the warlord had not even bothered to conquer.

Even before receiving Timur’s gifts, Firuz had embarked on an ambitious programme of Persianizing his court. In each year of his reign he had sent ships from his principal seaports on the Arabian Sea – Goa, Dabhol and Chaul – to the Persian Gulf to recruit Persian-speaking men of letters, administrators, soldiers and artisans. In 1399, only months after Timur sacked Delhi, he began building a new palace city, Firuzabad, twenty-seven kilometres south of Gulbarga. There, the sultan would emulate Timur’s aesthetic vision, just as Sultan Mahmud Khalaji would do in Malwa’s capital at Mandu. Between 1379 and 1396, shortly before launching his India campaign, Timur had built the most grandiose of his own architectural projects – the Aq Saray \(‘White Palace’\) in Shahr-i Sabz, the warlord’s birthplace south of Samarqand \[see Fig. 7\]. On the spandrels of this structure there appeared the image of a pair of lions, an ancient symbol of Persian royalty.4 News of this monument probably reached Firuz as he was planning Firuzabad, for the two lions also appeared on the spandrels of the city’s western gateway, built just three years after the completion of the Aq Saray palace.5

Upon succeeding his brother Firuz in 1422, Sultan Ahmad Bahmani \(r. 1422–36\) transferred the state’s capital from Gulbarga to Bidar. Located in the heart of the plateau at the junction of the Deccan’s three major subregions – the Kannada-speaking south-west, the Telugu-speaking east and the Marathi-speaking west and north-west – the site was well suited as the capital of a state aspiring to transregional, imperial status. Moreover, with Delhi still largely ruined since Timur’s invasion several decades earlier, Bidar would lay claim to being India’s most imposing imperial centre, at least architecturally. In contrast to the low, squat arches found at Gulbarga, the tall arches and graceful spandrels of Bidar’s Royal Chamber recall the sweeping vision of Timurid Samarqand. Those spandrels also repeat the same lion and sun motifs seen on the Aq Saray palace and at Firuzabad. Like Timur’s palaces, Bidar’s Hall of Public Audience was adorned with a profusion of blue, yellow, green and white glazed tiles.

Stylistically, Bidar’s most Timurid-looking monument is the *madrasa*, patronized by the renowned Mahmud Gawan \(d. 1481\). A high-born merchant prince from Iran’s Caspian Sea region, Gawan had joined the throngs of so-called ‘Westerners’ \(Persian *gharbian*\) who had been migrating to the Deccan from the Middle East ever since the Bahmani revolt against Muhammad bin Tughluq in 1347. Having severed their ties with Delhi, the Bahmanis now looked across the Arabian Sea for administrative talent and war-horses. Reaching the port of Dabhol in 1453, Mahmud Gawan, forty-one years of age and with considerable commercial and political experience behind him, was exactly the sort of person the regime wished to recruit. He easily convinced Dabhol’s governor that he was no ordinary horse merchant, but a cosmopolitan Iranian who had already travelled through Anatolia, Syria, Egypt and Central Asia and had declined offers to serve as minister in courts in both Iraq and Khurasan. Upon reaching the Bahmani capital he was interviewed by Sultan Ahmad II Bahmani \(r. 1436–58\), who made him an *amir* with a command of 1,000 cavalrymen. In 1458, after suppressing a minor rebellion in the eastern plateau, he was promoted to chief minister of the whole kingdom with the title ‘prince of merchants’ \(*malik al-tujjar*\), an office whose name indicates the importance the kingdom attached to trade with the outside world. In 1466 he was made regent for two successive boy monarchs and entrusted with supervising the administration of all the kingdom’s provinces, which then stretched from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal.

Boasting personal and commercial connections from the Balkans to India, the cosmopolitan *vazir* was determined to put Bidar on the world map. This is seen in his voluminous correspondence, which he maintained with luminaries all over the Persianate world, including the Ottoman sultan Mehmet II, who had conquered Constantinople the same year Gawan reached India. In these letters he sought to attract the brightest scholars of that world, for which purpose he built his famous *madrasa*, completed in 1472 and located just beyond the citadel in the heart of the city. Although a quarter of it is missing today owing to damage by lightning, the brilliant glazed tiles covering the minaret and eastern façade, the sweeping arches, the vaulting and the structure’s sheer monumentality reflect Timur’s aesthetic vision \[see Fig. 6\]. Standing before this remarkable structure, one can easily imagine oneself in Herat, Bukhara or Samarqand.

To the south, meanwhile, Vijayanagara’s ruling class had begun absorbing Persianate ideas and practices even before waves of Timurid culture washed over India in the early fifteenth century. From its founding in 1347, as we have seen, the state’s rulers styled themselves ‘sultan among Indian kings’ \(*hindu-raya-suratrana*\), a title used a century later by even minor Hindu chieftains in the Andhra country.6 By 1355 Vijayanagara’s rulers were referring to themselves simply as ‘sultan’ several decades before they began using Sanskrit imperial titles such as *rajadhiraja* \(‘king of kings’\) or *rajaparameśvara* \(‘supreme king’\).7 In 1442 they established direct contact with the Timurid court when Timur’s son and successor, Shah Rukh \(r. 1405–47\), sent an envoy on a diplomatic mission to important courts in south India. Sailing from the Persian Gulf, the envoy, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, first reached Calicut, the commercially important city state on India’s Malabar coast. When Vijayanagara’s King Deva Raya II \(r. 1422–46\) learnt of this, he summoned the Timurid ambassador to his court, where he gave his guest two private audiences a week and a generous allotment of gifts and cash, letting it be known how pleased he was that ‘the great Padishah’ \(Shah Rukh\) had sent him an emissary. What most impressed ‘Abd al-Razzaq in his report on the Vijayanagara court was the apparel he saw. The king, he noted, wore a tunic of Chinese silk locally known by a variation of the Persian term *qaba*. Made of cotton or silk, this long-sleeved pullover had first appeared in Iran in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Subsequent visitors to Vijayanagara noted that royalty and members of the nobility also wore tall, brocaded, brimless headgear whose name derived from another Persian word – *kulah.* Both the headgear and the name for it had come from Iran. By adopting the title of ‘sultan’ and wearing garments and headgear then fashionable in the cosmopolitan Timurid world, members of Vijayanagara’s ruling class showed their desire to participate in that world.8

Vijayanagara was drawn into the Persianate cultural orbit in other ways too. By the late fourteenth century, the capital had grown far beyond the temple complexes that hug the banks of the Tungabhadra, constituting the city’s Sacred Centre. Measuring thirty-nine kilometres in circumference, the city’s walls were extended southwards, snaking through the maze of jumbled granite boulders that define the area’s extraordinary, moonlike landscape \[see Fig. 4\]. Several kilometres south of the city’s Sacred Centre, these walls embraced the Royal Centre, where the kingdom’s ruling household and governing classes presided over cycles of elaborate political rituals. The participants in the processions central to those rituals – elephants, horses, warriors, entertainers, musicians, dancers, and so on – are vividly represented in the exuberant bas-relief figures that cover the outer surfaces of several prominent monuments.9 In contrast to the city’s Sacred Centre, most of those in the Royal Centre lavishly incorporate the architectural vocabulary of the Persianate world – domes, pointed arches, cross-vaultings and stucco reliefs – as seen in such structures as the so-called ‘Elephant Stables’, the ‘Queen’s Bath’, the ‘Lotus Mahal’ and in numerous gateways, watchtowers and water pavilions. At the heart of the capital’s Royal Centre stands a great audience hall of 100 columns, forty metres square, whose design closely adheres to those found in Persianate courts elsewhere in India and the Iranian plateau, the forerunner of which reaches back to the Hall of a Hundred Columns in Persepolis \(fifth century BC\), capital of the ancient Persian empire. Serving as a stage for enacting courtly rituals, receiving foreign emissaries and displaying the court’s cosmopolitan identity, the Royal Centre made manifest the rulers’ claims to being sultans among Indian kings.

Commerce and military concerns also linked Vijayanagara with the Persianate world. The base of the capital’s great ceremonial platform known as the Mahanavami Dibba, built in stages between the fourteenth and early sixteenth centuries, is adorned with bas-relief panels that depict, among others, foreign merchants. Appearing to be Turks from Central Asia, these men lead their horses to be received by the king and his attendants.10 Such images point to the state’s chronic dependence on war-horses imported from the Persian Gulf region and its active participation in maritime commercial networks. Far more numerous than foreign merchants were the Muslim soldiers recruited into the state’s army. In 1430 Deva Raya II employed 10,000 Turkish troops in his armed forces, and in 1535 Rama Raya \(d. 1565\) recruited 3,000 Iranian and Turkish troops.11 Tombs and mosques located in the urban core north-east of the Royal Centre indicate where they and their officers were settled. Krishna Raya \(r. 1509–29\) so valued his Muslim soldiers that in his 1520 invasion of Raichur he placed them in the vanguard of his troops.12 And in the capital itself, we find sculptures of Turkic – and presumably Muslim – warriors guarding the precincts of the city’s Hindu temples. On a free-standing hall in the walled compound of the city’s Vitthala Temple, the city’s most politically important temple in the sixteenth century, such warriors are depicted, three-quarters human in size, riding rearing lion-like beasts and armed with diverse weapons.13



## SUCCESSORS TO THE BAHMANI STATE

The Bahmani court’s efforts to recruit talent from the Persian-speaking world came at heavy cost. As more so-called Westerners – ethnic Persians and Turks – arrived from across the Arabian Sea and acquired positions of influence, the kingdom’s native Muslims, the Deccanis, felt increasingly embittered and alienated. This class was descended from north Indian immigrants who, such as Gisudaraz’s parents, had settled in the Deccan from the 1320s, when the Tughluqs established Daulatabad as their empire-wide co-capital. Born in the Deccan, this class spoke indigenous languages in addition to an early form of Hindavi called Dakani. And, to a far greater extent than Westerners, they had adopted the plateau as their natural home. During their successful struggle against the Tughluq regime in Delhi, they had positioned themselves against north Indians. But after achieving independence from Delhi, their rivals became the Westerners, whom they viewed as interlopers who had been given preferential treatment by the court. The differences between the two groups were therefore both political and cultural. By the mid fifteenth century a de facto apartheid system had emerged. In Bidar’s Hall of Public Audience, Westerners attending court stood to the right-hand side of the throne and the Deccanis to the left. While on military campaigns, the two factions continuously clashed, each side blaming the other for insubordination, cowardice, even treason.

As prime minister, Mahmud Gawan had addressed these tensions by decreasing the influence of both Deccani and Westerner *amir*s. To minimize quarrelling over lands coveted by either faction he increased the size of those controlled directly by the court; he also forbade *amir*s to have charge of more than a single fort. But the minister’s many months away from the capital directing military campaigns only gave his enemies opportunities to conspire behind his back, as one chronicler put it, ‘like wounded vipers, writhing in the torment of jealousy’.14 Gawan himself wrote: ‘Out of sheer malice they would kill each other and make me the object of all the wrongs which it is in their power to perpetrate.’15 In this vicious atmosphere the minister, himself a Westerner, became the object of conspiracies hatched by disaffected Deccanis. In 1481 members of that faction plied his seal-bearer with gifts and then gave him a blank sheet of paper that required Gawan’s seal. Told that it was only a routine document, the seal-bearer obligingly stamped it. The conspirators then filled in the document with treasonous words purporting to be Gawan’s, inviting a foreign power to invade the kingdom and share the spoils with him. When the sultan was shown the authenticated document he flew into a rage, summoned his minister to court, and forthwith had him beheaded for treason.

From this point on, the Bahmani kingdom fell into a downward spiral from which it never recovered. The deep and intractable Deccani–Westerner rift, and the poisonous intrigues and destructive civil wars it spawned, ultimately undermined the state’s stability. On the one hand, the court was obliged to patronize the Deccanis inasmuch as they were descended from the northern settlers who, having rebelled against Muhammad bin Tughluq, had launched the dynasty. But in order to earn a coveted place in the cosmopolitan Timurid world, rulers in Bidar felt equally obliged to recruit immigrants from the Middle East or Central Asia. In the end, the Deccanis and Westerners represented not just two competing political factions, but two different conceptions of state and society. Each class being legitimate in its own way, neither could be dislodged. Mahmud Gawan’s policy of politically balancing the two classes proved an impossible juggling act: no administrative measure could resolve the ideological rift.

Within a decade of Mahmud Gawan’s execution, the Bahmani kingdom began to disintegrate into five successor states, as provincial governors scrambled to assert their independence. The first to do so was Malik Ahmad, who founded the Nizam Shahi dynasty of Ahmadnagar \(1490–1636\). He was the son of one of the last Bahmani prime ministers, a staunchly partisan Deccani who in the 1480s had aggrandized all power and reduced the sultan to a puppet, exacerbating the perennial Westerner–Deccani conflict. In 1486 he was assassinated, and four years later Malik Ahmad, embittered by the politics of the court and the murder of his father, declared his independence at the fort of Junnar in Maharashtra, where he had been governor. He also established a new capital named after himself, Ahmadnagar, soon to become one of the Deccan’s most important centres of artistic patronage.

Variations on this pattern were now repeated throughout the plateau. To the north, Fath Allah ‘Imad al-Mulk \(r. 1490–1504\), the governor of the Bahmani province of Berar, also grew disgusted with the deteriorating affairs in Bidar and in 1490 declared his independence, founding the ‘Imad Shah sultanate \(1490–1574\) with the fort of Elichpur his capital. About the same time Yusuf ‘Adil Khan \(r. 1490–1510\), the provincial governor of Bijapur, asserted his de facto independence. An immigrant from Ottoman Anatolia, Yusuf declared Shi‘ism Bijapur’s state religion in 1503, shortly after Iran’s new Safavid regime \(1501–1736\) had done the same. Yet he never imposed his faith on Bijapur’s subjects. His son and successor Isma‘il \(r. 1510–34\), by contrast, was far more zealous. Brought up by an aunt who had migrated directly from Iran, Isma‘il seldom spoke Dakani, the language of the Deccani class, and employed only Westerners, banishing all Deccanis from his court. Clearly, the same ethnic poison that had killed the Bahmani parent state had infected its political offspring. In 1519 Isma‘il had the Friday prayers offered for Iran’s Safavid family and ordered his entire army to imitate the Safavid courtly custom of wearing scarlet caps with twelve points, symbolizing the imams of ‘Twelver’ Shi‘ism. Isma‘il’s son Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I, however, identified himself and his regime with his native Deccan and embraced Sunni Islam, the sect of most Deccani Muslims. In a move more dramatically expressing his identification with the plateau’s history and culture, he explicitly invoked the memory of the Kalyana Chalukyas \(974–1190\), one of the peninsula’s most illustrious imperial dynasties. Bijapur itself had once been an important Chalukya provincial centre known by its Sanskrit name, Vijayapura. The sultan referenced the past by placing Chalukya inscription tablets and a stunning ensemble of twenty-four Chalukya columns in conspicuous locations in his citadel’s grand gateway, the kingdom’s most public space.16

Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah’s son and successor ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah I \(r. 1558–80\), however, reoriented the dynasty’s sectarian affiliation back to Shi‘ism. No zealot himself, he was actually a serious intellectual and free-thinker. While on tours or on military campaigns he would take cartloads of books with him for his personal use. He invited Portuguese clerics to his capital so that he could learn about Christian tenets.17 His crowning intellectual achievement was to author a remarkable text, the *Nujum al-‘ulum*, or ‘Stars of the Sciences’, which, composed in Persian but replete with Dakani words, drew on Indic, Islamic, Greek and Turkic traditions to render a comprehensive vision of medieval Deccani courtly knowledge. Blending astrology, incantations, conjuring, talismans, omens, the interpretation of dreams, alchemy, poetry, music and martial skills, the text aimed at transforming a culturally diverse and politically divided body of courtiers into a cohesive whole. It was also lavishly illustrated with miniature paintings that artfully blended the Persianate and Sanskrit worlds. The planet Mars, for example, is depicted as a hero wearing a leopard helmet, which is associated with Rustam, the most celebrated hero of Persian mythology. But he also holds a trident, associated with the god Śiva. In another painting, the text depicts an anthropomorphic image of the sun drawn in Central Asian style, driving a chariot across the sky like the god Helios in Greek mythology. But the figure also holds a conch shell and a mace, which are associated with the god Vishnu.18 The text’s royal author thus emerges as a thoroughly cosmopolitan figure, epitomizing the degree to which the Deccan plateau had, by the mid sixteenth century, become a crossroads of diverse cultural traditions.

In the Bahmanis’ former capital of Bidar itself, the last Bahmani prime minister, Qasim Barid \(d. 1505\), established the Barid Shahi dynasty more or less by default, as he found himself effectively marooned in the old Bahmani capital, abandoned by rebellious provincial governors who, one by one, had withdrawn their support for the central government. Although the sultanate of Bidar \(*c*.1490–1619\) inherited the substantial fortifications and outworks of the last Bahmani capital, together with the palaces and audience halls that recalled the formerly united kingdom, it was also the smallest and weakest of that kingdom’s five successor states.

Finally, in the eastern Deccan another migrant from Iran, Sultan Quli \(r. 1497–1543\), had been appointed Bahmani governor of Telangana in 1496 with the title Qutb al-Mulk. But he soon asserted his independence, founding the Qutb Shahi dynasty, with his capital at the famous hill fort of Golconda. On the death of Sultan Quli Qutb Shah in 1543, his son Jamshid \(r. 1543–50\) blinded his elder brother and seized the throne. Anticipating the same fate for himself, Jamshid’s younger brother Ibrahim prudently fled south to the court of Vijayanagara, where he spent seven years as a guest of that state’s autocrat, Rama Raya, immersing himself in Telugu poetry and his host’s courtly culture. When Jamshid died in 1550, a coalition of Telugu and Westerner commanders met at the fort of Koilkonda \(100 kilometres south-west of Hyderabad\), where they resolved to invite Prince Ibrahim to return to Golconda and rule the kingdom.19 Ibrahim accepted the invitation and marched from Vijayanagara to Koilkonda, from where he was escorted to the Qutb Shahi throne.

Golconda’s hybridized culture is seen in the remarkable career of ‘Abd al-Qadir Amin Khan \(fl. 1568–83\), a prominent *amir* and a Deccani with long-standing family roots in India.20 At Patancheru, thirty kilometres north-west of Hyderabad, he patronized the construction of a mosque and a tomb for himself, the latter bearing an elegant Persian inscription indicating his humility, his piety and his devotion to a local Sufi shaikh. At the same time, he employed a Brahmin as his personal secretary and established a tax-free village \(*agraharam*\), ‘Aminpuram’, for the support of traditional Brahmin priests. He was also an enthusiastic patron of Telugu literature, commissioning a Telugu adaptation of part of the *Mahabharata* epic. Titled the *Yayati Caritramu*, this is the first known work that sought to ‘purify’ Telugu of its Sanskrit loan words, and as such compares with the *Shah-nama*, in which the epic poet Firdausi had endeavoured to do the same for modern Persian by minimizing his work’s use of Arabic loan words. There is even evidence that the Telugu poet was inspired by Firdausi’s example.21

The cultural achievements that appeared in the reigns of Golconda’s Sultan Ibrahim Qutb Shah and Bijapur’s ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah I were not isolated phenomena. The entire period from 1565 to the Mughal conquest in the 1680s enjoyed unprecedented peace, prosperity and artistic florescence. It was a golden age for the principal Deccani sultanates, whose great wealth, based especially on the production and export of textile fabrics, astonished foreign visitors. In the imagination of Europeans – and later, of Americans – Golconda in particular became synonymous with fabulous wealth, thanks to European merchants who travelled to that city’s bazaars and gave glowing accounts of the fine diamonds taken from nearby mines.22 The best evidence of Deccan-wide prosperity is the significant urbanization that took place in this period. Older cities such as Daulatabad were greatly enlarged to accommodate growing urban populations, while entirely new cities also appeared – most prominently Hyderabad, which Ibrahim’s successor, Sultan Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah \(r. 1580–1612\), founded in 1591.

Located several kilometres from Golconda fort and centred on the famous Charminar monument, Hyderabad is often called an ‘Islamic city’. But in reality, its layout and design reflect the aesthetic sensibilities of the new social classes that had attained prominence in the late-sixteenth-century eastern Deccan. One of those groups, the *nayakwari*s, were Telugu-speaking Hindu warriors whose political prominence dates back to the Kakatiya period. Although *nayakwari* families maintained strong ties to particular ancestral locales, the more successful among them enjoyed a good deal of mobility, moving easily from one chieftain or court to another, offering their military service in exchange for estates where they could maintain their troops. As suppliers of soldiers to would-be patrons, they served in the Deccan’s military labour market, which operated much like its counterpart in contemporary north India. As a class, Telangana’s *nayakwari*s were thoroughly familiar with Persianate courtly practices and had adopted Persianate military and administrative technology.23

Another prominent group in sixteenth-century Golconda were the Niyogis. These were worldly-oriented Telugu Brahmins who had given up their caste’s traditional priestly roles to assume salaried political and administrative appointments in the Qutb Shahi sultanate. Whereas most of them served as village accountants, maintaining official records such as tax ledgers, others kept records for towns, or served as governors, diplomats to neighbouring states, or court advisers. The prosperity of the Qutb Shahi sultanate depended upon its ability to recruit talent from all its four most powerful constituent groups – Deccanis, Westerners, *nayakwari* warriors and Niyogi Brahmins – and the willingness of their members to act in concert with one another politically, as happened when *nayakwari*s and Westerners collaborated in raising Ibrahim Qutb Shah to power.

Given the prominence of Niyogi Brahmins and *nayakwari*s in Golconda’s ruling structure, it is not surprising that, when planning his new city of Hyderabad near Golconda fort, Sultan Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah drew upon the aesthetic and material legacy of Telangana’s most important regional dynasty. These were the Kakatiya kings, who had established their capital at Warangal towards the end of the twelfth century. Located 140 kilometres north-east of Golconda, Warangal is South Asia’s best surviving example of a city replicating classical Indian conceptions of the world – that is, a great circular continent divided in four quarters and surrounded by a series of ring-shaped oceans, with the cosmic mountain Meru, where Śiva dwells, lying at its centre. At Warangal, the area within the inner, stone wall replicated the central continent, in the middle of which stood a great temple that was dedicated to Śiva and represented Mount Meru. Beyond the stone wall lay a moat representing a cosmic sea, with a second, outer wall and moat corresponding to the sea surrounding a second, ring-shaped continent and another sea. Standing at cardinal directions around the temple precincts, four majestic ceremonial gateways symbolized the sources of four rivers that flow outwards from Mount Meru, defining the universe’s four quarters.

Although Warangal’s Śiva temple had been demolished by the Tughluq prince Ulugh Khan when he seized the city in 1323, Qutb Shahi authorities in Golconda were well aware of Warangal’s cosmographic plan and its homology between Śiva as the lord of the universe and the Kakatiya king as lord of the human realm. The Qutb Shahis had ruled Warangal throughout the sixteenth century, and Telugu histories of the Kakatiyas had begun to appear from around 1550. Telugu verses praising Ibrahim Qutb Shah specifically connected that sultan with Mount Meru, identifying him as a *chakravartin* \(‘world-conqueror’\) who had crossed the seven seas and circled the seven continents of classic Indian mythology. All this suggests that for Qutb Shahi elites – whether *nayakwari*, Westerner, Niyogi Brahmin or Deccani – Warangal’s open plaza and four ceremonial gateways carried rich memories of the Kakatiya past and were powerfully redolent of imperial domination.

The physical parallels between Warangal and Hyderabad are also striking.24 Both cities were built on a plain seven kilometres south-east of a former capital and hill fort – Hanamkonda and Golconda respectively. Like Warangal, Hyderabad was laid out on a four-quartered plan produced by four avenues extending in cardinal directions from a distinctive structure that indicated the crossing point of those four avenues. Both cities featured a broad, open plaza defined by four lofty gateways, or *torana*s, located immediately north of that central crossing point. At Warangal these are the central plaza’s four ceremonial gateways, and in Hyderabad, four great portals, the ‘Char Kaman’. In both cities a palace complex was situated immediately west of the plaza, with which it was axially aligned. At Warangal, that palace was the well-preserved Tughluq audience hall, the so-called ‘Khush Mahal’ \[see Fig. 3\], and at Hyderabad it was the Qutb Shahi royal palace, subsequently destroyed. Most strikingly, in Warangal a simple, two-storeyed open-pillared structure, a *chaubara*, stands to the south-west of the plaza in the precise centre of the fort where Warangal’s four roads meet. Taking the idea of Warangal’s *chaubara* as marking the centre of the Kakatiya capital, Muhammad Quli built to the south of Hyderabad’s plaza what has become the most iconic monument of the Deccan, the famous Charminar, which marks both the city’s centre and the intersection of its principal avenues. Far more complex and sophisticated than Warangal’s *chaubara*, the Charminar features spacious arches, a domed chamber, two upper storeys, a mezzanine, arcades with views looking outwards, four tall minarets and at the topmost level a sumptuously decorated mosque.

As Hyderabad was established in 1591, corresponding to the year 1000 in the Islamic calendar, the city’s founding also inaugurated the second millennium of Islam. This would explain an important difference between these two structures: whereas Warangal’s *chaubara* is aligned with the cardinal directions, the Charminar is aligned with Mecca, which at Hyderabad’s latitude turns the structure ten degrees clockwise from cardinal directions. On the other hand, at the interior apex of the Charminar’s uppermost storey is a large solar lotus – the iconic Indian symbol of life and energy – with twelve smaller lotuses placed around it in the manner of the zodiac. In this way, the Charminar combined Indic and Persianate forms, while it was set in a city whose layout had been inspired by the memory of Telangana’s most famous regional dynasty, the Kakatiyas of Warangal. The monument may be understood, then, as one of India’s most eloquent visual representations of the interpenetration of the Indic and Persianate worlds.



## POLITICAL AND CULTURAL EVOLUTION AT VIJAYANAGARA

Long before Sultan Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah began planning the city of Hyderabad, royal patrons in the sprawling kingdom of Vijayanagara had already built the monumental temple complexes that, in popular imagination, remain iconic images of that state. In their metropolitan capital, kings regularly sponsored huge public processions and ceremonies taking place over several days that were enacted in elaborately built structures near their palaces or in the city’s temple complexes. Long chariot streets, tanks, multi-pillar halls and colonnades lining inner enclosure walls – all were prominent features of these complexes.

The capital’s oldest temple complexes appeared in its Sacred Centre, the well-defined quarter near the southern banks of the Tungabhadra, originating with the one dedicated to the goddess Pampa and a form of Śiva locally called Virupaksha \[see Fig. 4\]. Here, progressively greater Tamil influence can be seen in a cluster of temples associated with the first four Sangama rulers, spanning the period from the mid fourteenth to the early fifteenth centuries. This is readily understandable, since very early in the kingdom’s history, between 1352 and 1371, royal armies from the upland plateau conquered most of the fertile and prosperous Tamil country to the south and east of the dry interior that formed the core of the Vijayanagara state. Prolonged contact between Vijayanagara’s political centre and its wealthy coastal provinces led, among other things, to the imperial city’s gradual assimilation of the rich heritage of classical Tamil architecture, including such elements as heavily carved pyramidal entrance towers with their distinctive barrel-vaulted roofs.

Vijayanagara’s conquests in India’s deep south also had religious and ideological consequences. From the mid fourteenth century through to the mid sixteenth, as an increasingly diverse range of peoples and cultures were brought under its rule, the state evolved an ever more synthesized, cosmopolitan courtly style.25 We have noted the extent to which the kingdom’s elite classes had been assimilated into an expanding Persianate world. Eschewing the status of a regional kingdom, Vijayanagara also patronized a range of religious traditions that included Śaiva, Vaishnava and Jain, together with Islamic institutions. The Sangama brothers, who had founded the state in 1347, declared their official deity to be Virupaksha. Down to the mid sixteenth century, the kingdom’s official documents continued to be authenticated in the presence of the icon representing that god in the city’s Virupaksha temple. From the early fifteenth century onwards, however, ruling authorities gave increasing patronage to the god Vishnu in his various manifestations, or *avatar*s. The trend began with Deva Raya I, who built the Ramachandra Temple, a magnificent structure dedicated to the Vaishnava deity Rama, in the heart of the Royal Centre. In building this temple, the king made efficient use of the city’s mythic landscape, inasmuch as the Tungabhadra next to which it stands, together with the hills to the north and east of the Royal Centre, are all associated with an important episode in the *Ramayana* epic. This is the Kishkindha section, in which Rama meets and secures the help of monkey heroes in his quest to rescue his abducted wife, Sita. However, even though the mythic associations of Rama with Vijayanagara’s landscape had probably preceded the founding of the capital, the Sangama founders of the dynasty never mentioned Rama in their inscriptions, patronizing Virupaksha instead.

As a solution to this growing tension over which deity would be recognized as the dynasty’s Cosmic Overlord – the Śaiva god Virupaksha or the Vaishnava god Rama – recent research has proposed that, throughout the fifteenth century, Vijayanagara’s rulers practised a hybrid royal theology. Kings presented themselves as ideal *devotees* of Śiva in the form of Virupaksha, but as ideal *kings* in the manner of Rama, an *avatar* of Vishnu.26 But in the late fifteenth century when the Sangama house was overthrown by Saluva Narasimha \(r. 1485–91\), a warlord based at the stronghold of Chandragiri on the northern Tamil plain, the new king openly favoured the Vaishnava deity Venkateśvara, the lord of the popular shrine at Tirupati in southern Andhra. From Narasimha’s reign on, south India’s pilgrimage centre at Tirupati grew dramatically in importance, both for the general population and for the state’s rulers. Whereas before the Vijayanagara period only 150 inscriptions at Tirupati referred to the shrine’s benefactors, that figure rose to 480 in the short period between 1509 and 1542, when the state had attained its height of cultural and political influence. Vijayanagara’s most famous monarch, Krishna Raya, made Venkateśvara his patron deity and visited Tirupati seven times. His successor, Achyuta Raya \(r. 1529–42\), performed several coronation ceremonies, the first of which occurred at Tirupati in the presence of Venkateśvara.27 In 1544 the state altogether ceased authenticating official documents before the Śaiva god Virupaksha, as it had been doing for nearly two centuries; from then on, they were authenticated before another Vaishnava deity, Vitthala, locally identified with Krishna.28 This change in sectarian affiliation is also reflected in the state’s minted gold coins. Between 1377 and 1424, following Vijayanagara’s conquest of the Tamil coastal area, state coins bore mixed Śaiva and Vaishnava images, whereas after 1509 most of the coins’ motifs were exclusively Vaishnava in nature.29

It was in this last phase of metropolitan Vijayanagara’s historical evolution, the first half of the sixteenth century, that its theology most closely matched its imperial ambitions. Having expanded over most of the southern portion of the Indian peninsula, its sovereigns incorporated in the heart of their capital temples dedicated to cults specific to regions they had conquered, or which they aspired to conquer. The city’s temple complex dedicated to Balakrishna – the god Krishna as an infant – was specially built in the Sacred Centre to commemorate Krishna Raya’s 1513 victory over the Gajapati raja at Udayagiri near the Andhra coast. It also houses the Krishna image that was taken from Udayagiri to Vijayanagara. Similarly, the Vitthala Temple complex, the bulk of which dates to the early sixteenth century, reproduces in the imperial capital the worship of Vitthala, which had been centred in Pandharpur, 280 kilometres north-west of Vijayanagara. In 1534 Achyuta Raya built the capital city’s Tiruvengalanatha Temple, which replicates the Venkateśvara Temple at Tirupati, located 120 kilometres north-west of modern Chennai. In this manner, the later kings gathered into their imperial centre ritual representations of the state’s most important constituent sovereign territories, or \(as in the case of Pandharpur\) would-be territories: Virupaksha for the state’s core in Karnataka, Venkateśvara for the Tamil and southern Andhra country, Balakrishna for the coastal districts and Vitthala for the northern Deccan. The state’s imperial pantheon, made visual in its capital’s built landscape, thus fused its theology with its sovereign territory.

Vijayanagara’s economic history also experienced dramatic changes between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Two distinct periods of the kingdom’s economic growth are seen in the pattern of reservoir construction, projects that were essential to agrarian life in a region as arid as the Deccan plateau. During the century between the state’s founding in 1347 and 1450, thirty-five reservoirs were built in its core region, and twenty more in the first half of the sixteenth century. Between these two peaks of reservoir-construction, however, there was a lull from 1450 to 1500, when only three reservoirs are known to have been constructed on the plateau.30 Nor were any major temples built at this time, or many stone or copperplate inscriptions issued. Whereas the state continuously minted gold and copper coins between 1347 and 1446, only copper coins were issued for the next several decades, and for the next four decades after that no new coins appeared at all.31

This dramatic decline in cultural and economic activity is associated with a period of devastating drought-induced famines that struck the Deccan in the fifteenth century, which in turn triggered a marked decline in agricultural production, land revenue and population. This was exacerbated by the state’s chronic inability to harmonize the agrarian economy of the dry, upland plateau with the highly commercialized economy of the Tamil coast. Until the early 1500s, the plateau and coast practically lived in two separate economic worlds, as is seen in patterns of textile production and consumption. Along the coast, the port of Pulicat had emerged in the fifteenth century as a major centre for the export of textiles produced in both the Coromandel low country and the Kaveri delta. By the early sixteenth century, Pulicat’s annual textile exports to the South-east Asian port of Malacca were estimated to be worth 175,000 Portuguese *cruzados*,32 reflecting the integration of the heavily commercialized coastal region with the trading world of the wider Indian Ocean. The boom had also improved the lives of Tamil weavers, who in the course of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries won the right to ride in palanquins and blow conch shells on ritual occasions, a sure sign of their rising social status.33

Notably, the Coromandel coast’s manufacturing and commercial boom in the late fifteenth century coincided with the economic stagnation in Vijayanagara’s agrarian heartland. Although the court itself appears to have been consuming increasing amounts of cloth in this period, much of it produced on the Coromandel coast, the kingdom’s upland core region proved unable to profit fiscally from the coastal boom. In 1513 coastal weaving communities even induced the government to rescind an order that would have increased taxes on their looms.34 The court’s inability to impose and collect taxes on such a crucial sector of the economy points to the central government’s structural weakness with respect to its rich coastal provinces. An early sign of this came in the form of a major tax revolt. In 1429 communities of cultivators and artisans in the Kaveri delta, which Vijayanagara had conquered and annexed sixty years earlier, rose up in a widespread rebellion protesting the oppressive taxes imposed by imperial administrators.35 After that revolt, Vijayanagara’s central administration maintained only a loose grip over its Tamil province.36 As a result, the state’s core upland region failed to benefit from the economic boom then occurring in the Tamil country. As one historian remarks, ‘the Kaveri milch-cow of resources for a central Vijayanagara exchequer proved difficult to milk’.37

What is more, the rich Coromandel coast and its considerable wealth soon served as a power base for a succession of military commanders who would shape the state’s destiny. The pattern had already begun in the reign of Deva Raya II, who had granted considerable autonomy to powerful military commanders after the Kaveri delta tax revolt of 1429. In 1456 Saluva Narasimha began making generous endowments to the nearby Tirupati Temple complex, already the most important pilgrimage centre in south India. In the 1470s, gathering supporters through his military prowess and his continued patronage of the Tirupati shrine, he seized control over the entire Coromandel coast from the hill fort of Udayagiri in modern Nellore District down to Rameśwaram, adjacent to Sri Lanka. Although he remained for some time nominally subordinate to his royal overlord in the capital, in 1485 he became the first Vijayanagara general to overthrow the state’s ruling Sangama dynasty and establish a new one, the Saluva.

A violent pattern had now set in. In 1505 the son and successor of the new dynasty’s founder was himself overthrown by Tuluva Vira Narasimha \(r. 1505–9\), the son of Saluva Narasimha’s chief minister. He then founded Vijayanagara’s third dynasty, the Tuluvas. In 1509 he was succeeded by his half-brother Krishna Raya, the most famous of the kingdom’s rulers. Krishna Raya is celebrated for an unbroken string of military conquests that brought enormous wealth to the capital and helped end the state’s half-century of economic stagnation. The victories began in 1509, when at Koilkonda, 100 kilometres south-west of Hyderabad, he defeated the last remnant of Bahmani power, Sultan Mahmud along with Yusuf ‘Adil Khan, the founder of the fledgling sultanate of Bijapur. The king then led his armies southwards and seized Penukonda, Śrirangapattanam and Śivasamudram from the chiefs of the powerful Ummattur family. In 1513, turning to the southern Andhra coast, he reconquered the fort of Udayagiri, which had fallen into the hands of the Gajapati kings of Orissa. Two years later his armies took from the Gajapatis the fort of Kondavidu in the Krishna delta. In 1517 he took Vijayavada and Kondapalli, also in that delta, and then Rajahmundry, further up the coast in the Godavari delta. With the help of Portuguese mercenary musketeers, in 1520 he reconquered from Bijapur the rich Raichur region, an area that, lying between the Krishna and Tungabhadra Rivers, his Sangama predecessors had perennially contested with the Bahmani sultans. In 1523 he penetrated further north and seized, but chose not to hold, Gulbarga.

Thus ended fourteen years of uninterrupted military success. Especially notable was the king’s brief capture of Gulbarga, the Bahmanis’ second capital and a venerable site of Persianate culture in the Deccan. While he had the city in his grasp, Krishna Raya provocatively ‘appointed’ one of the sons of the last Bahmani sultan as the new Bahmani ruler – even though that state was by then defunct – and styled himself ‘the one who brings about the \(re\)establishment of Yavana \[Turkish\] rule’. This insolent gesture was probably made in retaliation for the Bahmanis’ reduction of Vijayanagara to tributary status for most of the first half of the fifteenth century. The boast also affirmed that he, Krishna Raya, now claimed to be the political arbiter of the entire Deccan, capable of establishing – or in this case, renewing – Turkish power. Never before had a ruler of Vijayanagara so brazenly intruded in the affairs of the northern Deccan. Once back in his capital and securely in power, Krishna Raya refrained from planting his kinsmen in central ministries or in command of major forts. Rather, he continued the state’s earlier practice of hiring large numbers of mercenary troops – Deccani and Westerner cavalry, Portuguese gunners – and of placing Brahmins, not kinsmen, in command of the kingdom’s prominent forts. Such measures were aimed at checking the power of quasi-independent warlords. After all, he was well aware of the pattern whereby earlier warlords, including his own half-brother Vira Narasimha, had used major forts as power bases to launch new dynasties.

Accompanying Krishna Raya on his military campaigns was Rama Raya, a chieftain of the Aravidu clan whose performance so impressed the king that he gave him his daughter in marriage. Born in 1484 in Kurnool District, south-western Andhra, Rama Raya began his career in the service of Quli Qutb Shah, the founder of the sultanate at Golconda. That the son of a prominent Vijayanagara general could so readily enrol in Golconda’s service suggests that in the Deccan, as in north India in this age, loyalty to family, faction or paymaster counted far more than loyalty to land, religion or ethnic group. But his service at Golconda lasted only three years. In 1515 Golconda’s neighbour to the west, Bijapur, invaded some districts that were under his charge, and instead of defending his fort he fled back to Golconda. Considering this an act of cowardice, the sultan dismissed the Telugu warrior, who then took up service with Krishna Raya. Once in Vijayanagara’s service, Rama Raya systematically gathered power around himself, his immediate family and his extended lineage, the Aravidu clan. Although Krishna Raya had named his other half-brother, Achyuta Raya, his successor, when the king died in 1529 Rama Raya tried to subvert his father-in-law’s choice by having the late king’s infant son proclaimed king and himself regent. Although the attempted power-grab was blocked by the kingdom’s nobility, Rama Raya exploited his position as minister and his marital connection with the late Krishna Raya by arranging that the command of key forts in the heartland – Adoni, Kurnool and Nandyal – be transferred to his Aravidu kinsmen. This marked an important step in Vijayanagara’s transition to a patrimonial state. Also, like Saluva Narasimha before him, Rama Raya showered lavish patronage on the shrine of Venkateśvara at Tirupati, which had earlier proved such a useful stepping stone to the throne. Whereas Achyuta Raya had granted forty-three villages for the benefit of the shrine at Tirupati, Rama Raya bestowed sixty.38

Rama Raya also benefited from political events to the north of the Krishna. In 1535, Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I of Bijapur dismissed all but 400 of his Westerner troops and replaced them with Deccanis. In another instance of elite mobility across the plateau, Rama Raya recruited the 3,000 Westerners dismissed by the sultan, most of them Shi‘i immigrants from Iran.39 When Achyuta Raya died in 1542 and was succeeded by his youthful son, the kingdom’s regent attempted to seize the throne for himself by wiping out nearly the entire ruling Tuluva family. This heinous act so alienated the nobility that Rama Raya, who had fled to one of his estates during the chaos in the capital, suddenly emerged as the rallying point for the kingdom’s salvation. In a rare public display of their covert power, the queens of the royal harem ordered the nobles to hand over the city to Rama Raya, who in the meantime had consolidated his grip over the major forts of the interior uplands. Gathering together large armies from these regions, in 1543 he triumphantly marched up to the capital, where he was hailed as a political saviour.

Riding by Rama Raya’s side through the city’s gates were his two brothers and Sadaśiva, the sole remnant of the ruling Tuluva dynasty to have escaped the violence of the preceding months. The sixteen-year old, a nephew of Krishna Raya whom Rama Raya had spirited off to an interior fort during the turmoil in the capital, would now serve as Rama Raya’s ticket to supreme power. Forgoing the more perilous path of seizing the throne for himself, Rama Raya chose the easier one of organizing Sadaśiva’s formal coronation, with himself as regent. This arrangement lasted until 1550, when Sadaśiva tried to assert himself, to which the regent responded by simply imprisoning his charge, allowing him but one public appearance a year. By now Vijayanagara had become a fully patrimonial state, as Rama Raya appointed his own Aravidu kinsmen as commanders of its principal forts, as high officials at court, and as governors over territories as distant as Sri Lanka. In 1562, he even discontinued the formality of allowing the hapless Sadaśiva his annual public viewing. Though stopping just short of having himself crowned, Rama Raya had emerged as the state’s supreme autocrat.40

To legitimize his power-grab, Rama Raya associated himself and his family with the long-defunct but once mighty and still prestigious Chalukya dynasty, which had ruled over the entire plateau between 973 and 1183 from its capital in Kalyana, in the heart of the Deccan. As in north India, where upwardly mobile chieftains employed specialists to support their claims to Rajput status, court poets and genealogists substantiated the claims that Rama Raya and his Aravidu kinsmen were directly descended from the Chalukya kings of Kalyana. As early as the 1540s, in the early days of his ascent to power, Rama Raya’s family members were praised with titles such as ‘Founder of the kingdom of Kalyana’, ‘Born in the Chalukya line’ and even ‘Chalukya emperor’. Subsequent Telugu poets not only claimed that Rama Raya had descended from the Kalyana Chalukya emperors, but assigned him exalted titles such as ‘Radiant king of Kalyana’, ‘Lord of the excellent city of Kalyana’ and ‘The one who captured the city of Kalyana’.41 Of course such claims had no basis in fact since Kalyana, located 300 kilometres north of Vijayanagara, had for more than two centuries been under the rule of the Tughluqs, the Bahmanis and, in Rama Raya’s own day, the sultanate of Bidar.

Rama Raya’s preoccupation with the Chalukya dynasty and its ancient capital of Kalyana did not stop with titular claims. For more than twenty years, mixing high-handed diplomacy with outright warfare, he worked to ensure that whichever northern sultan he was at the moment allied with also controlled Kalyana, as though that sultan were an intermediary vassal between himself and the former Chalukya capital. Because his own army was larger than that of any of the five northern sultanates, and because those mutually hostile kingdoms were often at war with one another, Rama Raya was able to play them off against each other. This he did from 1543 to 1565 with consummate skill, becoming ever more arrogant and audacious as he methodically humbled one proud sultan after another. In particular, Sultan Husain Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar was brought to his knees, on one occasion being compelled to eat *pan* \(betel nut\) from the autocrat’s own hand. While returning to his capital after a second occasion of humiliating that ruler, Rama Raya gratuitously plundered and annexed several districts belonging to Golconda, and even some belonging to his current ally, ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah I of Bijapur.

But this time, the scheming octogenarian had overplayed his hand. Four northern sultanates – Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, Golconda and Bidar – suspended their mutual hostilities and combined their forces to challenge the grand army of Vijayanagara. Gathering in December 1564 in the town of Talikota, just north of the Krishna, the four armies forded that river and in late January 1565 engaged an enormous Vijayanagara army near the river’s southern shores. The momentous Battle of Talikota would be Rama Raya’s last. During the conflict he suffered a spear wound that dislodged him from his horse. Snatched by the trunk of one of the coalition’s elephants, he was taken at once to the tent of Sultan Husain Nizam Shah who, confronting his bitter adversary for the last time, ordered him to be beheaded on the spot. His head was then stuffed with straw and displayed to his troops on the tip of a spear. Demoralized, the Vijayanagara army now completely disintegrated. Rama Raya’s brother Tirumala, blinded in one eye, rushed from the battlefield to the capital, where he released Sadaśiva from prison, picked up his family and hastily quit the city just before the advancing allies reached it.

While Tirumala and Sadaśiva were busy transferring the capital to the fort of Penukonda 200 kilometres to the south-east and reconstituting the state there, the victorious allies spent the next six months looting the Vijayanagara metropolis. The once-great city now lost its eminence, as well as most of its population. Wandering about the desolate site several years after the great battle, the Venetian traveller Cesare Federici described the place as ‘not altogether destroyed, yet the houses stand still, but emptie, and there is dwelling in them nothing as is reported, but Tygres and other wild beasts’.42



## GUNPOWDER TECHNOLOGY IN THE DECCAN

The drama that played out between Vijayanagara and its northern adversaries took place against the backdrop of a military revolution – or, as some historians would say, *the* military revolution.43 The term conventionally refers to the socio-political transformations that occurred in early modern Europe following the advent of large siege cannon capable of smashing the tall, vertical walls of medieval forts. It is widely assumed that such technologies and transformations first appeared in Europe and then diffused to the rest of the world in the early period of European colonialism, the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. However, the presence of gun-ports built into the walls of forts at Bidar, Kalyana and Raichur indicate that as early as the 1460s cannon were being used defensively in the heart of the plateau. In the early 1470s the Bahmani minister Mahmud Gawan directed military operations in which he seems to have referred to the use of siege cannon. By the beginning of the sixteenth century, Portuguese merchant-soldiers who had just entered the Indian Ocean reported the presence of artillery in cities along India’s western coast. And in 1510, when Portuguese naval squadrons captured the strategic seaport of Goa from the sultan of Bijapur, they found the arsenal in that city well stocked with munitions, including adaptations of some of their own firearm technology that had been captured from a naval engagement several years earlier. In the decades preceding 1510, Bijapur’s military engineers in Goa had been assimilating firearm technologies from both Mamluk and Ottoman, as well as European sources. Indeed, Afonso de Albuquerque \(d. 1515\), the viceroy and mastermind of the Portuguese enterprise in the Indian Ocean region, was so impressed with the weaponry manufactured at Goa that he reported to the king of Portugal in 1513 that Muslim gunsmiths there were making firearms of higher quality than those produced in Germany, which the Portuguese had considered the finest anywhere. Albuquerque even sent to Lisbon one of these master gunsmiths, together with samples of heavy cannon made in Goa, with the idea that Portuguese engineers might learn munitions techniques from him.44 Such evidence of technologies moving from India to Europe instead of vice versa challenges the conventional image of Europe as the undisputed font of military technology in the early modern era, and of the rest of the world as its passive recipients.

The first time such techniques were put to use on an Indian battlefield, both defensively and offensively, was at Raichur.45 Located in the fertile tract between the Krishna and the Tungabhadra Rivers, the fortress had long been contested between Vijayanagara and the Bahmani sultans. In the early sixteenth century this fort, defended by 200 heavy cannon positioned along its curtain walls, passed from Bahmani to Bijapuri control. Then in May 1520 Krishna Raya, owing to a dispute with Bijapur’s Isma‘il ‘Adil Khan \(r. 1510–34\), besieged the place, seeking to dismantle its walls with pickaxes and crowbars, for he possessed very few firearms of his own. After the siege had dragged on for weeks with no resolution, news reached the Vijayanagara camp that Isma‘il had mobilized Bijapur’s army to relieve the fort. So Krishna Raya suspended the siege and took 27,600 cavalry up to the Krishna, where he confronted a Bijapuri army of 18,000 cavalry, 150 war-elephants and 400 heavy field cannon. Upon crossing the river, Isma‘il arranged his entire cannon in a single line and ill-advisedly fired all of them at once into Krishna Raya’s massed heavy cavalry. Although the latter’s front lines broke, Vijayanagara’s remaining cavalry divisions swiftly circled behind Bijapur’s artillerymen before they had time to reload their ordnance. This caused panic in the rest of Isma‘il’s army, which Vijayanagara’s archers drove back towards and into the river with great loss of life. The sultan himself barely escaped the debacle. Then, returning to Raichur fort to resume his siege, Krishna Raya was joined by a contingent of Portuguese mercenary sharpshooters, one of whom shot and killed the fort’s governor with a matchlock gun. The next day, 15 June 1520, the dispirited defenders surrendered the fort. The Vijayanagara army thus prevailed against Bijapur both in a pitched battle by the Krishna and at the siege of Raichur.46

Two points stand out regarding the Battle of Raichur. First, the side that possessed what might seem the superior military technology – the 200 cannon defending the fort, and the 400 field cannon at the pitched battle – lost to an army using pickaxes and crowbars at the fort, and mounted archers at the pitched battle. Given the apparent advantages of gunpowder technology, such an outcome might seem counter-intuitive. But in both venues, Bijapur’s forces lost because of their faulty use of firearms. At the fort their cannon, placed on immobile carriages and fixed in their gun-ports, were unable to be easily manoeuvred in any direction, severely reducing their effectiveness. And at the Krishna, instead of firing their cannon in an orderly sequence of staggered volleys, Isma‘il’s artillerymen launched them all at once, enabling Krishna Raya’s remaining ranks of cavalry to attack the Bijapuris from the rear.

Second, the two armies drew exactly opposite conclusions from the battle’s outcome. Krishna Raya, though impressed with the matchlocks used by his Portuguese mercenaries, failed to see firearms as the way of the future. Both in the pitched battle by the river and at the besieged fort he had prevailed against Bijapur’s artillery without making significant use of firearms, which seems to have reinforced the king’s confidence in the efficacy of the conventional technologies and tactics of the day. There is no evidence that he followed up his victories by establishing an arsenal or a matchlock foundry in Vijayanagara. Nor did he or his successors ever mount cannon on the walls of their capital or provincial forts, or in other ways adapt their defensive systems to accommodate gunpowder technology. To the contrary, his victories at Raichur and other sites throughout southern India had the effect of lulling Krishna Raya and his commanders into a state of complacency, with the result that Vijayanagara’s military system stagnated. Apart from hiring some foreign mercenaries adept at using handguns, for the rest of its existence the state of Vijayanagara failed to take gunpowder technology very seriously.

Bijapur, by contrast, responded quite differently to the battle’s outcome, suggesting that the assimilation of new technologies can be a slow, painful process of trial and error, in the course of which failures can be as important as successes. Leaders in Bijapur understood from their twin failures at Raichur that, despite the advances in cannon technology they had made at their Goa arsenal, they needed to learn much more about the development and deployment of firearms, both defensively and offensively. They therefore launched an accelerated drive to pioneer new gunpowder technologies. Strategically, they aimed to control the wide tract of territory lying before their forts, thereby preventing attackers from approaching their walls with siege equipment. To accomplish this, their engineers replaced the fixed, relatively immobile breech-loading wrought-iron cannon on their forts with large, wrought-iron or cast bronze muzzle-loaders that could be manoeuvred both laterally and vertically. From the Ottomans they adopted the technique of the trunnion – that is, the pivot projecting from a cannon’s sides, enabling a gun to be moved up or down. And from the small swivel guns that the Portuguese had placed on the gunwales of their ships, they took the idea of mounting a much larger cannon on a cubic block of granite set on an iron pin, enabling the gun to move horizontally \[see Fig. 8\]. Engineers soon improved on this by replacing the unwieldy granite block with an iron swivel fork. Much of this pioneering experimentation took place in the late 1550s at the hill fort of Yadgir, 150 kilometres south-west of Hyderabad.47

By 1560, huge cannon ranging from two to five metres in length – with the longest of them exceeding nine metres – began appearing mounted on the bastions of forts across the northern plateau. Others were placed on tall, free-standing platforms as high as twenty-seven metres above ground level, giving them 360-degree coverage of the surrounding plains. To accommodate the new guns, forts across the northern Deccan were considerably modified: curtain walls were strengthened, while bastions were equipped with prominent gun-mounts for the big swivel guns. Realizing the superiority of the new technology, Bijapur’s neighbours – Ahmadnagar, Golconda and Bidar – soon engaged in a frenzy of activity to modernize their own forts. Of the Deccan’s seventy-four dated bastions built in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and capable of carrying the new guns, nearly half appeared during the thirty years between 1560 and 1590. At the same time, engineers in the northern Deccan also developed larger and more efficient cannon designed for use in pitched battles.48

Inasmuch as the battlefield is the ultimate test for new weapon systems, the Battle of Talikota of 1565 exposed the wide gap in military technology that had opened up between the northern and southern Deccan since 1520. The outcome of that battle, in which a coalition of northern sultanates completely routed the Vijayanagara army, lay in good part in the latter’s victory at Raichur forty-five years earlier. After defeating Bijapuri forces at both Raichur fort and the Krishna river, Krishna Raya not only failed to integrate the new gunpowder technology into his armed forces; he also exhibited blatant contempt for his adversary, Isma‘il ‘Adil Khan, promising to return to him all the spoils of his victory on the condition that he first come to his court and kiss his foot. When the sultan refused to suffer such a humiliation, the arrogant king marched up to Bijapur and forced Isma‘il to withdraw into the countryside for several days while his forces occupied and plundered the ‘Adil Shahi capital. Participating in these manoeuvres – and evidently taking notes on how to treat the northern sultanates – was Krishna Raya’s son-in-law Rama Raya. Forty-five years later Rama Raya would lead Vijayanagara’s army to catastrophic defeat at the Battle of Talikota. Although the southern kingdom’s forces did possess firepower in that battle, the more efficient use of field artillery by the northern sultanates carried the day. In a tactic resembling that earlier used by the Ottomans against the Safavid rulers of Iran, the coalition forces fastened together 600 cannon of different calibres in three rows, with 200 heavy cannon in the front row, intermediate cannon in the middle and swivel cannon at the back. Masking the artillery were several thousand archers, who showered arrows on Rama Raya’s advancing infantry. When the infantry came within close range, the archers withdrew while the gunners fired two devastating volleys: the first with cannon balls, the second with copper coins that functioned like shrapnel. This repulse decided the outcome. With the Vijayanagara army thrown into disarray and with Rama Raya himself captured and executed, the allies marched straight from the battlefield to loot metropolitan Vijayanagara, which lay defenceless before them.

The innovations in military technology pioneered in the northern Deccan and used with such effect at Talikota found no parallel anywhere in contemporary India, or, for that matter, the world. In Europe, when the advent of cannon enabled attackers to batter down stone walls, defenders of cities or forts responded by building lower, slanting walls so as to give incoming projectiles less of a target to hit, while adding angled, arrow-shaped bastions – the so-called *trace italienne* – to cover blind spots along the walls. In the Deccan, by contrast, engineers built bastions with higher profiles than those they replaced, complete with gun platforms on which their huge swivel cannon could be mounted in order to dominate the countryside. The idea was not to minimize the damage that enemy fire could inflict on a fort, which was the European approach, but to prevent besiegers from approaching close enough to fire at all. The reason that states in the Deccan took this path followed from the region’s unique topography, with its many hilltops spiking up from an otherwise flat plateau. For centuries prior to the advent of gunpowder, Deccanis had taken advantage of the plateau’s naturally hilly terrain by building forts on its many promontories. Being easier to defend than plains forts, hill forts enabled chieftains to control the surrounding countryside by using both the stick of coercion – that is, a fort’s garrisoned cavalry – and the carrot of holding, or withholding, grain stored in their granaries. Power itself was therefore understood in terms of seizing prominent heights in order to dominate the peoples below. With this background, when firearms reached the Deccan, it seemed natural to adapt the new gunpowder technologies to serve a familiar strategy, which meant building upwards and placing larger cannon on higher positions.



## CULTURAL PRODUCTION IN THE GUNPOWDER AGE

As modernized forts began to appear across the plateau, the balance of military advantage tipped from attackers to defenders. Besieging armies found it difficult or impossible to seize reconstituted forts, which thereafter virtually ceased changing hands. For the first time since the emergence of the five sultanates in the early sixteenth century, the Deccan’s internal frontiers stabilized. As this occurred, the cultural production of the northern sultanates grew in quantity and became more differentiated in quality. For example, for the first seven or eight decades of their independent existence, the Deccan’s four principal sultanates used existing stocks of Bahmani and Vijayanagara coins, which remained in circulation during that period. But then, between 1578 and 1584 – shortly after the northern Deccan’s internal borders had stabilized – each of the region’s sultanates began minting its own coins, reflecting an awareness of, and a desire to express, their distinctive identities. A similar thing happened regarding architecture, art and literature produced after the mid sixteenth century.

Shortly after the Battle of Talikota, the Nizam Shahi sultanate of Ahmadnagar saw a surge of cultural production, beginning with an illustrated chronicle, the *Ta‘rif-i Husain Shahi*, that narrated the famous battle. In the reign of Husain’s son Murtaza Nizam Shah \(1565–88\) there appeared architectural gems such as the Damri mosque \(1568\), which was delicately carved from brown-grey basalt, and the elegant Farah Bakhsh Bagh pavilion. In the reign of Sultan Burhan Nizam Shah II \(1591–5\), a new and distinctive school of drawing appeared using simple ink and line drawing, combined with technical effects such as stippling and shading. That ruler also patronized the first history of the Nizam Shahi dynasty, the *Burhan-i ma’athir*, which reflected an awareness of Ahmadnagar’s distinct identity among Deccani states.

Cultural production at Bijapur, like that at Ahmadnagar, did not peak until the latter sixteenth century and continued well into the seventeenth. Miniature painting came into its own there with the illustrations for the *Nujum al-‘ulum*, an extraordinary text composed in 1570 by Sultan ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah I himself. Whether in architecture, literature, music or painting, Sultan Ibrahim II’s reign \(1580–1627\) witnessed Bijapur’s high point in cultural achievement. Ibrahim was also an author, having composed a book on music, the *Kitab-i Nauras* \(‘Book of the Nine Emotions’\), which reveals his eclectic religious sensibilities and his personal devotion to Saraswati, the Hindu goddess of literature and the arts. It was in the latter half of the seventeenth century, too, that Bijapuri architecture evolved a distinctive style that included broad arches, domes with carved lotus petals around their drums, delicate plasterwork, finely carved brackets, bulbous turrets and relief ornaments featuring pendants from stone chains. Outstanding examples include ‘Ali ‘Adil Shah I’s congregational mosque \(begun 1576\), the Anda Masjid \(1608\), the Mihtar Mahal \(early 1600s\) and, most remarkably, the Ibrahim Rauza \(*c*.1627–35\), Sultan Ibrahim II’s sumptuously carved tomb complex.

The same pattern holds for the other Deccani sultanates. In Bidar, ‘Ali Barid Shah \(1543–80\) patronized the construction of the Rangin Mahal \(‘coloured palace’\), in the heart of the former Bahmani court. Adorning this structure’s arch is inlaid mother-of-pearl worked into polished black basalt, an aesthetic that prefigured the production of Bidriware, a kind of metalwork in which sheets of silver or brass floral or geometric motifs were inlaid into a blackened alloy of zinc and copper. This craftwork was singularly associated with Bidar, after which it was named, and was used for trays, incense burners, basins and especially water pipes, or *huqqa*. The latter proliferated in the late sixteenth century, along with the widespread use of tobacco, an American product recently introduced via Portuguese maritime contact with India. The Bidriware *huqqa* thus bears witness to the interplay of both global and regional forces. Just as Bijapuri engineers had responded to the introduction of Portuguese swivel guns by developing a new kind of cannon that involved redesigning their forts, so also Bidari metalworkers addressed the introduction of American tobacco by adapting their own craft traditions, as with Bidriware water pipes, to a growing demand for the plant.

In the easternmost sultanate of Golconda, Ibrahim Qutb Shah cultivated and promoted a distinctively regional culture informed by Telugu language and literature and a revived consciousness of Telangana’s past history. Ibrahim patronized the construction of large tanks for storing water from dammed-up streams, which were essential for sustaining agriculture in the dry, upland eastern plateau. It was a practice that stretched back to the region’s Kakatiya kings. As noted above, Kakatiya traditions had also found expression in the layout of the Qutb Shahis’ greatest legacy to subsequent history, the city of Hyderabad, with its incomparable gem, the Charminar monument. At the same time, for their mosques and tombs these kings evolved a style that included nearly spheroid domes with the forms of lotus petals at their base, plaster and carved stone, and minarets with miniaturized, bulbous domes.

In sum, by the 1570s and 1580s newly designed forts had given defenders a strategic advantage over besiegers in each of the sultanates of the northern Deccan. This, in turn, lowered the level of inter-state warfare, froze inter-state boundaries and allowed the sultanates to devote their energies to patronizing cultural projects that were both distinctive and remarkable.



## VIJAYANAGARA’S SUCCESSORS AND SOUTH INDIA

After the Battle of Talikota, the peninsula south of the Krishna evolved along very different lines from those of the northern Deccan. Following Rama Raya’s disastrous defeat and death on the battlefield, his brother, Tirumala, rescued the imprisoned king, Sadaśiva – together with courtiers, government officials, the harem, military personnel and 1,500 elephants laden with treasure49 – and set out to relocate the capital in more secure territory. This was the fort of Penukonda, 200 kilometres south-east of their abandoned metropolis. But the disruptions caused by the shock of defeat had plunged the empire into a state of chaos that persisted for the next six years, during which Sadaśiva, the last Tuluva emperor, mysteriously died. Tirumala’s efforts to pick up the pieces of the stricken state were further stymied by domestic turmoil, including a bitter dispute with his nephew, Rama Raya’s son, over leadership of the Aravidu clan. By 1570, however, Tirumala felt sufficiently secure to crown himself the first Aravidu monarch of a reconstituted state of Vijayanagara, to be succeeded two years later by his son Śriranga I \(r. 1572–85\).

Prior to the Battle of Talikota, the empire had sprawled over the entire peninsula south of the Krishna, excepting the Malabar coast. But after the calamitous events of 1565, most of Vijayanagara’s former territory gradually fell under the control of either its enemies to the north or its own vassals to the south. In 1592 the state’s capital was again relocated, from Penukonda to the stronghold of Chandragiri, another 200 kilometres to the south-east. The site was not only more distant from the northern sultanates; it also lay within just ten kilometres of one of the most popular temple-shrines in south India – that of Venkateśvara, near Tirupati. The Aravidu rulers \(1570–1669\) were well aware that kings of Vijayanagara’s two preceding dynasties – the Saluva and Tuluva – had both legitimized their rise to power in good measure by lavishly patronizing this key pilgrimage centre.50 The Aravidus would do the same.

Owing to increasing pressure from the sultans of Bijapur and Golconda, however, after 1604 the dynasty was compelled periodically to shift its capital eighty kilometres further south, to Vellore. In 1623 Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah II of Bijapur captured Kurnool, a stronghold strategically located near the juncture of the Krishna and Tungabhadra Rivers. Ten years later his successor, Muhammad ‘Adil Shah \(r. 1627–57\), invaded Vijayanagara’s former capital of Penukonda. In 1635 his generals seized Ikkeri, a former Vijayanagara dependency whose ruler moved his capital further south to Bednur. In 1638 they captured Bangalore, and several years later besieged Vellore. Stimulated by their ancient rivalry with Bijapur, as well as their own appetite for expansion, the rulers of Golconda launched assaults on Vijayanagara territory in the eastern Deccan, in 1642 capturing all the forts along the Andhra coast down to Pulicat. In the following year, their forces took the powerful stronghold of Udayagiri, 100 kilometres inland from the Coromandel coast. In 1644 Bijapur captured Bankapur in the western Deccan. As the two sultanates now found themselves competing for much of the same territory, in 1646 they agreed that any further spoils seized from Vijayanagara would be divided between them on a two-to-one basis in favour of Bijapur – a ratio indicating the latter’s greater power.

As Vijayanagara’s centre of gravity migrated deeper into the peninsula, its rulers became ever more dependent for support on their tributary vassals to the south.51 In the wake of the empire’s much earlier annexations made by Krishna Raya and Achyuta Raya, local administration had been left to military chieftains known as ‘nayakas’. Some of these were Telugu warriors appointed as regional governors by the Vijayanagara emperor; others were local chiefs whom the central government recognized as tributary vassals. Two important Telugu *nayaka* lineages in the Tamil-speaking South, those of Madurai and Tanjavur, claimed direct links either to Krishna Raya or Achyuta Raya, while a third, that of Jinji \(or Gingee\) in the northern part of the Tamil zone, did not emerge until the 1590s. In the Kannada-speaking south-western plateau, the *nayaka* lineage of Ikkeri \(later, Bednur\) is traceable to a local chieftain whose authority had been recognized by the Vijayanagara court shortly before 1565. Further south, the Wodeyar ruling lineage of Mysore was similarly descended from a local chieftain who had been a tributary vassal of Achyuta Raya.

The debacle at Talikota, however, forced Tirumala and his Aravidu successors to confront powerful centrifugal forces, since the chaos that followed that battle tested the loyalty of all these *nayaka*s. The third Aravidu monarch, Venkata II \(r. 1585–1614\), proved the most successful of the dynasty’s rulers in maintaining some of the integrity, though not the glory, of the old empire. Although recapturing Vijayanagara’s original capital lay well beyond his reach, the emperor did manage to recover key forts that had been seized by Golconda after 1565. For a while he even succeeded in restoring the Krishna as his northern frontier with that sultanate. To the south, he brought rebellious vassals in Kolar and Vellore back into line. But Venkata II had no sons, and his death in 1614 plunged the crippled state into a bitter, four-year succession struggle, with different *nayaka*s supporting different sides in the conflict. Worse still, the instability triggered by this war alienated the larger *nayaka* houses, some of which altogether ceased sending their annual tribute to their Aravidu overlord. This was also when Bijapur and Golconda began launching their aggressive southward campaigns. Nonetheless, a reconstituted Vijayanagara state under the Aravidus managed to limp along well into the seventeenth century, aided not least by the mutual rivalries and nearly constant warfare among its nominally dependent *nayaka* vassals.

Between 1570 and about 1650 those *nayaka* states – in particular the three in the Tamil country \(Jinji, Tanjavur and Madurai\) – evolved a distinctive style of articulating their political authority. The old Vijayanagara empire had celebrated and practised classic norms of Indian kingship, which included sponsoring Vedic sacrifices, protecting the Hindu social order and donating land to Brahmins, understood as ritually superior to the rulers. By contrast, the *nayaka*s of the Tamil zone were proud of their humble, Śudra origins and even inverted the classic conception of social order by placing Brahmins in a position subordinate to themselves. Moreover, as seen in contemporary Telugu literature patronized by these courts, their conception of kingship was structured around profligate expenditures on deities, courtesans, Brahmins, poets and, most conspicuously, on adorning and feeding their own bodies. Rather than supporting Brahmins with donations of land, they fed them on a vast scale: one text claimed that the *nayaka* of Tanjavur would not eat his breakfast until he had fed 12,000 Brahmins. Nor did these *nayaka*s present themselves in managerial or bureaucratic roles, devoting themselves instead to elaborate rounds of ritual. Contemporary texts focus especially on their sexual prowess, with their conquests of hosts of women effectively substituting for the warrior ideal of conquering other lands. For them, the symbolism of kingship replaced its substance. Put differently, symbolism had become the substance of kingship.52

Even though these states functioned as de facto successors to the old Vijayanagara empire, the *nayaka*s of the southern peninsula refrained from proclaiming their outright independence from their nominal Aravidu overlords. Mysore’s Wodeyar lineage of rulers went the furthest in the latter direction. In 1610 Raja Wodeyar \(r. 1578–1617\) seized Vijayanagara’s provincial capital of Śrirangapattanam from the Aravidu governor, marking a decisive break from imperial authority. And yet, although his successors adopted grandiose titles such as ‘supreme lord of kings of great kings’ and ‘emperor of Karnataka’, they continued to acknowledge Vijayanagara’s formal overlordship in their inscriptions. By the end of the seventeenth century, by which time the Aravidu dynasty had come to an end, Mysore’s rulers had even adopted Vijayanagara’s imperial boar seal, suggesting the enduring prestige of the old empire, as well as the Wodeyars’ self-image as its rightful heirs.53

Perhaps the most tortured imperial–vassal relationship was that between the Aravidu court and the *nayaka* of Madurai, near the peninsula’s southern extremity. Because the Aravidu sovereign at Chandragiri no longer possessed the requisite power to serve as a proper overlord, by the late sixteenth century Madurai’s *nayaka*s looked to Vijayanagara’s ‘golden age’ as an alternative source of their own legitimacy. A courtly Telugu text of *c*.1600, the *Rayavacakamu*, sees Madurai’s political authority as deriving not from its nominal Aravidu overlord in Chandragiri, whom the text never even mentions, but directly from the glorious reign of Krishna Raya, who had died some seven decades earlier. More fundamentally, the *nayaka*s of Madurai looked for political inspiration to that emperor’s great capital: metropolitan Vijayanagara.54 At the time of the text’s composition, Vijayanagara lay largely abandoned, a ghost city. But in the early sixteenth century, the empire’s glory days, it had been a sprawling megalopolis with an estimated population of between 300,000 and 400,000, making it at the time one of the largest cities in the world.55 More than that, it was so ideologically charged that it functioned rather like a political talisman. Apart from its vast wealth and architectural grandeur, its urban core had served as a stage on which magnificent political ceremonies were periodically enacted, thereby empowering those who possessed the thriving metropolis. As such, the site was not merely the centre of the state’s power: it was the *source* of its power. Imperial dynasts had derived their political authority by simply ruling over, and from, the great city. But the catastrophe of 1565 severed the bonds between city, ruling dynasty and the mandate to rule. Not only were the empire’s Tuluva rulers succeeded by a different dynasty, the Aravidus: more importantly, by abandoning the partially ruined city for sites deeper in the peninsula’s interior, this new dynasty had become physically detached from the source of the empire’s former legitimacy. The Aravidus were aware of this, of course, for they rather wistfully referred to their new capitals in Penukonda and Chandragiri as ‘Vijayanagara’.

As a consequence of these drastically altered political realities, south India’s *nayaka* rulers of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries exhibited a chronic ambivalence about their loyalty to Vijayanagara’s Aravidu kings. If they treasured the memory of the great metropolitan capital, their loyalty to the current dynasty was often lukewarm, perfunctory and grudging. A series of dramatic events in the mid 1640s, described by an eyewitness, illustrates not only the *nayaka*s’ uncertain relationship towards their nominal overlords, but also the intensity of their mutual rivalries, their penchant for ritual and symbolism over substance, and the means by which the sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda would ultimately dominate nearly the entire peninsula. Our source is a report to Rome filed by Balthazar da Costa, a Jesuit missionary who served in Madurai from 1640 to 1670. He knew the terrain well, having travelled throughout the Tamil country for three decades. He also had friends in Madurai’s court and disciples in its armies.56

By 1640, da Costa tells us, the *nayaka* of Madurai, Tirumala, had ceased paying tribute to the aged Aravidu king of Vijayanagara, Venkata III \(r. 1630–42\), who did nothing about it. But the king’s son, Śriranga III \(r. 1642–72\), resolved to claim the arrears as soon as his father died and he came to power, both of which happened in 1642. Reflecting his weak position with respect to his subordinate vassals, however, the prince could not be crowned without the consent of his principal *nayaka*s, and not all of them were willing to give it. Nonetheless, Śriranga III’s representative in Madurai pressed Tirumala for payment of his arrears of tribute. When Madurai’s *nayaka* prevaricated, the king wrote insulting letters to his recalcitrant vassal, swearing that if the arrears were not paid he would flay the *nayaka* alive and from his skin make a drum to be beaten during processions as a warning to other vassals. Such bombastic threats drove Tirumala to enlist Brahmin sorcerers to practise incantations intended to kill his meddlesome overlord. But seeing that witchcraft had no effect on Śriranga III’s life, Tirumala decided in 1645 to form an anti-Aravidu league with the *nayaka*s of neighbouring Tanjavur and Jinji. For this purpose he proposed to host a trilateral conference of the three rulers.

Tirumala ordered three pavilions to be built nearly a kilometre from each other in a wooded area at the point where his kingdom’s frontiers met those of both Tanjavur and Jinji. When all was ready, he marched to his pavilion with an army of 30,000 infantry and cavalry, supported by many elephants and oxen. His army was ordered to remain on Madurai’s territory while he occupied the pavilion specially built for him. The *nayaka* of Tanjavur came to the site with an equally large army, which camped on its own territory. Several days later the *nayaka* of Jinji arrived, but with only 10,000 men since his northern border met territory ruled directly by Śriranga III, and he felt it necessary to guard his domain from a possible invasion by his overlord’s army. After Brahmin priests consulted their auguries to determine the most auspicious time for their meeting, at the appointed hour on a particular Friday in August 1645, writes da Costa:

Tirumala Nayak mounted a magnificent elephant richly caparisoned with a saddle cloth of crimson velvet studded with pearls, and tusks sheathed in gold plates. He wore a rich robe embroidered with gold thread with a turban of the same material, and earrings consisting of eight large pearls, while his necklace and bracelets were of the best diamonds. To guide his elephant, he held in his right hand the ‘angusam’ \[*anku*ś*a*, iron hook\] of which the handle was inlaid with precious stones. On the same elephant sitting behind him was his nephew, dressed in the same style, who presented him with betel. He was preceded by the arms and insignia and followed by the file of elephants mounted by his chief nobles and captains, all dressed in rich garments and wearing huge pendants, earrings, and necklaces. The cavalry brought up the rear while the rest of the army marched past accompanied by the music of numberless martial instruments. It was an imposing and majestic procession well worth seeing.57

Late that afternoon Tirumala and his magnificent retinue arrived at the meeting place, as did the two other *nayaka*s on their respective elephants, which were also richly decorated. In a scene indicating the supreme necessity of preserving their relative status, the three men conversed for about half an hour without ever dismounting from their elephants. Given the ties between elephants and royal authority in Indian culture,58 none of them could have stepped to the ground without appearing to have relinquished his kingly status. Doing so would also have acknowledged his inferiority vis-à-vis the other *nayaka*s. The next day, Tirumala invited his guests to his pavilion for a magnificent banquet, followed by dances that continued far into the night. Had it not been for a fire that broke out in the Tanjavur *nayaka*’s pavilion the next day, that ruler would have hosted another such entertainment the following evening.

The three men ultimately reconvened in Tanjavur where, after another round of sumptuous banquets, they finally got down to the business of determining how best to deal with their nominal but still-dangerous overlord. Noting that Śriranga III could not be crowned without their consent, Tirumala urged deposing him and setting up a more pliable sovereign. After all, he argued, if the king were permitted to pressure his own state of Madurai, would he not soon be pressuring the other states he nominally ruled? The *nayaka* of Tanjavur, however, fearing the power that Śriranga still possessed, and apprehensive of the devastation to his lands that a war would cause, urged Tirumala to pay his arrears. The latter retorted that doing so would only enhance the king’s ability to crush all the *nayaka*s, and that the prudent course would be to stand united and attack Śriranga III while he was still relatively weak. Although the *nayaka* of Jinji accepted this argument, that of Tanjavur only pretended to accept it, for he secretly intended to assist the Aravidu monarch.

Śriranga III was very much aware of these intrigues against him, thanks to spies planted in the courts of all his *nayaka*s. He was especially angered at Tirumala’s resort to black magic to kill him. So he sent his cavalry into the territory of the *nayaka* nearest his southern frontier, that of Jinji, who immediately left the trilateral conference to confront and repulse his overlord’s troops. In the course of this new struggle, Jinji’s military units intercepted a convoy carrying 100,000 *cruzados* that the *nayaka* of Tanjavur had secretly sent to the king, a perfidious act that naturally stirred Jinji’s enmity with Tanjavur. Yet Tirumala engaged in behaviour even more duplicitous, secretly urging Golconda’s Sultan ‘Abd Allah Qutb Shah \(r. 1626–72\), whose territory lay directly north of the remnants of Vijayanagara territory, to seize as much of Śriranga III’s domain as possible while the Aravidu ruler was preoccupied with Jinji. The sultan did as encouraged, taking Chandragiri in April 1646 and advancing from there to Vellore, then the Aravidu capital, which he besieged. In a state of desperation, Sriranga III threatened that he himself would ally with Golconda if his *nayaka*s would not come to his aid. In these circumstances, all three *nayaka*s outwardly agreed to aid the king, and in May 1646, after peace had been concluded with Golconda, the king, then in Tanjavur, received the three Tamil rulers with honours.

The intrigues did not end there, however. To avoid a clash with ‘Abd Allah Qutb Shah of Golconda, whose armies were in the vicinity and still advancing south, the *nayaka* of Tanjavur abandoned his alliance with Madurai and allied himself with the Golconda sultan. To counter this, Tirumala invited the sultan of Bijapur to send troops to his defence, aiming to exploit Bijapur’s rivalry with Golconda in order to pursue his own – Madurai’s – rivalry with Tanjavur. But the strategy backfired. Once Bijapur’s 17,000 troops reached the Tamil country, their commanders came to an agreement with Golconda whereby Bijapur would continue the siege of Jinji while Golconda’s troops withdrew to consolidate earlier conquests. In December 1648 the *nayaka* of Jinji, in despair, surrendered his capital to Bijapur, whose armies continued south. Early the next year both Tanjavur and Madurai were forced to accept Bijapur’s overlordship.

Amidst these realignments of power in the peninsula, meanwhile, Śriranga III had become a king without a kingdom, forced to move about as a guest at the court of one or another of his nominal vassals. For a while he was maintained by Tirumala in the court of Madurai, until late 1647 when he settled in that of the *nayaka* of Tanjavur. But when the latter gradually decreased his royal guest’s allowance, Śriranga III took the hint and, with his court, settled in nearby forests. He next arranged to repair to the Kannada country as a guest of another notional vassal, Kanthirava Narasaraja \(r. 1638–59\), the Wodeyar king of Mysore. But by this time his stature had diminished appreciably. As he passed through Tanjavur and Madurai en route to the Kannada country in late 1648, the *nayaka*s of those places – still his nominal vassals – took no more notice of him than had he been an ordinary traveller.59

The advance of Golconda and Bijapur into India’s southern extremities was thus assisted by the duplicity of *nayaka*s who were technically vassals of the Aravidu house, the avowed enemy of the northern sultanates, but who repeatedly invited those two sultanates to intervene in their own affairs. Indeed, the political and diplomatic behaviour of these states harks back to India’s ancient theory of the Circle of Kings, the *mandala*, which recommends that a king create a ring of loyal, subordinate vassals around his territorial core, and then connive with his enemies’ enemies, construed as potential allies, to defeat and transform them into new allies. By the seventeenth century, however, this practice, derived from classical Sanskrit texts, had become mingled with other courtly practices derived from the Persianate world. Across the southern peninsula, courtiers in the *nayaka* states had inherited from the old Vijayanagara empire Persian-style clothing, including long tunics and coloured cloaks. This is suggested both by contemporary paintings and by the evidence of Dutch envoys, who remarked on the ‘Moorish’ dress they saw in local courts.60 Moreover, the same Persianate system of military-service tenures that had been fundamental to the old Vijayanagara empire appears to have been inherited by the *nayaka*s of Madurai.61 Mysore’s Wodeyar rulers even used the Persianate title ‘Sultan among Indian kings’, just as Vijayanagara’s emperors had done.62

To the west of Mysore and the Tamil country is a formidable mountain range, the Western Ghats, beyond which lie a hilly lowland and a lush, tropical coastal strip laced with rivers and channels that flow from the mountainous interior. This is Malabar. Hugging the shores of south-west India and stretching 300 kilometres in length and averaging sixty kilometres in width, the Malabar coast bore remarkable similarities to a contemporary coastal area on the opposite side of the planet. The Dutch colony of Manhattan – now the heart of New York City – flourished owing to its commercial connections with the wider world. Although geologically attached to North America, for four decades \(1624–64\) this ‘island at the centre of the world’ had served as a nexus through which beaver pelts extracted from the American interior were shipped to the Netherlands, garnering immense profits for Dutch merchants on both sides of the ocean.63 And in the process, Manhattan emerged as a free-trade zone, an ethnic melting pot, an experiment in self-government and religious tolerance, a socially fluid frontier and a shipping hub linked to a network of ports dotting the shores of the North and South Atlantic Oceans. Indeed, the quest for North American furs by Dutch merchants was driven by the same forces that had already sent their compatriots – and before them, Portuguese mariners – into the Indian Ocean in search of commodities even more valuable than beaver pelts: spices, and especially Malabar pepper, highly prized as a food seasoning.

For at least 1,500 years Malabar had been the world’s principal source of this ‘black gold’, as the Dutch called the spice, drawing to its shores long-distance merchants from as far away as the Mediterranean basin and the South China Sea. This coastal strip also exported other widely coveted tropical products to eager markets overseas: ginger, cardamom, cinnamon, aromatic woods and hard woods. Already in the first century AD Romans worried about the drain of hard currency going to feed their countrymen’s seemingly insatiable demand for Indian luxuries, especially pepper. By the thirteenth century China had become the world’s largest consumer of black pepper, with Hangzhou alone consuming more than 4,300 kilograms a day, if Marco Polo is to be believed. The Venetian also estimated that, for every boatload of pepper that reached the Mediterranean world, 100 went to China’s busy port of Quanzhou.64

Linked to distant transoceanic markets but cut off geographically and politically from the rest of India, Malabar was, like Dutch Manhattan, something of an island at the centre of the world. Although Vijayanagara had held a loose sort of sovereignty over part of its northernmost coast in order to import war-horses, the rest of Malabar, unlike south India’s *nayaka* states, was never ruled by Vijayanagara or by any other of the peninsula’s great empires. Ever since the twelfth century it had been divided into a handful of rival houses that, reigning from coastal ports, maintained only a formal sovereignty over their respective hinterlands. The most important such city states included, from north to south: Cannanore, Calicut, Cochin and Kollam. Inhibiting the rulers’ authority was the economic and military influence of a powerful martial aristocracy, the Nairs \(or Nayars\), who served the rulers as elite warriors. Because the Nairs also held superior rights to the coast’s rich hinterland, and because Brahmins collected dues on temple lands, Malabar’s coastal kings, unlike the rulers of India’s agrarian states, were unable to impose land taxes in areas over which they claimed sovereignty. But they did have an alternative source of income. Owing to strict taboos barring high-caste Hindus from seafaring, the region’s lucrative overseas export sector was handled entirely by foreigners – first Romans, then Jews, Christians, Tamils, Gujaratis, Sinhalese, Malays, Chinese, Persians and, especially, Arabs. Such an arrangement met local kings’ need for revenue, the bulk of which was derived from taxing the export of locally produced commodities that the entire world seemed to crave.65 Foreign traders, writes a classical Tamil poet, ‘arrive with gold and leave with pepper’.66

This singular political and commercial structure partly accounts for the Malabar coast’s demographic profile, unique among India’s subregions. By the early twenty-first century a little more than half its population was Hindu, with the remainder divided almost equally between Muslims and Christians. The latter were composed mainly of Syrian Christians, so called owing to their presumed Middle Eastern origins and their use of the Syriac language for liturgical purposes. They traced themselves back to Jesus’s apostle Thomas, who is thought to have reached Malabar in the mid first century and founded churches in at least seven coastal cities, all of which were centres of spice exports. By the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries local Christians appeared as pepper-brokers and port revenue officers in southern Malabar, especially Kollam, and, by the fifteenth century, as ship owners, brokers and merchants in Cochin, Kayamkulam and Kodungallur \(Cranganur\). By this time, too, the community had acquired a substantial base in Malabar’s interior. Many Syrian Christians were recruited as warriors in service to Hindu lords in southern Malabar’s pepper-growing interior, in this respect functioning as a separate caste, much like the Nairs. In fact, ruling houses gave these warriors titles and land grants, and a status equal to that of the Nairs. They endorsed the offices of Syrian Christians’ chief clerics and endowed and protected Christian churches in the same way that they patronized Hindu temples. For their part, the Christians adopted many Hindu rituals, were given access to Hindu temples, and until the late sixteenth century intermarried with the Nair community. Leading Christian clerics even took part in the trappings of Malabari kingship, such as travelling with large entourages of elite warriors \(*chaver*s\) sworn to die protecting their patron.67

Meanwhile, from at least the ninth century onwards, Arab Muslims began to play a prominent role in Malabar’s overseas commerce. By the eleventh century, Arab brokers controlled the long-distance spice trade between India and China and dominated the maritime trade between India and the Middle East. Owing to Malabar’s central position in the Indian Ocean and the natural rhythm of that ocean’s two annual sailing seasons, the south-western and north-eastern monsoons, Arab mariners found Malabar’s ports to be natural sites for the supply, trans-shipment and warehousing of commercial goods. As a result, communities of Arab merchants, the *pardesi*s \(foreigners\), put down permanent roots along the coast, conducting long-distance trade with kinfolk or trusted partners in ports across the entire Indian Ocean, especially the Arabian Sea. By the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Muslims dominated overseas trade in Malabar’s central and northern sectors as pepper cultivation spread northwards. By then one port in particular, Calicut, had become Malabar’s premier site for exporting pepper throughout the Indian Ocean region. In the 1340s Ibn Battuta saw thirteen large Chinese junks anchored beside the city. Although Calicut had no natural harbour, the Moroccan globetrotter considered it one of the world’s largest seaports.68 He attributed the city’s prosperity to the scrupulous attention that Calicut’s ruler, the so-called Zamorin, gave to the security of merchants and their property. The Zamorin – from *samudra raja*, or ‘king of the seas’ – not only protected his resident merchants: he also fostered a climate of religious tolerance, even letting Muslims build their mosques with tiled roofs, a privilege allowed for no other structures in the kingdom except royal palaces or Hindu temples.

Under such favourable circumstances Malabar’s Muslim community – especially in Calicut, but along the northern coast generally – flourished and swelled in numbers as low-caste labourers such as dock-workers, shipbuilders and other communities ancillary to the maritime trade converted to Islam, and as the residents from overseas increasingly intermarried with the local society. This new, hybridized Arabo-Malayali community, called the Mappilas, spoke Malayalam, dressed like the Nairs, except for their caps and beards, and practised matrilineal inheritance, again like the Nairs.69 Reflecting their historic ties to the Arab maritime world – especially the Red Sea region, a hub for shipping goods to the Mediterranean zone – Malabar’s Muslims followed the Shafi‘i branch of Islamic law, the same one followed by the peoples of Yemen and the Horn of Africa. By contrast, Muslims across north India and the Deccan followed the Hanafi school, then dominant across Anatolia, the Iranian plateau, Afghanistan and Central Asia – that is to say, the Persianate world. A similar pattern is seen in Mappila architecture, which reflects local Malayali, not Persianate, traditions. Rather than the pointed arches, domes, minarets and vaulted ceilings that are associated with the Persianate visual vocabulary, Malabar’s older mosques – and also its older Syrian Christian churches – feature the same multi-tiered roofs, sloped wooden window panels and elaborate gables that are found on the coast’s traditional palaces and Hindu temples \[see Fig. 9\]. Indicating the coastal region’s relative isolation from the rest of the peninsula, these characteristically Malabari architectural features are not found elsewhere in India.

At the very end of the fifteenth century Malabar’s society was upended by the abrupt arrival of Portuguese mariners driven by Roman Catholic crusading zeal and a quest for direct, maritime access to Indian spices, in particular pepper. Vasco da Gama’s pioneering voyage from Lisbon to Calicut in 1498 was followed by a second one led by Pedro Cabral. Shortly after reaching Calicut in 1500, Cabral seized a Muslim cargo ship, provoking a mob attack on a Portuguese warehouse in which a number of Portuguese died. Cabral retaliated by seizing five nearby merchant ships and slaying their crews. He then spent a full day bombarding the city before sailing down to Cochin. Since that city’s ruler viewed the Portuguese as a counterbalance to his rival, the Zamorin of Calicut, he allowed Cabral to establish a fortified trading post under his protection. This marked the first European toehold on Indian territory. In 1502 Vasco da Gama, returning to Calicut with twenty ships and nearly 1,000 men, sank a merchant ship sailing from Mecca, drowning 700 pilgrims, and then demanded that the Zamorin expel all Muslim merchants from the city. When the Zamorin refused to comply, da Gama also bombarded the city and then sailed down to Cochin, where he stationed a flotilla of ships at the post established by Cabral. This violent and monopolistic approach to trade quickly internationalized warfare on the Indian Ocean. In 1508, warships of Mamluk Egypt joined those of the sultanate of Gujarat to defeat a Portuguese fleet near Chaul \(forty kilometres south of Mumbai\), and nine years later an Ottoman fleet prevented the Portuguese from conquering the Red Sea port of Jiddah.

The sixteenth century thus saw an entirely new relationship between Malabar and the outside world, which in turn led to profound changes within Malayali society. In the course of that century the Syrian Christians would face mounting pressure to align their theology, liturgy, rites, ecclesiastical structure and socio-cultural practices with those of the Roman Catholic Church. This provoked powerful resistance, culminating in 1665 with the emergence of two rival communities. One followed Roman Catholic authority as mediated by European missionary bishops, and the other – the ‘Jacobite’ or ‘Orthodox’ Syrians – adhered to the authority of prelates in Antioch, as mediated by hereditary Malayali archdeacons.70

Malabar’s Muslim society was no less transformed by this sudden European intrustion. The Portuguese intervention led to the nearly complete withdrawal of Malabar’s resident community of foreign \(*pardesi*\) Arab merchants. This, in turn, created a space for indigenous Mappilas to expand their own operations, which they did by establishing transoceanic commercial networks and dodging Portuguese patrols, or by sending consignments of pepper overland to the sultanate of Gujarat, a sworn enemy of the Portuguese, and exporting them from Gujarati ports. Second, Portuguese assaults galvanized the Mappilas into a unified community and instilled in them a mentality of holy war directed at the Portuguese. This appeal to militancy was made explicit in an Arabic text that, composed in the 1580s and widely circulated in Malabar, identified the Portuguese not as infidels \(*kuffar*\) but as ‘Franks’ \(*al-frange*\), a term meant to evoke memories of the Crusades several centuries earlier.71

In sum, the advent of Portuguese operations in early-sixteenth-century Malabar, soon followed by similar operations elsewhere on Indian shores, exposed local communities to a style of commerce that was entirely new to them. This was the idea of armed trade, symbolized by the cannon carried on Portuguese caravels and the string of fortified trading posts that appeared along much of the Indian Ocean rim. Nonetheless, to label the centuries following 1498 the ‘Vasco da Gama epoch’, as some have suggested, is surely an exaggeration. By 1600, after a full century of doggedly pursuing commercial monopolies, Europeans were buying only 10 per cent of Malabar’s pepper production, estimated at about 10,000 metric tons a year.72 What is more, the Portuguese could never keep northern Europeans from discovering the knowledge they had painstakingly gathered regarding the winds, currents and ports of the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans.



## CONCLUSION

Between 1347 and 1565 Vijayanagara had often been at war with the Bahmani sultanate and the latter’s sixteenth-century successor states. Because the ruling houses of Vijayanagara and its northern neighbours adhered to different religious traditions, many modern historians have construed the Krishna as a civilizational frontier dividing the Deccan into a Muslim north and a Hindu south. In part, this idea is a legacy of historian Robert Sewell who, writing in 1900, first brought Vijayanagara’s history to the attention of the reading public. Sewell famously described that state as a ‘Hindu bulwark against Muhammadan conquests’,73 thereby contributing to an enduring trope of religiously defined territorial separatism in the plateau. Sewell’s book was published when India’s nationalist movement was in full swing, and when Indian historians were looking to the country’s past for evidence of successful states whose memory might mobilize British India’s population for the nationalist cause. Inasmuch as Indian nationalism for many meant Hindu nationalism, Sewell’s communalized characterization of Vijayanagara found a receptive audience.

But Sewell’s ‘bulwark’ thesis reads history backwards, projecting into the past an early-twentieth-century preoccupation with religious identity and motives. Nor is his thesis sustained by evidence: in fact, it is contradicted by evidence. Peninsular India in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries was not so much a sacred realm, far less a zone of two mutually exclusive sacred realms, as it was a crossroads. As in contemporary north India, peoples in the fifteenth- to the seventeenth-century Deccan circulated through overlapping religious, political and commercial networks. Long-distance merchants such as Mahmud Gawan brought horses, precious metals and other goods from the coasts inland and textiles and spices from the interior to the coasts. Jain, Hindu and Muslim pilgrims moved in all directions. Sufis, ascetics and lay seekers circulated from place to place, or from person to person, pursuing salvation, wisdom or more mundane goals. Adventurers and men of arms comprising the plateau’s military labour market moved from court to court seeking promising rulers, commanders or chieftains to whom they might offer their service. None of these people appear to have experienced any civilizational barrier of the sort that Sewell posited – certainly not the 10,000 Turkish archers that Deva Raya II recruited to serve at Vijayanagara. And certainly not the Qutb Shahi prince Ibrahim, who fled south to Rama Raya’s court in Vijayanagara to escape treachery in Golconda, or even Rama Raya himself, whose first patron was Golconda’s Sultan Quli Qutb Shah. As a region where loyalties frequently shifted and alliances were always subject to renegotiation, the peninsula differed little from north India, which experienced a similarly high degree of mobility of goods, peoples and ideas across borders.

Peninsular India, then, is best understood in this period as a single, interconnected zone, a perspective illustrated by the ways in which ordinary people used coinage. When the Bahmani and Vijayanagara kingdoms were established in the mid fourteenth century, both states minted their own coins, which initially circulated only within their respective realms. In the north, the Bahmanis introduced a currency system inherited from that of their parent state, the Delhi sultanate, which was based on the gold *dinar* and *tanka*, together with a silver *tanka*. To the south, Vijayanagara issued a gold coin, the *hon*, which had derived ultimately from the Chalukya dynasty of kings, whose realm spanned the entire plateau in the tenth to the twelfth centuries. In effect, the Bahmanis introduced a coinage system whose historical roots were alien to the plateau, whereas the kings of Vijayanagara issued coins with a long-standing, indigenous pedigree. Merchants and consumers in both realms consequently invested more trust in the *hon* than they did in Bahmani coinage. In the reign of the Bahmanis’ second sultan, Muhammad Shah I \(r. 1358–75\), money-changers would melt down locally minted gold *dinar*s and *tanka*s and send the bulk bullion across the Krishna to Vijayanagara, where it was re-struck as Vijayanagara *hon*s or its smaller denominations.74 The newly minted coins then found their way back north to Bahmani territory, where they were used for commercial transactions. Throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, twice as much Vijayanagara coinage circulated in the Bahmani state as did the Bahmanis’ own coins. In fact, more Vijayanagara coins circulated in the Bahmani kingdom than in Vijayanagara itself. Yet the southern coins never completely drove the Bahmanis’ coins out of circulation, since the two systems were used by different social communities. Wealthier elites used the larger-denomination gold and silver Bahmani coins for international trade and official salaries, whereas commoners in both rural and urban areas used the smaller, more versatile and more familiar Vijayanagara coins for local purchases and payments.

After the collapse of the Bahmani state in the early sixteenth century, its coins continued to circulate until the 1580s, when Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda began articulating their separate identities by issuing their own silver coins. Yet throughout this period Vijayanagara’s *hon*s still circulated in the northern Deccan. In fact, they were in such demand that from 1513 onwards the northern sultanates, succumbing to reality, began assessing agricultural and commercial taxes in the *hon*, and not exclusively in their own *dinar*s or *tanka*s. Even after 1565, when the Vijayanagara state was severely crippled following the Battle of Talikota, Bijapur, Golconda and Ahmadnagar not only continued using the Vijayanagara coins in their official transactions, but from the 1580s they began minting their own *hon*s, thereafter the only type of coin mentioned in sultanate inscriptions. These coins bore the same standard of weight and purity as the old Vijayanagara-minted coins, the only difference being that the Sanskrit titles and images of Hindu deities of the old coins were replaced by Persian lettering.

But even this compromise was not accepted by the peoples living within the sultanates’ frontiers. As the older, ‘genuine’ Vijayanagara *hon*s became rarer with the passage of time, their intrinsic value increased relative to that of the sultanate’s newer *hon*s. In their normal transactions, people therefore preferred using the *hon*s that had earlier been minted in Vijayanagara. Nonetheless, the sultanates tried to enforce the use of their own, newer *hon*s. In 1654 ‘Adil Shahi authorities in Bijapur ordered the confiscation of the property of anybody who used the older *hon*s minted by the defunct Vijayanagara state instead of Bijapur’s *hon*s. But such royal edicts evidently failed. Within several decades of that order, even the Muslim functionaries of a Qutb Shahi mosque were insisting that an annual grant made for their maintenance be made not in Golconda’s minted *hon*s, but in ‘genuine’ *hon*s – that is, the currency minted by Vijayanagara over a century earlier, bearing Sanskrit lettering and images of Hindu deities.75

Notwithstanding the bombastic rhetoric sometimes found in contemporary Persian chronicles regarding Vijayanagara’s ‘infidels’, or twenty-first-century talk of a Hindu–Muslim ‘clash of civilizations’ in the premodern Deccan, ordinary people actually living at that time experienced the plateau as a single economic zone that transcended both political frontiers and cultural difference. Their preference for the *hon* also speaks to a deep continuity over time, as merchants, producers and consumers across the peninsula preferred to use a familiar medium of economic exchange traceable to the Chalukya maharajas of Kalyana. This should not be surprising, for in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries ruling elites on both sides of the Krishna were actively reviving the memory of the Chalukya past. In Vijayanagara, government officials – probably Rama Raya himself – ordered a large, Chalukya-period stepped tank to be disassembled and transported from its original site to the Vijayanagara capital, where it was laboriously reassembled in the heart of the city’s Royal Centre. Meanwhile, Bijapur’s Sultan Ibrahim I \(r. 1534–58\) installed Chalukya-period stone inscriptions and an ensemble of Chalukya-period columns in the main gateway to his capital’s citadel, while at the fort of Kalyana – the Chalukyas’ former capital – his grandson Sultan Ibrahim II built a palace around a carefully preserved Chalukya-period temple.76

Such evidence speaks of a deeper trend in the Deccan’s cultural history, namely a progressive interpenetration of the Sanskrit and Persianate worlds between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. At the time of the Khalaji and Tughluq invasions of the Deccan in the early fourteenth century, these two worlds had remained quite distinct, sustained by two different literary traditions. But by the sixteenth century their mutual intermingling had proceeded to a remarkable extent. One sees this, for example, in a frieze that runs along the cornice of a gateway at Raichur which Vijayanagara’s Krishna Raya built when he seized that fort from Bijapur’s control in 1520. In the centre is an image of Krishna Raya seated in royal splendour and at ease, surrounded by female attendants \[see Fig. 10\]. Since the entire frieze narrates well-known stories from the *Ramayana* epic, the king is contextually associated with Rama, its divine hero. But unlike the panel depicting Rama, Krishna Raya also appears wearing tall, conical headgear called *kullayi* in Telugu \(*kulah* in Persian\). This item of apparel had migrated to India from Iran, where it was associated with high social status, even royalty. With whom, then, is Krishna Raya to be identified – a Hindu deity, a Persian nobleman, or both?

The ambiguity conveyed in this single image, like the assimilation of the headgear’s Persian name into the Telugu language, captures how a sixteenth-century Deccani monarch could draw from two discourses of power and civilization simultaneously. It is a phenomenon that will bear closer scrutiny in the following chapters.




