+++
title = "5 The Consolidation of Mughal Rule, 1526–1605"

+++





## OVERVIEW

The rise of the Mughal empire centres on the career of an extraordinary personality, Zahir al-Din Babur \(d. 1530\). Deprived of his father’s kingdom in the Central Asian highlands, Babur famously descended on the plains of India from his base in Kabul and, in a celebrated battle fought in 1526, defeated Ibrahim Lodi, the last ruler of the last dynasty of Delhi sultans. He then went on to launch India’s most splendid empire, which at its height would dominate nearly all of South Asia. Babur’s place in Indian history is rendered even more vivid thanks to his very personal and self-revealing memoir, the *Babur-nama*, which combines elements of a diary, a gazetteer, a chronicle and a father’s advice to his son. Much of this fascinating text was drafted by lamplight or a flickering campfire before being packed in saddlebags, as Babur and his men rode from Samarqand to Kabul, and then on to Delhi \[see Map 5\].

Much larger themes lie behind this tale. Babur’s mother was directly descended from Genghis Khan and, although she was separated from her illustrious ancestor by fourteen generations, that ancestry explains the name by which outsiders would call the dynasty launched by her son: the word ‘Mughal’ is simply Persian for ‘Mongol’. But Babur identified more powerfully with his father’s political and cultural inheritance. As his father was a great-great-grandson of Timur, Babur was much closer in descent to the storied warlord of Samarqand than he was to the founder of the Mongol empire. Moreover, during the century following his death in 1405, Timur’s descendants continued to rule parts of Central Asia and the Iranian plateau, where they upheld their forebear’s tradition of generously patronizing the Persianate arts. For Babur was, first and foremost, a proud Timurid. As destructive as Timur’s sack of Delhi had been – bitter memories of which certainly lingered on in north India – Babur prized his Timurid ancestry. He would doubtless have preferred to govern a kingdom from Timur’s city of Samarqand than to spend his remaining days in the plains of north India, about which he had little good to say. Hindustan, he flatly declares in his memoirs, did not possess much charm. ‘There is no beauty in its people,’ he grumbled, ‘no graceful social intercourse, no poetic talent or understanding, no etiquette, nobility, or manliness. The arts and crafts have no harmony or symmetry. There are no good horses, meat, grapes, melons, or other fruit. There is no ice, cold water, good food or bread in the markets. There are no baths and no madrasas. There are no candles, torches, or candlesticks.’1

As dismayed as he was over north India’s lack of melons or good horses, Babur was much impressed with the country’s wealth. Immediately upon seizing control of Delhi, he addressed his weary, homesick kinsmen and retainers, imploring them to abandon thoughts of marching back to Afghanistan. ‘For some years’, he reminded them:

we have struggled, experienced difficulties, traversed long distances, led the army, and cast ourselves and our soldiers into the dangers of war and battle; through God’s grace we have defeated such numerous enemies and taken such vast realms. What now compels us to throw away for no reason at all the realms we have taken at such cost? Shall we go back to Kabul and remain poverty-stricken? Let no one who supports me say such things henceforth. Let no one who cannot endure and is bound to leave be dissuaded from leaving.2

Having secured a foothold on the Indo-Gangetic plain, Babur sent letters back to Central Asia urging his kinsmen and their supporters to come and settle in India. For in the end, Babur understood his conquests in terms of reclaiming a piece of his Timurid patrimony. Although Timur had returned to Samarqand after sacking Delhi, for some time afterwards he continued to exercise an indirect rule in the Punjab. What history has called the ‘Mughal’ empire, then, was in the eyes of its founder an attempt to restore Timurid rule in north India after a lapse of more than a century.

Babur’s conquest also represented an historic moment in the relations between two very different ecological worlds. Central Asia’s semi-pastoral culture was based on rearing livestock and mastering horse-based warfare, and it assessed wealth largely in terms of movable assets: sheep, horses, goats, camels. The Indian world Babur encountered, by contrast, was one of ploughs and bullocks, a sedentary and agrarian society that understood wealth mainly in terms of fixed resources: harvested grain, manufactured goods, precious metals. If the kingdom that Babur established in India was initially a transplant of Central Asia’s semi-pastoral oasis culture, his descendants would root the state ever more deeply in India’s agrarian economy, its socio-religious culture and its political life. Evolving gradually over several centuries, this process is often overlooked by historians seeking to capture the character of the Mughal empire in static essences such as ‘centralized bureaucratic state’, ‘Oriental despotism’, ‘feudal kingdom’ or ‘Islamic empire’. No such facile characterization is satisfactory, not least because that empire was never static: its history was one of a progressive fusion of two very different worlds.

That said, Babur’s Indian kingdom was never purely agrarian, just as the Central Asian world of his youth and early manhood was never purely pastoral. Although the broad grasslands north of Afghanistan’s Hindu Kush Mountains were ideally suited for nomadic pastoralism, for centuries Turko-Mongol pastoral culture had interacted with that of Persianized oasis towns and cosmopolitan cities such as Samarqand or Bukhara. Babur’s native Ferghana valley was itself a fertile region of sedentary agriculture and urban settlement, in close touch with the great centres of Persian cultural production. His own parentage epitomized the mixing of pastoral, Mongol–Timurid with sedentary, Persianate culture. When sitting with his Turco-Mongol kinsmen or retainers, Babur’s father would wear a Mongol cap. But when holding court in the small principality he governed in the Ferghana valley, he would wear a turban in the fashion of a member of the Persianized ruling elite.3 Such headgear was associated with the more urbanized, socially stratified and literary Persianate world. Notwithstanding this mixed Mongol and Timurid/Persianate inheritance, it is telling that the Mughals understood themselves as Timurids – or, more precisely, ‘Indo-Timurids’, indicating the prestige they associated with Timur’s career and legacy, and more broadly with Persianate culture, in contrast to the Mongols’ lingering association with the devastation that had driven so many Central Asians from their homelands in the thirteenth century.

By the time the processes Babur set in motion came to an end, the Mughals had shed all but a few trappings of their former pastoral and semi-nomadic identity, and become a thoroughly agrarian state. A kingdom originally run by a mainly foreign governing class – ethnically Turko-Mongol, Persianate in literary and aesthetic traditions, Sunni Muslim by religion, Timurid in dynastic identity – would put down roots and, in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, become an essentially Indian polity.4



## BABUR

Babur was just eleven years old in 1494 when, on his father’s death, he ascended the throne of Ferghana, a small Central Asian principality 350 kilometres east of Samarqand, the jewel of Timurid Central Asia. From the very start, young Babur faced fierce resistance from his nobles and even his uncles, who tried to replace him with his more malleable younger brother. Nonetheless, when only fifteen he managed to seize control of Timur’s former capital of Samarqand. It proved a brief reign, however, for within just a few months he lost the city to a rival while trying to recover his base at Ferghana, which hostile elements had meanwhile snatched from his grasp. Finding himself now with no territory to rule, he spent several dismal years wandering about hills and valleys seeking kinsmen and supporters. In 1501 he made a second attempt at Samarqand, but was repulsed this time by a powerful confederation of ascendant Uzbeks, Turkish-speakers ethnically distinct from Timur’s Chagatai lineage of Turko-Mongols. One by one, Uzbek armies commanded by Muhammad Shaybani Khan \(r. 1500–10\) overthrew Babur’s kinsmen in the successor states of Timur’s former empire. Shaybani Khan had seized Samarqand just a year before Babur’s second attempt to recover the city, and in several years’ time he would take other flourishing centres of Persianate culture formerly under Timurid control, notably Bukhara. For his part, Babur was reduced to utter destitution, accompanied by a small band of loyal retainers and his mother, Qutlugh Nigar Khanum, who in their worst times was given the use of the only tent they possessed.

In 1504, sensing the futility of ever recovering his patrimony in Central Asia, Babur, his mother and 300 lightly armed men marched southwards across the snowy passes of Afghanistan’s Hindu Kush Mountains in search of a base safely distant from the growing Uzbek threat. They set their sights on Kabul, then ruled by an unpopular strongman generally considered a usurper, enabling Babur to capture the city in fairly short order. Kabul straddled several strategic crossroads: east–west caravan trade routes linking north India with Iran, and north–south routes linking India with Central Asia. Through this choke-point long caravans of Central Asian war-horses were sent through the mountain passes leading to India’s horse markets, on which so many states vitally depended for their cavalries. Making their way through Kabul from the opposite direction were caravans of Indian textiles and spices destined for markets in Iran, Central Asia and beyond. The Afghan city therefore presented an ideal staging site for raids across the Khyber into India.

As early as 1505 Babur waged his first such expedition in the Punjab, then held by Afghan chieftains nominally loyal to Sultan Sikandar Lodi \(r. 1489–1517\). But events in Central Asia and Iran awakened his dormant ambition to recover Samarqand from Uzbek control. Timur’s immediate successors had shifted their capital to Herat, at the time a brilliant centre of Persianate culture. In 1506, however, the city’s last Timurid ruler died, and a year later it, too, was taken by Uzbek Turks. Especially distressing was that the Uzbeks had seized and imprisoned Babur’s female relatives, including his sister Khanzada, his only full sibling, who was forced to marry his perennial nemesis, Shaybani Khan. These events not only humiliated and embittered Babur, they also left him the sole reigning Timurid anywhere in Timur’s former empire. Many of the remaining Timurid princes and their retainers, their own hopes dashed by the ascendant Uzbeks, now took refuge with him at Kabul. Aware that the survival of Timur’s legacy rested on his shoulders, in 1508 Babur adopted the exalted Persian title *padshah*, or ‘supreme king’. With so many disenfranchised Timurids looking to him for political leadership, his fading hopes of recovering his Central Asian patrimony were suddenly rekindled. Moreover, he would have a powerful ally in such an undertaking. Shah Isma‘il Safavi \(r. 1501–24\), the charismatic and seemingly invincible founder of Iran’s Safavid dynasty \(1501–1736\), was just then consolidating his authority across the Iranian plateau. Alarmed by Shaybani Khan’s 1507 conquest of Herat, Isma‘il defeated an Uzbek army in 1510, resulting in the death of Shaybani Khan and the fall of Herat to the Safavids. He also freed Babur’s imprisoned relatives, leading to Babur’s joyful reunion with his sister Khanzada.

With his long-standing Uzbek adversary out of the way, a grateful and indebted Babur collaborated with Shah Isma‘il in a joint project of conquering Uzbek territories for their respective kingdoms. Safavid assistance also helped Babur recover Samarqand, if only briefly. But collaboration came at a price. Isma‘il’s self-proclaimed semi-divine status horrified Babur’s fellow Sunni Muslims, who considered the shah a dangerous heretic. And in return for receiving material assistance from Isma‘il, Babur had to act as his junior partner, which involved wearing the Safavids’ twelve-pointed headgear, indicating the wearer’s identity as an ardent member of Shi‘ism’s dominant Twelver sect. Babur was painfully aware that he appeared to have renounced his Sunni identity and become a Shi‘i. Moreover, having recently proclaimed himself a *padshah*, it was especially humiliating publicly to acknowledge his subservient status to the Iranian shah, whose name was proclaimed on Samarqand’s coins and in its mosques. In the end, the city’s Sunni population rejected both Shi‘ism and nominal Iranian sovereignty, preferring instead another Uzbek overlord to Babur, who yet again proved unable to hold on to Samarqand. It is due to his long record of suffering at the hands of his Uzbek and other enemies that Babur’s memoirs are pervaded by themes of defeat, humiliation, displacement and exile.5

In 1514, abandoning the possibility of ever regaining Samarqand, Babur returned to his base in Kabul and again began to look to the north Indian plain, this time not as an object of plunder, but as territory for building a sovereign domain large and stable enough to preserve the threatened Timurid house from extinction. This was his foremost objective. Moreover, the only way a warlord could recruit and retain armed followers was by demonstrating success in obtaining and distributing resources from sedentary societies, and he was aware that in India, a land of fabulous wealth, the Lodis’ governing structure was rapidly crumbling. In 1517 Sikandar Lodi had died and was succeeded by his son Ibrahim, who unwisely replaced senior nobles in his service with younger men who were supposedly loyal but were also less experienced. When Babur’s expeditions of 1519 and 1520 took him as far as the Punjab’s Chenab River, some of those recently dismissed senior Lodi nobles, including the governor of the Punjab and even the sultan’s own uncle, began to see the Mughal commander as a viable alternative to the unpopular Ibrahim. In 1524 they invited him to invade and assume sovereign rule. Again he entered the Punjab, this time with the intent of challenging Sultan Ibrahim Lodi. But on reaching Lahore and Dipalpur, he found that he could not trust the Lodi turncoats nominally under his command, and so he returned to Kabul.

In late 1525 Babur, aged forty-two, launched his fifth and final invasion of India, marching from Kabul at the head of an army of 8,000 men, composed of subordinate Timurid princes and their retainers, Pashtun allies from south-eastern Afghanistan and artillery and matchlock contingents advised by Turkish officers from Anatolia. Crossing the Indus in mid December, his force faced little resistance as it advanced across the Punjab, where Lodi authority had already collapsed. By April 1526 he reached Panipat, sixty-five kilometres north-west of Delhi, and secured his defences. On the twenty-first he was met by a Lodi force much larger than his own, but far less disciplined. The Mughals also possessed the relatively new technology of matchlock and cannon firepower, which Ibrahim lacked. Most importantly, Babur deployed the same flanking cavalry tactics that Uzbek cavalries had used to defeat him decades earlier in his struggles over Samarqand. By midday, the decisive Battle of Panipat had left Sultan Ibrahim dead on the battlefield, with no obstacle standing between Babur and Delhi. Far from plundering that city as his Timurid ancestor had done, however, Babur took care to secure its palaces, guarantee the safety of its population, arrange for a pension for the mother of the slain Lodi sultan, and pay his respects to the shrines of the city’s most prominent Sufi saints – the Chishti shaikhs Qutb al-Din Bakhtiyar Kaki \(d. 1236\) and Nizam al-Din Auliya. Such measures signalled that the Mughals not only would remain in north India, but that they would patronize the same ‘invisible sovereigns’ as had several centuries of Delhi’s rulers, thereby establishing a spiritual continuity between themselves and previous Delhi-based dynasties. There was no going back to Samarqand. India would be Babur’s home and the seat of his kingdom, which he was determined to pass on to his descendants.




  IMAGE The Mughal empire to the mid seventeenth century


From Delhi, Babur sent his son Humayun down to Agra, the Lodi capital since 1506, in order to secure the defeated regime’s treasury and government palaces. Several days later he joined his son in Agra and, making that city his own capital, set himself to governing the fledgling kingdom. He soon realized, however, that he had stepped into a fierce struggle between two large ethno-political blocs contending for supremacy over the fertile north Indian plain: Afghans and Rajputs. The founding of Lodi rule in the mid fifteenth century had seen many Afghans pour through the mountain passes and become rooted in north India’s socio-political landscape as long-distance horse merchants, cavalrymen, petty traders and landholders. Challenging them for hegemony across northern and western India were confederations of martial lineages that, by the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, had become organized by common descent lines, like their Afghan rivals. But whereas the Afghans’ identification of clan with territory had become distorted by migration from their ancestral homelands, Rajput lineages tended to be displaced on to territory. In the early sixteenth century, one lineage in particular was making a bid for supremacy over north India and the Delhi sultanate itself – the Sisodiyas, based in Mewar in southern Rajasthan and led by the renowned Rana Sanga \(r. 1508–28\). In fact, at the very time that Babur was waging his final, decisive invasion of north India, Rana Sanga was preparing for his own assault on Delhi.

In 1527, only a year after defeating Sultan Ibrahim Lodi, Babur confronted Rana Sanga at Khanua, sixty-five kilometres west of Agra. The Sisodiya raja had under his command some 80,000 cavalry, augmented by contingents of surviving Afghans recently defeated by Babur, including Ibrahim Lodi’s brother Mahmud, who made common cause in trying to expel the Mughals from India. Although vastly outnumbered in cavalry, the Mughals again carried the day, and again the opposing commander, this time Rana Sanga, was killed in action. Babur’s memoirs reveal much about his state of mind before and after this battle. Although up to this point he had regularly participated in rousing drinking parties with his men, on the eve of his contest with Rana Sanga the new sovereign of Delhi and Agra solemnly vowed to renounce wine. Associating alcohol with his lower self, he felt it necessary first to subdue his baser part in order to gird himself for the approaching contest. And since Rana Sanga’s was a mainly non-Muslim army, Babur expressed his ideas in religious terms, comparing the breaking of wine goblets with the breaking of Hindu images. On achieving victory over Rana Sanga, he referred to his army as an ‘army of Islam’ and himself as a *ghazi*, or ‘holy warrior’, a title he now added to his seal.6 Immediately after the contest, though, the title disappeared from his vocabulary.

After his twin victories at Panipat and Khanua, Babur swiftly moved to consolidate his authority in a strip of territory stretching from eastern Afghanistan through the central Punjab to the mid-Gangetic plain. For personnel and models of governance he drew on his Central Asian and Timurid past, placing Turks and Mongols in the kingdom’s governing core. Although he was thoroughly conversant in Persian as a medium of cosmopolitan culture, his principal supporters were fellow Turkish-speakers. Having spent nearly his entire life leading a steppe-based band of warriors, he saw himself as the first among equals, very much in the tradition of Bahlul, the founder of the Lodi dynasty. Like his ancestor Timur, he governed on a personal and informal basis: men who had sworn allegiance to him received his unqualified protection and shared in any booty gained from successful military expeditions. But equally, men who had broken sworn compacts of loyalty were subject to severe punishments. For Babur, like Timur, was capable of inflicting severe cruelty, such as impaling defeated enemies or erecting towers filled with their skulls. Above all, although he held neither India nor Indians in very high regard, he was pragmatic, being well aware of his precarious position as an outsider in a large and politically volatile land. He was therefore quick to reach agreements with the Sisodiya lineage after defeating Rana Sanga at Khanua, as he did with other Rajput leaders in Awadh, Malwa and the Punjab.

The dynastic change in north India from Lodi to Mughal was accompanied by a change in royal patronage of Sufi orders. The dominant Sufi order in Babur’s homeland, the Naqshbandis, had been led by the eminent Shaikh Ubaid Allah Ahrar \(d. 1490\) who, thanks to the lavish patronage heaped on him by Timurid princes, also happened to be the largest single landowner in Central Asia. Babur’s father had been one of his many disciples, and Babur himself, while still a young man in Central Asia, once dreamt that Shaikh Ahrar appeared before him and allowed him to seize Samarqand, which he actually did soon after that dream. From his capital in Agra, Babur maintained close ties with Naqshbandi shaikhs in Central Asia, even though Chishti shaikhs were then dominant in Delhi, thanks to patronage by the erstwhile Lodi regime. At the Battle of Panipat, Delhi’s leading Chishti shaikh of the day, ‘Abd al-Quddus Gangohi, had prayed for the success of his Lodi patrons. But when the latter were defeated, the Mughal victors captured the shaikh and forced him to walk the sixty-five kilometres back to Delhi.7 Babur’s attitude to living Chishtis who had opposed him obviously differed from his respect for the shrines of revered Chishti saints.

Although he reigned in India for just under four years, Babur left a solid foundation for his descendants to build on: a ruling structure dominated by Mongols and Turks, a court guided by a Timurid ruling ideology, the spiritual direction of Naqshbandi shaikhs, and durable ties between India and the Persianate world. He left no grand monuments, apart from mosques at Panipat, Sambhal and Ayodhya, but he did bequeath to his successors a refined aesthetic sensibility and a fascination with the natural world, as is graphically reflected in his memoirs. He established gardens nearly everywhere that he could, recreating in India the same green, symmetrical and carefully laid-out spaces that might recall a Central Asian oasis. One of his first acts upon seizing Agra was to plant Afghan melons and grapes in his ‘Garden of the Eight Paradises’. Although surviving today only in fragments, the garden’s interlocking canals and raised walkways introduced to India the Timurid, and ultimately Persianate, scheme of a walled-in garden divided into quarters.8 And his *Babur-nama* gave subsequent dynastic rulers – most immediately, his son Humayun – a narrative lesson on proper governance and leadership. Its gazetteer quality also sketched out the idea, more fully developed later in the dynasty’s history, that, to rule a kingdom, its peoples and places must be identified, located and enumerated.



## HUMAYUN

Although repeatedly dismayed with his behaviour, in the end Babur favoured Humayun over his younger sons to manage the newly won kingdom. On one occasion, when Humayun lay seriously ill, he even vowed to offer his own life for that of his ailing son. Upon praying while thrice circumambulating Humayun’s bed, he sensed that Humayun’s illness had passed. He was right about that, but soon thereafter Babur himself was stricken by a severe illness to which he succumbed in December 1530. According to his wishes, he was buried in a magnificent garden he had earlier laid out on a Kabul hillside.

In what were reportedly his last words, Babur admonished Humayun to do nothing against his brothers, even though they might deserve it.9 Humayun steadfastly followed this advice, despite being betrayed time and again by his half-brothers Kamran, ‘Askari and Hindal – especially Kamran. One reason for his brothers’ frequent deceits lay in the Turko-Mongol tradition of collective sovereignty that Babur had inherited. In this theory, territorial sovereignty was shared collectively by a clan’s male members, meaning that a ruler’s nearest male relations had equal claims on succeeding to supreme rulership on his death. This explains why, when Babur was a youth in Ferghana and Samarqand, his closest relatives had also been his foremost political rivals. And it explains why, even though most of his successors on the Mughal throne preferred to be succeeded by their eldest son, younger sons fiercely challenged that idea; and why, from the sixteenth to the early eighteenth centuries, succession disputes were often bloody, fratricidal affairs. The idea of collective sovereignty also accounts for the practice of distributing large tracts of sovereign territory to royal princes to be governed on a semi-independent and semi-permanent basis. Accordingly, Babur had assigned to each of his sons separate territories to govern as semi-independent rulers – Humayun in Badakhshan, Kamran in Kandahar and Kabul, and ‘Askari in Multan.10 As soon as Humayun assumed sovereign authority, his brothers began plotting to take over the kingdom. Kamran, in particular, occupied Punjab from his base in Kabul, where he began drawing to his service officers formerly loyal to his father.

Meanwhile, Humayun marched eastwards to confront rebellious Afghans who had been driven down the Gangetic plain in the course of Babur’s initial conquest. Near Lakhnau he engaged and defeated Ibrahim Lodi’s brother Mahmud, who had declared himself sultan after Ibrahim’s defeat at Panipat. Then he heard that the powerful ruler of Gujarat, Sultan Bahadur, was planning to invade Mughal territories with the aid of the Portuguese, who had recently established a number of trading posts along India’s western shores. So in 1535 he turned to the south-west and confronted the Gujarat ruler. Although he managed to capture the strategic fort of Champaner, Humayun failed to pursue the fleeing Bahadur, much less advance further and annex the whole province. Instead, he abandoned his Gujarat campaign in order to resume his drive against Afghans, whose numbers continued to grow in the eastern Gangetic region, and who had allied themselves with remnants of the defeated Lodis.

Many of these soldiers regrouped around one of the most brilliant warriors of the age, the Afghan chieftain Sher Khan Sur. In point of military talent, he and Humayun differed profoundly. Whereas the former was strategically gifted and bold, the latter was inept and excessively cautious. Whereas the Afghan chieftain was self-disciplined, Humayun indulged in protracted bouts with wine or drugs. Sher Khan’s career also suggests how Afghans had become rooted in the north Indian countryside since the mid fifteenth century. Born as Farid Khan in 1486 in present-day Haryana, he was known in his youth as Sher Khan owing to his reputation for courage, for *shir* is Persian for lion \(or tiger\). But because he belonged to the Sur clan, a marginal Afghan lineage unrelated to the politically dominant Lodis, he lacked ready access to upper India’s rich agrarian resources. At some point between 1501 and 1511 he became a freelance soldier in the Jaunpur region. But it was further down the Gangetic plain, in western Bihar, that he built up a political base. There he recruited Afghans who had formerly served the Lodis before their defeat by Babur, and also local villagers who, when agricultural labour was in low demand, constituted the region’s pool of available military labour. Through non-Afghan middlemen, whose friendship and confidence he cultivated, Sher Khan was able to acquire local manpower to which he would otherwise have had no access. He then commanded these men with a combination of generosity and strict discipline: soldiers received regular monthly salaries but were subjected to systematic military drills.

The key to tapping into India’s military labour market, in Bihar as elsewhere, was access to cash. To this end, Sher Khan shrewdly gave refuge to a wealthy and respectable widow who belonged to one of the most powerful clans in the former Lodi regime. From her wealth he bulked up the number of troops under his command while placating the Mughal governor of Jaunpur to his west with tribute. This enabled him to mount a bold invasion eastwards. Skirting the defences of Sultan Ghiyath al-Din Mahmud Shah \(r. 1532–38\) of Bengal, he dashed straight to the latter’s capital of Gaur. Overwhelmed, the sultan was forced to concede all territories west of Rajmahal and to pay Sher Khan an annual tribute of 900,000 *tanka*s, cash that enabled the Afghan warlord to augment his armies still further. In 1537, when the sultan failed to pay his annual tribute, Sher Khan sent his generals into the delta and toppled his regime. After capturing the Bengal sultanate’s considerable treasure, Sher Khan commanded 40,000 cavalry, 1,500 war-elephants, 300 boats and 200,000 infantry. This gave him the confidence to crown himself sultan, adopt the sovereign title of Sher Shah Sur, and undertake the ultimate goal of overthrowing the new Mughal dynasty.11

Meanwhile, Humayun continued to pursue rebellious Afghans across upper India, marching from Bihar to Bengal. In response, Sher Shah merely melted into Bihar’s interior, allowing the Mughal sovereign to occupy Bengal’s capital of Gaur in 1538. But just then, Humayun’s younger half-brother Hindal audaciously stormed the Mughal capital of Agra and declared himself king. Such treachery did not stop there. With Humayun still in distant Bengal and the whole of upper India in turmoil, Kamran marched down from the Punjab, ostensibly to assist Humayun in his struggles with Afghans, but actually to cut a deal with Hindal to divide up the new kingdom and rid them both of their elder brother. In 1539, when Humayun heard this news he hastily moved towards upper India, even though that year’s monsoon rains had already submerged much of the Bengal delta. His luck then passed from bad to worse. At Chausa, by the Ganges in western Bihar, Sher Shah seized the moment to pounce upon Humayun, thoroughly outmanoeuvring and decimating his army. The Mughal monarch barely managed to escape with his life, swimming across the river with the help of an air-filled animal skin.12

The hapless Humayun then returned to Agra and, perhaps recalling his father’s dying admonition, generously pardoned his brothers for their treasonous behaviour. Yet even as news arrived of Sher Shah’s steady advance up the Gangetic plain towards Agra, the brothers could not agree on a common strategy. Ultimately, Kamran withdrew to Lahore, where he again raised an independent army. In May 1540, Humayun confronted Sher Shah at Kanauj, but owing to strategic military blunders he was again defeated and forced to retreat to Lahore. Sensing total victory, and with none of Babur’s sons able to challenge him, Sher Shah rejected Humayun’s offer to let him rule all Hindustan except the Punjab. The Afghan then drove the Mughals out of Lahore. Kamran and ‘Askari still governed in Afghanistan, but Humayun and his youngest half-brother Hindal were left with no sovereign domain at all.

The Mughals having vacated the entire Indo-Gangetic plain, Sher Shah now set himself up in Delhi as Hindustan’s sole sovereign and founder of a new ruling house, the Sur dynasty \(1540–56\). For five years, until his untimely death in 1545, he governed a realm renowned for its stability, prosperity and orderly government. As king, he brought to the art of governance the same discipline that as warlord he had brought to recruiting, training and commanding his army. To ensure a predictable flow of revenue to the royal centre, he systemized the measurement of agricultural lands, something that had been introduced only sporadically by previous rulers of the Delhi sultanate, notably ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji. He also stabilized his regime’s economy by establishing a trimetallic currency based on the silver *rupiya*, which he issued at a standard weight of 178 grains, complemented by the gold *mohur* and the copper *dam*. This standardized silver coin anticipated the modern rupee, found in states of South and South-east Asia today. Well aware of India’s strategic need for commerce with Central Asia, especially for importing war-horses, he renovated and extended one of the most famous roads in Asia – the Grand Trunk Road linking Sonargaon in eastern Bengal with Peshawar in western Punjab, with further extensions to Kabul. Because so many of his governing traditions have survived into modern times, the Republic of India issued a postage stamp in his honour in 1970, as did Pakistan in 1991.

Sher Shah’s most visible legacy lies in his architectural projects. In Delhi, he made considerable alterations and additions to the Purana Qila, the palace–citadel complex that Humayun had begun building in 1533. There he patronized the construction of an elaborately decorated mosque, whose façade of articulated entrance archway and alternating red sandstone and white marble recalls the entranceway of the Alai Darwaza in Delhi’s Qutb Minar complex, suggesting Sher Shah’s intention to link himself visually to Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalji, the mightiest of Delhi’s sultans. He also built a pair of imposing forts: Rohtas in western Punjab near the city of Jhelum, and Rohtasgarh in the Son valley, south-western Bihar. Finally, in Sasaram, his original political base 115 kilometres east of Benares, he built for himself a large three-storeyed domed octagonal mausoleum. Standing in the middle of an artificial lake, this massive structure rises to forty-six metres, surpassing in size the tomb of any previous Indian ruler. Nearby, his son and successor, Islam Shah Sur \(r. 1545–54\), began an even larger octagonal tomb for himself, but it was never completed. The scale of these tombs probably motivated subsequent Mughal rulers to build ever more monumental tomb complexes for themselves – most spectacularly, the Taj Mahal – by outperforming their former Afghan adversaries.13

For the fourteen years when Sher Shah and his son enjoyed north India’s political limelight, Humayun was driven off the stage entirely. During the first period of Sher Shah’s reign, the fugitive Mughal roamed across Sind and Rajasthan seeking allies and troops with which to reclaim his lost kingdom. But Sher Shah had pressured Humayun’s potential Rajput allies into refusing his overtures. Meanwhile, his brothers had become politically divided: Kamran and ‘Askari remained in Afghanistan, aloof and still opposed to their older brother, while Hindal, formerly so disloyal, joined the royal camp. In 1541 Humayun even married the daughter of Hindal’s tutor. The next year he and his party crossed the scorching Thar Desert en route to Sind under extremely stressful circumstances. When the horse his pregnant wife was riding died, Humayun gave her his own horse and rode a camel. Matters improved later that year when the party reached Umarkot, in Sind. The amir of that province, one of Humayun’s appointees who had earlier served Babur, helped his guest gather horses and arms. It was also there that Humayun’s wife Hamida gave birth to the king’s first son, the future emperor Akbar. The next year, they crossed the Indus and headed north-west towards Kandahar where Humayun, ever sanguine about his siblings’ loyalty, planned to rally his brothers in a bid to recover his throne from Sher Shah. But Hindal, already sent ahead to Kandahar, was arrested by Kamran for refusing to have the Friday prayers read in the latter’s name. Kamran also sent ‘Askari from Kabul with an army to confront the advancing Humayun. Under these circumstances, and with no better options in sight, the fugitive monarch avoided all his brothers and marched westwards toward Iran, where he hoped to secure help from the Safavid monarch. Since it was December and travel would be difficult in the snow and bitter cold, the infant Akbar was left in Kandahar in the care of ‘Askari’s wife. With Hamida and just forty men, Humayun undertook the arduous trip across western Afghanistan. In one snowy night they were so weakened from hunger that Humayun ordered a horse to be killed, and the party was reduced to eating boiled horsemeat in their helmets – another of Humayun’s many low points.

After a month they finally reached Herat, where their Iranian hosts gave them a warm welcome. The city had succeeded Samarqand as the Timurid capital soon after Timur’s death in 1405, and it was still ruled by a Timurid prince when Babur visited it a century later. When Humayun and his party arrived, it was held by Shah Tahmasp \(r. 1524–76\), the second ruler of Iran’s Safavid dynasty. Under both Timurid and Safavid rule, Herat had flourished as a major centre of Persianate culture, with its magnificent Timurid monuments and the studio of the brilliant miniature artist, Behzad, who had died nearly a decade earlier. When shown that artist’s work, Humayun made it known that, should he regain his Indian kingdom, he would patronize Behzad’s pupils. In July 1544 Humayun reached the Safavid capital of Qazvin, where he had his first audience with Shah Tahmasp. The Iranian monarch, however, pressured his fugitive guest to convert to Islam’s Shi‘i sect, which Shah Isma‘il had recently imposed across the Iranian plateau. Aware that he stood little chance of acquiring material assistance without acceding to his host’s demands, Humayun went through the formalities of showing his Shi‘i allegiance, just as his father had done when in similar straits. Swallowing his pride, he also agreed to hand over the city of Kandahar, in return for which Shah Tahmasp provided him with 10,000 cavalrymen for recovering his Indian kingdom.

In the spring of 1545 a combined Mughal–Safavid force marched into Afghanistan, taking first Kandahar from ‘Askari and then Kabul from Kamran, although both brothers evaded capture. Humayun’s next steps would both re-establish Mughal rule and define Mughal culture. First, in the course of the Afghan campaigns the infant Akbar was joyfully reunited with his parents, guaranteeing the continuance of the Mughal dynasty. Second, by reconfirming the tax-free land holdings of Naqshbandi shaikhs, the Sufi order traditionally favoured by Timurid princes, Humayun consolidated his grip on Kabul. What had been his father’s base for conquering Hindustan would now be his own for reconquering it. And third, he acted on his resolve, sworn while in Behzad’s studio in Herat, to promote Persian culture by recruiting and patronizing the brightest artistic and literary luminaries he could find. Some of them accompanied Humayun on his return to India; others migrated after he had regained his kingdom.

Humayun’s return to power, however, would take time. Although his old nemesis, Sher Shah, had been killed in a cannon accident in May 1545, the Afghan ruler’s son Islam Shah quickly consolidated his grip over Hindustan, while Kamran and ‘Askari continued to challenge their elder brother for dominance of eastern Afghanistan. In 1548 Humayun defeated Kamran in battle, after which he hosted a grand feast of reconciliation for all his brothers. But Kamran and ‘Askari again took up arms against him. Several years later he managed to capture ‘Askari, whom he exiled, but his younger brother Hindal – of late such a loyal ally – was killed by Kamran’s forces. In 1553 Humayun for a last time captured Kamran, yet he could not bring himself to have his troublesome brother executed. Instead, he had him blinded and sent off to Mecca. The next year, with the issue of his brothers finally settled, Humayun began to reoccupy territory in the Punjab, assisted by the expert military leadership of Bairam Khan, a former servant of Babur who had joined the royal camp during Humayun’s long period of wandering. Also favouring his cause was the political chaos then gripping Delhi, as five successive rulers of Sher Shah Sur’s dynasty rose to power during the year following Islam Shah’s death in 1554. The sudden collapse of the Sur house appears to have energized Humayun and concentrated his focus in ways seldom seen earlier in his career. In July 1555 he and his troops triumphantly entered Delhi.

Restored at last to his throne, Humayun acted vigorously to reestablish his authority after a fifteen-year absence. He also redefined the nature of Mughal kingship in ways that departed from his father’s ‘first-among-equals’ style of governance. Acting within the Timurid tradition, Babur had given his sons separate, semi-independent regions to govern. But Humayun’s long and painful experience with his brothers set a precedent for how subsequent Mughals, having attained the throne, would deal with their own brothers. Notwithstanding his mild temperament and his father’s admonitions to show kindness to his brothers, Humayun’s actions marked a crucial step in making succession to the Mughal throne a bloody fraternal struggle.

Humayun’s problems with his brothers also led him to embrace a more centralized notion of royal authority, which was elaborately enacted in courtly rituals derived from his fascination with astrology and cosmology.14 These rituals were set under a tent and on a carpet bearing a geocentric model of the universe, with concentric circles corresponding to the planets, the sun and the moon, each assigned a distinctive colour, with different classes of courtiers seated within spaces associated with particular planets. The tent above the carpet resembled a round horoscope, with the twelve zodiac signs and stars indicated by holes in the tent’s inner cover. Since the carpet and tent could be easily folded and carried around, the scheme was ideally suited for a court that was itself mobile – a practice reflecting the Mughals’ pastoral–nomadic origins. These rituals were carried over to Humayun’s royal palace in Delhi’s Purana Qila, which was said to have had seven rooms, each dedicated to a planet. Every day of the week, the king would hold court in the room corresponding to that day’s planetary ruler, wearing robes in colours corresponding to that planet.15

Central to Humayun’s courtly style was his identification with the sun, which was coloured gold on his courtly carpet and placed in the middle of the planetary spheres. He also greeted the rising sun every morning, showing his face to the public just as the sun showed itself to the king. The custom corresponded to a traditional Indian rite whereby a king would appear each morning for viewing by his subjects, seated icon-like in a small, raised pavilion called a *jharokha*, which projected from a royal palace’s exterior walls. Whereas the entire rite would be carried over by Akbar, complete with the *jharokha*, we already perceive its antecedents in Humayun’s daily ritual, suggesting an early stage in the progressive Indianization of the Mughals’ political culture. This is also seen in the king’s marriage to the daughter of an Indian Muslim landholder rather than to a Central Asian Timurid, and his encouraging his nobles to do the same. Finally, Humayun confirmed, rather than rescinded, key administrative initiatives undertaken by his bitter rival, Sher Shah. These included the Afghan king’s trimetallic currency system based on a standardized silver *rupiya* and his division of the kingdom’s administration into fixed territorial units, or *sarkar*s, subdivided in districts, or *pargana*s. From Sher Shah’s administration on, revenue and judicial officers were posted at both *sarkar* and *pargana* levels, thereby ensuring an orderly system of land-revenue assessment and collection. Further, to centralize his administration, Humayun designated as much revenue-producing land as possible as *khalisa*, or land administered directly by the state, rather than by nobles.

In short, many of the ideological and institutional foundations of Mughal rule commonly associated with the reign of Akbar \(r. 1556–1605\) were already in place during Humayun’s turbulent reign, or during the interregnum of Sher Shah and his successors. Tragically, however, notwithstanding the many travails suffered in regaining his kingdom, Humayun lived for only six months after restoring Mughal rule. In late January 1556, he accidently fell from the staircase of his library in the Purana Qila and died shortly thereafter. Once again, the Indo-Timurid project was thrown into turmoil.



## AKBAR’S EARLY YEARS

No succession struggle followed Humayun’s death. At the time, Akbar was thirteen and already in the capital of Delhi, whereas his half-brother Mirza Hakim was a two-year old child and in distant Kabul. It was apparent, moreover, that Akbar was blessed with a gift for memory and remarkable intelligence, even though his tutors were unable to teach him to read or write, as he was apparently dyslexic. Fortuitously, the young heir was placed under the regency of Bairam Khan, whose competent generalship had facilitated Humayun’s restoration of Mughal rule. On the other hand, his father’s short tenure after the restoration had given him little opportunity to consolidate his rule, as a result of which the countryside in upper India still abounded with disaffected Afghans. In late 1556 Hemu, a Hindu general who had formerly served the dislodged Afghan regime, seized Delhi and set himself up as the city’s ‘liberator’ and new sovereign. Bairam Khan met Hemu at the historic battlefield at Panipat, using the youthful Akbar to rally support for the Mughal cause. He also allowed his charge, barely fourteen years of age, his first taste of military combat, even letting him behead Hemu so that he could claim the title of *ghazi*.16 Thanks to Bairam Khan’s exertions so early in Akbar’s reign, Hemu’s uprising had been quashed, and the heartland of upper India had fallen securely under Mughal control. The last two prominent princes of Sher Shah’s dynasty, Sikandar and Ibrahim, were soon defeated and driven away, while the stronghold of Gwalior, 100 kilometres south of Agra, was secured after a two-year siege.

In response, many Afghans simply packed up and moved further down the Ganges valley, settling in Bihar and Bengal. In order to put pressure on those elements, the Mughals decamped their court from Delhi to Agra, Humayun’s capital before his exile from India. It was here that Akbar, now in his late teens, began to find his voice as an independent ruler. In 1560 he managed to extract himself from Bairam Khan’s control by suggesting that he do the pious thing and perform the pilgrimage to Mecca. It was an old ploy. The appeal to piety left the veteran counsellor and commander no choice but to leave India and Mughal service. But before the young king could fully assert himself, his former wet-nurse, Maham Anga, stepped into the vacuum as Akbar’s de facto regent. This woman enjoyed immense prestige within the Mughal household, as her husband had played a critical role in rescuing Humayun in a humiliating debacle caused by Sher Shah. But she overplayed her hand by promoting her own son, the ambitions Adham Khan, who in 1562 recklessly assassinated the kingdom’s leading minister of state. This so enraged the nineteen-year-old Akbar that, although the youth was his own foster-brother, he threw him over a palace balcony to his death. When a grief-stricken Maham Anga died shortly afterwards, Akbar ordered stately tombs to be built over both their graves – a politically astute move as the young king sought to assert his autonomy in a faction-ridden Mughal household. At the same time, he restored relations with the household of Bairam Khan, whom he had manoeuvred out of India altogether, by marrying one of the latter’s widows. He also adopted into his household one of Bairam Khan’s sons, a four-year-old child who would ultimately emerge as one of the most powerful nobles in Akbar’s court: Khan-i Khanan. Akbar already understood that a successful sovereign had to build up a large household of loyal dependants who represented a broad cross-section of the realm’s political and ethnic constituencies.

Yet the Mughals were still surrounded by enemies. Powerful Afghan chiefs held considerable territory from the central Ganges valley through Bihar to Bengal, and in Malwa. Rajput lineages dominated Rajasthan, while further south lay the rich and powerful state of Gujarat. For many disaffected parties uprooted by the return of Mughal power, the sultanate of Gujarat offered an attractive refuge and source of patronage. Among those parties were Uzbek Turks, Babur’s old enemies who, as Sunni Muslims, resented the influence of Shi‘i officers who had accompanied Humayun’s return from Iran. In the mid 1560s disaffected Uzbeks rebelled in eastern India, rallying around Akbar’s half-brother Mirza Hakim when he marched to Lahore from his base in Kabul. In response, Akbar first advanced to Lahore, driving Hakim back to Kabul. Then he routed the Uzbeks rebelling in the central Ganges valley. But exerting pressure in eastern India only drove more disaffected elements, especially Afghans and Uzbeks, into Gujarat. The conquest of this wealthy state thus became an early objective in Akbar’s efforts to consolidate his rule over north India.



## EMERGING IDENTITIES: RAJPUTS

However, lying between upper India and Gujarat, and controlling the major trade routes passing between the two regions, was Rajasthan, the hilly, semi-arid tract home to powerful warrior lineages known since Akbar’s day as Rajputs. Despite the occasional successful siege of one of its famous strongholds, neither the slave sultans nor the Khalajis, Tughluqs, Lodis or Surs had been able to subdue these chieftains, much less annex their territories. Nor had any of the sultans of Delhi enlisted into their service Rajasthan’s major warrior lineages, who for centuries had remained Delhi’s obdurate foes. The mutual enmity had continued with Babur’s 1527 defeat of Rana Sanga at Khanua, a debacle still within living memory when Akbar rose to power. In view of this background, Akbar’s signature policy of integrating these lineages into Mughal service was all the more dramatic. This bold break with the past had far-reaching consequences for both Mughals and Rajputs.

Akbar’s Rajput policy, however, did not result from any grand, premeditated strategy. Rather, it began as a response to the internal politics of one of the Rajput lineages, the Kachwaha clan, based in the state of Amber in northern Rajasthan. In 1534 the clan’s head, Puran Mal, died with no adult heir and was succeeded by his younger brother, Bharmal. Puran Mal, however, did have a son who by the early 1560s had come of age and challenged Bharmal’s right to rule Amber. Feeling this pressure from within his own clan, Bharmal approached Akbar for material support, offering in exchange his daughter in marriage. The king agreed to the proposal. In 1562 the Kachwaha chieftain entered Mughal service, with Akbar assuring him of support in maintaining his position in the Kachwaha political order, while his family entered the royal household. Besides his daughter, Bharmal also sent his son Bhagwant Das and his grandson Man Singh \(1550–1614\) to the court in Agra. For several generations thereafter, the ruling clan continued to give its daughters to the Mughal court, thereby making the chiefs of these clans the uncles, cousins or even fathers-in-law of Mughal emperors. The intimate connection between the two courts had far-reaching results. Not only did Kachwaha rulers quickly rise in rank and stature in the Mughal court, but their position within their own clan was greatly enhanced by Akbar’s confirmation of their political leadership. Akbar’s support also enhanced the position of the Kachwahas as a whole – and hence Amber state – in the hierarchy of Rajasthan’s other Rajput lineages.

Neighbouring clans soon realized the political wisdom of attaching themselves to the expanding Mughal state, a visibly rising star in north Indian politics. Around 1564 the Rathor raja of Merta, in western Rajasthan, submitted to Akbar and gave him his daughter in marriage. Mughal support now gave this lineage, a junior branch of the Rathors of Jodhpur, a political edge over local rivals. The same pattern continued across Rajasthan. In 1569 the Hada Rajputs surrendered the stronghold of Ranthambhor in order to gain Mughal backing for leverage vis-à-vis their own kinsmen in south-eastern Rajasthan. About the same time, the Baghela Rajputs of Bhatta surrendered the fort of Kalinjar to Akbar. The next year the Rathors of Bikaner submitted to Mughal power, as did the Bhatis of Jaisalmar. In 1583 Udai Singh of the Rathor clan of Jodhpur was recognized as the ruler of Marwar, in western Rajasthan, initiating that powerful house’s collaboration with Mughals. Driving these arrangements, though, was not just the incentive of courtly patronage. The clans of Rajasthan well understood that refusal to engage with the Mughals would bring the stick of military confrontation. Alone among the Rajput clans, the Sisodiyas of Mewar in southern Rajasthan, north India’s pre-eminent warrior lineage, obstinately refused to negotiate with the Mughals. In response, Akbar in 1568 led a four-month siege of the Sisodiyas’ principal stronghold of Chittor, which ultimately fell to the Mughals, but only after a spectacular *jauhar* in which the fort’s defenders, foreseeing their doom, killed their women and gallantly sallied forth to meet their deaths. In all, some 30,000 defenders of the fort were killed, although its ruler, Rana Pratap, managed to escape. For decades, he and the Sisodiya house would continue to resist Mughal domination, whereas nearly every other Rajput lineage had acknowledged Mughal overlordship.

Both sides gained from the partnership. For their part, Rajputs received high-ranking positions in Akbar’s imperial service, which had the effect of transforming what had been parochial, regional clans into elite players empowered to operate on an all-India stage. To gain this new mobility and status, moreover, Rajputs did not have to sacrifice their autonomy within their native lands, as they were free to continue managing their own courts and internal affairs, a major concession. Moreover, whereas the land assignments, or *jagir*s, of other imperial officers were regularly rotated around the empire, Rajputs were allowed to continue administering their ancestral lands as ‘native’ \(*watan*\) *jagir*s. Mughal support also gave those clans that entered the imperial orbit considerable bargaining strength with local rivals, which is what had induced Bharmal to ally himself with Akbar. Finally, Rajputs were guaranteed religious freedom; there was no pressure on them to convert to Islam. In fact, a warrior ethos common to both the Mughals and the Rajputs superseded religious identities, enabling Muslims to be included as fellow Rajputs within the latter’s scheme of socio-political hierarchy. As the historian Norman Ziegler notes, the category of ‘Muslim’ within a Rajput kin group did not include all Muslims, ‘but only those who were warriors and who possessed sovereignty and power equal to or greater than the Hindu Rajput. The Muslim emperor in particular held a position of high rank and esteem, and the traditions often equate him with Ram, the pre-eminent Ksatriya cultural hero of the Hindu Rajput.’17 In this way, both Muslims and the Mughal imperium could be conceptually assimilated into the Rajput world.

For their part, the Mughals received regular tribute payments from Rajput houses, in addition to the right to circulate their own coinage in Rajput domains, to regulate succession to Rajput houses, to incorporate Rajput princesses in the Mughal harem, and to enjoy safe passage for merchants and pilgrims passing through Rajasthan to Gujarat. Akbar’s inclusion of Rajput warriors in the Mughal army also served a political purpose. Just as Rajput chiefs such as Bharmal saw Mughal allies as a counterweight to the influence of their own kinsmen, Akbar regarded his Rajput allies as counterweights to Uzbek Turks, a potentially unruly faction in his service that he had inherited from his father. Moreover, from the Mughal perspective, the alliance had pacified Rajasthan after centuries of turbulence, rendering it no longer a breeding ground for revolt, as it had been under the Delhi sultans. The alliance’s ultimate consequence, however, was to fuse Rajput and Mughal cultures and, more generally, the Sanskritic and Persianate worlds, which would be reflected in north Indian architectural and artistic traditions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

In these high-stakes political negotiations, the direction in which women were moved from household to household defined asymmetric power relations between Akbar’s court and Rajput lineages, and also between Rajput clans themselves. Just as higher-ranking Rajput clans received women from the households of minor clans, the incorporation of Rajput women into the imperial harem defined the Mughals as overlords of consenting Rajput houses. Only the Sisodiya clan of Mewar in southern Rajasthan, proudly claiming pre-eminence among Rajput clans, refused to send its women to the Mughal harem, resulting in the siege and mass suicide at Chittor. Because Akbar saw the incorporation of women of prominent royal houses into the Mughal household as a tool of empire-building, the size of his harem grew with that of the empire – contemporary estimates of the number of his wives range from 300 to 5,000.18 This had the effect of swelling the Mughal court into a huge, multi-ethnic and women-centred world, with the Rajput element in the imperial harem steadily gaining in influence relative to that of other ethnicities.

To be sure, the Rajputs and the Mughals did not view these political arrangements in exactly the same way. Consider the surrender of the fort of Ranthambhor by the Hada Rajput chieftain, Surjan, in 1569. A miniature painting in the *Akbar-nama*, the official chronicle of the emperor’s reign, shows Surjan submissively bowing down to a seated Akbar, guided by a court servant \[see Fig. 11\]. In the accompanying text the chronicle’s author, Abu’l-fazl, boasts of how easily the fort had fallen, comparing Akbar’s feat with that of ‘Ala al-Din Khalaji, who had captured it in 1301. By contrast, a nearly contemporary Sanskrit biography of Surjan portrays Akbar as having been so pleased with Surjan’s courageous conduct that he offered him three territories in return for this single fort, suggesting that the siege’s outcome had actually been a victory for the Rajput chieftain. This text, the *Surjanacarita*, also has a different take on Surjan’s subsequent employment with the Mughals. Like other Rajputs who capitulated to Mughal overlordship, he went on to have a successful, prestigious career. After serving as a Mughal governor of Garha in central India, he was given charge of Chunar fort by the Ganges near Benares. He also took part in Akbar’s last campaign against the emperor’s half-brother, Mirza Hakim, and died holding a high rank in Mughal service. Yet the *Surjanacarita* ignores all this, emphasizing instead the chieftain’s piety and his pilgrimages to important Hindu sites, as though he had transcended his earlier, merely military service for something more worthy.19

Other Rajput houses resolved these asymmetrical relationships by imagining that they, not the Mughals, were the dominant player. As the grandson of Bharmal Kachwaha, Man Singh grew up steeped in the tradition of his clan’s service to the Mughals, entering imperial service in 1572 at just twelve years of age. His career shows how imperial service could expand the political horizons of an otherwise provincial lineage absorbed in inter-clan struggles within Rajasthan. Man Singh led campaigns against Rajput houses that remained outside the Mughal fold, notably the obdurate Sisodiyas and their chieftain Rana Pratap in the Battle of Haldighati \(1576\). He also fought Afghans in Kabul, led a Mughal army in its capture of the stronghold of Rohtas in Bihar, and another army against Afghan chiefs in Orissa. Through it all, he smoothly navigated between two political and cultural worlds. A eulogistic biography, the *Manacharit Raso* by Narottam Kavi \(*c*.1600\), celebrated his military career under Akbar, proudly listing the many Turkish groups that served under his command, even attributing the empire’s territorial expansion to Man Singh himself, and not to Akbar\!20 Similarly, the Persian section of a bilingual inscription gives Akbar fulsome praise, while Man Singh is mentioned as merely having built ‘a strong building’. In the inscription’s Sanskrit section, by contrast, Man Singh is given exalted titles, including ‘king of kings’, while Akbar is not mentioned at all.21

The pattern of Mughal–Rajput mutual accommodation is also seen in Man Singh’s religious patronage. As one of the most popular *avatar*s of Vishnu, Krishna had been an important object of devotional traditions in Bengal, owing especially to the exertions of the charismatic Bengali saint and ecstatic mystic Chaitanya \(d. 1533\). Already in the 1530s itinerant religious mendicants from Bengal had established places of Krishna worship in Braj, a region located along the Jamuna valley in the western part of modern Uttar Pradesh, closely identified with the life of Krishna. After inheriting the leadership of the Kachwaha lineage upon the death of his father, to whom Akbar had granted land in Braj, Man Singh patronized the construction of a major monument in this region, the Govinda Deva Temple in Vrindavan.22 Dedicated to Krishna and completed in 1590, this was the largest Hindu structure built in north India since the thirteenth century. Its long barrel vault, dome, squinches, cross-vaulting and intersecting arcuated corridors not only employ distinctly Persian architectural features, but create a sense of open space not previously seen in Mughal architecture \[see Fig. 12\].23 While demonstrating Man Singh’s participation in the Persianate world and the Mughal imperium, the Govinda Deva Temple also points to Akbar’s desire to associate the empire with Vaishnava Hinduism, as the sultanates of Kashmir, Bengal and Gujarat had earlier done \(see Chapter Three\).24 At the same time, by patronizing the construction of this temple, Man Singh was acting like a traditional Hindu king, even though he had no administrative or juridical authority in Vrindavan, since both taxation and justice were handled by local Mughal officials.25

Man Singh behaved similarly in his manner of conquering territories and communicating those conquests to his home constituents. In 1594 Akbar appointed him governor of Bengal, where he was charged with subduing Afghan and native chiefs. One of these, Kedar Rai, was the Hindu chief of Bhushana in the eastern delta, whose tutelary deity was the goddess Shila Mata. Upon defeating this chief in 1596, Man Singh seized the deity’s image and later installed it inside his own kingdom’s Amber fort. No break in ritual had occurred, since the Brahmin priests who had officiated at the temple in Bengal were brought to Rajasthan to continue performing these duties. But politically, Kedar Rai was left with neither sovereign domain nor protective goddess, whereas Man Singh had practically replaced Kedar Rai as the deity’s new sovereign patron.26

If the character of the Mughal state had been transformed by Akbar’s Rajput policy, the meaning of ‘Rajput’ was also consolidated at this time. Lineages in Rajasthan that had traditionally identified themselves as *kshatriya* \(warriors\) began calling themselves Rajputs only in the sixteenth century.27 Although few written accounts of the Rajput past survive from the period before Akbar’s reign, from the mid sixteenth century on, just when Akbar was engaging intensely with Rajasthan’s warrior lineages, a number of such narratives appeared in Sanskrit and in dialects of early Hindavi. Since the Mughals had brought from the Persianate world a keen sense of genealogy and the purity of blood as a mark of one’s cultural identity, a clan’s partnership with Akbar intensified a preoccupation with its own genealogy and purity of descent.28 But Rajputs were not just responding to the Mughals’ tradition of history-writing or genealogy-keeping. There were also practical considerations. Since only the Mughals could confirm legitimate succession to Rajput kingship, those clans needed detailed genealogies stating their origins and their exact lines of descent. Rajput rulers therefore patronized poets, bards and genealogists who compiled geneaologies and poems celebrating the heroic deeds of a clan’s collective past. This had the effect not only of sharpening the boundaries between Rajput clans, but also – because there were fierce struggles with other peoples in the region – of shaping the identity of Rajputs as against non-Rajputs. Rajput lineages now closed ranks into sharply defined social units.29

Moreover, at this time the ideology of martyrdom, sacrifice and honour – an ethos present in north-west India since at least the thirteenth century – became securely associated with ‘Rajput’. This indicated a final stage in the term’s evolution from at least the eleventh century, when it simply referred to a military position open to persons of any caste or religion. Catalysing this later understanding was an early Hindavi text dating to the 1590s, the *Prithviraj Raso*. This widely read work celebrated the career of the Chauhan king Prithviraj III, whose army famously engaged that of Muhammad Ghuri at the Battle of Tarain in 1192. The *Raso* transformed the actual loser of that battle, Prithviraj, into a larger-than-life hero. More importantly, it anachronistically identified each of Prithviraj’s subordinate officers as ancestors of the leading Rajput clans of Akbar’s day, while also characterizing those officers as embodying the essence of chivalry, courage and martial prowess. In this way, the text effectively collapsed three distinct time periods into one: the ancient epic past of the *Mahabharata*, with its *kshatriya* heroes; the late twelfth century, when Prithviraj fought Muhammad Ghuri; and the late-sixteenth-century world of the Mughal court, with which Rajput lineages were then closely engaged. Precisely because it encompassed such a large number of warrior lineages and offered them a shared history, the *Raso* contributed to the consolidation of an aristocratic Rajput identity, beginning in the late sixteenth century.30



## MUGHAL EXPANSION UNDER AKBAR

While enrolling Rajput warriors into his service, Akbar and his advisers refined and elaborated the decimal military organization they had inherited from Delhi sultanate, Timurid and Mongol traditions. By 1574 a rationalized system had emerged in which all state servants were classified into fixed ranks pegged to specified salaries and duties, and in most cases to specified assignments of land, or *jagir*s, from whose revenues they were expected to recruit, train and support specified numbers of mounted cavalry. This was new. Whereas appointments and pay under previous regimes had been rather ad hoc, officers were now assigned a numerical rank, or *mansab*, which could rise or fall according to assessments of the performance of the rank-holder, or *mansabdar*. The number associated with each rank originally ranged anywhere from ten to 10,000, indicating how many soldiers a given *mansabdar* was expected to maintain. Soon, however, ranks were expressed in two numbers: the first, *zat*, was the *mansabdar*’s personal salary; and the second, *sawar*, the number of cavalrymen that the *mansabdar* was expected to recruit, train, pay and command. The system therefore required matching a *mansabdar*’s rank with a *jagir* sufficient in size to support his required level of troops. *Jagir*s were also uninheritable and temporary, as both *mansabdar*s and their land assignments were regularly rotated through the realm every few years.

By maintaining a corps of state servants who were dependent upon and personally loyal to the regime, and by keeping tight control over those servants’ powers and responsibilities, Akbar sought to prevent any one ethnic faction of his nobility from becoming dominant. Afghans, only recently dislodged from power in upper India, were suspect among available fighting groups. So were the Uzbeks, who had driven Babur from Central Asia and had rebelled against Mughal authority early in Abkar’s reign. Even many in his own Timurid lineage had rallied around his younger half-brother Mirza Hakim in Kabul. To counteract these politically destabilizing trends, Akbar wanted his nobles to transcend their particular ethnic identities and to consider themselves as loyal servants of the state. This involved transforming the warrior–aristocratic values of his many retainers, regardless of their ethnic or cultural origins, and redirecting their ideas of honour from personal, lineage or sectarian pride to a more impersonal, imperial pride. The numerically based *mansab* system was intended to do precisely this, since a *mansabdar*’s promotion or demotion was in principle based solely on his accomplishments or failures in the imperial service, not on his genealogy or ethnic identity. The effects of such promotions or demotions, moreover, were publicly displayed according to where one stood in the court’s assembly halls, since highly ranked *mansabdar*s were positioned closer to the seated emperor, while lower-ranked officials stood at a greater distance.31 From Akbar’s time on, therefore, we see a certain tension between the ideal of ethnic or lineage pride, extolled in both Persianate and Rajput discourses, and the ideal of a rank-based meritocracy, which was the essense of the *mansabdari* system.

Further serving to create a cohesive and socially inclusive service corps, the court circulated among its *mansabdar*s a common core of Persian works on ethics and morality. Imperial servants were urged to read, most importantly, the *Akhlaq-i Nasiri* by the Khurasani political theorist Nasir al-Din Tusi \(d. 1274\), but also the theology of al-Ghazali \(d. 1111\), the Sufi poetry of Rumi \(d. 1273\), and the *Kalila wa Dimna*, the immensely popular collection of practical wisdom in the accessible form of animal fables. The point of promoting these classics from the Persian literary canon was to construct a model of masculine virtue that could transcend law, caste and religion, thereby providing a moral framework that was independent of the court’s Sunni Muslim clerical establishment.32 The circulation of these texts among Akbar’s multicultural nobility also helped assimilate the ruling elite into the Persianate world.

In the 1560s and 1570s, while consolidating his nobility politically and ideologically, Akbar led or sent armies in all directions on an astonishing string of conquests and annexations across northern India. To the south, he twice sent armies into Malwa. When an invasion launched in 1561 proved inconclusive, a second invasion the following year resulted in that region’s annexation to the nascent empire. In 1564 his forces invaded and annexed the kingdom of Gondwana, a hilly and heavily forested tract to the east of Malwa that was home to herds of wild elephants. This gave Akbar access to plentiful supplies of war-elephants, whose use in his armies reflect the Mughals’ growing reliance on classical Indian military traditions. The 1560s also saw the pacification of Rajasthan, where the emperor’s carrot-and-stick Rajput policy served the geostrategic aim of connecting the still-unconquered maritime world of Gujarat with the agrarian-rich Mughal heartland in upper India. With the important forts of Chittor and Ranthambhor in Mughal hands by 1568, and with most of the rest of Rajasthan under indirect control, Akbar turned his attention to the sultanate of Gujarat.

As a first step towards realizing this objective, in 1571 Akbar moved his capital westwards from Agra to the town of Sikri, the residence of a venerable Chishti Sufi, Shaikh Salim, whose prayers entreating divine intervention were believed to have facilitated the birth of Akbar’s first son, named Salim in his honour. From Sikri, the emperor then planned his operations in Gujarat. In 1572 he occupied the regional capital of Ahmedabad, legally annexed the province and returned to his new capital, which he renamed Fatehpur Sikri in commemoration of his victorious Gujarat campaign \(Fatehpur means ‘city of victory’\). But the following year, when a combination of Afghans, Rajputs and Turks in Gujarat resisted the new arrangement, Akbar raced back to Ahmedabad in an astonishing eleven-day blitz over a distance that normally took caravans several months to traverse, and reconquered the province. Yet the Mughals’ grip on it remained shaky. Although Muzzafar II, the last Gujarat sultan, had been imprisoned in Agra, ten years later he managed to escape and mobilize sufficient support to regain his throne. Only in 1584 did the Mughals finally sweep him away and achieve full authority in Gujarat.

Meanwhile, Akbar had turned his attention towards the equally rich province of Bengal. Ever since Babur’s day numerous Afghan migrants had fled upper India and put down roots in Bengali society. The Bengal sultan Nasir al-Din Nusrat Shah had actively encouraged the build-up of Afghans in Bihar with a view to creating a buffer zone between himself and the new Mughal state. Even more Afghans poured into the delta region during Humayun’s reign, and in 1564 their leader Taj Khan Karrani \(r. 1564–5\) launched an Indo-Afghan dynasty there. Keenly aware of Akbar’s successes in Rajasthan and Gujarat, Taj Khan’s successor Sultan Sulaiman Karrani \(r. 1565–72\) prudently adopted a posture of outward submission to the Mughals, even arranging that Akbar’s name be included on his coins and in the sermons of his mosques. But when Sulaiman died in late 1572, his son and successor Daud made no pretence of loyalty to the Mughals, striking coins and having the Friday sermon read in his own name. In response, in 1574 Akbar led a large army down the Ganges valley, routing Afghan defenders at Patna. From there one of his generals, Mun‘im Khan, led an army of 20,000 to the Afghans’ capital of Tanda, which he easily seized and declared ‘liberated’. But while Mun‘im Khan was reorganizing the region’s revenue administration, assisted by his renowned revenue officer Todar Mal, the Afghans melted into Bengal’s heavily forested eastern sector and merged with local society, patronizing Bengali language, architecture and literature.33 It took the Mughals another thirty-six years to root out Indo-Afghan resistance and establish lasting authority there.

Hindering the advance of Mughal authority in Bengal was the disaffection of many officers regarding new regulations that Akbar had instituted. In 1574, aiming to prevent officials from receiving pay for cavalry they were not maintaining, he ordered all *mansabdar*s to brand and present for imperial review the precise number of horses they were required to have according to their numerical rank. He also centralized the empire’s fiscal administration by converting imperial territories into crown lands.34 Such measures naturally provoked resentment among the nobles, and in 1579 rebellious officers plundered the fortress at Tanda, executed the Mughal governor and set up a ‘revolutionary government’ among themselves. For several years, imperial authority in Bengal utterly vanished. Although the regime soon restored order in western Bengal, from 1583 the vast eastern hinterland was dominated by a coalition of twelve chieftains \(*bara bhuyan*\) that the Mughals would spend the next decade pursuing. It was ultimately Raja Man Singh – chief of the Rajput Kachwaha lineage – who in 1602 planted Mughal authority in the heart of the eastern delta by establishing Dhaka, hitherto a remote outpost, as his military headquarters. From this point on, the momentum towards the delta’s complete annexation was irreversible.

Contributing to Bengal’s rebellion of 1579–82 was the political emergence of Mirza Hakim, Akbar’s half-brother and independent ruler of Kabul. Officers in Bengal, resentful of the emperor’s new regulations, had rallied around Akbar’s younger brother, and in response the prince, emboldened by this unexpected show of support, marched down to Lahore. Akbar, instead of dealing personally with the Bengal rebellion, in 1581 moved his whole army north to confront his half-brother. One reason for this response was the need to regain control of the vital trade routes leading from Kabul to Delhi and Agra. When Mirza Hakim retreated beyond the Khyber Pass, Akbar pursued him all the way to Kabul. Then, when his sibling fled with his troops to a nearby mountain, the emperor entered the city unopposed and for seven days occupied the throne of his grandfather and father in its ancient citadel. Rather than pursue his treasonous brother any further, a confident Akbar declared his sister Bakht al-Nissa Begum the legal governor of Kabul, in this way asserting de facto sovereignty over the strategic province. When Mirza Hakim died several years later, the emperor simply handed over the region’s administration to some Rajput officers. Like Gujarat and Bengal, Kabul had been annexed.

Akbar’s brush with Mirza Hakim highlighted the empire’s vulnerability from the north-west. Though unreliable and unpredictable, the emperor’s half-brother had at least provided a buffer between the Uzbeks and the Mughal heartland. But with him gone, Akbar needed to keep a closer watch on the turbulent north-west and the ever-dangerous Uzbeks – once his grandfather’s nemesis, and now his own. So in 1586 he moved his capital for a third time, abandoning Fatehpur Sikri for the historic city of Lahore. Meanwhile, Raja Man Singh was sent to Kabul as governor, and in 1588 the emperor himself made a second trip there. The next year he sent his minister Raja Birbal on a failed mission to suppress the Roshaniyya, a millenarian movement then raging among frontier Afghans of the Yusufzai lineage. In an attempt to subdue the uprising, the Mughals launched still more expeditionary forces from both Kabul and Lahore. They also built and garrisoned forts throughout the frontier region with a view to stabilizing imperial authority there. Further north, in 1585 Akbar sent an army into the valley of Kashmir, whose Shi‘i king was defeated the following year. Three years later Akbar made a state visit to the valley’s capital of Srinagar, formalizing Kashmir’s annexation to the empire. Finally, the emperor turned his attention southwards towards Sind, the land of his birth, which was then governed by Mirza Jani Beg Tarkhan, an independent Timurid prince. In 1586 the Mughal governor of Multan invaded the region without success, but another assault in 1590 succeeded. Several years later the mirza formally submitted to Akbar in Lahore and was made imperial *mansabdar* of Thatta, the capital of Sind. In short, the Lahore phase of Akbar’s reign, spanning the period from 1586 to 1598, witnessed a significant projection of Mughal power throughout the Indus valley and far into the mountainous zones to the north and north-west. By the end of the century the empire had embraced the entire Indo-Gangetic plain plus Kashmir and eastern Afghanistan.

How can one explain this extraordinary series of victories and annexations? New military technologies and tactics that the Mughals brought to India certainly played a role. Following Central Asian tradition, Akbar’s armies, like those of Babur and Humayun, were built around mounted archers.35 Numbering 12,000 when he came to power, by 1581 his cavalry had swollen to 50,000. Whereas many of these men had been recruited from beyond the Khyber Pass, the Rajput share of ordinary troopers in Mughal service steadily increased. Some Turkish and Iranian nobles commanded units composed mainly of Rajputs and, by the end of Akbar’s reign, Kachwaha *mansabdar*s alone commanded more than 26,000 ordinary cavalrymen in Mughal service.36 Enlisting India’s finest cavalries surely played a part in Akbar’s military successes. Also important was his use of firearms technology and tactics, such as placing field cannon between carts tied together to prevent opposing cavalry from breaking through Mughal lines. Though always secondary to cavalry, war-elephants were also incorporated into his armies. In pitched battles, Mughal forces were deployed in multiple divisions. Mounted archers would open a battle by probing and provoking the enemy, followed by a strategic retreat aimed at drawing the enemy to charge the Mughal centre. Supported by artillery, war-elephants and infantry, the centre would face the enemy directly while the right and left wings of mounted archers swiftly outflanked and surrounded their opponents.

Rather than mounting pitched battles, however, the Mughals often deployed the more subtle tactic of sowing and exploiting internal dissensions within enemy camps.37 In his 1574 campaign in Bengal, the veteran general Mun‘im Khan became bogged down for months in unfamiliar jungle terrain, while his 20,000 troops came close to desertion from lack of interest in fighting so far from upper India. In these circumstances, the commander’s colleague Todar Mal recommended that ‘the method to restrain the faction was to send money by one who was loyal and smooth-tongued’. By such tactics, wrote Akbar’s chronicler Abu’l-fazl, ‘the dust of disturbance \[*fitna*\] was laid’, later noting with satisfaction that the chosen approach had ‘quieted the slaves to gold’.38 With a large part of the Bengal sultan’s forces thus bribed over to Mughal service, the Bengal army had been hollowed out from within. Such transfers of manpower were enabled by India’s military labour market, which operated not on the basis of ethnic or political loyalties, primordial or otherwise, but on cash and the highest bidder. Because Akbar had greater access to financial resources than the sultan of Bengal, the scales necessarily tipped to the Mughals’ advantage.

Once an adversary’s army was prepared to surrender, Akbar conformed to the classical Indian practice of not annihilating his adversary but of honourably including him in the imperial orbit. Accordingly, when Sultan Daud Khan Karrani of Bengal realized the futility of continued opposition, he appeared before Mun‘im Khan in April 1575 and partook of a formal ‘banquet of reconciliation’, as Abu’l-fazl called it. Displaying warm affection, the Mughal general advanced to the edge of a carpet laid out in a ceremonial tent specially arranged for the occasion. There he greeted the defeated king. Daud ungirded his sword and set it aside. Mun‘im Khan then presented the Afghan with a Mughal sword, an embroidered belt and a cloak. Whether or not Akbar had actually worn the cloak, by donning it Daud Khan had become symbolically incorporated into the body of the emperor, a political rite the Bengali ruler would have well understood since his predecessors on the Bengal throne had followed the same practice.39 Adorned with Mughal regalia, Daud then turned in the direction of Akbar’s capital in Fatehpur Sikri and solemnly prostrated himself.40

A more interesting question is how the common people of defeated states accepted imperial rule. Well before the advent of the Mughal age, Indian bards, poets and chroniclers had prepared the ideological ground for the acceptance of an imperial overlord such as Akbar. In the fourteenth century, Indians referred to the Tughluq sultans using variations of the Sanskrit *sarvabhauma*, or ‘universal ruler’.41 From about the same time a hybridized Persianate and Indic notion of universal kingship became widely known and accepted among the masses, as political and proto-historical works that included warrior tales and retellings of epic stories began to appear in vernacular languages.42 In the early fifteenth century the poet Vidyapati, writing in an early vernacular tongue of eastern India, compared the court of Sultan Ibrahim Sharqi \(r. 1401–40\) in Jaunpur with heaven, imagining his court as existing above the whole universe, and the king \(Persian: *padshah*\) as supreme, with none but God \(Sanskrit: *karatara*\) above him.43 Vidyapati further wrote of chieftains \(*rajaputa*\) from such diverse and far-flung regions as Andhra, Bengal, Orissa and even the Tamil south all coming to Jaunpur and submitting to the overlord, Sultan Ibrahim, in their own languages. The poet here articulated in vernacular speech the essence of universal empire, an idea into which Akbar would insert himself more than a century later.

In addition to the formal submission by defeated rulers and the general population’s acceptance of the ideology of overlordship, the expansion of Mughal power entailed political negotiations and compromises at the local, grass-roots level.44 Across all India, Akbar’s success lay not so much in his superior use of military force as in how his officers co-opted political agents, intervened and mediated in local conflicts, and generated credit among conquered populations. Even as major political actors such as Todar Mal or Mun‘im Khan were cutting deals at the level of high politics, low-ranking imperial servants on the leading edge of the empire’s expanding frontier deepened the roots of Mughal authority by sharing the perquisites of sovereignty with local power holders. In Gujarat, for example, while appointing their own local judges \(*qazi*\), police commissioners \(*kotwal*\) and revenue functionaries \(*mutassadi*\), the Mughals also recruited petty officers from among the existing service gentry of scribal Brahmins. Proficient in both Persian and Gujarati, these Brahmins kept records of goods and merchants coming to the customs houses in bilingual registers. By helping the Mughals realize taxes and by advancing loans to Mughal officials, local merchants – together with the scribal Brahmins – implicitly co-shared Mughal authority with the imperial court.45

Indeed, soon after Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat, the Mughals began to grant revenue-collection rights to local parties, especially local gentry and merchants, including them in the imperial system by giving them emblems, honours and insignia such as elephants, horses, royal robes and turbans.46 Both ritually and practically, then, local actors became empowered. But such empowerment created a certain paradox, since each new perquisite granted to some local notable meant that one more tiny chip of imperial sovereignty had been effectively transferred from the centre to the periphery.47 This fact must inform our understanding of the growth of Mughal power. The Mughal empire was not a Leviathan state, and its extraordinary expansion in Akbar’s reign was anything but the relentless advance of a mighty juggernaut that simply rolled over and crushed its opponents. Although the Mughals propagated such a notion in their official chronicles, their courtly ceremonies and their imposing architecture, power was in reality distributed across the entire social body, becoming progressively more diffused as the state incorporated ever more territory.



## AKBAR’S RELIGIOUS IDEAS

Akbar’s views and policies regarding institutional religions evolved throughout his lifetime, swinging from one position to another in ways that puzzled or shocked contemporary observers. Both in his own day and in modern times he has been called everything from a strict Muslim to an apostate, from a free-thinker to a crypto-Hindu, from a Zoroastrian to a proto-Christian, from an atheist to a radical innovator, even a prophet. Each of these assessments contains a degree of truth, depending on which phase of his long forty-nine-year reign one considers. But through it all, the one constant was the emperor’s unquenchable curiosity regarding all things religious. This was abetted by his awareness that the turn of the first Islamic millennium, 1000 AH \(AD 1591\), would occur in the thirty-fifth year of his reign. Because that year also saw the height of his political successes and the maturity of his courtly style, some of his courtiers viewed Akbar as a millennial figure – as did the emperor himself for a while.

As a youth, Akbar had received a sound religious training by both Shi‘i and Sunni tutors, but as an adult he looked back with regret on his life before the age of twenty-one, confessing that in those days he had ‘persecuted men into conformity with my faith and deemed it Islam’.48 But after his twenty-first year he experienced what he called an internal bitterness, acknowledging that his soul had been ‘seized with exceeding sorrow’.49 Thus began a rocky spiritual ride. This was also when he began marrying the daughters of Rajput chiefs and placing those women on a social par with other women of the court, contributing to the growing diffusion of Rajput values in Mughal culture. Changes in official policies regarding non-Muslims soon followed. In 1563, also when aged twenty-one, he abolished pilgrimage taxes on non-Muslim institutions. The next year he abolished the *jizya* tax on non-Muslims, a measure to which earlier Muslim rulers had paid lip service but seldom enforced. The effect was to treat all Mughal subjects, regardless of religion, on a basis of legal equality before the state. He also banned the killing of cows and peacocks. In 1565 he went further by actively supporting Hindu institutions, establishing a grant that maintained the Govinda Deva Temple at Vrindavan.50 On the other hand, his bloody conquest of the Rajput fort of Chittor in 1568 was immediately followed by a ‘victory declaration’ \(*fath-nama*\) in which the emperor, flushed with victory, boasted of engaging in *jihad*, of occupying a fort belonging to infidels, and of ‘establishing Islam’ there.51

However, just a few years later, around 1571, Akbar fell under the influence of the Spanish-Arab mystic Ibn al-‘Arabi, whose pantheistic doctrines seem to have led him to reject the narrow, scripturalist understandings of Islam as promoted by his own state-supported clerics. His commitment to the more liberal-minded Chishti school of Sufism also deepened. Ever since 1562 he made annual pilgrimages to the shrine of the founder of the Chishti Sufi tradition in India, Shaikh Mu‘in al-Din Chishti \(d. 1236\), located in Ajmer, 350 kilometres west of Fatehpur Sikri. Some of those visits he made by foot across the scorching sands of Rajasthan. By 1577 he was practising arduous physical austerities unique to the Chishti order. It was at about this time, too, that he established in his court a so-called ‘House of Worship’ \(‘*ibadat-khana*\), in which he presided over formal debates between Muslims, Brahmins, Jains, Zoroastrians and Christians. Lasting late into the night, these soirées often saw Jesuit Fathers pose knotty theological questions to Muslim clerics, with the emperor apparently enjoying the spectacle of those clerics being discomfited.

These inter-faith debates led Akbar to conclude, however, that all religions were either equally true or equally false, a position that provoked condemnation among Muslim clerics and dismay among the delegation of Jesuit Fathers at his court, who had been hoping for his conversion.52 Matters came to a head in May 1578 when, in the midst of a hunting expedition in the Punjab, the emperor suddenly fell unconscious, which his friend and adviser Abu’l-fazl attributed to some spiritual experience. Upon recovery, he halted the hunt and freed the animals that had been caught by the beaters. At about the same time he adopted a vegetarian diet and shortened his hair in the manner of religious ascetics.53 But then, about a month after the hunting incident, informed that his ancestor Timur had occasionally read the Friday sermon in the Samarqand mosque, Akbar mounted the pulpit of Fatehpur Sikri’s royal mosque and began to do the same. In the midst of the sermon, however, he suddenly broke into a fit of stammering and trembling. Unable to continue, he stepped down and handed over the duties to a cleric.54

The problem evidently shadowing Akbar in those tumultuous months was how to reconcile imperial and religious authority, and perhaps, ultimately, how best to articulate his own sovereign identity. Several issues were now forcing a break with Sunni opinion. One of these was his multiple marriages, for which his Muslim jurists believed there was no legal basis. A particularly bitter controversy arose when one of his judges ordered the execution of a Brahmin who had allegedly cursed the Prophet of Islam. Akbar was infuriated when he heard of this, especially when advised that Muslim rulers were legally obliged to protect their non-Muslim subjects, even if they committed the act of which the Brahmin was accused. In response, the emperor exiled the judge to Mecca. In August 1579 he went further by issuing an order proclaiming his own ultimate authority in interpreting all matters pertaining to Islam, adopting for himself such grandiose titles as ‘commander of the faithful’, ‘shadow of God’ and ‘king of Islam’.55 Later that year, he even considered substituting his own name for that of the Prophet Muhammad in the Islamic credo, but he abandoned the idea when it caused commotion.56 For many of his Muslim subjects this was simply too much. In 1580, with rumours of Akbar’s religious excesses circulating throughout the realm, one disgruntled cleric urged the emperor’s half-brother Mirza Hakim in Kabul to seize the throne, which triggered the emperor’s long and eventful expedition to the north-west frontier.

During that march to Afghanistan, launched in early 1581, Akbar’s religious thinking made another sharp turn. When his army reached Peshawar, at the base of the Khyber Pass, he assured the son of Shaikh Bayazid, founder of the militant illuminationist Roshaniyya cult in eastern Afghanistan, that he was perfectly free to practise his religion. Learning of this, Father Monserrate, a member of the first Jesuit mission to Akbar’s court who was accompanying the expedition, remarked that ‘the King cared little that in allowing everyone to follow his religion he was in reality violating all’.57 Yet Akbar was still seen publicly offering prayers in a mosque in the Khyber Pass, and he still maintained his white tent where he supposedly performed his prayers in private. But on the return trip, after having driven his brother out of Kabul and reasserted his authority there, the white tent was nowhere to be seen, an absence the emperor pretended not to notice.58 This was also when he confided to Father Monserrate that he was not a Muslim, adding that he would allow his sons to follow whatever religion they might choose.59 The timing of this notable confession suggests that, with his brother eliminated as a potential focus of Islamic revolt, the emperor felt free to follow his own religious instincts. Moreover, it was clear to him by now that his earlier claims to Islamic leadership had proved fruitless: to pious Muslims they were deeply offensive, while to his non-Muslim subjects they were meaningless.

All this was happening while powerful millennial currents regarding an anticipated End of the World and Day of Judgment were roiling in Christian and Muslim societies.60 People in both faith traditions had been looking expectantly for signs of the apocalypse, or even claiming to be personally heralding a new age of justice that would follow the present age of injustice and chaos. In 1501, nearly a decade after millennial expectations had helped drive Christopher Columbus on his famous voyage westwards from Spain, Shah Isma‘il had launched Iran’s Safavid dynasty, claiming to be a messiah figure and identifying himself variously with Alexander, ‘Ali and even God. His Turkoman tribal followers, members of a rustic Sufi tradition of which Isma‘il was leader, believed him to be invincible, even immortal. Such potent beliefs propelled him and his ardent followers to embark on a vast campaign of ‘world conquest’ that would include the entire Iranian plateau, eastern Anatolia, Iraq, western Afghanistan and much of Central Asia.

Instead of first proclaiming himself a millennial sovereign and then embarking on a programme of territorial conquest, as Shah Isma‘il had done, Akbar projected himself as a saintly and messianic figure only after having conquered much of northern India. Apocalyptic ideas were clearly on his mind when he marched to Kabul to confront Mirza Hakim. In conversations with Father Monserrate during that march he made detailed inquiries about the Last Judgment, whether Christ would be the Judge, when it would occur, and what sort of signs would precede that day. Monserrate replied that such signs would include wars and rebellions, and that ‘these things we see happening very frequently in our time’.61 Upon returning to his capital, Akbar once again overhauled his sovereign identity, combining a saintly and a messianic persona in ways that recall what Iran’s Shah Isma‘il had done earlier in the century. According to his courtier and private critic Badauni, the emperor believed that Islam would last only 1,000 years – until 1000 AH, corresponding to AD 1591 – at which point he would be free to abjure the religion altogether. His chronicler Abu’l-fazl, on the other hand, asserted that Akbar had been born to inaugurate the second Islamic millennium,62 a claim the emperor evidently acted upon ten years before its arrival. In 1582, or 990 AH, he decreed that for the next ten years all coins of the realm would bear the same date, 1000 AH.63 In 1585 he ordered the minting of coins bearing only the words *Allahu akbar jalla jalaluhu*, or ‘God is great, splendid is His Glory’ – an ambiguous legend that could also be read as ‘Akbar is God’, with the word for glory also matching part of the emperor’s given name, Jalal.64 But in 1591, when the Islamic millennium actually did arrive, his coins ceased referring to the millennium altogether and began using instead a solar calendar based on the date of his accession.

His ten-year flirtation with millennial sovereignty having passed, Akbar now reverted to his predominant identity as a sacred king. In the early 1580s he had propounded a religious concoction, dubbed the Din-i Ilahi, or ‘divine faith’, which the Jesuits at his court judged an eclectic brew drawn from all existing systems. At its core was the emperor’s self-fashioning as the spiritual guide for his subjects. Despite what his Muslim adversaries or Jesuit interlocutors might have thought, Akbar’s principal ideologue, Abu’l-fazl, implied that his patron did not oppose Islam or any other religion, but rather that, as the most sacred sovereign on earth, he was simply above all religions.65 He had fashioned himself not as a *Muslim* ruler, but as the ruler of all humanity.66 In addition, the Jesuits noticed that the emperor had begun showing increasing favour to Hindus, and that he was venerating the rising sun every dawn from the highest point of his palace roof.67 He had also memorized the 1,001 Sanskrit names of the sun.68

As a result of these shifts in Akbar’s religious ideology, the Jesuit delegation, now very discouraged, gradually withdrew from participating in the emperor’s debates in the House of Worship, grudgingly concluding that he would never accept baptism. This, in turn, left the field open to increasing Hindu influence, not only in the debates in the House of Worship, but throughout the court. Some twenty Hindu chieftains, mainly Rajputs, were now admitted to the innermost parts of Akbar’s palace, a privilege not allowed even to Muslim courtiers.69 Meanwhile, the emperor adopted the political rituals of a traditional Indian raja, presenting himself to both public and private audiences seated in a *jharokha*. Finally, in view of the many peoples and cultures encompassed in his sprawling realm, Akbar and Abu’l-fazl promulgated a policy of *sulh-i kull.* Variously understood as ‘perfect reconciliation’, ‘universal toleration’, ‘peace with all’ or ‘complete civility’, this appears to have been a product of Akbar’s inclusivist religious outlook, which not only acknowledged the presence of cultural diversity in Mughal India but challenged his subjects to engage with new sources of knowledge, even if they conflicted with the traditions of their own community.70 There is even indirect evidence that, with the coming of the Islamic millennium in 1591, Akbar’s adventurous leanings led him to order the suppression of formal Islamic rites, including the prohibition of public prayer and the destruction of at least one congregational mosque. But these decrees do not appear to have been carried out. By 1601, just four years before his death, he had evidently backed off from authorizing such destabilizing measures. In fact, he seems to have resumed practising the external rites of Islam, if only to silence his conservative critics.71

If Akbar’s stance on religion shifted over time, his governing policies remained more stable. Early in his reign, he replaced the Delhi sultanate’s notion of a single, all-powerful minister, or *vazir*, with four central ministries: finance under a chief *diwan*, army under a *mir bakhshi*, the royal household under a *khan-i saman*, and the judiciary under a *qazi al-quzat* \(or *sadr-i jahan*\). These four offices were replicated in each of the empire’s fourteen provinces, co-ordinated by a governor. To maximize control over state revenue functions, towards the end of his reign he made provincial *diwan*s answerable to the imperial *diwan*, instead of, as formerly, to provincial governors. Unlike territories governed by tributary vassals, territories under direct rule were administered by the *zabt* system, according to which land revenue was collected in cash at rates calculated according to which crop was sown, the size of cropped land and soil types.

For administering justice, provincial judges appointed district-level judges \(*qazi*, *shiqdar*\), who judged civil and criminal cases on the basis of the Islamic *shari‘a*. Cases involving non-Muslims were normally decided by village councils \(*panchayat*\) according to local custom, although Mughal judges also adjudicated such cases on the basis of local custom, not Islamic law.72 All this testifies to the care Akbar gave to upholding the principle of justice, an ideal inherited from centuries of Persianate discourse and practice.73 Capital cases and important civil cases were normally conducted by the emperor himself, who alone could issue a death penalty. Punishments, moreover, were not meted out until he had given his orders a third time. Even in such cases, Akbar was capable of compassion. On one occasion, a prisoner who had been convicted of desertion from the army was handed over to him for an order of execution. The prisoner pleaded that his life be spared on the grounds that he possessed marvellous powers of a certain nature. When the emperor asked what those powers might be, the prisoner replied that he could sing beautifully. So Akbar commanded that he sing. ‘The wretched fellow’, writes a European observer:

then began to sing in a voice so discordant and absurd that everyone began to laugh and murmur, and the King himself could scarcely control his smiles. When the guilty man perceived this he put in, ‘Pardon me this poor performance, O King. For these guards of yours dragged me along so roughly and cruelly, on a hot and dusty road, and pummelled me so brutally with their fists, that my throat is full of dust, and my voice so husky that I cannot do myself justice in singing.’74

Appreciating the man’s wit, Akbar pardoned both him and his companions.



## CONCLUSION

Between Babur’s arrival in Delhi in 1526 and Akbar’s death in 1605, the Mughal dynasty had become rooted in the heart of north India. In the intervening period, three monarchs consolidated their rule in a great swathe of territory where the regime’s governing institutions and cultural traditions became firmly established. Yet the state that Babur founded differed vastly from the one Akbar left behind. Having captured Ibrahim Lodi’s capital and treasury, Babur did little more than replace the defeated Afghans with his own people, without substantially altering the Lodis’ governing structure. After Babur’s brief reign, his son Humayun was driven from India before he could consolidate his rule. Ironically, it was another Indo-Afghan, the capable Sher Shah Sur \(r. 1540–45\), who established many of the administrative traditions that Humayun and his son Akbar would then inherit and elaborate. In his long, nearly half-century reign, Akbar put in place the empire’s most enduring ruling institutions, while the dynasty’s character completed its transition from a mobile ruling group steeped in semi-pastoral Central Asian traditions to a sedentary empire based on the economic, political and cultural traditions of agrarian India.

One aspect of this transition was the abandonment, under Akbar, of the theory of co-sovereignty, a Mongol legacy traceable to Genghis Khan \(r. 1206–27\) and later incorporated into Timurid practice. In that theory, each and every prince sharing the blood of a ruling monarch could in principle lay claim to the empire’s sovereignty in whole or in part. Accordingly, the states launched by both Genghis Khan and Timur were, on the death of a sovereign, liable to territorial division among their lineal heirs. Luckily for him, Babur had no brothers competing for his newly won kingdom in north India. But, following Mongol–Timurid practice, he parcelled out parts of his kingdom to his four sons. Humayun consequently spent years struggling with his three brothers, each of whom claimed a share of their father’s sovereign legacy, if not the whole of it. Similarly, rule over Kabul by Akbar’s younger brother Mirza Hakim was also a remnant of the old Mongol tradition, since Humayun had divided his realm between Hakim in Kabul and Akbar in Hindustan. It was only in 1585, after his younger brother had died, that Akbar reimagined the empire as an indivisible state to be handed down to a single heir, while all princes would be rotated around the empire as high-ranking *mansabdar*s, like other nobles.

This new conception of the Mughal state meant that princes, acutely aware of the winner-take-all nature of any future succession struggle, would devote their entire adult lives to building up enormous households, learning political skills, gaining military experience and establishing allies on an empire-wide basis in preparation for the contest that would inevitably follow a sovereign’s demise. Such a strategy not only guaranteed the empire’s territorial unity and integrity from one sovereign to the next; it also meant that the best-‘networked’ prince would become the new emperor, since in any given pool of contenders the prince winning the empire would probably be the most competent militarily, politically and administratively. On the other hand, the system implied that succession disputes would be more intense and violent, since siblings knew that in the aftermath of such succession struggles the losers would be eliminated, whether by blinding, exile or execution. For the winner, meanwhile, it would be necessary to reintegrate back into the empire’s governing structure the former supporters of losing contenders.75 Much Mughal history from 1585 to the early eighteenth century flowed from this revised notion of the state.

The Mughals’ first seven decades also witnessed the elaboration of a multi-stranded ruling ideology. One strand was the tradition of sacred kingship traceable to Timur, who in his own day was widely seen as the expected messiah, a descendant of ‘Ali, and the Lord of the Conjunction \(*sahib-i qiran*\).76 The millennial aspect of the Mughals’ ruling ideology was most pronounced under Akbar between 1581 and 1591, the turn of the first Islamic millennium. Accordingly, he commissioned a chronicle, *The Millennial History*, which declared him to be the ‘Renewer of the Second Millennium’.77 Belief in astrology and the influence of planets formed another ideological strand, with both Humayun and Akbar matching the colour of their robes with the planet associated with a given day. Like their Delhi sultanate predecessors, the first three Mughals all believed deeply in the spiritual authority of Sufi masters, whom they patronized both in life and in revered memory. Although Babur had brought the Central Asian Naqshbandi tradition with him to north India, he soon turned to patronizing the indigenous Shattari order, as did Humayun. Akbar, for his part, fell under the spell of India’s most important indigenous order, the Chishti, which had been so closely associated with Tughluq imperialism in the fourteenth century. But, unlike any of his royal predecessors in India, Akbar not only patronized Chishti institutions: he went further and projected himself as an enlightened Sufi master for all his subjects, reinforced by his association with the sun and hints of divine illumination.

Another strand of the Mughals’ ruling ideology grew out of Akbar’s political alliance with Rajput chieftains and the incorporation of Rajput women in Akbar’s household. This contained Rajput ideas of rulership, reflected in the *jharokha* institution and the Rajputs’ aesthetic vision, prominently projected in the architecture of Akbar’s second capital, Fatehpur Sikri. At different points in his career, then, Akbar variously fashioned himself as a Sufi master, a solar and even divine emanation, a renewer of the second Islamic millennium, a Timurid prince and a traditional Indian sovereign. That last element, visible ever since he first began integrating Rajput chieftains into his ruling structure, became more pronounced after 1585 with the death of Mirza Hakim, who had presented himself as a traditional, Central Asian prince very much in the mould of his grandfather, Babur. Entrenched in Kabul, he continued to use the Turco-Mongol legal system and to circulate the Timurid currency, the *shahrukhi*. Once he disappeared from the scene, however, Akbar felt free to define the empire not only as a unitary state, but as a more forthrightly Indian one. This change is especially clear when one contrasts Babur’s memoir, the *Babur-nama*, with Abu’l-fazl’s history of Akbar’s reign, the *Akbar-nama*. Although Babur had dwelt at length on India’s flora and fauna, he showed very little interest in the cultures of India, dismissing its peoples as ‘infidels’. By contrast, Abu’l-fazl characterizes Indians as ‘seekers of God, kindhearted, friendly to strangers, congenial, and pleasant. They are fond of knowledge, inclined toward austerities, committed to justice, content, hardworking, skilled, loyal, honest and trustworthy.’78 In short, the *Akbar-nama* affirms the empire’s multi-ethnic and multi-religious character, promoting Akbar as a committed guardian of India’s cultural diversity.79

By the time of his death in 1605, Akbar was able to bequeath to his son Salim a consolidated state with well-ordered administrative institutions and a hybridized ruling ideology suited to India’s diverse society. To the south, the five successor states to the Bahmani sultanate \(1347–1528\) had narrowed to four, and would soon become just three as Akbar’s successors continued to exert pressure on the Deccan. At the same time, successor states to Vijayanagara had emerged in the interior of southern India, while European trading companies began planting commercial enclaves along India’s shores a century after the Portuguese Estado da India established its first coastal toehold in 1500. Whereas India’s north, Deccan and coastal regions had evolved more or less separately prior to 1605, after Akbar they were brought into much tighter relations with each other – a topic to which we now turn.




