+++
title = "6 India under Jahangir and Shah Jahan, 1605–1658"

+++





## JAHANGIR

Of his three sons, Akbar favoured his firstborn, Salim, to succeed him. Yet Salim, even while being groomed for the throne, felt excluded from what he deemed his proper share of royal authority. He was especially jealous of the attention that his father showered on his principal adviser and friend, Abu’l-fazl. Already in the early 1590s, he began showing signs of impatience for full sovereign power, picking fights with his younger brothers and engaging in excesses and follies that Abu’l-fazl would bring to Akbar’s attention. This only created tensions between father and son, while intensifying the prince’s hostility towards Abu’l-fazl. Matters came to a head in 1599 when, while his father was campaigning in the Deccan, Salim gathered supporters and made an impetuous strike on Agra, where the imperial treasure was stored. When Akbar’s mother scolded the wayward prince, Salim, ashamed and unable to challenge his dear grandmother, dashed back to his base in Allahabad. In 1601, after Akbar had returned to Agra, he again marched towards the capital, pretending to pay respects to his father. But he turned away, intimidated by the prospect of actually confronting him. Yet when he returned to Allahabad, he followed the urgings of his advisers and set up his own court. He even assumied imperial titles.

A crisis occurred when Akbar recalled Abu’l-fazl, then campaigning in the Deccan. Fearing that the powerful minister might advise Akbar to take stern measures against him, possibly even barring his succession to power, Salim took the drastic step of arranging for Abu’l-fazl’s assassination. In August 1602, while marching north, Akbar’s devoted friend was cut down by Bir Singh Bundela, the Rajput chieftain of Orchha, who was then in rebellion against the Mughals. A deeply anguished Akbar now sent another senior Mughal female, Salim’s stepmother Sultana Salima Begam, to Allahabad to persuade his son to return to court. The prince again yielded to this soft diplomacy, and in April 1603 the emperor and heir apparent had an emotional reconciliation.

But it was short-lived. The emperor’s feckless attempts to check his rebellious son only worsened relations between the two men. First, he allowed Salim’s younger brother Daniyal the honour of using, while on campaign, the red tents that were normally reserved for the sovereign’s sole use. Worse, he tried to temper his son’s excesses by driving a wedge between Salim and Salim’s own son Khusrau, whom he promoted to high rank. This began as early as 1594, when Khusrau was only seven years of age. The emperor also insisted on keeping his grandson under his personal charge instead of leaving him in Salim’s household. Such measures only made the prince more frustrated and rebellious. In 1603, when Akbar sent Salim to reduce the Sisodiya chieftains of Mewar, the last major Rajput lineage to resist partnership with the Mughals, he refused to advance far from the court, fearing that, should his ageing father die, his brother Daniyal would be in a better position than he to claim the throne. Akbar finally relented and allowed him to return to his base in Allahabad, which he did in November 1603, only to set up an independent court once again.

By this time Salim’s son Khusrau was seventeen and, thanks to his grandfather’s promotions, had built up a substantial household of his own. Moreover, Khusrau was the nephew of Raja Man Singh and the son-in-law of Akbar’s foster-brother Aziz Koka, two of the most powerful nobles in the realm, both of whom supported the young prince. In April 1604 Daniyal, Akbar’s only surviving son after Salim, died of alcoholism, which considerably narrowed the number of possible successors to the throne. Four months later, when Salim was in Agra for the ceremonies after the death of Akbar’s mother, the emperor reprimanded him for his many acts of disloyalty, even humiliating his thirty-five-year-old son by confining him in a room for ten days without access to wine or opium, for both of which he had developed a fondness, if not a dependency. All this kindled in Khusrau thoughts that he himself, and not his father, should rightfully succeed to the throne. In September 1605, during an elephant fight that the emperor staged for courtly entertainment, Salim and his son had an ugly, vicious quarrel. Everybody, however, understood the quarrel’s real meaning, for Akbar’s health was then rapidly declining, and opposing factions were lining up behind his two likely successors. Despite Aziz Koka’s and Man Singh’s backing of Khusrau, it became clear that Akbar would never agree to his grandson’s succession. Consequently, when the emperor died a month later, Salim ascended the throne without a struggle, adopting as his imperial title Jahangir, ‘world-conqueror’.

Notwithstanding an emotional reconciliation between Khusrau and his father, shortly after his accession to power, a wary Jahangir confined his son in Agra in a state of virtual detention, cut off from the outer world and deprived of the ability to forge alliances with would-be supporters. But, having tasted the dynasty’s practice of princely networking during the last years of Akbar’s reign, and having nearly gained the throne for himself, young Khusrau chafed at his deplorable fate. So, by a ruse, he managed to escape his confinement and with a core of followers rode towards the Punjab in search of potential allies. He was now in open rebellion. By plundering imperial convoys and using their cash to buy new supporters, Khusrau gathered a growing, though ragtag army of 10,000. When he reached Lahore, however, the governor refused to open the city’s gates for him. Meanwhile, his father and the imperial army pursued and easily defeated his hastily organized force. Khusrau fled towards Kabul, but was captured near the Chenab and brought back to Lahore. On 1 May 1606 the fugitive rebel was dragged, weeping and in chains, before his father in a garden just outside the city. But the new emperor was not about to show leniency. Khusrau’s supporters were impaled along both sides of a road, while their miserable leader was placed on an elephant and mockingly made to receive his supporters’ ‘homage’ as they writhed in agony.

From Lahore Jahangir continued marching north-west to Kabul, for the shah of Iran had recently tried to reconquer the contested city of Kandahar, which Akbar had recovered from Safavid control in 1594. In Kabul Jahangir unchained Khusrau, unaware that his son had been secretly plotting another rebellion. When the plot was discovered, Jahangir executed its ringleaders and partially blinded his son. Secure in power at last, Jahangir made shrewd choices about whom to patronize, and to what degree. He enlisted into his service Bir Singh Bundela as a reward for assassinating Abu’l-fazl. To appease his former enemies in Akbar’s court, and perhaps also to assuage his guilt, he promoted Abu’l-fazl’s son. In the same way, powerful nobles who had backed Khusrau for the succession were reintegrated into the imperial fold. Aziz Koka retained all his former titles and, although Raja Man Singh was removed as governor of Bengal, his son Jagat was promoted. Showing continuity with his father’s pattern of patronage, Jahangir generously supported the family of Shaikh Salim Chishti, in whose village Akbar had established his capital Fatehpur Sikri, and to whom Jahangir owed his princely name.

The course of Jahangir’s life was changed for ever in March 1611 when the emperor met a striking woman named Mihr al-Nissa. He was immediately smitten, notwithstanding that his harem was already stocked with seventeen wives and numerous concubines. Their marriage several months later created one of the most extraordinary marital partnerships in Mughal history. Nur Jahan, as the emperor would title her, was already a mature woman of thirty-four and the mother of a young girl from an earlier marriage. She was also the daughter of a high-ranking Iranian immigrant, I‘timad al-Daula, who had served Akbar and was now in Jahangir’s court, together with his son Asaf Khan. From all reports, Nur Jahan was a capable, independent and intelligent woman of uncommon beauty. In a contemporary painting depicting her loading a musket, her posture and her strong, angular body language suggest anything but a delicate wallflower \[see Fig. 13\]. In fact, she was an excellent shot. In a single day in 1617 she killed four tigers from atop an elephant, firing only six bullets without a single miss.1

Within months of her marriage, Nur Jahan began to exercise considerable influence at court, arranging high positions for her family members and associates. A powerful clique soon formed around her, consisting of herself, her father I‘timad al-Daula, her brother Asaf Khan and Jahangir’s third son, Khurram. Already nineteen years old when Nur Jahan and Jahangir were married, Khurram was brought into Nur Jahan’s clique by virtue of his marriage to Asaf Khan’s daughter, the future Mumtaz Mahal. Of the emperor’s immediate family, he was by far the most disciplined. He refused even to touch wine – the bane of many Mughals – until he was twenty-four, and then only because his father had urged it on him. Since Nur Jahan had no children with the emperor, it was Khurram on whom the clique fixed their sights to succeed Jahangir, in preference to the disgraced and partially blinded Khusrau, the dull and incompetent second son Parviz, or the much younger and totally untested Shahryar.

The ascendance of Khurram – the future emperor Shah Jahan – was associated with the Mughals’ fraught relations with the one major Rajput house that Akbar had failed to absorb into his imperial orbit: the Sisodiyas of Mewar in southern Rajasthan. Ever since the Mughals had defeated them at the Battle of Haldighati, the clan’s leader Rana Pratap, who escaped the battlefield, had led a protracted guerrilla war against Akbar. Over the next several decades he even recovered much Sisodiya territory that Akbar had seized, except the important stronghold of Chittor. During the first six years of his reign Jahangir repeatedly sent armies into Mewar against Rana Pratap’s son and successor Amar Singh. But the results were inconclusive, if not outright failures. Finally, in 1614 the emperor dispatched the veteran general Aziz Koka into Mewar, assisted by the twenty-two-year-old Khurram, his first major military assignment. However, the two had a falling-out that ended with the prince placing the senior general in confinement. Having a free hand, Khurram prosecuted a vigorous campaign against Amar Singh, who, with his forces thinning and famine threatening, finally offered peace negotiations. With a view to integrating this last major Rajput holdout into the Mughal system, Khurram treated his adversary with dignity and respect.

The agreement concluded in 1615 between Khurram and Amar was exceptional in the history of Mughal–Rajput relations. The Sisodiyas were exempted from entering into matrimonial relations with the Mughals; they were not obliged to send their ruling head to the imperial court; and no Sisodiya territory was placed under Mughal administration. In addition, Jahangir made two gestures of goodwill towards these ancient adversaries. First, he returned the historic fort of Chittor to the Sisodiya house, on the condition that it never again be fully inhabited. And, second, he ordered that two life-size equestrian statues of Amar Singh and his son Karan Singh be carved from marble and placed in Agra’s most important palace garden. It was a politically astute move. While acknowledging the unique importance of the Sisodiya clan by monumentalizing its two leading political figures in the heart of Mughal power and authority, the statues visibly displayed the Sisodiyas’ obeisance to Mughal authority since they were placed immediately below the *jharokha* in which the Mughal emperor would sit above his subjects.2

Jahangir also inherited the perennial north Indian ambition, going back to the days of Ashoka \(r. 268–232 BC\), of conquering the Deccan plateau, thereby bringing territories both north and south of the Vindhya Mountains under the sway of a single, northern sovereign. Both ‘Ala al-Din Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughluq had been seized by this ambition. In Mughal times Akbar was the first to chip away at the Deccan’s north-western corner, conquering and occupying Asirgarh and Burhanpur in Khandesh, and the Nizam Shahi capital of Ahmadnagar \(though not its territory\). Early in Jahangir’s reign, Mughal generals waged no fewer than five major campaigns south of the Vindhyas, with no decisive breakthrough. Finally, the veteran commander ‘Abd al-Rahim Khan-i Khanan \(d. 1627\) deployed the Mughals’ vast financial resources to bribe independent chieftains and officers of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar to the Mughal cause, followed by decisive battlefield victories in early 1616 that brought territories between the Tapti and Godavari Rivers into Mughal possession. A year later Prince Khurram reached Burhanpur, by then the Mughals’ staging point for subsequent Deccan operations. From there he sent envoys to the sultan of Bijapur to negotiate a treaty formally ceding to the Mughals the territories that Khan-i Khanan had recently conquered. Khurram then proceeded to the imperial court in Mandu, where in October 1617 Nur Jahan hosted a grand feast to celebrate his recent triumphs, even though in reality he had only formalized territorial gains already made by Khan-i Khanan. Jahangir also used that occasion to raise his son’s rank to an unprecedented *mansab* of 30,000/30,000 and to confer on him the lofty title Shah Jahan, ‘king of the world’.

The Mandu celebrations marked the zenith of the cohesiveness and political influence of Nur Jahan’s clique. Thereafter serious splits developed, followed by a headlong train of events that would end with a new emperor. It began with the first signs of Jahangir’s deteriorating health. For years the emperor had been consuming twenty cups of doubly distilled spirits daily, which by 1616 had caused so much trembling in his hands that he needed assistance drinking.3 In 1618 he began suffering from shortness of breath. By 1623 he was no longer physically able to write his memoir, which he entrusted to the chronicler Mu‘tamad Khan.4 While empowering Nur Jahan, Jahangir’s worsening condition also made urgent the issue of succession at the very time that Khurram, the clique’s favourite candidate, was growing arrogant, thanks to his Deccan successes and his father’s favours. This only made Nur Jahan more jealous of her authority as she gradually grew threatened by, and estranged from, her headstrong stepson.

Aware that she could never exercise the same influence through Khurram that she could through her husband, Nur Jahan began looking for an alternative candidate for the impending succession. Her ace card in this delicate game was her daughter from her first marriage, Ladli, whom she would marry off to any prince she could manipulate. Initially, she set her hopes on the still-imprisoned and partially blind Khusrau, even offering him freedom if he would marry the girl. But Khusrau refused, stubbornly preferring life in confinement with his devoted wife to accepting his stepmother’s offer. The queen then focused on marrying Ladli to Jahangir’s youngest surviving son, the sixteen-year-old Shahryar. Although the lad was widely dismissed as an inexperienced lightweight, in late 1620 his marriage took place, and immediately the queen’s clique began to crumble. Her father I‘timad al-Daula, for years the pillar of the clique, died soon after the marriage ceremonies had concluded, while her brother Asaf Khan stoutly supported Khurram, to whom his own daughter Arjomand Banu was married. With brother and sister now backing different princes, and Nur Jahan’s new son-in-law by far the weaker of the two, the queen became ever more isolated, even as her influence over her failing husband continued to grow.

To prevent Khurram from participating in a succession struggle, the queen persuaded Jahangir to send him back south to resume his Deccan operations. But Khurram, wary of her designs, refused to go unless his imprisoned brother Khusrau, whom he regarded as his only viable rival, be transferred to his custody. Content with having both rivals to Shahryar away from the court, Nur Jahan got the emperor to approve Khurram’s request. In December 1620 the prince left the court at Lahore with 40,000 troops and headed for Burhanpur. Once in the Deccan, however, Khurram learnt that Jahangir had fallen seriously ill and, anticipating his father’s death, arranged for Khusrau’s murder. Refusing to believe Khurram’s claim that he had died from colic, in 1622 Jahangir reassigned Khurram’s *jagir*s in a manner the prince considered punitive. In response, the unruly Khurram went into open rebellion, marching directly north towards Agra, with the Mughal treasury his target. In an imperial order bearing her own seal, the queen then summoned the veteran commander Mahabat Khan from virtual exile in Afghanistan, raised his rank to 6,000/5,000 and sent him to check the rebellious prince. In March 1623 an army under his command soundly defeated Khurram between Delhi and Agra. Mahabat Khan then pursued Khurram in a great pan-India sweep as the fugitive prince first moved south to Mandu, then east through Golconda’s territory to Masulipatam on the Andhra coast, then north through Orissa and into Bengal. Swinging back up the Gangetic plain, in mid 1624 Khurram was again defeated by Mahabat Khan near Allahabad. Once more he returned to the Deccan where, having run out of options, he begged for the court’s full pardon. In early 1626 Nur Jahan replied that he would first have to surrender several forts – Rohtas in Bihar and Asirgarh in Khandesh – and as a sign of good faith, send to the court two of his sons: ten-year-old Dara Shukoh and eight-year-old Aurangzeb. Khurram complied, and in June 1626 the two boys reached Lahore, where they were placed under the queen’s care.

Khurram’s three-year traipse through the subcontinent reveals much about the nature of Mughal politics at the highest level. Whereas a prince might acquire the skills of political networking in a gradual way while serving as a governor or field commander, in the midst of rebellion he had to learn them very quickly to survive. Prince Khusrau had failed that test. In a rebellion lasting less than a month in early 1606, he had only begun frantically forging alliances before he was captured, blinded and imprisoned. Prince Khurram, by contrast, had passed the test, but not without enduring great hardships. In November 1623, by the time he reached the Andhra coast with the imperial army in hot pursuit, he had been reduced to just 4,500 cavalry, 10,000 infantry and 500 elephants.5 But because he managed to stay just beyond the reach of the imperial forces, he had three full years to build up broad political networks across a wide expanse stretching from Gujarat to Bengal, and from Allahabad to the northern Deccan. Everywhere he went, he gained the support of groups either previously opposed to the Mughals or poorly integrated into imperial networks. In Bengal and Bihar, for example, he paid respects to important Sufi shrines, to which he distributed large sums of money, which won him favour.6 He also recruited landed chiefs – especially Indo-Afghans, who had a long history of opposition to Mughal rule – to join him in defeating the Mughal governor of Bengal.7 Such intense political activity placed Khurram in a far better position than any rival both to win the succession struggle when it finally arrived, and also to govern successfully once he had gained the throne.

Another lesson to draw from Khurram’s three-year rebellion is the court’s benign response to it. Once he fulfilled the conditions imposed on him for a pardon, he was fully rehabilitated into the imperial structure. His reconciliation with Jahangir recalls Jahangir’s own with Akbar after he, as Prince Salim, had similarly rebelled against imperial authority. For such reasons Mughal succession struggles, while disastrous for their losers and disruptive for many in the short term, could in the long run be restorative for the empire as a whole. New elites and political networks were invariably swept into power with their victors, thereby replenishing the entire system.8



## THE VIEW FROM THE FRONTIER

Jahangir’s India amounted to much more than the palace intrigues and battles that fill the pages of contemporary chronicles, or the courtly gossip that so fascinated contemporary European visitors. A very different picture emerges if one steps away from the courtly centre and considers the empire’s political margins. In these porous frontier zones, the imperial presence was but a shadow of its imposing profile in Agra or Lahore. In the first place, such zones were hardly empty spaces that the empire simply occupied. Rather, they were filled with peoples of varied cultural backgrounds who had their own political traditions and leaders. Many of them, moreover, participated in India’s vast military labour market. Armed villagers might sell their martial services to the highest bidder, but would remain in service only as long as their salaries were forthcoming. How, then, did the Mughals integrate such politically fluid, often volatile, zones into their cultural and political system? With what success? We get glimpses from a detailed memoir left by Mirza Nathan, a junior imperial officer who was posted on the Mughals’ eastern frontier between 1607 and 1624, spanning most of Jahangir’s reign.

At an auspicious hour on 4 July 1607, Emperor Jahangir sat in his *jharokha* in Agra watching while, below him, a mighty flotilla of warships commanded by Admiral Ihtiman Khan set sail down the Jamuna. Announcing the great military enterprise, artillery was fired with thunderous noise. ‘The conquest of Bengal’, wrote Mirza Nathan, the admiral’s son, ‘had assumed a practical shape, as was desired by all the nobles of the State.’9 Akbar had begun the conquest several decades earlier, planting the first toeholds of imperial authority in the delta’s north-western and western quarters when he accepted the surrender of Sultan Daud Khan Karrani in 1575. But the task of subduing the entire delta remained far from complete, as the region’s dense jungles and ever-shifting maze of waterways afforded protection for indigenous peoples and an ideal refuge for those resisting Mughal suzerainty. When Jahangir came to power, Bengal’s central, northern and eastern quarters were seething with well-armed warlords, most of them Indo-Afghans, who had carved out independent kingdoms fiercely opposed to Mughal intrusions. Socially, the region was a mix of communities: independent Kuch tribes in the northern mountains, ethnic Assamese in the broad, upper Brahmaputra valley, Bengali-speakers in the delta’s flat central and eastern districts, and ethnic Arakanese who, settled in the Chittagong region, regularly made predatory raids in the southern delta. In addition, thousands of Portuguese adventurers who had abandoned service to Lisbon effectively joined eastern India’s thriving military labour market by selling their services to whichever warlord could make them the best offer. Some even set up their own petty kingdoms.

Such was the turbulent, swampy realm that Ihtiman Khan’s flotilla entered, having sailed down the Jamuna and the Ganges. The admiral was first met by Bengal’s new governor, Islam Khan Chishti \(1608–13\), who commanded large numbers of cavalry, infantry, elephants and war-boats of his own. These were quartered in the provincial capital of Rajmahal, in the delta’s north-western corner. In 1610 the governor would transfer the provincial capital from Rajmahal to Dhaka, in the heart of the delta, dramatizing the Mughals’ determination to subdue and annex the delta’s unsettled central and eastern quarters. The fleet sent down from Agra consisted of 295 war-boats, seventy of them equipped with heavy cannon. It was also an amphibious operation, with Ihtiman Khan commanding 770 cavalry, 3,000 infantry and eighty elephants. But co-ordinating river and land operations was always difficult, given the logistical problem of moving men, animals and supplies through Bengal’s dense forest tracts. On one occasion Mirza Nathan describes getting lost with his men in a swamp, wandering about ‘in that deep water in the whirlpool of perplexity’.10 He spoke of ‘wallowing perpetually in mud like buffaloes’,11 and tells of a Mughal army moving against Arakanese forces in the Chittagong area ‘through a jungle route which was impassable even for an ant’. Along the way, he continued:

not only others but even the Khan himself cleared jungles with his own hands and he proceeded onward till he arrived at a place where the boats could not ply any farther. A small gondola was carried with the Khan with very great difficulty. The horses also could not be taken farther. The elephants proceeded with very great difficulty. The scarcity of food became so great that a seer of oil could not be procured for Rs. 15 … The state of all other things may be imagined from this.12

Dealing with the Mughals’ human adversaries was as challenging as coping with the natural environment. On one occasion Arakanese raiders on 300 boats audaciously sailed from the Bay of Bengal to the Dhaka region, where they captured villagers and carried them off into slavery. Portuguese raiders took 1,500 villagers for the same purpose.13

Ultimately, the conquest of eastern Bengal, like that of other regions, was a political process. Islam Khan treated the delta’s warlords as Akbar and Jahangir had treated the Rajputs: while carrying a big stick, whenever possible he bestowed honours on them and confirmed them in their existing possessions, insisting only that they or their close family members serve the provincial court in Dhaka. The governor thus confronted Raja Satrajit, the king of Bhushana \(in modern Faridpur District, Bangladesh\), with a large army but offered him his own territory as *jagir* if he would enlist in Mughal service. After initially resisting, the raja ultimately submitted, in exchange for which the governor honoured him by calling him ‘son’ \(*farzand*\). Similarly, after an initial show of force, Islam Khan met the warlord of modern Jessore, Pratapaditya, at an agreed spot where the governor presented his adversary with a horse, a grand robe of honour and a bejewelled sword-belt. ‘Thus,’ records Mirza Nathan, ‘he was converted into a loyal officer.’14

An important objective of such ceremonies was to draw chieftains to the Mughal cause, on the assumption that smaller actors looked to their more powerful neighbours for political cues. Pratapaditya agreed to send his son with 400 war-boats to join the imperial fleet, while he himself contributed 20,000 infantry and 500 war-boats, together with more than 30,000 kilos of gunpowder. All these were combined with imperial forces with a view to confronting an even bigger warlord, Musa Khan, ruler of an immense tract of the eastern delta and considered the chief of east Bengal’s so-called ‘twelve chiefs’ \(*bara bhuyan*\).15 In effect, the governor offered carrots to large chieftains, enabling them to apply sticks to still larger chieftains.

In Bengal’s northernmost region, Kuch Bihar and Kamrup \(western Assam\), the Mughals faced tough resistance in thickly forested terrain inhabited by peoples very different from the mainly Hindu, hierarchically structured peasant society of the western delta, which for centuries had been well integrated into the Bengal sultanate \(1342–1574\). Kuch society, by contrast, consisted of clan-based tribes whose cultivators paid tribute to a king, not in cash or crops but in rotational corvée labour, rendering service to him for one of every four years. The region had never evolved bureaucratic land-revenue systems as found in monetized and agrarian tracts such as western Bengal. Only in the sixteenth century had Kuch agriculture begun shifting from the hoe to the plough, adopting with it the sedentary life associated with the cultivation of wet rice.

In early 1613, having already subdued the ‘twelve chieftains’ of lower Bengal, Islam Khan sent a large force of musketeers, cavalrymen, war-boats, elephants and cash up the Brahmaputra valley into the Kuch country. Upon besieging and seizing Dhubri, an important fortress on the western banks of the Brahmaputra, the imperial forces pushed on, driving the Kuch raja into Kamrup, where he finally submitted to Mughal authority and was sent off to Dhaka in order, as Mirza Nathan put it, ‘to learn the court etiquettes’.16 By mid 1613 the Mughals had annexed both Kuch Bihar and Kamrup, bringing both regions under direct imperial administration. The land was divided into revenue circles, taxes were levied on the peasantry, and agents were sent to collect the newly imposed revenue demand. The Mughals also required that local militias be paid out of the general land tax, thus transforming a corvée-based militia system into a salaried army under the authority of a distant governor. Mughal revenue farmers who had contracted to pay the government’s land tax squeezed the peasantry for their own profit by raising taxes in their revenue circles. The whole system was supported by tax burdens imposed on a peasantry unfamiliar with a monetized economy. Such conditions led to serious peasant revolts in 1614, followed the next year by a full-scale Mughal invasion in which imperial stockades recently seized by the rebels were retaken by force.17

But Mughal rule along the Bengal frontier was always constrained by the region’s politically porous, sponge-like character. Local authorities, whether natives or imperial appointees, had options: if their overlords on one side of the frontier were oppressive or simply too demanding, they could – and did – cast their eyes to the other side. Apart from the Mughals, these might be Indo-Afghans, forest chieftains, renegade Portuguese, Ahom rajas or Arakanese, among others.18 Similarly, cultivators had to be treated fairly lest they flee their lands, leaving revenue authorities with nothing to tax. This would explain why government assessors sent to recently annexed Jessore were instructed to prepare revenue registers ‘to the satisfaction of the ryots \[cultivators\]’.19 Islam Khan instructed his commanders to offer enemy chieftains, in exchange for submission, the hope of having their territory transformed into *jagir*, with themselves named the *jagirdar*, or *jagir*-holder.20 Mirza Yusuf Barlas, the chief minister of Raja Ananta Manik, warlord of the Noakhali region in south-eastern Bengal, accepted an imperial *mansab* of 500/300 in return for submission to the Mughals.21 The imperial governor well understood the empire’s relatively weak position along its furthest peripheries, where offers of honours, land or a rank in the Mughal *mansabdari* system were more effectual than the application of brute force.

On frontiers such as eastern Bengal the Mughals used various mechanisms to promote cohesiveness among their own culturally mixed imperial corps. The Islamic religion was certainly not among these; in fact, state officials were punished for promoting Islam among non-Muslim subjects. When Islam Khan learnt that an officer of his had converted the son of one of Bengal’s notorious ‘twelve chiefs’, he had him censured and transferred from his *jagir*.22 More important for this purpose, and more subtle, was the substance and political symbolism of salt, great quantities of which had been loaded on to the flotilla of boats bound for Bengal in July 1607. For the Mughals, salt possessed a deep cultural significance since it defined patron–client relations. From the emperor down to the lowest servant, individuals and groups were intrinsically linked vertically by mutual obligations of protection and dependency expressed by the giving and receiving of the mineral: the giver of salt pledged to protect a recipient, and the latter swore undying loyalty to the giver. The symbolism of salt also bound together members of the imperial corps horizontally, as it expressed corporate solidarity, especially at times when the group felt itself mortally endangered. In 1615, during an imperial invasion of Assam, Mughal troops once found themselves surrounded by the army of the Ahom raja. The commanding officer and his comrades wrapped their heads in shrouds and, preparing for death rather than surrender, cried out to the Assamese: ‘As we have taken the salt of Jahangir, we consider martyrdom to be our blessings for both the worlds.’23 Such declarations were not just metaphorical. After Musa Khan finally submitted to Mughal power in Bengal, the Afghan warlord Khwaja Usman became the Mughals’ most redoubtable opponent and leader of the resistance to imperial rule in the delta. When he was killed in battle in 1612, his Indo-Afghan supporters formalized their surrender by presenting elephants to the Mughal general, who in turn gave robes of honour to the relatives of Usman Khan and shawls to 400 Afghan commanders. Then, preceding a grand feast organized for their former enemies, the Mughals distributed the salt the emperor to all the Afghans.24 It was, in effect, the political and ideological ‘glue’ cementing the loyalty of these former enemies to the Mughal order.

Also serving to promote solidarity within Mughal service were Rajput practices that, by the time Jahangir came to power, had thoroughly saturated Mughal culture. In Dhaka, governor Islam Khan had a *jharokha* built into the side of his palace four metres above ground level, overlooking the courtyard. Seated in the *jharokha*, he would review both military and non-military personnel, who in turn paid him their respects, standing in fixed positions according to their *mansab*.25 When Jahangir learnt of this he sternly rebuked the governor, on the grounds that it too closely approximated his own imperial *jharokha* in Agra. The governor was ordered that his *jharokha* could be no higher than half a man’s height above the ground and that nobody could pay obeisance there or remain standing while attending the governor.26 Here one sees not just an assertion of an imperial prerogative over that of a provincial governor. The larger point is that first Akbar, then Jahangir and now Jahangir’s governors had all taken an originally Rajput political institution and made it their own. Even more strikingly, by the early seventeenth century the tradition of *jauhar* had found its way into the practices of officers and ordinary troopers in Bengal, indicating the Mughals’ assimilation of an ethos of martial heroism and honour that by this time had become associated with Rajput lineages. In 1617 Bengal’s ex-governor, Qasim Khan Chishti, and his allies were besieged in a fort near Dhaka and, when it became clear that they would not survive the battle, they destroyed all their women in the terrifying rite of *jauhar*.27 Somewhat later, Mirza Nathan twice ordered his men to commit the rite of *jauhar* should their situation in the heat of battle likewise become so desperate.28

The diffusion of Rajput institutions in Mughal culture is partly explained by the incorporation of Rajput women in the Mughal harem and Rajput youths in Mughal households, which had begun in the early decades of Akbar’s reign. Children born of Rajput women in the imperial harem were treated as full members of the Mughal dynasty and eligible for inheriting the throne. This meant that, although Jahangir’s paternal grandfather was Humayun, his maternal grandfather was Raja Bharmal, leader of the Kachwaha Rajput lineage. Jahangir’s mother, Harkha,29 entitled Mariam al-Zamani, was the sister of Raja Bharmal’s son and successor, Bhagwant Das. Jahangir himself, then, was biologically half Rajput. He, in turn, married the daughters of prominent Rajput rulers who had submitted to Mughal overlordship. Seven of his seventeen wives before Nur Jahan had come from Rajput lineages: two from Amber, and one each from Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Jhabua, Bikaner and Orchha.30 His son Khurram, the future Shah Jahan, was born of one of these Rajputs – Jagat Gosain Begum, the daughter of Udai Singh of Jodhpur. Shah Jahan was therefore three-quarters Rajput by blood. Since Rajput mothers imparted their inherited culture to their offspring, the Mughal harem became a site for the diffusion of Rajput values at the heart of the imperial system. The Mughal connection with Rajputs, then, was more than political. It was biological and cultural, as Rajput institutions, introduced at the upper end of the Mughal order, percolated downwards, gradually diffusing among the officer corps. In addition, many officers and troopers in Mughal service were themselves Rajputs, which also served to lend a Rajput ethos to imperial armies.



## THE DECCAN: AFRICANS AND MARATHAS

One of the most arresting portraits commissioned by Jahangir is the deeply allegorical painting of himself standing on a globe that rests on the horns of a bull, which in turn stands on a great fish – symbols of kingship drawn from Hindu lore \[see Fig. 14\]. All around the emperor are seen images representing his highest aspirations. Cherubs in the sky offer him a sword and arrows. To one side is an elaborate crown above a roundel in which is inscribed his own name and those of each of his royal ancestors reaching back to Timur. Above the crown flutters a bird of paradise. To the emperor’s other side is a golden scale of justice hanging from a chain with golden bells. The chain is suspended between the globe and a javelin, against which rests a musket. In the centre of the painting, wearing a white turban, a crimson gown and impeccably white slippers, is Jahangir himself, drawing a reverse-curved bow and aiming his arrow at the severed head of his most hated enemy, Malik Ambar \(d. 1626\), which rests on the tip of the javelin. Perched on Ambar’s bare head is an owl, a symbol of darkness. All around the head are inscriptions that speak of the emperor’s contempt for Malik Ambar – ‘The head of the night-coloured servant has become the house of the owl’; ‘Ambar the owl, which fled the light, has been driven from the world by your \[Jahangir’s\] enemy-smiting arrow.’31

The painting was completed *c*.1616, another bad year in a series of bad years for Mughal military operations in the Deccan. From the start of his reign, Jahangir had sent army after army south to fulfil his father’s dream of annexing the plateau to the empire. Between 1608 and 1612 he launched four major invasions led by his best generals, but all were repulsed by armies loyal to Ahmadnagar, one of the three remaining major sultanates of the plateau. Although the kingdom’s Nizam Shahi house was headed by a series of weak, puppet sultans and the capital of Ahmadnagar was occupied by Mughal forces, the state was kept alive by two powerful groups: Maratha warrior lineages and the so-called Habshis – natives of east Africa recruited as military slaves. Malik Ambar, a disciplined leader and master tactician, was a member of the latter group. His career is important, not just because he and his Deccan forces managed to check India’s mightiest armies for two decades, but also for what it reveals about the place of Africans in Indian history, and about military slavery itself.

From at least the fifteenth century, cotton goods manufactured in Gujarat and the western Deccan had been reaching the Ethiopian highlands in exchange for African exports of gold, ivory and, especially, slaves. Since the Christians who ruled Ethiopia could not legally enslave other Christians, they captured pagan Africans and sold them to Arab or Gujarati merchants for Indian textiles. The captives were then sent to slave markets along African or Middle Eastern coasts, where they were purchased, converted to Islam and then became either domestic servants or were given military training and resold to other buyers. As with any type of slavery, military slaves were severed from their natal kin group, rendering them dependent upon their owners. And, as with military slavery under the Ghaznavid and Ghurid dynasties, it was assumed that, as uprooted outsiders with no local kin network, these men would be reliably loyal to the state their masters served. Ever since the fourteenth century, the sultanates of the Deccan had been weakened by incessant struggles between the ruling class’s Deccani and Westerner factions. Recruiting military labour unaffiliated ethnically or politically with either group was therefore considered a practical way to neutralize intractable domestic strife.

Masters fed, housed and educated their African slaves, receiving in return unswerving loyalty, which is why courts were willing to entrust their Habshi slaves with such important positions as governors, seal-bearers, bodyguards and commanders, as well as ordinary troopers. But the status of African slaves in the Deccan was never permanent. On the death of their masters, they typically became freedmen and served as freelancers in the service of powerful commanders, thereby exchanging a master–slave relationship for a patron–client one. While the humbler sorts sought out and served commanders as paid troopers, the more talented ex-slaves managed to attract their own troopers \(often other ex-slaves\), obtain land assignments and enter a sultanate’s official hierarchy as ranked commanders or *amir*s. Because their ties with Africa had been permanently severed, these men necessarily adopted the Deccan as their home, readily embracing the local culture and becoming fiercely loyal to the region and its political systems.

This is what happened to Malik Ambar. Born in 1548 in the pagan countryside surrounding the Ethiopian highlands, he turned up in the slave markets of the Red Sea, was taken to Baghdad and sold to a prominent merchant who educated him, converted him to Islam and changed his name from ‘Chapu’ to ‘Ambar’. From Baghdad he reached the Deccan in the early 1570s, having been purchased by the *peshwa* \(prime minister\) of the Nizam Shahi sultanate of Ahmadnagar. When the *peshwa* died in 1574/5 Ambar was freed by his master’s widow and became a freelancer. He also acquired a wife. For a while he served the sultan of Bijapur, who gave him the title ‘Malik’, and in 1595, having acquired a contingent of his own troops, he entered the service of a Habshi commander in the Nizam Shahi state. In 1600 its capital, Ahmadnagar, fell to Mughal forces – but not the countryside, which teemed with troops formerly employed by the sultanate. Foremost among those picking up the pieces of the fragmented kingdom was Malik Ambar, whose cavalry swiftly grew to 7,000 men. Upon finding a prince of Ahmadnagar’s royal house, he promoted the youth’s cause as the future sovereign of a reconstituted Nizam Shahi state. He also married his daughter to him and presided over his coronation as Sultan Murtaza Nizam Shah II \(r. 1600–10\), who for the next ten years would reign as the first of Malik Ambar’s two puppet sultans, with Ambar himself actually managing the state as *peshwa* and commanding its armies. Ambar’s repeated successes against Jahangir’s forces – and the source of the emperor’s frustration, as revealed in the miniature painting – lay in his mastery of guerrilla tactics. Avoiding pitched battles against the Mughals’ formidable armies, Ambar harassed Mughal supply lines, launched surprise night attacks and drew imperial forces into wooded hills and rugged ravines where they could be ambushed by light cavalry.

Between 1600 and 1627, when Malik Ambar held undisputed control over the Ahmadnagar sultanate’s military and civil affairs, the kingdom acquired a distinctly African character. By 1610 he commanded an army of 50,000, a fifth of whom were Africans.32 Habshis entered India in considerable numbers as military slaves, some of whom, after attaining their freedom, would purchase large numbers of their own Habshi slaves. This had become an established pattern. Just as Malik Ambar had arrived in the Deccan as one of 1,000 slaves of Chengiz Khan, who was then *peshwa* of Ahmadnagar, Chengiz Khan himself had earlier come to the Deccan as a Habshi slave. These men could experience a remarkable degree of upward mobility, moving from slaves to freelancers, to commanders, and finally to slave owners. Their experience recalls the pattern found in thirteenth-century north India, where a freed slave such as Balban acquired his own slaves and eventually went on to seize control of the Delhi sultanate. The difference was that Malik Ambar never declared himself sultan, preferring to maintain a puppet sovereign so as not to upset Nizam Shahi dynastic continuity, much as Rama Raya, a century earlier, had retained Sadaśiva to uphold Vijayanagara’s Tuluva dynasty.

Malik Ambar could not have held off sustained Mughal pressure without the substantial contributions of Maratha warrior clans that, together with Habshi slaves, had also been recruited into Ahmadnagar’s state system. Alongside the Africans, the Marathas’ swift and light cavalry units stoutly resisted the Mughals’ cumbersome armies, which they occasionally pursued as far as the imperial headquarters at Burhanpur. The emergence of such units in the Deccan’s sultanates had a deep history. Like the Delhi sultans before them, the Mughals easily recruited war-horses and cavalrymen from Central Asia, owing to north India’s proximity to that region’s military labour markets and abundant pasture lands. But the Deccan sultanates, cut off by hostile Mughal territory from inner Asia’s military labour markets and horse pastures, had to find alternatives. Either they could import warrior-slaves native to East Africa and war-horses from the Persian Gulf, or they could recruit both cavalrymen and horses from their own locality, thereby tapping into the Deccan’s military labour market.

They actually did both. Beginning with the Bahmani dynasty \(1347–1518\), the sultans of the Deccan understood that in order to access the grass-roots source of local wealth – the surplus grains produced by the cultivating classes – they had to recruit hereditary territorial chiefs, or *deshmukh*s, who were native to the plateau. The sultans also needed a reliable source of military labour. The *deshmukh*s not only collected revenue, adjudicated disputes and provided ritual leadership in the lands they controlled: they also recruited troops from among their own villager–clients, who formed the region’s military labour market. They would then make these recruits available to a sultan, who in return gave the *deshmukh*s documents \(*sanad*s\) that formalized their rights to specified lands. Sultan Ibrahim ‘Adil Shah I recruited 30,000 Maratha cavalry for service in the sultanate of Bijapur. He also introduced the practice of enlisting *bargir*s, Maratha cavalrymen whose horses were supplied by the state.33 Many leading Maratha clans had risen to prominence in tandem with the rise of the sultanates themselves. The Shinde lineage of Kanerkhed had served the Bahmani sultans as *siledar*s, that is, cavalrymen who furnished their own horses. The Mane lineage of Mhasvad did the same for the sultans of Bijapur. As rewards for their military service, those sultans made the Nimbalkar lineage of Nimlak and the Ghatge lineage of Malavdi *sardeshmukh*s, that is, ‘heads of *deshmukh*s’.34 The rights to lands inherited by Shivaji \(r. 1674–80\), who would found the Maratha kingdom later in the seventeenth century, were initially conferred on his father, Shahji, by the sultans of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur in return for his service to those states. It was the *sanad* from the court that gave a *deshmukh* authority over his own kinsmen and the state’s backing if they opposed him, as they often did. As a result, the history of Maharashtra and the Maratha polity is essentially the history of these *deshmukh* families.35

Under Malik Ambar’s leadership, then, the Ahmadnagar sultanate had actually become a joint Habshi–Maratha enterprise. Building on earlier sultanate methods of recruitment, the units of Maratha cavalry in Malik Ambar’s service grew from 10,000 in 1609 to 50,000 in 1624.36 In the end, however, it was the Maratha component that would have the more lasting consequences for Indian history. Few Ethiopian females were brought to India, meaning that the Habshi population there could never be self-replicating. Furthermore, the collapse of the Nizam Shahi sultanate ended the patronage system by which African military slaves had been recruited to India. By contrast, the number of fighters that *deshmukh* families could recruit on behalf of the sultans eventually enabled them not only to surpass the Habshis in importance, but to replace the sultanates that had initially recruited them. In short, the rise of Maratha power – such an important socio-political development between the late seventeenth and early nineteenth centuries – was deeply rooted in the Marathas’ prior patronage by the region’s sultanates.



## EMERGING IDENTITIES: THE IDEA OF ‘SIKH’

Especially between the fourteenth and seventeenth centuries, poets across India, writing in the spoken languages of the people, aspired for direct experience of ultimate reality unmediated by liturgy, elaborate rituals, book learning or intercession by institutionalized specialists such as Brahmin priests or Muslim clerics. Some poets focused on fervent devotion – *bhakti* – to a loving, personal deity who possessed attributes that were manifested in visible form. Such devotion was expressed by outward forms of piety such as reciting or singing verses of adoration addressed directly to the deity, or making pilgrimages to a temple in which the deity’s image was enshrined. Other poets conceived of the deity as a formless, eternal, all-pervading consciousness that both created and inhabited reality, but which was not manifested with attributes and could not be represented in images. Both kinds of devotion were animated by the promise of liberation for all sincere devotees, regardless of caste or gender, meaning that the verses of *bhakti* poet-saints often carried, at least implicitly, a message of protest against socio-religious inequality. From at least the late nineteenth century on, it was common to refer to the collective aspirations and deeds of these poets as constituting a ‘*bhakti* movement’. This phrase, however, suggests a monolithic and self-conscious historical phenomenon possessing a well-considered goal, such as a ‘nationalist movement’. An alternative model is the notion of a ‘*bhakti* network’, in which the voices of disparate poets echoed or resonated with one another across time and space, but without there ever having been a coherent or collectively organized ‘movement’.37

In the Punjab, such a voice was heard in the words of Guru Nanak \(1469–1539\). Unlike other poet-saints of pre-colonial India, however, Guru Nanak actually did initiate a movement – indeed, a new and original religious tradition: Sikhism. Born in 1469, Nanak belonged to the rural Punjab’s upper-caste Khatri community. His father had learnt Persian to get a job as a *patwari*, or village accountant in the service of a village headman, working in the lower rungs of the Delhi sultanate’s revenue system during the Lodi dynasty’s final, chaotic days. As a young man, Nanak became a householder and found a job as a rural grain merchant. But he was living in unsettled times; he was thirty-six in 1505 when Babur launched the first of his five raids on north India. The political landscape was collapsing, and to him the moral landscape looked no better. As a rural official who witnessed plenty of corruption first-hand, he concluded that he was living in the *kaliyuga*, that is, a time of moral decay when *dharma*, codes of proper conduct, had vanished. It seemed to him that neither Hindu nor Muslim ideals were being upheld. According to one tradition, a holy man came to him and so ‘subdued his mind’ that he gave away all his granary’s assets, together with his personal property, and abandoned his wife and children.38 He then undertook a series of long trips that included, within the Punjab, sites important for yogi ascetics as well as Sufi centres in Multan and Pakpattan. He also made more distant travels within and beyond India before finally returning to the Punjab and settling down at Kartarpur, on the banks of the Ravi River. Here he famously declared his distance from both Hindu and Islamic institutions, gathering a group of followers who would hear and accept his message. Nanak returned from his wanderings and began his career as a spiritual teacher around 1524, just a few years before Babur swept away the last Lodi sultan and established the Mughal empire, meaning that north India witnessed the launching of two new dispensations – one spiritual, one political – at nearly the same time.

Like other *bhakti* poets, Nanak challenged the hierarchal order of the caste system and delivered a message of liberation from the cycle of births and rebirths fundamental to classical Indian thought, preaching that liberation was offered to all, regardless of caste or gender. And, like most devotional poets, he composed his verses in the common language of the people, in his case Punjabi, with a view to reaching a broader public. He saw no merit in making pilgrimages or in worshipping images. For him the Supreme God is a formless, eternal being who, both transcendent and immanent, created not only the observable reality but also the very deities that head the Hindu pantheon: Brahma, Vishnu, Śiva. He would not worship such derivative, created deities, much less their many incarnations or *avatar*s. To his followers at Kartarpur, Nanak preached a distinctive doctrine of meditation on the name and the word of God, together with an active, ethical engagement with society; there would be no retreating from the world in the manner of monks or ascetics. Release from the bonds of karma \(the theory of action and its consequences\), and the cycle of repeated rebirths to which karma gives rise, could result only from the grace of God, together with one’s individual effort and piety. That is to say, the law of karma might explain the social position into which one is born, but it could also be annulled by the grace \(*hukm*\) of God.39

Nanak, who soon acquired the title *guru*, or ‘teacher’, understood his teachings as constituting a decisive break with existing religious traditions, which is why he took measures to institutionalize his work so as to ensure its survival for subsequent generations. He modified a thirty-five-character script that had existed from before his day, and used it for his own verses – hence the script’s name of Gurmukhi, ‘from the mouth of the Guru’. Just as the Arabic script was associated with Islam, and Devanagari with classical Hindu scriptures, the use of this distinctive script was intended to ensure the unique nature of Guru Nanak’s teachings. Written scriptures also served to stabilize the new community, since they could provide focus, cohesion and permanence across space and time. Indeed, the Sikhs \(from the Sanskrit *shishya*, ‘disciple’\), being a community that coalesced around a holy book, present a clear instance of a ‘scriptural community’. Guru Nanak took further steps to stabilize his fledgling following. He established three daily prayers \(dawn, sunset and day’s end\), and in order to eradicate distinctions of caste and gender he instituted a communal kitchen open to all followers. He engaged in collective singing of his own verses in a sacred meeting place, initially called a *dharmsal*, and admitted followers through a formal initiation rite. He also took great care in selecting a successor, both to institutionalize the authority of his position and to ensure its continuance in succeeding generations. By choosing someone who was not a member of his own family, moreover, he implicitly rejected a dynastic principle for the tradition’s future leadership.40

That said, the religion founded by Guru Nanak, like any when viewed across historical time, did not fail to evolve after the death of its founder in 1539. Some fluidity is seen, for example, in the different terms by which the community was known – for example, Nanak-panth, Gurmukh-panth, Nirmal-panth, Gursikh. The same is true of the growth of the movement’s holy book, the Guru Granth Sahib. Originating in a volume of Guru Nanak’s own hymns that were passed on to his first successor, Guru Angad \(1539–52\), the book continued to grow during the sixteenth century.41 This was a time when devotional verses of poet-saints across northern India were being compiled in anthologies. The so-called Fatehpur manuscript, compiled in Rajasthan in 1582, included the verses of Surdas \(d. 1573\) and thirty-five other poet-saints such as Kabir \(d. *c.*1518\), Namdev \(d. *c*.1350\), and Ravidas \(d. 1540\).42 Similarly, the third Sikh Guru, Amar Das \(1552–74\), collected surviving verses by Guru Nanak and included them in a two-volume holy book, the Adi Granth, to which he added hymns and couplets of more than a dozen non-Sikh poet-saints – most prominently Kabir, Namdev, Ravidas and the Chishti Sufi Shaikh Farid al-Din Ganj-i Shakar \(d. 1265\) – evidently because their thought conformed to Sikh theological and ethical principles.43 Apart from the Adi Granth, however, from the late sixteenth century there circulated oral narratives of Guru Nanak’s life, the *janam-sakhi*s, which freely borrowed themes from tales of Hindu deities \(*Purana*s\), Sufi saints \(*tazkira*s\), and the Buddha \(*Jataka*s\). This sort of diversity suggests the malleability of Sikh identity in the sixteenth century, and the lack of a fixed image of the religion’s founder, whose life appears in these stories to have been fashioned, at least in part, by the fluid cultural universe of early Mughal Punjab.44

The Sikh community grew rapidly in the sixteenth century. Nanak’s earliest followers had been fellow Khatris engaged in petty trade, shopkeeping, or lower-level civil service in the Lodi or Mughal bureaucracies. But as the movement grew, it experienced a significant influx of Jat cultivators.45 The Jats first appear in recorded history in eighth-century Sind, where they were described as cattle-herding tribes that lacked a sense of social hierarchy. By the eleventh century they had migrated up the lower Indus to the Multan region of southern Punjab, where they were described as ‘cattle-owners, low Sudra people’. By the thirteenth century they had moved further north into the central Punjab, and by the late sixteenth century they had abandoned pastoralism for agriculture, becoming dominant landholders in nearly half of Mughal Punjab. Their adoption of agriculture was assisted by the introduction of the Persian wheel \(see p. 73\), which enhanced the land’s capacity for producing food crops.46 The Jats’ transformation from nomadic pastoralism to field agriculture progressed to the point that, by the 1650s, the word ‘Jat’ had become virtually synonymous with ‘villager’, or even ‘cultivator’. Yet their elevation in economic status had not been accompanied by a commensurate rise in caste status in the Hindu social hierarchy. They also appear to have retained an egalitarian social outlook from their pastoralist days. As an open community that espoused social as well as religious equality, the Sikh movement was therefore well positioned to absorb a significant influx of Jats.

The growth in the Sikh religion also saw changes in ritual. Guru Amar Das established festival days and distinctive ceremonies for a Sikh’s birth, marriage and death. Even though Guru Nanak had rejected the idea of pilgrimages, Guru Amar Das built a well of eighty-four steps in his village of Goindwal, which became the Sikhs’ first pilgrimage centre. Before his death in 1574, he had begun excavating a great tank on a plot of 500 *bigha*s \(a unit of land area\) given to him by Akbar. Completed by the next guru, Ram Das \(1574–81\), the tank would become known as Amritsar, ‘the nectar of immortality’. Eventually the town that grew up around the tank would be known by that name, too, as it became the primary seat of Sikh authority.47 As the community grew across the Punjab and even beyond, Guru Amar Das began sending personal representatives \(*masand*s\) to look after distant congregations and to bring annual offerings to Amritsar. This organizational elaboration was followed by attempts to standardize the Sikhs’ canonical scripture. The fifth guru, Arjan \(1581–1606\), updated the Adi Granth by adding his own verses and those of Guru Amar Das to the two-volume body that had been collected by Guru Ram Das. He then supervised the compilation of an authoritative text, completed in 1604. This was done, in part, to commit to writing hymns that in his day were available mainly in oral form, and partly to protect the purity of Sikh verses from interpolations by the guru’s rivals.48 The result was to stabilize the scriptural foundation of the Sikh religion. To strengthen its institutional and ritual basis, Guru Arjun enlarged Amritsar’s great tank, paved it with bricks and – most prominently – in 1589 built in its middle the famous Harmandir, popularly known as the Golden Temple. Apart from being one of India’s greatest architectural triumphs, the Harmandir made Amritsar the Sikh faith’s primary ritual focus, since it was here that the Adi Granth was placed for continuous reading, highlighting that scripture’s role as the heart and soul of Sikhdom. Notably, the Harmandir’s distinctive design and architectural style clearly set this structure apart from mosques and Hindu temples of the day, boldly asserting the autonomy of its faith community from India’s other religious traditions \[see Fig. 15\]. It even appears that Akbar – who had a brief but cordial meeting with Guru Arjan when passing through the Punjab in 159849 – allowed the latter to manage the city of Amritsar, effectively placing it outside the Mughal administrative framework, a ‘state within a state’.50

In the sixteenth century, the growth of the Sikh movement attracted little if any attention at the Mughal court. But this changed soon after Jahangir came to the throne in 1605. Because the new emperor’s eldest son, Khusrau, had contested his father’s claim to succeed Akbar, he was detained immediately upon Jahangir’s accession. But in April 1606 the headstrong prince managed to escape confinement in Agra and dashed straight for the Punjab in a desperate search for support to overthrow his newly crowned father. When his hastily assembled army reached Tarn Tarun, a settlement south of Amritsar, which Guru Arjan had established, the guru responded favourably to Khusrau’s call for supporters, notwithstanding the fact that the emperor was advancing towards the Punjab in hot pursuit of his rebellious son. Jahangir himself relates what took place next:

Khusrau happened to halt at the place where he \[Guru Arjun\] was, and he came out and did homage to him. He behaved to Khusrau in certain special ways, and made on his forehead a fingermark in saffron, which the Indians \(Hinduwan\) call *qashqa* \[*tika*\], and is considered auspicious. When this came to my ears and I clearly understood his folly, I ordered them to produce him \[Arjun\] … and having confiscated his property commanded that he should be put to death.51

Jahangir ordered the execution not out of any animus against Sikhism, which in any event he failed to recognize as a separate religion, but because of the guru’s apparent support for a state rebel.52

Guru Arjun’s execution posed a major crisis for the Sikh community. The late guru had personally acquired both spiritual and temporal authority and had done more to institutionalize the Sikh religion than anybody since Guru Nanak. His absence therefore not only left the Sikhs momentarily leaderless: it set them on a collision course with the Mughal empire. The guru’s son and successor Guru Hargobind \(1606–44\) reacted by girding himself with two swords that symbolized spiritual and temporal authority, indicating an ethos of militancy hitherto alien to Sikh tradition. He also built a fort to defend Amritsar, another sign of the community’s more militant profile. Finally, he adopted the trappings of royalty, building opposite Amritsar’s Harmandir a high platform called the Akal Takht, ‘immortal throne’, where he conducted worldly business in a court-like atmosphere. When suspicious officials reported these activities to the imperial court, Jahangir ordered that the guru be detained in Gwalior fort, where the Mughals’ political prisoners were held. Although he was released several years later, Sikh–Mughal relations were poisoned for decades to come.



## ASSESSING JAHANGIR

Jahangir’s reign falls into two distinct phases. From his coronation to 1622, the emperor remained active in the state’s administrative and military affairs, ruling after 1611 in virtual partnership with Nur Jahan. The latter issued land grants to women under her own seal, struck coins in her own name and sat in the *jharokha* of her palace, while below her nobles presented themselves and received her orders. Her name and title were jointly attached on all imperial documents receiving Jahangir’s signature.53 But in the last five years of his life, from 1622 to his death in 1627, the emperor became so incapacitated by drink and opium that Nur Jahan took many administrative matters into her own hands. The extent of her influence in this latter phase of Jahangir’s reign is suggested by Francisco Pelsaert, a Dutch East Company commercial officer serving in Agra from 1621 to 1627. ‘When the King comes home in the evening from hunting,’ he wrote:

he takes his seat in his Ghusalkhana \[private audience chamber\], where all the lords come to present themselves, and where strangers who have requests to make are received in audience. He sits here till a quarter of the night or more has passed, and during this time he drinks his three *piyala*, or cups, of wine, taking them successively at regular intervals … Everyone leaves when the last cup has been drunk, and the King goes to bed. As soon as all the men have left, the Queen comes with the female slaves, and they undress him, chafing and fondling him as if he were a little child; for his three cups have made him so ‘happy’ that he is more disposed to rest than to keep awake. This is the time when his wife, who knows so well how to manage him that she obtains whatever she asks for or desires, gets always ‘yes’, and hardly ever ‘no’ in reply.54

Some might dismiss such an intimate glimpse of the emperor and his favourite wife as bazaar gossip tossed off by a foreigner who would have had no access to the royal chambers. On the other hand Mu‘tamad Khan, the courtier entrusted with completing Jahangir’s memoir and identified by him as ‘a servant who knows my temperament’,55 remarked that the emperor repeatedly let it be known ‘that he had bestowed the sovereignty on Nur Jahan Begam, and would say, “I require nothing beyond only a *sir* \[0.9 kg\] of wine and a half *sir* of meat.”’56 Politics aside, Nur Jahan was deeply devoted to the emperor, as he was to her.57

Like Sultan Muhammad bin Tughluq before him, Jahangir made ostentatious displays of his devotion to justice. In his very first order as emperor he established a ‘chain of justice’ strung between the Agra fort and the Jamuna, with bells attached to it so that anybody seeking justice could shake the chain and expect the government’s response.58 And like his Tughluq predecessor, he was a man of sharp contradictions. He could be almost arbitrarily cruel, as when he had a man nearly beaten to death and imprisoned for life for breaking a china dish.59 When two bearers and a bush-beater accidently caused a blue bull to run off during a hunt, he ordered the bearers to be hamstrung and the bush-beater killed on the spot.60 On the other hand, he was capable of great sensitivity. He noticed, for example, that in the winter elephants would shiver when splashing themselves with cold water. Fearing their discomfort, he ordered that lukewarm water be prepared for their use.61 In the Khyber Pass, he once marvelled at watching a spider the size of a crab seize and kill a snake 1.4 metres in length.62 He was so struck by the beauty of a falcon and its black markings that he ordered it to be painted by the famous artist Ustad Mansur.63 And he made a detailed list of the thirty birds that were *not* found in Kashmir.64 In short, Jahangir’s most refined sensibility was aesthetic, especially of the visual sort. But unlike the art patronized by Akbar, which depicts the latter engaged in a frenzy of heroic activity – hunting, fighting, directing great projects, and so on – the work patronized by his son was typically contemplative and naturalistic. The contrasting temperaments of father and son could hardly be more stark. And yet he shared with Akbar a fascination with Indian religions, he maintained his father’s practice of sponsoring inter-faith debates, and he went out of his way to visit the Hindu ascetic Jadrup, in whose cave near Ujjain he thrice held extended philosophical discussions. Those meetings, too, he ordered to be documented in art \[see Fig. 16\].

In the last analysis Jahangir, having inherited a finely tuned administrative machine capable of running largely on its own, was able to devote himself to cultivating the sort of cultural projects that only peace and security could afford. He knew that he lived in the shadow of an overachieving father, whom he always honoured despite his youthful rebellion against him. Thus the magnificent tomb in Agra that Jahangir built for Akbar suggests its patron’s wish to be remembered as the dutiful son, rather than as the impatient prince who had rebelled against his father and arranged for the assassination of his father’s revered adviser. Art, literature, architecture, landscaping – especially in his beloved Kashmir – all these were incomparably enriched by Jahangir’s refined sensibility and generous patronage. In fact, had he inherited his father’s hyperactive side, Jahangir might have waged a lot more wars and overextended the empire to breaking point, as actually did happen under his grandson ‘Alamgir. Indeed, Akbar arguably had already overextended the empire with his annexation of Kandahar, which lies beyond the subcontinent. All this suggests that, in hindsight, Jahangir was the right man for his time.65



## SHAH JAHAN

Jahangir died in late October 1627 while en route from Kashmir to Lahore. Nur Jahan’s brother Asaf Khan, who all along had backed the cause of the late emperor’s third son, Khurram, now took matters into his own hands, swiftly putting his sister under detention while, as a precautionary measure, removing Khurram’s young sons Dara Shukoh and Aurangzeb from her custody. He also sent a courier down to the Deccan to fetch Khurram to north India. While marching to Agra, the prince sent a return courier ordering the execution of other princes who might contest his claim to the throne: his younger brother Shahryar, the two sons of his late brother Khusrau, and two sons of his late uncle Danyal. Khurram was doubtless determined to avoid the sort of messy succession conflict experienced by his father, for which he himself had been responsible. In January 1628 his grisly order was carried out, and soon he triumphantly entered Agra where he was hailed with the title that his father had earlier given him – Shah Jahan. On 4 February 1628, at an hour precisely fixed by his astrologers, he was formally crowned emperor.

Shah Jahan now found himself heading one of the world’s mightiest empires at its height of wealth, political clout and cultural attainment. And the empire had found a sovereign who would revel in the most lavish displays of that wealth and glory. The new emperor lost no time in setting the tone for his reign. Upon his coronation, he doled out generous sums to his immediate family: 200,000 gold coins \(*ashrafi*\) and 600,000 rupees to his favourite wife, Mumtaz Mahal, 100,000 *ashrafi*s and 600,000 rupees to his favourite daughter, Jahanara, and 150,000 rupees to each of his first three sons. He made Asaf Khan the *vazir* of the empire, with a rank of 8,000/8,000. Mahabat Khan was made governor of Ajmer, with the even higher rank of 9,000/9,000, doubtless in recognition of his superior military skills – which Shah Jahan could well appreciate, having been pursued throughout India as a rebel prince and defeated several times by him. By contrast, all Nur Jahan’s former power and authority at once drained away from the erstwhile queen, who now sank to a political nonentity. Coins stamped with her name were withdrawn from circulation. Reduced to a pensioned dowager, the once-mighty Nur Jahan quietly lived her remaining eighteen years in Lahore with her daughter, Shahryar’s widow. She would be buried next to Jahangir in the magnificent tomb that she had built for her husband outside the city.

Shortly after Shah Jahan assumed the throne, serious rebellions broke out. The Afghan nobleman Khan Jahan Lodi, though a man of mediocre military abilities, had enjoyed high favour under Jahangir, holding governorships first in Gujarat, then in the strip of the northern Deccan under Mughal administration. But in the latter capacity he had handed over much of that strip to the Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar in exchange for 300,000 rupees, which he pocketed. On top of that treasonous act, he had backed Shahryar, Nur Jahan’s candidate to succeed Jahangir to the throne. Khan Jahan therefore suspected that his prior actions had compromised his status in the new regime. When he failed to pursue the emperor’s forward agenda in the Deccan and was transferred to a less prestigious post in Malwa, his insecurity turned to paranoia. And when some of his *jagir*s were resumed, he became so alarmed that he failed to appear in court, as protocol required of *mansabdar*s when in the capital. In October 1629, realizing that his absence had been noticed, he gathered up his household and retainers and fled south. Although an imperial army was sent to pursue the fugitive nobleman, he managed to evade capture and made his way to Daulatabad. Back in the Deccan, he was welcomed by the Nizam Shahi sultan, Burhan III, who placed him in command of his own army in the hope that he could recover parts of his territory which the Mughals had occupied. But in December Shah Jahan, aware that he could not fail this first challenge to his authority as emperor, personally left Agra for Burhanpur, the Mughals’ provincial capital in the Deccan, in order to supervise military operations against the rebel. Aware that his sheltering of Khan Jahan had only brought trouble for himself, the Nizam Shahi sultan hinted that his guest should leave. When Mughal pressure drove him from his base, Khan Jahan took the hint and left for the Punjab, but he was abandoned by most of his supporters and ultimately overpowered and beheaded by a detachment of Shah Jahan’s Rajput cavalry.

Another early rebellion had its roots in Mughal relations with the Bundela Rajputs of Orchha, located just outside modern Jhansi. In 1627 Jhujhar Singh, the son and successor of Orchha’s Raja Bir Singh \(r. 1605–27\), proceeded to Agra to pay homage to Shah Jahan, who confirmed him with a rank of 4,000/4,000. But in June the next year, after the emperor ordered an inquiry into the unauthorized gains that Bir Singh had made during Jahangir’s regime, Jhujhar Singh became alarmed and, like Khan Jahan Lodi, fled Agra. Shah Jahan responded by sending an army that pursued his Rajput vassal to Erachh, the fort in Bundelkhand to which he had fled, sixty-five kilometres north-east of Jhansi. After a successful siege of the stronghold, the rebel Rajput submitted and begged forgiveness for his misdeeds, which the emperor readily granted, restoring him to his original rank. He would soon promote him to an even higher rank as a reward for his service against Khan Jahan Lodi. But in 1634 the Bundela raja reverted to his errant ways. Back in his ancestral capital of Orchha, Jhujhar Singh led an unprovoked attack on the fort of Chauragarh \(one hundred kilometres west-south-west of Jabalpur\), which belonged to the Gond chieftain Prem Narayan. This siege led to another instance of *jauhar* as Prem Narayan, in extreme desperation, massacred his women and fought to the death with 300 kinsmen, after which Jhujhar Singh occupied the fort.66 The emperor’s response to this egregious act was utterly cynical. While understandably enraged at Jhujhar Singh’s grievous behaviour, he did not seek justice or recompense for any of Prem Narayan’s surviving kinsmen. Instead, he demanded that Jhujhar Singh pay the court a large indemnity, in effect splitting with his rebel *mansabdar* the loot that the latter had plundered from Prem Narayan.

But Jhujhar Singh, now in full rebellion, refused the emperor’s offer and fled further south, into Malwa. In response, in 1635 Shah Jahan sent an army of 20,000 after him, commanded by three veteran generals. On the grounds that the property of a *mansabdar* belonged to the state and was hence liable to confiscation or destruction should its *mansabdar*/patron commit a state crime such as rebellion, Shah Jahan ordered the demolition of the Bundela rajas’ dynastic temple at Orchha.67 But the rebel was not the only target of the emperor’s order. The temple had been completed by Jhujhar Singh’s father, Bir Singh, mainly to legitimize his irregular accession to the throne, and to atone for the fact that his privileged position as a major courtier at Jahangir’s court had been bought through the murder of Abu’l-fazl.68 Therefore its destruction by Shah Jahan served to undermine the claims to legitimate rule asserted by both the usurper Bir Singh and his rebel son Jhujhar Singh. The emperor also forcibly converted Jhujhar Singh’s two sons to Islam, another cynical move since it excluded the rebel’s direct descendants from inheriting the rulership of Orchha. Instead, he gave that rulership to a rival branch of the Bundela lineage headed by Raja Debi Singh, a more compliant vassal. As for Jhujhar Singh himself, the fugitive rebel was ultimately driven deep into the forests of Gondwana, where he was slain by a band of Gonds, evidently in revenge for his earlier killing of their king, Prem Narayan.

Shah Jahan also took decisive steps to intensify the governance of provinces that were only loosely brought into the imperial orbit. The aggressive measures he took in 1632 against the Portuguese in lower Bengal transformed much of that region from a zone of political anarchy, favourable for piracy and slaving, to one of orderly government where Bengalis enjoyed a greater degree of security. Further to the north, in 1636 the Mughal ambassador to the Ahom court was murdered by the Assamese, leading to a series of hard-fought battles between the two powers. Although the Ahoms initially overwhelmed the Mughal outpost of Hajo, the Mughals retaliated in late 1637, driving the Assamese back to Darrang, thirty kilometres east of Gauhati. After an Assamese counter-attack the next year, the two powers negotiated a treaty whereby the Ahoms formally acknowledged Mughal control of Kamrup to the west, while the Mughals recognized the independence and territorial integrity of the Ahom kingdom. These operations established the Mughals’ ability to adapt to Bengal’s riverine terrain, where they had learnt to co-ordinate the use of watercraft and gunboats with cavalry and infantry.

On the other side of the subcontinent, in Sind, the geographical and cultural environment could hardly have been more different. Here, the fertile strip of the Indus abuts a hot, dry pastoral zone inhabited by tribal communities whose raids on trade caravans had caused perennial havoc for the Mughals. In response, Shah Jahan established regular garrisons from which provincial authorities could launch campaigns to collect taxes, in cash, from pastoral tribes. He also sought to integrate tribal chieftains into the Mughal system by defining them as *mansabdar*s governing over territorially bounded pastoral regions that the Mughals called *jagir*s. Lastly, imperial officers gave lucrative land grants to important Sufi shrines that dotted the Indus valley from Sind north to the southern Punjab, and which played important roles in the religious and economic lives of the region’s pastoral and agrarian communities. From at least the late fifteenth century, in fact, tribal chieftains had been giving their daughters to descendants of prominent Sufi shaikhs. Shah Jahan therefore treated Sufi shrines as nodes of stability in an otherwise unstable region.69

The manner in which Shah Jahan prosecuted these military operations hints at changes in how the emperor began fashioning his public image. Early in his reign, when Jhujhar Singh revolted against imperial authority by fleeing the imperial court, the emperor intended to pursue the fugitive Rajput in person. But the seasoned general Mahabat Khan dissuaded him from doing so, arguing that it was beneath the emperor’s dignity to take the field against ‘a crowd of peasants and defenceless people’.70 Heeding the advice, Shah Jahan marched only as far as Gwalior, leaving the command of battlefield operations to his generals. He likewise left the direction of his later military operations to his sons. In this respect Shah Jahan broke from the tradition of his Timurid ancestors, most of whom had personally engaged in battlefield combat. It also pointed to the emperor’s gradual withdrawal from direct contact with his subjects, a process actually begun by Akbar, who had institutionalized the use of the *jharokha*. Even when relatively low to the ground, these devices had the effect of removing the sovereign spatially and symbolically from the people, be they commoners or nobility, and of rendering him more an icon to be adored than an administrator with whom one could interact. Settling into his persona as supreme sovereign, Shah Jahan, in sharp contrast to the feisty prince of his earlier days, increasingly projected himself as lofty, distant and majestic.

Such self-fashioning is clearly seen in the emperor’s architectural programme. Of all the Mughals, Shah Jahan was the most invested in patronizing grand works of architecture that have become iconic of the entire Mughal era – indeed, of India itself. Even before his accession to power, he had patronized architectural projects in his various postings – for example, quarters inside Kabul fort, the Shahi Bagh in Ahmedabad, a hunting lodge near Burhanpur, the Shalimar garden in Kashmir. But it was an event in the fourth year of his reign that provided a major impetus to express himself through works of monumental architecture. In March 1630 he, his household and his court had reached the Deccan’s provincial capital of Burhanpur in order to oversee military and diplomatic operations against the plateau’s three remaining independent sultanates: Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda. This was a happy period for the emperor and his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal, who gave birth to a daughter, Husn Ara Begum, a month after the imperial household had reached Burhanpur. This was followed by the good news of the rebel Khan Jahan Lodi’s capture and execution.

But in the following year personal tragedy struck. In June 1631, Mumtaz Mahal died giving birth to her fourteenth child, plunging the king into a state of unremitting grief. For a week he refused to appear in public. No business was transacted. From constant weeping he was forced to wear spectacles, so his chronicler reports, and within a matter of days a third of his beard and moustache had turned white.71 The queen’s body was sent to Agra, escorted by their second son, prince Shuja‘, and buried by the Jamuna on a plot formerly owned by Raja Man Singh. On that spot would rise one of the world’s most famous monuments. Work on building the Taj Mahal, a corruption of the queen’s name Mumtaz Mahal, began in January 1632 and was completed eleven years later at a cost of five million rupees. Although Europeans of the day – and even colonial British scholars of the twentieth century – were certain it was the work of a European architect,72 the emperor himself appears to have provided both the inspiration and the overall design, with skilled architects merely carrying out the execution.73 His aim was to create an earthly replica of the house of Mumtaz Mahal in the Garden of Paradise. For this purpose he took to a monumental scale the kind of riverfront style that was already prevalent among Agra’s residential gardens, while also building upon the tradition of Mughal tomb design.74 Placing any monument over a grave – especially one with a proud, assertive dome – is problematic in Islamic tradition, which stresses humility before God. Babur’s grave in Kabul was open to the sky. By contrast Humayun’s tomb, built by Akbar, broke with tradition with its prominent marble dome. This was followed by Akbar’s and Jahangir’s tombs, both of which lack domes. With the Taj, its more daring, more bulbous dome set on a higher drum, surrounded by four smaller domes, Shah Jahan not only reasserted the idea of a domed tomb, but surpassed that of Humayun.

If the Taj Mahal projects an aura of sublime harmony, elegance and simplicity, Shah Jahan’s palace complexes convey his vision of a highly centralized, absolute monarchy and of his own exalted place in the cosmos. Notably, the emperor titled himself the ‘Second Lord of the Conjunction’ \(*sahib-i qiran-i thani*\), referring to the significance his astrologers attributed to periodic conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter. In the Persianate world, persons thought to have been born during such an event were considered extraordinary, capable even of ushering in a new age of justice, peace and prosperity. The phrase suggested, in short, a messiah-like figure. Although Timur himself had laid no claim to being a ‘Lord of the Conjunction’ \(*sahib-i qiran*\), and in fact denied it, contemporaries across the Persianate world had called him that, while his own soldiers worshipped him as a saint. Shah Jahan’s reference to himself as the *second* ‘Lord of the Conjunction’ therefore reveals how the emperor saw himself in relation to his own, illustrious ancestor. It also reveals a man claiming quasi-divine attributes, destined to play a transformative role in world history – in short, a ‘millennial sovereign’.75 Unlike portraits of Mughal emperors from Babur through to Jahangir, which typically reveal each monarch’s humanity, emotions and individual character, those of Shah Jahan present a flawless, unchanging ideal, a face enveloped by a halo, often with small angels above his head, even crowning him. The emperor’s official chronicle opens with a frontispiece depicting Timur and Shah Jahan seated on thrones, facing each other, the former presenting the imperial crown to the latter.76 These were not just artistic fantasies. Revealing how closely he identified with Timur and his legacy, Shah Jahan – alone among Mughal emperors – tried to reclaim for the Mughal empire territory that both Timur and Babur had once ruled. So in the mid 1640s he sent armies across Afghanistan’s Hindu Kush Mountains into Central Asia, there to confront his dynasty’s ancient enemies, the Uzbeks. Although the invasion failed, the effort shows the emperor’s determination to act out his identity as the ‘Second Lord of the Conjunction’.

In the first decade of his reign, with a view to aligning his palace architecture with his exalted self-image, Shah Jahan remodelled the forts of the empire’s two primary capitals, Lahore and Agra. At both sites, nearly all the structures built by Akbar and Jahangir were dismantled to make room for new palaces that emphasized political hierarchy, a rigid formalization of artistic expression and an obsessive regulation of every detail of courtly life. Shah Jahan’s name, after all, means ‘king of the world’, and a guiding idea pervading his reign was that of the court as a microcosm of the world. It followed that a well-ordered court would radiate outwards, projecting its order into the empire at large. Prior to his reign, imperial *mansabdar*s simply stood in the open courtyards before the emperor’s *jharokha*. Shah Jahan, however, built covered audience halls \(*chihil sutun*\), whose forty evenly spaced columns enabled a precise positioning of courtiers in the imperial hierarchy. *Mansabdar*s stood stiffly at a distance from the *jharokha* corresponding to their relative rank in the imperial hierarchy, their eyes riveted on the emperor seated above them. Probably inspired by audience halls of Persepolis in ancient Iran, these underscored the emperor’s centrality in both the cosmos and the empire.77 In Agra, courtiers faced east towards the emperor’s *jharokha*, while directly across the adjacent courtyard was a mosque, whose *qibla* – a niche indicating the direction of Mecca – lay on a direct axis with Jahangir’s *jharokha*. Such a design visually expressed a unity of political and spiritual authority and implied the emperor’s centrality for both, since contemporary eulogists often praised him as the *qibla* of his subjects.78

Remodelling the cramped and crowded forts of Lahore and Agra, however, had its limitations. In order more fully to press architecture and the principles of urban design to serve his expansive political ideals, Shah Jahan resolved to build an entire city–fort complex from scratch. This is Shahjahanabad, today’s ‘Red Fort’ and its adjoining walled city – now Old Delhi – built between 1639 and 1648 at a cost of six million rupees. With its red-sandstone walls rising to a height of thirty-three metres and a perimeter of nearly two and a half kilometres, its eastern side abutting the Jamuna, and with the rest of the perimeter punctuated by stately gateways and encircled by a moat, the fort was intended to be dramatic and imposing, as it certainly is. Moreover, by placing his new capital in the greater Delhi plain, Shah Jahan associated his dynasty more directly with the historical cockpit of north Indian power, and also with the many active shrines of saints – in particular Chishti Sufis – that both the Delhi sultans and the Mughals had patronized. Finally, like Akbar’s Fatehpur Sikri, this fort–city gave the emperor a large stage on which to enact his ideals of courtly hierarchy and absolute monarchy. It was in the fort’s ornate Hall of Private Audience that Shah Jahan placed his famous Peacock Throne, which took craftsmen seven years to assemble, and whose precious stones were valued at ten million rupees. The French traveller Jean-Baptiste Tavernier visited the court in the winter of 1640–41, when the throne had been built but was still in the court at Agra, as the new capital at Shahjahanabad was then under construction. Himself a gem merchant, Tavernier described a dazzling throne 1.8 metres in length and 1.2 metres wide inlaid with numerous emeralds, rubies, pearls and diamonds, with a canopy surmounted with a peacock, its tail made of blue sapphires, its gold body inlaid with precious stones and an enormous pear-shaped pearl suspended from a large ruby fronting its breast.79

Tavernier was hardly the only foreigner struck by the pomp of Shah Jahan’s court. Other seventeenth-century travellers like him carried their sense of awe back to Europe, where the very word ‘mogul’ came to connote grandiose power, as it still does today. Coincidentally, monarchal absolutism and centralized authority, together with a rigid formalization of courtly ritual amplified by elaborate ceremony and monumental architecture, were also being articulated in contemporary Europe. The reign of France’s Louis XIV began in 1643, shortly before Shah Jahan formally occupied Shahjahanabad. The French ‘Sun King’ began enlarging his own dazzling palace–city at Versailles in 1661, just a few years after Shah Jahan’s rule had come to an end. By the mid seventeenth century, then, royal absolutism had reached both India and Europe, which is perhaps why contemporary Europeans in India, when beholding Shahjahanabad, seem to have felt a shock of recognition.



## CONCLUSION

India and the Mughals experienced important changes under Jahangir and Shah Jahan. First, the empire grew in both territorial extent and wealth: between 1580 and 1646 its revenue demand more than doubled, growing from 90.7 to 222.3 million rupees, owing largely to territorial annexations, especially in Bengal and the northern Deccan.80 When Shah Jahan came to power, however, he found a treasury that had been nearly depleted. To remedy this, he increased the amount of the empire’s *khalisa* land, or land whose revenues went directly to the central treasury, and decreased its total *jagir* land, whose revenues were allocated to imperial *mansabdar*s. Between 1631 and 1646, *khalisa* land increased from 6.6 per cent to 14.3 per cent of the empire’s total assessed revenue.81 Both *khalisa* and *jagir* lands were administered under Akbar’s regulation system \(*zabt*\), according to which government officials made periodic surveys and revenue assessments by measuring land areas and by determining the quality of the fields and their potential crop value. Detailed records of such surveys and assessments were kept in both local and central revenue offices – information that was critical for running the army, since the number of troops a *mansabdar* was expected to maintain had to match the amount of revenue his *jagir*s were expected to produce.

*Mansabdar*s of medium or higher rank, by ethnicity82

1595

1656

Number

Per cent

Number

Per cent

Iranian

75

26.9

139

28.4

Turkish

93

33.3

123

25.1

Afghan

10

3.6

34

6.9

Indian Muslim

36

12.9

59

12.0

Rajput

40

14.3

87

17.8

Other

25

9.0

48

9.8

TOTAL

279

490

As the empire’s territory expanded, so did its corps of *mansabdar*s, both in size and in composition. As the above chart indicates, *mansabdar*s holding medium or higher ranks nearly doubled in number between the end of Akbar’s reign and the end of Shah Jahan’s reign. Throughout this period the nobility’s Iranian component remained high and stable, comprising about a quarter of the total. Afghans were poorly represented in Akbar’s nobility owing to suspicions of their loyalty, but they fared somewhat better under Jahangir and Shah Jahan, as those suspicions began to dissipate. Whereas the proportion of Indian Muslims in the nobility remained at about an eighth of the total throughout this period, the number of Turkish nobles dropped from a third to a quarter of the total, while Rajputs made a modest gain overall. However, these figures distort the extent of the Rajputs’ actual importance in Mughal service, since they tended to have, on average, higher ranks than did other groups.

An important change also occurred in the nature of the *mansabdar*s’ relationship to the emperor. Under Akbar and Jahangir, powerful *mansabdar*s were bound to the emperor by a personality cult in which they were considered disciples of a charismatic ruler. Upon being ceremonially inducted into Akbar’s or Jahangir’s inner circle, these men received small images of the emperor, which they pinned to their turbans. They also performed full prostration before him. But Shah Jahan did away with the little images, the prostration and the personality cult altogether, replacing them with formalized rituals that established a greater distance between himself and all his subjects. Moreover, with each passing generation, the imperial service became more of an entrenched, hereditary nobility. Instead of instilling an ideological conformity among its ruling elite by instituting something like imperial China’s examination system, which was based on a common core of literary classics that applicants had to master, the Mughals recruited new talent through a highly regulated process of nomination. Senior officers recommended candidates whose credentials were then vetted by court officials and, in theory, by the emperor himself. If approved, these recruits were given appointments, typically in the form of *jagir*s. By the end of Shah Jahan’s reign, relatives of powerful nobles might enter imperial service not only on the death of their patron-relative, but even during his lifetime. In fact, sons of the highest-ranking *mansabdar*s were normally enrolled as *mansabdar*s themselves. Although they could not inherit their fathers’ status or titles and had to begin their careers with a relatively low rank, such men were marked for promotion and rapid advancement in the system.

Shah Jahan’s refinements in his courtly self-fashioning speak of broader changes in royal ideology that had taken place during the early seventeenth century. The century had opened with Akbar, who, despite his vacillations, remained genuinely fascinated with religions of all sorts. Jahangir mostly followed his father in this respect, not only allowing all religions to flourish, but opposing the conversion from any religion to another one.83 But with Shah Jahan the matter is more complicated. On the one hand, he personally commissioned or initiated the construction of more mosques than any Mughal ruler before or after him. These include Lahore’s mosque of Wazir Khan \(1635\), the mosque at Shaikh Mu‘in al-Din Chishti’s shrine in Ajmer \(1636\), and the congregational mosques at Agra \(1648\), Shahjahanabad \(1656\) and Thatta \(1657\). He also reinstituted the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and issued an edict prohibiting the repair of non-Muslim structures. In view of such acts, his reign has sometimes been called a ‘return to an Islamic political culture’.84

However, there was a genuine disconnect between Shah Jahan as portrayed in official edicts and court chronicles, and the emperor as portrayed in art and courtly culture. Whereas the former category presents him in the tradition of Islam, the latter portrays him in terms of sacred kingship, messianism, and the cult of Timur as a world-conqueror.85 At the top of the arched niche behind the *jharokha* in Shahjahanabad’s Hall of Public Audience, there is a Florentine image of *Orpheus Playing to the Beasts.* This figure, who in Greek mythology could charm living beings with his music, was identified by the Mughals with the prophet-king Solomon – the font of justice in Middle Eastern lore – who in the context of this throne ensemble was identified with Shah Jahan himself.86 Cosmic entities also appear differently in paintings of Shah Jahan and his father. Whereas Jahangir is depicted surrounded by superhuman agencies only in paintings in which he is dreaming or imagining something, such as shooting Malik Ambar, those of Shah Jahan often show the emperor surrounded by cosmic beings even while he is engaged in worldly events, as though he were an active millennial figure existing in real time.87 Furthermore, by titling himself the Second Lord of the Conjunction, the emperor asserted his direct link with Timur, the alleged Lord of the Conjunction. Since Shah Jahan happened to be born in the year 1000 of the Islamic era, he could readily imagine himself as literally a millennial sovereign, a self-perception that appears to have guided his actions. By sending huge armies into Central Asia with the goal of capturing parts of Timur’s sovereign territory, the emperor was doing more than just expanding Mughal territory: he was conflating real time with millennial time – he was doing what, to his own thinking, he was born to do.

Important changes in imperial succession also occurred during the reigns of Jahangir and Shah Jahan. The practice that crystallized during their reigns, and which continued down to the year 1712, was unique among the great Persianate states of the day. From around 1600, princes in the Safavid and Ottoman empires were customarily confined to the harem, while the reigning emperor or powerful royal or non-royal actors nominated the next ruler from among those princes. As a result, the new ruler would probably have had little if any experience in the rough-and-tumble world of forging political alliances and networks. By contrast, the Mughals practised an open-ended succession system in which any prince could claim the throne; but he could win it only by defeating his brothers. This principle was conceptualized late in Akbar’s reign, and then put to the test in the reigns of his two successors. By denying the throne to his grandson Khusrau, Akbar established a precedent whereby only a sovereign’s sons could contend for the throne. This narrowed the eligible princes down to a manageable figure, which in the case of Akbar’s own succession was only one: Salim. In addition, Akbar ended the earlier practice of giving semi-independent and semi-permanent holdings to princely heirs. From his reign onwards, princes would receive transferable *jagir*s like any other noble, instead of permanent or semi-permanent power bases on the model of the *iqta‘*s of the Delhi sultans. This meant that the Mughals’ sovereign realm was no longer thought of as a confederation of semi-independent political territories, but as a single indivisible state. As was revealed in the political manoeuvrings of Khusrau and Salim in the last month of Akbar’s life, contenders for power had therefore to vie for the entire empire, and not a portion of it. It was an all-or-nothing contest.

It is sometimes suggested that the sort of bloody, fratricidal contests to which these ideas gave rise were politically destabilizing and detrimental to the long-term health of the Mughal empire, if not, indeed, illustrative of what was once called ‘Oriental despotism’. It can be argued, though, that in reality the post-Akbar winner-take-all succession contest fought by a limited number of actors actually contributed to the empire’s success and dynamism. Anticipating certain conflict with their brothers in a contest for the throne, princes would spend several decades building up powerful households, resilient alliances and networks of support spanning the entire empire. This sort of princely competition drew new groups into the political system, integrated peripheral areas more closely to the imperial centre, reinforced the foundations of imperial authority and forced princes to articulate a vision of how they might rule. In short, princes had to learn how to be competent political actors, since by this brutal logic the best-networked prince would become the next emperor. Moreover, by backing the right candidate, supporters of the winning prince – many of them from humble origins or from peripheral regions – would be swept into positions of importance. As a result, succession struggles, or even rebellions during a given reign, replenished the empire’s body politic with new blood every few decades. At the same time, since supporters of defeated opponents were never considered permanent enemies – an echo of India’s ancient *mandala* theory of warfare – victors made a point of forgiving and reintegrating them into the system, which was also a stabilizing influence.88

These ideas are nowhere better illustrated than in the bitter and fateful succession struggle that was fought among the four sons of Shah Jahan, an event that occurred about midway in the long life of one of those sons, Aurangzeb. It has been suggested that for sixty years, from the mid seventeenth to the early eighteenth century, the history of India and that of this one individual are practically the same.89 This claim might be only a slight exaggeration, as we will see in the next chapter.




