+++
title = "Conclusion and Epilogue"

+++





## INDIA IN THE PERSIANATE WORLD

India has never been isolated. Jutting into the heart of the Indian Ocean – the world’s oldest maritime zone – and connected to the Iranian plateau by several strategic mountain passes, the Indo-Gangetic plain and the great peninsula to its south have long been a major crossroads of transregional movement and exchange. Pathways leading to and across the subcontinent have carried a wide range of global flows, while migrating populations brought or took away diverse cultural traditions embracing statecraft, architecture, warfare, cuisine, religion and much more. Although some of these flows had very deep roots in time, they all moved with a quickening pace between the eleventh and eighteenth centuries, the period of this book’s concern.

As a subset of these transregional flows, Persian texts and Persian-speakers circulated through West, Central and South Asia from the eleventh century in expanding and increasingly dense networks. Artisans, mercenaries, Sufi shaikhs, slaves, poets, scholars, adventurers, diplomats, migrants, pilgrims and merchants all travelled along the maritime and overland routes that both undergirded and constituted the Persianate world. For most of these peoples, whatever their ethnic background or geographical origin, facility in Persian was an acquired skill. Yet even rudimentary acquaintance with the language exposed them to a stable canon of Persian texts, together with the sensibilities and norms of sociability they elaborated. In the present age, when South Asia has been absorbed in an Anglophone world, it is easy to forget India’s central place in an earlier, Persophone world. For centuries Persian had been the pre-eminent language of diplomatic discourse in India. Even before the Mughal age, Lodi rulers had employed members of Hindu scribal communities and issued bilingual revenue documents in Persian and Hindavi.1 During the Afghan interregnum that followed the Mughal conquest, Sher Shah appointed two writers \(*karkun*s\) for each district, one for Persian and one for Hindavi.2

The big breakthrough, however, came in 1582 when Akbar, with the apparent aim of promoting a political culture that would arch over the Mughal realm’s diverse religious and cultural communities, established Persian as the official language. It was to be used at every level of the Mughals’ bureaucracy, from the imperial capitals down to the most remote settlements in the rural hinterland.3 Within a few generations, India had become a major centre of the Persian-speaking or -reading world. An Italian who travelled through Gujarat in 1623 considered that in Mughal territories Persian was more commonly used than vernacular languages.4 By 1700 India was probably the world’s leading centre for the patronage of Persian literature and scholarship, with an estimated seven times more people literate in Persian than in Iran.5 For scribal castes that had traditionally served state bureaucracies such as the Kayasthas or Khatris, facility in Persian was a practical necessity. Gaining proficiency in it, moreover, was no more traumatic than acquiring English during the British Raj, since Persian, notwithstanding its extensive use in Sufi writings of all sorts, was not tied to liturgical or scriptural Islam, as was Arabic. Rather, in seventeenth-century north India it was viewed as an unproblematic, neutral language of everyday correspondence, literary expression and social mobility.6

Partially meeting the growing demand for a working knowledge of Persian was the system of schools, or *madrasa*s, that Akbar had reformed.7 Village schools, or *maktab*s, also introduced India’s scribal castes to basic Persian literacy. From the age of four, children of the Kayastha caste were taught practical skills such as accounting \(*siyaqi*\), enabling them to tabulate rent rates and audit revenue accounts. Manning the lower tiers of the Mughal revenue machine, Kayasthas typically served as land registrars \(*qanungo*\) and village accountants \(*patwari*\), providing the institutional mortar of the whole governing edifice. Higher up in the system, Kayasthas served as news writers, revenue reporters, petition writers, surveyors or even court readers. In all these capacities, it was their facility in Persian that gave them not only employment in the Mughal bureaucracy but status in the larger Persianate world, for a *maktab* curriculum invariably included classics drawn from the Persian literary cannon, such as Sa‘di’s *Gulistan* or Firdausi’s *Shahnama*. In the process, Kayasthas gradually became acculturated to Persianate norms, adopting Persian pen names and attending musical rituals \(*qawwali*\) at Sufi shrines in centres like Allahabad or Lucknow.8

In addition, from at least the fourteenth century versified bilingual wordbooks circulated throughout the Persian-speaking world. Known as *nisab*s, these simplified, rustic dictionaries interpreted words from an unfamiliar language to a familiar one. Prior to the mid sixteenth century such books had explained Hindavi terms for Persian-knowing immigrants to India.9 From the mid sixteenth century onwards, however, they had the opposite aim of interpreting Persian words for Hindavi-speakers. After Akbar had made Persian the sole language for all levels of the Mughal bureaucracy, such wordbooks proliferated, their numbers exploding in the eighteenth century. Many of them were intended for children of groups occupying the social space between the labouring and ruling classes, particularly scribal castes, with a view to socializing them into the Mughal world from a tender age. For such groups, *nisab*s provided an introduction to the language of power and an avenue to higher education, and hence to the vast horizons afforded by the financial, political and cultural cosmopolitanism of the Persianate world.10 In short, Persian in the Mughal period was not just a bureaucratic medium. Bilingual wordbooks served as guides for accessing courtly culture. It is not coincidental that the Persian word for ‘dictionary’, *farhang*, also means ‘good breeding’, ‘greatness’ or ‘education’.11 In eighteenth-century Bihar, Hindu and Muslim *zamindar*s established *madrasa*s where Hindu literati taught the language, and where students studied classic texts such as the poetry of Sa‘di.12 All descriptions of the educational attainments of Bengali aristocrats of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries emphasize their proficiency in Persian, which was even accorded the status of a *shastra* – that is, a formal intellectual discipline, and not just a practical medium to be used for keeping revenue accounts or composing government petitions.13

Whereas Persian–Hindavi word-books, *madrasa*s and *maktab*s helped make Persian the language of ordinary governance across north India and the Deccan, the Mughal court had loftier aims. A ‘classical’ canon of Persian literature as we know it today had been consolidated and stabilized under Timurid patronage in centres such as late-fifteenth-century Herat, a city that both Babur and Humayun visited in the twilight of that city’s Timurid glory.14 Having begun their imperial career in India just as their Timurid kin had ended theirs in Central Asia, the Mughals therefore inherited a Persian literary past that was already coherent, systematized and available.15 The Mughal court then not only lavishly patronized that canon, but endeavoured to place India at the centre of the wider Persophone world. It was to this end that Akbar commissioned the compilation of a comprehensive Persian dictionary, the *Farhang-i Jahangiri*, so called because it was completed in 1606 during Jahangir’s reign. The compilers of this work of some 9,000 entries consulted forty-four dictionaries in the course of its making, thereby seeking to consolidate all previous lexicographical efforts and embrace the entirety of the Persian language.

Contemporary accounts of the Mughal court suggest how its cosmopolitan atmosphere overlapped with the Persianate world. Chandar Bhan Brahman \(d. *c*.1666/70\), who enjoyed a long career as imperial secretary for Jahangir, Shah Jahan and ‘Alamgir, described one of Shah Jahan’s assemblies as including:

Tajiks, Kurds, Georgians, Tatars, Russians, Ethiopians, Circassians and various others from the lands of Rum, Egypt, Syria, ‘Iraq, Arabia, ‘Ajam, Persia, Gilan, Mazandaran, Khurasan, Transoxiana, the Qipchaq steppes, Turkistan, Georgia and Kurdistan, each in their respective places.

So too with the various communities of Hindustan, from among the masters of excellence and perfection, and men of the sword and the pen, such as *sayyids* of pure ancestry, martial *shaikh-zadas*, Afghan tribes \[*alusat*\] like the Lodis, Rohillas, Khweshgis, Yusufza’is and others, not to mention various classes of Rajputs, Ranjas, Rajas, Raos, and Rais, among them the Rathors, Sisodias, Kachwahas, Hadas, Kurus, Chauhans, Jhalas, Chandrawats, Jaduns, Tonwars, Baghelas, Baiswaras, Gujars, Pawars \[Paramaras\], Bhadauriyas, Singhis, Bundelas, Shagarwals, and other attendees from the rest of India.16

Inasmuch as all the sites mentioned were centres of Persianate cultural production, Chandar Bhan Brahman was implicitly aligning the court’s geographical reach with that of the Persianate world, while placing the Mughal court in its conceptual centre.17 Many Rajputs certainly saw themselves as sharing in that world. The *Manacharita*, a vernacular biography written in 1585, falsely credits the Rajput *mansabdar* Man Singh with Mughal victories far beyond India, including in Kirghizstan, Samarqand, Merv, Khurasan, Hormuz, Baghdad, Isfahan and Tabriz.18 In the author’s fertile imagination, the territorial extent of the Mughal empire overlapped much of the Persianate world, and in this reading it was a Rajput general who had brought it about.

In the end, what sustained this universe was the circulation of people along established transregional networks that connected key centres of Persianate cultural production. The moral authority underpinning this universe derived from a canon of classical texts that circulated along those same networks, providing peoples of diverse ethnic or religious backgrounds with a common point of reference. The texts comprising this canon were never fixed. Chandar Bhan Brahman compiled his own list of texts that he considered fundamental for shaping a well-rounded, cultured person, and which he recommended for his own son to study and absorb.19 Yet some literary genres remained constant over time, including advice literature, poetry of all sorts \(epic, lyric, mystical\), biographies, histories, treatises, narratives, even proverbs. Certain authors regularly appeared in the canon, such as Firdausi, Sa‘di, Nizami, Amir Khusrau, Tusi and Jami.20 Taught in *madrasa*s and other educational outlets at both elite and non-elite levels, works by these writers were read, reread, memorized, recited and quoted so often and so widely that to varying degrees their readers or listeners internalized their values and sentiments.21

Owing to the extent of Persian literacy among India’s non-elite classes, considerable Persian vocabulary penetrated India’s vernacular languages, even as those languages were attaining their own status as literary vehicles. It is telling that, shortly after his coronation in 1674, Shivaji commissioned the compilation of a Persian–Sanskrit glossary, the *Rajavyavaharakośa*, intended to help government administrators find Sanskrit equivalents for Persian lexical items already in common use among Marathi-speaking clerks, accountants and revenue officials.22 The very attempt to purge the spoken language of Persian vocabulary indicates the degree to which the western Deccan had become absorbed into the Persianate world during the previous several centuries.23 Persian vocabulary even entered Indian religious thought, with the Sikh tradition absorbing such key lexical items as *hukm* \(‘grace of God’\), *langar* \(‘communal meal’\), *khalsa* \(‘community of sworn initiates’\) and the term by which Guru Nanak referred to himself – *tabl-i baz*, or ‘herald’.24 Persian literary culture also entered Indian thought streams via translations, commentaries and adaptations of canonical works in India’s vernacular languages. The Tamil ‘tellings’ of the popular text *The Book of One Thousand Questions* \(*Ayira Macala*\) claimed Persian origins traceable to sixteenth-century south India.25 Between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries Persian romance narratives, especially Nizami’s *Layli va Majnun* and Jami’s *Yusuf va Zulaykha*, enjoyed numerous translations in vernacular languages.26 In this way values and sensibilities embedded in works of the Persian canon were absorbed by Indian populations having no facility in the Persian language.

The case of Burma’s Arakan coastal region illustrates this process. Between the mid fifteenth and early seventeenth centuries the region’s Buddhist kings, seeking to integrate themselves with a maritime world saturated with Persian culture, adopted Persian royal titles and issued coins in the Perso-Arabic script, as well as those of Sanskrit and Arakanese. By the mid seventeenth century Arakanese was used as the language of the ruling elite, Sanskrit that of the court’s Brahmins, Pali that of the Buddhist canon, Bengali that of the kingdom’s sizeable Muslim population \(the ancestors of today’s Rohingya community\) and Persian that of administration and diplomacy. Connecting the Buddhist court with the Persianized maritime world beyond Arakan were literati such as the poet-translator Alaol \(fl. 1651–71\), one of thousands of Bengalis whom Arakanese pirates had seized from lower Bengal, enslaved and taken to labour at the Arakanese capital of Mrauk-U. With the help of powerful patrons, Alaol rose in courtly circles and adapted such Persian classics as Nizami’s *Haft Paykar* and *Sikandar-nama* to vernacular Bengali, thereby conveying a high, transregional Persianate tradition into a local idiom.27 Whereas the poet had got to Arakan via established slave routes, Persian literary motifs reached Arakan via commercial routes that crossed the Bay of Bengal. Whenever a Persian literary theme or motif was adopted in Dakani – the dialect of Hindavi spoken in the Qutb Shahi sultanate of Golconda – that same motif would appear several years later in Bengali texts composed in Arakan by Alaol or other poets.28 In this way, routes of literary transmission were mapped on existing migration corridors and commercial networks.



## THE MUGHALS IN THE SANSKRIT WORLD

The Persianate was not the only cosmopolitan tradition that flourished in the Mughal period. More than any of the Indian sultanates that preceded them, the Mughals staked their claims to sovereignty by engaging with Sanskrit literary traditions. By appropriating a culture deeply rooted in India’s pre-Persianate past, they saw themselves as Indian kings and wished to be seen as such by others. It is therefore hardly surprising that both Brahmin and Jain scholars maintained a significant presence in the Mughal court in the latter decades of Akbar’s reign and continuing through those of Jahangir and Shah Jahan.29

Such a policy did have precedents. In fifteenth-century Kashmir Sultan Zain al-‘Abidin had patronized the production of successive local histories, the *Rajatarangini*s, by the Sanskrit writers Śrivara and Jonaraja. But Akbar and Jahangir made more significant moves in this direction, ordering some fifteen Sanskrit works to be translated into Persian, which enabled court literati unfamiliar with that language to engage with Sanskrit thought.30 Meanwhile, Jain and Brahmin intellectuals who served in the Mughal court as astrologers, translators, religious guides and political negotiators inevitably drew the Mughals into their own world. Padmasundara \(fl. 1569\), an early Jain visitor to the imperial court, accommodated the Mughal world to Sanskrit literary theory and placed Akbar at the centre of Sanskrit aesthetics. The Jain monk Śanticandra \(fl. 1580s\) mapped the Mughal empire on to the topography of a timeless India as imagined in Sanskrit literature, portraying Akbar as a Jain king and his military exploits as a classically Indian ‘conquest of the quarters’ \(*digvijaya*\).31 In the late sixteenth century Akbar commissioned Vihari Krsnadasa to write *Parasiprakaśa*, which was both a thesaurus-like list of common words in both languages and a Sanskrit grammar of Persian in which the author aimed to explain Persian to Sanskrit intellectuals.32

Among such inter-cosmopolitan projects, the most ambitious were the court-commissioned Persian translations of the great Sanskrit epics, the *Mahabharata* and the *Ramayana*, which Akbar sponsored from the 1580s. Here the overriding effort was to emphasize the epics’ political character and to accommodate Indian deities to Persianate sensibilities. Thus, a translation of the *Ramayana* was refashioned into a meditation on Mughal sovereignty, associating Akbar with the epic’s hero, Rama, and suggesting that the emperor was an incarnation of Vishnu.33 A translation of the *Mahabharata*, entitled *Razm-nama*, preserved hundreds of Sanskrit words, Indian imagery, *avatar*s and Indian deities while conveying the idea of a monotheistic deity, identifying Brahma with the generic Persian term for ‘god’ \(*khudavand*\). The epic’s most specifically religious section, the *Bhagavad Gita*, occupies just a few pages of the Persian translation, in contrast to 700 pages of the Sanskrit text.34 Rather than adhering to the Sanskrit text’s emphasis on establishing cosmic and social order \(*dharma*\) in the world, the Persian translation emphasizes the proper virtues of the king. In his preface to the translation, Akbar’s principal spokesman Abu’l-fazl framed the work within the kingly advice genre of classic Persian literature. His brother, the court’s poet laureate Fayzi, went further, transforming parts of the *Mahabharata* into Persian literature, even poetry. The Iranian immigrant Muhammad Tahir Sabsavari, who was active at the courts of Akbar and Jahangir, included another version of the *Mahabharata* story in his universal history *Rauzat al-Tahirin*, assimilating the Indian epic into a wider history of the human race and linking the Mughals with India’s ancient kings.35

Among all spheres of culture, it was perhaps in the sciences that knowledge passed most freely between the Persianate and Sanskritic worlds. In the field of medical theory, Greco-Islamic doctrines inherited from the Persian polymath Ibn Sina \(Avicenna, d. 1037\) differed radically from India’s Ayurvedic tradition regarding the number and nature of bodily humours. But the fourteenth-century Indo-Persian scholar Shihab al-Din Nagauri, whose treatise on the subject circulated widely among both Hindu and Muslim physicians, sought to reconcile these differences by assimilating Ayurvedic understandings of physiology into the Avicennian framework. Most Persian writing on Indian medicine, however, focused on practice, not theory. Since the Avicennian tradition had evolved in the dry Middle Eastern environment, many diseases and therapies integral to that tradition were not relevant in wetter, tropical India. This required Indo-Persian physicians and scholars to engage closely with Sanskrit works on pharmacology and native Indian plants. By ‘Alamgir’s reign, Avicenna’s theories had become Indianized as Hindus who had learnt Persian engaged with them. At the same time, Ayurvedic medicine became Persianized as it gained influence in the courts of the Deccan and north India.36

Interaction between Indic and Persianate views on astronomy also gathered momentum in the Mughal age. If Indo-Persian writers had taken the initiative accommodating Indian medicine to Persian medical theory and practice, with astronomy the reverse was the case. In the Mughal period Brahmin pundits – not without considerable controversy among themselves – gradually assimilated Greek models of planetary movements as originally formulated by Aristotle, Euclid, or Ptolemy, and as refined and mediated by medieval Arabo-Persian scientists. Prominent among the latter was the Persian polymath Nasir al-Din Tusi, who persuaded his Mongol overlords to support the construction of a massive observatory at Maragheh \(1259\), in north-west Iran, together with a library and teams of scholars, to test Greek principles against empirical observation. In 1429 Timur’s grandson, Ulugh Beg \(d. 1449\), built another such observatory in Samarqand, modelled on that at Maragheh. He, too, assembled teams of scholars who in turn tested, wrote commentaries on, and refined the astronomical theories of Tusi and other Arabo-Persian scientists. The assimilation of these ideas by Indian scholars, however, was slow. One problem was the smugly insular stance of Sanskrit scientific literature which, refusing to recognize the authority of non-Indian science, remained for centuries wilfully ignorant of its competitors. There were also profound differences over cosmology. The medieval Arabo-Persian tradition, following the ancient Greeks, believed in the uniformity of nature over time and space, whereas the classical Indian view saw the universe as decaying over time. Moreover, Greco-Islamic physics assumed that planets move by Aristotelian ideas of natural motion, whereas Indian cosmology postulated planetary movement by material forces such as wind or demons. Finally, any transmission of ideas required proper dictionaries, and the first Persian–Sanskrit dictionary only appeared in the late sixteenth century, with Krsnadasa’s *Parasiprakaśa*. In 1643 Shah Jahan patronized the compilation of another dictionary with the same title.37

Thanks to such dictionaries, and the patronage of Brahmins and Brahmanical knowledge at the Mughal court, the self-imposed walls of Brahmanical orthodoxy regarding astronomy began to crack. In 1628 the first pundit to absorb Arabo-Persian astronomical influence, Nityananda, translated from Persian into Sanskrit the tables that had been prepared for Shah Jahan predicting the location and movements of the planets. These tables were based on those prepared by Ulugh Beg in fifteenth-century Samarqand, which in turn had built on those of Nasir al-Din Tusi in thirteenth-century Iran. In 1639 Nityananda composed another Sanskrit translation in which, in order to gain its acceptance by orthodox Brahmins, he offered the pretext that the Arabo-Persian astronomy it contained had been derived from the revelation of an Indian deity.38 Despite such camouflage, the work led to fierce disputes in Benares, the bastion of Brahmanical learning, which split into opposing camps over the compatibility of Arabo-Persian astronomy with received Indian tradition. One camp was led by Kamalakara, who in 1658 authored a Sanskrit treatise that agreed with the Ptolemaic notions of the structure of the planetary system as confirmed by the observations at Ulugh Beg’s observatory.39 Although his ideas were vigorously opposed in some quarters of orthodox opinion, by ‘Alamgir’s reign Persianate notions of astronomy had stimulated considerable intellectual ferment in Sanskrit circles, forcing scholars either to defend, modify or reject their inherited tradition.

Ulugh Beg’s observatory in Samarqand also inspired Jai Singh II \(r. 1700–43\), the Rajput raja of Amber and high-ranking Mughal *mansabdar*, to build a number of his own observatories, including those in Delhi and Jaipur, the eponymous capital city he founded. Unlike the pundits at Benares, who were divided over the acceptability of non-Indian astronomy, Jai Singh enthusiastically studied Brahmanical and Perso-Arabic systems and patronized scholars of both traditions at his court. In Jaipur between 1728 and 1732, just as Mughal central authority was dissolving and provincial governments were assuming de facto independence, a Persian scholar collaborated with a Brahmin pundit in translating the works of Tusi, Ptolemy and Euclid from Persian or Arabic into Sanskrit, through the medium of their common tongue, Hindavi.40 Jai Singh himself wrote texts on astronomy in both Persian and Sanskrit, and his direct observations led him to modify astronomical calculations of Ulugh Beg, his Timurid predecessor.41 Although the raja’s modifications of Perso-Arabic astronomical theory hardly represented a scientific breakthrough, his close engagement with Persianate science is nonetheless impressive, as is the stunning effect of his observatories, with their sweeping curves, on the landscapes of Delhi and Jaipur.



## THE LOTUS AND THE LION

When considering the pre-colonial evidence in such fields as architecture, art, language, literature, religion or the sciences, one might ask whether the Sanskritic universe had assimilated its Persianate counterpart, or whether it had been the other way around. But perhaps the question is misplaced. At the moment of their initial encounter, to be sure, each literary tradition and the fields it elaborated were mutually opposed in nearly every respect. That was certainly how it seemed to the eleventh-century Persian polymath Abu Rayhan al-Biruni \(d. 1048\), who registered one of the most thoughtful and articulate responses to the Sanskrit world ever voiced by an educated Persian. Having travelled extensively in north India, learnt Sanskrit and immersed himself in the study of all aspects of Indian culture, Biruni wrote a comprehensive survey of Indian knowledge, *Kitab ta’rikh al-Hind*, at the dawn of the encounter between the Persianate and Sanskritic worlds. The book’s very first chapter emphasized the stark opposition he perceived between the Indian scholarly and cultural universe and his own, which had synthesized Greek, Arabic and Persian intellectual traditions.42 And yet already in 1027 Biruni’s own patron, Mahmud of Ghazni, minted coins bearing a Sanskrit translation of the Islamic confession of faith in which the Prophet Muhammad was presented as an *avatar* of God, translated as *avyaktam*, ‘the Unmanifested’.43 By using Sanskrit terms that roughly approximated the meaning of the Arabic, Mahmud was already blurring two very different theological spheres.

Six hundred years later, however, the process of mutual acculturation had proceeded to the extent that many ordinary Indians reflexively combined these worlds in their ritual practices. In the early seventeenth century, Jahangir noted that ‘crowds on crowds of the people of Islam’ travelled long distances to bring offerings and pray at the stone image in the temple of Bajreśwari Devi near the Kangra fort in present-day Himalchal Pradesh.44 In the same century, it was natural for educated elites to view India’s history and material culture through the prism of universal kingship, rather than that of specific religions. Chandar Bhan’s seventeenth-century history of the kings of Delhi seamlessly connected the Mughals and Delhi sultans to their north Indian royal predecessors, something Biruni could never have imagined.45 Shortly after 1596 Bijapur’s ambassador to Ahmadnagar, the Iran-born Rafi‘ al-Din Shirazi, visited the famous rock-cut temples and monasteries at Ellora in the north-western Deccan. Comparing the site to the palaces of Persepolis, the ceremonial capital of ancient Persian emperors that he knew from having grown up nearby, Shirazi viewed Ellora’s monuments as a past record of dynastic royalty, the same way that Chandar Bhan perceived Indian history. Accordingly, the ambassador understood the Kailash Temple to be a monument depicting the court life of some ancient Indian king, and its statue of Śiva to be a stone portrait of a royal figure.46

Works of architecture and literature also reflect the extent to which, from the late sixteenth century onwards, the Persianate and Indic cultural spheres lost the stark polarity that had seemed so obvious to Biruni. The kingdom of Orchha had been a tributary state of the Mughals since the 1570s. As a Rajput chief assimilated into the Mughal ruling class, Orchha’s ruler, Bir Singh, lavishly incorporated Indo-Timurid, Vaishnava and Rajput motifs into the monuments he patronized, such as the Keśavadeva Temple in Mathura or the Jahangir Mahal in Orchha itself. Meanwhile, Akbar’s alliance with Rajput houses, and the presence of high-ranking Rajput women in the Mughal harem, had brought the dialect of Hindavi spoken in the region south of Delhi – Brajbhasha \(or Braj\) – into the heart of the imperial court. By the late sixteenth century, both Hindu and Muslim poets of Braj enjoyed Mughal patronage.47 A pivotal figure in this movement was Bir Singh’s court poet, Keshavdas \(fl. 1580–1612\), who, instead of writing in Sanskrit as his ancestors had done, pioneered a refined, courtly style of Braj that incorporated protocols and genres from classical Sanskrit literature.

As seventeenth- and eighteenth-century writers of Braj literature moved from court to court seeking patrons across the Mughal realm, their dialect of Hindavi became increasingly cosmopolitan in nature. And since courtliness in India was largely an imitative behaviour, courts naturally responded to what other, higher-status courts were doing. So when the Mughals, as north India’s supreme lords, began promoting distinctive styles in domains such as manuscript painting, architecture or courtly Braj literature, their Rajput allies, who served as imperial *mansabdar*s across north India and the Deccan, imitated those same styles.48 In this way, the Mughals’ patronage and stamp of excellence proved critical for the success of classical Hindi, meaning that the Rajput–Mughal alliance was as much a literary as a political phenomenon.49 On the other hand, the success of vernacular Braj as a literary form carried serious implications for the patronage and usage of Sanskrit. Keshavdas and his many successors in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century India contributed to a larger process by which Braj, by appropriating Sanskrit style, began to encroach upon the cultural space that Sanskrit had once monopolized, eventually usurping its place and rendering the classical language increasingly irrelevant.50

Persian in India would experience a fate similar to that of Sanskrit, though somewhat later and for very different reasons. Critical to this process was the reception of Europe’s ‘one nation, one language’ ideology in nineteenth-century Iran and India, and the rise of nationalist movements in both countries. In Iran, Persian was vigorously promoted as that country’s national language, for which purpose classical poets such as Firdausi were appropriated as proto-national Iranian poets. This seriously compromised Persian’s former status as a transregional, cosmopolitan medium, thereby eroding an historic cultural bridge between India and Iran. In India, meanwhile, Persian experienced a precipitous drop in patronage following the final collapse of the Mughal empire in 1858 and the subsequent rise of Indian nationalism. Unlike Persian in Iran, Sanskrit could not be nationalized since it was not commonly spoken anywhere. However, as Delhi’s economic and political importance continued to decline after the mid eighteenth century, many of the city’s poets migrated to the empire’s former provinces – Bengal, Bihar, Awadh, Punjab, Hyderabad – where they acquired students wishing to emulate the new metropolitan poetic style called *rekhtah.* Written in Persian script and appropriating Persian literary models, this new style was composed in the vernacular dialect of the Delhi region and evoked the lustre of the Mughals’ remembered, glorious past. In particular, it was associated with the prestige of the imperial Mughal camp, or *urdu*, by which name the language would be known.51

In this way, between the mid eighteenth and the late nineteenth centuries, two great transregional languages, which for centuries had defined the Sanskritic and Persianate worlds, became artefacts in India, eclipsed in the north by new literary genres in dialects of spoken Hindavi – prominently Braj and Urdu.52 And yet, although the patronage of Sanskrit and Persian literature and the usage of the two languages receded dramatically, the values, sentiments and ideas sustained through their respective literary traditions had become deeply enmeshed over the course of nearly a millennium of mutual interaction. It would take the efforts of later generations to reverse that process.



## TOWARDS MODERNITY

Contrary to the claims of British imperial propagandists or apologists, modernity in India did not commence with the arrival of European merchants or colonial rulers. That story goes back to their Mughal predecessors. The reigns of two Mughal emperors in particular – Akbar and ‘Alamgir – saw distinctive, but very different, harbingers of what people in the twenty-first century might call modernity. Akbar’s reign exhibited a spirit of rational self-control and a nearly obsessive preoccupation with order in all spheres of experience, especially in governance and administration. Abu’l-fazl’s monumental imperial gazetteer, the *A’in-i Akbari* or ‘Institutes of Akbar’ \(*c*.1595\), shows a determined effort to standardize and impose the most minute regulations over nearly everything: the manner of cleaning matchlock firearms, the daily allowance for feeding mules, the wages for imperial glass-cutters, the rearing and care of pigeons, the expenses for the maintenance of different classes of war-horses, etc. Every plot of the empire’s cultivated area was subjected to careful surveys using standard units of measurement. Corruption, while endemic in most large state systems, was minimized by the Mughals’ promoting an ethic of efficiency, while standard monetary units – the silver rupee, the gold *muhr* and the copper *dam* – helped regularize the most basic of governmental functions: the collection of revenue. Record-keeping from Akbar’s reign onwards was meticulous, as strict rules were established for maintaining data and auditing accounts. Soldiers under the charge of a *mansabdar* were listed by name, place of residence, age, race and physical descriptions; war-horses were carefully identified by their types and their distinguishing features – all with a view to promoting military efficiency.53

The imperial court’s endeavour to set the tone for an empire-wide ethos of discipline and rational order is neatly epitomized by a water-clock that Akbar maintained in his palace in Fatehpur Sikri. There, orderlies would strike loud bronze gongs as each quarter-hour had elapsed. ‘These water-clocks’, noted a Jesuit Father then residing at the court:

consist of a brazen vessel filled with water, and a hollow bronze cone of such a size that exactly a quarter of an hour is taken for the water to fill it through a small hole in the bottom. This cone is placed on the top of the vessel filled with water, and the water runs in through the hole in its bottom. When the cone is full, it sinks, and thus shows that a quarter of an hour has elapsed. *Everything that goes on in the palace is regulated by this clock*.54

The preoccupation with efficient management of time, with discipline and with control suggests an attempt to impose an ethos of rational order on the world. Accompanying this sensibility was a new sort of secularism. Sultanates dating to ninth-century Central Asia had in principle divided a state’s political and religious spheres between the sultan and the caliph respectively. But chronicles going back to the reigns of the Delhi sultans had nonetheless manipulated historical anecdotes to show a deep divine intervention in human affairs. In the writings of prominent Mughal literati from the late sixteenth century onwards, however, human agency was understood as having replaced divine agency. Only the Mughals rationalized their empire by applying this secular outlook to the religious traditions of their subjects.55

Despite such indicators of modernity, however, Akbar immersed himself in the cult of sacred kingship inherited from his Timurid patrimony.56 In this view it was the Mughal emperor, endowed with semi-divine attributes, who conceptually linked the mundane world of everyday life to the spiritual world. Akbar’s messianic identity was reinforced by the atmosphere of anticipation leading up to the close of the first Islamic millennium, which occurred in 1591, the thirty-fifth year of his reign. By that time, the emperor was presenting himself as a charismatic millennial sovereign, as well as the Perfect Man as elaborated in Sufi discourse, reinforced by his association with light, Illuminationist philosophy and Zoroastrian thought. All this meant that, paradoxically, Akbar’s regime exhibited both the premodern sensibility of sacred kingship *and* the modern sensibility of a rationally ordered universe, as manifested in his court’s culture and administration.

In contrast, ‘Alamgir rejected, at least in principle, the cult of sacred kingship inherited from his Timurid predecessors. As prince, Aurangzeb had commanded a large Mughal army sent deep into Central Asia to fulfil his father’s fantasy of conquering the heartland of Timur’s former empire, thereby affirming the emperor’s claim to being the ‘Second Lord of the Conjunction’. But the expedition failed spectacularly, owing mainly to the logistical impossibility of holding territory so far from India. Although this failure did not shake Shah Jahan’s belief in his own sacred status, it was his son who had to trudge through bitter winter snows high in the Hindu Kush Mountains, where 5,000 soldiers under his command froze to death. In the first instance, the debacle contributed to the prince’s growing estrangement from his father. More fundamental was his rejection of the ideology of sacred kingship that had informed his father’s policies, including the Central Asian campaign. Aurangzeb also had to distance himself politically and ideologically from his brother Dara Shukoh, his bitter rival for the Peacock Throne. Lacking military competence or administrative experience, Dara had enthusiastically embraced his father’s potent ideology of sacred kingship, which he mistakenly felt would carry him to power in the 1658–9 War of Succession. Most decisive, however, was Aurangzeb’s conviction, formed already while governor of Gujarat, that the cult of sacred kingship was incapable of countering or absorbing anti-state movements that were millennial in nature.

After winning the throne, therefore, ‘Alamgir endeavoured to replace Dara’s and his ancestors’ cult of sacred kingship with something entirely new in Mughal history. Instead of a state that pivoted on a charismatic, sacred emperor, he tried to establish an impersonal polity governed by the rule of law, for which purpose he gave sweeping powers to the Mughal judiciary and patronized the production of the *Fatawa-i ‘Alamgiri,* a comprehensive and authoritative legal compendium of Hanifi Sunni Islam that was promulgated throughout the empire. This effort not only marked a radical departure from the past; it also had a decidedly modern ring to it, since such a state would have effectively desacralized a world believed to be charged with spiritual presence and energy.57 But the emperor’s lofty project ultimately failed. For one thing, the sort of judicial state he apparently envisioned could be successfully implemented only by efficient and honest subordinates, and ‘Alamgir was served by all-too-human officials who, like the venal functionaries who collected *jizya* taxes, were immersed in local politics, petty power struggles, bribery and corruption.

Moreover, any transition from the idea of sacred kingship to the rule of law was too drastic a move to have been accomplished even in ‘Alamgir’s long reign. Most of his subjects yearned for a sovereign who mediated human and sacred realities. In fact, the emperor himself occasionally found it expedient to draw upon the deep reservoir of sacred kingship that was his inheritance, as when he was thought to have calmed a raging river by casting on it pieces of paper on which he had written prayers, or when his troops faced down rebels with banners on which he had personally inscribed prayers and magic symbols. Perceiving such actions as miraculous, ordinary subjects hailed him as a living saint \(*‘Alamgir, zinda pir*\). In short, the emperor could not shake off a ruling ideology so deeply entrenched among his dynastic predecessors and his own subjects. Yet he had at least envisioned a break with the sacred kingship of the premodern past, wherein lay the seeds of modern statehood. In this way his efforts prefigured modern movements of political Islam; they would go on to have a profound effect on South Asian modernity.58

In very different ways, then, the long, half-century reigns of both Akbar and ‘Alamgir set India on a path towards modernity well before European colonial rule took hold in South Asia. The former sovereign established principles of efficiency, discipline and rational order at every level of governance, and the latter laid out a vision of a state run by the impersonal rule of law rather than the whims of a sacred sovereign. Yet, for all its rationality, Akbar’s reign remained deeply invested in the premodern mould of the sacred king, and for all his dedication to the principle of a judicial state, ‘Alamgir was let down by his own corrupt officials, and on occasion found it expedient to invoke his inherited status as sacred king.

Still, by the beginning of the eighteenth century critical foundations of modern South Asia had been put in place. Also in place by then, of course, was India’s highly advanced textile-manufacturing sector, which was already clothing much of Europe, Africa and Asia. That sector would soon draw India into ever-tighter economic and political relationships with the rest of the world, and with the rest of world history.

