+++
title = "04 CHAPTER THREE MUSLIM RESPONSE TO HINDU PROTECTION"

+++
**CHAPTER THREE**

**MUSLIM RESPONSE TO HINDU PROTECTION**

The protection provided by Siddharãja JayasiMha to Muslims and their
places of worship was continued by his successors in Gujarat. The
population of Muslims as well as their places of worship continued to
multiply in several cities of Gujarat as is borne out by numerous
inscriptions, particularly from Khambat, Junagadh and Prabhas Patan,
dated before Gujarat passed under Muslim rule in the aftermath of Ulugh
Khãn’s invasion in AD 1299.

“These records,” observes Z.A. Desai, the learned Muslim epigraphist,
“make an interesting study primarily because they were set up in Gujarat
at a time when it had still resisted Muslim authority. That the Muslims
inhabited quite a few cities, especially in the coastal line of Gujarat,
quite long before its final subjugation by them, is an established fact.
The accounts of Arab travellers like Mas‘ûdî, Istakharî, Ibn Hauqal and
others, who visited Gujarat during the ninth and tenth centuries of the
Christian era, amply testify to the settlements of Muslims in various
towns and cities. The inscriptions studied below also tend to
corroborate the fact that the Muslims had continued to inhabit Gujarat
until it became a part of the Muslim empire of Delhi. Moreover, they
furnish rare data for an appraisal of the condition of Muslims under
non-Muslim rulers of Gujarat. On one hand, they indicate the extent of
permeation of Islamic influence in Gujarat at a time when it was still
ruled by its own Rajput princes and show that Muslims had long
penetrated into different parts of Gujarat where they lived as
merchants, traders, sea-men, missionaries, etc.; these settlements were
not only on the coastal regions but also in the interior as is indicated
by some of these records. On the other hand, these epigraphs form a
concrete and ever-living proof of the tolerance and consideration shown
vis-a-vis their Muslim subjects by Hindu kings who were no doubt
profited by the trade and commerce carried on by these foreign
settlers.”^([1](#1))

It seems, however, that these “merchants, traders, sea-men and
missionaries” were not satisfied with the situation obtaining under
Hindu rule. They kept looking forward to the day when the *Dãr al-Harb*
(land of the infidels against which Muslims are obliged to wage war)
that was Gujarat would become *Dãr al-Islãm* (land of the faithful). The
evidence of how these Muslim settlers worked as sappers and miners of
Islamic invasions of Gujarat remains to be collected from Muslim annals.
Here we are citing an inscription from Prabhas Patan, the city which was
famous for its temple of Somanatha.

The inscription is dated AD 1264 and records the construction of a
mosque at Prabhas Patan by a Muslim ship-owner. The stone slab
containing its Arabic version is now fixed in the Qazi’s Mosque at
Prabhas Patan and is not *in situ*. The Sanskrit version which, it
seems, was removed at some time and is now in a wall of the Harasiddha
Mata temple in the nearby town of Veraval, has been summarised as
follows by Z.A. Desai:

“Ship-owner Nûru’d-Dîn Pîrûz, son of ship-owner Khwãja Abû Ibrãhîm, a
native of Hormuz,^([2](#2)) had come for business to the town of god
Somnath during the reign of Arjunadeva, the Vãghelã king of Gujarat (C.
AD 1261-74) when Amîr Ruknu’d-Dîn was the ruling chief of Hormuz; Pîrûz
purchased a piece of land situated in the Šikottari Mahãyãnpãl outside
the town of Somnath in the presence of the leading men like Thakkur Šri
Palugideva, Rãnak Šri Somešvaradeva, Thakkur Šri Rãmdeva, Thakkur Šri
Bhimsiha and others and in the presence of all (Muslim) congregations,
from Rãjakula Šri Chhãdã, son of Rãjakula Šri Nãnasiha; Pîrûz, who by
his alliance with the great man Rãjakula Šri Chhãdã, had become his
associate in meritorious work, caused a mosque to be constructed on that
piece of land; for its maintenance, i.e., for the expenses of oil for
lamp, water, preceptor, crier to prayers and a monthly reader (of the
*Qur’ãn*) and also for the payment of expenses of the particular
religious festivals according to the custom of sailors, as well as for
the annual white-washing and repairs of rents and defects in the
building, the said Pîrûz bequeathed three sources of income: firstly, a
*pallaDika* (particulars regarding whose location and the owner are
given in detail); secondly, a *dãnapala* belonging to one oil-mill; and
thirdly, two shops in front of the mosque, purchased from Kilhanadeva,
Lunasiha, Ãšãdhar and others; Pîrûz also laid down that after meeting
the expenses as indicated above, the surplus income should be sent to
the holy cities of Mecca and Medina; as regards the management, he
desired that the various classes of Muslims such as the communities of
sailors, ship-owners, the clergy (?), the artisans (?), etc., should
look after the source of income and properly maintain the
mosque.”^([3](#3))

The English translation of the first seven lines of the Arabic text as
given by Z.A. Desai, is as follows:

1\. Allãh the Exalted may assign this (reward) to one who builds a house
in the path of Allãh… \[This auspicious mosque was built\].

2\. on the twenty-seventh of the month of RamaDãn, year \[sixty-two\].

3\. and six hundred from migration of the Prophet (23rd July AD 1264),
in the reign of the just Sultãn and \[die generous king\].

4\. Abu’l-Fakhr (lit., father of pride), Ruknu’d-Dunyã wa’d-Dîn (lit.,
pillar of State and Religion), Mu’izzu’l-Islãm wa’l-Muslimîn (lit.
source of glory for Islãm and the Muslims), shadow of Allãh in \[the
lands\],

5\. one who is victorious against the enemies, (divinely) supported
prince, Abi’n-Nusrat (lit., father of victory), Mahmûd, son of Ahmad,
may Allãh perpetuate his…

6. and may his affair and prestige be high, in the city of Somnãt (i.e.
Somnath), may God make it one of the cities of Islãm ad \[banish?\].

7\. infidelity and idols… ^([4](#4))

Z.A. Desai has noted some differences between the Arabic and the
Sanskrit versions. “For example,” he writes, “the Arabic inscription
does not give all the details regarding the sources of income, the
procedure for its expenditure, management, etc., which are mentioned at
some length in the Sanskrit record. Also, the Arabic version mentions
only the leader of prayer (*imãm*), caller to prayers (*mu’addhin*) and
the cities of Mecca and Medina among the beneficiaries… Likewise, no
mention is made of the provision for the celebration of religious
festivals as stated in the Sanskrit record.  Further, in the extant
portion of the Arabic record, we do not find mention of the then Vãghelã
king of Gujarat, Arjunadeva… On the other hand, the Arabic version gives
some more information regarding the status and position of Pîrûz (Fîrûz)
and his father Abû Ibrãhîm. For example, Fîrûz is called therein ‘the
great and respected chief (*sadr*), prince among sea-men, and king of
kings and merchants.’ He is further eulogised as the ‘Sun of Islãm and
Muslims, patron of kings and monarchs, shelter of the great and the
elite, pride of the age’, etc. Likewise, his father, Abû Ibrãhîm, son of
Muhammad al-‘Irãqî, is also mentioned with such lofty titles as ‘the
great chief of fortunate position, protector of Islãm and the Muslims,
patron of kings and monarchs, prince among great men of the time, master
of generosity and magnanimity’, etc. Needless to say, all these titles
are absent in the Sanskrit version.”^([5](#5))

One wonders, however, why the learned epigraphist has overlooked the
most glaring difference in the two versions and tried to cover it up by
stating that “in the extant portion of the Arabic record, we do not find
mention of the then Vãghelã king of Gujarat.” The record is complete for
all practical purposes except for a few gaps which the epigraphist has
filled up creditably with the help of his long experience in reading and
reconstructing such inscriptions. It is difficult to imagine that the
name of Arjunadeva, the then Vãghelã king of Gujarat, could have
occurred in any of these gaps even if the king was stripped of all his
appellations. Moreover, the name of a Hindu king could have found no
place in the scheme followed in the inscription.

The scheme followed in the inscription is similar to that which we find
in thousands of such inscriptions set up on mosques and other Muslim
monuments all over India, before and after AD 1264. The name of the
ruling Muslim monarch with his appellations finds a prominent place in
most of these inscriptions. And that is exactly what we find in the
present instance. The only difference is that there being no Muslim
monarch at that time in Gujarat and Gujarat being a Hindu kingdom
independent of the Delhi Sultanate, the builder of the mosque chose the
king of Hormuz for showing his solidarity with *Dãr al-Isãm*.

That in itself was objectionable enough for a subject of the Hindu king
of Gujarat or a resident alien doing business in Gujarat. The mosque was
erected at Prabhas Patan which was situated in the kingdom of Gujarat
and not at a place in the kingdom of Hormuz. But the builder went much
farther as, after extolling the king of Hormuz as “the source of glory
for Islãm and the Muslims,” he prayed fervently that “may his affair and
prestige be high in the city of Somnãt, may Allãh make it one of the
cities of Islãm, and \[banish?\] infidelity and idols” from it. In other
words, he was praying for and looking forward to another Islamic
invasion of Gujarat.

Comparing the Sanskrit and Arabic versions of this inscription, the
conclusion is unavoidable that the Muslim merchant from Hormuz had
eschewed carefully from the Sanskrit version what he had included
confidently in the Arabic text. He must have been sure in his mind that
no Hindu from Prabhas Patan or elsewhere was likely to compare the two
texts and that even if a Hindu noticed the difference between the two he
was not likely to understand its meaning and purport. At the same time,
he was sharing with his co-religionists in Gujarat a pious aspiration
enjoined on all believers by the tenets of Islam.

There was a similar Muslim settlement at ANhilwãD Pãtan, the capital of
Gujarat under the Chaulukya and the Vãghelã dynasties of Hindu kings. An
inscription dated AD 1282 fixed in the wall of a mosque in this place,
records the death of a Muslim merchant in the reign of the Vãghelã king
Sãrañgadeva (AD 1274-96). “Within our present state of knowledge,”
writes Z.A. Desai, “this is the only record at Pãtan which is dated in
the pre-Muslim period of Gujarat, furnishing evidence of the settlement,
or at least presence, of Muslims in the very capital of the Rajput
rulers.”^([6](#6)) But as he himself admits “Muslim remains also have
not survived the ravages of time”^([7](#7)) in this town. It is quite
likely that an inscription similar to that at Prabhas Patan existed at
ANhilwãD Pãtan also.

Cambay or Khambat, the famous port of Gujarat, abounds in Muslim
inscriptions from the time when Gujarat was a Hindu kingdom. An
inscription dated AD 1218 in the reign of the Chaulukya king Bhîmadeva
II (AD 1178-1242), records the construction of a Jãmi‘ Masjid and says
in the very first sentence that no one else would be invoked with
Allãh.^([8](#8)) Another inscription dated AD 1232 in the reign of the
same Hindu king records the death of a Muslim and declares, again in the
first sentence, that “Surely, the true religion with Allãh is
Islãm.”^([9](#9)) A third inscription dated 1284 in the reign of the
Vãghelã king Sãrañgadeva (AD 1274-96), records the death of another
Muslim and says that “whoever disbelieves in the communications of
Allãh-then, surely Allãh is quick in reckoning.”^([10](#10))

An inscription dated AD 1286-87 records the construction of a mosque at
Junagadh in the reign of Sãrañgadeva. The record invests the name of the
builder, Abu’l Qãsim, with high-sounding titles. “The titles,” observes
Z.A. Desai, “may be taken to suggest that Abu’l Qãsim, probably an
influential merchant conducting business in that part, was associated in
some way with the liaison work between the state and its Muslim
population. The record also indicates that there was a considerable
number of Muslim population residing at Junagadh, which necessitated the
building of a prayer house and that some of the Saurashtra ports used to
clear the traffic of Haj pilgrims from Gujarat and possibly from outside
too.”^([11](#11))

Settlements of Arab and other merchants from West Asia were nothing new
for Gujarat. These merchants had established colonies all along the West
Coast of India and even farther afield, long before the prophet of Islam
was born. The ports of Gujarat being the most prosperous had exercised a
particular attraction for them. They also travelled in the interior of
Gujarat in search of merchandise fit for the markets in Africa, West
Asia and Europe. Mecca itself was an entrepot for trade between India
and the Far East on the one hand and the Roman Empire on the other. At
the same time, Indian merchants including those from Gujarat had
established their colonies in most of the coastal towns along the
Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. Neither religion nor
politics had ever divided the two merchant fraternities.

All this, however, changed radically after Arabia was conquered by the
sword of Islam and every Arab was forced to become a Muslim on pain of
death or permanent exile from his homeland. The Indian colonies along
the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and the Mediterranean were attacked by
Islamic legionaries, both from land and sea.  Indian merchants, except a
few who opted for the new faith, were killed or hounded out from every
place which came under Islamic occupation. Meanwhile, Arab merchants
added a new item to their merchandise-they became salesmen of Islam as
well. Arab settlements in India had not suffered the slightest
discomfort or dislocation following from the stormy events in Arabia and
the march of Islamic hordes towards the frontiers of India. Many more
people to the west and north of India passed under the yoke of Islam in
the next few decades. Merchants from all these places had also to
embrace Islam and make a common cause with the Arab merchants. A new
fraternity known as the *ummah* or *millat* of Islam emerged all along
the West Coast of India as also at many places in the interior.

Only a state and a population that did not know or understand the tenets
of Islam and the obligations which those tenets imposed upon every
Muslim, could permit these seditious settlements in its leading cities
and ports. There is little doubt that each one of these settlements
served as an intelligence network for Islamic invaders. The missionaries
of Islam who took care of the flock might have hoodwinked the Hindus
around them with their pieties. But the faithful understood the message
of these missionaries and readily served as advance guards of the armies
of Islam hovering on the borders of Gujarat.  
 

**II**

It cannot be said that at the time these inscriptions were set up at
ANhilwãD Pãtan, Prabhas Patan, Khambat, Junagadh and other places, the
Hindus of Gujarat had had no taste of what Islam had in store for them,
their women, their children, their cities, their temples, their idols,
their priests, and their properties.  The invasion of Ulugh Khãn that
was to subjugate Gujarat to a long spell of Muslim rule, was the eighth
in a series which started within a few years after the Prophet’s death
at Medina in AD 632. Five Islamic invasions had been mounted on Gujarat
before Siddharãja JayasiMha ascended the throne of that kingdom in AD
1094 - first in AD 636 on Broach by sea; second in AD 732-35 by land;
third and fourth in AD 756 and 776 by sea; and fifth by Mahmûd of Ghazni
in AD 1026. Two others had materialised by the time the Muslim
ship-owner set up his inscription in AD 1264 on a mosque at Prabhas
Patan. The sixth invasion was by Muhammad Ghûrî in AD 1178, and the
seventh was by Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak in AD 1197. The only conclusion that
can be drawn from the evidence is that either the Hindus of Gujarat had
a very short memory or that they did not understand at all the
inspiration at the back of these invasions. The temple of Somnath which
stood, after the invasion of Mahmûd of Ghazni in AD 1026, as a grim
reminder of the character of Islam, had also failed to teach them any
worthwhile lesson. Nor did they visualize that the Muslim settlements in
their midst could play a role other than that of carrying on trade and
commerce.

The foreign merchants turned Muslims had continued to do business and
amass wealth as in the earlier days. But the leadership in the Muslim
settlements had now passed into the hands of the missionaries of Islam
known as Sufis, Walîs, Dirvishes and by several other high-sounding
names. The sole occupation of these missionaries was to see the
frontiers of *Dãr al-Islãm* extend towards Gujarat. All Muslims in
Gujarat were now expected to serve as the eyes and ears of the Caliphate
which had started on a career of imperialist aggression in all
directions. Gujarat had had a taste of this aggression earlier than any
other part of India. As the armies of Islam marched towards the land
frontiers of India in Makran and Seistan, Indian ports on the West Coast
became targets for the newly created Islamic navy.  
 

**Legends about Mahmûd of Ghazni**

Mahmûd of Ghazni had led twelve to seventeen expeditions to India,
according to different accounts. He destroyed many temples and smashed
or burnt numerous idols wherever he was victorious over Hindu
resistance. But what made him into a myth was his expedition to Somnath.
“The destruction of the temple of Somnãth,” observes Muhammad Nãzim,
“was looked upon as the crowning glory of Islam over idolatry, and
Sultãn Mahmûd as the champion of the Faith, received the applause of all
the Muslim world.  Poets vied with each other in extolling the real or
supposed virtues of the idol-breaker and the prose writers of later
generations paid their tribute of praise to him by making him the hero
of numerous ingenious stories.”^([12](#12))

One such story was told by Shykh Farîdu’d-Dîn ATTãr, the renowned
“mystic poet” in his *ManTiqu’t-Tair* (Conference of Birds). “In this
story,” writes Muhmmad Nãzim, “the Sultãn is made to show his preference
for the title of idol-breaker to that of idol-seller.” While rejecting
the offer of the BrãhmaNas to ransom the idol of Somnath with its weight
in gold, Mahmûd is supposed to have said, “I am afraid that on the Day
of Judgment when all the idolaters are brought into the presence of
Allãh, He would say, ‘Bring Ãdhar and Mahmûd together one was
idol-maker, the other idol-seller’.” Ãdhar or Ezra, the uncle of
Abraham, according to the Qur’ãn, made his living by carving idols. “The
Sultãn,” according to ATTãr, “then ordered a fire to be lighted round
it. The idol burst and 20 *manns* of precious stones poured out from its
inside. The Sultãn said, ‘This (fire) is what Lãt^([13](#13)) (by which
name ATTãr calls Somnãth) deserves; and that (the precious stones) is my
guerdon from my God.”^([14](#14))

Another story is told in the *Futûhu’s-Salãtîn*. “It is stated,”
summarises Muhammad Nãzim, “that shortly after the birth of Mahmûd, the
astrologers of India divined that a prince had been born at Ghazna who
would demolish the temple of Somnãth. They therefore persuaded Rãjã
Jaipãl to send an embassy to Mahmûd while he was still a boy, offering
to pay him a large sum of money if he promised to return the idol to the
Hindûs whenever he captured it. When Mahmûd captured Somnãth the
Brahmins reminded him of his promise and demanded the idol in compliance
with it. Mahmûd did not like either to return the idol or to break his
promise. He therefore ordered the idol to be reduced to lime by burning
and when, on the following day, the Brahmins repeated their demand, he
ordered them, to be served with betel-leaves which had been smeared with
the lime of the idol. When the Brahmins had finished the chewing of the
betel-leaves they again repeated their demand, on which the Sultãn told
them that they had the idol in their mouths.”^([15](#15)) As we would
see at a later stage in this study, this story inspired some other
Sultãns to do actually what Mahmûd was supposed to have done in the
imagination of a story-teller.

Finally, we have a story which presents the Muslims as a persecuted
community in the Hindu kingdom of Gujarat and Mahmûd’s invasion as a
punitive expedition. The Rãjã of Gujarat, we are told, used to sacrifice
a Muslim everyday “in front of the idol of Somnãth.” So Prophet Muhammad
appeared in a dream to Hãjjî  Muhammad of Mecca and told him to go to
the rescue of the Prophet's beloved people in Gujarat. The Hindu Rãjã
tried to kill the Hãjjî but did not succeed. “The Hãjjî,” the story goes
on, “now invited Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazna to come with his army and stop
this iniquity.” The Sultãn came, reduced the idol of Somnath to powder
which he fed to Rãjã Kunwar Rãy in betel-leaves. The deputy he appointed
at Somnãtha before his return to Ghazni “demolished the temple and set
fire to it.”^([16](#16))

The story, of course, seeks psychological compensation for an unprovoked
aggression against a king and a people who had been kind to the Muslims
settled in Gujarat. We hear similar stories about many other places
which were invaded by the armies of Islam and which had provided
protection to Muslim settlements, particularly the Sufis. But at the
same time, it betrays the secret that the Muslim community in Gujarat
had invited Mahmûd to invade the kingdom and destroy the temple of
Somnath. Professor Mohammad Habib was telling this truth when he wrote
that “the far-flung campaigns of Sultan Mahmud would have been
impossible without an accurate knowledge of trade routes and local
resources, which was probably obtained from Muslim
merchants.”^([17](#17))

Sidhpur, like many other famous Hindu cities, is a small town today. But
it reminds us of the days when it was the most important place of Hindu
pilgrimage in North Gujarat.

The Rudramahãlaya, like many other magnificent Hindu temples, is a heap
of ruins at present. But it reminds us of a past when it was one of the
most magnificent temples ever built in India.

The Jãmi‘ Masjid, like many other historical mosques, stands as a
dilapidated structure now. But it reminds us of a regime under which it
symbolised the might of Islam.

The destruction of the Rudramahãlaya at Sidhpur in Gujarat was not an
isolated event; it was only a link in the long chain which stretches
from the middle of the seventh century, when the first Islamic invaders
stepped on the soil of India, to the closing years of the eighteenth
century when Tîpû Sultãn led his expedition into Malabar. The vast land
which is spread from Transoxiana, Khurasan and Seistan in the West to
Assam in the East, and from Sinkiang in the North to Tamil Nadu in the
South, is literally littered with the ruins of temples belonging to all
Hindu sects- Bauddha, Jaina, Šaiva, Šãkta VaishNava, and the rest.

The Jãmi‘ Masjid at Sidhpur is not the only mosque built on the site and
from the debris of a demolished Hindu temple. There are innumerable
mosques all over India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan and the
neighbouring lands towards the north-west which have, embedded in their
masonry, some epigraphical or sculptural or architectural evidence that
they were places of Hindu worship in the past. Quite a few of these
mosques have failed to withstand the ravages of time and are in ruins at
present. But quite a few are still in use by the worshippers of Allãh.  
 

**Conclusion**

The story of Gujarat was repeated all over India in wave after wave of
Islamic invasions from the middle of the seventh century onwards. Hindus
fought the invaders at every step and defeated them quite often. But
they failed to study and understand the theology of Islam, and the
aspirations of Muslims living in their midst.  The invaders continued to
forge ahead for several centuries. The situation is the same today.
Afghanistan, North-West Frontier Province, Punjab, Sindh, and East
Bengal have been lost. No one can say how things will turn out in
Kashmir. Muslims inside India continue to create street riots on an
ascending scale. But the Hindus have refused to learn, either from
history or from contemporary experience.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Arabic Inscriptions of the Rajput period from Gujarat’,
*Epigraphia Indica-Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1961, pp. 1-2.  It
is, of course, his personal view that Hindu tolerance towards Muslims
was inspired in part by profits derived from foreign trade.

[²](#2a) A principality in the Persian Gulf.

[³](#3a) *Epigraphia Indica-Arabic and Persian Supplement*, 1961, pp.
11-12.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., p. 14.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p. 12.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 16.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 15.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p. 6.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 8

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 17.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., p. 18.

[¹²](#12a) Muhammad Nãzim. *The Lift and Times of Sultãn Mahmûd of
Ghazna*, second edition, 1971, p. 219.

[¹³](#13a) Al-Lãt was a Goddess of the pre-Islamic Arabs. Prophet
Muhammad had got her idols destroyed. She was seen by Islamic
iconoclasts in many Hindu idols.

[¹⁴](#14a) Muhammad Nãzim, op. cit., p. 221.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., pp. 221-22.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid. pp. 222-24. The story is based on a ballad written by
some Muslim in Gujarati language in AH 1216 (AD 1800). The ballad was
summarised by Major J.W. Watson in *Indian Antiquary*, Vol. VIII (June,
1879), pp. 153-61.

[¹⁷](#17a) Quoted by Ram Gopal Misra in his *Indian Resistance to Early
Muslim Invaders upto AD 1206*, Meerut City, 1983, p. 101.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
