+++
title = "08 CHAPTER SEVEN THE LITERARY EVIDENCE"

+++
**CHAPTER SEVEN**

**THE LITERARY EVIDENCE**

Islamic literary sources provide far more extensive evidence of temple
destruction by the Muslim invaders of India in medieval times. They also
cover a larger area, from Sinkiang and Transoxiana in the North to Tamil
Nadu in the South, and from the Seistan province of present-day Iran in
the West to Assam in the East. As we wade through this evidence, we can
visualise how this vast area, which was for long the cradle of Hindu
culture, came to be literally littered with the ruins of temples and
monasteries belonging to all schools of Sanãtana Dharma-Bauddha, Jaina,
Šaiva, Šãkta, VaishNava and the rest. Archaeological explorations and
excavations in modern times have proved unmistakably that most of the
mosques, *mazãrs, ziãrats* and *dargãhs* which were built in this area
in medieval times, stood on the sites of and were made from the
materials of deliberately demolished Hindu monuments.

Hundreds of medieval Muslim historians who flourished in India and
elsewhere in the world of Islam, have written detailed accounts of what
their heroes did in various parts of the extensive Hindu homeland as
they were invaded one after another. We have had access only to a few of
these histories on account of our limitations in terms of language and
resources. Most of the histories pertaining to what are known as
provincial Muslim dynasties, have remained beyond our reach. One thing,
however, becomes quite clear from the evidence we have been able to
compile, namely, that almost all Muslim rulers destroyed or desecrated
Hindu temples whenever and wherever they could. Archaeological evidence
from various Muslim monuments, particularly mosques and *dargãhs*, not
only confirms the literary evidence but also adds the names of some
Muslim rulers whom Muslim historians have failed to credit with this
pious performance.

We are citing the literary evidence also in a chronological order, that
is, with reference to the time at which a particular work was written
and not with reference to the period with which it deals. Appendix 1
Provides the names and dates of dynasties and kings described in these
histories in the context of India. Most of these histories start with
the creation of Adam and Eve or the rise of the Prophet of Islam, and
come down to the time when the authors lived. Glorification of Islam, as
its armies invaded various countries and laid them waste with slaughter
and rapine, is their common theme. The writers have exhausted their
imagination in describing g the holocaust that was caused everywhere and
in coining names for those whom they look down upon as infidels and
idolaters.^([1](#1))

The apologists of Islam are likely to point out that quite often the
instances of iconoclasm have been copied by succeeding historians from
the writings of their predecessors and that this repetition should be
kept in mind while assessing the extent of temple destruction. There is
no substance in this argument. Firstly, there are many instances of
temple destruction which are not reported in the histories but which
archaeological evidence proves. Secondly, what is relevant in this
context is that the historians regard some instances as significant
enough to bear repetition. It is obvious that no account of some reigns
was considered complete unless the concerned ruler was credited with the
destruction of Hindu temples. Had it not been an important pious
performance from the point of view of Islam, it is inconceivable that
historians who wrote in times when the dust of war had settled down,
would have cared to mention it. The repetitions are valuable from
another point of view as well. In quite a few cases, succeeding
historians add details which are not found in the preceding accounts. It
is immaterial whether the details were missed by the earlier historians
or are the products of the succeeding historians’ imagination. What
matters is that the historians thought them fit for the glorification of
Islam.  
 

**(1)**  
**Futûhu’l-Buldãn**

The author, Ahmad bin Yahya bin Jãbir, is known as al-Bilãdhurî. He
lived at the court of Khalîfa Al-Mutawakkal (AD 847-861) and died in AD
893. His history is one of the earliest and major Arab chronicles. It
gives an account of Arab conquests in Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Iran,
Armenia, Transoxiana, Africa, Spain and Sindh. The account is brought
down to Khalîfa Mu’tasim’s reign in AD 842. We have had no access to a
translation of the full text in a language we know, and have depended on
extracts.  
 

**Ibn Samûrah (AD 653)**

His full name was ‘Abd ar-Rahmãn bin Samûrah bin Habîb bin ‘Abd
ash-Shams. He was appointed governor of Seistan after the first Arab
invasion of that province in AD 650 was defeated and dispersed. Ibn
Samûrah reached the capital of Seistan in AD 653.  
 

*Seistan (Iran)*

“On reaching Dãwar, he surrounded the enemy in the mountain of Zûr,
where there was a famous Hindu temple.”^([2](#2))

“…Their idol of Zûr was of gold, and its eyes were two rubies. The
zealous Musalmãns cut off its hands and plucked out its eyes, and then
remarked to the Marzabãn how powerless was his idol to do either good or
evil…”^([3](#3))  
 

**Qutaibah bin Muslim al-Bãhilî (AD 705-715)**

He was a general of Al-Hajjãj bin Yûsuf Saqafî, the notorious Governor
of Iraq under Caliph Al-Walîd I (AD 705-715). He was made Governor of
Khurasan in AD 705 and is renowned in the history of Islam as the
conqueror of Central Asia right upto Kashghar.  
 

*Samarqand (Farghana)*

“Other authorities say that Kutaibah granted peace for 700,000 dirhams
and entertainment for the Moslems for three days. The terms of surrender
included also the houses of the idols and the fire temples. The idols
were thrown out, plundered of their ornaments and burned, although the
Persians used to say that among them was an idol with which whoever
trifled would perish. But when Kutaibah set fire to it with his own
hand, many of them accepted Islãm.”^([4](#4))  
 

**Muhammad bin Qãsim (AD 712-715)**

He was the nephew as well as son-in-law of Al-Hajjãj, who sent him to
Sindh after more than a dozen invasions of that province had been
defeated by the Hindus.  
 

*Debal (Sindh)*

“…The town was thus taken by assault, and the carnage endured for three
days. The governor of the town, appointed by Dãhir, fled and the priests
of the temple were massacred. Muhammad marked a place for the Musalmans
to dwell in, built a mosque, and left four thousand Musalmans to
garrison the place…

“…‘Ambissa son of Ishãk Az Zabbî, the governor of Sindh, in the Khilafat
of Mu’tasim billah knocked down the upper part of the minaret of the
temple and converted it into a prison. At the same time he began to
repair the ruined town with the stones of the minaret…”^([5](#5))  
 

*Multan (Punjab)*

“…He then crossed the Biyãs, and went towards Multãn… Muhammad destroyed
the water-course; upon which the inhabitants, oppressed with thirst,
surrendered at discretion. He massacred the men capable of bearing arms,
but the children were taken captive, as well as the ministers of the
temple, to the number of six thousand. The Muslamãns found there much
gold in a chamber ten cubits long by eight broad, and there was an
aperture above, through which the gold was poured into the
chamber…”^([6](#6))  
 

**Hashãm bin ‘Amrû al-Taghlabî**

He was appointed Governor of Sindh by Khalîfa Al-Mansûr (AD 754-775) of
the Abbãsid dynasty. He led many raids towards different parts of India,
both by land and sea.  
 

*Kandahar (Maharashtra)*

“He then went to Kandahãr in boats and conquered it. He destroyed the
Budd there, and built in its place a mosque.”^([7](#7))  
 

**(2)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Tabarî**

The author, Abu Ja‘far Muhammad bin Jarîr at-Tabarî, is considered to be
the foremost historian of Islam. His *Tãrîkh* is regarded as
*Umdatu’l-Kutab*, mother of histories. He was born at Amil in Tabaristan
in the year AD 839. He was educated at Baghdad and lived in Basra and
Kufa as well. He travelled to Egypt and Damascus in order to perfect his
knowledge of Traditions. He spent the last days of his life in Baghdad
where he died in AD 922. We have had no access to his work in a
translation we could follow. The citations below are only summaries made
by modern historians.  
 

**Qutaibah bin Muslim al-Bãhilî (AD 705-715)**

*Beykund (Khurasan)*

“The ultimate capture of Beykund (in AD 706) rewarded him with an
incalculable booty; even more than had hitherto fallen into the hands of
the Mahommedans by the conquest of the entire province of Khorassaun;
and the unfortunate merchants of the town, having been absent on a
trading excursion while their country was assailed by the enemy, and
finding their habitations desolate on their return contributed further
to enrich the invaders, by the ransom which they paid for the recovery
of their wives and children. The ornaments alone, of which these women
had been plundered, being melted down, produced, in gold, one hundred
and fifty thousand meskals; of a dram and a half each. Among the
articles of the booty, is also described an image of gold, of fifty
thousand meskals, of which the eyes were two pearls, the exquisite
beauty and magnitude of which excited the surprise and admiration of
Kateibah. They were transmitted by him, with a fifth of the spoil to
Hejauje, together with a request that he might be permitted to
distribute, to the troops, the arms which had been found in the place in
great profusion.”^([8](#8))  
 

*Samarqand (Farghana)*

“A breach was, however, at last effected in the walls of the city in AD
712 by the warlike machines of Kateibah; and some of the most daring of
its defenders having fallen by the skill of his archers, the besieged
demanded a cessation of arms to the following day, when they promised to
capitulate. The request was acceded to by Kateibah; and a treaty was the
next day accordingly concluded between him and the prince of Samarkand,
by which the latter engaged for the annual payment of ten millions of
dirhems, and a supply of three thousand slaves; of whom it was
particularly stipulated, that none should either be in a state of
infancy, or ineffective from old age and debility. He further contracted
that the ministers of his religion should be expelled from their temples
and their idols destroyed and burnt; that Kateibah should be allowed to
establish a mosque in the place of the principal temple, in which, to
discharge the duties of his faith… To all this, Ghurek, with whatever
reluctance, was compelled to subscribe, and he proceeded accordingly to
prepare for the reception of Kateibah; who at the period agreed upon,
entered Samarkand with a retinue of four hundred persons, selected from
his own relatives, and the principal commanders of his army. He was met
by Ghurek, with a respect bordering on adoration, and conducted to the
gate of the principal temple, which he immediately entered; and after
performing two rekkauts of the ritual of his faith, directed the images
of pagan worship to be brought before him, for the purpose of being
committed to the flames. From this some of the Turks or Tartars of
Samarkand, endeavouring to dissuade him, by a declaration, that among
the images, there was one, which if any person ventured to consume, that
person should certainly perish; Kateibah informed them, that he should
not shrink from the experiment, and accordingly set fire to the whole
collection with his own hands; it was soon consumed to ashes, and fifty
thousand meskals of gold and silver, collected from the nails which has
been used in the workmanship of the images.”^([9](#9))  
 

**Yã’qûb bin Laith (AD 870-871)**

He was a highway robber who succeeded in seizing Khurasan from the
Tãhirid governors of the Abbãsid Caliphate. He founded the short-lived
Saffãrid dynasty.  
 

*Balkh and Kabul (Afghanistan)*

“He first took Bãmiãn, which he probably reached by way of Herãt, and
then marched on Balkh where he ruined (the temple) Naushãd. On his way
back from Balkh he attacked Kãbul…^([10](#10))

“Starting from Panjhîr, the place he is known to have visited, he must
have passed through the capital city of the Hindu Šãhîs to rob the
sacred temple - the reputed place of coronation of the Šãhî rulers-of
its sculptural wealth…^([11](#11))

“The exact details of the spoil collected from the Kãbul valley are
lacking. The *Tãrîkh \[-i-Sistãn\]* records 50 idols of gold and silver
and Mas’udî mentions elephants. The wonder excited in Baghdãd by
elephants and pagan idols forwarded to the Caliph by Ya’qûb also speaks
for their high value.

“The best of our authorities put the date of this event in 257 (870-71).
Tabarî is more precise and says that the idols sent by Ya’qûb reached
Baghdãd in Rabî’ al-Ãkhar, 257 (Feb.-March, 871). Thus the date of the
actual invasion may be placed at the end of AD 870.”^([12](#12))  
 

**(3)**  
**Tãrîkhu'l-Hind**

“The author, Abû Rîhan Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Bîrûnî al-Khwãrizmî, was
born in about AD 970-71. He was an astronomer, geometrician, historian
and logician. He was sent to Ghazni in an embassy from the Sultãn of
Khwãrizm. On invitation from Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030) he
entered his service, travelled to India and spent forty years in the
country, chiefly in the Punjab. He learnt Sanskrit and translated some
works from that language into Arabic. His history treats of the
literature and learning of the Hindus at the commencement of the
eleventh century.  
 

**Jalam ibn Shaiban (Ninth century AD)**

*Multan (Punjab)*

The Sun Temple at Multan has been described by early Arab geographers
like Sulaimãn, Mas‘ûdî, Istakhrî and Ibn Hauqal who travelled in India
during the ninth and tenth centuries of the Christian era. The Arab
invaders did not destroy it because besides being a rich source of
revenue, it provided protection against Hindu counter-attack. “Mûltan,”
wrote Mas‘ûdî, “is one of the strongest frontier places of the
Musalmãns… In it is the idol also known by the name of
Mûltãn.^([13](#13)) The inhabitants of Sind and India perform
pilgrimages to it from the most distant places; they carry money,
precious stones, aloe wood and all sorts of perfumes there to fulfil
their vows. The greatest part of the revenue of the king of Mûltãn is
derived from the rich presents brought to the idol… When the
unbelievers^([14](#14)) march against Mûltãn and the
faithful ^([15](#15)) do not feel themselves strong enough to oppose
them, they threaten to break their idol, and their enemies immediately
withdraw.”^([16](#16))

Al-Bîrûnî records: “A famous idol of theirs was that of Multan,
dedicated to the sun, and therefore called *Aditya*. It was of wood and
covered with red Cordovan leather; in its two eyes were two red rubies.
It is said to have been made in the last *Kritayuga*… When Muhammad Ibn
Alkasim Ibn Almunabih conquered Multan, he inquired how the town had
become so very flourishing and so many treasures had there been
accumulated, and then he found out that this idol was the cause, for
there came pilgrims from all sides to visit it. Therefore he thought it
best to have the idol where it was, but he hung a piece of cow’s flesh
on its neck by way of mockery. On the same place a mosque was
built. When the Karmatians^([17](#17)) occupied Multan, Jalam Ibn
Shaiban, the usurper, broke the idol into pieces and killed its
priests…”^([18](#18))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“The city of Taneshar is highly venerated by Hindus. The idol of that
place is called *Cakrasvamin*, i.e. the owner of the *cakra*, a weapon
which we have already described. It is of bronze, and is nearly the size
of a man. It is now lying in the hippodrome in Ghazna, together with the
Lord of Somanath, which is a representation of the *penis* of Mahadeva,
called *Linga*.”^([19](#19))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“The linga he raised was the stone of Somnath, for *soma* means the moon
and *natha* means *master*, so that the whole word means *master of the
moon*. The image was destroyed by the Prince Mahmud, may God be merciful
to him! - AH 416. He ordered the upper part to be broken and the
remainder to be transported to his residence, Ghaznin, with all its
coverings and trappings of gold, jewels, and embroidered garments. Part
of it has been thrown into the hippodrome of the town, together with the
*Cakrasvamin*, an idol of bronze, that had been brought from Taneshar.
Another part of the idol from Somanath lies before the door of the
mosque of Ghaznin, on which people rub their feet to clean them from
dirt and wet.”^([20](#20))  
 

**(4)**  
**Kitãbu’l-Yamînî**

The author of this history in Arabic was Abû Nasr Muhammad ibn Muhammad
al Jabbãru’l-‘Utbî. The family from Utba had held important offices
under the Sãmãnîs of Bukhara. ‘Utbi himself became Secretary to Sultãn
Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030). His work comprises the whole of the
reign of Subuktigîn and that of Sultãn Mahmûd down to the year AD 1020.
He lived a few years longer. Persian translations of this history are
known as *Tarjuma-i-Yamînî* or *Tãrîkh-i-Yamînî*.  
 

**Amîr Subuktigîn of Ghazni (AD 977-997)**

*Lamghan (Afghanistan)*

“The Amîr marched out towards Lamghãn, which is a city celebrated for
its great strength and abounding wealth. He conquered it and set fire to
the places in its vicinity which were inhabited by infidels, and
demolishing idol temples, he established Islãm in them. He marched and
captured other cities and killed the polluted wretches, destroying the
idolaters and gratifying the Musalmãns.”^([21](#21))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Narain (Rajasthan)*

“The Sultãn again resolved on an expedition to Hind, and marched towards
Nãrãîn, urging his horses and moving over ground, hard and soft, until
he came to the middle of Hind, where he reduced chiefs, who, up to that
time obeyed no master, overturned their idols, put to the sword the
vagabonds^([22](#22)) of that country, and with delay and circumspection
proceeded to accomplish his design…”^([23](#23))  
 

*Nardin (Punjab)*

“After the Sultãn had purified Hind from idolatry, and raised mosques
therein, he determined to invade the capital of Hind to punish those who
kept idols and would not acknowledge the unity of God… He marched with a
large army in the year AH 404 (AD 1013) during a dark night…^([24](#24))

“A stone was found there in the temple of the great Budda on which an
inscription was written purporting that the temple had been founded
fifty thousand years ago. The Sultãn was surprised at the ignorance of
these people, because those who believe in the true faith represent that
only seven thousand years have elapsed since the creation of the world,
and the signs of resurrection are even now approaching. The Sultãn asked
his wise men the meaning of this inscription and they all concurred in
saying that it was false, and no faith was to be put in the evidence of
a stone.”^([25](#25))  
 

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“The chief of Tãnesar was… obstinate in his infidelity and denial of
God. So the Sultãn marched against him with his valiant warriors, for
the purpose of planting the standards of Islãm and extirpating
idolatry…^([26](#26))

“The blood of the infidels flowed so copiously, that the stream was
discoloured, not withstanding its purity, and people were unable to
drink it… The victory was gained by God’s grace, who has established
Islãm for ever as the best of religions, notwithstanding that idolaters
revolt against it… Praise be to God, the protector of the world, for the
honour he bestows upon Islãm and Musulmãns.”^([27](#27))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The Sultãn then departed from the environs of the city, in which was a
temple of the Hindûs. The name of this place was Maharatul Hind… On both
sides of the city there were a thousand houses, to which idol temples
were attached, all strengthened from top to bottom by rivets of iron,
and all made of masonry work…^([28](#28))

“In the middle of the city there was a temple larger and firmer than the
rest, which can neither be described nor painted. The Sultãn thus wrote
respecting it: - ‘If any should wish to construct a building equal to
this, he would not be able to do it without expending an hundred
thousand, thousand red dînãrs, and it would occupy two hundred years
even though the most experienced and able workmen were employed’… The
Sultãn gave orders that all the temples should be burnt with naptha and
fire, and levelled with the ground.”^([29](#29))  
 

*Kanauj (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In Kanauj there were nearly ten thousand temples, which the idolaters
falsely and absurdly represented to have been founded by their ancestors
two or three hundred thousand years ago… Many of the inhabitants of the
place fled and were scattered abroad like so many wretched widows and
orphans, from the fear which oppressed them, in consequence of
witnessing the fate of their deaf and dumb idols. Many of them thus
effected their escape, and those who did not fly were put to
death,”^([30](#30))  
 

**(5)**  
**Dîwãn-i-Salmãn**

The author, Khwãjah Mas‘ûd bin Sa‘d bin Salmãn, was a poet. He wrote
poems in praise of the Ghaznavid Sultãns – Mas‘ûd, Ibrãhîm and Bahrãm
Shãh. He died sometime between AD 1126 and 1131.  
 

**Sultãn Abu’l Muzaffar Ibrãhîm (AD 1059-1099)**

“As power and the strength of a lion was bestowed upon Ibrãhîm by the
Almighty, he made over to him the well-populated country of Hindustãn
and gave him 40,000 valiant horsemen to take the country, in which there
were more than 1000 *rãîs*… Its length extends from Lahore to the
Euphrates, and its breadth from Kashmîr to the borders of Sîstãn… The
army of the king destroyed at one time a thousand temples of idols,
which had each been built for more than a thousand years. How can I
describe the victories of the king…”^([31](#31))  
 

*Jalandhar (Punjab)*

“The narrative of thy battles eclipses the stories of Rustam and
Isfandiyãr. Thou didst bring an army in one night from Dhangãn to
Jãlandhar… Thou didst direct but one assault and by that alone brought
destruction upon the country. By the morning meal not one soldier, not
one *Brãhman*, remained unkilled or uncaptured. Their beads were severed
by the carriers of swords. Their houses were levelled with the ground
with flaming fire… Thou has secured victory to the country and to
religion, for amongst the Hindus this achievement will be remembered
till the day of resurrection.”^([32](#32))  
 

*Malwa (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Thou didst depart with a thousand joyful anticipations on a holy
expedition, and didst return having achieved a thousand victories… On
this journey the army destroyed a thousand idol-temples and thy
elephants trampled over more than a hundred strongholds. Thou didst
march thy arm to Ujjain; Mãlwã trembled and fled from thee… On the way
to Kãlinjãr thy pomp obscured the light of day. The lip of infidelity
became dry through fear of thee, the eye of plural-worship became
blind…”^([33](#33))  
 

**(6)**  
**Chach-Nãmah**

This Persian history was translated from Arabic by Muhammad ‘Alî bin
Hamîd bin Abû Bakr Kûfî in the time of Nãsiru’d-Dîn Qabãcha, a slave of
Muhammad Ghurî, who contested the throne of Delhi with Shamsu’d-Dîn
Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236). The translator who lived at Uccha had gone to
Alor and Bhakkar in search of accounts of the Arab conquest. He met a
Maulãna who had inherited a history written in Arabic by one of his
ancestors. The translation in Persian followed because Kûfî found that
the Hijãjî Arabic of the original was little understood by people in
those days while the work was “a mine of wisdom.” The Arabic original
has been lost. The author remains unknown.  
 

**Muhammad bin Qãsim (AD 712-715)**

*Nirun (Sindh)*

“Muhammad built at Nîrûn a mosque on the site of the temple of Budh, and
ordered prayers to be proclaimed in the Muhammadan fashion and appointed
an Imãm.”^([34](#34))  
 

*Siwistan and Sisam (Sindh)*

Muhammad bin Qãsim wrote to al-Hajjãj, the governor of Iraq: “The forts
of Siwistãn and Sîsam have been already taken. The nephew of Dãhir, his
warriors, and principal officers have been despatched, and infidels
converted to Islãm or destroyed. Instead of idol temples, mosques and
other places of worship have been built, pulpits have been erected, the
Khutba is read, the call to prayers is raised so that devotions are
performed at the stated hours. The takbîr and praise to the Almighty God
are offered every morning and evening.”^([35](#35))  
 

*Alor (Sindh)*

“Muhammad Kãsim then entered and all the town people came to the temple
of Nobhãr, and prostrated themselves before an idol. Muhammad Kãsim
enquired: ‘Whose house is this, in which all the people high and low are
respectfully kneeling and bowing down.’ They replied: ‘This is an
idol-house called Nobhãr.’ Then, by Muhammad Kãsim’s order, the temple
was opened. Entering it with his officers he saw an equestrian statue.
The body of the idol was made of marble or alabaster, and it had on its
arms golden bracelets, set with jewels and rubies. Muhammad Kãsim
stretched his hand and took off a bracelet from one of the idol’s arms.
Then he asked the keeper of the Budh temple Nobhãr: ‘Is this your idol?’
‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘but it had two bracelets on, and one is
missing.’ ‘Well’ said Muhammad Kãsim, ‘cannot your god know who has
taken away his bracelet?’ The keeper bent his head down. Muhammad Kãsim
laughed and returned the bracelet to him, and he fixed it again on the
idol’s arm.”^([36](#36))  
 

*Multan (Punjab)*

“Then all the great and principal inhabitants of the city assembled
together, and silver to the weight of sixty thousand dirams was
distributed and every horseman got a share of four hundred dirams
weight. After this, Muhammad Kãsim said that some plan should be devised
for realizing the money to be sent to the Khalîfa. He was pondering over
this, when suddenly a Brahman came and said, ‘Heathenism is now at an
end, the temples are thrown down, the world has received the light of
Islãm, and mosques are built instead of idol temples. I have heard from
the elders of Multãn that in ancient times there was a chief in this
city whose name was Jîbawîn, and who was a descendent of the Rãî of
Kashmîr. He was a Brahman and a monk, he strictly followed his religion,
and always occupied his time in worshipping idols. When his treasures
exceeded all limits and computation, he made a reservoir on the eastern
side of Multãn, which was hundred yards square.  In the middle of it he
built a temple fifty yards square, and he made a chamber in which he
concealed forty copper jars each of which was filled with African gold
dust. A treasure of three hundred and thirty *mans* of gold was buried
there. Over it there is an idol made of red gold, and trees are planted
round the reservoir.’ It is related by historians, on the authority of
‘Ali bin Muhammad who had heard it from Abû Muhammad Hinduî^([37](#37))
that Muhammad Kãsim arose and with his counsellors, guards and
attendants, went to the temple. He saw there an idol made of gold, and
its two eye were bright red rubies.

“……Muhammad Kãsim ordered the idol to be taken up. Two hundred and
thirty *mans* of gold were obtained, and forty jars filled with gold
dust… This gold and the image were brought to treasury together with the
gems and pearls and treasures which were obtained from the plunder of
Multãn.”^([38](#38))  
 

*Jãnakî’s Evidence*

Jãnakî was one of the daughters of King Dãhir of Sindh. She was captured
along with her sister and sent to the Khalîfa at Baghdad. When the
Khalîfa invited Jãnakî to share his bed, she lied to him that she had
already been violated by Muhammad bin Qãsim. Her sister supported her
statement. The Khalîfa ordered that Muhammad be sewed up in raw hide and
sent to his court. Muhammad was already dead when the chest containing
him arrived in Baghdad. Jãnakî accused the Khalîfa of having killed one
of his great generals without making proper enquiry. She said:

“The king has committed a very grievous mistake, for he ought not, on
account of two slave girls, to have destroyed a person who had taken
captive a hundred thousand modest women like us… and who instead of
temples had erected mosques, pulpits and minarets…”^([39](#39))  
 

**(7)**  
**Jãmiu’l-Hikãyãt**

The author of this collection of stories was Maulãna Nûru’d-Dîn Muhammad
‘Ufî. He was born in or near the city of Bukhara in Transoxiana. He came
to India and lived in Delhi for some time in the reign of Shamsu’d-Dîn
Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236). He travelled to several other places in
India.  
 

**‘Amrû bin Laith (AD 879-900)**

*Sakawand (Afghanistan)*

“It is related that Amrû Lais conferred the governorship of Zãbulistãn
on Fardaghãn and sent him there at the head of four thousand
horse. There was a large Hindu place of worship in that country, which
was called Sakãwand, and people used to come on pilgrimage from the most
remote parts of Hindustãn to the idols of that place. When Fardaghãn
arrived in Zãbulistãn he led his army against it, took the temple, broke
the idols in pieces and overthrew the idolaters…”^([40](#40))  
 

**(8)**  
**Tãju’l-Ma’sîr**

The author, Sadru’d-Dîn Muhammad Hasan Nizãmî, was born at Nishapur in
Khurasan. He had to leave his ancestral place because of the Mongol
invasion. He came to India and started writing his history in AD 1205.
The history opens with the year 1191 and comes down to AD 1217.  
 

**Sultãn Muhammad Ghûrî (AD 1175-1206)**

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“He destroyed the pillars and foundations of the idol temples and built
in their stead mosques and colleges, and the precepts of Islãm, and the
customs of the law were divulged and established…”^([41](#41))  
 

*Kuhram and Samana (Punjab)*

“The Government of the fort of Kohrãm and of Sãmãna were made over by
the Sultãn to Kutbu-d dîn… He purged by his sword the land of Hind from
the filth of infidelity and vice, and freed it from the thorn of
God-plurality, and the impurity of idol-worship, and by his royal vigour
and intrepidity, left not one temple standing…”^([42](#42))  
 

*Meerut (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Kutbu-d dîn marched from Kohrãm ‘and when he arrived at Mirãt -which is
one of the celebrated forts of the country of Hind, for the strength of
its foundations and superstructure, and its ditch, which was as broad as
the ocean and fathomless-an army joined him, sent by the dependent
chiefs of the country’. The fort was captured, and a Kotwal appointed to
take up his station in the fort, and all the idol temples were converted
into mosques.”^([43](#43))  
 

*Delhi*

“He then marched and encamped under the fort of Delhi… The city and its
vicinity were freed from idols and idols-worship, and in the sanctuaries
of the images of the Gods, mosques were raised by the worshippers of one
God.”^([44](#44))

“Kutbu-d dîn built the Jãmi‘ Masjid at Delhi, and adorned it with stones
and gold obtained from the temples which had been demolished by
elephants, and covered it with inscriptions in Toghra, containing the
divine commands.”^([45](#45))  
 

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“From that place \[Asni\] the royal army proceeded towards Benares
‘which is the centre of the country of Hind’ and here they destroyed
nearly one thousand temples, and raised mosques on their foundations;
and the knowledge of the law became promulgated, and the foundations of
religion were established…”^([46](#46))  
 

*Aligarh (Uttar Pradesh)*

“There was a certain tribe in the neighbourhood of Kol which had…
occasioned much trouble… ‘Three bastions were raised as high as heaven
with their beads, and their carcases became the food of beasts of prey. 
That tract was freed from idols and idol-worship and the foundations of
infidelity were destroyed’…”^([47](#47))  
 

*Bayana (Rajasthan)*

“When Kutbu-d dîn beard of the Sultãn’s march from Ghazna, he was much
rejoiced and advanced as far as Hãnsî to meet him… In the year AH 592
(AD 1196), they marched towards Thangar, and the centre of idolatry and
perdition became the abode of glory and splendour…”^([48](#48))  
 

*Kalinjar (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In the year AH 599 (AD 1202), Kutbu-d dîn proceeded to the investment
Kãlinjar, on which expedition he was accompanied by the Sãhib-Kirãn,
Shamsu-d dîn Altamsh… The temples were converted into mosques and abodes
of goodness, and the ejaculations of bead-counters and voices of
summoners to prayer ascended to high heaven, and the very name of
idolatry was annihilated…”^([49](#49))  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Delhi*

“The Sultãn then returned \[from Jalor\] to Delhi… and after his arrival
‘not a vestige or name remained of idol temples which had raised their
heads on high; and the light of faith shone out from the darkness of
infidelity… and the moon of religion and the state became resplendent
from the heaven of prosperity and glory.”^([50](#50))  
 

**(9)**  
**Kãmilu’t-Tawãrîkh**

Also known as *Tãrîkh-i-Kãmil*, it was written by Shykh ‘Abu’l Hasan
‘Alî ibn ‘Abu’l Karam Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul Karîm ibn ‘Abdul
Wãhid as-Shaibãnî, commonly known as Ibn Asîr. He was born in AD 1160 in
the Jazîrat ibn ‘Umar, an island on the Tigris above Mosul. The book
embraces the history of the world from the earliest period to the year
AD 1230. It enjoys a very high reputation.  
 

**Khalîfa Al-Mahdî (AD 775-785)**

*Barada (Gujarat)*

“In the year 159 (AD 776) Al Mahdî sent an army by sea under ‘Abdul
Malik bin Shahãbu’l Musamma’î to India… They proceeded on their way and
at length disembarked at Barada. When they reached the place they laid
siege to it… The town was reduced to extremities, and God prevailed over
it in the same year. The people were forbidden to worship the *Budd*,
which the Muhammadans burned.”^([51](#51))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Unidentified Places (Rajasthan and Gujarat)*

“So he prayed to the Almighty for aid, and left Ghaznî on the 10th of
Sha’bãn AH 414… with 30,000 horse besides volunteers, and took the road
to Multãn. After he had crossed the desert he perceived on one side a
fort full of people, in which there were wells. People came down to
conciliate him, but he invested the place, and God gave him victory… So
he brought the place under the sway of Islãm, killed the inhabitants,
and broke in pieces their images…^([52](#52))

“The chief of Anhilwãra called Bhîm, fled hastily… Yamînu-d daula again
started for Somnãt, and on his march he came to several forts in which
were many images serving as chamberlains or heralds of Somnãt, and
accordingly he (Mahmûd) called them Shaitãn. He killed the people who
were in these places, destroyed the fortifications, broke in pieces the
idols and continued his march to Somnãt…”^([53](#53))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“This temple of Somnãt was built upon fifty-six pillars of teak wood
covered with lead. The idol itself was in a chamber… Yamînu’d daula
seized it, part of it he burnt, and part of it he carried away with him
to Ghaznî, where he made it a step at the entrance of the Jãmi‘
masjid…”^([54](#54))  
 

**(10)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Jahãn-Kushã**

“The author, ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Malik ibn Bahãu’d-Dîn Muhammad Juwainî, was a
native of Juwain in Khurasan near Nishapur. His father who died in AD
1253 was one of the principal revenue officers under the Mongol ruler of
Persia. ‘Alau’d-Dîn followed in his father’s office. He was with Halãkû
during the Mongol campaign against the Ismãi’lians and was later on
appointed the governor of Baghdad. He fell from grace and was imprisoned
at Hamadan. He was, however, exonerated and restored to his office which
he retained till his death in AH 681 (AD 1282). His history comes down
to the year AD 1255.  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Mankbarnî (AD 1222-1231)**

*Debal (Sindh)*

“The Sultãn then went towards Dewal and Darbela and Jaisî… The Sultãn
raised a Jãmi‘ Masjid at Dewal, on the spot where an idol temple
stood.”^([55](#55))  
 

**(11)**  
**Tabqãt-i-Nãsirî**

The author, Maulãna ‘Abû Umr ‘Usmãn Minhãju’d-Dîn bin Sirãju’d-Dîn
al-Juzjãnî, was born in AD 1193. In 1227 he arrived in Uccha where he
was placed in charge of Madrasa-i-Fîrûzî. He presented himself to Sultãn
Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish when the latter came to Uccha in 1228. The same
year he accompanied Iltutmish to Delhi and joined the expedition to
Gwalior, which city was placed in his charge. He returned to Delhi in
1238 and took charge of Madrasa-i-Nãsiriya. His fortune brightened after
Nãsiru’d-Dîn became the Sultãn in 1246; he was appointed
*Qãzi-i-mamãlik* in 1251. His history starts with Adam and comes down
the year 1260.  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“When Sultãn Mahmûd ascended the throne of sovereignty, his illustrious
deeds became manifest unto all mankind within the pale of Islãm when he
converted so many thousands of idol temples into masjids… He led an army
to Nahrwãlah of Gujarãt, and brought away Manãt, the idol, from Somnãth,
and had it broken into four parts, one of which was cast before the
entrance of the great Masjid at Ghaznîn, the second before the gateway
of the Sultãn’s palace, and the third and fourth were sent to Makkah and
Madînah respectively.”^([56](#56))

The translator comments in a footnote: “Among die different coins struck
in Mahmûd’s reign one bore the following inscription: ‘The right hand of
the empire, Mahmûd Sultãn, son of Nãsir-ud-Dîn Subuk-Tigîn, Breaker of
Idols.’ This coin appears to have been struck at Lãhor, in the seventh
year of his reign.”^([57](#57))  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“After he returned to the capital in the year AH 632 (AD 1234) the
Sultãn led the hosts of Islãm toward Mãlwah, and took the fortress and
town of Bhîlsãn, and demolished the idol-temple which took three hundred
years in building and which, in altitude, was about one hundred
ells.”^([58](#58))  
 

*Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“From thence he advanced to Ujjain-Nagarî and destroyed the idol-temple
of Mahãkãl Dîw. The effigy of Bikramjît who was sovereign of
Ujjain-Nagarî, and from whose reign to the present time one thousand,
three hundred, and sixteen years have elapsed, and from whose reign they
date the Hindûî era, together with other effigies besides his, which
were formed of molten brass, together with the stone (idol) of Mahãkãl
were carried away to Delhî, the capital.”^([59](#59))

Among his “Victories and Conquests” is counted the “bringing away of the
idol of Mahãkãl, which they have planted before the gateway of the
*Jãmi’ Masjid* at the capital city of Delhi in order that all true
believers might tread upon it.”^([60](#60))  
 

**(12)**  
**Ãsãru’l-Bilãd**

The author, Zakarîya bin Muhammad, was born in the town of Kazwin in
Iran and became known as al-Kazwînî. His work is a compilation from the
writings of travellers like Istakhrî and Ibn Hauqal. It was written
between AD 1263 and 1275.  
 

**Sultãn Muhmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“SOMNÃT-A celebrated city of India, is situated on the shores of the
sea, and washed by its waves. Among the wonders of that place was the
temple in which was placed the idol called Somnãt… When the Sultãn
Yamînu-d Daula Mahmûd bin Subuktigîn went to wage religious war against
India, he made great efforts to capture and destroy Somnãt, in the hope
that Hindus would become Muhammadans. He arrived there in the middle of
Zîl K’ada AH 416 (December AD 1025). The Indians made a desperate
resistance… The number of slain exceeded 50,000…”^([61](#61))  
 

**Muhammad bin Qãsim (AD 712-715)**

*Multan (Punjab)*

“Muhammad Kãsim, ascertaining that large offerings were made to the
idol, and wishing to add to his resources by those means, left it
uninjured, but in order to show his horror of Indian superstition, he
attached a piece of cow’s flesh to its neck, by which he was able to
gratify his avarice and malignity at the same time.”^([62](#62))  
 

**(13)**  
**Nizãmu’t-Tawãrîkh**

The author, ‘Abû Sa‘îd ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abû’l Hasan ‘Alî Baizãwî, was born
at Baiza, a town near Shiraz in Iran. He became a Qãzî, first at Shiraz
and then at Tabriz, where he died in AD 1286. His history starts from
the earliest period and comes down to the Mongol invasions.  
 

*Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghaznî (AD 997-1030)*

“Nãsiru-d dîn \[Subuktigîn\] died in the year AH 387 (AD 997) and the
command of his troops descended to Mahmûd by inheritance, and by
confirmation of Nûh, son of Mansûr… He demolished the Hindû temples and
gave prevalence to the Muhammadan faith…”^([63](#63))  
 

**(14)**  
**Miftãhu'l-Futûh**

The author, Amîr Khusrû, was born at Delhi in 1253. His father occupied
high positions in the reigns of Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD
1210-1236) and his successors. His mother was the daughter of another
dignitary under Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Balban (AD 1266-1286). He himself
became a companion of Balban’s son, Prince Muhammad, and stayed at
Multãn till the prince was killed in a battle with the Mongols. Reputed
to be the dearest disciple of Shykh Nizãmu’d-Dîn Auliyã‘, he became the
lick-spittle of whoever came out victorious in the contest for the
throne at Delhi. He became a court poet of Balban’s successor, Sultãn
Kaiqubãd (AD 1288-1290) and wrote his *Qirãnu’s S‘ãdaîn* in the Sultãn’s
praise in AD 1289. Next, he joined Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD
1290-1296) as a court poet after the latter murdered Kaiqubãd. He wrote
in 1291 the *Miftãhu‘l-Futûh* which describes Jalãlu’d-Dîn’s
victories.  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d -Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Jhain (Rajasthan)*

“The Sultãn reached Jhãin in the afternoon of the third day and stayed
in the palace of the Rãya… He greatly enjoyed his stay for some time.
Coming out, he took a round of the gardens and temples. The idols he saw
amazed him… Next day he got those idols of gold smashed with stones. The
pillars of wood were burnt down by his order… A cry rose from the
temples as if a second Mahmûd had taken birth. Two idols were made of
brass, one of which weighed nearly a thousand mans. He got both of them
broken, and the pieces were distributed among his people so that they
may throw them at the door of the Masjid on their return \[to
Delhi\]…”^([64](#64))

Another version of the same text is available in the translation by
Elliot edited by Dowson:

“Three days after this, the king entered Jhãin at midday and occupied
the private apartment of the *rãi*… He then visited the temples, which
were ornamented with elaborate work in gold and silver. Next day he went
again to the temples, and ordered their destruction, as well as of the
fort, and set fire to the palace, and ‘thus made hell of
paradise’… While the soldiers sought every opportunity of plundering,
the Shãh was engaged in burning the temples, and destroying the idols.
There were two bronze idols of Brahma each of which weighed more than a
thousand *mans*. These were broken into pieces and the fragments
distributed amongst the officers, with orders to throw them down at the
gates of the *Masjid* on their return.”^([65](#65))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“When he advanced from the capital of Karra, the Hindûs, in alarm,
descended into the earth like ants. He departed towards the garden of
Behãr to dye that soil with blood as red as tulip. He cleared the road
to Ujjain of vile wretches, and created consternation in Bhîlsãn. When
he effected his conquests in that country, he drew out of the river the
idols which had been concealed in it.”^([66](#66))  
 

*Devagiri (Maharashtra)*

“But see the mercy with which he regarded the brokenhearted, for, after
seizing the *rãî*, he set him free again. He destroyed the temples of
the idolaters, and erected pulpits and arches for
mosques.”^([67](#67))  
 

**(15)**  
**Khazãinu’l-Futûh**

This work is also by Amîr Khusrû who wrote it in praise of ‘Alãu’d-Dîn
Khaljî when the latter became the Sultãn after murdering his uncle and
father-in-law, Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî. Khusrû was among the foremost
notables who welcomed ‘Alãu’d-Dîn when the latter reached Delhi with the
head of the late king held aloft on the point of a spear. He completed
this history in AD 1311. It is famous for its flowery language and
figures of speech.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Delhi*

“He started his building programme with the Jãmi‘ Hazrat mosque…
Thereafter he decided to build a second *mînãr* opposite to the lofty
*mînãr* of the Jãmi‘ Masjid, which *mînãr* is unparalleled in the
world…^([68](#68)) He ordered the circumference of the new *mînãr* to be
double that of the old one. People were sent out in all directions in
search of stones. Some of them broke the hills into pieces. Some others
proved sharper than steel in breaking the temples of the infidels.
Wherever these temples were bent in prayers, they were made to do
prostration.”^([69](#69))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“On Wednesday, the 20th of Jamãdî-ul Awwal in AH 698 (23 February,
1299), the Sultãn sent an order to the manager of the armed forces for
despatching the army of Islãm to Gujarãt so that the temple of Somnãt on
its shore could be destroyed. Ulugh Khãn was put in charge of the
expedition. When the royal army reached that province, it won a victory
after great slaughter. Thereafter the Khãn-i-‘Ãzam went with his army to
the sea-shore and besieged Somnãt which was a place of worship for the
Hindûs. The army of Islãm broke the idols and the biggest idol was sent
to the court of the Sultãn.”^([70](#70))

Professor Mohammed Habib’s translation provides a fuller version. It
reads: “So the temple of Somnath was made to bow towards the Holy Mecca;
and as the temple lowered its head and jumped into the sea, you may say
that the building first said its prayers and then had a bath… It seemed
as if the tongue of the Imperial sword explained the meaning of the
text: ‘So he (Abraham) broke them (the idols) into pieces except the
chief of them, that haply they may return to it.’ Such a pagan country,
the Mecca of the infidels, now became the Medina of Islam. The followers
of Abraham now acted as guides in place of the Brahman leaders. The
robust-hearted true believers rigorously broke all idols and temples
wherever they found them. Owing to the war, *‘takbir,’* and *‘shahadat’*
was heard on every side; even the idols by their breaking affirmed the
existence of God. In this ancient land of infidelity the call to prayers
rose so high that it was heard in Baghdad and Madain (Ctesiphon) while
the ‘Ala’ proclamation (*Khutba*) resounded in the dome of Abraham and
over the water of Zamzam… The sword of Islam purified the land as the
Sun purifies the earth.”^([71](#71))  
 

*Jhain (Rajasthan)*

“On Tuesday, the 3rd of Ziqãd in AH 700 (10 July, 1301), the strong fort
\[of Ranthambhor\] was conquered. Jhãin which was the abode of the
infidels, became a new city for Musalmãns. The temple of Bãhirdev was
the first to be destroyed. Subsequently, all other abodes of idolatry
were destroyed. Many strong temples which would have remained unshaken
even by the trumpet blown on the Day of Judgment, were levelled with the
ground when swept by the wind of Islãm.”^([72](#72))  
 

*Warangal (Andhra Pradesh)*

“When the blessed canopy had been fixed about a mile from the gate of
Arangal, the tents around the fort were pitched together so closely that
the head of a needle could not go between them… Orders were issued that
every man should erect behind his own tent a *kathgar*, that is wooden
defence. The trees were cut with axes and felled, notwithstanding their
groans; and the Hindus, who worship trees, could not at that time come
to the rescue of their idols, so that every cursed tree which was in
that capital of idolatry was cut down to the roots…^([73](#73))

“During the attack, the catapults were busily plied on both sides…
‘Praise be to God for his exaltation of the religion of Muhammad. It is
not to be doubted that stones are worshipped by Gabrs,^([74](#74)) but
as the stones did no service to them, they only bore to heaven the
futility of that worship, and at the same time prostrated their devotees
upon earth’…”^([75](#75))  
 

*Deccan and South India*

“The tongue of the sword of the Khalîfa of the time, which is the tongue
of the flame of Islãm, has imparted light to the entire darkness of
Hindustãn by the illumination of its guidance… and on the right hand and
on the left hand the army has conquered from sea to sea, and several
capitals of the gods of the Hindûs in which Satanism had prevailed since
the time of the Jinns, have been demolished. All these impurities of
infidelity have been cleansed by the Sultãn’s destruction of idol
temples, beginning with his first expedition against Deogîr, so that the
flames of the light of the law illumine all these unholy countries, and
places for the criers to prayers are exalted on high, and prayers are
read in mosques. God be praised!”^([76](#76))  
 

*Chidambaram (Tamil Nadu)*

“After returning to Bîrdhûl, he again pursued the Rãjã to Kandûr… The
Rãî again escaped him, and he ordered a general massacre at Kandûr. It
was then ascertained that he had fled to Jãlkota… There the Malik
closely pursued him, but he had again escaped to the jungles, which the
Malik found himself unable to penetrate, and he therefore returned to
Kandûr… Here he heard that in Brahmastpûrî there was a golden idol,
round which many elephants wore stabled. The Malik started on a night
expedition against this place, and in the morning seized no less then
two hundred and fifty elephants. He then determined on razing the
beautiful temple to the ground – ‘you might say that it was the Paradise
of Shaddãd which, after being lost, those hellites had found, and that
it was the golden Lanka of Rãm,’ – ‘the roof was covered with rubies and
emeralds’, - ‘in short, it was the holy place of the Hindûs, which the
Malik dug up from its foundations with the greatest care… and heads of
the Brahmans and idolaters danced from their necks and fell to the
ground at their feet,’ and blood flowed in torrents. ‘The stone idol
called Ling Mahãdeo which had been a long time established at that place
and on which the women of the infidels rubbed their vaginas for
\[sexual\] satisfaction, these, up to this time, the kick of the horse
of Islãm had not attempted to break.’ The Musalmãns destroyed all the
lings, ‘and Deo Narain fell down, and the other gods who had fixed their
seats there raised their feet, and jumped so high, that at one leap they
reached the fort of Lanka, and in that affright the lings themselves
would have fled had they had any legs to stand on.’ Much gold and
valuable jewels fell into the hands of the Musalmãns, who returned to
the royal canopy, after executing their holy project, on the 13th of
Zî-l Ka’da, AH 710 (April 1311 AD). They destroyed an the temples at
Bîrdhûl, and placed the plunder in the public treasury.”^([77](#77))  
 

*Madura (Tamil Nadu)*

“After five days, the royal canopy moved from Bîrdhûl on Thursday, the
17th of Zî-l Ka’da, and arrived at Kham, and five days afterwards they
arrived at the city of Mathra (Madura), the dwelling place of the
brother of the Rãî Sundar Pãndyã. They found the city empty, for the Rãî
had fled with the Rãnîs, but had left two or three elephants in the
temple of Jagnãr (Jagganãth). The elephants were captured and the temple
burnt.”^([78](#78))  
 

**(16)**  
**Dawal Rãnî-Khizr Khãnî**

Amîr Khusrû wrote this epic in AD 1315. It is popularly known as
*‘Ãshîqa*, love-story. Its main theme is love between Dawal Rãnî, the
captured daughter of the last Hindu King of Gujarat, and Khizr Khãn, the
eldest son of ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî. It also describes Muslim history in
India upto the reign of ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî, including Malik Kãfûr’s
expedition to South India in AD 1310.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Pattan (Tamil Nadu)*

“There was another *rãî* in those parts, whose rule extended over sea
and land, a Brahmin named Pandyã Gurû. He had many cities in his
possession, and his capital was Fatan, where there was a temple with an
idol in it laden with jewels… The *rãî*, when the army of the Sultãn
arrived at Fatan, fled away, and what can an army do without its
leader?  The Musalmãns in his service sought protection from the king’s
army, and they were made happy with the kind of reception they met. 500
elephants were taken. They then struck the idol with an iron hatchet,
and opened its head. Although it was the very Kibla of the accursed
gabrs, it kissed the earth and filled the holy treasury.”^([79](#79))  
 

**(17)**  
**Nuh Siphir**

It is the fourth historical *mathnavî* which Amîr Khusrû wrote when he
was 67 years old. It celebrates the reign of Sultãn Mubãrak Shãh Khaljî.
It consists of nine(*nuh*) *siphirs* (parts). In *Siphir* III, he says
that the Hindus “worship...stones, beasts, plants and the sun, but they
recognize that these things are creations of God and adore them simply
because their forefathers did so.”^([80](#80))  
 

**Sultãn Mubãrak Shãh Khaljî (AD 1316-1320)**

*Warrangal (Andhra Pradesh)*

“They pursued die enemy to the gates and set everything on fire. They
burnt down all those gardens and groves. That paradise of
idol-worshippers became like hell. The fire-worshippers of Bud were in
alarm and flocked round their idols…”^([81](#81))  
 

**(18)**  
**Siyaru’l-Auliyã‘**

It was written by Sayyid Muhammad bin Mubãrak bin Muhammad ‘Alwî Kirmãnî
known as Amîr or Mîr Khwurd. He was the grandson of an Iranian merchant
who traded between Kirman in Iran and Lahore, and who became a disciple
of Shykh Farîdu’d-Dîn Ganj-i-Shakar, the Sufi luminary of Ajodhan near
Multan. His father was also a disciple of the same Sufi. The family
travelled to Delhi after Shykh Farîd’s death and became devoted to Shykh
Nizãmu’d-Dîn Auliyã‘. Mîr Khwurd was forced to migrate to Daulatabad by
Sultãn Muhammad bin Tughlaq but allowed to return to Delhi after some
time. It was then that he wrote this detailed biography of the Auliyã‘
and his disciples.  
 

**Shykh Mu‘în al-Dîn Chistî of Ajmer (d.  AD 1236)**

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“The other miracle is that before his arrival the whole of Hindustan was
submerged by unbelief and idol-worship. Every haughty man in Hind
pronounced himself to be Almighty God and considered himself as the
partner of God. All the people of India used to prostrate themselves
before stones, idols, trees, animals, cows and cow-dung. Because of the
darkness of unbelief over this land their hearts were locked and
hardened.

“All India was ignorant of orders of religion and law. All were ignorant
of Allãh and His Prophet. None had seen the Ka‘ba. None had heard of the
Greatness of Allãh.

“Because of his coming, the, Sun of real believers, the helper of
religion, Mu‘în al-dîn, the darkness of unbelief in this land was
illumined by the light of Islam.

“Because of his Sword, instead of idols and temples in the land of
unbelief now there are mosques, *mihrãb* and *mimbar*. In the land where
there were the sayings of the idol-worshippers, there is the sound of
‘Allãhu Akbar’.

“The descendants of those who were converted to Islam in this land will
live until the Day of Judgement; so too will those who bring others into
the fold of Islam by the sword of Islam. Until the Day of Judgement
these converts will be in the debt of Shaykh al-Islãm Mu‘în al-dîn Hasan
Sijzã and these people will be drawing closer to Almighty Allãh because
of the auspicious devotion of Mu‘în al-dîn.”^([82](#82))  
 

**(19)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Wassãf**

The author, ‘Abdu’llãh ibn Fazlu’llãh of Shiraz, is known by his
literary name which was Wassãf, the panegyrist. The history he wrote is
titled *Tazjiyatu’l Amsãr Wa Tajriyatu’l Ãsãr*. But it is popularly
known as *Tãrîkh-i-Wassãf*. The first four volumes of the work were
published in AD 1300. Later on, the author added a fifth volume,
bringing the history down to AD 1328. The work was dedicated to Sultãn
Uljãîtû, the Mongol ruler of Iran.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“…In short, the Muhammadan army brought the country to utter ruin, and
destroyed the lives of the inhabitants, and plundered the cities, and
captured their offspring, so that many temples were deserted and the
idols were broken and trodden under foot, the largest of which was one
called Somnãt, fixed upon stone, polished like a mirror of charming
shape and admirable workmanship… Its head was adorned with a crown set
with gold and rubies and pearls and other precious stones… and a
necklace of large shining pearls, like the belt of Orion, depended from
the shoulder towards the side of the body.

“The Muhammadan soldiers plundered all these jewels and rapidly set
themselves to demolish the idol. The surviving infidels were deeply
affected with grief, and they engaged ‘to pay a thousand pieces of gold’
as ransom for the idol, but they were indignantly rejected, and the idol
was destroyed, and ‘its limbs, which were anointed with ambergris and
perfumed, were cut off. The fragments were conveyed to Delhi, and the
entrance of the Jãmi‘ Masjid was paved with them, that people might
remember and talk of this brilliant victory.’ Praise be to God, the Lord
of the worlds. Amen!”^([83](#83))  
 

**(20)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Guzîda**

The author, Hamdu’llãh bin ‘Abû Bakr bin Hamd bin Nasr Mustaufî of
Kazwin in Iran, composed this work in AD 1329. He was secretary to
Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn as well as his father Rashîdu’d-Dîn, the ministers of
Sultãn Uljãîtû. His work contains matter not found elsewhere.  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“…He now attacked the fort of Bhîm, where was a temple of the Hindus. He
was victorious, and obtained much wealth, including about a hundred
idols of gold and silver. One of the golden images, which weighed a
million *mishkãls*, the Sultãn appropriated to the decoration of the
Mosque of Ghaznî, so that the ornaments of the doors were of gold
instead of iron.”^([84](#84))  
 

**(21)**  
**Masãlik’ul Absãr fi Mamãlik’ul Amsãr**

The author, Shihãbu’d-Dîn ‘Abu’l Abbãs Ahmad bin Yahya bin Fazlu’llãh
al-‘Umrî, was born in AD 1301. He was educated at Damascus and Cairo. He
is considered to be a great scholar of his time and author of many
books. He occupied high positions in Syria and Egypt. This book of his
is a large collection of history, geography and biographies. He himself
never visited India about which he based his account on sources
available to him. He died at Damascus in AD 1348.  
 

**Sultãn Muhammad bin Tughlaq (AD 1325-1351)**

“The Sultãn is not slack in *jihãd*. He never lets go of his spear or
bridle in pursuing *jihãd* by land and sea routes. This is his main
occupation which engages his eyes and ears. He has spent vast sums for
the establishment of the faith and the spread of Islãm in these lands,
as a result of which the light of Islãm has reached the inhabitants and
the flash of the true faith brightened among them. Fire
temples^([85](#85)) have been destroyed and the images and idols of Budd
have been broken, and the lands have been freed from those who were not
included in the *dãru’l Islãm*, that is, those who had refused to become
*zimmîs*. Islãm has been spread by him in the far east and has reached
the point of sunrise. In the words of ‘Abû Nasr al-Ãinî, he has carried
the flags of the followers of Islãm where they had never reached before
and where no chapter or verse (of the Qur’ãn) had ever been
recited. Thereafter he got mosques and places of worship erected, and
music replaced by call to prayers (*azãn*), and the incantations of
fire-worshippers stopped by recitations of the Qur’ãn. He directed the
people of Islãm towards the citadels of the infidels and, by the grace
of Allãh, made them (the believers) inheritors of wealth and land and
that country which they (the believers) had never trodden
upon…^([86](#86))

“The Sultãn who is ruling at present has achieved that which had not
been achieved so far by any king. He has achieved victory, supremacy,
conquest of countries, destruction of the forts of the infidels, and
exposure of magicians. He has destroyed idols by which the people of
Hindustãn were deceived in vain…”^([87](#87))  
 

**(22)**  
**Futûhu’s-Salãtîn**

The author whose full name is not known is famous by his surname of
Isãmî. His forefathers had served the Sultãns of Delhi since the days of
Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236). He was born in AD 1311-12 and
lived at Daulatabad (Devagiri) till 1351 when he finished this work at
the age of forty. It covers the period from Mahamûd of Ghazni (AD
997-1030) to Muhammad bin Tughlaq (AD 1325-1351).  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Devagiri (Maharashtra)*

“Malik Nãîb \[Kãfûr\] reached there expeditiously and occupied the fort…
He built mosques in places occupied by temples.”^([88](#88))  
 

**(23)**  
**Rehalã of Ibn Battûta**

The full name of this book is *Tuhfãtu’n-nuzzãr fi Gharãibu’l-amsãr wa
Ajãibu’l-afsãr*. The author was Shykh ‘Abû ‘Abdu’llãh Muhammad ibn
‘Abdu’llãh ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrãhim al-Lawãtî at-Tanjî al- Ma’ruf be Ibn
Battûta. He belonged to an Arab family which was settled in Spain since
AD 1312. His grandfather and father enjoyed the reputation of scholars
and theologians. He himself was a great scholar who travelled
extensively and over many lands. He came to India in 1325 and visited
many places - east, west, north and south - till he left in 1346. India
during this period was ruled by Muhammad bin Tughlaq with whom Ibn
Battûta came in close contact. He was very fond of sampling Hindu girls
from different parts of India. They were presented to him by the Sultãn
and other Muslim big-wigs during his sojourn in various places. He also
married Muslim women wherever he stayed, and divorced them before his
departure. He finished his book in 1355 after reaching Fez in Morocco
where his family lived after migration from Spain.  
 

*Lahari Bandar (Sindh)*

“One day I rode in company with ‘Alã-ul-mulk and arrived at a plain
called Tarna at a distance of seven miles from the city. There I saw
innumerable stone images and animals, many of which had undergone a
change, the original shape being obliterated.^([89](#89)) Some were
reduced to a head, others to a foot and so on. Some of the stones were
shaped like grain, wheat, peas, beans and lentils. And there were traces
of a house which contained a chamber built of hewn stone, the whole of
which looked like one solid mass. Upon it was a statue in the form of a
man, the only difference being that its head was long, its mouth was
towards a side of its face and its hands at its back like a captive’s.
There were pools of water from which an extremely bad smell came. Some
of the walls bore Hindî inscriptions. ‘Alã-ul-mulk told me that the
historians assume that on this site there was a big city, most of the
inhabitants of which were notorious. They were changed into stone. The
petrified human form on the platform in the house mentioned above was
that of their king. The house still goes by the name of ‘the king’s
house’. It is presumed that the Hindî inscriptions, which some of the
walls bear, give the history of the destruction of the inhabitants of
this city. The destruction took place about a thousand years
ago…”^([90](#90))  
 

*Delhi*

“Near the eastern gate of the mosque lie two very big idols of copper
connected together by stones. Every one who comes in and goes out of the
mosque treads over them. On the site of this mosque was a bud *khãnã*
that is an idol-house. After the conquest of Delhi it was turned into a
mosque…”^([91](#91))  
 

*Maldive Islands*

“Reliable men among the inhabitants of the islands, like the jurist
(*faqîh*) and teacher (*mu‘allim*) ‘Alî, the judge ‘Abdullãh - and
others besides them - told me that the inhabitants of these islands were
infidels… Subsequently a westerner named Abul Barakãt the Berbar who
knew the great Qur’ãn came to them… He stayed amongst them and God
opened the heart of the king to Islãm and he accepted it before the end
of the month; and his wives, children and courtiers followed suit… They
broke to pieces the idols and razed the idol-house to the ground. On
this the islanders embraced Islãm and sent missionaries to the rest of
the islands, the inhabitants of which also became Muslims. The westerner
stood in high regard with them, and they accepted his cult which was
that of Imãm Mãlik. May God be pleased with him!  And on account of him
they honour the westerners up to this time. He built a mosque which is
known after his name…”^([92](#92))  
 

**(24)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Fîrûz Shãhî**

The author, Ziau’d-Dîn Baranî was born in AH 684 (AD 1285-86) at Baran,
now known as Bulandshahar, in Uttar Pradesh. His ancestors, paternal as
well as maternal, had occupied important positions in the reigns of
Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Balban (AD 1266-1286) and the Khaljîs. His uncle
was a confidant of ‘Alau’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316). Barani became a
friend of Amîr Khusrû and a disciple of Nizãmu’d-Dîn Auliyã‘, the
renowned Chishtî saint of Delhi. His prosperity continued in the reign
of Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Tughlaq (AD 1320-1325) and he became a favourite
of Sultãn Muhammad bin Tughlaq (AD 1325-1351). But he fell from favour
with the rise of Sultãn Fîrûz Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388) and was imprisoned
for five months for some offence. He completed this history in AD 1357.
It covers a period of 82 years, from AD 1265 onwards. He wrote several
other books among which *Fatwa-i-Jahãndãrî* is famous for its tenets
regarding how an Islamic state should be run. Baranî’s ideal ruler was
Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni. He exhorted Muslim rulers to follow Mahmûd’s
example in their treatment of Hindus, for whom he often uses very foul
language.  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Jhain (Rajasthan)*

“In the year AH 689 (AD 1290), the Sultãn led an army to Rantambhor… He
took… Jhãin, destroyed the idol temples, and broke and burned the
idols…”^([93](#93))  
 

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“ ’Alãu’d-dîn at this time held the territory of Karra, and with the
permission of the Sultãn he marched to Bhailsãn (Bhîlsa).  He captured
some bronze idols which the Hindus worshipped and sent them on carts
with a variety of rich booty as presents to the Sultãn. The idols were
laid before the Badãûn gate for true believers to tread
upon…”^([94](#94))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“At the beginning of the third year of the reign, Ulugh Khãn and Nusrat
Khãn, with their *amîrs* and generals, and a large army marched against
Gujarat… All Gujarãt became a prey to the invaders, and the idol, which
after the victory of Sultãn Mahmûd and his destruction of (the idol) of
Manãt, the Brahmans had set up under the name of Somanãt, for the
worship of the Hindus, was carried to Delhi where it was laid for the
people to tread upon…”^([95](#95))  
 

*Ma‘bar (Tamil Nadu)*

“……Malik Nãîb Kãfûr marched on to Ma’bar, which he also took. He
destroyed the golden idol temple (*but-khãnah i-zarîn*) of Ma’bar, and
the golden idols which for ages had been worshipped by the Hindus of
that country. The fragments of the golden temple, and of the broken
idols of gold and gilt became the rich spoil of the army…”^([96](#96))  
 

**(25)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Fîrûz Shãhî**

The author, Shams Sirãj Afîf or Shamsu’d-Dîn bin Siraju’d-Dîn, became a
courtier of Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq and undertook to complete the
aforementioned history of Baranî who had stopped at the sixth year of
Fîrûz Shãh’s reign.  
 

**Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388)**

*Puri (Orissa)*

“The Sultãn left Banãrasî with the intention of pursuing the Rãî of
Jãjnagar, who had fled to an island in the river… News was then brought
that in the *jangal* were seven elephants, and one old she-elephant,
which was very fierce. The Sultãn resolved upon endeavouring to capture
these elephants before continuing the pursuit of the Rãî... ^([97](#97))

“After the hunt was over, the Sultãn directed his attention to the Rãî
of Jãjnagar, and entering the palace where he dwelt he found many fine
buildings. It is reported that inside the Rãî’s fort, there was a stone
idol which the infidels called Jagannãth, and to which they paid their
devotions. Sultãn Fîroz, in emulation of Mahmûd Subuktigîn, having
rooted up the idol, carried it away to Delhi where he placed it in an
ignominious position…”^([98](#98))  
 

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“The idol, Jwãlãmukhî, much worshipped by the infidels, was situated on
the road to Nagarkot… Some of the infidels have reported that Sultãn
Fîroz went specially to see this idol and held a golden umbrella over
it. But the author was informed by his respected father, who was in the
Sultãn’s retinue, that the infidels slandered the Sultãn, who was a
religious, God-fearing man, who, during the whole forty years of his
reign, paid strict obedience to the law, and that such an action was
impossible. The fact is, that when he went to see the idol, all the
*rãîs, rãnas* and *zamîndãrs* who accompanied him were summoned into his
presence, when he addressed them, saying, ‘O fools and weak-minded, how
can ye pray to and worship this stone, for our holy law tells us that
those who oppose the decrees of our religion, will go to hell?’ The
Sultãn held the idol in the deepest detestation, but the infidels, in
the blindness of their delusion, have made this false statement against
him. Other infidels have said that Sultãn Muhammad Shãh bin Tughlik Shãh
held an umbrella over the same idol, but this is also a lie; and good
Muhammadans should pay no heed to such statements. These two Sultãns
were sovereigns especially chosen by the Almighty from among the
faithful, and in the whole course of their reigns, wherever they took an
idol temple they broke and destroyed it; how, then, can such assertions
be true? The infidels must certainly have lied!”^([99](#99))  
 

*Delhi*

“A report was brought to the Sultãn that there was in Delhi an old
Brahman (*zunãr dãr*) who persisted in publicly performing the worship
of idols in his house; and that people of the city, both Musulmãns and
Hindus, used to resort to his house to worship the idol. The Brahman had
constructed a wooden tablet (*muhrak*), which was covered within and
without with paintings of demons and other objects… An order was
accordingly given that the Brahman, with his tablet, should be brought
into the presence of the Sultãn at Fîrozãbãd. The judges and doctors and
elders and lawyers were summoned, and the case of the Brahman was
submitted for their opinion. Their reply was that the provisions of the
Law were clear: the Brahman must either become a Musulmãn or be burned.
The true faith was declared to the Brahman, and the right course pointed
out, but he refused to accept it. Orders were given for raising a pile
of faggots before the door of the *darbãr*. The Brahman was tied hand
and foot and cast into it; the tablet was thrown on top and the pile was
lighted. The writer of this book was present at the *darbãr* and
witnessed the execution. The tablet of the Brahman was lighted in two
places, at his head and at his feet; the wood was dry, and the fire
first reached his feet, and drew from him a cry, but the flames quickly
enveloped his head and consumed him. Behold the Sultãn’s strict
adherence to law and rectitude, how he would not deviate in the least
from its decrees!”^([100](#100))  
 

**(26)**  
**Inshã-i-Mãhrû**

The author, Ãînu’d-Dîn Abdullãh bin Mãhrû, was a high official in the
court of Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq. *Inshã-i-Mãhrû* is a collection of
133 letters related to various events.  
 

**Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388)**

*Jajnagar (Orissa)*

“The victorious standards set out from Jaunpur for the destruction of
idols, slaughter of the enemies of Islãm and hunt for elephants near
Padamtalãv… The Sultãn saw Jãjnagar which had been praised by all  
travellers…^([101](#101))

“The troops which had been appointed for the destruction of places
around Jãjnagar, ended the conceit of the infidels by means of the sword
and the spear. Wherever there were temples and idols in that area, they
were trampled under the hoofs of the horses of Musalmãns…^([102](#102))

“After obtaining victory and sailing on the sea and destroying the
temple of Jagannãth and slaughtering the idolaters, the victorious
standards started towards Delhi…”^([103](#103))  
 

**(27)**  
**Futûhãt-i-Fîrûz Shãhî**

This small history was written by Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD
1351-1388) himself. The writer of *Tabqãt-i-Akbarî*, Nizãm’ud-Dîn Ahmad,
a 16th century historian, says that the Sultãn had got the eight
chapters of his work inscribed on eight slabs of stone which were fixed
on eight sides of the octagonal dome of a building near the Jãmi‘ Masjid
at Fîrûzãbãd.  
 

*Prayers for Temple-destroyers of the Past*

“The next matter which by God’s help I accomplished, was the repetition
of names and titles of former sovereigns which had been omitted from the
prayers of Sabbaths and Feasts. The names of those sovereigns of Islãm,
under whose happy fortune and favour infidel countries had been
conquered, whose banners had waved over many a land, under whom
*idol-temples had been demolished*, and mosques and pulpits built and
exalted, the fragrant creed had been extended, and the people of Islãm
had waxen strong and warlike, the names of these men had fallen into
neglect and oblivion. So I decreed that according to established custom
their names and titles should be rehearsed in the khutba and aspirations
offered for the remission of their sins.”^([104](#104))  
 

*Delhi and Environs*

“The Hindus and idol-worshippers had agreed to pay the money for
toleration (*zar-i zimmiya*) and had consented to the poll-tax (*jizya*)
in return for which they and their families enjoyed security. These
people now erected new idol-temples in the city and the environs in
opposition to the Law of the Prophet which declares that such temples
are not to be tolerated. Under divine guidance I destroyed these
edifices and I killed those leaders of infidelity who seduced others
into error, and the lower orders I subjected to stripes and
chastisement, until this abuse was entirely abolished. The following is
an instance:- In the village of Malûh^([105](#105)) there is a tank
which they call *kund* (tank). Here they had built idol-temples and on
certain days the Hindus were accustomed to proceed thither on horseback,
and wearing arms. Their women and children also went out in palankins
and carts. There they assembled in thousands and performed idol-worship…
When intelligence of this came to my ears my religious feelings prompted
me at once to put a stop to this scandal and offence to the religion of
Islãm. On the day of the assembly I went there in person and I ordered
that the leaders of these people and the promoters of this abomination
should be put to death. I forbade the infliction of any severe
punishments on Hindus in general, but I destroyed their idol-temples,
and instead thereof raised mosques. I founded two flourishing towns
(*kasba*), one called Tughlikpûr, the other Sãlãrpûr. Where infidels and
idolaters worshipped idols, Musulmãns now, by God’s mercy, perform their
devotions to the true God. Praises of God and the summons to prayer are
now heard there, and that place which was formerly the home of infidels
has become the habitation of the faithful, who there repeat their creed
and offer up their praises to God.

“Information was brought to me that some Hindus had erected a new idol
temple in the village of Sãlihpûr, and were performing worship to their
idols. I sent some persons there to destroy the idol temple, and put a
stop to their pernicious incitements to error.”^([106](#106))  
 

*Gohana (Haryana)*

“Some Hindûs had erected a new idol-temple in the village of Kohãna, and
the idolaters used to assemble there and perform their idolatrous rites.
These people were seized and brought before me. I ordered that the
perverse conduct of the leaders of this wickedness should be publicly
proclaimed, and that they should be put to death before the gate of the
palace. I also ordered that the infidel books, the idols, and the
vessels used in their worship, which had been taken with them, should
all be publicly burnt. The others were restrained by threats and
punishments, as a warning to all men, that no zimmî could follow such
wicked practices in a Musulmãn country.”^([107](#107))  
 

**(28)**  
**Sîrat-Fîrûz Shãhî**

It is a text either written or dictated by Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq
himself. According to this book, the objects of his expedition to
Jajnagar were: “extirpating Rai Gajpat, massacring the
unbelievers, demolishing their temples, hunting elephants, and getting a
glimpse of their enchanting country.” ‘Ain-ul-Mulk also says, “The
object of the expedition was to break the idols, to shed the blood of
the enemies of Islãm (and) to hunt elephants.”^([108](#108))  
 

**Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388)**

*Puri (Orissa)*

“Allãh, who is the only true God and has no other emanation, endowed the
king of Islãm with the strength to destroy this ancient shrine on the
eastern sea-coast and to plunge it into the sea, and after its
destruction, he ordered the nose of the image of Jagannãth to be
perforated and disgraced it by casting it down on the ground. They dug
out other idols, which were worshipped by the polytheists in the kingdom
of Jãjnagar, and overthrew them as they did the image of Jagannãth, for
being laid in front of the mosques along the path of the Sunnis and way
of the *musallis* (the multitude who offer prayers) and stretched them
in front of the portals of every mosque, so that the body and sides of
the images may be trampled at the time of ascent and descent, entrance
and exit, by the shoes on the feet of the Muslims.”^([109](#109))  
 

**(29)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Mubãrak Shãhî**

The author, Yahya bin Ahmad bin Abdu’llãh Sirhindî, lived in the reign
of Sultãn Muizu’d-Dîn Abu’l Fath Mubãrak Shãh (AD 1421-1434) of the
Sayyid dynasty which ruled at Delhi from AD 1414 to 1451. This history
starts from the time of Muhammad Ghûrî (AD 1175-1206) and closes with
the year AD 1434.  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Vidisha and Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In AH 631 he invaded Mãlwah, and after suppressing the rebels of that
place, he destroyed that idol-temple which had existed there for the
past three hundred years.

“Next he turned towards Ujjain and conquered it, and after demolishing
the idol-temple of Mahãkãl, he uprooted the statue of Bikramãjît
together with all other statues and images which were placed on
pedestals, and brought them to the capital where they were laid before
the Jãmi‘ Masjid for being trodden under foot by the
people.”^([110](#110))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“Ulugh Khãn invaded Gujarãt. He sacked the whole country… He pursued the
Rãî upto Somnãth. He destroyed the temple of Somnãth which was the
principal place of worship for the Hindûs and great Rãîs since ancient
times. He constructed a mosque on the site and returned to
Delhi…”^([111](#111))  
 

**(30)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Muhammadî**

The author, Muhammad Bihãmad Khãnî was the son of the governor of Irich
in Bundelkhand. He was a soldier who participated in several wars. At
last he became the disciple of a Sufi, Yûsuf Buddha, of Irich and spent
the rest of his life in religious pursuits. His history covers a long
period - from Prophet Muhammad to AD 1438-39.  
 

**Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Tughlaq Shãh II (AD 1388-89)**

*Kalpi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In the meanwhile Delhi received news of the defeat of the armies of
Islãm which were with Malikzãdã Mahmûd bin Fîrûz Khãn… This Malikzãdã
reached the bank of the Yamunã via Shãhpur and renamed Kãlpî, which was
the abode and centre of the infidels and the wicked, as Muhammadãbãd,
after the name of Prophet Muhammad. He got mosques erected for the
worship of Allãh in places occupied by temples, and made that city his
capital.”^([112](#112))  
 

**Sultãn Nasîru’d-Dîn Mahmûd Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1389-1412)**

*Kalpi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Historians have recorded that in the auspicious year AH 792 (AD
1389-90) Sultãn Nasîru’d-Dîn got founded a city named Muhammadãbãd,
after the name of Prophet Muhammad, at a place known as Kãlpî which was
a home of the accursed infidels, and he got mosques raised in place of
temples for the worship of Allãh. He got palaces, tombs and schools
constructed, and ended the wicked ways of the infidels, and promoted the
Shariat of Prophet Muhammad…”^([113](#113))  
 

*Khandaut (Uttar Pradesh)*

“He laid waste KhaNdaut which was the home of infidels and, having made
it an abode of Islãm, founded Mahmûdãbãd after his own name. He got a
splendid palace and fort constructed there and established all the
customs of Islãm in that city and place.”^([114](#114))  
 

*Prayag and Kara (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The Sultãn moved with the armies of Islãm towards Prayãg and Arail with
the aim of destroying the infidels, and he laid waste both those places.
The vast crowd which had collected at Prayãg for worshipping false gods
was made captive. The inhabitants of Karã were freed from the mischief
of rebels on account of this aid from the king and the name of this king
of Islãm became famous by this reason.”^([115](#115))  
 

**(31)**  
**Jawamiu’l Kilãm**

The book contains the *malfûzãt* of Khwãjah Sayyid Muhammad bin Yãsuf
al-Husainî Bandã Nawãz Gisû Darãz (AD 1321-1422), one of the leading
disciples of Shykh Nasiru’d-Dîn Mahmûd Chirãgh-i-Dihlî. He settled down
at Gulbarga, the capital of the Bahmanî Empire in the Deccan, and became
the mentor of Sultãn Ahmad Shãh Bahmanî (AD 1422-1436).  
 

**Shykh Jalãlu’d-Dîn Tabrizî (AH 533-623)**

*Pandua (Bengal)*

“An anecdote relating to Shaikh Jalalu’d-Din’s stay in Deva Mahal reads
like other stock-in-trade stories and fairytales. It was related by such
an authority as Gisu Daraz. According to him Shaikh Jalalu’d-Din stayed
at Pandua in the house of a flower vendor. On the day of his arrival, he
found each of the house members crying. On enquiry he was told there was
a demon in the temple who daily ate a young man. It was the king’s duty
to provide the demon with his daily food. On that day it was the turn of
the young son in the family. The Shaikh requested them to send him in
place of their son but they refused to accept the offer for fear of the
king. The Shaikh, then followed the young man to the temple and killed
the demon with a single blow from his staff. When the king accompanied
by his retinue reached the temple to worship the demon they were amazed
to find the demon killed and an old man dressed in black with his head
covered with a blanket. The Shaikh invited them to see the fate with
their god. The sight of their vanquished idol prompted them to accept
Islam.”^([116](#116))  
 

**(32)**  
**Habîbu’s-Siyar**

The author, Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Muhammad bin Humãmu’d-Dîn, is known as
Khondmîr. He was the son of Mîrkhond, the author of the famous Persian
history, *Rauzatu’s-Safa*. Born at Herat in AD 1475 he reached Agra in
1528-29 when he was introduced to Bãbur. He accompanied Bãbur in his
expedition to Bengal and Humãyûn in his expedition to Gujarat where he
died in 1534-35. His *Khulãstu’l-Akhbãr* is a history of Asia brought
down to AD 1471. The *Habîbu’s-Siyar* which he started writing in 1521
starts with the birth of the Prophet and comes down to AD 1534-35.  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**  
  
*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“He several times waged war against the infidels of Hindustãn, and he
brought under his subjection a large portion of their country, until,
having made himself master of Somnãt, he destroyed all idol temples of
that country…^([117](#117))

“…Sultãn Mahmûd, having entered into the idol temple, beheld an
excessively long and broad room, in so much that fifty-six pillars had
been made to support the roof. Somnãt was an idol cut out of
stone, whose height was five yards, of which three yards were visible,
and two yards were concealed in the ground. Yamînu-d daula having broken
that idol with his own hand, ordered that they should pack up pieces of
the stone, take them to Ghaznîn, and throw them on the threshold of the
Jãma’ Masjid…”^([118](#118))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“From that place the Sultãn proceeded to a certain city, which was
accounted holy by the people of the country. In that city the men of
Ghaznîn saw so many strange and wonderful things, that to tell them or
to write a description of them is not easy… In short, the Sultãn Mahmûd
having possessed himself of the booty, burned their idol temples and
proceeded towards Kanauj.”^([119](#119))  
 

*Kanauj (Uttar Pradesh)*

“…The Ghaznivids found in these forts and their dependencies 10,000 idol
temples, and they ascertained the vicious belief of the Hindus to be,
that since the erection of these buildings no less than three or four
hundred thousand years had elapsed. Sultãn Mahmûd during this expedition
achieved many other conquests after he left Kanauj, and sent to hell
many of the infidels with blows of the well tempered sword. Such a
number of slaves were assembled in that great camp, that the price of a
single one did not exceed ten *dirhams*.”^([120](#120))  
 

**(33)**  
**Bãbur-Nãma**

It is an autobiography written in the form of a diary by Zahîru’d-Dîn
Muhammad Bãbur, founder of the Mughal dynasty in India, who proclaimed
himself a Pãdshãh after his victory in the First Battle of Panipat (AD
1526), and a Ghãzî (killer of *kãfirs*) after the defeat of RãNã Sãñgã
in the Battle of Khanwa (AD 1528). While presenting himself as an
indefatigable warrior and drug-addict he does not hide the cruelties he
committed on the defeated people, particularly his fondness for building
towers of the heads of those he captured as prisoners of war or killed
in battle. He is very liberal in citing appropriate verses from
the Qur’ãn on the eve of his battle with RãNã Sãñgã. In order to ensure
his victory, he makes a covenant with Allãh by breaking the vessels
containing wine as also the cups for drinking it, swearing at the same
time that “he would break the idols of the idol-worshippers in a similar
manner.”^([121](#121)) In the *Fath-Nãma* (prayer for victory) composed
for him by Shykh Zain, Allah is described as “destroyer of idols from
their foundations.”^([122](#122)) The language he uses for his Hindu
adversaries is typically Islamic.  
 

**Zahîru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bãbur Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1526-1530)**

*Chanderi (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In AH 934 (AD 1528), I attacked Chanderî and, by the grace of Allãh,
captured it in a few hours… We got the infidels slaughtered and the
place which had been a *dãru’l-harb* for years, was made into a
*dãru’l-Islãm*.”^([123](#123))  
 

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Next day, at the time of the noon prayer, we went out for seeing those
places in Gwãlior which we had not yet seen… Going out of the Hãthîpole
Gate of the fort, we arrived at a place called Urwã…

“Solid rocks surround Urwã on three sides… On these sides people have
carved statues in stone. They are in all sizes, small and big. A very
big statue, which is on the southern side, is perhaps 20 yards high.
These statues are altogether naked and even their private parts are not
covered…

“Urwã is not a bad place. It is an enclosed space. Its biggest blemish
is its statues. I ordered that they should be
destroyed.”^([124](#124))  
 

**(34)**  
**Siyaru’l-‘Ãrifîn**

The author, Hamîd bin Fazlullãh is also known as Dervish Jamãlî Kamboh
Dihlawî. He was a Sufi of the Suhrawardiyya sect who died in AD 1536
while accompanying the Mughal Emperor Humãyun in the latter’s expedition
to Gujarat. His son, Shykh Gadãî was with the Mughal army in the Second
Battle of Panipat (AD 1556) and advised Akbar to kill the Hindu king,
Hîmû, with his own hand. On Akbar’s refusal, according to Badãunî, Shykh
Gadãî helped Bairam Khãn in doing the same deed. *Siyaru’l-‘Ãrifîn*,
completed between AD 1530 and 1536, is an account of the Chishtî and
Suhrawardî Sufis of the period.  
 

*Shykh Jalãlu’d-Dîn Tabrizî (AH 533-623)*

He was the second most outstanding disciple of Shykh Shihabu’d-Dîn
Suhrawardî (AD 1145-1235), founder of the Suhrawardiyya silsilã of
Sufism. Having lived in Multan, Delhi and Badaun, he finally settled
down in Lakhanauti, also known as Gaur, in Bengal.  
 

*Devatala (Bengal)*

“Shaikh Jalalu’d-Dîn had many disciples in Bengal. He first lived at
Lakhnauti, constructed a *khanqah* and attached a langar to it. He also
bought some gardens and land to be attached to the monastery. He moved
to Devatalla (Deva Mahal) near Pandua in northern Bengal. There a
*kafir* (either a Hindu or a Buddhist) had erected a large temple and a
well. The Shaikh demolished the temple and constructed a *takiya*
(*khanqah*) and converted a large number of *kafirs*… Devatalla came to
be known as Tabrizabad and attracted a large number of
pilgrims.”^([125](#125))  
 

**Shykh ‘Abû Bakr Tûsî Haidarî (Thirteenth Century AD)**

He was a qalandar (anchorite) of the Haidarî sect founded by a Turk
named Haidar, who lived in Sawa in Kuhistan. His disciples migrated into
India when the Mongols sacked their homeland.  
 

*Delhi*

“The most prominent Indian Haidari was Shaikh Abu Bakr Tusi Haidari, who
settled in Delhi in the mid-thirteenth century. There he demolished a
temple on a site on the banks of the Jamna where he built a *khanqah*
and organized *sama* gathering. Shaikh Nizamu’d-Din Auliya’ was a
frequent visitor of Abu Bakr as was Shaikh Jamalu’d-Din of Hansi when he
was in Delhi. The latter gave Shaikh Abu Bakr the title Baz-i Safid
(White Falcon) symbolizing his rare mystical
achievements.”^([126](#126))  
 

**(35)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Shãhî**

The author, Ahmad Yãdgãr, was an old servant of the Sûr sultãns. He
started writing this history on order from Da‘ûd Shãh bin Sulaimãn Shãh.
It is also known as *Tãrîkh-i-Afãghana* and
*Tãrîkh-i-Salãtin-I-Afãghana*. It deals with the history of the Lodîs
down to AD 1554. He completed it in AH 1001-02 (AD 1592-93). He calls
the Hindu kings “rascally infidels”, “black-faced foes”, “evil-doers”,
“dark-faced men”, etc. He extols the plunder and depopulation of entire
regions by Bahlûl Lodî (AD 1451-1489). He reports how Bãbur presented to
his sons, Humãyûn and Kãmrãn, two daughters of the Raja of Chanderi.  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Kurukshetra (Haryana)*

“One day he ordered that ‘an expedition be sent to Thaneswar, (the tanks
at) Kurkaksetra should be filled up with earth, and the land measured
and allotted to pious people for their maintenance,’ …He was such a
great partisan of Islãm in die days of his youth…”^([127](#127))  
 

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“Sultãn Sikandar led a very pious life… Islãm was regarded very highly
in his reign. The infidels could not muster the courage to worship idols
or bathe in the (sacred) streams. During his holy reign, idols were
hidden underground. The stone (idol) of Nagarkot, which had misled the
(whole) world, was brought and handed over to butchers so that they
might weigh meat with it.”^([128](#128))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhim Lodî (AD 1517-1526)**

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“It so happened that Rãjã Mãn, the ruler of Gwãlior who had been warring
with the Sultãns for years, went to hell. His son, Bikarmãjît, became
his successor. The Sultãn captured the fort after a hard fight. There
was a quadruped, made of copper, at the door of the fort. It used to
speak. It was brought from there and placed in the fort at Agra. It
remained there till the reign of Akbar Bãdshãh. It was melted and a
cannon was made out of it at the order of the Bãdshãh.”^([129](#129))  
 

**(36)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Sher Shãhî**

The author, Abbãs Sarwãnî, was connected with the family of Sher Shãh
Sûr by marriage. He wrote this work by order of Akbar, the Mughal
emperor, and named it *Tuhfãt-i-Akbar Shãhî*. But it became known as
*Tãrîkh-i-Sher Shãhî* because of its main theme. He wrote it probably
soon after AD 1579.  
 

**Sher Shãh Sûr (AD 1538-1545)**

“…The nobles and chiefs said, ‘It seems expedient that the victorious
standards should move towards the Dekhin’…Sher Shãh replied: ‘What you
have said is most right and proper, but it has come into my mind that
since the time of Sultãn Ibrãhîm, the infidel *zamîndãrs* have rendered
the country of Islãm full of unbelievers, and having thrown down masjids
and buildings of the believers, placed idol-shrines in them, and they
are in possession of the country of Delhî and Mãlwã. Until I have
cleansed the country from the existing contamination of the unbelievers,
I will not go into any other country’…”^([130](#130))  
 

**(37)**  
**Wãqi‘ãt-i-Mushtãqî**

The author, Shykh Rizqu’llãh Mushtãqî, was born in AD 1492 and died in
1581. He heard accounts of the past from the learned men of his times
and compiled them in a book. He was a great story-teller who revelled in
“marvels”. He was known for his study of Sufi doctrines and spiritual
exercises.  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“Khawãs Khãn, who was the predecessor of Mîãn Bhûa, having been ordered
by the Sultãn to march towards Nagarkot, in order to bring the hill
country under subjection, succeeded in conquering it, and having sacked
the infidels’ temple of Debi Shankar, brought away the stone which they
worshipped, together with a copper umbrella, which was placed over it,
and on which a date was engraved in Hindu characters, representing it to
be two thousand years old. When the stone was sent to the King, it was
given over to the butchers to make weights out of it for the purpose of
weighing their meat. From the copper of the umbrella, several pots were
made, in which water might be warmed, and which were placed in the
*masjids* and the King’s own palace, so that everyone might wash his
hands, feet and face in them and perform "131 his purifications before
prayers…”^([131](#131))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“He got the temples of the infidels destroyed.  No trace of infidelity
was left at the place in Mathurã where the infidels used to take bath.
He got caravanserais constructed so that people could stay there, and
also the shops of various professionals such as the butchers, bãwarchîs,
nãnbãîs and sweetmeatsellers. If a Hindu went there for bathing even by
mistake, he was made to lose his limbs and punished severely. No Hindu
could get shaved at that place. No barber would go near a Hindu,
whatever be the payment offered.”^([132](#132))  
 

**Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Khaljî of Malwa (AD 1469-1500)**

*Jodhpur (Rajasthan)*

“Once upon a time a temple had been constructed in Jodhpur. The Sultãn
sent the Qãzî of Mandû with orders that he should get the temple
demolished. He had said to him, ‘If they do not demolish the temple on
instructions from you, you stay there and let me know.’ When the Qãzî
arrived there, the infidels refused to obey the order of the Sultãn and
said, ‘Has Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn freed himself from lechery so that he has
turned his attention to this side?’ The Qãzî informed the king
accordingly. He climbed on his mount in Mandû and reached Jodhpur in a
single night. He punished the infidels and laid waste the
temple…”^([133](#133))  
 

**(38)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Alfî**

It was composed in AD 1585 by Mullã Ahmad ThaTãwî and Ãsaf Khãn. It
covers a period of one thousand years from the death of the Prophet.  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“Mahmûd, as soon as his eyes fell on this idol, lifted up his battle-axe
with much anger, and struck it with such force that the idol broke into
pieces. The fragments of it were ordered to be taken to Ghaznîn, and
were cast down at the threshold of the Jãmi’ Masjid where they are lying
to this day…”^([134](#134))  
 

**(39)**  
**Burhãn-i-Ma‘sir**

The author, Sayyid ‘Alî bin ‘Azîzu’llãh Tabãtabã Hasanî, served Muhammad
Qutb Shãh (AD 1580-1627) of Golconda at first and then Sultãn Burhãn
Nizãm Shãh (AD 1591-1595) of Ahmadnagar. He wrote this history in AD
1592. It deals with the Bahmanî Sultãns of Gulbarga (AD 1347-1422) and
Bidar (AD 1422-1538) and the Nizãm Shãhî Sultãns of Ahmadnagar upto AD
1596.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Hasan Bahman Shãh (AD 1347-1358)**

*Dankuri (Karnataka)*

“The Sultãn sent Khwãja-i-Jahãn to Gulbargã, Sikandar Khãn to Bîdar, Qîr
Khãn to Kûtar, Safdar Khãn to Sakar which is called Sãgar, and Husain
Garshãsp to Kotgîr. He appointed other chiefs to invade the kingdom of
the infidels. ‘Aitmãdul Mulk and Mubãrak Khãn led raids upon the
river Tãwî and laid waste the Hindu Kingdom. After having invaded the
province of Dankurî and cutting off the head of Manãt,^([135](#135))
they attacked Janjwãl…”^([136](#136))  
 

**(40)**  
**Tabqãt-i-Akharî**

The author, Khwãjah Nizãmu’d-Dîn Ahmad bin Muhammad Muqîm al-Harbî, was
a Bakshî in the reign of Akbar, the Mughal emperor (AD 1556-1605). He
wrote this history in AD 1592-93 and added to it, later on, events upto
1593-94. He died next year. The history starts with the times of the
Ghaznivid Sultãns. The work was initially known as *Tabqãt-i-Akbar
Shãhî* but became known as simply *Tabqãt-i-Akbarî*. It is also known as
*Tãrîkh-i-Nizãmî*. It is the first Muslim history which confines itself
to India and excludes matter relating to other countries.  
 

**Amîr Subuktigîn (AD 977-997)**

“After this with kingly energy and determination, he girded up his loins
for a war of religion, and invaded Hindustãn, and carried away many
prisoners of war and other plunder; and in every country, which he
conquered, he founded mosques, and he endeavoured to ruin and desolate
the territories of Rãjã Jaipãl who, at that time, was the ruler of
Hindustãn.”^([137](#137))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“The Sultãn now received information that there was a city in Hindustãn
called Thãnessar, and there was a great temple there in which there was
an idol called Jagarsom, whom the people of Hindustãn worshipped. He
collected a large force with the object of carrying on a religious war,
and in the year AH 402 marched towards Thãnessar. The son of Jaipãl
having received intelligence of this, sent an envoy and represented
through him, that if the Sultãn would relinquish this enterprise, he
would send fifty elephants as tribute. The Sultãn paid no heed to this
offer, and when he reached Thãnessar he found the city empty. The
soldiers ravaged and plundered whatever they could lay hands upon, broke
the idols and carried Jagarsom to Ghaznîn. The Sultãn ordered that the
idol should the placed in front of the place of prayer, so that people
would trample upon it.”^([138](#138))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“From that place \[Mahãwan\] the Sultãn advanced to Mathurah, which is a
large city containing many temples… and the Sultãn completely destroyed
the city and burnt the temples… There was one golden idol which was
broken up under the orders of the Sultãn…”^([139](#139))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“Then in accordance with his custom, he advanced with his army towards
Hindustãn with the object of the conquest of Somnãth… there were many
golden idols in the temple in the city, and the largest of these idols
was called Manãt…

“…When he reached Somnãth, the inhabitants shut the gate on his face.
After much fighting and great struggles the fort was taken, and vast
multitudes were killed and taken prisoners. The temples were pulled
down, and destroyed from their very foundations. The gold idol Somnãth
was broken into pieces, and one piece was sent to Ghaznîn, and was
placed at the gate of the Jãmi’ Masjid; and for years it remained
there.”^([140](#140))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Abû-Sa‘îd Mas‘ûd of Ghazni (AD 1030-1042)**

*Sonipat (Haryana)*

“…He marched with his army to the fort of Sonipat, and the commandant of
that fort, Daniãl Har by name, becoming aware of his approach, fled… the
army of Islam, having captured that fort, pulled down all the temples
and obtained an enormous quantity of booty.”^([141](#141))  
 

**Ikhtiyãru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bakhtiyãr Khaljî (AD 1202-1206)**

*Bengal*

“In short, Muhammad Bakhtiyar assumed the canopy, and had prayers read,
and coin struck in his own name and founded mosques and Khãnkahs and
colleges, in place of the temples of the heathens.”^([142](#142))  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…In the year AH 631, he invaded the country of Mãlwah and conquered the
fort of Bhîlsã. He also took the city of Ujjain, and had the temple of
Mahãkãl… completely demolished, destroying it from its foundations; and
he carried away the effigy of Bikramãjît… and certain other statues
which were fashioned in molten brass, and placed them in the ground in
front of the Jãmi’ Masjid, so that they might he trampled upon by the
people.”^([143](#143))  
 

**Sultãn Jalãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“About the same time Malik Alãu’d-Dîn, the nephew of the Sultãn, begged
that he might have permission to march against Bhîlsah and pillage those
tracts. He received the necessary orders, and went and ravaged the
country and brought much booty for the Sultãn’s service. He also brought
two brass idols which had been the object of the worship of the Hindus
of these parts; and cast them down in front of the Badãûn Gate to be
trampled upon by the people…”^([144](#144))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“In the third year after the accession, the Sultãn sent Ulugh Khãn and
Nasrat Khãn, with large armies to invade Gujarãt. They ravaged and
plundered Nahrwãlah, and all the cities of the province… Ulugh Khãn and
Nasrat Khãn also brought the idol, which the Brãhmans of Somnãth had set
up, and were worshipping, in place of the one which Sultãn Mahmûd had
broken to pieces, to Delhi, and placed it where the people would trample
upon it…”^([145](#145))  
 

*M‘abar (Tamil Nadu)*

“Again in the year AH 716 Sultãn Alãuddîn sent Malik Nãib towards Dhor
Samundar (Dvar Samudra) and M’abar… they then advanced with their troops
to M’abar, and conquered it also, and having demolished the temples
there, and broken the golden and jewelled idols, sent the gold into the
treasury…”^([146](#146))  
 

**Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388)**

“Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh composed a book also in which he compiled an account
of his reign and which he named *Futuhãt-i-Fîrûz Shãhî*…^([147](#147))

“He writes in its second chapter… ‘Muslim and infidel women used to
visit sepulchres and temples, which led to many evils. I stopped it. I
got mosques built in place of temples’…”^([148](#148))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Mandrail (Madhya Pradesh)*

“After the rainy season was over, he marched in Ramzãn AH 910 (AD
February-March, 1505) for the conquest of the fort of MunDrãil. He
stayed for a month near Dholpur and sent out armies with orders that
they should lay waste the environs of Gwãlior and MunDrãil. Thereafter
he himself laid siege to the fort of MunDrãil. Those inside the fort
surrendered the fort to him after signing a treaty. The Sultãn got the
temples demolished and mosques erected in their stead…”^([149](#149))  
 

*Udit Nagar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“After the rainy season was over, he led an expedition towards the fort
of Udit Nagar in AH 912 (AD 1506-07)…^([150](#150))

“…Although those inside the fort tried their utmost to seek a pardon,
but he did not listen to them, and the fort was breached at many points
and conquered… The Sultãn thanked Allãh in die wake of his victory… He
got the temples demolished and mosques constructed in their
stead…”^([151](#151))  
 

*Narwar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“After the rainy season was over, he made up his mind to take possession
of the fort of Narwar which was in the domain of Mãlwã. He ordered Jalãl
Khãn Lodî, the governor of Kãlpî, to go there and besiege the fort… The
Sultãn himself reached Narwar after some time… He kept the fort under
siege for an year… The soldiers went out to war everyday and got
killed… 

“Thereafter the inhabitants of the fort were in plight due to scarcity
of water and dearness of grains, and they asked for forgiveness. They
went out with their wealth and property. The Sultãn laid waste the
temples and raised mosques. Men of learning and students were made to
reside there and given scholarships and grants. He stayed for six months
under the walls of the fort.”^([152](#152))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“He was a stout partisan of Islãm and made great endeavours on this
score. He got all temples of the infidels demolished, and did not allow
even a trace of them to remain. In Mathurã, where the infidels used to
get together for bathing, he got constructed caravanserais, markets,
mosques and *madrasas*, and appointed there officers with instructions
that they should allow no one to bathe; if any Hindû desired to get his
beard or head shaved in the city of Mathurã, no barber was prepared to
cut his hair.”^([153](#153))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhîm Lodî (AD 1517-1526)**

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“At the same time the Sultãn thought that though ‘Sultãn Sikandar had
led several expeditions for conquering the fort of Gwãlior and the
country attached to it but met with no success.’ Consequently he sent
‘Ãzam Humãyûn, the governor of Karã, with 300,000 horsemen and 300
elephants for the conquest of Gwãlior…  After some time the royal army
laid a mine, filled it with gunpowder, and set fire to it. He entered
the fort and took possession of it after the wall of the fort was
breached. He saw there a bull made of brass, which the Hindûs had
worshipped for years. In keeping with a royal order, the bull was
brought to Delhî and placed at the Baghdãd Gate. It was still there till
the reign of Akbar. The writer of this history saw it
himself.”^([154](#154))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd bin Ibrãhîm Sharqî (AD 1440-1457)**

*Orissa*

“After some time he proceeded to Orissa with the intention of jihãd. He
attacked places in the neighbourhood of that province and laid them
waste, and destroyed the temples after demolishing
them…”^([155](#155))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd Khaljî of Malwa (AD 1436-1469)**

*Chittaurgarh (Rajasthan)*

“After he had crossed the river Bhîm, he started laying waste the
country and capturing its people by sending expeditions towards Chittor
everyday. He started constructing mosques after demolishing temples. He
stayed 2-3 days at every halt.”^([156](#156))  
 

*Kumbhalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“When he halted near Kumbhalmîr which was a very big fort of that
province, and well-known for its strength all over Hindustãn, Devã the
Vakîl of the Governor of Kumbhã took shelter in the fort and started
fighting. It so happened that a magnificent temple had been erected in
front of that fort and surrounded by ramparts on all sides. That temple
had been filled with weapons of war and other stores. Sultãn Mahmûd
planned to storm the ramparts and captured it \[the temple\] in a week.
A large number of Rajpûts were made prisoners and slaughtered. About the
edifices of the temple, he ordered that they should be stocked with wood
and fired, and water and vinegar was sprinkled on the walls. That
magnificent mansion which it had taken many years to raise, was
destroyed in a few moments. He got the idols broken and they were handed
over to the butchers for being used as weights while selling meat. The
biggest idol which had the form of a ram was reduced to powder which was
put in betel-leaves to be given to the Rajpûts so that they could eat
their god.”^([157](#157))  
 

*Mandalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“He started for the conquest of ManDalgaDh on 26 Muharram, AH 861 (AD 24
December, 1456) after making full preparation… Reaching there the Sultãn
issued orders that ‘trees should be uprooted, houses demolished and no
trace should be left of human habitation’… A great victory was achieved
on 1 Zilhijjã, AH 861 (AD 20 October, 1457).  Sultãn Mahmûd offered
thanks to Allãh in all humility. Next day, he entered the fort. He got
the temples demolished and their materials used in the construction of a
Jãmi‘ Masjid. He appointed there a qãzi, a muftî, a muhtasib, a khatîb
and a mu‘zzin and established order in that place…”^([158](#158))  
 

*Kelwara and Delwara (Rajasthan)*

“Sultãn Mahmûd started again in AH 863 (AD 1458-59) for punishing the
Rajpûts. When he halted at ÃhãD, Prince Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn and Fidan Khãn
were sent towards Kîlwãrã and Dîlwãrã in order to lay waste those lands.
They destroyed those lands and attacked the environs of Kumbhalmîr.

“When they came to the presence of the Sultãn and praised the fort of
Kumbhalmîr, the Sultãn started for Kumbhalmîr next day and went ahead
destroying temples on the way. When he halted near that fort, he mounted
his horse and went up a hill which was to the east of the fort in order
to survey the city. He said, ‘It is not possible to capture this fort
without a siege lasting for several years’…”^([159](#159))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1392-1410)**

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“In AH 796 (AD 1393-94), it was reported that Sultãn Muhammad bin Fîrûz
Shãh had died at Delhî and that the affairs of the kingdom were in
disorder so that a majority of zamîndãrs were in revolt, particularly
the Rãjã of Îdar. Zafar Khãn collected a large army and mountain-like
elephants and proceeded to Îdar in order to punish the Rãjã… The Rãjã of
Îdar had no time to prepare a defence and shut himself in the fort. The
armies of Zafar Khãn occupied the Kingdom of Îdar and started plundering
and destroying it. They levelled with the ground whatever temple they
found… The Rãjã of Îdar showed extreme humility and pleaded for
forgiveness through his representatives. Zafar Khãn took a tribute
according to his own desire and made up his mind to attack
Somnãt…^([160](#160))

“In AH 803 (AD 1399-1400) ‘Ãzam Humãyûn paid one year’s wages (in
advance) to his army and after making great preparations, he attacked
the fort of Îdar with a view to conquer it. After the armies of the
Sultãn had besieged the fort from all sides and the battle continued
non-stop for several days the Rãjã of Îdar evacuated the fort one night
and ran away towards Bîjãnagar. In the morning Zafar Khãn entered the
fort and, after expressing his gratefulness to Allãh, and destroying the
temples, he appointed officers in the fort…”^([161](#161))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“In AH 797 (AD 1394-95)… he proceeded for the destruction of the temple
of Somnãt. On the way he made Rajpûts food for his sword and demolished
whatever temple he saw at any place. When he arrived at Somnãt, he got
the temple burnt and the idol of Somnãt broken. He made a slaughter of
the infidels and laid waste the city. He got a Jãmi‘ Masjid raised there
and appointed officers of the Shari‘h…”^([162](#162))

“In AH 804 (AD 1401-02) reports were received by Zafar Khãn that the
infidels and Hindûs of Somnãt had again started making efforts for
promoting the ways of their religion. ‘Ãzam Humãyûn started for that
place and sent an army in advance. When the residents of Somnãt learnt
this, they advanced along the sea-shore and offered battle. ‘Ãzam
Humãyûn reached that place speedily and he slaughtered that group. Those
who survived took shelter in the fort of the port at Dîp (Diu). After
some time, he conquered that place as well, slaughtered that group also
and got their leaders trampled under the feet of elephants. He got the
temples demolished and a Jãmi‘ Masjid constructed. Having appointed a
qãzî, muftî and other guardians of Shari‘h… he returned to the capital
at PaTan.”^([163](#163))  
 

**Sultãn Ahmad Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1411-1443)**

*Champaner (Gujarat)*

“Sultãn Ahmad… encamped near Chãmpãner on 7 Rabî-us-Sãni, AH 822 (AD 3
May, 1419). He destroyed temples wherever he found them and returned to
Ahmadãbãd.”^([164](#164))  
 

*Mewar (Rajasthan)*

“In Rajab AH 836 (AD February-March, 1433) Sultãn Ahmad mounted an
expedition for the conquest of MewãR and Nãgaur. When he reached the
town of Nãgaur, he sent out armies for the destruction of towns and
villages and levelled with the ground whatever temple was found at
whichever place… Having laid waste the land of Kîlwãrã, the Sultãn
entered the land of Dîlwãrã, and he ruined the lofty palaces of RãNã
Mokal and destroyed the temples and idols…”^([165](#165))  
 

**Sultãn Qutbu’d-Dîn Ahmad Shãh II of Gujarat (AD 1451-1458)**

*Kumbhalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“…Sultãn Qutbu’d-Dîn felt insulted and he attacked the fort of
Kumbhalmîr in AH 860 (AD 1455-56)… When he reached near Sirohî, the Rãjã
of that place offered battle but was defeated.

“From that place the Sultãn entered the kingdom of RãNã Kumbhã and he
sent armies in all directions for invading the country and destroying
the temples…”^([166](#166))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd BegDhã of Gujarat (AD 1458-1511)**

*Junagadh (Gujarat)*

“In AH 871 (AD 1466-67) he started for the conquest of Karnãl \[Girnãr\]
which is now known as JûnãgaDh. It is said that this country had been in
the possession of the predecessors of Rãi Mandalîk for the past two
thousand years… Sultãn Mahmûd relied on the help of Allãh and proceeded
there; on the way he laid waste the land of SoraTh… From that place the
Sultãn went towards the temple of those people. Many Rajpûts who were
known as Parwhãn, decided to lay down their lives, and started fighting
with swords and spears in (defence) of the temple… Sultãn Mahmûd
postponed the conquest of the fort to the next year… and returned to
Ahmadãbãd.”^([167](#167))  
 

*Dwarka (Gujarat)*

“After some time the Sultãn started contemplating the conquest of the
port of Jagat which is a place of worship for the BrahmaNas… With this
resolve he started for the port of Jagat on 16 Zil-Hajjã, AH 877 (AD 14
July, 1473). He reached Jagat with great difficulty due to the
narrowness of the road and the presence of forests… He destroyed the
temple of Jagat…”^([168](#168))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh II of Gujarat (AD 1511-1526)**

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“Sultãn Muzaffar… started for Îdar. When he arrived in the town of
Mahrãsã, he sent armies for destroying Îdar. The Rãjã of Îdar evacuated
the fort and took refuge in the mountain of Bîjãnagar. The Sultãn, when
he reached Îdar, found there ten Rajpûts ready to lay down their lives.
He heaped barbarities on them and killed them. He did not leave even a
trace of palaces, temples, gardens and trees…”^([169](#169))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Butshikan of Kashmir (AD 1389-1413)**

*Kashmir*

“On account of his extensive charities, scholars from Irãq, Khorãsãn and
Mawãraun-Nahar started presenting themselves in his court and Islãm was
spread.  He held in great regard Sayyid Muhammad who was a very great
scholar of the time, and strived to destroy the idols and temples of the
infidels. He got demolished the famous temple of Mahãdeva at Bahrãre.
The temple was dug out from its foundations and the hole (that remained)
reached the water level. Another temple at Jagdar was also demolished…
Rãjã Alamãdat had got a big temple constructed at Sinpur. He had come to
know from astrologers that after 11 hundred years a king by the name of
Sikandar would get the temple destroyed and the idol of Utãrid, which
was in it, broken. He got this \[forecast\] inscribed on a copper plate
which was kept in a box and buried under the temple. The inscription
came up when the temple was destroyed \[by Sikandar\]…^([170](#170))

“…The value of currency had come down, because Sultãn Sikandar had got
idols of gold, silver and copper broken and turned into
coins…”^([171](#171))  
 

**Sultãn Fath Shãh of Kashmir (AD 1489-1499 and 1505-1516)**

*Kashmir*

“Fath Shãh ascended the throne in AH 894 (AD 1488-89)… In those days Mîr
Shams, a disciple of Shãh Qãsim Anwar, reached Kashmir and people became
his devotees. All endowments, imlãk, places of worship and temples were
entrusted to his disciples. His Sûfîs used to destroy temples and no one
could stop them…”^([172](#172))  
 

**Jalãlu’d-Dîn Muhammad Akbar Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1556-1605)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“On the 1st Rajab 990 \[AD 1582\] he (Husain Qulî Khãn) encamped by a
field of maize near NagarkoT. The fortress (hissãr) of Bhîm, which is an
idol temple of Mahãmãî, and in which none but her servants dwelt, was
taken by the valour of the assailants at the first assault. A party of
Rajpûts, who had resolved to die, fought most desperately till they were
all cut down. A number of Brãhmans who for many years had served the
temple, never gave one thought to flight, and were killed. Nearly 200
black cows belonging to Hindûs had, during the struggle, crowded
together for shelter in the temple. Some savage Turks, while the arrows
and bullets were falling like rain, killed those cows. They then took
off their boots and filled them with the blood and cast it upon the roof
and walls of the temple.”^([173](#173))  
 

**(41)**  
**Muntakhãbu’t-Tawãrîkh**

The author, Mullã ‘Abdul Qãdir Badãunî son of Mulûk Shãh, was born at
Badaun in AD 1540 or 1542. He was a learned man who was introduced to
the court of Akbar by Shykh Mubãrak, father of Abu’l Fazl and Faizî, two
of the favourite courtiers of that king. He was employed by Akbar for
translating Sanskrit classics into Persian, a work which he hated. He
was a pious Muslim who acquired great aversion for Akbar due to the
latter’s liberal policies via-a-vis the Hindus. His history, which is
known as Tãrîkh-i-Badãunî also, is the general history of India from the
time of the Ghaznivids to the fortieth year of Akbar’s reign.  
 

**Sultãn Muhmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“…‘Asjadi composed the following qaSîda in honour of this expedition:

> When the King of kings marched to Somnãt,  
> He made his own deeds the standard of miracles…^([174](#174))

“Once more he led his army against Somnãt, which is a large city on the
coast of the ocean, a place of worship of the Brahmans who worship a
large idol. There are many golden idols there. Although certain
historians have called this idol Manãt, and say that it is the identical
idol which Arab idolaters brought to the coast of Hindustãn in the time
of the Lord of the Missive (may the blessings and peace of God be upon
him), this story has no foundation because the Brahmans of India firmly
believe that this idol has been in that place since the time of Kishan,
that is to say four thousand years and a fraction… The reason for this
mistake must surely be the resemblance in name, and nothing else… The
fort was taken and Mahmûd broke the idol in fragments and sent it to
Ghaznîn, where it was placed at the door of the Jãma‘ Masjid and trodden
under foot.”^([175](#175))  
 

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“In the year AH 402 (AD 1011) he set out for Thãnesar and Jaipãl, the
son of the former Jaipãl, offered him a present of fifty elephants and
much treasure. The Sultãn, however, was not to be deterred from his
purpose; so he refused to accept his present, and seeing Thãnesar empty
he sacked it and destroyed its idol temples, and took away to Ghaznîn,
the idol known as Chakarsum on account of which the Hindûs had been
ruined; and having placed it in his court, caused it to be trampled
under foot by the people…”^([176](#176))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“…From thence he went to Mathra which is a place of worship of the
infidels and the birthplace of Kishan, the son of Basudev, whom the
Hindûs Worship as a divinity -  where there are idol temples without
number, and took it without any contest and razed it to the ground.
Great wealth and booty fell into the hands of the Muslims, among the
rest they broke up by the orders of the Sultãn, a golden
idol…”^([177](#177))  
 

**Ikhtiyãru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bakhtiyãr Khaljî (AD 1202-1206)**

*Navadvipa (Bengal)*

“…In the second year after this arrangement Muhammad Bakhtyãr brought an
army from Behãr towards Lakhnautî and arrived at the town of Nûdiyã,
with a small force; Nûdiyã is now in ruins. Rãi Lakhmia (Lakhminîa) the
governor of that town… fled thence to Kãmrãn, and property and booty
beyond computation fell into the hands of the Muslims, and Muhammad
Bakhtyãr having destroyed the places of worship and idol temples of the
infidels founded Mosques and Monasteries and schools and caused a
metropolis to be built called by his own name, which now has the name of
Gaur.

> There where was heard before  
> The clamour and uproar of the heathen,  
> Now there is heard resounding  
> The shout of ‘Allãho Akbar’.”^([178](#178))

  
**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210\~1236)**

*Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…And in the year AH 631 (AD 1233) having made an incursion in the
direction of the province of Mãlwah and taken Bhîlsã and also captured
the city of Ujjain, and having destroyed the idol-temple of Ujjain which
had been built six hundred years previously, and was called Mahãkãl, he
levelled it to its foundations, and threw down the image of Rãi
Vikrmãjît from whom the Hindûs reckon their era… and brought certain
other images of cast molten brass and placed them on the ground in front
of the door of the mosque of old Dihlî and ordered the people to trample
them under foot…”^([179](#179))  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Ranthambhor (Rajasthan)*

“…and in the same year the Sultan for the second time marched against
Ranthambhor, and destroyed the country round it, and overthrew the idols
and idol-temples, but returned without attempting to reduce the
fort…”^([180](#180))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Patan and Somnath (Gujarat)*

“And in the year AH 698 (AD 1298) he appointed Ulugh Khãn to the command
of a powerful army, to proceed into the country of Gujarat… Ulugh Khãn
carried off an idol from Nahrwãla… and took it to Dihlî where he caused
it to be trampled under foot by the populace; then he pursued Rãi Karan
as far as Somnãt, and a second time laid waste the idol temple of
Somnãt, and building a mosque there retraced his steps.”^([181](#181))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Mandrail (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…At the time of his return he restored the fort of Dholpur also to
Binãyik Deo, and having spent the rainy season in Ãgra after the rising
of the Canopus in the year AH 910 (AD 1504), marched to reduce the
fortress of Mandrãyal, which lie took without fighting from the Rãjah of
Mandrãyal, who sued for peace; he also destroyed all the idol-temples
and churches of the place…”^([182](#182))  
 

*Udit Nagar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“And in the year AH 912 (AD 1506), after the rising of the Canopus, he
marched against the fortress of ÛntgaRh and laid siege to it, and many
of his men joyfully embraced martyrdom, after that he took the fort and
gave the infidels as food to the sword… He then cast down the
idol-temples, and built there lofty mosques.”^([183](#183))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhîm Lodî (AD 1517-1526)**

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…The fortress of Bãdalgarh, which lies below the fortress of Gwãliãr, a
very lofty structure, was taken from Rãi Mãn Singh and fell into the
hands of the Muslims, and a brazen animal which was worshipped by the
Hindûs also fell into their hands, and was sent by them to Ãgra, whence
it was sent by Sultãn Ibrãhîm to Dihlî, and was put over the city
gate. The image was removed to Fathpûr in the year AH 992 (AD 1584), ten
years before the composition of this history, where it was seen by the
author of this work. It was converted into gongs, and bells, and
implements of all kinds.”^([184](#184))  
 

**Jalãlu’d-Dîn Muhammad Akbar Pãdshãh Ghãzi (AD 1556-1605)**

*Siwalik (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In this year on the dismissal of Husain Khãn the Emperor gave the
pargana of Lak’hnou as jãgîr to Mahdî Qãsim Khãn… Husain Khãn was
exceedingly indignant with Mahdî Qãsim Khãn on account of this… After a
time he left her in helplessness, and the daughter of Mahdî Qãsim Bêg at
Khairãbãd with her brothers, and set off from Lak’hnou with the
intention of carrying on a religious war, and of breaking the idols and
destroying the idol-temples. He had heard that the bricks of these were
of silver and gold, and conceiving a desire for this and all the other
abundant and unlimited treasures, of which he had heard a lying report,
he set out by way of Oudh to the Siwãlik mountains…”^([185](#185))  
 

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“…The temple of Nagarkot, which is outside the city, was taken at the
very outset… On this occasion many mountaineers became food for the
flashing sword. And that golden umbrella, which was erected on the top
of the cupola of the temple, they riddled with arrows… And black cows,
to the number of 200, to which they pay boundless respect, and actually
worship, and present to the temple, which they look upon as an asylum,
and let loose there, were killed by the Musulmãns. And, while arrows and
bullets were continually falling like drops of rain, through their zeal
and excessive hatred of idolatry they filled their shoes full of blood
and threw it on the doors and walls of the temple… the army of Husain
Qulî Khãn was suffering great hardships.  For these reasons he concluded
a treaty with them… and having put all things straight he built the
cupola of a lofty mosque over the gateway of Rãjãh Jai
Chand.”^([186](#186))  
 

**Sultãn Sulaimãn Karrãnî of Bengal (AD 1563-1573)**

*Puri (Orissa)*

“In this year also Sulaiman Kirrãnî, ruler of Bengal, who gave himself
the tide of Hazrati Ã’la, and had conquered die city of Katak-u-Banãras,
that mine of heathenism, and having made the stronghold of Jagannãth
into the home of Islãm, held sway from Kãmru to Orissa, attained the
mercy of God…”^([187](#187))  
 

**(42)**  
**Shash Fath-i-Kãñgrã**

The author is unknown. It is supposed to have been written in the reign
of Jahãngîr.  
 

**Nûru’d-Dîn Muhammad Jahãngîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1605-1628)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“The Emperor by the divine guidance, had always in view to extirpate all
the rebels in his dominions, to destroy all infidels root and branch,
and to raze all Pagan temples level to the ground. Endowed with a
heavenly power, he devoted all his exertions to the promulgation of the
Muhammadan religion; and through the aid of the Almighty God, and by the
strength of his sword, he used all his endeavours to enlarge his
dominions and promote the religion of Muhammad…”^([188](#188))  
 

**(43)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Da‘ûdî**

The author, ‘Abdu’llãh, says nothing about himself and does not give
even his full name. As he mentions the name of Jahãngîr, it can be
assumed that he wrote it at some time after AD 1605. He starts with the
reign of Sultãn Bahlûl Lodî (AD 1451-1489) and ends with the reign of
Da‘ûd Shãh who was beheaded in AD 1575 by the order of Bairam Khãn.  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Kurukshetra (Haryana)*

“It is also related of this prince, that before his accession, when a
crowd of Hindûs had assembled in immense numbers at Kurkhet, he wished
to go to Thãnesar for the purpose of putting them all to
death…”^([189](#189))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“He was so zealous a Musalmãn that he utterly destroyed divers places of
worship of the infidels, and left not a vestige remaining of them. He
entirely ruined the shrines of Mathurã, the mine of heathenism, and
turned other principal Hindu places of worship into caravansarais and
colleges. Their stone images were given to the butchers to serve them as
meat-weight, and all the Hindus in Mathurã were strictly prohibited from
shaving their heads and beards, and performing their
ablutions…”^([190](#190))  
 

*Dholpur (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In that year the Sultãn sent Khawãs Khãn to take possession of the fort
of Dhûlpûr. The Rãjã of that place advanced to give battle, and daily
fighting took place. The instant His Majesty heard of the firm
countenance shown by the rãî of Dhûlpûr in opposing the royal army, he
went there in person; but on his arrival near Dhûlpûr, the rãî made up
his mind to fly without fighting… He (Sikandar) offered up suitable
thanksgivings for his success, and the royal troops spoiled and
plundered in all directions, rooting up all the trees of the gardens
which shaded Dhûlpûr to the distance of seven kos. Sultãn Sikandar
stayed there during one month, erected a mosque on the site of an
idol-temple, and then set off towards Ãgra…”^([191](#191))  
 

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…Sultãn Sikandar passed the rainy season of that year at Ãgra. After
the rising of the star Canopus, he assembled an army, and set forth to
take possession of Gwãlior and territories belonging to it. In a short
space of time he took most of the Gwãlior district, and after building
mosques in the places of idol-temples returned towards
Ãgra…”^([192](#192))  
 

*Narwar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Sultãn Sikandar, after the lapse of two years, in AH 913 (AD 1507)
wrote a farmãn to Jalãl Khãn, the governor of Kãlpî, directing him to
take possession of the fort of Narwar… Jalãl Khãn Lodî, by the Sultãn’s
command, besieged Narwar, where Sultãn Sikandar also joined him with
great expedition. The siege of the fort was protracted for one year… Men
were slain on both sides. After the time above mentioned, the defenders
of the place were compelled, by the want of water and scarcity of grain,
to ask for mercy, and they were allowed to go forth with their property;
but the Sultãn destroyed their idol-temples, and erected mosques on
their sites. He then appointed stipends and pensions for the learned and
the pious who dwelt at Narwar, and gave them dwellings there. He
remained six months encamped below the fort.”^([193](#193))  
 

**Sher Shãh Sûr (AD 1538-1545)**

*Jodhpur (Rajasthan)*

“His attack on Mãldev, Rãjã of Jodhpur, (was due) partly to his
religious bigotry and a desire to convert the temples of the Hindus into
mosques.”^([194](#194))  
 

**(44)**  
**Zafaru’l-Wãlih Bi Muzaffar Wa Ãlîhi**

The author, ‘Abdu’llãh Muhammad bin ‘Umar al-Maqqî al-Asafî Ulugh-Khãnî,
is popular as Hãjjiu’d-Dabîr. He arrived in India with his father in AD
1555. After 1573 he started living in Ahmadabad where Akbar had put his
father in charge of many endowments, die income from which was sent to
Mecca and Medina. After the death of his father he entered the service
of another Amîr, and finally went to Khandesh in 1595. He finished his
history in 1605 but took some more years to revise it. The English
translation we have is pretty bad.  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…In 631 (1233), Shamsuddîn marched to Mãlwã and conquered the city of
Bailsan and its fort and demolished its famous temple. The historians
have narrated that its citizens built the temple by digging its
foundation and raising its walls one hundred cubits from the ground in
300 years. All the images are fixed with lead. The temple is called
Gawãjit (?) (Vikramajit) Sultãn of Ujjain Nagari. The history of the
temple is a proof of what is said about its construction and demolition,
that is, eleven hundred years. People of Hind are ignorant of
history.”^([195](#195))  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Jhain (Rajasthan)*

“He marched from it to Ranthanbhor. He first encamped at Jhãyan and
conquered it. He demolished temples and broke idols. He killed, captured
and pillaged…”^([196](#196))  
 

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“He permitted ‘Alãuddîn for a religious war in Bhilastãn. Jalãluddîn had
marched to Mandu. ‘Alãuddîn influenced his uncle by the booty of the
religious war. It was immense. It contained a Nandi idol carved in
yellow metal and equal in weight to an animal. Jalãluddîn ordered it to
be placed at the entrance to the Gate of Delhi famous as Badãun Gate. He
was pleased with ‘Alãuddîn and put the ‘Diwan-ul-‘Ard’ under his charge
and added Oudh to Kara…”^([197](#197))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Devagiri (Maharashtra)*

“…He routed Rãmdev everywhere except the fort. The fort contained
temples of gold and silver and images of the same metals. Besides, there
were jewels of different varieties. He ordered them to be destroyed and
collected its gold. Ruler of the fort was surprised at this action and
his mind got confused. He sent an envoy for conclusion of peace on
condition of sparing the temples from destruction which was agreed
to…”^([198](#198))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“…MaHmud demolished Somnath in the year 416 (1122)… and carried its
relics to Ghazni. After his death, unbelief returned to Naharwãla as its
residents took an idol and buried it on a side. There was publicity of
return of Somnãth. They took it out from its burial place. It was
exhibited and fixed at a place where it was. Malek Ulugh Khãn took it
along with all the spoils to Delhi. They made it the threshold at its
gate. This victory took place on Wednesday, 20th Jamãdi I, 698
(1299)…^([199](#199))

“It was kept by a Brahmin after being mutilated by MaHamud. It was
Lamnat. They named it Somnãth. They worshipped it out of misguidance
from ancient times. They carried it to Delhi. It was placed at the
entrance of the gate…”^([200](#200))  
 

*Ma‘bar (Tamil Nadu)*

“…In 710 (1310) Kãfur conquered the region of Ma‘bar (Malabar) and Dahur
Samand. Both these regions belonged to Bir Rãi. He marched further to
Sarandip (Ceylon) and Kãfur broke the famous idol of Rãm Ling Mahãdev.
It was wonderful that the swordsmen deserted the temple. The Brahmins
assembled to fight with him at the time of his breaking the idol till
they collected all broken parts and got displeased with swordsmen. Kãfur
marched further to Sirã and demolished the temple of
Jagannãth…^([201](#201))

“…Kãfur always gained one victory after another until he dominated over
Jagannãth and consigned it to fire. He returned from it on 5th Zilhajj
of the year 710 (1310) and arrived at Delhi on 4th Jamãdi II of the year
711 (1311). It was a day worth witnessing. No one had undertaken such
campaigns before him and there would be none after him. A good omen was
drawn from his arrival with that booty for his sultãn and for general
Muslim public. They believed that all these victories were facilitated
by the blessings of Quth-uz-Zamãn, Qiblat-ul-Asfiyã Mawlãnã Shaikh
Nizãmuddîn Awliyã and Qutb-uz-Zamãn, Madãr ul-Jamkin Mawalãna Shaikh
Nasiruddin and similarly the two Qutbs of people of the world and faith
Mawlãnã Shaikh Ruknuddin and Mawlãnã Shaikh ‘Alãuddîn, may God benefit
us through them. During their life time, whatever they desired from
their Lord, became the sunna (rule and regulation of the Prophet, may
peace and benediction of God be on him). Every member of the house of
the ‘Alãiya Sultãn was a disciple and spiritual follower of Mawalãnã
Shaikh Nizãmuddin Awliya including the wazirs and amirs and persons of
rank. His blessings were upon them all…”^([202](#202))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd BegDhã of Gujarat (AD 1485-1511)**

*Junagadh (Gujarat)*

“In AH 871 (AD 1466-67) the Sultãn led an expedition to Karnãl
\[Girnãr\]… He spread the story that he was out for hunting. Thereafter
he suddenly attacked and his army also arrived. He took possession of
those treasuries which were beyond estimation. Many people living in
those valleys lost their lives. They had a famous idol there. When
Mahmûd decided to break it, many members of the Barãwãn clan gathered
round it. All of them were slaughtered and the idol was
broken…”^([203](#203))  
 

*Dwarka (Gujarat)*

“In the same year of AH 877 (AD 1472-73) the Sultãn made up his mind to
destroy Jagat… Jagat is a very famous abode of infidelity and idolatry.
Its idol is regarded as higher than all other idols in India and it is
because of this idol that the place is called Dwãrkã. It is a very big
nest of BrãhmaNas too. The idolaters come here from far off places and
the great hardships they undergo in order to reach here is regarded by
them as earnest worship… There is a fort nearby known as
Bait…^([204](#204))

“…The Sultãn mounted (his horse) in the morning. The people of Jagat
also got this information. They shut themselves in the fort along with
Rãi Bhîm. After a few days the Sultãn entered Jagat and got its idols
broken. He got its canopies pulled down and established the way of Islãm
there.”^([205](#205))  
 

**(45)**  
**Zubdatu’t-Tawãrîkh**

The author, Shaykh Nãru’l-Haqq al-Mashriqî al-Dihlivî al-Bukhãrî, was
the son of ‘Abdul Haqq who wrote Tãrîkh-i Haqqî in AD 1596-97.
Nûru’l-Haqq’s history is an enlarged edition of his father’s work. The
history commences with the reign of Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak and ends with the
close of Akbar’s reign in AD 1605.  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

“In his time Hindû temples were razed to the ground, and neither name
nor vestige of them was allowed to remain…”^([206](#206))  
 

**Jalãlu’d-Dîn Muhammad Akbar Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1556-1605)**

*Mewar (Rajasthan)*

“When Mewar was invaded \[AD 1600\] many temples were demolished by the
invading Mughal army \[led by Prince Salîm\].”^([207](#207))  
 

**(46)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Firishta**

The author, Muhammad Qãsim Hindû Shãh Firishta, was born in Astrabad on
the Caspian Sea and came to Bijapur in AD 1589. He lived under the
patronage of Sultãn Ibrãhîm ‘Ãdil Shãh II of Bijapur where he died in
1611. He claims to have consulted most of the earlier histories in
writing his *Gulshan-i-Ibrãhîmî* which became known as
*Tãrîkh-i-Firishta*. He completed it in 1609. It contains sections on
the independent sultanates of the Deccan, Gujarat, Malwa, Khandesh,
Bengal, Multan, Sindh and Kashmir besides narrating the history of the
kings of Ghazni, Lahore, Delhi and Agra. This is the most widely read
Persian history at present.  
 

**Amîr Subuktigîn of Ghazni (AD 977-997)**

*NWFP and Punjab*

“Even during the fifteen years of Alptigin’s reign Subuktigin is
represented by Firishta in an untranslated passage to have made frequent
attacks upon India, and even to have penetrated as far as Sodra on the
Chinab, where he demolished idols in celebration of Mahmud’s birth,
which, as it occurred on the date of the prophet’s birth, Subuktigin was
anxious that it should be illustrated by an event similar to the
destruction of idols in the palace of the Persian king by an earthquake,
on the day of the prophet’s birth.”^([208](#208))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“The king, in his zeal to propagate the faith, now marched against the
Hindoos of Nagrakote, breaking down their idols and razing their
temples. The fort, at that time denominated the Fort of Bheem, was
closely invested by the Mahomedans, who had first laid waste the country
around it with fire and sword.”^([209](#209))  
 

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“In the year AH 402 (AD 1011), Mahmood resolved on the conquest of
Tahnesur, in the kingdom of Hindoostan. It had reached the ears of the
king that Tahnesur was held in the same veneration by idolaters, as
Mecca by the faithful; that they had there set up a number of idols, the
principal of which they called Jugsom, pretending that it had existed
ever since the creation. Mahmood having reached Punjab, required,
according to the subsisting treaty with Anundpal, that his army should
not be molested on its march through his country…”^([210](#210))

“The Raja’s brother, with two thousand horse was also sent to meet the
army, and to deliver the following message:- ‘My brother is the subject
and tributary of the King, but he begs permission to acquaint his
Majesty, that Tahnesur is the principal place of worship of the
inhabitants of the country: that if it is required by the religion of
Mahmood to subvert the religion of others, he has already acquitted
himself of that duty, in the destruction of the temple of Nagrakote. But
if he should be pleased to alter his resolution regarding Tahnesur,
Anundpal promises that the amount of the revenues of that country shall
be annually paid to Mahmood; that a sum shall also be paid to reimburse
him for the expense of his expedition, besides which, on his own part he
will present him with fifty elephants, and jewels to a considerable
amount.’ Mahmood replied, ‘The religion of the faithful inculcates the
following tenet: That in proportion as the tenets of the prophet are
diffused, and his followers exert themselves in the subversion of
idolatry, so shall be their reward in heaven; that, therefore, it
behoved him, with the assistance of God, to root out the worship of
idols from the face of all India. How then should he spare Tahnesur?’

“This answer was communicated to the Raja of Dehly, who, resolving to
oppose the invaders, sent messengers throughout Hindoostan to acquaint
the other rajas that Mahmood, without provocation, was marching with a
vast army to destroy Tahnesur, now under his immediate protection. He
observed, that if a barrier was not expeditiously raised against this
roaring torrent, the country of Hindoostan would be soon overwhelmed,
and that it behoved them to unite their forces at Tahnesur, to avert the
impending calamity. 

“Mahmood having reached Tahnesur before the Hindoos had time to take
measures for its defence, the city was plundered, the idols broken, and
the idol Jugsom was sent to Ghizny to be trodden under
foot…”^([211](#211))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Mahmood having refreshed his troops, and understanding that at some
distance stood the rich city of Mutra, consecrated to Krishn-Vasdew,
whom the Hindoos venerate as an emanation of God, directed his march
thither and entering it with little opposition from the troops of the
Raja of Delhy, to whom it belonged, gave it up to plunder. He broke down
or burned all the idols, and amassed a vast quantity of gold and silver,
of which the idols were mostly composed. He would have destroyed the
temples also, but he found the labour would have been excessive; while
some say that he was averted from his purpose by their admirable beauty.
He certainly extravagantly extolled the magnificence of the buildings
and city in a letter to the governor of Ghizny, in which the following
passage occurs: ‘There are here a thousand edifices as firm as the faith
of the faithful; most of them of marble, besides innumerable temples;
nor is it likely that this city has attained its present condition but
at the expense of many millions of deenars, nor could such another be
constructed under a period of two centuries.’^([212](#212))

“The King tarried in Mutra 20 days; in which time the city suffered
greatly from fire, beside the damage it sustained by being pillaged. At
length he continued his march along the course of a stream on whose
banks were seven strong fortifications, all of which fell in succession:
there were also discovered some very ancient temples, which, according
to the Hindoos, had existed for 4000 years. Having sacked these temples
and forts, the troops were led against the fort of Munj…^([213](#213))

“The King, on his return, ordered a magnificent mosque to be built of
marble and granite, of such beauty as struck every beholder with
astonishment, and furnished it with rich carpets, and with candelabras
and other ornaments of silver and gold. This mosque was universally
known by the name of the Celestial Bride. In its neighbourhood the King
founded an university, supplied with a vast collection of curious books
in various languages. It contained also a museum of natural curiosities.
For the maintenance of this establishment he appropriated a large sum of
money, besides a sufficient fund for the maintenance of the students,
and proper persons to instruct youth in the arts and
sciences…^([214](#214))

“The King, in the year AH 410 (AD 1019), caused an account of his
exploits to be written and sent to the Caliph, who ordered it to be read
to the people of Bagdad, making a great festival upon the occasion,
expressive of his joy at the propagation of the faith.”^([215](#215))  
 

*East of the Jumna (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In this year, that is AH 412, Sultãn Mahmûd learnt that the people of
Hindustãn had turned against the Rãjã of Qanauj… Nandã, the Rãjã of
Kãlinjar attacked Qanauj because Rãjã Kuwar (of Qanauj) had surrendered
to Sultãn Mahmûd. As a result of this attack Rãjã Kuwar was killed. When
Sultãn Mahmûd learnt it, he collected a large army… and started towards
Hindustãn with a view to take revenge upon Rãjã Nandã. As the army of
Musalmãns reached the Jumnã, the son of Rãjã Ãnand Pãl… stood in the way
of Mahmûd. The river of Jumnã was in spate at this time… and it became
very difficult for the army to get across… But as chance would have it,
eight royal guards of Mahmûd showed courage and crossed the river… they
attacked the army of the Hindûs and dispersed it… the son of Ãnand Pãl
ran away with his chiefs. All the eight royal guards… entered a city
nearby and they plundered it to their heart’s content. They demolished
the temples in that place…”^([216](#216))  
 

*Nardin (Punjab)*

“About this time the King learned that the inhabitants of two hilly
tracts, denominated Kuriat and Nardein, continued the worship of idols
and had not embraced the faith of Islam… Mahmood resolved to carry the
war against these infidels, and accordingly marched towards their
country… The Ghiznevide general, Ameer Ally, the son of Arslan Jazib,
was now sent with a division of the army to reduce Nardein, which he
accomplished, pillaging the country, and carrying away many of the
people captives. In Nardein was a temple, which Ameer Ally destroyed,
bringing from thence a stone on which were curious inscriptions, and
which according to the Hindoos, must have been 40,000 years
old…”^([217](#217))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“The celebrated temple of Somnat, situated in the province of Guzerat,
near the island of Dew, was in those times said to abound in riches, and
was greatly frequented by devotees from all parts of Hindoostan… Mahmood
marched from Ghizny in the month of Shaban AH 415 (AD Sept. 1024), with
his army, accompanied by 30,000 of the youths of Toorkistan and the
neighbouring countries, who followed him without pay, for the purpose of
attacking this temple…^([218](#218))

“Some historians affirm that the idol was brought from Mecca, where it
stood before the time of the Prophet, but the Brahmins deny it, and say
that it stood near the harbour of Dew since the time of Krishn, who was
concealed in that place about 4000 years ago… Mahmood, taking the same
precautions as before, by rapid marches reached Somnat without
opposition. Here he saw a fortification on a narrow peninsula, washed on
three sides by the sea, on the battlements of which appeared a vast host
of people in arms… In the morning the Mahomedan troops advancing to the
walls, began the assault…”^([219](#219))

“The battle raged with great fury: victory was long doubtful, till two
Indian princes, Brahman Dew and Dabishleem, with other reinforcements,
joined their countrymen during the action, and inspired them with fresh
courage. Mahmood at this moment perceiving his troops to waver, leaped
from his horse, and, prostrating himself before God implored his
assistance… At the same time he cheered his troops with such energy,
that, ashamed to abandon their king, with whom they had so often fought
and bled, they, with one accord, gave a loud shout and rushed forwards.
In this charge the Moslems broke through the enemy’s line, and laid
5,000^([220](#220)) Hindus dead at their feet… On approaching the
temple, he saw a superb edifice built of hewn stone. Its lofty roof was
supported by fifty-six pillars curiously carved and set with precious
stones. In the centre of the hall was Somnat, a stone idol five yards in
height, two of which were sunk in the ground. The King, approaching the
image, raised his mace and struck off its nose. He ordered two pieces of
the idol to be broken off and sent to Ghizny, that one might be thrown
at the threshold of the public mosque, and the other at the court door
of his own palace. These identical fragments are to this day (now 600
years ago) to be seen at Ghizny. Two more fragments were reserved to be
sent to Mecca and Medina. It is a well authenticated fact, that when
Mahmood was thus employed in destroying this idol, a crowd of Brahmins
petitioned his attendants and offered a quantity of gold if the King
would desist from further mutilation. His officers endeavoured to
persuade him to accept of the money; for they said that breaking one
idol would not do away with idolatry altogether; that, therefore, it
could serve no purpose to destroy the image entirely; but that such a
sum of money given in charity among true believers would be a
meritorious act. The King acknowledged that there might be reason in
what they said, but replied, that if he should consent to such a
measure, his name would be handed down to posterity as ‘Mahmood the
idol-seller’, whereas he was desirous of being known as ‘Mahmood the
destroyer’: he therefore directed the troops to proceed in their
work…^([221](#221))

“The Caliph of Bagdad, being informed of the expedition of the King of
Ghizny, wrote him a congratulatory letter, in which he styled him ‘The
Guardian of the State, and of the Faith’; to his son, the Prince Ameer
Musaood, he gave the title of ‘The Lustre of Empire, and the Ornament of
Religion’; and to his second son, the Ameer Yoosoof, the appellation of
‘The Strength of the Arm of Fortune, and Establisher of Empires.’ He at
the same time assured Mahmood, that to whomsoever he should bequeath the
throne at his death, he himself would confirm and support the
same.”^([222](#222))  
 

**Sultãn Mas‘ûd I of Ghazni (1030\~1042)**

*Sonipat (Haryana)*

“In the year AH 427 (AD 1036)… he himself marched with an army to India,
to reduce the fort of Hansy… Herein he found immense treasure, and
having put the fort under the charge of a trusty officer, he marched
towards the fort of Sonput. Depal Hurry, the governor of Sonput,
abandoned the place, and fled into the woods; but having no time to
carry off his treasure, it fell into the conqueror’s hands. Musaood
having ordered all the temples to be razed to the ground, and the idols
to be broken proceeded in pursuit of Depal Hurry…”^([223](#223))  
 

**Sultãn Mas‘ûd III of Ghazni (AD 1099-1151)**

*Uttar Pradesh*

“In his reign Hajib Toghantugeen, an officer of his government,
proceeded in command of an army towards Hindoostan, and being appointed
governor of Lahore, crossed the Ganges, and carried his conquests
farther than any Mussulman had hitherto done, except the Emperor
Mahmood. Like him he plundered many rich cities and temples of their
wealth, and returned in triumph to Lahore, which now became in some
measure the capital of the empire, for the Suljooks having deprived the
house of Ghizny of most of its territory both in Eeran and Tooran, the
royal family went to reside in India.”^([224](#224))  
 

**Sultãn Muhammad Ghûrî (AD 1175-1216)**

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Mahomed Ghoory, in the mean time returning from Ghizny, marched towards
Kunowj, and engaged Jye-chund Ray, the Prince of Kunowj and Benares…
This prince led his forces into the field, between Chundwar and Etawa,
where he sustained a signal defeat from the vanguard of the Ghiznevide
army, led by Kootbood-Deen Eibuk, and lost the whole of his baggage and
elephants… He marched from thence to Benares, where, having broken the
idols in above 1000 temples, he purified and consecrated the latter to
the worship of the true God…”^([225](#225))  
 

*Bihar*

“Mahomed Ghoory, following with the body of the army into the city of
Benares, took possession of the country as far as the boundaries of
Bengal, without opposition, and having destroyed all the idols, loaded
four thousand camels with spoils.”^([226](#226))  
 

**Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)**

*Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“After the reduction of Gualiar, the King marched his army towards
Malwa, reduced the fort of Bhilsa, and took the city of Oojein, where he
destroyed a magnificent temple dedicated to Mahakaly, formed upon the
same plan with that of Somnat. This temple is said to have occupied
three hundred years in building, and was surrounded by a wall one
hundred cubits in height. The image of Vikramaditya, who had been
formerly prince of this country, and so renowned, that the Hindoos have
taken an era from his death, as also the image of Mahakaly, both of
stone, with many other figures of brass, were found in the temple. These
images the King caused to be conveyed to Dehly, and broken at the door
of the great mosque.”^([227](#227))  
 

**Sultãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1290-1296)**

*Malwa (Madhya Pradesh)*

“The King, after the decease of his son, marched his army towards
Runtunbhore, to quell an insurrection in those parts, leaving his son
Arkully Khan in Dehly, to manage affairs in his absence. The enemy
retired into the fort of Runtunbhore, and the King reconnoitred the
place, but, despairing of reducing it, marched towards Oojein, which he
sacked. At the same time also, he broke down many of the temples of
Malwa, and after plundering them of much wealth, returned to
Runtunbhore.”^([228](#228))  
 

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In the year AH 692 (AD 1293), the King marched against the Hindoos in
the neighbourhood of Mando, and having devastated the country in that
vicinity, returned to Dehly. In the mean time, Mullik Allood-Deen, the
King’s nephew, governor of Kurra, requested permission to attack the
Hindoos of Bhilsa, who infested his province. Having obtained leave, he
marched in the same year to that place, which he subdued; and having
pillaged the country, returned with much spoil, part of which was sent
to the King. Among other things, there were two brazen idols which were
thrown down before the Budaoon gate of Dehly, to be trodden under foot.

“Julal-ood-Deen Feroze was much pleased with the success and conduct of
his nephew on this expedition, for which he rewarded him with princely
presents, and annexed the province of Oude to his former government of
Kurra.”^([229](#229))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Gujarat*

“In the beginning of AH 697 ‘Alãu’d-Dîn sent Almãs Beg and Nasrat Khãn
along with other chiefs of Dehlî and the army of Sindh, for the conquest
of Gujarãt… Gujarãt had a very famous idol which was not only of the
same name as Somnãt but was also equally prestigious. The Musalmans got
hold of this idol and had it sent to Dehlî so that it could be trampled
upon…”^([230](#230))  
 

*Dwarasamudra (Karnataka)*

In the year AH 710 (AD 1310), the King again sent Mullik Kafoor and
Khwaja Hajy with a great army, to reduce Dwara Sumoodra and Maabir in
the Deccan, where he heard there were temples very rich in gold and
jewels… They found in the temple prodigious spoils, such as idols of
gold, adorned with precious stones, and other rich effects, consecrated
to Hindoo worship. On the sea-coast the conqueror built a small mosque,
and ordered prayers to be read according to the Mahomedan faith, and the
Khootba to be pronounced in the name of Allaood-Deen Khiljy. This mosque
remains entire in our days at Sett Bund Rameswur, for the infidels,
esteeming it a house consecrated to God, would not destroy
it.”^([231](#231))  
 

**Sultãn Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq (AD 1351-1388)**

*Nagarkot Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“From thence the King marched towards the mountains of Nagrakote, where
he was overtaken by a storm of hail and snow. The Raja of Nagrakote,
after sustaining some loss, submitted, but was restored to his
dominions. The name of Nagrakote was, on this occasion, changed to that
of Mahomedabad, in honour of the late king… Some historians state, that
Feroze, on this occasion, broke the idols of Nagrakote, and mixing the
fragments with pieces of cow’s flesh, filled bags with them, and caused
them to be tied round the necks of Bramins, who were then paraded
through the camp. It is said, also, that he sent the image of Nowshaba
to Mecca, to be thrown on the road, that it might be trodden under foot
by the pilgrims, and that he also remitted the sum of 100,000 tunkas, to
be distributed among the devotees and servants of the
temple.”^([232](#232))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Mandrail (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Sikundur Lody, having returned to Dholpoor, reinstated the Raja Vinaik
Dew, and then marching to Agra, he resolved to make that city his
capital. He stayed in Agra during the rains, but in the year AH 910 (AD
1504), marched towards Mundril. Having taken that place, he destroyed
the Hindoo temples, and caused mosques to be built in their
stead.”^([233](#233))  
 

*Udit Nagar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Having returned to Agra, the King proceeded in the year AH 912 (AD
1506) towards the fort of Hunwuntgur, despairing of reducing Gualiar. 
Hunwuntgur fell in a short time, and the Rajpoot garrison was put to the
sword, the temples were destroyed, and mosques ordered to be built in
their stead…”^([234](#234))  
 

*Narwar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…In the following year (AH 913, AD 1506), the king marched against
Nurwur, a strong fort in the district of Malwa, then in possession of
the Hindoos. The Prince Julal Khan governor of Kalpy, was directed to
advance and invest the place; and should the Hindoos resist, he was
required to inform the King… The King remained for the space of six
months at Nurwur, breaking down temples, and building mosques. He also
established a college there, and placed therein many holy and learned
men.”^([235](#235))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“…He was firmly attached to the Mahomedan religion, and made a point of
destroying all Hindoo temples. In the city of Mutra he caused musjids
and bazars to be built opposite the bathing-stairs leading to the river
and ordered that no Hindoos should be allowed to bathe there. He forbade
the barbers to shave the beards and beads of the inhabitants, in order
to prevent the Hindoos following their usual practices at such
pilgrimages…”^([236](#236))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhîm Lodî (AD 1517-1526)**

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…The Dehly army, arriving before Gualiar, invested the place… After the
siege had been carried on for some months, the army of Ibrahim Lody at
length got possession of an outwork at the foot of the hill, on which
stood the fort of Badilgur. They found in that place a brazen bull,
which had been for a long time an object of worship, and sent it to
Agra, from whence it was afterwards conveyed to Dehly, and thrown down
before the Bagdad gate (AH 924, AD 1518).”^([237](#237))  
 

**Sultãn Alãu’d-Dîn Mujãhid Shãh Bahmanî (AD 1375-1378)**

*Vijayanagar (Karnataka)*

“Mujahid Shah, on this occasion, repaired mosques which had been built
by the officers of Alla-ood-Deen Khiljy. He broke down many temples of
the idolaters, and laid waste the country; after which he hastened to
Beejanuggur… The King drove them before him, and gained the bank of a
piece of water, which alone divided him from the citadel, where in the
Ray resided. Near this spot was an eminence, on which stood a temple,
covered with plates of gold and silver, set with jewels: it was much
venerated by the Hindoos, and called, in the language of the country,
Puttuk. The King, considering its destruction a religious obligation
ascended the hill, and having razed the edifice, became possessed of the
precious metals and jewels therein.”^([238](#238))  
 

**Sultãn Ahmad Shãh I Walî Bahmanî (AD 1422-1435)**

*Vijayanagar (Karnataka)*

“Ahmud Shah, without waiting to besiege the Hindoo capital, overran the
open country; and wherever he went put to death men, women, and
children, without mercy, contrary to the compact made between his uncle
and predecessor, Mahomed Shah, and the Rays of Beejanuggur. Whenever the
number of slain amounted to twenty thousand, he halted three days, and
made a festival celebration of the bloody event. He broke down, also,
the idolatrous temples, and destroyed the colleges of the bramins.
During these operations, a body of five thousand Hindoos, urged by
desperation at the destruction of their religious buildings, and at the
insults offered to their deities, united in taking an oath to sacrifice
their lives in an attempt to kill the King, as the author of all their
sufferings…”^([239](#239))  
 

*Kullum (Maharashtra)*

“In the year AH 829 (AD 1425), Ahmud Shah marched to reduce a rebellious
zemindar of Mahoor… During this campaign, the King obtained possession
of a diamond mine at Kullum, a place dependent on Gondwana, in which
territory he razed many idolatrous temples, and erecting mosques on
their sites, appropriated to each some tracts of land to maintain holy
men, and to supply lamps and oil for religious
purposes…”^([240](#240))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Ahmad Shãh II Bahmanî (AD 1436-1458)**

“…He was averse from shedding human blood, though he destroyed many
idolatrous temples, and erected mosques in their stead. He held
conversation neither with Nazarenes nor with bramins; nor would he
permit them to hold civil offices under his government.”^([241](#241))  
 

**Sultãn Muhammad Shãh II Bahmanî (AD 1463-1482)**

*Kondapalli (Andhra Pradesh)*

“Mahomed Shah now sat down before Condapilly and Bhim Raj, after six
months, being much distressed, sued for pardon; which being granted, at
the intercession of some of the nobility, he surrendered the fort and
town to the royal troops. The King having gone to view the fort, broke
down an idolatrous temple, and killed some bramins, who officiated at
it, with his own hands, as a point of religion. He then gave orders for
a mosque to be erected on the foundation of the temple, and ascending a
pulpit, repeated a few prayers, distributed alms, and commanded the
Khootba to be read in his name. Khwaja Mahmood Gawan now represented,
that as his Majesty had slain some infidels with his own hands, he might
fairly assume the title of Ghazy, an appellation of which he was very
proud. Mahmood Shah was the first of his race who had slain a
bramin…”^([242](#242))  
 

*Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu)*

“…On his arrival at Condapilly, he was informed by the country people,
that at the distance of ten days’ journey was the temple of Kunchy the
walls and roof of which were covered with plates of gold, and ornamented
with precious stones; but that no Mahomedan monarch had as yet seen it,
or even heard of its name. Mahomed Shah, accordingly, selected six
thousand of his best cavalry, and leaving the rest of his army at
Condapilly, proceeded by forced marches to Kunchy… Swarms of people,
like bees, now issued from within, and ranged themselves under the walls
to defend it. At length, the rest of the King’s force coming up, the
temple was attacked and carried by storm, with great slaughter. An
immense booty fell to the share of the victors, who took away nothing
but gold, jewels, and silver, which were abundant…”^([243](#243))  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alî ‘Ãdil Shãh I of Bijapur (AD 1557-1579)**

*Bankapur (Karnataka)*

“…Ally Adil Shah, at the persuasions of his minister, carried his arms
against Bunkapoor. This place was the principal residence of Velapa Ray,
who had been originally a principal attendant of Ramraj; after whose
death he assumed independence…^([244](#244))

“…Velapa Ray, despairing of relief, at length sent offers for
surrendering the fort to the King, on condition of being allowed to
march away with his family and effects, which Ally Adil Shah thought
proper to grant, and the place was evacuated accordingly. The King
ordered a superb temple within it to be destroyed, and he himself laid
the first stone of a mosque, which was built on the foundation, offering
up prayers for his victory. Moostufa Khan acquired great credit for his
conduct, and was honoured with a royal dress, and had many towns and
districts of the conquered country conferred upon him in
jageer…^([245](#245))  
 

**Sultãn Qulî Qutb Shãh of Golconda (AD 1507-1543)**

*Dewarconda (Andhra Pradesh)*

“After his return the King proceeded to reduce the fortress of
Dewurconda, strongly situated on the top of a hill, which after a long
siege was taken, and the Hindoo palaces and temples, by the King’s
orders were consumed to ashes, and mosques built in their
stead.”^([246](#246))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhîm Qutb Shãh of Golconda (AD 1550-1580)**

*Adoni (Karnataka)*

“When the late king, Ibrahim Kootb Shah, had settled the countries of
the Hindoos on his southern frontier, and despatched his commander,
Ameer Shah Meer, to oppose the armies of his Mahomedan neighbours, he
vested the management of the affairs of his government in the hands of
one Moorhary Row, a Marratta bramin, to whom was attached a body of ten
thousand infantry, under the command of Mahomedan officers of rank, with
permission to beat the nobut. Moorhary Row was in every respect the
second person in the state, not even excepting the princes of the
blood-royal. In the latter end of the late king’s reign, this
unprincipled infidel proceeded with a force towards a famous temple near
Adony, where he attacked the inhabitants, laid waste the country, and
sacked it of its idols, made of gold and silver, and studded with
rubies. He levied also four lacks of hoons (160,000l.) from the
inhabitants. At sight of the idols the King was taken seriously ill, and
never recovered. He died on Thursday the 21st of Rubbeeoos-Sany, AH 988
(AD June 2, 1580) AD…”^([247](#247))  
 

**Sultãn Muhammad Qulî Qutb Shãh of Golconda (AD 1580-1612)**

*Cuddapah (Andhra Pradesh)*

“The sudden swelling of the rivers, and the absence of the King with his
army, gave Venkutputty leisure to muster the whole of his forces, which
amounted to one hundred thousand men. The leaders were Yeltumraj,
Goolrung Setty, and Munoopraj, who marched to recover Gundicota from the
hands of Sunjur Khan. Here the enemy were daily opposed by sallies from
the garrison, but they perservered in the siege; when they heard that
Moortuza Khan, with the main army of the Mahomedans, had pentrated as
far as the city of Krupa, the most famous city of that country, wherein
was a large temple. This edifice the Mahomedans destroyed as far as
practicable, broke the idol, and sacked the city…”^([248](#248))  
 

*Kalahasti (Tamil Nadu)*

“The King determined to spare neither men nor money to carry on the war
against the Hindoos: he accordingly directed Etibar Khan Yezdy, the
Hawaldar of Condbeer (henceforth called Moortuza Nuggur), to collect all
the troops under his command, with orders to march towards Beejanuggur,
and to lay in ashes all the enemy’s towns in his route… Etibar Khan now
proceeded to the town of Calistry, which he reached after a month’s
march from Golconda. Here he destroyed the Hindoo idols, and ordered
prayers to be read in the temples. These edifices may well he compared
in magnificence with the buildings and paintings of China, with which
they vie in beauty and workmanship. Having given a signal example of the
Mahomedan power in that distant country, the Hindoos did not dare to
interrupt his return…”^([249](#249))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1392-1410)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“…On the return of Moozuffur Khan to Guzerat, he learnt that in the
western Puttun district the Ray of Jehrend, an idolater, refused
allegiance to the Mahomedan authority. To this place Moozuffur Khan
accordingly marched, and exacted tribute. He then proceeded to Somnat,
where having destroyed all the Hindoo temples which he found standing,
he built mosques in their stead; and leaving learned men for the
propagation of the faith, and his own officers to govern the country,
returned to Puttun in the year AH 798 (AD 1395).”^([250](#250))  
 

*Jhalawar (Rajasthan)*

“…From Mundulgur Moozuffur Khan marched to Ajmeer, to pay his devotions
at the shrine of Khwaja Moyin-ood-Deen Hussun Sunjury, from the whence
he went towards Guzerat. On reaching Julwara, he destroyed the temples;
and after exacting heavy contributions, and establishing his authority,
he returned to Puttun…”^([251](#251))  
 

*Diu (Gujarat)*

“…In the following year AH 804 (AD 1402), he marched to Somnat, and
after a bloody action, in which the Mahomedans were victorious, the Ray
fled to Diu. Moozuffur Shah having arrived before Diu laid siege to it,
but it opened its gates without offering resistance. The garrison was,
however, nearly all cut to pieces, while the Ray, with the rest of the
members of his court, were trod to death by elephants. One large temple
in the town was razed to the ground, and a mosque built on its site;
after which, leaving his own troops in the place, Moozuffur Shah
returned to Puttun.”^([252](#252))  
 

**Sultãn Ahmad Shãh I of Gujrat (AD 1411-1443)**

*Sompur (Gujrat)*

“Ahmud Shah having a great curiosity to see the hill-fort of Girnal
pursued the rebel in that direction… After a short time, the Raja,
having consented to pay an annual tribute, made a large offering on the
spot. Ahmud Shah left officers to collect the stipulated amount, and
returned to Ahmadabad; on the road to which place he destroyed the
temple of Somapoor, wherein were found many valuable jewels, and other
property.”^([253](#253))  
 

*General order*

“In the year AH 817 (AD 1414), Mullik Tohfa, one of the Officers of the
King’s government was ennobled by the title of Taj-ool-Moolk, and
received a special commission to destroy all idolatrous temples, and
establish the Mahomedan authority throughout Guzerat; a duty which he
executed with such diligence, that the names of Mawass and Girass were
hereafter unheard of in the whole kingdom.”^([254](#254))  
 

*On way to Nagaur (Rajasthan)*

“In the year AH 819 (AD 1416), Ahmud Shah marched against Nagoor, on the
road to which place he plundered the country, and destroyed the
temples…”^([255](#255))  
 

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“…In the year 832 he marched again to Idur; and on the sixth of Suffur,
AH 832 (AD Nov. 14, 1428) carried by storm one of the principal forts in
that province, wherein he built a magnificent mosque…”^([256](#256))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd BegDhã of Gujarat (AD 1458-1511)**

*Girnar (Gujarat)*

“The author of the history of Mahmood Shah relates, that in the year AH
872 (AD 1468), the King saw the holy Prophet (Mahomed) in a dream, who
presented before him a magnificent banquet of the most delicate viands.
This dream was interpreted by the wise men as a sign that he would soon
accomplish a conquest by which he would obtain great treasures, which
prediction was soon after verified in the capture of Girnal.

“In the year AH 873 (AD 1469), Mahmood Shah marched towards the country
of Girnal, the capital of which bears the same name…^([257](#257))

“…The victorious army, without attacking the fort of Girnal, destroyed
all the temples in the vicinity; and the King sending out foraging
parties procured abundance of provisions for the camp…^([258](#258))

“The King, being desirous that the tenets of Islam should be propagated
throughout the country of Girnal, caused a city to be built, which he
called Moostufabad, for the purpose of establishing an honourable
residence for the venerable personages of the Mahomedan religion,
deputed to disseminate its principles; Mahmood Shah also took up his
residence in that city…”^([259](#259))  
 

*Dwarka (Gujarat)*

“Mahmood Shah’s next effort was against the port of Jugut, with a view
of making converts of the infidels, an object from which he had been
hitherto deterred by the reports he received of the approaches to
it…”^([260](#260))

“The King, after an arduous march, at length arrived before the fort of
Jugut a place filled with infidels, misled by the infernal minded
bramins… The army was employed in destroying the temple at Jugut, and in
building a mosque in its stead; while measures, which occupied three or
four months in completing, were in progress for equipping a fleet to
attack the island of Bete…”^([261](#261))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh II of Gujarat (AD 1511-1526)**

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“The King, hearing of this disaster, instantly marched towards Idur. On
reaching Mahrasa he caused the whole of the Idur district to be laid
waste. Bheem Ray took refuge in the Beesulnuggur mountains; but the
garrison of Idur, consisting of only ten Rajpoots, defended it against
the whole of the King’s army with obstinacy; they were, however,
eventually put to death on the capture of the place; and the temples,
palaces, and garden houses, were levelled with the
dust…”^([262](#262))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd Khaljî of Malwa (AD 1435-1469)**

*Kumbhalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“…Sooltan Mahmood now attacked one of the forts in the Koombulmere
district, defended by Beny Ray, the deputy of Rana Koombho of Chittor.
In front of the gateway was a large temple which commanded the lower
works. This building was strongly fortified, and employed by the enemy
as a magazine. Sooltan Mahmood, aware of its importance, determined to
take possession of it at all hazards; and having stormed it in person,
carried it, but not without heavy loss; after which, the fort fell into
his hands, and many Rajpoots were put to death. The temple was now
filled with wood, and being set on fire, cold water was thrown on the,
stone images, which causing them to break, the pieces were given to the
butchers of the camp, in order to be used as weights in selling meat.
One large figure in particular, representing a ram, and formed of solid
marble, being consumed, the Rajpoots were compelled to eat the calcined
parts with pan, in order that it might be said that they were made to
eat their gods…”^([263](#263))  
 

*Mandalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“On the 26th of Mohurrum, in the year AH 861 (AD Dec. 23, 1465), the
King again proceeded to Mundulgur; and after a vigorous siege occupied
the lower fort, wherein many Rajpoots were put to the sword, but the
hill-fort still held out; to reduce which might have been a work of time
but the reservoirs of water failing in consequence of the firing of the
cannon, the garrison was obliged to capitulate, and Rana Koombho
stipulated to pay ten lacks of tunkas. This event happened on the 20th
of Zeehuj of the same year AH 861 (AD Nov. 8, 1457), exactly eleven
months after the King’s leaving Mando. On the following day the King
caused all the temples to be destroyed, and musjids to be erected in
their stead, appointing the necessary officers of religion to perform
daily worship…”^([264](#264))  
 

*On Way to Kumbhalgadh (Rajasthan)*

“Sooltan Mahmood, in the year AH 863 (AD 1485), again marched against
the Rajpoots. On arriving at the town of Dhar, he detached
Gheias-ood-Deen to lay waste the country of the Kolies and Bheels. In
this excursion the Prince penetrated to the hills of Koombulmere, and on
his return, having given the King some description of that fortress,
Sooltan Mahmood resolved to march thither. On the next day he moved for
that purpose, destroying all the temples on the road…”^([265](#265))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd Shãh bin Ibrãhîm Sharqî of Jaunpur (AD 1440-1457)**

*Orissa*

“…Mahmood Shah Shurky, having recruited his army, took the field again
for the purpose of reducing some refractory zemindars in the district of
Chunar, which place he sacked, and from thence proceeded into the
province of Orissa, which he also reduced; and having destroyed the
temples and collected large sums of money, returned to
Joonpoor.”^([266](#266))  
 

**Muhammad bin Qãsim (AD 712-715)**

*Debal (Sindh)*

“On the receipt of this letter, Hijaj obtained the consent of Wuleed,
the son of Abdool Mullik, to invade India, for the purpose of
propagating the faith and at the same time deputed a chief of the name
of Budmeen, with three hundred cavalry, to join Haroon in Mikran, who
was directed to reinforce the party with one thousand good soldiers more
to attack Deebul. Budmeen failed in his expedition, and lost his life in
the first action. Hijaj, not deterred by this defeat, resolved to follow
up the enterprise by another. In consequence, in the year AH 93 (AD 711)
he deputed his cousin and son-in-law, Imad-ood-Deen Mahomed Kasim, the
son of Akil Shukhfy, then only seventeen years of age, with six thousand
soldiers, chiefly Assyrians, with the necessary implements for taking
forts, to attack Deebul…^([267](#267))

“On reaching this place, he made preparations to besiege it, but the
approach was covered by a fortified temple, surrounded by strong wall,
built of hewn stone and mortar, one hundred and twenty feet in height.
After some time a bramin, belonging to the temple, being taken, and
brought before Kasim, stated, that four thousand Rajpoots defended the
place, in which were from two to three thousand bramins, with shorn
heads, and that all his efforts would be vain; for the standard of the
temple was sacred; and while it remained entire no profane foot dared to
step beyond the threshold of the holy edifice. Mahomed Kasim having
caused the catapults to be directed against the magic flag-staff,
succeeded, on the third discharge, in striking the standard, and broke
it down… Mahomed Kasim levelled the temple and its walls with the ground
and circumcised the brahmins. The infidels highly resented this
treatment, by invectives against him and the true faith. On which
Mahomed Kasim caused every brahmin, from the age of seventeen and
upwards, to be put to death; the young women and children of both sexes
were retained in bondage and the old women being released, were
permitted to go whithersoever they chose.”^([268](#268))  
 

*Multan (Punjab)*

“…On reaching Mooltan, Mahomed Kasim also subdued that province; and
himself occupying the city, he erected mosques on the site of the Hindoo
temples.”^([269](#269))  
 

**Sultlãn Jalãlu’d-Dîn Mankbarnî of Khwarîzm (AD 1222-1231)**

*Thatta (Sindh)*

“…Julal-ood-Deen now occupied Tutta, destroyed all the temples, and
built mosques in their stead; and on one occasion detached a force to
Nehrwala (Puttun), on the border of Guzerat…”^([270](#270))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Butshikan of Kashmir (AD 1389-1413)**

*Kashmir*

“In these days he promoted a bramin, by name Seeva Dew Bhut, to the
office of prime minister, who embracing the Mahomedan faith, became such
a persecutor of Hindoos that he induced Sikundur to issue orders
proscribing the residence of any other than Mahomedans in Kashmeer; and
he required that no man should wear the mark on his forehead, or any
woman be permitted to burn with her husband’s corpse. Lastly, he
insisted on all golden and silver images being broken and melted down,
and the metal coined into money. Many of the bramins, rather than
abandon their religion or their country, poisoned themselves; some
emigrated from their native homes, while a few escaped the evil of
banishment by becoming Mahomedans. After the emigration of the bramins,
Sikundur ordered all the temples in Kashmeer to be thrown down; among
which was one dedicated to Maha Dew, in the district of Punjhuzara,
which they were unable to destroy, in consequence of its foundation
being below the surface of the neighbouring water. But the temple
dedicated to Jug Dew was levelled with the ground; and on digging into
its foundation the earth emitted volumes of fire and smoke which the
infidels declared to be the emblem of the wrath of the Deity; but
Sikundur, who witnessed the phenomenon, did not desist till the building
was entirely razed to the ground, and its foundations dug up.

“In another place in Kashmeer was a temple built by Raja Bulnat, the
destruction of which was attended with a remarkable incident. After it
had been levelled, and the people were employed in digging the
foundation, a copper-plate was discovered, on which was the following
inscription:- ‘Raja Bulnat, having built this temple, was desirous of
ascertaining from his astrologers how long it would last, and was
informed by them, that after eleven hundred years, a king named Sikundur
would destroy it, as well as the other temples in Kashmeer’…Having
broken all the images in Kashmeer, he acquired the title of the
Iconoclast, ‘Destroyer of Idols’…”^([271](#271))  
 

**Sultãn Fath Shãh of Kashmir (AD 1485-1499 and 1505-1516)**

*Kashmir*

“On the imprisonment of Mahomed, Futteh Khan, assuming the reigns of
government, and being formally crowned, was acknowledged King of
Kashmeer in the year 902; and appointed Suffy and Runga Ray, the two
officers who had lately made their escape, his ministers. About this
time one Meer Shumsood-Deen, disciple of Shah Kasim Anwur, the son of
Syud Mahomed Noorbukhsh arrived in Kashmeer from Irak. Futteh Khan made
over to this holy personage all the confiscated lands which had lately
fallen to the crown; and his disciples went forth destroying the temples
of the idolaters, in which they met with the support of the government,
so that no one dared to oppose them. In a short time many of the
Kashmeeries, particularly those of the tribe of Chuk, became converts to
the Noorbukhsh tenets. The persuasion of this sect was connected with
that of the Sheeas; but many proselytes, who had not tasted of the cup
of grace, after the death of Meer Shumsood-Deen, reverted to their
idols…”^([272](#272))  
 

**(47)**  
**Tûzuk-i-Jahãngîrî**

The author is the fourth Mughal emperor, Jahãngîr (AD 1605-1628). He
wrote it himself as his memoirs upto the thirteenth year of his reign,
that is, AD 1617. After that his ill-health forced him to give up
writing and the work was entrusted to Mu‘tamad Khãn who continued
writing it in the name of the emperor upto the beginning of the
nineteenth year of the reign. Muhammad Hãdî continued the memoirs upto
Jahãngîr’s death in 1628.  
 

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“…On the 7th Ãzar I went to see and shoot on the tank of Pushkar, which
is one of the established praying-places of the Hindus, with regard to
the perfection of which they give (excellent) accounts that are
incredible to any intelligence, and which is situated at a distance of
three kos from Ajmir. For two or three days I shot waterfowl on that
tank, and returned to Ajmir. Old and new temples which, in the language
of the infidels, they call Deohara are to be seen around this tank.
Among them Rãnã Shankar, who is the uncle of the rebel Amar, and in my
kingdom is among the high nobles, had built a Deohara of great
magnificence, on which 100,000 rupees had been spent. I went to see that
temple. I found a form cut out of black stone, which from the neck above
was in the shape of a pig’s head, and the rest of the body was like that
of a man. The worthless religion of the Hindus is this, that once on a
time for some particular object the Supreme Ruler thought it necessary
to show himself in this shape; on this account they hold it dear and
worship it. I ordered them to break that hideous form and throw it into
the tank. After looking at this building there appeared a white dome on
the top of a hill, to which men were coming from all quarters. When I
asked about this they said that a Jogî lived there, and when the
simpletons come to see him he places in their hands a handful of
flour, which they put into their mouths and imitate the cry of an animal
which these fools have at some time injured, in order that by this act
their sins may be blotted out. I ordered them to break down that place
and turn the Jogî out of it, as well as to destroy the form of an idol
there was in the dome…”^([273](#273))  
 

*Kangra (Himachal Pradesh)*

“On the 24th of the same month I went to see the fort of Kãngra, and
gave an order that the Qãzî, the Chief Justice (*Mir‘Adl*), and other
learned men of Islam should accompany me and carry out in the fort
whatever was customary, according to the religion of Muhammad. Briefly,
having traversed about one koss, I went up to the top of the fort, and
by the grace of God, the call to prayer and the reading of the Khutba
and the slaughter of a bullock which had not taken place from the
commencement of the building of the fort till now, were carried out in
my presence. I prostrated myself in thanksgiving for this great gift,
which no king had hoped to receive, and ordered a lofty mosque to be
built inside the fort… 

“After going round the fort I went to see the temple of Durgã, which is
known as Bhawan. A world has here wandered in the desert of error.
Setting aside the infidels whose custom is the worship of idols, crowds
of the people of Islam, traversing long distances, bring their offerings
and pray to the black stone (image)… Some maintain that this stone,
which is now a place of worship for the vile infidels, is not the stone
which was there originally, but that a body of the people of Islam came
and carried off the original stone, and threw it into the bottom of the
river, with the intent that no one could get at it. For a long time the
tumult of the infidels and idol-worshippers had died away in the world,
till a lying brahman hid a stone for his own ends, and going to the Raja
of the time said: ‘I saw Durgã in a dream, and she said to me: They have
thrown me into a certain place: quickly go and take me up.’ The Raja, in
the simplicity of his heart, and greedy for the offerings of gold that
would come to him, accepted the tale of the brahman and sent a number of
people with him, and brought that stone, and kept it in this place with
honour, and started again the shop of error and
misleading…”^([274](#274))  
 

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“I am here led to relate that at the city of Banaras a temple had been
erected by Rajah Maun Singh, which cost him the sum of nearly thirty-six
laks of five methkally ashrefies. The principle idol in this temple had
on its head a tiara or cap, enriched with jewels to the amount of three
laks ashrefies. He had placed in this temple moreover, as the associates
and ministering servants of the principal idol, four other images of
solid gold, each crowned with a tiara, in the like manner enriched with
precious stones. It was the belief of these Jehennemites that a dead
Hindu, provided when alive he had been a worshipper, when laid before
this idol would be restored to life. As I could not possibly give credit
to such a pretence, I employed a confidential person to ascertain the
truth; and, as I justly supposed, the whole was detected to be an
impudent imposture. Of this discovery I availed myself, and I made it my
plea for throwing down the temple which was the scene of this imposture
and on the spot, with the very same materials, I erected the great
mosque, because the very name of Islam was proscribed at Banaras, and
with God’s blessing it is my design, if I live, to fill it full with
true believers.”^([275](#275))  
 

**(48)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Khãn Jahãn Lodî**

The author, Ni‘ãmatu’llãh, was a historian in the court of the Mughal
emperor Jahãngîr (AD 1605-1628). His *Tãrîkh* is practically the same as
his *Makhzan-i-Afghãni* except for the memoirs of Khãn Jahãn Lodî which
have been added. Khãn Jahãn Lodî was one of the most illustrious
generals of Jahãngîrî. The history begins with Adam and comes down to AD
1612 when it was completed. Ni‘ãmatu’llãh refers to Hindus as “the most
notorious vagabonds and rebels.”  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“After a long time, in AH 400, Allãh… conferred the honour of sultanate
on Sultãn Mahmûd Ghãzî, son of Subuktigîn… Nine men from among the
Afghãn chiefs… took to his court and joined his servants… The Sultãn…
gave to each one of them enamelled daggers and swords, horses of good
breed and robes of special quality and, taking them with him, he set out
with the intention of conquering Hindustãn and Somnãt.

“Rãî Dãishalîm whom some historians have pronounced as Dãbshalîm or
Dãbshalam was the great ruler of that country. The Sultan inflicted a
smashing defeat on that Rãjã, demolished and desecrated the idol temples
there, and devastated that land of the infidels…”^([276](#276))  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Lodî (AD 1489-1517)**

*Dholpur (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…Sikandar himself marched on Friday, the 6th Ramzãn AH 906 (AD March,
1501), upon Dhûlpûr; but Rãjã Mãnikdeo, placing a garrison in the fort,
retreated to Gwãlior. This detachment however, being unable to defend
it, and abandoning the fort by night, it fell into the hands of the
Muhammadan army. Sikandar on entering the fort, fell down on his knees,
and returned thanks to God, and celebrated his victory. The whole army
was employed in plundering and the groves which spread shade for seven
kos around Bayãna were tom up from the roots…^([277](#277))  
 

*Mandrail (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In Ramzãn of the year 910 (AD 1504), after the rising of Canopus, he
raised the standard of war for the reduction of the fort of Mandrãil;
but the garrison capitulating, and delivering up the citadel, the Sultãn
ordered the temples and idols to be demolished, and mosques to be
constructed. After leaving Mîãn Makan and Mujãhid Khãn to protect the
fort, he himself moved out on a plundering expedition into the
surrounding country, where he butchered many people, took many
prisoners, and devoted to utter destruction all the groves and
habitations; and after gratifying and honouring himself by this
exhibition of holy zeal he returned to his capital
Bayãna.”^([278](#278))  
 

*Udit Nagar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“In 912, after the rising of Canopus, the Sultãn went towards the fort
of Awantgar… 

On the 23rd of the month, the Sultãn invested the fort, and ordered the
whole army to put forth their best energies to capture it… All of a
sudden, by the favour of God, the gale of victory blew on the standards
of the Sultãn, and the gate was forced open by Malik ‘Alãu-d dîn… The
Rãjpûts, retiring within their own houses, continued the contest, and
slew their families after the custom of *jauhar*… After due
thanks-giving for his victory, the Sultãn gave over charge of the fort
to Makan and Mujãhîd Khãn, with directions that they should destroy the
idol temples, and raise mosques in their places…”^([279](#279))  
 

*Narwar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…The Sultãn set out for conquering the fort of Narwar. Those inside the
fort asked for refuge when they became helpless because of the dearness
of grains and scarcity of water; they sought security of their lives and
left the fort together with their goods. The Sultãn took over the fort,
demolished the temples and idol-houses in it and built mosques, and
fixed scholarships and stipends for the teachers and the taught. He
resided for six months in the fort.”^([280](#280))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The Islamic sentiment (in him) was so strong that he demolished all
temples in his kingdom and left no trace of them. He constructed
*sarãis, bazãrs, madrasas* and mosques in Mathurã which is a holy place
of the Hindûs and where they go for bathing. He appointed government
officials in order to see that no Hindû could bathe in Mathrã. No barber
was permitted to shave the head of any Hindû with his razor. That is how
he completely curtailed the public celebration of infidel
customs…”^([281](#281))  
 

*Thanesar (Haryana)*

“Sultãn Sikandar was yet a young boy when he heard about a tank in
Thãnesar which the Hindûs regarded as sacred and went for bathing in it.
He asked the theologians about the prescription of the Shari‘ah on this
subject. They replied that it was permitted to demolish the ancient
temples and idol-houses of the infidels, but it was not proper for him
to stop them from going to an ancient tank. Hearing this reply, the
prince drew out his sword and thought of beheading the theologian
concerned, saying that he (the theologian) was siding with the
infidels…”^([282](#282))  
 

**Sultãn Ibrãhîm Lodî (AD 1517-1526)**

*Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh)*

“…When the thought occurred to Sultãn Ibrãhîm, he sent ‘Ãzam Humãyûn on
this expedition… The Afghãn army captured from the infidels the statue
of a bull which was made of metals such as copper and brass, which was
outside the gate of the fort and which the Hindûs used to worship. They
brought it to the Sultãn. The Sultãn was highly pleased and ordered that
it should be taken to Delhi and placed outside the ‘Red Gate’ which was
known as the Baghdãd Gate in those days. The statue was so fixed in
front of the ‘Red Gate’ till the time of the Mughal emperor, Akbar the
Great, who ordered in AH 999 that it be melted down and used for making
cannon as well as some other equipment, which are still there in the
government armoury. The author of this history… has seen it in both
shapes.”^([283](#283))  
 

**Sultãn Sulaimãn Karrãnî of Bengal (AD 1563-1576)**

*Puri (Orissa)*

“After Tãj Khãn, his brother Sulaimãn Karrãni took possession of the
province of Gaur and proclaimed his independence… He also made up his
mind to demolish all the temples and idol-houses of the infidels. As the
biggest temple of the Hindûs was in Orissa and known as Jagannãth, he
decided to destroy it and set out in that direction with a well-equipped
force. Reaching there, he demolished the idol-house and laid it waste.
There was an idol in it known as that of Kishan… Sulaimãn ordered that
it be broken into pieces and thrown into the drain. In like manner, he
took out seven hundred golden idols from idol-temples in the
neighbouring areas… and broke them.^([284](#284))

“…When the armies of Islãm entered that city, the women of the Brahmans,
dressed in costly robes, wearing necklaces, covering their heads with
colourful scarves and beautifying themselves in every way, took shelter
at the back of the temple of Jagannãth. They were told again and again
that a Muslim army that had entered the city would capture and take them
away, and that those people would desecrate the temple after laying it
waste. But the women did not believe it at all. They kept on saying.
‘How could it happen?  How could the soldiers of the Muslim army cause
any injury to the idols?’

“When the army of Islãm arrived near the temple, it made prisoners of
those Hindû women. That is what surprised them most…”^([285](#285))

The *History of the Afghans in India AD 1545-1631* by M.A. Rahim
(Karachi, 1961) quotes *Makhzan-i-Afghãna* while describing the exploits
of Sulaimãn Karrãni’s general, Kãlãpahar, in AD 1568. It says: “Every
Afghãn, who took part in the campaign, obtained as booty one or two gold
images. Kãlã Pahãr destroyed the temple of Jagannãth in Puri which
contained 700 idols made of gold, the biggest of which weighed 30
mãns.”^([286](#286))  
 

**(49)**  
**Mir‘ãt-i-Sikandarî**

The author, Sikandar bin Muhammad Manjhû bin Akbar, was in the employ of
Azîz Kokã, the Mughal governor of Gujarat, and fought against Sultãn
Muzaffar Shãh III, the last independent sultãn of Gujarat, who was
dethroned in AD 1591.

He finished his history in 1611 or 1613. It relates the history of
Gujarat from Muzaffar Shãh I to Muzaffar Shãh III.  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1392-1410)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“On his return (from Îdar) the Khãn made up his mind to destroy Somnãt,
that is, the temple of PaTandev. But in the meanwhile he received a
report that ‘Ãdil Khãn, the ruler of Ãsir and Burhãnpur, had crossed the
border and stepped into die province of Sultãnpur and Nadrabãr which was
under Gujarat… The Khãn postponed his march to PaTandev…

“In AH 799 (AD 1394-95) he invaded Jahdand (JûnãgaDh)which was in the
Kindgdom of Rãi Bhãrã and slaughtered the infidels there. 

“From there he proceeded towards Somnãt, and destroyed the famous
temple. He embellished that city with the laws of
Islãm.”^([287](#287))  
 

**Sultãn Ahmad Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1411-1443)**

*Sidhpur (Gujarat)*

His destruction of the Rudramahãlaya and construction of a mosque on the
same site, as described in *Mir‘ãt-i-Sikandarî*, has been related
already in Chapter One. Strangely, the long verse cited from the Aligarh
text has been omitted from the English translation by Fazlullah
Lutfullah Faridi, originally published from Dharampur (Gujarat) and
reprinted from Gurgaon in 1990.  
 

*General Order*

“Thereafter in AH 823 (AD 1420-21) he proceeded to different parts of
his Kingdom for establishing order and good government… He got temples
demolished and palaces and mosques constructed in their
stead…”^([288](#288))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd BegDhã of Gujarat (AD 1458-1511)**

*Dwarka (Gujarat)*

“On 17 Zilhijjã he started towards Jagat and reduced that place after
marching continuously. The infidels of Jagat ran away to the island of
Sãnkhû. The Sultãn destroyed Jagat and got its palaces dismantled. He
got the idols broken…”^([289](#289))  
 

*Sankhodhar (Gujarat)*

“…When the Sultãn saw that the infidels had gone to that island, he
ordered boats from the ports and proceeded to the island with his
well-armed soldiers… The infidels did not stint in fighting with swords
and guns. In the end the army of Islãm achieved victory. A majority of
the infidels were slaughtered. The Musalmãns started giving calls to
prayers after mounting on top of the temples. They started destroying
the temples and desecrating the idols. The Sultãn offered *namãz* out of
gratefulness of Allãh… He got a Jãmi‘ Masjid raised in that
place…”^([290](#290))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh II of Gujarat (AD 1511-1526)**

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“…The Rãjã of Îdar ran away to the mountains and on the fourth day the
Sultãn started from Morãsã and halted near Îdar. He ordered that the
houses and temples of Îdar should be destroyed in such a way that no
trace of them should remain.”^([291](#291))  
 

**Sultãn Bahãdur Shãh of Gujarat (AD 1526-1537)**

*Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“Afterwards he went towards Bhîlsã which country had been conquered for
Islãm by Sultãn Shamsu’d-dîn (Altamsh), King of Delhî. Since eighteen
years the estate of Bhîlsã had been subject to Silahdî, and the laws of
Islãm had been changed there for the customs of infidelity. When the
Sultãn reached the above place, he abrogated the ordinances of
infidelity and introduced the laws of Islãm, and slew the idolaters and
threw down their temples…”^([292](#292))  
 

**(50)**  
**Intikhãb-i-Jahãngîr Shãbî**

The name of the author is not known. He was evidently a contemporary and
a companion of Jahãngîr. The *Tabqãt-i-Shãh-Jahãnî* mentions a work
written by Shykh ‘Abdul Wahãb and named *Akhlãq-i-Jahãngîrî*. This work
may be the same as the *Intikhãb*. The Shykh died in 1622-23.  
 

**Nûru’d-Dîn Muhammad Jahãngîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1605-1628)**

*Ahmadabad (Gujarat)*

“One day at Ahmadabad it was reported that many of the infidel and
superstitious sect of the *Seoras* (Jains) of Gujarãt had made several
very great and splendid temples, and having placed in them their false
gods, had managed to secure a large degree of respect for themselves and
that the women who went for worship in those temples were polluted by
them and other people… The Emperor Jahãngîr ordered them banished from
the country, and their temples to be, demolished. Their idol was thrown
down on the uppermost step of the mosque, that it might be trodden upon
by those who came to say their daily prayers there. By this order of the
Emperor, the infidels were exceedingly disgraced, and Islãm
exalted…”^([293](#293))  
 

**(51)**  
**Tazkirãtu’I-Mulûk**

It is a history of sixteenth century Bijapur written in AD 1608-09 by
Rafîu’d-Dîn Ibrãhîm Shîrãzî, an Iranian adventurer and diplomat.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alî I ‘Ãdilshãh of Bijapur (AD 1557-1580)**

*Karnataka*

“While campaigning in Karnataka following the fall of Vijayanagar ‘Ali
I’s armies destroyed two or three hundred Hindu temples, and the monarch
himself was said to have smashed four or five thousand Hindu
images…”^([294](#294))  
 

**(52)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Kashmîr**

The author, Haidar Malik Chãdurãh, was a Kashmirian nobleman in the
service of Sultãn Yûsuf Shãh (AD 1579-1586). He gives the history of
Kashmir from the earliest times. Though mainly based on
*Rãjã-tarañgiNî*, there are some additions in the later period. It was
begun in AD 1618 and finished sometime after 1620-21.  
 

**Sultãn Sikandar Butshikan of Kashmir (AD 1389-1413)**

*Kashmir*

“During the reign of Sultãn Sikandar, Mîr Sayyîd Muhammad, son of Mîr
Sayyîd Hamadanî… came here, and removed the rust of ignorance and
infidelity and the evils, by his preaching and guidance… He wrote an
epistle for Sultãn Sikandar on *tasawwuf*… Sultãn Sikandar became his
follower. He prohibited all types of frugal games. Nobody dared commit
acts which were prohibited by the Sharîat… The Sultãn was constantly
busy in annihilating the infidels and destroyed most of the
temples…”^([295](#295))  
 

**Malik Mûsã of Kashmir**

*Kashmir*

He was a powerful minister in the reign of Sultãn Fath Shãh (AD
1489-1516), but *Tãrîkh-i-Kashmîr* presents him as the monarch. It says:

“Malik Mûsã ascended the throne in AH 907 (AD 1501). During his reign,
he devoted himself to the obliteration of the infidels and busied
himself with the spread of the religion of the prophet. He made desolate
most of the temples where the infidels had practised idolatry. Wherever
there was a temple, he destroyed it and built a mosque in its
place… None of the Sultãns of Kashmîr after Sultãn Sikandar… ever made
such an effort for the spread of the Islamic faith as did Malik Mûsã
Chãdurãh, and for this auspicious reason he received the title of the
‘Idol Breaker’.”^([296](#296))  
 

**Sufi Mîr Shamsu’d-Dîn Irãqî**

*Kashmir*

He was a sufi of the Kubrawiyya sect who came to Kashmir first in AD
1481, next in AD 1501, and finally in 1505 in the reign of Sultãn Fath
Shãh. He found it convenient to work as a member of the Nûr Bakhsh Sufi
sect. His doings are “anticipated” in the *Tãrîkh-i-Kashmîr* in the
following words:

“…Bãbã Ûchah Ganãî went for circumambulation of the two harms (Mecca and
Medina)… in search of the perfect guide (Pîr-i-Kãmil). He prayed to God
(to help) him when he heard a voice from the unknown that the ‘perfect
guide’ was in Kashmîr himself… Hazrat Shaikh, Bãbã Ûchah Ganãî… returned
to Kashmîr… All of a sudden his eyes fell upon a place of worship, the
temples of the Hindus. He smiled; when the devotees asked the cause of
(his smile) he replied that the destruction and demolition of these
places of worship and the destruction of the idols will take place at
the hand of the high horn Shaikh Shams-ud-Dîn Irrãqî. He will soon be
coming from Iraq and shall turn the temples completely desolate, and
most of the misled people will accept the path of guidance and Islãm… So
as was ordained Shaikh Shams-ud-Dîn reached Kashmîr. He began destroying
the places of worship and the temples of the Hindus and made an effort
to achieve the objectives.”^([297](#297))  
 

**(53)**  
**Mir‘ãt-i-Mas‘ûdî**

It is a biography of Sayyid Sãlãr Mas‘ûd Ghãzî whose tomb at Bahraich
(Uttar Pradesh) occupies the site of a Sun Temple. It was written by
Shykh ‘Abdu’r-Rahmãn Chishtî in the reign of Jahangir (1605-1628). He
drew his main material from *Tawãrîkh-i-Mahmûdî* by Mullã Muhammad
Ghaznavî, a contemporary of Sultãn Mahmûd of Ghazni (AD 997-1030). Sãlãr
Mas‘ûd, according to this account, was the son of Sitr Mu’alla’, a
sister of Sultãn Mahmûd, married to his general, Sãlãr Sãhû. Sãlãr
Mas‘ûd was born when the couple was staying in Ajmer. He is famous among
the Muslims as *Ghãzî Miyãn, Bãlã Miyãn* (revered boy) and *Hathîlã* Pîr
(the obstinate saint). There are many stories current regarding how he
led or sent many expeditions against the Hindu *Kãfîrs* in all direction
from his headquarters at Satrakh in the Barabanki District of Uttar
Pradesh. He is supposed to have defeated many *Rãjãs*, plundered many
towns, and destroyed many temples, particularly in Awadh. Many tombs all
over Awadh and neighbouring areas are reputed to be the graves of his
*Ghãzîs* (veterans) who became *Shahîds* (martys) in a prolonged *Jihãd*
(holy war) directed by him. He was finally caught and killed near
Bahraich by a league of Hindu *Rãjãs*. The Sun Temple which was his
target escaped this time, but was destroyed when another wave of Islamic
invasion swept over the area at the end of the twelfth century.  
 

**Saiyyid Sãlãr Mas‘ûd Ghãzî (AD 1013-1033)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“It happened that Mahmûd had long been planning an expedition into
Bhardana, and Gujarat, to destroy the idol temple of Somnãt, a place of
great sanctity to all Hindus. So as soon as he had returned to Ghaznî
from his Khurasan business, he issued a *farmãn* to the General of the
army, ordering him to leave a confidential officer in charge of the fort
of Kabuliz, and himself to join the court with his son Sãlãr
Mas‘ud…^([298](#298))

“It is related in the *Tãrîkh-i Mahmûdî* that the Sultãn shortly after
reached Ghaznî, and laid down the image of Somnãt at the threshold of
the Mosque of Ghaznî, so that the Musulmãns might tread upon the breast
of the idol on their way to and from their devotions. As soon as the
unbelievers heard of this, they sent an embassy to Khwãja Hasan
Maimandî, stating that the idol was of stone and useless to the
Musulmãns, and offered to give twice its weight in gold as a ransom, if
it might be returned to them. Khwãja Hasan Maimandî represented to the
Sultãn that the unbelievers had offered twice the weight of the idol in
gold, and had agreed to be subject to him. He added, that the best
policy would be to take the gold and restore the image, thereby
attaching die people to his Government. The Sultãn yielded to the advice
of the Khwãja, and the unbelievers paid the gold into the treasury.

“One day, when the Sultãn was seated on his throne, the ambassadors of
the unbelievers came, and humbly petitioned thus: ‘Oh, Lord of the
world! we have paid the gold to your Government in ransom, but have not
yet received our purchase, the idol Somnãt.’ The Sultãn was wroth at
their words, and, falling into reflection, broke up the assembly and
retired, with his dear Sãlãr Mas‘ûd, into his private apartments. He
then asked his opinion as to whether the image ought to be restored, or
not?  Sãlãr Mas‘ûd, who was perfect in goodness, said quickly, ‘In the
day of the resurrection, when the Almighty shall call for Ãzar, the
idol-destroyer, and Mahmûd, the idol-seller, Sire! what will you say?’
This speech deeply affected the Sultãn, he was full of grief, and
answered, ‘I have given my word; it will be a breach of promise.’ Sãlãr
Mas‘ûd begged him to make over the idol to him, and tell the unbelievers
to get it from him. The Sultãn agreed; and Sãlãr Mas‘ûd took it to his
house, and, breaking off its nose and ears, ground them to powder.

“When Khwãja Hasan introduced the unbelievers, and asked the Sultãn to
give orders to restore the image to them, his majesty replied that Sãlãr
Mas‘ûd had carried it off to his house, and that he might send them to
get it from him. Khwãja Hasan, bowing his head, repeated these words in
Arabic, ‘No easy matter is it to recover anything which has fallen into
the hands of a lion.’ He then told the unbelievers that the idol was
with Sãlãr Mas‘ûd, and that they were at liberty to go and fetch it. So
they went to Mas‘ûd’s door and demanded their god.

“That prince commanded Malik Nekbakht to treat them courteously, and
make them be seated; then to mix the dust of the nose and ears of the
idol with sandal and the lime eaten with betel-nut, and present it to
them. The unbelievers were delighted, and smeared themselves with
sandal, and ate the betel-leaf. After a while they asked for the idol,
when Sãlãr Mas‘ûd said he had given it to them. They inquired, with
astonishment, what he meant by saying that they had received the
idol? And Malik Nekbakht explained that it was mixed with the sandal and
betel-lime. Some began to vomit, while others went weeping and lamenting
to Khwãja Hasan Maimandî and told him what had occurred…”^([299](#299))

“Afterwards the image of Somnãt was divided into four parts, as is
described in the *Tawãrîkh-i-Mahmûdî*. Mahmûd’s first exploit is said to
have been conquering the Hindû rebels, destroying the forts and the idol
temples of the Rãî Ajipãl (Jaipãl), and subduing the country of India.
His second, the expedition into Harradawa and Guzerãt, the carrying off
the idol of Somnãt, and dividing it into four pieces, one of which he is
reported to have placed on the threshold of the Imperial Palace, while
he sent two others to Mecca and Medina respectively. Both these exploits
were performed at the suggestion, and by the advice, of the General and
Sãlãr Mas‘ûd; but India was conquered by the efforts of Sãlãr Mas‘ûd
alone, and the idol of Somnãt was broken in pieces by his sold advice,
as has been related. Sãlãr Sãhû was Sultãn of the army and General of
the forces in Iran…^([300](#300))  
 

*Awadh (Uttar Pradesh)*

“…Mas‘ûd hunted through the country around Bahraich, and whenever he
passed by the idol temple of Sûraj-kund, he was wont to say that he
wanted that piece of ground for a dwelling-place. This Sûraj-kund was a
sacred shrine of all the unbelievers of India. They had carved an image
of the sun in stone on the banks of the tank there. This image they
called Bãlãrukh, and through its fame Bahraich had attained its
flourishing condition. When there was an eclipse of the sun, the
unbelievers would come from east and west to worship it, and every
Sunday the heathen of Bahraich and its environs, male and female, used
to assemble in thousands to rub their heads under that stone, and do it
reverence as an object of peculiar sanctity. Mas‘ûd was distressed at
this idolatry, and often said that, with God’s will and assistance, he
would destroy that mine of unbelief, and set up a chamber for the
worship of the Nourisher of the Universe in its place, rooting out
unbelief from those parts…^([301](#301))

“Meanwhile, the Rãi Sahar Deo and Har Deo, with several other chiefs,
who had kept their troops in reserve, seeing that the army of Islãm was
reduced to nothing, unitedly attacked the body-guard of the Prince. The
few forces that remained to that loved one of the Lord of the Universe
were ranged round him in the garden. The unbelievers, surrounding them
in dense numbers, showered arrows upon them. It was then, on Sunday,
the 14th of the month Rajab, in the aforesaid year 424 (14th June, 1033)
as the time of evening prayer came on, that a chance arrow pierced the
main artery in the arm of the Prince of the Faithful…^([302](#302))  
 

**(54)**  
**Siyar al-Aqtãb**

This work was completed in AD 1647 by Allãh Diyã Chishtî. It deals with
many miracles performed by the Sufis, particularly of the Sãbriyya
branch of the Chishtiyya silsilã.  
 

**Shykh Mu‘în al-Dîn Chishtî of Ajmer (d. AD 1236)**

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“Although at that time there were very many temples of idols around the
lake, when the Khwaja saw them, he said: ‘If God and His Prophet so
will, it will not be long before I raze to the ground these idol
temples.’

“It is said that among those temples there was one temple to reverence
which the Rãjã and all the infidels used to come, and lands had been
assigned to provide for its expenditure. When the Khwãja settled there,
every day his servants bought a cow, brought it there and slaughtered it
and ate it…

“So when the infidels grew weak and saw that they had no power to resist
such a perfect companion of God, they… went into their idol temples
which were their places of worship. In them there was a dev, in front of
whom they cried out and asked for help…^([303](#303))

“…The dev who was their leader, when he saw the perfect beauty of the
Khwãja, trembled from head to foot like a willow tree. However much he
tried to say ‘Ram, Ram’, it was ‘Rahîm, Rahîm’ that came from his
tongue… The Khwãja… with his own hand gave a cup of water to a servant
to take to the dev… He had no sooner drunk it than his heart was
purified of darkness of unbelief, he ran forward and fell at the
Heaven-treading feet of the Khwãja, and professed his belief…

“The Khwãja said: ‘I also bestow on you the name of Shãdî Dev \[Joyful
Deval\]’…^([304](#304))

“…Then Shadî Dev… suggested to the Khwãja, that he should now set up a
place in the city, where the populace might benefit from his holy
arrival. The Khwãja accepted this suggestion, and ordered one of his
special servants called Muhammad Yãdgîr to go into the city and set in
good order a place for faqîrs. Muhammad Yãdgîr carried out his orders,
and when he had gone into the city, he liked well the place where the
radiant tomb of the Khwãja now is, and which originally belonged to
Shãdî Dev, and he suggested that the Khwãja should favour it with his
residence…^([305](#305))

“…Mu‘în al-dîn had a second wife for the following reason: one night he
saw the Holy Prophet in the flesh. The prophet said: ‘You are not truly
of my religion if you depart in any way from my sunnat.’ It happened
that the ruler of the Patli fort, Malik Khitãb, attacked the unbelievers
that night and captured the daughter of the Rãjã of that land. He
presented her to Mu‘în al-dîn who accepted her and named her Bîbî
Umiya.”^([306](#306))  
 

P.M. Currie comments:

“…The take-over of ‘pagan’ sites is a recurrent feature of the history
of the expansion of Islam. The most obvious precedent is to be found in
the Muslim annexation of the Hajar al-aswad at Mecca… Sir Thomas Arnol
remarks that ‘in many instances there is no doubt that the shrine of a
Muslim saint marks the site of some local cult which was practised on
the spot long before the introduction of Islam.’

“There is evidence, more reliable than the tradition recorded in the
Siyar al-Aqtãb, to suggest that this was the case in Ajmer. Sculpted
stones, apparently from a Hindu temple, are incorporated in the Buland
Darwãza of Mu‘în al-dîn’s shrine. Moreover, his tomb is built over a
series of cellars which may have formed part of an earlier temple… A
tradition, first recorded in the ‘Anis al-Arwãh, suggests that the
Sandal Khãna is built on the site of Shãdî Dev’s
temple.”^([307](#307))  
 

**(55)**  
**Bãdshãh-Nãma**

The author, ‘Abdu’l Hamîd Lãhorî, was commissioned by Shãh Jahãn himself
to compile this history which is a voluminous work covering the first
twenty years of Shãh Jahãn’s reign. Lãhorî died in 1654.  
 

**Nûru’d-Dîn Muhammad Jahãngîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1605-1628)**

*Many Places*

“Perhaps these in stances \[Mewar, Kangra, and Ajmer\] made a
contemporary poet of his court sing his praises as the great Muslim
emperor who converted temples into mosques.”^([308](#308))  
 

**Shihãbu’d-Dîn Muhammad Shãh Jahãn Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1628-1658)**

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“It had been brought to the notice of His Majesty that during the late
reign many idol temples had been begun, but remained unfinished at
Benares, the great stronghold of infidelity. The infidels were now
desirous of completing them. His Majesty, the defender of the faith,
gave orders that at Benares, and throughout all his dominions in every
place, all temples that had been begun should be cast down. It was now
reported from the province of Allahãbãd that seventy-six temples had
been destroyed in the district of Benares.”^([309](#309))  
 

*Orchha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“At the Bundela capital the Islam-cherishing Emperor demolished the
lofty and massive temple of Bir Singh Dev near his palace, and erected a
mosque on its site.”^([310](#310))  
 

*Kashmir*

“Some temples in Kashmir were also sacrificed to the religious fury of
the emperor. The Hindu temple at Ichchhabal was destroyed and converted
into a mosque.”^([311](#311))  
 

**(56)**  
**Shãhjahãn-Nãma**

It was written by ‘Inãyat Khãn whose original name was Muhammad Tãhir
Ãshnã. It comes down to AH 1068 (AD 1657-58), the year when Aurangzeb
seized power and imprisoned Shãh Jahãn in the fort of Agra. It presents
Shah Jahan as a pious Muslim vis-a-vis the Hindu Kãfirs.  
 

**Shihãbu’d-Dîn Muhammad Shãh Jahãn Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1628-1658)**

*Orchha (Madhya Pradesh)*

“When the environs of Orchha became the site of the royal standards, an
ordinance was issued authorising the demolition of the idol temple,
which Bir Singh Deo had erected at a great expense by the side of his
private palace, and also the idols contained in it…”^([312](#312))  
 

**(57)**  
**Mir‘ãt-i-‘Ãlam**

The author, Bakhtãwar Khãn, was a nobleman of Aurangzeb’s court. He died
in AD 1684. The history ascribed to him was really compiled by Muhammad
Baqã of Saharanpur who gave the name of his friend as its author. Baqã
was a prolific writer who was invited by Bakhtãwar Khãn to Aurangzeb’s
court and given a respectable rank. He died in AD 1683.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*General Order*

“Hindû writers have been entirely excluded from holding public offices,
and all the worshipping places of the infidels and great temples of
these infamous people have been thrown down and destroyed in a manner
which excites astonishment at the successful completion of so difficult
a task. His Majesty personally teaches the sacred kalima to many
infidels with success… All the mosques in the empire are repaired at
public expense. Imãma, criers to the daily prayers, and readers of the
khutba, have been appointed to each of them, so that a large sum of
money has been and is still laid out in these
disbursements…”^([313](#313))  
 

**(58)**  
**‘Ãlamgîr-Nãma**

This work, written in AD 1688 by Mîrza Muhammad Kãzim, contains a
history of the first ten years of Aurangzeb’s reign.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Palamau (Bihar)*

“In 1661 Aurangzeb in his zeal to uphold the law of Islam sent orders to
his Viceroy of Bihar, Dãud Khãn, to conquer Palamau. In the military
operations that followed many temples were destroyed…”^([314](#314))  
 

*Koch Bihar (Bengal)*

“Towards the end of the same year when Mîr Jumla made a war on the Raja
of Kuch Bihar, the Mughals destroyed many temples during the course of,
their operations. Idols were broken and some temples were converted into
mosques.”^([315](#315))  
 

**(59)**  
**Mã‘sîr-i-‘Ãlamgîrî**

The author, Sãqã Must‘ad Khãn, completed this history in AD 1710 at the
behest of ‘Inãyatu’llãh Khãn Kashmîrî, Aurangzeb’s last secretary and
favourite disciple in state policy and religiosity. The materials which
Must‘ad Khãn used in this history of Aurangzeb’s reign came mostly from
the State archives which were thrown open to him.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*General Order*

“The Lord Cherisher of the Faith learnt that in the provinces of Tatta,
Multãn, and especially at Benares, the Brahman misbelievers used to
teach their false books in their established schools, and that admirers
and students both Hindu and Muslim, used to come from great distances to
these misguided men in order to acquire this vile learning. His Majesty,
eager to establish Islãm, issued orders to the governors of all the
provinces to demolish the schools and temples of the infidels and with
the utmost urgency put down the teaching and the public practice of the
religion of these misbelievers.”^([316](#316))  
 

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“It was reported that, according to the Emperor’s command, his officers
had demolished the temple of Viswanãth at Kãshî.”^([317](#317))  
 

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“…During this month of Ramzan abounding in miracles, the Emperor as the
promoter of justice and overthrower of mischief, as a knower of truth
and destroyer of oppression, as the zephyr of the garden of victory and
the reviver of the faith of the Prophet, issued orders for the
demolition of the temple situated in Mathurã, famous as the Dehra of
Kesho Rãi. In a short time by the great exertions of his officers the
destruction of this strong foundation of infidelity was accomplished,
and on its site a lofty mosque was built at the expenditure of a large
sum…

“Praised be the august God of the faith of Islãm, that in the auspicious
reign of this destroyer of infidelity and turbulence, such a wonderful
and seemingly impossible work was successfully accomplished. On seeing
this instance of the strength of the Emperor’s faith and the grandeur of
his devotion to God, the proud Rajas were stifled and in amazement they
stood like images facing the wall. The idols, large and small, set with
costly jewels which had been set up in the temple were brought to Agra,
and buried under the steps of the mosque of the Begam Sãhib, in order to
be continually trodden upon. The name of Mathurã was changed to
Islãmãbãd.”^([318](#318))  
 

*Khandela (Rajasthan)*

“…Dãrãb Khãn who had been sent with a strong force to punish the Rajputs
of Khandela and to demolish the great temple of the place, attacked the
place on the 8th March/5th Safar, and slew the three hundred and odd men
who made a bold defence, not one of them escaping alive. The temples of
Khandela and Sãnula and all other temples in the neighbourhood were
demolished…”^([319](#319))  
 

*Jodhpur (Rajasthan)*

“On Sunday, the 25th May/24th Rabi. S., Khan Jahãn Bahãdur came from
Jodhpur, after demolishing the temples and bringing with himself some
cart-loads of idols, and had audience of the Emperor, who highly praised
him and ordered that the idols, which were mostly jewelled, golden,
silvery, bronze, copper or stone, should be cast in the yard
(jilaukhãnah) of the Court and under the steps of the Jãm‘a mosque, to
be trodden on.  They remained so for some time and at last their very
names were lost”^([320](#320))  
 

*Udaipur (Rajasthan)*

“…Ruhullah Khan and Ekkatãz Khan went to demolish the great temple in
front of the Rãnã’s palace, which was one of the rarest buildings of the
age and the chief cause of the destruction of life and property of the
despised worshippers Twenty mãchãtoR Rajputs who were sitting in the
temple vowed to give up their lives; first one of them came out to
fight, killed some and was then himself slain, then came out another and
so on, until every one of the twenty perished, after killing a large
number of the imperialists including the trusted slave, Ikhlãs. The
temple was found empty. The hewers broke the images.”^([321](#321))

“On Saturday, the 24th January, 1680/2nd Muharram, the Emperor went to
view lake Udaisãgar, constructed by the Rãnã, and ordered all the three
temples on its banks to be demolished.”^([322](#322))

“…On the 29th January/7th Muharram, Hasan ‘Ali Khan brought to the
Emperor twenty camel-loads of tents and other things captured from the
Rãnã’s palace and reported that one hundred and seventy-two other
temples in the environs of Udaipur had been destroyed. The Khan received
the title of Bahãdur ‘Alamgirshãhi…^([323](#323))  
 

*Amber (Rajasthan)*

“Abû Turãb, who had been sent to demolish the temples of Amber, returned
to Court on Tuesday, the 10th August/24th Rajab, and reported that he
had pulled down sixty-six temples…”^([324](#324))  
 

*Bijapur (Karnataka)*

“…Hamiduddin Khan Bahãdur who had gone to demolish a temple and build a
mosque (in its place) in Bijapur, having excellently carried out his
orders, came to Court and gained praise and the post of dãrogha of
gusalkhãnah, which brought him near the Emperor’s
person…”^([325](#325))  
 

*Iconoclasm was a part of Aurangezb’s Islamic Piety*

“…As his blessed nature dictated, he was characterized by perfect
devotion to the rites of the Faith; he followed the teaching of the
great Imãm. Abu Hanifã (God be pleased with him!), and established and
enforced to the best of his power the five foundations of
Islãm…”^([326](#326))

“…Through the auspices of his hearty endeavour, the Hanafi creed (i.e.,
the Orthodox Sunni faith) has gained such strength and currency in the
great country of Hindustan as was never seen in the times of any of the
preceding sovereigns. By one stroke of the pen, the Hindu clerks
(writers) were dismissed from the public employment. Large numbers of
the places of worship of the infidels and great temples of these wicked
people have been thrown down and desolated. Men who can see only the
outside of things are filled with wonder at the successful
accomplishment of such a seemingly difficult task. Arid on the sites of
the temples lofty mosques have been built…”^([327](#327))  
 

**(60)**  
**Akhbãrãt**

These were reports from different provinces compiled in the reign of
Aurangzeb.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The Emperor learning that in the temple of Keshav Rai at Mathura there
was a stone railing presented by Dara Shukoh, remarked, ‘In the Muslim
faith it is a sin even to look at a temple, and this Dara had restored a
railing in a temple. This fact is not creditable to the Muhammadans.
Remove the railing.’ By his order Abdun Nabi Khan (the faujdar of
Mathura) removed it.”^([328](#328))  
 

*Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh)*

“News came from Malwa that Wazir Khan had sent Gada Beg, a slave, with
400 troopers, to destroy all temples around Ujjain… A Rawat of the place
resisted and slew Gada Beg with 121 of his men.”^([329](#329))  
 

*Aurangabad (Maharashtra)*

“The Emperor learnt from a secret news writer of Delhi that in
Jaisinghpura Bairagis used to worship idols, and that the Censor on
hearing of it had gone there, arrested Sri Krishna Bairagi and taken him
with 15 idols away to his house; then the Rajputs had assembled flocked
to the Censor’s house, wounded three footmen of the Censor and tried to
seize the Censor himself; so that the latter set the Bairagi free and
sent the copper idols to the local subahdar.”^([330](#330))  
 

*Pandharpur (Maharashatra)*

“The Emperor, summoning Muhammad Khalil and Khidmat Rai, the darogha of
hatchet-men… ordered them to demolish the temple of Pandharpur, and to
take the butchers of the camp there and slaughter cows in the temple… It
was done.”^([331](#331))  
 

*On Way to the Deccan*

“When the war with the Rajputs was over, Aurangzeb decided to leave for
the Deccan. His march seems to have been marked with the destruction to
many temples on the way. On 21 May, 1681, the superintendent of the
labourers was ordered to destroy all the temples on the
route.”^([332](#332))  
 

*Lakheri (?)*

“On 27 September, 1681, the emperor issued orders for the destruction of
the temples at Lakheri.”^([333](#333))  
 

*Rasulpur (?)*

“About this time, on 14 April, 1692, orders were issued to the
provincial governor and the district fojdãr to demolish the temples at
Rasulpur.”^([334](#334))  
 

*Sheogaon (?)*

“Sankar, a messenger, was sent to demolish a temple near Sheogaon. He
came back after pulling it down on 20 November, 1693.”^([335](#335))  
 

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“Bijai Singh and several other Hindus were reported to be carrying on
public worship of idols in a temple in the neighbourhood of Ajmer. On 23
June, 1694, the governor of Ajmer was ordered to destroy the temple and
stop the public adoration of idol worship there.”^([336](#336))  
 

*Wakenkhera (?)*

“The temple of Wakenkhera in the fort was demolished on 2 March,
1705.”^([337](#337))  
 

*Bhagwant Garh (Rajasthan)*

“The newswriter of Ranthambore reported the destruction of a temple in
Parganah Bhagwant Garh. Gaj Singh Gor had repaired the temple and made
some additions thereto.”^([338](#338))  
 

*Malpura (Rajasthan)*

“Royal orders for the destruction of temples in Malpura Toda were
received and the officers were assigned for this work.”^([339](#339))  
 

**(61)**  
**Fathiyya-i-‘Ibriyya**

This is a diary of Mîr Jumla’s campaigns in Kuch Bihar and Assam. “By
looting,” writes Jadunath Sarkar, “the temples of the South and hunting
out buried treasures, Mîr Jumla amassed a vast fortune. The huge Hindu
idols of copper were brought away in large numbers to be melted and cast
into cannon.”^([340](#340))  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Koch Bihar (Bengal)*

“Mir Jumla made his way into Kuch Bihar by an obscure and neglected
highway… In six days the Mughal army reached the capital (19th December)
which had been deserted by the Rajah and his people in terror. The name
of the town was changed to Alamgirnagar; the Muslim call to prayer, so
long forbidden in the city, was chanted from the lofty roof of the
palace, and a mosque was built by demolishing the principal
temple…”^([341](#341))  
 

**(62)**  
**Kalimãt-i-Tayyibãt**

This is a collection of letters and orders of Aurangzeb compiled by
‘Inayatullãh in AD 1719 and covers the years 1699-1704 of Aurangzeb’s
reign.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“The temple of Somnath was demolished early in my reign and idol worship
(there) put down. It is not known what the state of things there is at
present. If the idolaters have again taken to the worship of images at
the place, then destroy the temple in such a way that no trace of the
building may be left, and also expel them (the worshippers) from the
place.”^([342](#342))  
 

*Satara (Maharashtra)*

“The village of Sattara near Aurangabad was my hunting ground. Here on
the top of a hill, stood a temple with an image of Khande Rai. By God’s
grace I demolished it, and forbade the temple dancers (muralis) to ply
their shameful profession…”^([343](#343))  
 

*General Observation*

“The demolition of a temple is possible at any time, as it cannot walk
away from its place.”^([344](#344))  
 

*Sirhind (Punjab)*

“In a small village in the sarkãr of Sirhind, a Sikh temple was
demolished and converted into a mosque. An imãm was appointed who was
subsequently killed.”^([345](#345))  
 

**(63)**  
**Ganj-i-Arshadî**

It is a contemporary account of the destruction of Hindu temples at
Varanasi in the reign of Aurangzeb:  
 

**Mubiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The infidels demolished a mosque that was under construction and
wounded the artisans. When the news reached Shãh Yasîn, he came to
Banaras from Mandyawa and collecting the Muslim weavers, demolished the
big temple. A Sayyid who was an artisan by profession agreed with one
Abdul Rasûl to build a mosque at Banaras and accordingly the foundation
was laid. Near the place there was a temple and many houses belonging to
it were in the occupation of the Rajputs. The infidels decided that the
construction of a mosque in the locality was not proper and that it
should be razed to the ground. At night the walls of the mosque were
found demolished. Next day the wall was rebuilt but it was again
destroyed. This happened three or four times. At last the Sayyid hid
himself in a corner. With the advent of night the infidels came to
achieve their nefarious purpose. When Abdul Rasûl gave the alarm, the
infidels began to fight and the Sayyid was wounded by Rajputs. In the
meantime, the Musalman resident of the neighbourhood arrived at the spot
and the infidels took to their heels. The wounded Muslims were taken to
Shãh Yasîn who determined to vindicate the cause of Islam. When he came
to the mosque, people collected from the neighbourhood. The civil
officers were outwardly inclined to side with the saint, but in reality
they were afraid of the royal displeasure on account of the Raja, who
was a courtier of the Emperor and had built the temple (near which the
mosque was under construction). Shãh Yasîn, however, took up the sword
and started for Jihad. The civil officers sent him a message that such a
grave step should not be taken without the Emperor’s permission. Shãh
Yasîn, paying no heed, sallied forth till he reached Bazar Chau Khamba
through a fusillade of stones… The, doors (of temples) were forced open
and the idols thrown down. The weavers and other Musalmans demolished
about 500 temples. They desired to destroy the temple of Beni Madho, but
as lanes were barricaded, they desisted from going
further.”^([346](#346))  
 

**(64)**  
**Kalimãt-i-Aurangzeb**

This is another compilation of letters and orders by ‘Inãyatu’llãh
covering the years 1703-06 of Aurangzeb’s reign.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Maharashtra*

“The houses of this country (Maharashtra) are exceedingly strong and
built solely of stone and iron. The hatchet-men of the Government in the
course of my marching do not get sufficient strength and power (i.e.,
time) to destroy and raze the temples of the infidels that meet the eye
on the way. You should appoint an orthodox inspector (darogha) who may
afterwards destroy them at leisure and dig up their
foundations.”^([347](#347))  
 

**(65)**  
**Muraq‘ãt-i-Abu’I Hasan**

This is a collection of records and documents compiled by Maulãna Abu’l
Hasan, one of Aurangzeb’s officers in Bengal and Orissa during AD
1655-67.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Bengal and Orissa*

“Order issued on all faujdars of thanas, civil officers (mutasaddis),
agents of jagirdars, kroris, and amlas from Katak to Medinipur on the
frontier of Orissa:- The imperial paymaster Asad Khan has sent a letter
written by order of the Emperor, to say, that the Emperor learning from
the newsletters of the province of Orissa that at the village of Tilkuti
in Medinipur a temple has been (newly) built, has issued his august
mandate for its destruction, and the destruction of all temples built
anywhere in this province by the worthless infidels. Therefore, you are
commanded with extreme urgency that immediately on the receipt of this
letter you should destroy the above-mentioned temples. Every idol-house
built during the last 10 or 12 years, whether with brick or clay, should
be demolished without delay. Also, do not allow the crushed Hindus and
despicable infidels to repair their old temples. Reports of the
destruction of temples should be sent to the Court under the seal of the
qazis and attested by pious Shaikhs.”^([348](#348))  
 

**(66)**  
**Futûhãt-i-‘Ãlamgîrî**

The author, Îshwardãs Nãgar, was a Brahman from Gujarat, born around AD
1654. Till the age of thirty he as in the service of the Chief Qãzî of
the empire under Aurangzeb. Later on, he took up a post under Shujã‘t
Khãn, the governor of Gujarat, who appointed him amîn in the pargana of
Jodhpur. His history covers almost half a century of Aurangzeb’s reign,
from 1657 to 1700. There is nothing in his style which may mark him out
as a Hindu. He sends to “hell” every Hindu who dies at the hands of
Muslims or otherwise, while every Muslim who gets killed becomes a
“martyr” and attains paradise.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 16M-1707)**

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“When the imperial army was encamping at Mathura, a holy city of the
Hindus, the state of affairs with regard to temples of Mathura was
brought to the notice of His Majesty. Thus, he ordered the faujdar of
the city, Abdul Nabi Khan, to raze to the ground every temple and to
construct big mosques (over their demolished sites).”^([349](#349))  
 

*Udaipur (Rajasthan)*

“The Emperor, within a short time, reached Udaipur and destroyed the
gate of Dehbari, the palaces of Rana and the temples of Udaipur. Apart
from it, the trees of his gardens were also destroyed.”^([350](#350))  
 

**(67)**  
**Nau-Bahãr-i-Murshid Qulî-Khãnî**

The author, Ãzãd al-Husainî, was a poor but learned immigrant from
Persia, who presented this work in AD 1729 to Mîrza Lutfullãh surnamed
Murshid Qulî II who had arrived in Dhaka in 1728 as the Deputy Governor
of Shujãu’d-Dîn, the Mughal Governor of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa from
1727 to 1739.

**Nasiru’d-Dîn Muhammad Shãh Bahãdur Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1719-1748)**

*Udaipur (Tripura)*

“Tipara is a country extremely strong… The Raja is proud of his strength
and the practice of conch-blowing and idol-worship prevailed there…

“Murshid Qulî II decided to conquer Tipara and put down idolatry there.
He wrote to Sayyid Habibullah (the Commander-in-Chief), Md. Sadîq, Mir
Hãshim, Shaikh Sirãjuddin Md., and Mahdi Beg who were then engaged in
the Chittogong expedition, that… they should set out with their forces,
observing every precaution, arrive close to the Kingdom of Tipara, and
try to conquer it…”^([351](#351))

“The Tipara soldiers did not fail to fight regardless of death. The
Muslim troops invested the fort from four sides. A severe battle was
fought. The zamindar’s men lay dead in heaps. The victors entered the
fort… The flag of Murshid Quli Khan was unfurled on the top of fort
Udaipur. The Muslims raised the cry of *Allahu-ãkbar* and the Muslim
credo (There is no deity except Allah and Muhammad is His messenger),
and demolished the temple of the zamindar which had long been the seat
of idol-worship. Making a level courtyard on the side of the temple,
they read the *Khutba* in the Emperor’s name… The world-illuminating sun
of the faith of Muhammad swept away the dark night of infidelity, and
the bright day of Islam dawned.”^([352](#352))  
 

**(68)**  
**Kanzu’l-Mahfûz**

The name and position of the author is not known. It deals with the
history of the ‘Ummayids, the Ghaznivids and the Muslim dynasties of
India.  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Agra (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In the city of Agra there was a large temple, in which there were
numerous idols, adorned and embellished with precious jewels and
valuable pearls. It was the custom of the infidels to resort to this
temple from far and near several times in each year to worship the
idols, and a certain fee to the Government was fixed upon each man, for
which he obtained admittance. As there was a large congress of pilgrims,
a very considerable amount was realized from them, and paid into the
royal treasury. This practice had been observed to the end of the reign
of the Emperor Shãh Jahãn, and in the commencement of Aurangzeb’s
government; but when the latter was informed of it, he was exceedingly
angry and abolished the custom. The greatest nobles of his court
represented to him that a large sum was realized and paid into the
public treasury, and that if it was abolished, a great reduction in the
income of the state would take place. The Emperor observed, ‘What you
say is right, but I have considered well on the subject, and have
reflected on it deeply; but if you wish to augment the revenue, there is
a better plan for attaining the object by exacting the *jizya*. By this
means idolatry will be suppressed, the Muhammadan religion and the true
faith will be honoured, our proper duty will be performed, the finances
of the state will be increased, and the infidels will be disgraced.’
…This was highly approved by all the nobles; and the Emperor ordered all
the golden and silver idols to be broken, and the temple
destroyed…”^([353](#353))  
 

**(69)**  
**Muntikhãbu’l-Lubãb**

The author, Hãshim ‘Alî Khãn, is better known by his designation of
Khãfî Khãn. His father was also a historian in the employ of Aurangzeb.
He was brought up in the court of Aurangzeb, made a dîwãn, but was
ordered to stop writing history. He, however, continued writing in
secret. Muhammad Shãh was pleased when he saw what had been written and
named him Khãfi Khãn. The work is also known as *Tãrîkh-i-Khãfî Khãn*.
It starts with the invasion of Bãbur in AD 1519 and comes upto the
fourteenth year of Bahãdur Shãh (AD 1719-1748). He refers to the Hindus
as evil dogs, accursed wretches, etc.  
 

**Shihãbu’d-Dîn Muhammad Shãh Jahãn Pãdshãh Ghãzî (1628-1658)**

After describing the destruction of temples in Benares and Gujarat, this
author stated that “The materials of some of the Hindu temples were used
for building mosques.”^([354](#354))  
 

*Hargaon (Uttar Pradesh)*

“In AD 1630-31 (AH 1040) when Abdãl, the Hindu chief of Hargaon in the
province of Allahabad, rebelled, most of the temples in the state were
either demolished or converted into mosques. Idols were
burnt.”^([355](#355))  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (1658-1707)**

*Golkonda (Andhra Pradesh)*

“On the capture of Golkonda, the Emperor appointed Abdur Rahim Khan as
Censor of the city of Haiderabad with orders to put down infidel
practices and (heretical) innovations and destroy the temples and build
mosques on their sites.”^([356](#356))  
 

*Bijapur (Karnataka)*

“The fall and capture of Bijapur was similarly solemnized though here
the destruction of temples was delayed for several years, probably till
1698.”^([357](#357))  
 

*Sikh Temples (Punjab)*

“Aurangzeb ordered the temples of the Sikhs to be destroyed and the
guru’s agents (*masands*) for collecting the tithes and presents of the
faithful to be expelled from the cities.”^([358](#358))  
 

**Shãh ‘Ãlam Bahãdur Shãh Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1707-1712)**

*Jodhpur (Rajasthan)*

“Ajît Singh… sent a message humbly asking that Khãn Zamãn and the
*Kãzîu’I-Kuzãt* might come into Jodhpur, to rebuild the mosques, destroy
idol-temples, enforce the provisions of the law about the summons to
prayer and the killing of cows, to appoint magistrates and to commission
officers to collect the *jizya*. His submission was graciously accepted,
and his requests granted…”^([359](#359))  
 

**(70)**  
**Mir’at-i-Ahmadî**

This is the most important Persian history of Gujarat. It starts with
the Hindu Rãjãs of ANhilwãD PãTan and ends with the establishment of
Maratha rule in the eighteenth century. It was written after the Third
Battle of Panipat in AD 1761. The author, ‘Alî Muhammad Khãn, came to
Gujarat from Burhanpur in 1708-09 and, when grown up, had access to
official records.  
 

**Sultãn ‘A1ãu’d-Dîn Khaljî (AD 1296-1316)**

*Sidhpur (Gujarat)*

“…When Raja Sidhraj Jaisingh Solanki became the king, he extended his
conquest as far as Malwa and Burhanpur etc. and laid foundation of lofty
forts such as the forts of Broach and Dabhoi etc. He dug the tank of
Sahastraling in Pattan, many others in Biramgam and at most places in
Sorath. His reign is known as ‘Sang Bast’, the Age of Stone Buildings.
He founded the city of Sidhpur and built the famous Rudramal Temple. It
is related that when he intended to build Rudramal, he summoned
astrologers to elect an auspicious hour for it. The astrologers said to
him that some harm through heavenly revolution is presaged from Alauddin
when his turn comes to the Saltanat of Dihli. The Raja relied on the
statement of astrologers and entered into a pledge and pact with the
said Sultan. The Sultan had said. ‘If I do not destroy it under terms of
the pact, yet I will leave some religious vestiges.’ When, after some
time, the turn of the Sultan came to the Saltanat of Delhi, he marched
with his army to that side and left religious marks by constructing a
masjid and a minar…”^([360](#360))  
 

*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“In the year 696, six hundred and ninety-six, he sent an army for the
conquest of Gujarat under the command of Ulugh Khan who became famous
among the Gujaratis as Alp Khan and Nusrat Khan Jalesri. These Khans
subjected Naharwala that is, Pattan and the whole of that dominion to
plunder and pillage… They broke the idol of Somnat which was installed
again after Sultan Mahmud Ghaznawi and sent riches, treasure, elephants,
women and daughters of Raja Karan to the Sultan at
Delhi…”^([361](#361))  
 

*Patan (Gujarat)*

“After conquest of Naharwala and expulsion of Raja Karan, Ulugh Khan
occupied himself with the government. From that day, governors were
appointed on this side on behalf of the Sultans of Dilhi. It is said
that a lofty masjid called Masjid-i-Adinah (Friday Masjid) of marble
stone which exists even today is built by him. It is popular among
common folk that error is mostly committed in counting its many pillars.
They relate that it was a temple which was converted into a masjid… Most
of the relics and vestiges of magnificence and extension of the ancient
prosperity of Pattan city are found in the shape of bricks and dried
clay, which inform us about the truth of this statement, scattered
nearly to a distance of three kurohs (one kuroh = 2 miles) from the
present place of habitation. Remnants of towers of the ancient
fortifications seen at some places are a proof of repeated changes and
vicissitudes in population due to passage of times. Most of the ancient
relics gradually became extinct. Marble stones, at the end of the rule
of rajas, were brought from Ajmer for building temples in such a
quantity that more than which is dug out from the earth even now. All
the marble stones utilized in the city of Ahmedabad were (brought) from
that place…”^([362](#362))  
 

**Sultãn Muzaffar Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1392-1410)**  
  
*Somnath (Gujarat)*

“He made efforts at the proclamation of the word of God (confession of
the Muslim faith). He led an army for plundering the temple of Somnat,
that is, Pattan Dev. He spread Islam at most of the
places…”^([363](#363))  
 

**Sultãn Ahmad Shãh I of Gujarat (AD 1411-1443)**

*Sidhpur (Gujarat)*

“In the year 817, eight hundred and seventeen Hijri, he resolved to
march with intent of jihad against the unbelievers of Girnar, a famous
fort in Sorath. Raja Mandalik fought with him but was defeated and took
refuge in the fort. It is narrated that even though that land (region)
this time did not get complete brightness form the lamp of Islam, yet
the Sultan subdued the fort of Junagadh situated near the foot of Girnar
mountain. Most of the Zamindars of Sorath became submissive and obedient
to him and agreed to pay tribute. After that, he demolished the temple
of Sayyedpur in the month of Jamadi I of the year 818, eight hundred and
eighteen Hijri… In the year 823, eight hundred and twenty-three Hijri,
he attended to the establishment of administrative control over his
dominion. He suppressed refractoriness wherever it was found. He
demolished temples and constructed masjids in their
places…”^([364](#364))  
 

**Sultãn Mahmûd BegDãh of Gujarat (AD 1458-1511)**

*Junagadh (Gujarat)*

“Rao Mandalik saw that his fate was sealed. He fled at night to the fort
and gave him a battle. When the warfare continued for some time
provisions in the fort became scarce. He requested the Sultan in all
humility to save his life. The Sultan agreed on condition of his
accepting Islam. Rao Mandalik came down from the fort, surrendered the
fort’s keys to the Sultan. The Sultan offered recitation of the word of
Unity to him to repeat. He instantly recited it. The fort was conquered
in the year 877, eight hundred and seventy-seven… In a few days, he
populated a city which can be called Ahmedabad and named it Mustafabad.
Rao Mandalik was given the title of Khan Jahan with a grant of jagir. He
gave away as presents the gold idols brought from the temple of Rao
Mandalik to all soldiers…”^([365](#365))  
 

*Sankhodhar (Gujarat)*

“This victory took place in the year 878, eight hundred and
seventy-eight; the island of Sankhodar was never conquered in any age by
any king of the past. It is related that the Sultan performed two
genuflexions of namaz out of thanksgiving at the time of demolishing the
temple and breaking the idols of Jagat. He grew eloquent in recitation
of praise out of gratitude to God. The Muslims raised calls to namaz
(azan) by loud voice from top of temples… He built a masjid
there.”^([366](#366))  
 

*Idar (Gujarat)*

“He marched towards Malwa, in the same month, from Muhammedabad for
repulsion of unbelievers and defence of religious-minded Muslims. He
halted at the town of Godhra for reinforcement of powerful forces when
he received a report about insolence of the Raja of Idar. He, therefore,
marched thither and ordered to demolish houses and temples of Idar. This
event took place in the year 919, nine hundred and nineteen
Hijri…”^([367](#367))  
 

**Muhiyu’d-Dîn Muhammad Aurangzeb ‘Ãlamgîr Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD
1658-1707)**

*Ahmadabad (Gujarat)*

“During the Subedari of religious-minded, noble prince, vestiges of the
Temple of Chintaman situated on the side of Saraspur built by Satidas
jeweller, were removed under the Prince’s order and a masjid was erected
on its remains. It was named ‘Quwwat-ul-Islam’…”^([368](#368))  
 

*Gujarat*

“As it has come to His Majesty’s knowledge that some inhabitants of the
*mahals* appertaining to the province of Gujarat have (again) built the
temples which had been demolished by imperial order before his
accession… therefore His Majesty orders that… the formerly demolished
and recently restored temples should be pulled down.”^([369](#369))  
 

*Vadnagar (Gujarat)*

“The Emperor ordered the destruction of the Hateshwar temple at
Vadnagar, the special guardian of the Nagar Brahmans.”^([370](#370))  
 

*Malarina (Rajasthan)*

“Salih Bahadur was sent to pull down the temple of
Malarna.”^([371](#371))  
 

*Sorath (Gujarat)*

“In AD 1696-97 (AH 1108) orders were issued for the destruction of the
major temples at Sorath in Gujarat.”^([372](#372))  
 

*Dwarka (Gujarat)*

“He stopped public worship at the Hindu temple of
Dwarka.”^([373](#373))  
 

**(71)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Ibrãhîm Khãn**

It was composed by Nawãb Ibrãhîm Khãn and written down by Mullã Baksh in
the town of Benares. It was finished in the year AD 1786. It is mainly a
history of the Marathas.  
 

**Ahmad Shãh Abdãlî (AD 1747-1773)**

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Ahmad Shãh Abdãlî in the year AH 1171 (AD 1757-58), came from the
country of Kandahãr to Hindãstãn, and on the 7th of Jumãdal awwal of
that year, had an interview with the Emperor ‘Ãlamgîr II, at the palace
of Shãh-Jahãnãbãd… After an interval of a month, he set out to coerce
Rãjã Sûraj Mal Jãt, who from a distant period, had extended his sway
over the province of Ãgra, as far as the environs of the city of Delhî.
In three days he captured Balamgarh, situated at a distance of fifteen
kos from Delhî… After causing a general massacre of the garrison he
hastened towards Mathurã, and having razed that ancient sanctuary of the
Hindûs to the ground, made all the idolaters fall a prey to his
relentless sword…”^([374](#374))  
 

**(72)**  
**Tãrîkh-i-Husain Shãhî**

It was written in AD 1797-98 by Sayyid Imãmu’d-Dîn al-Husain. We have
not been able to obtain other particulars about it.  
 

**Ahmad Shãh Abdãlî (AD 1747-1773)**

*Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Idols were broken and kicked about like polo-balls by the Islamic
heroes.”^([375](#375))  
 

**(73)**  
**Nishãn-i-Haidarî**

The author, Mîr Hussain ‘Alî Kirmãnî, describes his work as “the History
of the Nawab Hyder Ali Khan Bahadur, and a commentary on the reign and
actions of Tipu Sultan.” He completed the work in AD 1802.  We have been
able to get an English translation of the second part only.  
 

**Tipu Sultan (AD 1782-1799)**

*Srirangapatnam (Karnataka)*

“…At this time the Sultan determined to recommence the building of the
Masjidi Ala, the erection of which had been suspended since the year
1198 Hijri, and the Daroghu Public buildings, according to the plan,
which will be mentioned hereafter, completed it in two years, at the
expense of three lakhs of rupees…

“…It is known that when the vile and rejected Brahman Khunda Rao
imprisoned the Nawab’s Zanana and the Sultan (who was then a boy of six
or seven years of age) in a house in the fort… there stood a Hindu
temple, the area or space round which was large. The Sultan, therefore,
in his infancy being like all children fond of play, and as in that
space boys of Kinhiri Brahmin castes assembled to amuse themselves, was
accustomed to quit the house to see them play, or play with them… It
happened one day that a Fakir (a religious mendicant) a man of
saint-like mind passed that way, and seeing the Sultan gave him a life
bestowing benediction, saying to him, ‘Fortunate child, at a future time
thou will be the king of this country, and whey thy time comes, remember
my words-take this temple and destroy it, and build a Masjid in its
place, and for ages it will remain a memorial of thee.’ The Sultan
smiled, and in reply told him, ‘that whenever, by his blessing, he
should become a Padishah, or king, he would do as he (the Fakir)
directed.’ When, therefore, after a short time his father became a
prince, the possessor of wealth and territory, he remembered his
promise, and after his return from Nagar and Gorial Bundar, he purchased
the temple from the adorers of the image in it (which after all was
nothing but the figure of a bull, made of brick and mortar) with their
goodwill, and the Brahmins, therefore, taking away their image, placed
it in the Deorhi Peenth, and the temple was pulled down, and the
foundations of a new Masjid raised on the site, agreeably to a plan of
the Mosque built by Ali Adil Shah, at Bijapur, and brought
thence.”^([376](#376))

The nature of the purchase needs no comment:  
 

**(74)**  
**Riyãzu’s-Salãtîn**

This is a history of Bengal from the invasion of Bakhtiyãr Khaljî to AD
1788 when the British were in complete control. The author, Ghulãm
Hussain Salîm of Zaidpur in Awadh, had migrated to Bengal and become a
Postmaster in Malda. He died in AD 1817.  
 

**Ikhtiyãru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bakhtiyãr Khaljî (AD 1202-1206)**

*Lakhnauti (Bengal)*

“Muhammad Bakhtiyar sweeping the town with the broom of devastation,
completely demolished it, and making anew the city of Lakhnauti… his
metropolis, ruled over Bengal… and strove to put in practice the
ordinances of the Muhammadan religion… and for a period ruling over
Bengal he engaged in demolishing the temples and building
mosques.”^([377](#377))  
 

**Sulaimãn Karrãnî of Bengal (AD 1563-1576)**

*Orissa*

“Kãlãpahãr, by successive and numerous fightings, vanquished the Rajah's
forces, and brought to his subjection the entire dominion of Odîsah
(Orissa), so much so that he carried off the Rani together with all
household goods and chattels. Notwithstanding all this, from fear of
being killed, no one was bold to wake up this drunkard of the sleep of
negligence, so that Kãlãpahãr had his hands free. After completing the
subjugation of the entire country, and investing the Fort of BãrahbãTi,
which was his (the Rajah’s) place of sleep, Kãlãpahãr engaged in
fighting… The firm Muhammadan religion and the enlightened laws of Islãm
were introduced into that country. Before this, the Musalman Sovereigns
exercised no authority over this country. Of the miracles of Kãlãpahãr,
one was this, that wherever in that country, the sound of his drum
reached, the hands and the feet, the ears and the noses of the idols,
worshipped by the Hindus, fell off their stone-figures, so that even now
stone-idols, with hands and feet broken, and noses and ears cut off, are
lying at several places in that country. And the Hindus pursuing the
false, from blindness of their hearts, with full sense and knowledge,
devote themselves to their worship!

> It is known what grows out of stone:  
> From its worship what is gained, except shame?

“It is said at the time of return, Kãlãpahãr left a drum in the jungle
of Kãonjhãr, which is lying in an upset state. No one there from fear of
life dares to set it up; so it is related.”^([378](#378))  
 

**(75)**  
**Bahãr-i‘Ãzam**

It is an account of a journey undertaken in 1823 by ‘Ãzam Jãh Bahãdur
“after he ascended the throne of the Carnatic as Nawwãb Wãlãjãh
VI.”^([379](#379)) The author, Ghulãm ‘Abdul Qadir Nãzir, was his court
scribe who accompanied the Nawwãb on this journey. Nãzir does not tell
us that his patron was a Nawwãb only in name as he was living in Madras
on British charity, his ancestral principality of Arcot having been
ceded to the British in 1801. What he says instead is how the “Nawwãb”
lost his temper when he learnt that the Muslims in his retinue were
visiting the Hindu temples at Chidambaram and how he “gave strict
orders” to British officers of the place “that no Muslim should be
allowed to go over to the temple and enter it.”^([380](#380)) At a later
stage, we are told that “the party marched forth… to the accompaniment
of music provided by dancing girls of the Hindu
cornmunity.”^([381](#381)) The account names numerous Sufis etc., who
came to the districts of Chingleput, North Arcot, South Arcot,
Tiruchirapalli and Thanjavur and established Muslim places of worship.
What these new monuments replaced becomes obvious from the following few
instances.  
 

**Sufi Nãtthar Walî**

*Tiruchirapalli (Tamil Nadu)*

“It is said that in ancient days Trichila, an execrable monster with
three heads, who was a brother of Rawan, with ten heads, had the sway
over this country. No human being could oppose him. But as per the
saying of the Prophet, ‘Islam will be elevated and cannot be subdued’,
the Faith took root by the efforts of Hazarat Natthar Wali. The monster
was slain and sent to the house of perdition. His image namely but-ling
worshipped by the unbelievers was cut and the head was separated from
the body. A portion of the body went into the ground. Over that spot is
the tomb of the Wali, shedding rediance till this day.”^([382](#382))  
 

**Sufi Shãh Bheka**

“Shah Bheka… when he was at Trichinopoly during the days of Rani
Minachi, the unbelievers who did not like his stay there harassed him.
One day when he was very much vexed, he got upon the bull in front of
the temple, which the Hindus worship calling it *swami*, and made it
move on by the power and strength of the Supreme Life Giver… They
abandoned the temple and gave the entire place on the *aruskalwa* as
present to the Shah.”^([383](#383))  
 

**Sufi Qãyim Shãh**

“Qayim Shah… came here from Hindustan. He was the cause for the
destruction of twelve temples. He lived to an old age and passed away on
the 17th Safar AH 1193.”^([384](#384))  
 

**Sufi Nûr Muhammad Qãdirî**

*Vellore (Tamil Nadu)*

“Hazarat Nur Muhammad Qadiri was the most unique man regarded as an
invaluable person of his age. Very often he was the cause of the ruin of
temples. Some of these were laid waste. He selected his own burial
ground in the vicinity of the temple. Although he lived five hundred
years ago, people at large still remember his
greatness.”^([385](#385))  
 

**(76)**  
**Ãsãru’s-Sanãdîd**

It is a book on the antiquities of Delhi written by Sayyid Ahmad Khãn,
the famous founder of the Aligarh Muslim University. Its first edition
was published in 1847, the second in 1854, and the third in 1904. A new
edition with a long introduction, footnotes, comments, bibliography, and
index has been published recently. We are reproducing relevant passages
from this edition.  
 

*Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak (AD 1192-1210)*

*Iron Pillar*: “…In our opinion this pillar was made in the ninth
century before (the birth of) Lord Jesus… When Rãi Pithorã built a fort
and an idol-house near this pillar, it stood in the courtyard of the
idol-house. And when Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak constructed a mosque after
demolishing the idol-house, this pillar stood in the courtyard of the
mosque…”^([386](#386))

*Idol-house of Rãi Pithorã*: “There was an idol-house near the fort of
Rãi Pithorã. It was very famous… It was built along with the fort in
1200 Bikarmî \[Vikrama SaMvat\] corresponding to AD 1143 and AH 538. The
building of this temple was very unusual, and the work done on it by
stone-cutters is such that nothing better can be conceived. The
beautiful carvings on every stone in it defy description… The eastern
and northern portions of this idol-house have survived intact. The fact
that the Iron Pillar, which belongs to the Vaishnava faith, was kept
inside it, as also the fact that sculptures of Kirshan avatãr and
Mahãdev and Ganesh and Hanumãn were carved on its walls, leads us to
believe that this temple belonged to the Vaishnava faith. Although all
sculptures were mutilated in the times of Muslims, even so a close
scrutiny can identify as to which sculpture was what.  In our opinion
there was a red-stone building in this idol-house, and it was
demolished. For, this sort of old stones with sculptures carved on them
are still found.”^([387](#387))

*Quwwat al-Islãm Masjid*: “When Qutbu’d-Dîn, the commander-in-chief of
Muizzu’d-Dîn Sãm alias Shihãbu’d-Dîn Ghûrî, conquered Delhi in AH 587
corresponding to AD 1191 corresponding to 1248 Bikarmî, this idol-house
(of Rãi Pithorã) was converted into a mosque. The idol was taken out of
the temple.  Some of the images sculptured on walls or doors or pillars
were effaced completely, some were defaced. But the structure of the
idol-house kept standing as before. Materials from twenty-seven temples,
which were worth five crores and forty lakhs of Dilwãls, were used in
the mosque, and an inscription giving the date of conquest and his own
name was installed on the eastern gate…^([388](#388))

“When Mãlwãh and Ujjain were conquered by Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn in AH 631
corresponding to AD 1233, then the idol-house of Mahãkãl was demolished
and its idols as well as the statue of Rãjã Bikramãjît were brought to
Delhi, they were strewn in front of the door of the
mosque…”^([389](#389))

“In books of history, this mosque has been described as Masjid-i-Ãdînah
and Jãma‘ Masjid Delhi, but Masjid Quwwat al-Islãm is mentioned nowhere.
It is not known as to when this name was adopted. Obviously, it seems
that when this idol-house was captured, and the mosque constructed, it
was named Quwwat al-Islãm…”^([390](#390))  
 

***Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish (AD 1210-1236)***

*Tomb of Sultãn Ghãrî*: Sayyid Ahmad Khãn notices this tomb and
describes it as exquisite. He says that it was built in AH 626
corresponding to AD 1228 when the corpse of Sultãn Nãsiru’d-Dîn Mahmûd,
the eldest son of Sultãn Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish, who was Governor of
Laknauti and who died while his father was still alive, was brought to
Delhi and buried.^([391](#391)) But the editor, Khaleeq Anjum, comments
in his introduction that “the dome of the mosque which is of marble has
been re-used and has probably been obtained from some temple”, and that
the domes on the four pavilions outside “are in Hindu style in their
interior.”^([392](#392)) He provides greater details in his notes at the
end of Sayyid Ahmad’s work. He writes:

“…This is the first Muslim tomb in North India, if we overlook some
others. And it is the third historical Muslim monument in India after
Quwwat al-Islãm Masjid and ADhãî Din Kã JhoñpRã… Stones from Hindu
temples have been used in this tomb also, as in the Quwwat al-Islãm
Masjid.”^([393](#393))

“…In the middle of the corridor on the west there is a marble dome. A
look at the dome leads to the conclusion that it has been brought from
some temple. The pillars that have been raised in the western corridor
are of marble and have been made in Greek style. It is clear that they
belong to some other building…”^([394](#394))  
 

**Sultãn Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Tughlaq (AD 1320-1325)**

*Tomb of Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn Tughlaq*: Similarly, Sayyid Ahmad notices this
tomb in some detail but does not describe its Hindu
features.^([395](#395)) Khaleeq Anjum, however, says in his introduction
that “corridors inside this tomb have been constructed in the style
of Hindu architecture, and the pillars as well as the beams in the
corridors are fully of Hindu fashion.”^([396](#396)) He repeats the same
comments in his notes at the end.”^([397](#397))

**Nasîru’d-Dîn Muhammad Humãyûn Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1530-1540 and 1556)**

*Nîlî Chhatrî*: “At the foot of Salîm Garh and on the bank of the
Jamunã, there is a small Bãrãdarî near Nigambodh Ghãt… It is known as
Nîlî Chhatrî because of the blue mosaic work on its dome. This Chhatrî
was built by Humãyûn Bãdshãh in AH 939 corresponding to AD 1533 in order
to have a view of the river. Hindus ascribe this Chhatrî to the time of
the PãNDûs. Even if that is not true, this much is certain that the
bricks with mosaic work which have been used in this Chhatrî have been
taken from some Hindu place because the bricks bear broken and mutilated
images. On account of a derangement of the carvings, some have only the
head left, while some others show only the torso. This derangement of
carvings also goes to prove that these bricks have been placed here
after being taken out from somewhere else. According to the Hindus, Rãjã
Judhastar had performed a Jag \[Yajña\] at this Ghãt. It is not
inconceivable that in the Hindu era a Chhatrî had been built at some
spot on this Ghãt in commemoration of the Jag, and that this Chhatrî was
built in the reign of Humãyûn after demolition of that (older)
Chhatrî…^([398](#398))

He repeats some of these comments while describing the Nigambodh
Ghãt…^([399](#399))  
 

**(77)**  
**Hadiqah-i-Shuhadã**

This was written in the reign of Nawãb Wãjid ‘Alî Shãh of Awadh (AD
1847-1856) by Mîrza ‘Alî Jãn, an eyewitness of and active participant in
the *jihãd* led by Amîr ‘Alî Amethawî in 1855 for recapturing the
Hanumãn GaRhî temple at Ayodhya. The temple had been converted into a
mosque in the reign of Aurangzeb but restored when Muslim power suffered
an eclipse. The work was written immediately after the failure of the
*jihãd* and published in 1856.  
 

**Zahîru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bãbur Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1026-1030)**

*Ayodhya (Uttar Pradesh)*

“Wherever they found magnificent temples of the Hindus ever since the
establishment of Sayyid Salar Mas’ud Ghazi’s rule, the Muslim rulers in
India built mosques, monasteries and inns, appointed mu’azzins,
teachers, and store-stewards, spread Islam vigorously and vanquished the
Kafirs. Likewise, they cleared up Faizabad and Avadh, too, from the
filth of reprobation (infidelity), because it was a great centre of
worship and capital of Rama’s father. Where there stood the great temple
(of Ramjanmasthan), there they built a big mosque, and where there was a
small *mandap* (pavilion), there they erected a camp mosque
(*masjid-i-mukhtasar-i-qanati*). The Janmasthan temple is the principal
place of Rama’s incarnation, adjacent to which is the *Sita ki
Rasoi*. Hence, what a lofty mosque was built there by king Babar in AH
923 (AD 1528) under the patronage of Musa Ashiqan! The mosque is still
known far and wide as the Sita ki Rasoi mosque. And that temple is
extant by its side (*aur pahlu mein wah dair baqi
hai*).”^([400](#400))  
 

**(78)**  
**Muraqqa‘-i-Khusrawî**

It was completed in 1869 by Shykh ‘Azmat Alî Kãkorwî Nãmî who was an
eyewitness of much that happened in the reign of Wãjid ‘Alî Shãh. The
work, known as *Tãrîkh-i-Awadh* also, was published for the first time
in 1986 by the Fakhruddin Ali Ahmad Committee, U.P., Lucknow, but the
chapter dealing with the *jihãd* led by Amîr ‘Alî Amethawî was left out.
This chapter was published separately by Dr. Zakî Kãkorawî from Lucknow
in 1987.  
 

**Zahîru’d-Dîn Muhammad Bãbur Pãdshãh Ghãzî (AD 1526-1530)**

*Ayodhya (Uttar Pradesh)*

“According to old records, it has been a rule with the Muslim rulers
from the first to build mosques, monasteries, and inns, spread Islam,
and put (a stop to) non-Islamic practices, wherever they found
prominence (of *kufr*). Accordingly, even as they cleared up Mathura,
Bindraban etc., from the rubbish of non-Islamic practices, the Babari
mosque was built up in AH 923 (?) under the patronage of Sayyid Musa
Ashiqan in the Janmasthan temple (*butkhane Janmsthan mein*) in Faizabad
Avadh, which was a great place of (worship) and capital of Rama’s
father…

“A great mosque was built on the spot where Sita ki Rasoi is situated.
During the regime of Babar, the Hindus had no guts to be a match for the
Muslims. The mosque was built in AH 923 (?) under the patronage of
Sayyid Mir Ashiqan… Aurangzeb built a mosque on the Hanuman Garhi… The
Bairagis effaced the mosque and erected a temple in its place. Then
idols began to be worshipped openly in the Babari mosque where the Sita
ki Rasoi is situated.”^([401](#401))  
 

**(79)**  
**Wãqi‘ãt-i-Mamalakat-i-Bîjãpur**

This is an Urdu work compiled in 3 volumes by Bashîr’ud-Dîn Ahmad in AD
1913-14 and published from Agra in 1915. The first two volumes are
translations of *Basãtîn al-Salãtîn*, a general history of Bijapur
written in 1811 by Muhammad Ibrãhîm Zubairî. The third volume contains
details collected by Bashîru’d-Dîn Ahmad himself from the life-stories
and sayings of Sufis.  
 

**Sultãn ‘Alî ‘Ãdil Shãh I of Bijapur (AD 1558-1580)**

*Mudgal (Karnataka)*

“And in Mudgal town located 75 miles south-east of Bijapur ‘Ali I tore
down two temples and replaced them with *ashurkhanas*, or houses used in
the celebration of Shi’a festivals.”^([402](#402))  
 

**(80)**  
**Mosque Architecture of Pre-Mughal Bengal**

This is a modern work published from Dacca (Bangladesh) in 1979. The
author, Dr. Syed Mahmudul Hasan, had submitted it as his Ph.D. thesis to
the University of London in 1965. He has been the Head of the
Post-Graduate Department of Islamic History and Culture in Jagannath
University College in Decca, a member of F.R.A.S. and F.S.A. (Scot), and
has served on the staff of the Department of Eastern Art in the
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. The book is documented from impeccable
sources, literary and archaeological. It carries 43 plates with 45
photographs of monuments, and of inscriptions etc. discovered in them.
We have brought together, from different pages, the passages which
relate to the same subject.  
 

*General and Persistent Practice*

“The Muslim invaders were necessarily impressed by Indian architecture
and sculpture, expressing as they do foreign religious emotions in terms
of images and emblems. What they saw at Delhi, and the other cities of
India, which they attacked, was absolutely foreign to them. Yet when
they came to raise their own religious buildings, they were not averse
to using the spoils of their temples…^([403](#403))

“The ruthless desecration and makeshift conversion of Indian temples
into Mosques has led many scholars to regard Indo-Muslim architecture as
nothing more than a local variety of hybrid nature. In point of fact,
these early Indian mosques which were compiled from Brahamanical
fragments, such as the Deval Masjid at Bodhan near Hyderabad, have no
direct bearing on the general development of Mosque architecture in
India.”^([404](#404))

“On the other hand the use of the spoils of non-Muslim ruins was a
widely recognised feature in early Muslim architecture…^([405](#405))

“Just as later Mughal painting is a harmonious blend of Persian and
Indian artistic tradition, so the Indo-Muslim architecture of Delhi and
Ajmer is a blend. In the Quwwat al-Islam at Delhi and the Arhai
din-ka-Jhopra at Ajmer, existing remains bear unmistakable evidence that
they were not merely compilations, but the distinctive, planned works of
professional architects…^([406](#406))

“Although constructed of destroyed Hindu temples, the Mosques at Old
Delhi and Ajmer once and for all set the fashion to be followed by later
mosques in Muslim India…^([407](#407))

“The early formative phase of Indo-Muslim architecture, marked by the
adaptation of Hindu, Buddhist or Jaina temples, is illustrated by the
oldest Mosques at Delhi, Bengal, Jaunpur, Daulatabad, Patan, etc. In
Malwa, also, spoils of Hindu temples were used…^([408](#408))

“Creighton says, ‘It appears to have been the general practice of the
Muhammadan conquerors of India, to destroy all the temples of the
idolaters, and to raise Mosque out of their ruins.’ The statement is of
course a gross exaggeration, for innumerable contemporary Hindu and
Buddhist temples still exist in the cities of India once conquered by
the Muslims. ‘Abid ‘Ali seems to have carried the observation of
Creighton further when he remarks, ‘It seems to the writer that the
builder of the Mosque \[Chhoto Sona Masjid at Gaud\] had collected the
stones containing the figure of the Hindu gods from the citadel of Gaur
where temples must have existed in the time of the earlier Hindu kings.’
Incidentally, Ravenshaw gave illustrations of sculptured stones,
representing stone capitals and *Makara* gargoyles, which have been
discovered in Hazrat Pandua. Westmacott, however, thinks that the
circular stone given in Ravenshaw’s plate XXX ‘formed a part of the high
ornament or pinnacle with which both the Buddhist Stupas and later Hindu
temples were usually crowned. I have seen similar pieces at Debkot, and
elsewhere, often with a perforation through the centre, through which I
conjecture that a rod of metal, or perhaps a column of molten lead may
have been passed, to retain it in an upright position’. In the event of
a prodigious abundance of Hindu temple building material scattered all
over the province, it is difficult to pin-point the provenance of each
stray sculptured piece used in the mosques of Gaud and Hazrat Pandua.
The existence of any Hindu temple in the citadel or outside Gaud as
‘Abid ‘Ali tells us, is as difficult to prove as to obviate the fact
that no material was taken from Devikot or Bannagar in Dinajpur.
Contradicting the views of ‘Abid ‘Ali, Stapleton says, ‘On the other
hand from Manrique’s statement that in 1641, he saw figures of idols
standing in niches surrounded by carved grotesques and leaves in some
stone reservoirs in Gaur, it is possible that except during periods of
persecution the Muhammadan Kings of Gaur allowed idols and Hindu temples
to remain unmolested in their capital.’ Although examples of the use of
Hindu material are not scarce, as proved by the discovery of three
sculptured figures from Mahisantosh with Muslim ornament on the reverse
side, now in the Varendra Research Society Museum, it would be wrong to
say after Creighton that all the Hindu temples were desecrated by the
Muslims to procure building material…^([409](#409))

“…The Indian Museum, Calcutta, as well as the *Bangiya Sahitya Parishad*
Museum, Calcutta, acquired a large number of architectural objects from
the ancient sites of Bengal, particularly, Gaud, Hazrat Pandua,
Bagerhat, Hughli, Rajshahi, Dinajpur and elsewhere. Besides freshly
quarried basalts, a large quantity of locally available building
materials was employed by the architects of Gaud, Hazrat Pandua and
elsewhere. Ravenshaw’s unwarranted observation that ‘Though it (Hazrat
Pandua) cannot boast of such antiquity as Gaud, its remains afford
stronger evidence than those of the latter city of its having been
constructed mainly from the materials of Hindoo buildings’, has been
brushed aside by Westmacott, who thinks that Hazrat Pandua is older than
Gaud. One of the strongest advocates of the Indianized form of Muslim
structures is Havell, who is too intolerant to allow any credit to the
Muslim builders for the use of radiating arches, domes, minarets,
delicate relief works. He maintains that the central *mihrab* of the
Adina Masjid (Pl. III) at Hazrat Pandua is so obviously Hindu in design
as hardly to require comments. While Havell writes that ‘The image of
*Vishnu* or *Surya* has trefoil arched canopy, symbolizing the aura’ of
the god, of exactly the same type as the outer arch of the *mihrab*,
Beglar says that the Muslims delighted in ‘placing the sanctum of his
orthodox cult (in this case the main prayer niche) on the spot, where
hated infidel had his sanctum’. Saraswati is even more emphatic on this
point when he contends, ‘An examination of the stones used in the
construction of the Adina Masjid (one of them bearing a Sanscrit
inscription, recording merely a name of *Indranath*, in the character of
the 9th century AD) and those lying about in heaps all round, reveals
the fact, which no careful observer can deny, that most of them came
from temples that once stood in the vicinity.’ Ilahi Bakhsh, Creighton,
Ravenshaw, Buchanan-Hamilton, Westmacott, Beglar, Cunnigham, King, and a
host of other historians and archaeologists bear glowing testimony to
the utilization of non-muslim materials (Fig. 3b & Pl. V), but none of
them ventured to say that existing temples were dismantled and materials
provided for the construction of magnificent monuments in Gaud and
Hazrat Pandua.^([410](#410))

“Creighton drew the sketches of a few Hindu sculptures which were
evidently used in the Chhoto Sona Masjid at Gaud. These are the image of
*Sivani*, the consort of *Siva, Varahaavatara* or *Vishnu* in the form
of a Boar, *Brahmani*, consort of Brahma. In the British Museum there
are a few images of Hindu and Buddhist character, such as the Brahmani,
sketched by Creighton, and the seated Buddha figure (Pls. XLI-XLII). The
Muslim builders out of sheer expediency felt no scruple to use these
fragments in their mosques by concealing the carved sides into the wall
and utilizing the flat reverse side of these black basalts for arabesque
design in shallow carvings. Piecemeal utilization of Hindu sculptures
were also to be seen in the earlier monuments, such as, the Mosque and
Tomb of Zafar Khan at Tribeni, the Mosque at Chhoto Pandua, the Adina
Masjid at Hazrat Pandua, etc. The British Museum and the Victoria and
Albert Museum, both in London, the Indian Museum and the *Bangiya
Sahitya Parishad* Museum, both at Calcutta, Varendra Research Society
Museum, Rajshahi, provide large specimens of carved stones and
architectural fragments used in the monuments of pre-Mughal Bengal.
Ravenshaw photographed a circular stone pedestal and a gargoyle, which
is now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Used obviously as the gargoyle in
the Adina Masjid, it ‘consists of a modification of an elephant’s head
with the eyes, horns and ears of a *sardula* (elephant).’ Cunningham
found in the pulpit of the Adina Masjid ‘a line of Hindu sculpture of
very fine bold execution.’ Innumerable Hindu lintels, pillars,
door-jambs, bases, capitals, friezes, fragments of stone carvings,
dadoes, etc., have been utilized in such a makeshift style as to render
‘improvisation’ well-nigh impossible. In many cases as observed in the
Quwwat al-Islam at Delhi and the Arhai-din-ka-Jhopra Mosque at Ajmer,
pillars were inverted, joining the base with capitals, suiting neither
pattern nor size. Still there is no denying the fact that Hindu
materials were utilized, yet it would be far-fetched to say that
existing Hindu temples were dismantled and converted by improvisation
into mosques as observed in the early phase of Muslim architecture in
Indo-Pak sub-continent. The ritual needs and structural properties of
the Hindus and the Muslims are so diametrically opposite as to deter any
compromise and, therefore, the early Muslim conquerors of Bengal said
their prayer in mosques built out of the fragments of Hindu materials in
the same way as their predecessors did at Delhi, Ajmer, Patan, Janupur,
Dhar and Mandu, and elsewhere. In the event \[absence?\] of any complete
picture of pre-Muslim Hindu art as practised in Gaud and Hazrat Pandua,
it is an exaggeration to hold the view after Saraswati that ‘indeed,
every structure of this royal city (Hazrat Pandua) discloses Hindu
materials in its composition, thus, disclosing that no earlier monument
was spared.”^([411](#411))

“…During the Husain Shahi period the stone cutter’s art was thoroughly
practised and perfected, as walls of gates and mosques were adorned with
stone, either quarried from Rajmahal hills or obtained from some
existing buildings…^([412](#412))

“…The British Museum, London, has in its collection two sculptured
pieces from Bengal, namely, the seated Buddha figure (Pl. XLIIa) and the
image of Brahmani (Pl. XLIa). Both these images have on their obverse
(Pls. XLIb, XLIIb) exquisitely carved diaper work of unmistakable Muslim
workmanship. The Indian Museum, Calcutta, has a stone slab carved on the
one side with the image of Durga, destroying *Mahisha* or
Buffalow-demon, and on the reverse arabesque. The panel consisting of a
scalloped arch with a lotus rosette on each of its sides, surrounded by
richly foliated devices, is undoubtedly a Muslim work.^([413](#413))

“The Muslim calligraphers did not feel any scruple to utilize fragments
of Hindu or Jaina sculpture in carving out beautiful inscriptions in
elegant *Naskh, Thulth* and *Tughra*, keeping the images inside the
wall…”^([414](#414))  
 

*Delhi*

“…Delhi was the source of artistic inspiration for all the later
provincial schools of Indo-Muslim architecture. Codrington remarks, ‘At
Delhi, the Kutb-ul-Islam marks the beginning of Islamic architecture in
India.’ This formative phase of Mosque architecture in India began with
the random utilization of temple spoils, Hindu architraves, corbelled
ceilings, kumbha pillars with hanging bell-and-chain motifs, which were
organised to fulfil the needs of congregational prayer. It is said that
the columns of twenty-seven Hindu and Jaina temples were utilized in the
great Mosque, at Delhi, rightly called the ‘Might of Islam’. It was
built by Qutb-al-Din Aybak in AH 587/AD 1191-92 on an ancient pre-Muslim
plinth.^([415](#415))

“…Originally there were five domes in the liwan all compiled of Hindu
fragments, as is evident from their corbelled interiors…^([416](#416))

“…Incidentally, it may be recalled that Beglar carried out excavations
at the Quwat-al-Islam Mosque at Old Delhi under the supervision of
Cunningham and noticed the foundation of pre-Muslim temples
there…^([417](#417))  
 

*Ajmer (Rajasthan)*

“…To Iletmish we owe some of the finest Muslim works in India. The Arhai
din ka-Jhopra began by Qutab al-Din in AD 1198-99, was also completed by
him. Tod had said of it that it was ‘one of the most perfect as well as
the most ancient monuments of Hindu architecture’, on the evidence of
certain four-armed figures to be seen on the pillars…^([418](#418))

“The Ajmer Mosque resembles the Delhi Mosque in its use of pre-Muslim
materials as well as in its courtyard plan, arched screen, columnar
*liwan* and *riwags* and use of reconstructed Hindu corbelled domes. All
these features, except the fragments of Hindu and Jain carvings used in
the work are essentially Islamic. The Ajmer Mosque indicates a further
improvement in Mosque design… As Sardar puts it, ‘These pillars have a
greater height than those at the Kutub, and are more elegant in their
sculpture and general appearance than the converted Mosques in Malwa and
Ahmedabad.’”^([419](#419))  
 

*Badaun (Uttar Pradesh)*

“The Jami Masjid of Badaun, also built by Iletmish is one of the largest
mosques in India. Following the traditional courtyard plan, it also
utilizes Hindu temple pillars. The entrance arches of the gateways
leading into the courtyard of the Mosque presumably recall those in the
great Mosques at Delhi and Ajmer…”^([420](#420))  
 

*Bayana (Rajasthan)*

“That the practice of utilizing the spoils of Hindu temples continued
throughout the reign of Sultan Iletmish is proved by the Mosque of Ukha
in Bayana (Uttar Pradesh), which is also on the site of a Hindu
temple…”^([421](#421))  
 

*Dhar (Madhya Pradesh)*

“The oldest of the Mosques in Malwa is the Kamal Maula Masjid which was
built in Dhar in AH 803/AD 1400. Both this Mosque and the slightly later
Jami or Lat Masjid are clearly adaptations of ruined Hindu temple
material…”^([422](#422))  
 

*Mandu (Madhya Pradesh)*

“The transfer of the capital from Dhar to Mandu by Dilwar Khan in AH
794/AD 1392, marks a new phase in the development of Mosque architecture
in Malwa. The Mosque built by him in C. AH 808/AD 1405-06 is oblong in
ground plan, the western side being formed by the liwan. Its roof is
supported by Hindu pillars…”^([423](#423))  
 

*Gujarat*

“It is true that Mosque architecture in Gujarat only began in the 14th
century. When ‘Ala-al-Din Khalji conquered and annexed the country to
the Delhi Sultanate in the later part of the 13th century, there still
flourished a singularly beautiful indigenous style of architecture. The
early monuments of Gujarat, notably at Patan (Anhilvada) tell the same
story of the demolition of local temples and the reconstruction of their
fragments…^([424](#424))

“…In the beginning, at the Qutb, the Hindu element was confined
architecturally to the trabeate constructive methods, and to part of the
decoration, Islam contributing the plan and the embellishment of the
Arabic lettering. In Gujarat, notably in the entrance porches of the
Jami‘ Masjid at Cambay, much may fairly be described as literal
reconstruction of Hindu work, as units in the established plan of a
Muslim place of worship. These entrances have their parallels in the
pavilions and *mandapas* of Hindu and Jaina temples still standing, for
instance, at Modhera and Mount Abu…”^([425](#425))  
 

*Patan (Gujarat)*

“The earliest recorded building in Gujarat is the Adina Masjid at Patan
(Anhilvada), as stated above. This bears the same unusual name as that
of the Mosque built by Sikandar Shah at Hazrat Pandua about fifty years
later. The tomb of Sheikh Farid and the Adina Masjid at Patan, which are
dated C. AH 700/AD 1300, correspond in their utilization of Hindu
building material with the tomb and the Mosque of Zafar Khan Ghazi at
Tribeni in Hooghly, Bengal, which are dated C. AH 705/ AD 1305. The now
demolished Adina Masjid at Patan, is said to have had one thousand and
fifty pillars of marble and other stones taken from destroyed temples.
Erected by Ulugh Khan, ‘Ala’-al-Din Khalji’s Governor, it measures 400
feet by 300 feet…”^([426](#426))  
 

*Bharuch (Gujarat)*

“…Unlike the Patan Mosque, the Jami‘ Masjid of Bharoch, which is also
dated C. AH 700/AD 1300 is a new creation. Although it does incorporate
Hindu pillars, it is built on the usual Mosque plan with which we are
familiar in earlier works. The brackets of the incorporated pillars and
the carved interior of the corbelled domes are particularly fine. They,
of course, necessarily recall the much earlier work of the Quwwat
al-Islam at Delhi. It is important to realize that these primitive
methods were still being used in the Indian provinces two hundred years
after they were fully developed at Delhi…”^([427](#427))  
 

*Khambhat (Gujarat)*

“…The Mosque of Cambay demonstrates the imposition of Khalji features,
such as the arched screen of the *Jama‘at Khana* Masjid at the *Dargah*
of Nizam-al-Din Aulia in Delhi, upon the local trabeate forms of Gujarat
Hindu architecture. Codrington writes, ‘The Jami‘ Masjid at Cambay was
finished in 1325, and is typical of these earlier buildings. It has all
the appurtenances that Islam demands-cloisters, open court-yard, the
covered place for prayer, *mimbar* and *mihrab*-but only the west end is
in any sense Islamic. As at Delhi and Ajmir, the pillars of the
cloisters, and notably the entrance porches as a whole, are the relics
of sacked Hindu shrines…”^([428](#428))  
 

*Deccan*

“Like all other provinces of India, the Deccan, also, witnessed the
growth of a distinguished school of Muslim architecture. Its early phase
is also, characterized by the adaptation of local temples, for the
purpose of Muslim congregational prayer, as exemplified by the Deval
Mosque of Bodhan in Nizamabad, near Hyderabad, dated AD 1318, which was
formerly a Hindu shrine…”^([429](#429))  
 

*Bodhan (Maharashtra)*

“…It is said that the star-shaped Jaina Temple built in the Chalukya
style at Bodhan in the 9th or 10th century was, also, transformed into a
Mosque during the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq (AH 726-52/AD  
1325-51).”^([430](#430))  
 

*Daulatabad (Maharashtra)*

“The Mosque of Qutb al-Din Mubarak Khalji at Daulatabad, dated AH 718/AD
1318, is probably the earliest surviving Muslim structure in the Deccan.
It is a square, 260 feet each way, assembled into the usual orthodox
plan out of destroyed Hindu pillars, brackets, and
beams…”^([431](#431))  
 

*Pandua (Bengal)*

“Beglar traces the origin of the Adina Masjid to pre-Muslim sources… He
bases his arguments on the point that if the Adina Masjid occupies the
site of a pre-Muslim Hindu temple, the name may be a reminiscent of
Adisur, the so-called founder of the hitherto unidentified temple dating
from the 7th century AD; however, he does not know that there is a
mosque at Patan, called Adina, and that it is a Persian term for
Friday. The use of fragments of Hindu or Buddhist architectural works in
the Masjid do \[does?\] not prove that the site was pre-Muslim. They may
have been brought there…”^([432](#432))

“…Beglar suggests that the *mihrab* of the Adina Masjid was transferred
from a Hindu temple. He says, ‘Of the Hindu sculpture, the most striking
and superb is beyond question the trefoil arch and pillars of the main
prayer niche.’ But there are no grounds for his assertion. The Adina
Masjid *mihrab*, forming a single work of art, must be accepted as
contemporary with the fabric of the Masjid itself. But it must be
admitted that the style is local…^([433](#433))

“Particular attention has been drawn to the curiously interesting
designs of the archivolt of the niche. The conventional grotesque Lion’s
head at the crown and the *Kinnara* and *Kinnari* at the haunches, which
appear in the lintel of the Vaishnava temple from Gaud, according to
many scholars have been transformed into graceful foliage, palmette and
sensuous tendrils…^([434](#434))

“The discovery of an odd fragment of Hindu sculpture found built into
the steps of the staircase has led many scholars to ascribe a pre-Muslim
origin to the Adina Masjid. As Cunningham puts it, ‘The steps leading up
to the pulpit have fallen down, and, on turning over one of the steps I
found a line of Hindu sculpture of very fine and bold execution… The
main ornament is a line of circular panels… formed by continuous
intersecting lotus stalks. These are five complete panels, and two
half-panels which have been cut through. These two contain portions of
an elephant and a rhinoceros. In the complete panels are: (i) cow and a
calf; (ii) human figures broken; (iii) a goose; (iv) a man and woman and
a crocodile; (v) two elephants. The carving is deep and the whole has
been polished.’ This sculpture is still visible. It is, therefore, clear
that the exigencies of the circumstances led to the utilization of some
Hindu materials available on the site. Nevertheless, such mutilated
fragments hardly testify to the fact that the Adina Masjid was built on
the ruins of an ancient Indian temple.^([435](#435))

“The western wall of the northern prayer hall is pierced by two openings
on either side of die zenana gallery, which reduce the number of niches
(Fig. 3) between the pilaster of the back walls from the 16 found in the
southern prayer hall to 14. These postern gateways (Figs. 3, 9, & Pls. 
IV, V), are built out of elements of Hindu door frames and, therefore,
are unusual features, rarely found in Indian Mosques. It is hard to
believe that they were provided for the use of the general worshippers.
Probably they were for the use of the attendants, palanquin-bearers and
entourage of the King and his ladies, who entered the Mosque through the
adjoining Ladies’ vestibule.^([436](#436))

“…However, there is one exception shown in the northern hall, which
differs from the other semi-circular niches. Here the trefoil arch
corresponds generally with that of the central *mihrabs*. The arch
itself has a superimposed ribbed roof, recalling Hindu architecture. The
face of the trefoil is decorated with a lotus and diamond band, the
pilasters on either side having *kumbha* bases and looped garlands on
their shafts. All these details are different from the rest of the
decorative motifs in the Adina Masjid. But there are no grounds for the
suggestion that the work is Hindu or that it is built up of fragments of
a destroyed Hindu temple. The space between the pilasters of this
*mihrab* and the stone-face of the brick wall is filled with fragmentary
remains of Hindu sculpture.^([437](#437))

“…The two postern gateways and the two doors are already mentioned.
Beglar pointed out that the door frames of all these four door ways are
built up of fragments from some other buildings. He identifies the work
as being Hindu but admits that he does not know any local source from
their fragments. The work is more or less of the same kind as that to be
seen in the postern gate. In all these doorways various Indian motifs
attracts undivided attention. These include pot and foliage, pilasters,
door guardians and the intertwined *nagas* on the lintel. The
utilization of non-Muslim materials in the Adina Masjid as well as in
later Mosques in Gaud and Hazrat Pandua is supported by two fragments in
the British Museum. They are cut in basalt and the first shows finely
cut Muslim diaper work on one side and the figure of Buddha on the other
(Pls. XLII, a-b). Another fragment has the image of probably the goddess
Brahmani on the other side (Pls. XLI, a-b). The work indicates that
these fragments came from Gaud or Hazrat Pandua.^([438](#438))

“…The entrance gateway to the Minar at Chhoto Pandua as well as that of
the Eklakhi Mausoleum at Hazrat Pandua (Pl. XVI) provide parallels for
zenana gatways. The floor of the zenana gallery with its worn basalt
paving slabs is supported by the squat pillars of the prayer hall
below. These support bays roofed by a corbelled construction of plain
slabs placed across the corners of the bays. At earlier mosques, such as
the Quwwat al-Islam, internal domes constructed in this way were removed
from Hindu temples. Here the old Indian method is still utilized with
fresh material…^([439](#439))

“A curiously interesting feature of the Adina Masjid is the square
structure, adjoining the outer wall of the *qibla* on the northern side
of the central *mihrab*. It communicates with the zenana gallery by
lintellect doorways, formed by Hindu door jambs as stated
earlier. According to Beglar it measures externally 54 feet by 48 feet,
whereas ‘Abid ‘Ali notes that this roofless annexe is 42 feet square. It
stands on a very high plinth, raising the floor to the level of the
ladies’ gallery. The plinth is built of random rubble work with
conventionalised Buddhist railing ornament resembling those in the
dadoes of the *qibla* wall of the mosque.^([440](#440))

“The real character as well as the distinguishing features of the Adina
Masjid have yet to be determined. In the present crumbling state of this
one-time ‘wonder of the world’, as Cunningham calls it, it is well nigh
impossible to say whether this magnificent mosque occupies the site of
any Hindu or Buddhist temple. A group of scholars failed to see in the
impressive Adina Masjid anything more than a mere assemblage of Hindu or
Buddhist fragments, arranged skilfully to adhere to a mosque plan. Ilahi
Bakhsh started the controversy when he wrote, ‘It is worth observing
that in front of the *chaukath* (lintel) of the Adina Masjid, there was
a broken and polished idol, and that there were other idols lying about.
So it appears that, in fact, this mosque was originally an idol-temple.’
Beglar steps up this controversy by saying, ‘the Adina Masjid occupies
the site, of a once famous, or at least a most important, and highly
ornamented, pre-Muhammadan shrine’; he depends for his arguments on a
Proto-Bengali inscription (Fig. 4b) discovered in the building which
bears the name of Brahma. Saraswati seems to have carried the thesis too
far when he writes, ‘an examination of the stones used in the
construction of the Adina Mosque (one of them bearing a Sanskrit
inscription recording merely a name, Indranath, in character of the 9th
century) and those lying about in heaps all around, reveals the fact,
which no careful observer can deny, that most of them came from temples
that once stood in the vicinity.’ Beglar even went so far as to
pin-point ‘the sanctum of the temple, judging from the remnants of heavy
pedestals of statues, now built into the pulpit, and the superb canopied
trefoils, now doing duty as prayer niches, stood where the main prayer
niche now stands; nothing would probably so tickle the fancy of a bigot,
as the power of placing the sanctum of his orthodox cult (in this case
the main prayer niche) on the spot, where hated infidel had his
sanctum’. The existence of the foundation of a Hindu Temple in the Adina
Masjid is as far-fetched as to consider the circular pedestal to the
west of the *qibla* wall as remains of a Buddhist stupa (Fig. 3). It may
be the base of a detached minar, as similar examples are to be seen in
the mosques of Egypt, Persia and India…”^([441](#441))  
 

*Tribeni (Bengal)*

“The existing tomb and mosque of Zafar Khan Ghazi at Tribeni is another
example of contemporary Hindu fragments being utilized in Muslim
structure…^([442](#442))

“The Mosque of Zafar Khan Ghazi is the earliest known example of Mosque
architecture in Bengal, and ‘is certainly the oldest in Bengal far
anterior to any building at Gaud and Hazrat Pandua’. Marking the
earliest phase of Muslim building activities, it incorporates fragments
of non-Muslim monuments, like those of the Quwwat al-Islam Mosque in
Delhi. R.D. Banerjee is of opinion that ‘the Mosque of Tribeni was most
probably a Vaishnava temple but relics of Buddhism and Jainism were
found…’^([443](#443))

“…Unmistakable Hindu workmanship is evident in the mutilated figures in
some of the architectural fragments used -- a phenomenon to be observed
in the Adina Masjid at Hazrat Pandua, dated AH 776/AD 1374. There are
five *mihrabs* in the *qibla* wall, the most striking being the central
one. Tastefully carved multifoil brick arch of the central mihrab is
supported by slender stone pillars of some Hindu temple…^([444](#444))

“…The utilization of non-Muslim building materials is to be taken as a
matter of expediency for no mosque plan was ever superimposed on the
traditional ground plan of temple architecture. In the light of this
phenomena the mosques can hardly be regarded as mere improvisations of
existing temples, as stated by R.D. Banerjee in the case of the Mosque
of Zafar Khan. The Muslim architects did not feel any scruple to employ
fragments of Hindu sculpture still bearing traces of iconographical art
in their mosques, and furthermore Hindu workmanship is evident in the
delicate stone carvings and sensuous tendrils, and corbelled
domes.”^([445](#445))  
 

*Gaud (Bengal)*

“…Both Cunningham and Marshall accept Creighton’s suggestion that the
Lattan Masjid was built in the year AH 880/AD 1475…^([446](#446))

“The *qibla* wall has three semi-circular niches, the central one being
bigger than the side ones. These are all encrusted with glazed tiles.
The *mihrab* to the north of the central niche has fragments of Hindu
sculpture built into it…^([447](#447))

“…Although less ornate than those of the southern prayer chamber in the
Adina Masjid, the Tantipara Masjid pillars have square bases, moulded
bands and cubical abaci. Brown says that the pillars of this mosque are
‘of the square and chamfered variety originally part of a Hindu temple’,
but this was not so. They are contemporary with the building. Certainly
work of this character is known in Hindu building, and this seems to
have misled Brown.^([448](#448))

“…Two rows of chamfered pillars, each carrying 5 pointed arches, divide
the interior of the \[Chhoto Sona\] Mosque into 3 longitudinal aisles.
In each row there are 4 pillars of black basalt which in their moulded
string-courses, cubical pedestal, dog-tooth ornament and square abacus
recall those of the supporting pillars of the zenana gallery in the
Adina Masjid. Evidently they are much more attenuated in shape in the
Chhoto Sona Masjid than those in the Adina Masjid. It is hard to
ascertain their origins, but considering the enormous quantity of Hindu
spoil used in the Chhoto Sona Masjid (Pls. XLI, XLII) and comparing its
pillars with the carved stone pillars at the Bari Dargah which
originally must have been brought from the Adina Masjid it may be said
that they were taken from unidentifiable Hindu temples. ^([449](#449))

“…Many of the stones used for casing the wall to give the illusion of a
stone monument from distance are evidently Hindu. To quote Creighton,
‘The stone used in these mosques had formerly belonged to Hindu temples
destroyed by the zealous Muhammadans,’ as will be evident from an
inspection of Plates XLI and XLII, representing two slabs taken from
this Building. Creighton’s painting XVI represents a stone with the
image of the Hindu deity, *Vishnu*, in the Boar incarnation, with
shallow diaper carving on the reverse side. The figure of Sivani, the
consort of Siva, one of the Hindu triad, appears on another stone
sketched by Creighton (painting XVII). The mother figure evidently drawn
from sculptured stones used in the Small Golden Mosque is that of
Brahmani, given in Plate XLIa (Creighton’s painting XVII). It is very
interesting to point out in connection with the figure of Brahmani that
it agrees in meticulous execution of details and perfection of style
with that of the British Museum piece. Therefore, it is certain that
Creighton drew his sketch from this black stone which curiously displays
diaper work on the other side (Pl. XLIb) similar to that of Creighton’s
Plate XVI. Arabesque design in shallow stone carving, resembling
delicate tapestry, appears also in another superb black basalt piece,
shown in Plate XLIb, now in the British Museum. It has the image of a
seated Buddha on one side thereby again indicating the utilization of
non-Muslim material (Pl. XLIIa). This fascinating piece may well be
attributed to the Chhoto Sona Masjid on the grounds of the close
similarity of its diaper work with that of the stone sketched by
Creighton in his Plate XVI, and of the existence of gilding in the
shallow carvings of the diaper work.”^([450](#450))  
 

*Rampal (Bengal)*

“The famous Mosque of Baba Adam, (Fig. 17) the patron saint of the
locality in the ancient Hindu site of Rampal where Raja Ballal Sena
built his palace in the district of Dacca is an impressive architectural
monument of pre-Mughal Bengal.^([451](#451))

“…Measuring 43 feet by 36 feet externally and 34 feet by 22 feet
internally, the Mosque incorporated a number of beautifully carved stone
pillars of unmistakable Hindu workmanship…^([452](#452))

“In the construction of this 6-domed mosque, measuring 36 feet by 24
feet, considerable amount of locally available materials from
dilapidated Hindu monuments were employed as evident in the black carved
basalts of the pillars, *mihrabs*, epigraphic slabs,
etc…^([453](#453))  
 

*Chhota Pandua (Bengal)*

“‘Next to Satgaon’, writes D.G. Crawford, ‘Pandua is the oldest place of
Hughli District-once the capital of a Hindu Raja and is famous as the
site of a great victory gained by the Musulmans under Shah Safi over the
Hindus in about AD 1340.’ Besides the Mosque and Tomb of Shah Safiuddin,
the most outstanding architectural project of great magnitude is the
Great Mosque at Chhoto Pandua… O’Malley and M.M. Chakravarti differ from
Blockmann in ascribing Buddhist origin to these pillars and maintain
that they were probably quarried from a Hindu temple. As put forward by
Cunningham, ‘The Mosque stands on a mound once die site of a Hindu
temple, the pillars of which now support this mean-looking barn-like
Masjid.’ It would be far-fetched to maintain that the Great Mosque at
Chhoto Pandua was built on the very foundation of a Hindu temple, like
the improvised Tomb of Zafar Khan Ghazi at Tribeni, dated 14th century
AD.”^([454](#454))  
 

*Sadipur (Bengal)*

“…A.K. Bhattacharya points out that an inscription in Arabic, carved in
*Tughra* is found on the reverse of an image of Adinath, which is
recovered from a ruined *Dargah* in the village Sadipur, P.S. Kaliachak,
Malda.”^([455](#455))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) The language which is uniformly used by Muslim writers in
describing the slaughter of people, destruction of cities and towns, and
enslavement of the conquered men, women and children, has to be read in
the original Arabic or Persian in order to realize that the writers
themselves must have been bloodthirsty thugs masquerading as
theologi­ans, poets and historians. Amîr Khusrû and Ziãu‘d-Dîn Baranî,
the two distinguished disciples of Nizãmu‘d-Dîn Auliyã‘, excel them all
in the respect. The Urdu translations retain some of the flavour which
is lost in translations in other languages. Urdu is truly an Islamic
language.

[²](#2a) Cited by Abdur Rahman, *The Last Two Dynasties of the Shãhîs*,
Delhi Reprint, 1988, pp. 55-56

[³](#3a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 413-14.

[⁴](#4a) *Kitab Futuh Al-Buldan of al-Biladhuri*, translated into
English by F.C. Murgotte, Columbia University, New York, 1924, p. 707.

[⁵](#5a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 120-21.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., pp. 122-23.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 127. “*Budd*” in Islamic parlance means an idol. The
word is derived from “*Buddha*” whose idols were known as *Budd or But*
in Iran long before the Muslims conquered that land. The Muslims
borrowed the word and extended it to mean all idols. The Iranian text of
*Bundahism* translated by H.W. Bailey says that “The demon *But* is that
which they worship in India and in his image a spirit is resident which
is worshipped as *Bodasf*” (*Indian Studies, Volume in Honour of Edward
James Rapson, edited by J. Bloch et al., London, 1931, Delhi Reprint*,
1988, p. 279). *Bodasf* is Persian for Bodhisattva.

[⁸](#8a) Major David Price, *Mahommedan History*, London. 1811. New
Delhi Reprint, 1984, Vol. I. pp. 467-68.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., pp. 474-75.

[¹⁰](#10a) Abdur Rahman, op. cit., p. 102.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., pp. 103-04.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., p. 104.

[¹³](#13a) The ancient name of Multan was Mûlasthãna and the Sun God was
probably named accordingly.

[¹⁴](#14a) Hindus under the leadership of the Gurjara-Pratihãra rulers
of Kanauj.

[¹⁵](#15a) The Muslim occupants of Multan.

[¹⁶](#16a) Elliot and Dowson. op. cit., Vol. I. p. 23.

[¹⁷](#17a) A Shî‘ah Muslim sect.

[¹⁸](#18a) E.C. Sachau (tr.), *Alberuni’s India*, New Delhi Reprint,
1983, p. 116.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., p. 117.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., pp. 102-03.

[²¹](#21a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 22.

[²²](#22a) This is one of the names by which Muslims mean Hindus.

[²³](#23a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit, Vol. II, p. 36.

[²⁴](#24a) Ibid., p. 37.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibid., p. 39. According to Firishta the temple in which the
inscription was found was destroyed.

[²⁶](#26a) Ibid., p. 40.

[²⁷](#27a) Ibid., p. 40-41.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., p. 44.

[²⁹](#29a) Ibid., pp. 44-45. The conspicuous temple referred to in this
passage was most probably that of Kešavadeva, predecessor of those
destroyed by latter-day Islamic icono­clasts, the latest by Aurangzeb.

[³⁰](#30a) Ibid., p. 46.

[³¹](#31a) Ibid. Vol. IV, pp. 518-19.

[³²](#32a) Ibid., pp. 520-21.

[³³](#33a) Ibid., p, 524.

[³⁴](#34a) Ibid. Vol. I, p. 158.

[³⁵](#35a) Ibid., p. 164.

[³⁶](#36a) *The Chachnamah*, translated into English by Mirza Kalichbeg
Fredunbeg. Delhi Reprint, 1979, pp. 179-80.

[³⁷](#37a) This man was most probably the Brahmana who led Muhammad bin
Qãsim to the temple treasure. He had accepted Islam simply because its
arms were victorious.

[³⁸](#38a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. I. pp. 205-06.

[³⁹](#39a) Ibid., p. 21.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Ibid., Vol. II, p. 172.

[⁴¹](#41a) Ibid., p. 215.

[⁴²](#42a) Ibid., p. 216-17.

[⁴³](#43a) Ibid., p. 219.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Ibid., p. 223.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Ibid., p. 222.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Ibid., p. 219.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Ibid., p. 224.  Kol was the old name of Aligarh.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Ibid., p. 226. Thangar or Tahangarh is the name of the Fort
near Bayana.

[⁴⁹](#49a) Ibid., p. 231.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Ibid., pp. 238-39.

[⁵¹](#51a) Ibid., p. 246.

[⁵²](#52a) Ibid., p. 469.

[⁵³](#53a) Ibid., pp. 469-70.

[⁵⁴](#54a) Ibid., p. 471.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Ibid., p. 398.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Tabqãt-i-Nãsirî*, translated into English by Major H.G.
Reverty, New Delhi Reprint, 1970, Vol. I, pp. 81-82.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Ibid., p. 88, footnote 2.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Ibid., pp. 621-22.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Ibid., pp. 622-23.

[⁶⁰](#60a) Ibid., p. 628.

[⁶¹](#61a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 97-98.

[⁶²](#62a) Ibid., p. 470.

[⁶³](#63a) Ibid.,  Vol. II, p. 252.

[⁶⁴](#64a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included in
*Khaljî Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1955, pp. 153-54.

[⁶⁵](#65a) Elliot and Dowson, up. cit., Vol. III, p. 542.

[⁶⁶](#66a) Ibid., p. 543.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Ibid.

[⁶⁸](#68a) The reference is to the tower known as Qutb Minãr at present.

[⁶⁹](#69a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included in
*Khaljî Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1955, pp. 156-57. The last sentence
means that the temples were first made to topple and then levelled with
the ground.

[⁷⁰](#70a) Ibid., p. 159.

[⁷¹](#71a) Quoted by Jagdish Narayan Sarkar, *The Art of War in Medieval
India*, New Delhi, 1964, pp. 286-87.

[⁷²](#72a) S. A. A. Rizvi, op. cit., p. 160. Bahirdev arms to be
Bhairavadeva.

[⁷³](#73a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit.  Vol. III, p. 81.

[⁷⁴](#74a) “Gabr” was a term which the Muslims used for the Zoroastrians
to start with. Later on, the term was sometimes extended to mean the
Hindus as well.

[⁷⁵](#75a) Ibid., pp 82-83.

[⁷⁶](#76a) Ibid., p. 85.

[⁷⁷](#77a) Ibid., pp. 90-91. The Hindi translation by S.A.A. Rizvi says
that temples at Birdhul touched the sky with their tapes, and reached
the nether world in their foundations, but they were dug up (*Khaljî
Kãlîna Bhãrata*, p. 169).

[⁷⁸](#78a) Ibid., p. 91.

[⁷⁹](#79a) Ibid., pp. 550-51. Other histories identify this place as
Birdhul, the PãNDya capital. Capitals and seaports were often called
*pattana* in ancient India. This was not the only instance of Muslims
employed by Hindu rulers deserting to Islamic invaders. Muslims have
always placed their loyalty to Islam above loyalty to the employer whose
salt they have eaten, sometimes for many years.

[⁸⁰](#80a) Mohammad Wahid Mirza, *The Life and Works of Amir Khusrau*
(1935), Delhi Re­-Print 1974. pp. 183-84.

[⁸¹](#81a) Elliot Dowson, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 559.

[⁸²](#82a) Cited in P.M. Currie, *The Shrine and Cult of Mu‘in al-Dîn
Chishtî of Ajmer*, OUP, 1989, p. 30.

[⁸³](#83a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol.  III, pp. 43-44.

[⁸⁴](#84a) Ibid., p. 65.

[⁸⁵](#85a) Hindu temples were often called ‘fire temples’ by Muslim
writers as Hindus were often described as ‘fire-worshippers’ or ‘gabrs’.
The appellations were transferred from the Zoroastrian temples and the
Zoroastrian people.

[⁸⁶](#86a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included in
*Tughlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata, Aligarb*, 1956, Vol. I, p. 325.

[⁸⁷](#87a) Ibid., p. 327.  The saints, sages, scholars and Brahmin
priests of the Hindus were re­garded as “magicians” by the theologians
of Islam.

[⁸⁸](#88a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included in
*Khaljî Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1955, p. 206.

[⁸⁹](#89a) The figures were defaced. That is how Islamic iconoclasts
spent some of their fury against “false gods”.

[⁹⁰](#90a) *The Rehalã of Ibn Battûta* translated into English by Mahdi
Hussain, Baroda, 1967, p. 10. It shows how local legends grew about a
whole city destroyed by Muslim invad­ers during one of their invasions
of Sindh. This was moss probably the site of Debal.

[⁹¹](#91a) Ibid., p. 27.

[⁹²](#92a) Ibid., pp. 203AM.  The “westerner” was a Muslim missionary
from North Africa which is known as *Maghrib* (the West) among the
Arabs. See Thor Heyerdahl, *The Maldive Mystery*, Bethesda (Maryland,
USA), 1986, for the large number of Hindu temples destroyed. Many
mosques stand on their sites now.

[⁹³](#93a) Elliot and Dowson.  Vol. III, p. 146.

[⁹⁴](#94a) Ibid., p. 148. The last line according to S.A.A. Rizvi should
be translated as “so that people may be educated” (*Khaljî Kãlîna
Bhãrata.* p. 29), and as “for the fun of the people” according to Dr.
Mu‘în-ul-Haq (Urdu translation of Baranî. Lahore, 1983, p. 335).

[⁹⁵](#95a) Ibid., p. 163. Dr. Mu‘în-ul-Haq translate it as “for the fun
of the people,” (Ibid., p. 377), but S.A.A. Rizvi agrees with Elliot’s
translation.

[⁹⁶](#96a) Ibid., p. 204.

[⁹⁷](#97a) Ibid., p. 313. Banãrsî is the name of Cuttack which was known
as Kataka-VãraNasî to the Hindus of medieval India. 

[⁹⁸](#98a) Ibid.,  p. 314.

[⁹⁹](#99a) Ibid.,  p. 318. Hindus had to spread such “lies” in order to
save their temples from demolition and their idols from desecration by
succeeding sultans and swordsmen of Islam.

[¹⁰⁰](#100a) Ibid., p. 365. *Zunãr or Zunnãr* is the Muslim term for the
sacred thread worn by the BrãhmaNas who were accordingly called
*Zunãr-dãrs.*

[¹⁰¹](#101a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Tughlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1957, Vol. II, p. 380.

[¹⁰²](#102a) Ibid., p. 381.

[¹⁰³](#103a) Ibid., p. 382.

[¹⁰⁴](#104a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. III, pp. 376-77. This
translation does not mention “idol-temples had been demolished.” This
qualification of the “former sovereigns”, however, is mentioned in the
Hindi translation by S.A.A. Rizvi included in *Tughlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata*,
Aligarh, 1957, Vol. II, p. 328.

[¹⁰⁵](#105a) It was probably Malzã or Malchã where, according to Shams
Sîrãj, Sultãn Fîrûz had built a dam. This place is near the Kalka Temple
in the area of Okhla (S.A.A. Rizvi, *Tuqhlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Vol.  II,
p. 333, footnote 1).

[¹⁰⁶](#106a) Elliot and Dowson. op. cit., Vol. III, pp. 380-81. The
apologists of Islam tell us that *zimmîs* are guaranteed freedom of
worship once they agree to pay *jijyah*. Here we have a most pious
sultãn saying and acting otherwise.

[¹⁰⁷](#107a) Ibid., p. 381.

[¹⁰⁸](#108a) Quoted in R.C. Majumdar (ed.), op. cit., Vol. VI, *The
Delhi Sultanate*, Bombay, 960, p. 94.

[¹⁰⁹](#109a) Quoted in Ibid., pp. 105-60.

[¹¹⁰](#110a) Translated from the Urdu version by Dr. Ãftãb Asghar,
second edition, Lahore. 1982.

[¹¹¹](#111a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Khaljî Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1955, p. 223.

[¹¹²](#112a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Tughlaq Kãlina Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1957, Vol.  II, pp. 228-29.

[¹¹³](#113a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1959, Vol. II, p. 27.

[¹¹⁴](#114a) Ibid., pp. 27-28.

[¹¹⁵](#115a) Ibid., p. 29.

[¹¹⁶](#116a) Summarised by S.A.A. Rizvi in *History of Sufism in India*,
New Delhi, 1978, Vol. I, pp. 201-202, footnote 4. Tabrizî is most
probably the hero of *Sekasubhodaya*, a San­skrit work ascribed to
Halãyudha Mišra, discovered at Gaur in Bengal and edited with an English
translation by Sukumar Sen, Calcutta, 1963.

[¹¹⁷](#117a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 166.

[¹¹⁸](#118a) Ibid., pp. 182-83.

[¹¹⁹](#119a) Ibid., pp. 178-79.

[¹²⁰](#120a) Ibid., pp. 179-80. The number of temples mentioned in this
passage means the number of temples destroyed.

[¹²¹](#121a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Mughal Kãlîna Bhãrata: Bãbur*, Aligarh, 1960, p. 233.

[¹²²](#122a) Ibid., 237.

[¹²³](#123a) Ibid., p. 167. Professor Sri Ram Sharma cites from
*Tãrîkh-i-Bãburî* that “His Sadr, Shaikh Zain, demolished many Hindu
temples at Chanderî when he occupied it” (*Religious Policy of the
Mughal Emperors*, p. 9).

[¹²⁴](#124a) Ibid., p. 277. It seems that for some reason, the statues
could not be destroyed, though they were mutilated. All of them are Jain
statues.

[¹²⁵](#125a) Summarised by S.A.A. Rizvi in his. *A History of Sufism in
India*. Vol. I, New Delhi, 1978, pp. 201-02.

[¹²⁶](#126a) ‘Summarised by Ibid., p. 307.

[¹²⁷](#127a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1955, Vol. I, p. 322.

[¹²⁸](#128a) Ibid., p. 331.

[¹²⁹](#129a) Ibid., p. 343.

[¹³⁰](#130a) Eliot and Dowson, op. cit, Vol. IV, pp. 403-04.

[¹³¹](#131a) Ibid., p. 544.

[¹³²](#132a) Translated Iron the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1958, Vol. I, p. 102.

[¹³³](#133a) Ibid., Vol. II. 138. Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn had collected 16,000
women in his harem and was notorious for his lewdness. Piety in Islam
has no relation with personal character. Lechers can serve the faith as
well as the recluse.

[¹³⁴](#134a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 471.

[¹³⁵](#135a) The reference is to some Hindu Goddess. Islamic iconoclasts
often named Hindu Goddesses after those of Arabia whose idols the
prophet of Islam had destroyed.

[¹³⁶](#136a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A. A. Rizvi included
in *Tughlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata*. Aligarh, 1956, Vol. I, p. 370.

[¹³⁷](#137a) The *Tabqãt-i-Akbarî* translated by B. De, Calcutta, 1973,
Vol. I, p. 3.

[¹³⁸](#138a) Ibid., p. 7.

[¹³⁹](#139a) Ibid., p. 11.

[¹⁴⁰](#140a) Ibid., p. 16.

[¹⁴¹](#141a) Ibid., p. 22.

[¹⁴²](#142a) Ibid., p. 51.

[¹⁴³](#143a) Ibid., pp. 68-69.

[¹⁴⁴](#144a) Ibid., p. 144.

[¹⁴⁵](#145a) Ibid., p. 157.

[¹⁴⁶](#146a) Ibid., p. 184.

[¹⁴⁷](#147a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Tughlaq Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1957. Vol. II, p. 349.

[¹⁴⁸](#148a) Ibid., p. 350.

[¹⁴⁹](#149a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarb, 1958. Vol. I, p. 219.

[¹⁵⁰](#150a) Ibid., p. 220.

[¹⁵¹](#151a) Ibid., p. 221.

[¹⁵²](#152a) Ibid., p. 222.

[¹⁵³](#153a) Ibid., p. 227.

[¹⁵⁴](#154a) Ibid., pp, 236-37. The bull was most probably a Nandî
standing outside a temple of Šiva.

[¹⁵⁵](#155a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttar Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh 1959, Vol. II. p. 9.

[¹⁵⁶](#156a) Ibid., p. 74.

[¹⁵⁷](#157a) Ibid., p. 75.

[¹⁵⁸](#158a) Ibid., p. 85.

[¹⁵⁹](#159a) Ibid., p. 86.

[¹⁶⁰](#160a) Ibid., pp. 177-78.  Zafar Khãn crowned himself as Muzaffar
Shãh a few years later, and founded the independent kingdom of Gujarat.

[¹⁶¹](#161a) Ibid., p. 180.

[¹⁶²](#162a) Ibid., p. 178.

[¹⁶³](#163a) Ibid., p. 180.

[¹⁶⁴](#164a) Ibid., p. 192.

[¹⁶⁵](#165a) Ibid., pp. 201-02.

[¹⁶⁶](#166a) Ibid., pp. 206-07.

[¹⁶⁷](#167a) Ibid., p. 214.

[¹⁶⁸](#168a) Ibid., p. 218-19.

[¹⁶⁹](#169a) Ibid., pp. 233-34.

[¹⁷⁰](#170a) Ibid., p. 515. The discovery of an inscription seems to be
true, but the reading is obviously wishful and fictitious.

[¹⁷¹](#171a) Ibid., p. 517.

[¹⁷²](#172a) Ibid., p. 527.

[¹⁷³](#173a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cab, Vol. V, p. 358.

[¹⁷⁴](#174a) *Muntakhãbu’t-Tawãrikh*, translated into English by George
S.A. Ranking, Patna Reprint 1973, Vol. I, p. 17.

[¹⁷⁵](#175a) Ibid., pp. 27-28.

[¹⁷⁶](#176a) Ibid., pp. 21-22.

[¹⁷⁷](#177a) Ibid., p. 24.

[¹⁷⁸](#178a) Ibid., pp. 82-83.

[¹⁷⁹](#179a) Ibid., p. 95.

[¹⁸⁰](#180a) Ibid., pp. 235-36.

[¹⁸¹](#181a) Ibid., pp. 255-56.

[¹⁸²](#182a) Ibid., p. 420.

[¹⁸³](#183a) Ibid., p. 422.

[¹⁸⁴](#184a) Ibid., pp. 432-33.

[¹⁸⁵](#185a) Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 128-29.

[¹⁸⁶](#186a) Ibid., pp. 165-66.

[¹⁸⁷](#187a) Ibid., pp. 166-67.

[¹⁸⁸](#188a) Elliot and Dowson. op. cit, Vol. VI, p. 528.

[¹⁸⁹](#189a) Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 439.

[¹⁹⁰](#190a) Ibid., p. 447.

[¹⁹¹](#191a) Ibid., p. 465.

[¹⁹²](#192a) Ibid., p. 466.

[¹⁹³](#193a) Ibid., pp. 466-67.

[¹⁹⁴](#194a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 11.

[¹⁹⁵](#195a) *Zafaru’l Wãlih Bi Muzaffar Wa Ãlihi*, translated into
English by M.F. Lokhand­wala, Baroda, 1970 and 1974, Vol. II, p. 575.

[¹⁹⁶](#196a) Ibid., p. 626.

[¹⁹⁷](#197a) Ibid., pp. 627-28.

[¹⁹⁸](#198a) Ibid., Vol. I, p. 138.

[¹⁹⁹](#199a) Ibid., Vol. II. pp. 646-47.

[²⁰⁰](#200a) Ibid., p. 650. 

[²⁰¹](#201a) Ibid., Vol. I, p. 139.  Malabar in wrongly indicated by the
translator. 

[²⁰²](#202a) Ibid., Vol. II, p. 676.  This is a revealing report. The
Sufis were not only instigators but also beneficiaries of *jihãd* and
iconoclasm. 

[²⁰³](#203a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi included
in *Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1959, Vol. II, p. 413. 

[²⁰⁴](#204a) Ibid., p. 417. 

[²⁰⁵](#205a) Ibid., p. 418. 

[²⁰⁶](#206a) Elliot and Dowson, op.cit., Vol. VI, p. 187. 

[²⁰⁷](#207a) *Tãrîkh-i-Haqqî* (of which *Zubdatu’t-Tawãrîkh* is an
extension) cited by Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 62. 

[²⁰⁸](#208a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 435-36. 

[²⁰⁹](#209a) *Tãrîkh-i-Firishta*, translated by John Briggs under the
title *History of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power in India*, first
published in 1829, New Delhi Reprint 1981, Vol. I, pp. 27-28. 

[²¹⁰](#210a) Ibid., p. 29. 

[²¹¹](#211a) Ibid., p. 30. 

[²¹²](#212a) Ibid., p. 34. 

[²¹³](#213a) Ibid., p. 35. 

[²¹⁴](#214a) Ibid., p. 36. Mahmûd was a pious Muslim who destroyed Hindu
temples and idols in keeping with the tenets of Islam. Those who present
him as a freebooter out to plun­der temple treasuries are either fools
like Jawaharlal Nehru or knaves like Mohammad Habib, and Pandit
Sunderlal. Mahmûd is too great an hero of Islam to be sacrificed in
order to salvage the faith. 

[²¹⁵](#215a) Ibid., p. 37. 

[²¹⁶](#216a) Translated from the Urdu version of *Tãrîkh-i-Firishta* by
‘Abdul Haî Khwãjah, Deoband, 1983, pt. I, p. 125. 

[²¹⁷](#217a) John Briggs, op. cit., pp. 38-39. 

[²¹⁸](#218a) Ibid., pp. 40-41. Lure of plunder as well as religious
merit made many Muslims join the army without pay. Islam like
Christianity enables people to make the best of the both the worlds. 

[²¹⁹](#219a) Ibid., pp. 41-42. 

[²²⁰](#210a) Other accounts put the figure at 50,000. 

[²²¹](#211a) Ibid., pp. 43-44. 

[²²²](#212a) Ibid., p. 49. 

[²²³](#213a) Ibid., p. 63. 

[²²⁴](#214a) Ibid., p. 82. 

[²²⁵](#215a) Ibid., pp. 100-01. 

[²²⁶](#216a) Ibid., p. 108. 

[²²⁷](#217a) Ibid., P. 119. 

[²²⁸](#218a) Ibid., p. 170. 

[²²⁹](#219a) Ibid., p. 171. 

[²³⁰](#230a) ‘Abdul Haî Khwãjah, op. cit, pt. I, p. 349. It appears to
be the Šivaliñga of the Rudramahãlaya at Sidhpur. 

[²³¹](#231a) John Briggs, op. cit., pp. 213-14.  Modern historians doubt
if Malik Kãfûr reached Setubandha Ramešvaram. 

[²³²](#232a) Ibid., p. 263. The word “temple” at the end of the passage
stands for the Ka‘ba. 

[²³³](#233a) Ibid., p. 338. 

[²³⁴](#234a) Ibid., p. 339. 

[²³⁵](#235a) Ibid., pp. 339-40. 

[²³⁶](#236a) Ibid., p. 343. 

[²³⁷](#237a) Ibid., pp. 347-48. 

[²³⁸](#238a) Ibid., Vol. II, p. 206-07. 

[²³⁹](#239a) Ibid., p. 248. 

[²⁴⁰](#240a) Ibid., p. 251. 

[²⁴¹](#241a) Ibid., p. 269. 

[²⁴²](#242a) Ibid., p. 306. 

[²⁴³](#243a) Ibid., p. 308. 

[²⁴⁴](#244a) Ibid., Vol. III, p. 82. 

[²⁴⁵](#245a) Ibid., p. 84. 

[²⁴⁶](#246a) Ibid., p. 212. 

[²⁴⁷](#247a) Ibid., p. 267.  Murahari Rao was obviously a precursor of
our present-day devotees Secularism who are Hindus by accident of birth
and who stop at nothing in order to please the Muslims. 

[²⁴⁸](#248a) Ibid., p. 274. 

[²⁴⁹](#249a) Ibid., pp. 276-77. 

[²⁵⁰](#250a) Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 3. 

[²⁵¹](#251a) Ibid., p. 4. 

[²⁵²](#252a) Ibid., p. 5. 

[²⁵³](#253a) Ibid., p. 10. 

[²⁵⁴](#254a) Ibid. 

[²⁵⁵](#255a) Ibid., pp. 10-11. 

[²⁵⁶](#256a) Ibid., p. 16. There is evidence that the mosque was raised
on the site of a temple. 

[²⁵⁷](#257a) Ibid., p. 31. 

[²⁵⁸](#258a) Ibid., p. 32. 

[²⁵⁹](#259a) Ibid., p. 33. 

[²⁶⁰](#260a) Ibid., p. 35. 

[²⁶¹](#261a) Ibid., p. 36. 

[²⁶²](#262a) Ibid., p. 49. 

[²⁶³](#263a) Ibid., pp. 125-26. 

[²⁶⁴](#264a) Ibid., p. 135. 

[²⁶⁵](#265a) Ibid., p. 136. 

[²⁶⁶](#266a) Ibid., p. 215. 

[²⁶⁷](#267a) Ibid., p. 234. 

[²⁶⁸](#268a) Ibid., p. 235. 

[²⁶⁹](#269a) Ibid., p. 238. 

[²⁷⁰](#270a) Ibid., p. 244. 

[²⁷¹](#271a) Ibid., pp. 268-69. Another wishful reading of an ancient
inscription. 

[²⁷²](#272a) Ibid., pp. 279-80. 

[²⁷³](#273a) *Tûzuk-i-Jahãngîrî*, translated into English by Alexander
Rogers, first published 1909-1914, New Delhi Reprint, 1978, Vol. I, pp.
254-55. 

[²⁷⁴](#274a) Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 223-25. 

[²⁷⁵](#275a) Another manuscript of *Tûzuk-i-Jahãngîrî*, translated into
English by Major David Price, Calcutta, 1906, pp. 24-25. 

[²⁷⁶](#276a) Translated from the Urdu version by Muhammad Bashîr Husain,
second edition, Lahore, 1986, pp. 121-22. 

[²⁷⁷](#277a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. V, p. 97. The Urdu
version by Muhammad Bashir Husain adds that “all buildings were pulled
down” (p. 166). 

[²⁷⁸](#278a) Ibid., p. 98 

[²⁷⁹](#279a) Ibid., pp. 100-01 

[²⁸⁰](#280a) Translated from the Urdu version, op. cit., p. 172. 

[²⁸¹](#281a) Ibid., p. 178. 

[²⁸²](#282a) Ibid., p. 179. 

[²⁸³](#283a) Ibid., P. 199. 

[²⁸⁴](#284a) Ibid., p. 305. 

[²⁸⁵](#285a) Ibid., pp. 305-06 

[²⁸⁶](#286a) Cited in *The Cult of Jagannath and the Regional Tradition
of Orrisa* by Anncharotte Eschmann et al, New Delhi, second printing.
1981, p. 322. footnote 7. 

[²⁸⁷](#287a) Translated from the Hindi version by S.A.A. Rizvi in
*Uttara Taimûr Kãlîna Bhãrata*, Aligarh, 1959, Vol.  II, p. 256. 

[²⁸⁸](#288a) Ibid., p. 273. 

[²⁸⁹](#289a) Ibid., p. 318. 

[²⁹⁰](#290a) Ibid., p. 319. 

[²⁹¹](#291a) Ibid., p. 350. 

[²⁹²](#292a) *Mir‘ã-i-Sikandarî*, translated by Fazlullah Lutfullah
Faridi, Dharampur (Gujarat), Gurgaon Reprint, 1990, p. 171. 

[²⁹³](#293a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit, Vol. VI, p. 451.  An additional
excuse besides commandments of Allãh was invented in order to destroy
the temples. 

[²⁹⁴](#294a) Summarised by Richard Maxwell Eaton in his *Sufis of
Bijapur* 1300-1700, Princeton (U.S.A.), 1978, p. 68. 

[²⁹⁵](#295a) *Tãrîkh-Kashmîr*, edited and translated into English by
Razia Bano, Delhi, 1991, p. 55. 

[²⁹⁶](#296a) Ibid., p. 61. 

[²⁹⁷](#297a) Ibid., pp. l02-03. 

[²⁹⁸](#298a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. II. p. 524. 

[²⁹⁹](#299a) Ibid., pp. 525-27. 

[³⁰⁰](#300a) Ibid., p. 527. 

[³⁰¹](#301a) Ibid., p. 538. 

[³⁰²](#302a) Ibid., pp. 546-47. 

[³⁰³](#303a) Cited by P.M. Currie, op. cit., p. 74. 

[³⁰⁴](#304a) Ibid., p. 75. 

[³⁰⁵](#305a) Ibid., p. 80. 

[³⁰⁶](#306a) Ibid., p. 83. The Sunnah of the Prophet prescribes that
every true Muslim should force into his bed some captured women of the
unbelievers. 

[³⁰⁷](#307a) Ibid., pp. 86-87. 

[³⁰⁸](#308a) *Bãdshãh Nãma* cited by Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 63. 

[³⁰⁹](#309a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 36. Sri Ram
Sharma op. cit. cites Lãhorî to add that “three temples were destroyed
in Gujarat” (p. 86). 

[³¹⁰](#310a) Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. I and II, p. 15. 
Sri Ram Sharma cites Lãhorî to add that “several other temples suffered
the same fate and were converted into mosques” (p. 86). 

[³¹¹](#311a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 86. 

[³¹²](#312a) *The Shahjahan Nama* of ‘Inayat Khan, translated by A.R.
Fuller and edited and compiled by W.E. Beyley and Z.A. Desai, OUP,
Delhi, 1090, p. 161. 

[³¹³](#313a) Elliot and Dowson, Vol. VII, p. 159. 

[³¹⁴](#314a) Cited by Sri Rain Sharma, op. cit., p. 129. 

[³¹⁵](#315a) Ibid. 

[³¹⁶](#316a) *Maãsir-i-‘Ãlamgiri*, translated into English by Sir
Jadu-Nath Sarkar, Calcutta, 1947, pp. 51-52. 

[³¹⁷](#317a) Ibid., p. 55. 

[³¹⁸](#318a) Ibid., p. 60. 

[³¹⁹](#319a) Ibid., p. 107. 

[³²⁰](#320a) Ibid., pp. 108-09. 

[³²¹](#321a) Ibid., pp. 114-15. 

[³²²](#322a) Ibid., p. 116. 

[³²³](#323a) Ibid., p. 116-17. 

[³²⁴](#324a) Ibid., p. 120. Amber had hem loyal to the Mughals since the
days of Akhar, and, unlike Mewar and Mewar, given no offence to
Aurangzeb. 

[³²⁵](#325a) Ibid., p. 241. 

[³²⁶](#326a) Ibid., p. 312. 

[³²⁷](#327a) Ibid., pp. 314-15. 

[³²⁸](#328a) Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 186. 

[³²⁹](#329a) Quoted by Ibid., p. 187. 

[³³⁰](#330a) Quoted by Ibid., p. 188. 

[³³¹](#331a) Quoted by Ibid., p. 189. 

[³³²](#332a) Cited by Sri Rain Sharma, op. cit, p. 136. 

[³³³](#333a) Ibid. 

[³³⁴](#334a) Ibid., p. 137. 

[³³⁵](#335a) Ibid. 

[³³⁶](#336a) Ibid. 

[³³⁷](#337a) Ibid., p. 138. 

[³³⁸](#338a) Ibid. 

[³³⁹](#339a) Ibid., pp.138-39 

[³⁴⁰](#340a) Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit, Vol. I and II, pp. 120-21. 

[³⁴¹](#341a) Summarised in Ibid., Vol. III, p. 103. 

[³⁴²](#342a) Quoted in Ibid., Vol. III, pp. 185-86. 

[³⁴³](#343a) Quoted in Ibid., Vol. I and II, p. 94. 

[³⁴⁴](#344a) Quoted in Ibid., Vol. III, p. 188. 

[³⁴⁵](#345a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma. op. cit., p. 138. 

[³⁴⁶](#346a) Ibid., pp. 144-45. The mosque demolished by Hindus had been
built on the site of a temple recently destroyed. 

[³⁴⁷](#347a) Quoted in Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit, Vol. III, pp. l88-89. 

[³⁴⁸](#348a) Quoted in Ibid., p. 187. 

[³⁴⁹](#349a) *Futûhãt-i-‘Ãlamgîrî*, translated into English by Tanseem
Ahmad, Delhi, 1978. p. 82 

[³⁵⁰](#350a) Ibid., p.130. 

[³⁵¹](#351a) *Nau-Bahãr-i-Murshid Quli-Khãni*, translated into English
by Jadu Nath Sarkar and included in his *Bengal Nawãbs*, Calcutta
Reprint, 1985, p. 4. 

[³⁵²](#352a) Ibid., p. 7. 

[³⁵³](#353a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. VIII, pp. 38 -39. 

[³⁵⁴](#354a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma. op. cit, p. 86. 

[³⁵⁵](#355a) Cited by Ibid., pp. 86-87. 

[³⁵⁶](#356a) Quoted in Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 188. 

[³⁵⁷](#357a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma, cit., p. 137. 

[³⁵⁸](#358a) Quoted in Jadunath Sarkar, Vol. III, p. 207, footnote. 

[³⁵⁹](#359a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 405. 

[³⁶⁰](#360a) *Mirat-i-Ahmdi*, translated into English by M.F.
Lokhandwala, Baroda, 1965, P. 27. This account is obviously a folktale
because ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî became a Sultãn two hundred years after
Siddharãja JayasiMha ascended the throne of Gujarat. Moreover,
‘Alãu’d-Dîn never went to Gujarat; he sent his generals, Ulugh Khãn and
Nasrat Khãn. 

[³⁶¹](#361a) Ibid., p. 28. 

[³⁶²](#362a) Ibid., P. 29. 

[³⁶³](#363a) Ibid., P. 34. 

[³⁶⁴](#364a) Ibid., pp. 37-38. Sayyedpur is Sidhpur. 

[³⁶⁵](#365a) Ibid., pp. 47-48. 

[³⁶⁶](#366a) Ibid., p. 48. 

[³⁶⁷](#367a) Ibid., pp. 51-52. 

[³⁶⁸](#368a) Ibid., p. 194. It was a Jain Temple built at great
expense. 

[³⁶⁹](#369a) Quoted in Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 186. 

[³⁷⁰](#370a) Quoted in Ibid., p. 188. 

[³⁷¹](#371a) Quoted in Ibid., p. 186. 

[³⁷²](#372a) Cited by Sri Ram Sharma, op. cit., p. 137. 

[³⁷³](#373a) Cited by Ibid., p. 138. 

[³⁷⁴](#374a) Elliot and Dowson, op. cit., Vol. VIII, pp. 264-65. 

[³⁷⁵](#375a) Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar, *Fall of The Mughal Empire*,
Vol. II, Fourth Edition, New Delhi, 1991, p. 70. 

[³⁷⁶](#376a) *History of Tipu Sultan Being a Continuation of The
Neshan-i-Hyduri*, translated from Persian by Col. W. Miles, first
published 1864, New Delhi Reprint, 1986, pp. 66-67. 

[³⁷⁷](#377a) *Riyuz-us-Salatin*, translated into English by Abdus Salam,
Delhi Reprint, 1976, pp. 63-64. 

[³⁷⁸](#378a) Ibid., pp. 17-18. 

[³⁷⁹](#379a) *Bahãr-i-Ãzam*, translated in English, Madras, 1960, p. 2. 

[³⁸⁰](#380a) Ibid., pp. 18-19. 

[³⁸¹](#381a) Ibid., p. 101. 

[³⁸²](#382a) Ibid., p. 51. Hindu mythology from the RãmãyaNa has
obvious, up with the story of how Sayyid Nathar Shah (AD 969-1030) from
Arabia destroyed a Šiva temple and converted it into his *khãnqãh*. He
died in AH 673, and the *khãnqãh* became a *dãrgãh* which has since
grown into an important place of Muslim pilgrimage. 

[³⁸³](#383a) Ibid., p. 63. This is another garbled account of how a
Hindu temple was converted into a Muslim *dargãh* during the time when
Tiruchirapalli was occupied by Chandã Sãhib, the Dîwan of the Nawwãb of
Arcot, and Rãnî Mînãkshî committed suicide when thrown into prison
through treachery. 

[³⁸⁴](#384a) Ibid., p. 64. 

[³⁸⁵](#385a) Ibid., p. 128. 

[³⁸⁶](#386a) Translated from the Urdu of *Ãsãru’s-Sanãdîd*, edited by
Khaleeq Anjum, New Delhi, 1990.  Vol. I, p. 305. 

[³⁸⁷](#387a) Ibid., p. 310. 

[³⁸⁸](#388a) Ibid., pp. 310-11. 

[³⁸⁹](#389a) Ibid., p. 316. 

[³⁹⁰](#390a) Ibid., p. 310. 

[³⁹¹](#391a) Ibid., p. 317. 

[³⁹²](#392a) Ibid., p. 89. 

[³⁹³](#393a) Ibid., Vol. III, p. 406. 

[³⁹⁴](#394a) Ibid., p. 407. 

[³⁹⁵](#395a) Ibid., Vol. I, p. 321. 

[³⁹⁶](#396a) Ibid., p. 97. 

[³⁹⁷](#397a) Ibid., Vol. III, p. 409. 

[³⁹⁸](#398a) Ibid., Vol. I, p. 334. 

[³⁹⁹](#399a) Ibid., p. 361. 

[⁴⁰⁰](#400a) Cited by Dr. Harsh Narain in his article, *Rama-Janmabhumi
Temple: Muslim Testimony*, Indian Express, February 26, 1990. 

[⁴⁰¹](#401a) Cited by Ibid. 

[⁴⁰²](#402a) Summarised from the *Wãqî’ãt*, Vol. III, p. 575 by Richard
Maxwell Eaton m his *Sufis of Bijapur* 1300-1700, Princeton (U.S.A.),
1978, p. 68. 

[⁴⁰³](#403a) Syed Mahmudul Hasan, *Mosque Architecture of Pre-Mughal
Bengal*, Dacca (Bangladesh), 1979, p. 33. 

[⁴⁰⁴](#404a) Ibid. 

[⁴⁰⁵](#405a) Ibid. 

[⁴⁰⁶](#406a) Ibid., p. 34. 

[⁴⁰⁷](#407a) Ibid., p. 38. 

[⁴⁰⁸](#408a) Ibid., p. 43. 

[⁴⁰⁹](#409a) Ibid., pp. 163-64. His statement that “innumerable Hindu
and Buddhist temples still exit in the     cities of India once
conquered by the Muslims”, is a figment of his imagination. No city in
North India can show a temple from pre-Islamic times. 

[⁴¹⁰](#410a) Ibid., pp. 170-71. In subsequent passages he himself says
that existing buildings were quarried for stones used in Mosques.
Medieval Muslim historians say that all Hindu temples were destroyed and
mosques raised at Lakhnauti, the site of Gaud, and Pandau. 

[⁴¹¹](#411a) Ibid., pp. 171-72. 

[⁴¹²](#412a) Ibid., p. 183. 

[⁴¹³](#413a) Ibid. 

[⁴¹⁴](#414a) Ibid., p. 185. 

[⁴¹⁵](#415a) Ibid., p. 37. 

[⁴¹⁶](#416a) Ibid. 

[⁴¹⁷](#417a) Ibid., P. 64. 

[⁴¹⁸](#418a) Ibid., p. 38. 

[⁴¹⁹](#419a) Ibid. 

[⁴²⁰](#420a) Ibid., p. 39. 

[⁴²¹](#421a) Ibid. 

[⁴²²](#422a) Ibid., p. 43. 

[⁴²³](#423a) Ibid., p. 44. 

[⁴²⁴](#424a) Ibid., p. 45. 

[⁴²⁵](#425a) Ibid., p. 46. 

[⁴²⁶](#426a) Ibid. 

[⁴²⁷](#427a) Ibid. 

[⁴²⁸](#428a) Ibid. 

[⁴²⁹](#429a) Ibid., p. 49. 

[⁴³⁰](#430a) Ibid., p. 50. 

[⁴³¹](#431a) Ibid. 

[⁴³²](#432a) Ibid., 62 and 64 (Illustration on p. 63). 

[⁴³³](#433a) Ibid., p. 77. 

[⁴³⁴](#434a) Ibid. 

[⁴³⁵](#435a) Ibid., pp. 80-81. 

[⁴³⁶](#436a) Ibid., pp. 81-82. 

[⁴³⁷](#437a) Ibid., p. 83. 

[⁴³⁸](#438a) Ibid., pp. 85-86. 

[⁴³⁹](#439a) Ibid., P. 86. 

[⁴⁴⁰](#440a) Ibid., pp. 90-91. 

[⁴⁴¹](#441a) Ibid., p. 97. 

[⁴⁴²](#442a) Ibid., p. 86. 

[⁴⁴³](#443a) Ibid., p. 128. 

[⁴⁴⁴](#444a) Ibid., p. 129. 

[⁴⁴⁵](#445a) Ibid., p. 131. 

[⁴⁴⁶](#446a) Ibid., p. 123. 

[⁴⁴⁷](#447a) Ibid., p. 122. 

[⁴⁴⁸](#448a) Ibid., p. 131. 

[⁴⁴⁹](#449a) Ibid., pp. 160-61. 

[⁴⁵⁰](#450a) Ibid., p. 163. 

[⁴⁵¹](#451a) Ibid., p. 138. 

[⁴⁵²](#452a) Ibid. 

[⁴⁵³](#453a) Ibid., p. 141. 

[⁴⁵⁴](#454a) Ibid., pp. 144-45. 

[⁴⁵⁵](#455a) Ibid., p. 185.   
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


