+++
title = "09 CHAPTER EIGHT SUMMING UP"

+++
**CHAPTER EIGHT**

**SUMMING UP**

Starting with Al-Bilãdhurî who wrote in Arabic in the second half of the
ninth century, and coming down to Syed Mahmudul Hasan who wrote in
English in the fourth decade of the twentieth, we have cited from eighty
histories spanning a period of more than twelve hundred years. Our
citations mention sixty-one kings, sixty-three military commanders and
fourteen sufis who destroyed Hindu temples in one hundred and fifty-four
localities, big and small, spread from Khurasan in the West to Tripura
in the East, and from Transoxiana in the North to Tamil Nadu in the
South, over a period of eleven hundred years. In most cases the
destruction of temples was followed by erection of mosques, *madrasas*
and khãnqãhs, etc., on the temple sites and, frequently, with temple
materials. Allãh was thanked every time for enabling the iconoclast
concerned to render service to the religion of Muhammad by means of this
pious performance.

Some more kings or commanders or sufis who figure in these histories in
a similar context may have remained unmentioned because we had access to
the full texts only in a few cases; most of the time we had to remain
content with excerpts or summaries made by modern historians in one
context or the other. Many more localities have remained unspecified
because quite often the histories under reference, instead of naming
particular places, mention provinces and regions where large-scale
destruction of temples took place as a result of general orders issued
to this effect, or intensive campaigns undertaken for this purpose
alone.

It is seldom that translations retain the full flavour of the language
and meaning of the original works. In our case, some of the flavour must
have been lost in citations which we had to translate into English from
Urdu or Hindi renderings of the Persian texts. Even so, we feel that,
taken together, the citations do bring out something of the religious
zeal harboured by the historians concerned when they sat down to glorify
Islam and highlight its heroes.

Coming to the heroes themselves, some of them figure more prominently or
frequently in our citations, such as Muhammad bin Qãsim, Mahmûd of
Ghazni, Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish, Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî, Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq,
Ahmad Shãh I and Mahmûd BegDha of Gujarat, Sikander Lodî, and Aurangzeb;
they have earned permanent fame in the annals of Islam by doing what
they did to Hindus in general and to Hindu temples in particular. But
the others, too, do not come out discreditably if a state of mind or an
expressed intention is any indication. Maybe, their achievements in this
context have found a more detailed description in histories to which we
have had no access.

It is highly doubtful if the Mughal period deserves the credit it has
been given as a period of religious tolerance. Akbar is now known only
for his policy of *sulh-i-kul*, at least among the learned Hindus. It is
no more remembered that to start with he was also a pious Muslim who had
viewed as *jihãd* his sack of Chittor. Nor is it understood by the
learned Hindus that his policy of *sulh-i-kul* was motivated mainly by
his bid to free himself from the stranglehold of the orthodox *‘Ulamã*,
and that any benefit which Hindus derived from it was no more than a
by-product. Akbar never failed to demand daughters of the Rajput kings
for his harem. Moreover, as our citations show, he was not able to
control the religious zeal of his functionaries at the lower levels so
far as Hindu temples were concerned. Jahãngîr, like many other Muslim
kings, was essentially a pleasure-seeking person. He, however, became a
pious Muslim when it came to Hindu temples of which he destroyed quite a
few. Shãh Jahãn did not hide what he wanted to do to the Hindus and
their places of worship. His Islamic record on this score was much
better than that of Jahãngîr. The reversal of Akbar’s policy thus
started by his two immediate successors reached its apotheosis in the
reign of Aurangzeb, the paragon of Islamic piety in the minds of India’s
Muslims. What is more significant, Akbar has never been forgiven by
those who have regarded themselves as custodians of Islam, right upto
our own times; Maulana Abul Kalam Azad is a typical example. In any case
one swallow has never made a summer.

Certain localities also figure more prominently or more frequently in
our citations, such as Multan, Thanesar, Kangra, Mathura, Somnath,
Varanasi, Ujjain, Chidambaram, Puri, Dwarka, Girinar and Kanchipuraim.
The iconoclasts paid special attention to temples in these places or
mounted repeated attacks on them. They knew that these were the holy
cities of the Hindus, and entertained the fond hope that desecration of
idols and destruction of temples in these sanctuaries was most likely to
make the Hindus lose faith in their “false gods” and prepare them for
receiving the, “light of Islam”. That, however, does not mean that
destruction of temples at other places was in any sense less thorough.
Our citations reveal more or less the same pattern everywhere, once the
swordsmen of Islam got fired by their religious fervour.

It was not unoften that Hindu temples were admired by the iconoclasts
for their strength or antiquity or exquisiteness or the expense incurred
on their construction. We are told that they were “as firm as the faith
of the faithful” and “a thousand years old”. It was estimated that they
must have cost so many “thousand thousand dirhams” or so many “lakhs of
asharfies”. But none of these plus points was reason enough for sparing
them from the fate they deserved according to the Sunnah of the Prophet.
They embodied an “age of darkness and error”, they housed “false gods”,
and they enticed people away from the worship of the “one and only true
God” - Allãh of the Qur’ãn.

So the temples were attacked “all along the way” as the armies of Islam
advanced; they were “robbed of their sculptural wealth”, “pulled down”,
“laid waste”, “burnt with naptha”, “trodden under horse’s hoofs”, and
“destroyed from their very foundations”, till “not a trace of them
remained”. Mahmûd of Ghazni robbed and burnt down 1,000 temples at
Mathura, and 10,000 in and around Kanauj. One of his successors,
Ibrãhîm, demolished 1,000 temples each in Hindustan (Ganga-Yamuna Doab)
and Malwa. Muhammad Ghûrî destroyed another 1,000 at Varanasi.
Qutbu’d-Dîn Aibak employed elephants for pulling down 1,000 temples in
Delhi. “Alî I ‘Ãdil Shãh of Bijapur destroyed 200 to 300 temples in
Karnataka. A sufi, Qãyim Shãh, destroyed 12 temples at Tiruchirapalli.
Such exact or approximate counts, however, are available only in a few
cases. Most of the time we are informed that “many strong temples which
would have remained unshaken even by the trumpets blown on the Day of
Judgment, were levelled with the ground when swept by the wind of
Islãm”.

We find the Muslim historians going into raptures as they describe
scenes of desecration and destruction.  For Amîr Khusrû it was always an
occasion to show off the power of his poetic imagination. When
Jalãlu’d-Dîn Khaljî wrought havoc at Jhain, “A cry rose from the temples
as if a second Mahmûd had taken birth”. The temples in the environs of
Delhi were “bent in prayers” and “made to do prostration”, by Alãu’d-Dîn
Khaljî. When the temple of Somnath was destroyed and its debris thrown
into the sea towards the west, the poet rose to his full height. “So the
temple of Somnãth,” he wrote, “was made to bow towards the Holy Mecca,
and the temple lowered its head and jumped into the sea, so you may say
that the building first said its prayers and then had a bath.”

Our citations have a lot to tell about how the votaries of Islam viewed
the idols of Gods and Goddesses enshrined in the temples. Though the
Arabic word used in the Qur’ãn for idols is *Sanam*, we find our
historians using the word *but* which they had borrowed form the
Persians. The Persian word was a corruption of the Sanskrit word
*“Buddha”*, with which the Persians had been familiar for a long time
because there were many Buddhist temples in Seistan, Khurasan and
Transoxiana. The word *“budd”* has actually been used in some of the
histories when referring to idols which were burnt or which the infidels
were prevented from worshipping. Small wonder that the temples which
enshrined statues of the Buddha became special targets for the Islamic
iconoclasts. We shall deal with this subject in greater detail at a
later stage in this series; for now, it is sufficient to say that the
deathblow to Buddhism, a religion centred round temples and monasteries
and monks, was delivered by the armies of Islam and not by the
much-maligned “Brahmanical reaction” as our Marxist “historians” are
never tired of telling the world.

There was, however, one name which intrigued the iconoclasts for a long
time, till the matter was cleared by some scholars of Islam in
consultation with the Brahmans. It seems that the Arabs were familiar
with the word *“Somanãtha”* (which they pronounced as “Somnãt”) even in
the pre-Islamic period. Arab merchants who visited or lived in Gujarat
must have told their countrymen about this fabulous Šiva temple. It is
also possible that Somnath was a place of pilgrimage for the Arabs. The
pre-Islamic Arabs were “idolaters” like the Hindus and could not but
have felt reverence for “Somnãt”. Something of this reverence seems to
have survived even after Islam brought about a radical transformation in
their religious values. We find reflection of it in the story that
*Manãt*, a Goddess of the pagan Arabs, had escaped when the Prophet
tried to get her, and taken refuge in the temple of “Somnãt”; the word
“Somnãt” was split into “So” and “manta” in order to support the story.
We find references to this story in several histories. Once in a while
another Arab Goddess, Lat, was also suspected to be hiding at Somnath.

In any case, the Qur’ãn had proclaimed that the idols were “deaf and
dumb”, could “neither help nor harm”, and “did not know it when they
were broken”. Subsequent theologians extended the meaning of “broken”
and explained that the idols did not know when they were robbed of their
adornments or defiled or mutilated; their only function was to “deceive”
those who had not been blessed by the “message of monotheism”. So an
iconoclast cut off the hands of a Hindu idol in Seistan and plucked out
its eyes in order to demonstrate the “divine truth”. Muhammad bin Qãsim
took off the necklace of the idol at Multan and replaced it with a piece
of cow’s flesh. The idol did not “protest”, nor did it do anything else
in order to prove that it had any “power for good or evil”. Other
veterans of Islam tried other methods to show to the “infidels” that
their “gods” were “helpless” and they themselves “misguided”.

Again, we can depend upon the poetic powers of Amîr Khusrû. He quoted
the Qur’ãn before describing the iconoclasm at Somnath. “It seemed,” he
wrote, “as if the tongue of the Imperial sword explained the meaning of
the text: ‘So he (Abraham) broke them (the idols) into pieces except the
chief of them, that haply they may return to it.’ Such a pagan country,
the Mecca of the infidels, now became the Medina of Islam.” The earliest
historians relate that while Mahmûd broke the other idols, he carried
the main “idol” unbroken to Ghazni. So the “big brother” did not know
what had happened to the “little ones”, as in the story of Abraham in
the Qur’ãn.^([1](#1)) Khusrû’s highest poetic performance, however, came
when he described the scene at Chidambaram. “The stone idol called Ling
Mahadeo,” he sang, “which had been a long time established at that place
and on which the women of the infidels rubbed their vaginas for (sexual)
satisfaction, these upto this time the kick of the horse of Islam had
not attempted to break… The Musalmans destroyed all the *lings* and Deo
Narain fell down, and the other gods who had fixed their seats there
raised their feet, and jumped so high, that at one leap they reached the
fort of Lanka, and in that affright the lings themselves would have fled
had they any legs to stand on.”

To resume the story, some of the idols were made of precious metals
and/or adorned with costly jewels; they had to be handled with care so
that the faithful were not deprived of the booty promised by Allãh to
those who removed his rivals out of the way. Such images were first
divested of their jewellery, then they were broken or burnt, and finally
melted down; the bullion and the jewels were forwarded to the caliph or
the king, whoever happened to be the patron of the “holy expedition”.
Occasionally, the idols were simply collected and sent to the capital
city and it was the despot there who decided what to do with them. They
certainly provided “great fun” to the “chosen people” before being
disposed off in whatever manner was found appropriate, depending upon
the type of the idols. Those made of precious metals ended in the royal
treasury. Those made of inferior metals were turned into various
instruments or vessels or used for decorative purposes such as door
handles; later on, the bigger ones were recast to make cannon. Idols
made of wood and stone etc., were broken and scattered on the doorsteps
of mosques, particularly the Jãmi‘ Masjids, so that people on their way
to prayers could trample or cleanse their soiled feet upon them, before
entering the “sacred precincts”.

Several instances are cited when the Hindus tried to ransom their idols,
sometimes by expressing willingness to pay their weight in gold. All
such offers were “rejected with contempt” because the hero concerned
wanted to earn “merit in the eyes of Allãh” rather than “mere mammon”.
Those who want to explain away the destruction of Hindu temples in terms
of economic motives, are called upon to explain these instances.

Mahmûd of Ghazni broke many idols with his own hand, including that of
“Somnãt”. He sent the pieces to Mecca, Medina and Baghdad, besides
keeping some in his own capital at Ghazni. It was not for nothing that
his coins struck at Lahore described him as *“butshikan”*, idol-breaker.
Subsequent sultãns followed his example. Unfortunately for them, the
“accursed Mangol”, Changiz Khãn, overran a large part of Islamdom and
blocked the way to the “holy cities” in the first quarter of the
thirteenth century, just at the time when a vast field for breaking
idols and collecting their pieces was opening before the heroes of Islam
in Hind. In AD 1258, his grandson, Halãkû, beat their own idol, the
caliph, into pulp and got the “holy” city of Baghdad ploughed over. So
the pieces had perforce to lie before mosques in lesser places-Lahore,
Delhi, Lakhnauti, Daulatabad, Gulbarga, Madura, Burhanpur, Bidar, Mandu,
Ahmadabad, Jaunpur, Agra, Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, Golkonda, Hyderabad,
Aurangabad. They will be brought in by cart-loads in the time of
Aurangzeb. One of our historians tells us that ‘Alî I ‘Ãdil Shãh of
Bijapur broke four to five thousand idols with his own hands while
campaigning in Karnataka.

Meanwhile, other methods of telling the “truth” about the idols had been
devised by the more imaginative among the swordsmen of Islam. Fîrûz Shãh
Tughlaq had the idol at Purî perforated and dragged along the road to
Delhi. The pieces of the idol at Kangra were given to the butchers for
being used as weights while selling meat. The copper umbrella of the
same idol he got recast into pots for heating water with which the
faithful washed their “hands, feet and faces”, before saying their
prayers. Mahmûd Khaljî of Malwa had the idol at Kumbhalgadh reduced to
lime which was put in *pans* (betel-leaves) and the Hindus were forced
to “eat their god”. He had taken literally a latter-day story of what
Mahmûd of Ghazni had done to the idol of “Somnãt” when the Brahmans
arrived in his capital to “ransom their God”.

The Brahmans who were custodians of the idols and idol-houses, and
“teachers of the infidels”, also received their share of attention from
the soldiers of Allãh. Our citations contain only stray references to
the Brahmans because they have been compiled primarily with reference to
the destruction of temples. Even so, they provide the broad contours of
another chapter in the history of medieval India, a chapter which has
yet to be brought out in full. The Brahmans are referred to as magicians
by some Islamic invaders and massacred straight away. Elsewhere, the
Hindus who are not totally defeated and want to surrender on some terms,
are made to sign a treaty saying that the Brahmans will be expelled from
the temples. The holy cities of the Hindus were “the nests of the
Brahmans” who had to be slaughtered before or after the destruction of
temples, so that these places were “cleansed” completely of *“kufr”* and
made fit as “abodes of Islam”.

Amîr Khusrû describes with great glee how the heads of Brahmans “danced
from their necks and fell to the ground at their feet”, along with those
of the other “infidels” whom Malik Kãfûr had slaughtered during the sack
of the temples at Chidambaram. Fîrûz Shãh Tughlaq got bags full of cow’s
flesh tied round the necks of Brahmans and had them paraded through his
army camp at Kangra. Muhmûd Shãh II Bahmanî bestowed on himself the
honour of being a *ghãzî*, simply because he had killed in cold blood
the helpless BrãhmaNa priests of the local temple after Hindu warriors
had died fighting in defence of the fort at Kondapalli. The present-day
progressives, leftists and *dalits* whose main plank is anti-Brahminism
have no reason to feel innovative about their ideology. Anti-Brahminism
in India is as old a the advent of Islam. Our present-day
Brahmin-baiters are no more than ideological descendants of the Islamic
invaders. Hindus will do well to remember Mahatma Gandhi’s deep
reflection--“if Brahmanism does not revive, Hinduism must perish.”

The next step which the heroes of Islam took after a place had been
“purged by the sword form the filth of impurity and the thorn of
god-plurality” and the “foundations of infidelity destroyed”, was to
build mosques and *madrasas* etc., on the same sites where the temples
stood, most often with the materials of those very temples. The
operation was generally preceded by a pious ritual in which the victors
prostrated themselves and praised Allãh “for the honour He bestows on
Islãm and the Musalmãns”. Cows were slaughtered on the temple sites in
order to render them unclean for the Hindus for all time to come; it had
been noticed that the Hindus demolished the mosques and rebuilt their
temples on the same sites whenever they recaptured a place. Now the
mosques and *madrasas* could spread the “light of Islam” without
interruption. Finally, the priests of Islam took over--the *khatîbs*,
the *mu’zzins*, the *muhtahsibs* and the *qãzîs*. The “uproar of the
heathens gave way to shouts of *Allahû Akbar*” and the “strongholds of
heathenism were made into abodes of Islãm”. Meanwhile, the endowments
enjoyed by the temples had been transferred to the upcoming Islamic
establishments, so that whatever temple priests had survived the
slaughter had to starve while the Muslim clerics prospered.

The most significant feature of our histories, however, is the religious
zeal felt or exhibited by the swordsmen of Islam before and after the
“infidels” who resisted “were sent to hell”, the Brahmans massacred or
molested or expelled, idols desecrated, temples demolished, and mosques
raised in their stead. The prophet of Islam appears in a dream and bids
a sultãn to start on the “holy expedition”, leaving no doubt that the
“victory of religion” was assured. Amîr Khusrû was very eloquent about
the transformation that was taking place. When the hordes of Alãu’d-Dîn
Khaljî sacked the temple of Somnath, he exulted, “The sword of Islãm
purified the land as the Sun purifies the earth.” His enthusiasm broke
all bounds when the same hordes swept over South India: “The tongue of
the sword of the Khalifa of the time, which is the tongue of the flame
of Islãm, has imparted light to the entire darkness of Hindustãn by the
illumination of its guidance… and several capitals of the gods of the
Hindus in which Satanism had prevailed since the time of Jinns, have
been demolished. All these impurities of infidelity have been cleansed
by the Sultãn’s destruction of idol-temples, beginning with his first
expedition to Deogîr, so that the flames of the fight of the law
illumine all these unholy countries… God be praised!” One wonders
whether the poet of Islam is being honoured or slandered when he is
presented in our own times as the pioneer of Secularism. Or, perhaps,
Secularism in India has a meaning deeper than that we find in the
dictionaries or dissertations on political science. We may not be much
mistaken if, seeing its studied exercise in blackening everything Hindu
and whitewashing everything Islamic, we suspect that this Secularism is
nothing more than the good old doctrine of Islam in disguise.

If our citations prove anything and prove it beyond a shadow of doubt,
it is this that in doing what they did to Hindu temples the heroes of
Islam were inspired by their religion and religion alone. They cannot be
blamed if the plunder which occasionally preceded the destruction of
temples was viewed by them as a well-deserved reward for doing service
to Allah and his Last Prophet; they knew what the Qur’ãn and the Sunnah
had prescribed in very clear language and, therefore, had a clean
conscience. It is a different matter altogether that their religion
provided, more often than not, a cover, or an *a posteriori*
justification as Professor Mohammed Habib would like to put it, for some
of the basest motives in human nature and attracted to its standards
some of the worst hoodlums and gangsters and blood-thirsty bandits that
the world has known. The fact that these despicable characters have been
made to masquerade as *Mujãhids* and *Ghãzîs* and *Shahîds* and Sultãns
and Sufis by Muslim historians can hoodwink no one except those who
either do not know the facts or have the same moral standards as those
of Islam.

Our Marxist professors and other pandits of Secularism are very much
mistaken when they discover or invent economic and/or political motives
for explaining away the crimes committed by Islam. Either they have
remained totally ignorant of what the Theology of Islam prescribes
vis-a-vis the unbelievers, their women and children, their properties,
their homelands, their religious teachers, and their places of worship;
or their deep-seated animus against everything Hindu has pushed them
into the camp of those who are out to destroy everything for which this
country has been held in high esteem down the ages. We shall, give them
the benefit of doubt and assume that their ignorance of the Theology of
Islam rather than their anti-Hindu animus is the culprit. We proceed to
present that Theology in the chapter that follows.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Qu’rãn, 21.51-70.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


