+++
title = "10 CHAPTER NINE THEOLOGY OF MONOTHEISM"

+++
**CHAPTER NINE**

**THEOLOGY OF MONOTHEISM**

The destruction of Hindu temples at the hands of Islamized invaders
continued for more than eleven hundred years, from the middle of the
seventh century to the end of the eighteenth.^([1](#1)) It took place
all over the cradle of Hindu culture, from Sinkiang in the North to
Tamil Nadu in the South, and from Seistan in the West to Assam in the
East.^([2](#2))

All along, the iconoclasts remained convinced that they were putting
into practice the highest tenets of their religion. They also saw to it
that a record was kept of what they prized as a pious performance. The
language of the record speaks for itself. It leaves no doubt that they
took immense pride in doing what they did.

It is inconceivable that a constant and consistent behaviour pattern,
witnessed for a long time and over a vast area, can be explained except
in terms of a settled system of belief which leaves no scope for second
thoughts. Looking at the very large number of temples, big and small,
destroyed or desecrated or converted into Muslim monuments, economic or
political explanations can be only a futile, if not fraudulent,
exercise. The explanations are not even plausible.

In fact, it is not at all difficult to locate the system of belief which
inspired the behaviour pattern. We have only to turn to the scriptures
of Islam-the Qur’ãn and the Sunnah of the Prophet-and we run straight
into what we are looking for. The principles and the pious precedents
which were practised and followed by the subsequent swordsmen of Islam
are, all of them, there.

The scriptures of Islam do not merely record what happened in the past;
they also prescribe that what is recorded should be imitated by the
faithful in the future, till the end of time. That is why the swordsmen
of Islam who functioned in times much later than that of the Qur’ãn and
the Sunnah, did what they did.  It is in the very nature of scriptures,
as we shall see, that they make permanent what can otherwise be dated
and dismissed as temporary aberrations.

Those scriptures are still being taught in hundreds of maktabs and
madrasas spread over the length and breath of India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh. Missionaries of Islam that are turned out by these
institutions, year after year, are never told by their teachers that the
prescriptions regarding other people’s places of worship stand abrogated
or are out of date. At the same time, the swordsmen who destroyed
innumerable temples and monasteries all over the vast cradle of Hindu
culture, retain their halos as the heroes of Islam. That alone can
explain why Hindu temples become the first targets of attack whenever
Muslim mobs are incited against India by the mullas in Pakistan,
Bangladesh and Kashmir.

It is, therefore, worthwhile to clarify what the word “scripture” stands
for, before we take up the scriptures of Islam. The language of
Christianity and Islam in the modern media has confused the language of
religion, all along the line. Even scholars do not seem to know or care
to clarify that scriptures as such are specific to the prophetic or
revealed religions such as Judaism, Christianity and Islam, and that
they remain unknown to the pagan^([3](#3)) spiritual traditions such as
that of the Hindus, the Chinese, the ancient Iranians, and the
pre-Christian Greeks, Romans, Germans, Slavs, Scandinavians, Celts, etc.

The confusion has been further confounded by what passes for Secularism
in this country. Most of our scribes in the mass media are either
equally ignorant of all religions or equally indifferent to them. But
they insist, with considerable vehemence, that all religions say the
same things. Politicians in power are much worse. As they preside over
the birthday functions or festivals related to Šrî Rãma, Šrî KrishNa,
Bhagavãn Mahãvîra, Bhagavãn Buddha and Guru Nãnak on the one hand, and
Jesus Christ and Prophet Muhammad on the other, they harangue the
audience to follow the teachings in each case. It never occurs to them
that Christianity and Islam have nothing in common with the Hindu
spiritual traditions and that the followers of the former have tried and
are trying their utmost to wipe out the latter.^([4](#4))  
 

**Meaning of Scripture**

Etymologically, the word “scripture” is derived from the Latin
*“scribere”*, to write. In the lexicons of the revealed religions,
however, the word does not refer to writing down of human speech or
verbalizing of human thought or recording of terrestrial events.
Instead, it stands for the “Word of God” written in “the Book”.

The word of God, in its turn, does not come to any and every one who
seeks it, howsoever devoutly. Instead, it is “revealed” to some highly
privileged persons known as “prophets”. Everyone else has to learn it
second-hand, and accept it as authentic even when it runs counter to
one’s experience, or reason, or moral sense, or all of them taken
together. No one else can have direct knowledge of it or aspire to enter
into the consciousness to which it was revealed, as in the case of pagan
spiritual traditions which entitle every seeker to attain the
consciousness of their greatest saints and sages, and know God directly
and first-hand. Belief in the word of God as spoken by *the* Prophet and
as written in *the* Book is, therefore, all that is needed for
qualifying as one of the faithful. At the same time, mental belief and
not moral behaviour is the criterion for judging a person’s character.

Nor do the prophets take birth among any or every people. 
Etymylogically, the word “prophet” is derived from the Greek *“phanai”*,
to speak, which is a cognate of the Sanskrit *“bhaNa”*. In the lexicons
of the revealed religions, however, the prophet is no ordinary
spokesman. Instead, he is the “spokesman of deity.”^([5](#5)) And he is
“sent” only to the “Chosen People,” with whom God intends to enter into
a “Covenant”.

So far there have been only three chosen people-the Jews, the
Christians, and the Muslims. According to the covenants which God has
entered into with them, each of them has been promised world-dominion
and untold amounts of unearned wealth in exchange for making God known
to all those who worship “other gods” and thus deny God’s “Unity” and
“Unique Majesty”.  
 

**Rise of Theology**

In due course, as the word of God is studied, systematized and
interpreted, it gives birth to a supplementary discipline named
Theology. Etymologically, the word “theology” is a compound of two Greek
words-“theos”^([6](#6)) meaning “god”, and “logos” meaning “word.” But
curiously enough, the ancient Greeks from whose language the compound
has been constructed were unaware of the very notion of word of God.
Theology was formulated and used for the first time by the Founding
Fathers of the Christian Church for presenting their peculiar creed to
pagans in the Roman Empire. It had nothing whatsoever to do with any
Greek religion or philosophy, of which there were quite a few before
they were destroyed or subverted by Christianity. Islamic scholarship
which flourished in the wake of the Prophet, fashioned another theology,
more or less on the same pattern, a few hundred years later.

Theology is a large and complex subject. What concerns us here is some
specific features which characterise it. One of those features is that
the life-style of the Prophet and his companions/apostles is proclaimed
as the “divine pattern of human conduct” which should be copied by
everyone, everywhere, in order to qualify for salvation or paradise.
According to another, the doings of the chosen people as they wage wars,
conquer countries and convert or kill other people, are to be seen as
the unfoldment of a “divine plan in human history”.

What is most significant, however, is that theology notices and notifies
three neat and sharp divisions. Firstly, it divides human history into
two periods-an “age of ignorance” preceding the appearance of *the*
Prophet, and an “age of illumination” following that event. Secondly, it
bifurcates the human family into two factions-the “believers” who accept
*the* Prophet as the one and only “mediator” between God and human
beings, and the “unbelievers” who have either not heard of *the* Prophet
at all or find him unacceptable for whatever reason. Thirdly, it breaks
up the inhabited world into two camps-the lands ruled by the believers,
and the lands where the unbelievers live.

Proceeding further, theology pronounces a permanent war, hailed as
“holy”, between the three sets of divisions. Religions and cultures
which preceded the age of ignorance have to go and yield place to the
religion and culture of the age of illumination. Next, the believers
must strive, ceaselessly and by every means at their disposal, to
convert the unbelievers to the new creed. Finally, the lands of the
believers must be made into launching pads for missions as well as
military expeditions to be sent to the lands of the unbelievers, so that
the latter are conquered and turned into lands of the believers.

Naturally, the places where the unbelievers worship and the institutions
which sustain that worship, become the first and foremost targets of
holy wars. The idols^([7](#7)) of the unbelievers’ Gods are at least
mutilated, if they cannot be smashed to pieces. The temples where those
Gods are worshipped are at least desecrated, if they cannot be
destroyed. The schools and monasteries where the unbelievers learn their
religion are at least plundred, if they cannot be razed to the ground.
The saints, sages and scholars who guide the unbelievers are at least
humiliated, driven out and deprived of livelihood, if they cannot be
killed outright. The literature which enshrines the unbelievers’
religion and culture is scattered to the winds, or burnt on the spot, or
used as fuel in the homes of the believers. And so on, the war on the
religion and culture of the unbelievers is total and unrelenting.

These operations are expected to help the unbelievers lose faith in
their own Gods and acquire an awe for the God of the conqueror. The God
of the conqueror stands glorified when new places of worship are raised
on the sites of the old, preferably with the debris of those that have
been deliberately demolished. And that God is fully vindicated when the
believers tread under foot the idols of the unbelievers’ Gods or their
pieces, as they walk towards the new places of worship for offering
prayers.

Finally, theology enjoins that the holy wars and all that they mean
should be recorded meticulously and in lustrous language. These records
testify to the unfoldment of the divine plan in human history in the
past, and inspire future generations of believers to unfold it further.
We have three extensive versions of this unfoldment or the triumph of
the “true faith” over “false belief-the Judaic, the Christian, and the
Islamic. All of them glorify the “great heroes” who waged holy wars and
heaped defeats and humiliations on the “infidels”. The “rich rewards”
which God bestowed on the believers for fulfilling their part of the
covenant are also described at length. And succeeding generations of
believers have, no doubt, felt inspired to follow in the footsteps of
their “illustrious forefathers”.  
 

**Role of Theology**

Apart from providing the right perceptions, inspiring pious
performances, and establishing illustrious precedents, theology serves
another and, psychologically, a very useful purpose. It prepares the
believers for feeling the “glow of faith” as they read or listen to the
unfoldment of the divine plan in human history. The accounts are
spiritually satisfying-how every trace of the religion and culture of
the age of ignorance was wiped out, to start with, in the Prophet’s own
land of birth; how one land after another was invaded and laid waste
without any provocation on the part of the victims of aggression; how
innocent and defenceless people were massacred in cold blood and with a
clean conscience; how large numbers of noncombatant men, women and
children were captured and sold into slavery and concubinage; how native
populations were reduced to the status of non-citizens, drawing water
and hewing wood for the conqueror, and groaning under the weight of
discriminatory levies and back-breaking disabilities; how great
creations of graphic arts were mutilated or broken to pieces or trampled
under foot; how edifices of exquisite beauty, embodying skills
accumulated over ages, were pulled down and levelled with the ground;
how whole libraries containing priceless works of science and
literature, were burnt down; how saints and sages and scholars who had
given no offence and meant no harm, were humiliated or manhandled or
killed; how vast properties, moveable and immoveable, were
misappropriated. And so on, the record is invariably crowded with the
darkest crimes and fiendish cruelty. Only the believers find it
fulfilling. For persons with normal moral sensibilities, it is a
nightmare. The only point which goes in its favour is that it provides
the best commentary on the doctrines of the creed concerned.

Looking at the character of the God of revealed religions, the quality
of his words, the life-styles of his prophets, and the course of his
divine plans in human history, one wonders whether the revealed
religions do not reveal an Orwellian world abounding in marvels of
doublethink and double-speak. Here one meets the Devil masquerading as
God, and gangsters strutting around as prophets. Here one discovers that
the scripture does not inspire spiritual seeking or moral discipline
but, on the contrary, encourages the basest in human nature to run riot
without any restraint. All in all, Theology stands out as another name
for Demonology, and the revealed religions reveal themselves as no more
than totalitarian ideologies of imperialism, of enslavement and
genocide. They turn out to be older versions of what we have known as
Communism and Nazism in our own times. A Secularism which puts them on
par with the spiritual traditions of Hinduism is not only foolish but
also mischievous. It misses the very meaning of religion, and shelters
gangsterism.  
 

**Theology of Islam**

Islam uses the Arabic language instead of Hebrew or Greek, but says the
same things as the older revealed religions. Its only point of departure
is that it abrogates the earlier revelations, and subordinates the
earlier prophets to the “latest and the last”.

Islam has hijacked Allah from the pantheon of the pre-Islamic Arabs and
turned him into a jealous God who tolerates no “other gods”. Allãh of
Islam is no more than a reincarnation of Jehovah, the Judaic and the
Christian God in the Bible.

The prophet of Islam, Muhammad, moulds himself, consciously and
progressively, in the image of Moses. In fact, his very name, Nabî, has
been taken from the Hebrew Lexicon.

Allãh now speaks only through the mouth of Muhammad. That is the Qur’ãn,
or the Book (*Kitãb*). Here also the word of God is borrowed, by and
large, from the Bible. The only difference is that the Qur’ãn lacks the
literary merit and narrative coherence of the earlier scripture. It is a
loose bundle of vehement utterances, without any chronological or
thematic order, and has to be understood with the help of laborious,
very often speculative, commentaries.

Again, Allãh acts in the life-style of Muhammad. That is the Sunnah of
the Prophet. This divine pattern of human conduct knows all the answers.
No pious Muslim has to use his own mental faculties or devise his own
individual course of action. It is all laid down for him, from birth to
death, and even beyond. As the theologians of Islam say, Muslims should
not use their *aql* (reason); all they need is *naql* (imitation of the
Prophet).

The covenant, *MiSãq*, into which Allãh enters with the newly chosen
people, the *Ummatu Muhammadî*, commands them to worship him alone and
convert or kill or enslave those who worship other gods. Allãh’s earlier
covenants with the Jews or the *Ummatu Ibrãhîmî* and the Christians or
the *Ummatu Îsã*, stand cancelled. Now onwards, Muslims alone are
entitled to rule over the world and appropriate its wealth. There is a
slight “improvement” also in the new covenant. Plunder of the infidels’
properties, particularly their women and children, was not permitted to
the earlier chosen people, while it has been prescribed as obligatory
for the *Ummatu Muhammadî*.

The doings of the *Ummatu Muhammadî* in Arabia and many other lands
manifest the divine plan in human history. The annals of Islam, the
Twãrîkh, which are an integral part of its theology, have been penned by
some of its most pious scholars.

The theology of Islam, *Kalãm*, deals with the same old divisions of
human history, the human family, and the inhabited world. The period
before Muhammad started receiving revelations and proclaimed his
prophethood is denounced as *Jãhilîya*, the age of ignorance; the period
succeeding that event is the age of *Ilm*, enlightenment. Those who
recite the Kalima or confession of faith-*Lã Ilãha Illa‘llãhû,
Mahammadûn Rasûl‘llãh* (there is no god but Allãh and Muhammad is the
Prophet)^([8](#8)) -are *Mu‘mins*, the believers; those who do not, are
*Kãfirs*, the unbelievers. The lands ruled by the *Mu‘mins* are *Dãr
al-Islãm*, abodes of peace, while those where the *Kãfirs* live are *Dãr
al-Harb*, abodes of war, where the *Mu‘mins* should ply their swords. It
sounds logical that in popular Muslim parlance a *Kãfir* is often called
a *Harbî*, that is, one who deserves treatment of the sword.

Finally, Islam enjoins a permanent war, *Jihãd*, by the *Mu‘mins* and
against the *Kãfirs*. We need not give the details which we have already
presented elsewhere, in principle as well as practice.^([9](#9)) Suffice
it to say that it is an extremely bloody affair, entailing continued
wars of conquest, massacres, mass conversions by force, widespread
plunder, enslavement of prisoner taken in war, collection of booty
including non-combatant men and women and children, subjugation of
native populations, and the rest. What concerns us here is that *Jihãd*
is centred round iconoclasm. In fact, the need for *Jihãd* arises only
because the *Kãfirs* worship their own Gods instead of Muhammad’s Allãh.
*Jihãd*, therefore, remains incomplete till all places where those Gods
are worshipped get levelled with the ground, and all saints and priests
who spread and sustain *Kufr* are converted or killed.

Confining ourselves to India, “The Mohammedan conquest of India is
probably the bloodiest story in history,” according to Will Durant, the
famous student of civilizations. He finds it “a discouraging tale, for
its evident moral is that civilization is a precious thing whose
delicate complex of order and liberty, culture and peace may at any time
be overthrown by barbarians…”^([10](#10)) But the pious Muslims read or
listen to this story with immense satisfaction. They go into raptures as
their heroes invade Sind and Hind, massacre the accursed *Kãfirs*
without remorse, capture and sell into slavery large numbers of Hindu
men and women and children, kill or heap humiliations on Hindu saints
and scholars, desecrate or destroy idols of Hindu Gods and Goddesses,
pull down Hindu temples or convert them into *masjids* and *madrasas*,
reduce the Hindus to non-citizens in their own homeland, and
misappropriate all properties, moveable and immoveable. And they get
furious when they find the Hindus failing to admire Muhammad bin Qãsim,
Mahmûd of Ghazni, Muhammad Ghûrî, Shamsu’d-Dîn Iltutmish, Ghiyãsu’d-Dîn
Balban, ‘Alãu’d-Dîn Khaljî, Muhammad and Fîrûz Shãh Tughalaq, Sikandar
Lodî, Bãbur, Aurangzeb, and Ahmad Shãh Abdãlî, to cite only the most
notable among Muslim heroes in the history of India. The theology of
Islam has thus performed to perfection the function it is intended to
perform, even though the forefathers of an overwhelming majority of
Muslims in India were victims of this theology.

In our specific context, namely, the destruction of Hindu temples, it
should be more than sufficient if we merely cite what the Qur’ãn says,
in verse after verse and chapter after chapter, vis-a-vis the *mushriks*
(polytheists) and the *aSnãm* (idols) they worship. Allãh of Islam
leaves no one in doubt that he sanctions the destruction of “false gods”
and the places where they receive homage. So is the case with the Sunnah
of the Prophet. We have only to list the instances of iconoclasm which
Muhammad undertook himself or ordered in his own lifetime, and we have
more than sufficient pious precedents which the faithful are expected to
follow. Anyone who says that the Qur’ãn and the Sunnah do not enjoin the
destruction of other people’s places of worship has either not read the
documents, or has failed to grasp the message, or is practising
deliberate deception. No amount of apologetics can cover up or explain
away the principle and the practice.

A mere narration of principle and practice, however, is likely to leave
a mistaken impression. People who are not familiar with the rise and
spread of Islam have been led away by the Big Lie that the people of
Arabia rallied round a prophet and did, willingly and voluntarily,
whatever he asked them to do, because they knew no better. This lie has
succeeded to a great extent not only in the lands which are now occupied
by the believers but also in India which has battled with Islam for more
than thirteen hundred years. But nothing can be farther from the truth
as told in the orthodox biographies of the Prophet. The people of Arabia
resisted Muhammad and his message, and fought in defence of their
ancient religion and culture, till they were forced to surrender in the
face of a formidable military machine forged by him at Medina. The
machine was financed by plunder obtained through widespread raids, and
manned by desperados recruited from all over Arabia. Neither the Qur’ãn
nor the Sunnah of the Prophet can be understood or evaluated properly
unless it is placed in its historical context, namely, the pre-Islamic
Arab society and culture which had functioned for a long time to the
satisfaction of the people concerned, till Muhammad appeared on the
scene.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) We are leaving for the time being the destruction that took
place in Muslim princely states under British rule as also that which
has continued since 1947 in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Kashmir.

[²](#2a) We are leaving for the time being the destruction which took
place and is taking place in Indonesia and Malaysia.

[³](#3a) The *Chambers 20th Century Dictionary* defines a pagan as “a
heathen, one who is not a Christian, Jew, or Muslim…”

[⁴](#4a) The subject has been discussed in detail by Dr. Harsh Narain in
his study, *Myths of Composite Culture and Equality of Religions*,
published by Voice of India, New Delhi, 1991.

[⁵](#5a) See the *Chambers 20th Century Dictionary* for the Meaning of
Prophet.

[⁶](#6a) It is a cognate of the Sanskrit *“deva”*.

[⁷](#7a) The word “idol” is derived from the Greek *“idein”*, to see,
which is a cognate of the Sanskrit *“vid”*, to perceive.

[⁸](#8a) The first part of the *Kalima* is often translated as “there is
no god but God,” which is not only misconceived but positively
mischievous. Allãh of the Qur’ãn never claims to be the God of mankind;
he prides in being the God of Muslims alone.

[⁹](#9a) *The Calcutta Quran Petition By Chandmal Chopra*, with two
prefaces by Sita Ram Goel, second the enlarged edition, New Delhi. 987,
pp. 35-37.

[¹⁰](#10a) Will Durant, *The Story of Civilization*, Vol. I, *Our
Oriental Heritage*, New York, 1972, p. 459.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


