+++
title = "04 2 Encounter in Malabar"

+++
**2**  
**Encounter in Malabar**

It is not known whether the news of the Christian onslaught on Hinduism
in the Roman Empire reached India. One wonders whether the merchants and
monks who survived and returned home grasped the import of what was
happening. If they gave to their countrymen an account of what they had
witnessed in a distant land, the record has not survived or is not yet
known. Nor do we know how the Hindus at home reacted, if at all. What we
do know, however, is that Hinduism in India had not heard of
Christianity when the two had their second encounter, this time inside
the homeland of Hinduism.

The Hindus of Malabar were the first to see Christians arriving in their
midst. They were mostly refugees from persecution in Syria and later on
in Iran. Christians in Syria were persecuted by their own brethren in
faith. They had become suspect in Iran from the fourth century onwards
when Iran’s old adversary, the Roman Empire, became a Christian state.
They suffered repeated persecutions in both countries. As most of them
were heretics in the eyes of Christian orthodoxy, they could not go
west. So they fled towards India and China, which two countries were
known for their religious tolerance throughout the ages. Later on, they
were joined by refugees from Armenia flying from Christian
heresy-hunters.

The record that has been preserved by the Christian refugees themselves
tells us that they were received well by the Hindus of Malabar. Hindu
Rajas gave them land and money grants for building houses and churches.
Hindus in general made things so pleasant for them that they decided to
stay permanently in Malabar. No Hindu, Raja or commoner, ever bothered
about what the refugees believed or what god they worshipped. No one
interfered with the hierarchs who came from Syria from time to time to
visit their flock in India and collect the tithes. In due course, the
refugees came to be known as Syrian Christians.

It is not known how the Syrian Christians viewed their Hindu neighbours.
If they despised the Hindus as heathens, they kept it a closely guarded
secret. Nor did they try to evangelize and convert the Hindus, the two
practices which had been proclaimed by the Founding Fathers of the
Church as inseparable parts of the Christian Creed and inalienable
rights of Christians everywhere. On the contrary, they lost their
separate identity and became a part of the local population, so much so
that Christian travellers who came to these parts in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries did not notice them as different from Hindus. They
learnt the local language and took to Hindu modes in dress and food and
the other externals of life. They intermarried with certain sections of
Hindu society. Even inside their churches, their rituals acquired the
character of Hindu *pUjA*.

Latter-day Christian theologians and historians would claim that Syrian
Christianity had. a tremendous impact on Hinduism. The notion of One God
which some sixteenth-century missionaries “discovered” in Hinduism would
be seen as a contribution of Christianity. Nineteenth-century Christian
scholars would assert that Hindus had derived the concepts of *bhakti*
(devotion) and *mukti* (salvation) from the Christian contact in South
India which was held by Hindus as the original home of the medieval
Bhakti Movement. Christ was seen disguised in Krishna who figured
prominently in certain Vaishnava schools of *bhakti*. Hindu philosophies
like the *advaita* of Shankara and the *vishisTAdvaita* of Ramanuja were
also traced to Christian sources.

No scholar today takes these hair-brained Christian speculations
seriously. The current fashion among scholars of medieval India is to
see Islam as the source of the Bhakti Movement. But that is a different
story. it is also a different story that some Christian theologians are
trying to use *advaita* and *vishisTAdvaita* as vehicles for implanting
Christianity into the heart of Hinduism. What is pertinent in the
present context is that the Syrian Christians were never known to their
Hindu neighbours for spiritual or philosophical profundities. The only
thing that was known about them was that they were hardworking and
intelligent businessmen, some of whom had succeeded as prosperous spice
merchants. They were also known for keeping slaves as well as trading in
them.

The significant point to be noted about the Syrian Christians, however,
is their sudden change of colour as soon as the Portuguese arrived on
the scene. They immediately rallied round the Portuguese and against
their Hindu neighbours, and when the Portuguese started pressurizing the
Hindu Rajas for extraterritorial rights so that their co-religionists
could be “protected”, the Syrian Christians evinced great enthusiasm
everywhere. They became loyal subjects of the king of Portugal and pious
adherents of the Roman Catholic Church. Was it the demonstration of
Portuguese power which demoralised the Syrian Christians and made them
do what they did? Or was it the Christian doctrine which, though it lay
dormant for a long time, surfaced at the first favourable opportunity?
The matter has to be examined. Looking at the behaviour of Syrian
Christians ever since, the second proposition seems to be nearer the
truth.^([1](#1))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) cf. K.M. Panikkar, Malabar and the Portuguese. Bombay, 1929.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
