+++
title = "05 3 Hallucinations of the Devil’s Devotees"

+++
**3**  
**Hallucinations of the Devil’s Devotees**

For a long time, the Syrian Christians provided the only contact which
Hinduism had with Christianity. India lost touch with the Christian West
for well-nigh seven centuries because Islamic empires in the Middle East
and Central Asia, had raised a barrier between the two. Christians and
Muslims were involved in mortal combat soon after the death of prophet
Muhammad in AD 632. Christian travellers ran the risk of death if they
tried to come east through Muslim dominated routes on land and sea.
Hindu merchants, too, lost the incentive for going to Europe. Muslim
merchants had monopolised all trade between the East and the West. Hindu
sages and savants could hardly think of going abroad; they were having a
very difficult time at home where Islam was heaping humiliations on
them.

It goes to the credit of medieval Christianity that in spite of this
total loss of physical contact, it kept alive the memory of the
Brahmanas in its theology. Christian theologians never forgot to
remember the Brahmanas whenever they thought of the Pagan Greeks, which
was quite often. Only the status of the Brahmanas vis-a-vis the Greeks
had suffered a decline. In Pagan times, the Brahmanas were known as
teachers of the Greeks, but in Christian centuries they came to be known
only as Pythagoreans who avoided animal food and believed in
transmigration. That, however, did not make a difference to Christian
perception of the Brahmana religion.

So, when the Church Fathers converted the Gods o the Greeks into devils,
the Gods of the Brahmanas suffered a similar fate. “St. Augustine,”
writes Professor Partha Mitter, “sanctioned the idea that demons
persuaded the ancients to false belief. Some of the most virulent
attacks on pagan gods are to be found in St. Augustine’s *De Civitate
Dei*, where he argued that devils presented themselves to be adored, but
they were no gods but wicked fiends and most foul, unclean and impotent
spirits.”^([1](#1)) The Christian travellers who started trickling into
India from the fourteenth century onwards, could not help seeing the
hosts of hell in Hindu temples.

The first Christian traveller to India who has left a written account
was a friar, Father Odoric of Podenone. He was in South India from AD
1316 to 1318. “He was the first traveller,” proceeds Professor Mitter,
“to leave a description of a monstrous idol in the form of half man and
half ox. The monster at Quilon in South India gave responses from its
mouth and demanded the blood of forty virgins to be given to
it.”^([2](#2)) This description passed into a painting by Boucicau
Master, the greatest illuminator of manuscripts in Paris in the first
years of the fifteenth century. One of his illustrations in Livres de
marveilles, a famous manuscript, is “on human sacrifice taking place in
Quilon in front of an idol.”^([3](#3)) This painting “for the first time
assigned horns and goat-head to an Indian god which had until now been
the common features of the devil.”^([4](#4))

But by far the best Christian commentator on Hindu Gods was the Italian
traveller, Ludovico di Varthema, from Bologna. He was in South India
between AD 1503 and 1508. According to his “description of the religion
prevailing in the area”, the Raja of Calicut “paid respect to a devil
known as Deumo in these parts.” He had an eye for detail, small and big,
as is evident from his *Itineratio* published in AD 1510. The Raja of
Calicut, he wrote, “keeps this Deumo in his chapel in his palace.” The
chapel had in its midst ‘a devil made of metal.’ This devil had “four
horns and four teeth with a very large mouth, nose and most terrible
eyes.” Its hands were “made like those of a flesh-hook and the feet like
those of a cock.” Varthema saw many more devils in “pictures around the
said chapel.” On each side of the chapel, he found a Satan “seated in a
seat, which seat is placed in a flame of fire, wherein are a great
number of souls, of the length of half a finger and a finger of the
hand.” He concluded his account of the Raja’s chapel by stating that the
Satan “holds a soul in his mouth with the right hand and with the other
seizes a soul by the waist.”^([5](#5))

An illustrated edition of Varthema’s *Itineratio* was published in
Germany in AD 1515. The Deumo of Calicut came alive in a woodcut by an
Augsburg artist. Varthema was translated in all major European languages
and ran into numerous illustrated editions. It became the best travel
guide for most European visitors to India during the two succeeding
centuries. Professor Mitter has summarised the reports of these
travellers so far as they refer to Hindu Gods. He has also reproduced
pictorial samples of what these travelers “saw with their own eyes” in
one Hindu temple after another. He prepares his readers before he
proceeds with the travelogues. “It does not surprise us,” he explains,
“that these travellers believed in the essential truthfulness of their
reports which were of course unquestionably accepted by their
contemporaries. Yet as a comparison of actual Indian sculptures with
their early descriptions reveals, the early travellers were far from
being objective. That is not to say that there was a deliberate
conspiracy, for that would have made things easy for us. It is simply
that early travellers preferred to trust what they had been taught to
expect instead of trusting their own eyes.”^([6](#6))

Professor Mitter puts the blame on the Church Fathers who had taught
that “all pagan gods were demons and devils.”^([7](#7)) But that does
not explain why devils and demons occupied all the attention of the
Church for many centuries to the exclusion of everything else even when
no “pagan gods” were around any more. It has been calculated by scholars
of the subject that the number of devils and demons known to the Church
ran up to eight millions. We have to face the fact that Christianity has
been and remains a cult of devil-worship. That is why its adherents see
only devils and demons wherever they go. There is no other explanation
for the hallucinations of Varthema and Company. The fact that the Devil
is described as God in the Bible should make no difference.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Partha Mitter, *The Much Maligned Monsters*, Oxford, 1977, p.
9.

[²](#2a) *Ibid.,* p. 11.

[³](#3a) *Ibid.*

[⁴](#4a) *Ibid.,* p. 14.

[⁵](#5a) *Ibid.,* p. 17

[⁶](#6a) *Ibid.,* p. 2.

[⁷](#7a) *Ibid.,* p. 17. The medieval Christian image of Hindu Gods
persists in our own times. Abbe Duboi, the famous French missionary,
wrote a whole chapter on Hindu temples in his book, *Hindu Manners,
Customs and Ceremonies*. Coming to Hindu idols he says, “Hindu
imagination is such that it cannot be excited except by what is
monstrous and extravagant” (p. 607). The third and final edition of this
book was published in 1897, nearly a hundred years ago. But it remains
the best primer on Hinduism for the average Western traveller to India.
Max Muller recommended it “as containing views of an eye-witness, a man
singularly free from all prejudice” (p. vii). It has run through a dozen
reprints in England. The Oxford University Press has printed its Fifth
Indian impression as recently as 1985. Several other Indian publishers
have produced it in different shapes and sizes because it is in constant
demand. We have no idea in how many languages it has been translated and
how many reprints it has run elsewhere. The total turnout over the years
must have been considerable. For many modern Hindus, it is the only
source of their knowledge about the religion of their ancestors.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
