+++
title = "01 CHAPTER 2 - Words Which Defy Dictionaries"

+++
## CHAPTER 2 - Words Which Defy Dictionaries

As one surveys India's political parlance the first features one notices
is that while certain people and parties are described as Leftist,
certain others are designated as Righist. Once in a while, political
scientists and journalists add nuances to this broad bracketing when
they pronounce some splinter group as Left or Right of Centre. But one
is left guessing about the location of the Centre itself. It is
sometimes suggested that the Centre is constituted by the ruling
Congress Party. The Congress Party however, repudiates this description.

The second feature which invites attention is that these
contradistinctive labels - Leftist and Rightist - have never been
apportioned among people and parties converned by an impartial tribunal
like, say, the Election Commission. What has happened is that certain
people and parties have appropriated one label - Leftist - for
themselves and reserved the other label - Rightist - for their oppoents,
without permission from or prior consultation with the latter.

The third feature which one discovers very soon is that people and
parties who call themselves Leftist also claim to be progressive,
revolutionary, socialist, secularist and democratic. At the same time
they accuse the *"Rightists"* of being reactionary, revivalist,
capitalist and fascist. At this stage, the labels cease to be merely
descriptive. They become laudatory and denuciatory instead. Labels like
progressive and revolutionary, etc., acquire an aura of virtue and
holiness. On the other hand, labels like reactionary and revivalist
ect., start smelling of vice and sin.

The fourth feature of the Indian political scene needs a somewhat deeper
look because it goes beyond the merely political and borders on the
philosophical. The Leftist claim that they are committed to a scientific
interpretation of the world-process including economic, social,
political and cultural developments and that, therefore, their plans and
programmes are not only pertinent but also profitable for the modern
age. Simultaneously, they accuse that the *"Rightists"* are addicted to
an obscurantist view of the same world-process and, therefore, to such
outmoded forms of economy, polity and culture as should find no place at
this stage of human history.

Lastly one finds that the Leftists in general are pretty self-rightenous
as if some supreme power which presides over the world-process has not
only entrusted them with the destiny of the Indian people but also
assured them of ultimate and inevitable victory. At the same time the
Leftists expect the *"Rightists"* to feel sorry for themselves as if the
latter have committed or are out to commit some heinous crimes against
humanity and, therefore, should not have any future except the dustbin
of history.

It would be an interesting investigation to look up the dictionary
meanings of these words which are being bandied around by the Leftists
as political labels, and see if they really stick where they have been
made to stick. Human history has known many instances in which the wolf
has prowled and preyed in sheep's clothing while the poor sheep has been
presented as a wolf by sheer trick of language. The secular version of
medieval India under Muslim rule, as taught in our schools and colleges
at present, is a case in point. Foreign invaders and mass murderers are
being portrayed as illustrious emperors while patriots and freedom
fighters are being pilloried as petty upstarts.

On 13 August 1934 Pandit Nehru had written to Mahatma Gandhi that
socialism had *"a clearly defined meaning in the English language.*" The
Mahatma had written back: *"I have looked up the dictionary meaning of
socialism. It takes me no further than where I was before I read the
definition. What will you have me to read to know its full contents?"*
(Sankar Ghosh, *"Socialism and Communism in India"*, Bombay 1971, p.
183).

The various words which the Leftists now employ in order to applaud
themselves and denigrate those who differ from them can be found in any
standard dictionary of the English language. But the dictionaries do not
vouchsafe for the values with which the Leftists load these words. In
most cases, the dictionaries assume prior definitions derived from
different universes of discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## LEFTIST VERSUS RIGHTIST

Dictionaries define a Leftist as *"the more progressive or actively
innovating party or wing (from its sitting in some legislature to the
president's left)"*. The same dictionaries define a Rightist as *"an
adherent of the political right (conservative)"*. Neither of these
definitions is very illuminating unless we have prior notions of
progressive and conservative. Nor are the values attached to these words
evident in these definitions.

We shall discuss the word *"progressive"* when we come to it at a
slightly later stage. Right here we can take up the word
*"conservative"*. The dictionaries define it as *"tending or having
power to keep entire, to retain, to preserve"* and also as *"averse of
change"*. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with keeping entire
retaining and preserving unless it has been proved first that what is
being kept entire, retained and preserved is undesirable. Nor need an
aversion to change be bad in itself unless the change that is being
sought to be brought about has already been proved as desirable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PROGRESSIVE VERSUS REACTIONARY

This second pair of labels is generally used to cover segments of
socio-political opinion which are quite often broader than those covered
by the first pair, that is, Leftist and Rightist. There are many people
who do not relish being called Leftists. But they feel flattered when
they are proclaimed to be progressives. Similarly, there are many people
who do not mind being called Rightists. But they take fright as soon as
they are called reactionaries. Leftist politics makes a clever use of
this confusion. It ropes in as progressives many many people who are not
prepared to be known as Leftist. At the same time, it scares away or
silences many peoples by branding them as reactionaries.

Dictionaries define a progressive as one who is *"moving forward, making
progress."* That sounds tautological unless we have fixed some prior
meaning of moving forward odr have some prior notion of progress. The
Leftists cannot get away with this label for themselves unless it is
assum,ed arbitrarily that whatever they do or advocate should
automaticvally pass for progress. Not is it easy to arrive at a
universally agreed definition of progress, particularly at the present
time when all nineteenth century notions of progress are being subjected
to serious questioning.

On the other hand the dictionaries define a reactionary as *"one who
attempts to revert to past political conditions."* This is a very vague
generalisation. Firstly it is very difficult, almost impossible for any
people, at any stage of history, to revert to past political conditions
unless those conditions are confined to quite narrow limits such as, for
instance the restoration of a royal dynasty. In fact, the word
*"reactionary"* was used exactly in this sense during the French
Revolution. Secondly, the past happens to be a rather long stretch of
time in the history of most nations. It is not at all clear as to which
part -- ancient or medieval or modern - of a nation's past is implied in
this definition. Thirdly, we cannot deride all attempts to revert to the
past unless we assume arbitrarily that the past of all people was always
worse than their present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## REVOLUTIONARY VERSUS REVIVALIST

This third pair of labels is very weighty indeed. The very sound of the
word *"revolution"* casts such a magic spell on our intelligentsia that
many a time ordinary criminals draw applause from otherwise decent
people by claiming to be revolutionaries. People who abhor their
violence approve of them as *misguided idealists*. No one has any tears
to shed for the victims of these revolutionaries. The mangled bodies of
policemen and other people are shoved away as symbols of an unjust
socio-political system.

The dictionaries define revolution as *"a great upheaval; great change,
i.e. in outlook, social habits and circumstances; a radical change in
government."* It is nowhere indicated in this definition that this great
upheaval this great change this radical change in government is
necessarily and invariably bound to be for the better. Even if it is for
the worse, it will still be regarded as a revolution. Human history has
known several upheavals which have left the prople affected in an
infinitely worse situation. It may be psychologically satisfying for
some people to press for a great upheaval, a great change, a radical
change in government. But that is no reason for them to feel superior
and self-righteous unless they can prove that they are working for a
fuller freedom of man, for a greater measure of social prosperity, for a
deeper culture of the human soul, and for a larger fraternity among
different sections of mankind.

On the other hand, the dictionaries define a revivalist as *"one who
promotes religious, architectural or other revival."* Obviously the
Leftists cannot be aiming any guns at architectural revival. Their
objection has always been to religious revival. Religion has always been
an anathema to the Leftists. This is understandable when we look at
closed creeds like Christianity and Islam which strike at the very roots
of rationalism, humanism and universalism. But the objection becomes
blind when it comes to the religions of the ancient world of which the
sole survivor today is the commonwealth of Sanatana Dharma. They ought
to distinguish between deeper drives of the human spirit from the
fervour and fanaticism of the outer mind of man. And their ignorance in
this matter is no reason for a blanket blackening of all religious
revival.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SOCIALIST VERSUS CAPITALIST

This fourth pair of labels arouses intense emotions, Socialism, too, is
a magic word which paralyses all thinking processes in a majority of our
politically conscious intelligentsia. It calls for no questions and
stands self-proved. There is no political party in india which does not
swear by Socialism. Ever since the ruling party has espoused socialism,
the socialist ranks have become swollen by a large number of
self-seekers who cannot even spell the word. Seeing these people one
cannot help observing that while all socialists are not scoundrels, all
scoundrels are socialists.

The dictionaries define Socialism as *"as a scheme of social
organisation which places means of production in the hands of the
community."* The same dictionaries define capitalism as *"the economic
system which generates and gives power to capilatists."* Here the choice
is clear for all these who place public weal above private profit. They
would always vote for Socialism. The problem arises when the community
is equated with the state and the state with a monolithic party machine
which chokes out allindividual freedom. And that is exactly what the
Leftists have done. They hail as socialist only those countries where
totalitarian states have reduced the communities to conglomerations of
dumb-driven slaves. In India, the Leftists describe the public sector as
a signpost of Socialism, self-satisfied bureaucrats and swollen-headed
babus who are bribed and/or bamboozled by another cartel of freebooters
known as the private secto. The two cartels fatten together with utter
disregard for the suffering and privation they inflict on the community.

On the other hand, the Leftists denounce as capitalist precisely those
countries where powerful labour unions, free press, parliamentary
institutions and vigilant public opinion have combined to make private
enterprise accountable to the community. The rising standards of wages
and consumption, the social security measures and other welfare schemes
speak volumes about how public good is gaining ground over private
greed. The meaning of Socialism as well as Capityalism would have been
crystal clear but for the conceptual swindle practised by the Leftists.
They have succeeded eminently in painting the black as white and vice
versa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SECULAR VERSUS COMMUNAL

This fifth pair of labels has attained the widest currency of all
political words. We face a peculiar problem here. The meanings which
these words have acquired in India's political parlance are not even
remotely related to the meanings which the dictionaries assign to them.
It would not be an exaggeration to say that although these two words
belong to the English language, their meanings in India have become
exclusively Indian.

The word *secular* is defined in the dictionaries as *"the belief that
the state, morals, education, etc. should be independent of religion."*
But in India it means only one thing -- eschewing everything Hindu and
espousing everything Islamic.

Every one who wants to qualifying as secular should subscribe to the
folowing articles of faith :

1.  the Muslims in India after independence have become a poor and
    persecuted minority;
2.  they are being deprived of their fair share in the fruits of
    development;
3.  their religion and culture are not getting legitimate expression in
    public life and media;
4.  they are not being given employment in public and private sectors in
    proportion to their population; and
5.  the preponderance of Hindus in the security forces puts in grave
    peril the lives, honour and properties of Muslims.

Every Hindu politician or pen-pusher who aspires to pass the test has to

1.  proclaim that Islam stands for equality and human brotherhood;
2.  celebrate the prophet's birthday with fanfare and throw an iftar
    dinner at the end of Ramzan;
3.  attend Urs of sufis and Urdu mushairas;
4.  support the claim of Urdu to be the second state language in all
    states where Muslims are in a minority;
5.  admire whatever passes for Islamic art and architecture;
6.  relish Muslim cooking and appreciate Muslim dress and demeanour;
7.  abuse Israel and applaud Arab countries.

He should also keep quiet or look the other way when Muslims

1.  breed like rats;
2.  refuse to give modern education to their children;
3.  push their women into purdah;
4.  practise polygamy;
5.  start street-riots at the slightest pretext;
6.  rejoice over every Pakistan victory and every Indian defeat in
    sports; and
7.  invite and protect infiltrators from across the borders. And he
    should not whisper a word when Arab governments pour petro-dollars
    and professional preachers of Islam into this country in order to
    convert the weaker sections of Hindu society.

Even these positive services rendered to Islam are not sufficient for a
Hindu politician or pen-pusher out to earn the secular certificate. One
is not secular unless one harbours and expresses a pronounced anti-Hindu
animus. One should lodge an immediate protest against the least little
expressionm of Hindu religion or culture in public media and at
government functions. One should frown upon every government dignitary
performing a pooja in a Hindu temple or going to Hindu place
prilgrimage. One should accuse all educational, cultural and research
institutions of hiding Hindu communalists. One should put the blame
squarely on the RSS for every communal riot. And so on, the list of
one's grievances against Hindu society should be as long as one's love
for Islam and Muslims.

The definition of communal is a logical corollary of the above
definition of secular. The dictionaries define the word *communal* as
*"pertaining to community, owned in common,, shared."* But Hindus in
India have only to say that they belong to a community and that they
share a culture in common. They immediately provoke secularists of all
hues to come down upon them. In fact, the word *Hindu* itself has become
a dirty word, almost an obscenity in India' political parlance. Woe
betide the Hindu who dares say that India is his ancestral homeland and
that his religion and culture also have a case. He will be immediately
denounced as a Hindu chauvinist. A Hindu who blunders into reading
Indian history with his own eyes who finds that his society has suffered
immeasurably at the hands of Islamic imperialism, and who cries out that
this aggression should now stop, makes the Leftists mad with fury. They
brand him as an enemy of public peace and national integration. They
find in him a fiend who is plotting a genocide of the *"poor Muslim
minority."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## DEMOCRATIC VERSUS FASCIST

This sixth pair of labels is not so much in fashion these days as it
used to be at one time. The Leftists invoke these labels only when they
are in search of a united front of all *democratic forces* in order to
fight the *forces of fascism.* They use the word *democrat* to entice
some elements who do not rise immediately to the bait of a united front.
And they hurl the word *fascist* when they find that their other
swear-words like reactionary and revivalist, etc. have failed to hurt.

The dictionaries define a democrat as *"one who adheres to or promotes
democracy as a principle,"* and a fascist as *"one who believes in using
forceful methods."* The definitions make it easy to find out where the
caps fit. The Leftists swear by democracy only so long as they are in
the opposition. They believe and proclaim that they will use force to
transform society once they are in power. They are convinced that they
alone know what is good for the rest of the community. They divide every
society into shepherds and sheep, reserving the former's role for
themselves. Their self-righteousness and extreme intolerance of every
other point of view mould them into the first class fascists, whatever
the ism with which they adorn themselves. They promote and profit by an
irrational, anti-intellectual atmosphere. They suspect and shout a
conspiracy behind every move of every other party. It is, therefore,
difficult to understand how the Leftists label themselves as democrats.
But it is easy to understand why they denounce as fascists all those who
do not subscribe to their aims and methods. It is simply a case of the
thief crying thief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PROFITS OF PERVERSION

One cannot help concluding that the dictionaries are not at all helpful
in desciphering the Leftist language. The souces of that language has to
be sought elsewhere. But one has also to notice that this language has
so far proved very profitable for the Leftists. They have no roots in
India and are altogether an alien implant on our body-politic. But with
the help of this language they have so far managed to pass as paragons
of partriotism, progress and public welfare.

One is reminded of a folktale from Haryana which illustrates the Leftist
way of reasoning. A jat (peasant) was carrying a khat (cot) as he passed
by the house of a teli (oilman). The teli was a poet. He burst out in
rhyme: *"Jat re jat, tere sir par Khat (O you jat, on your head you have
a Khat)."* The jat has also a poet. He hit out: *"Teli re teli, tere sir
par kholu (O you oilman on your head you have an oilpress)."* The teli
protested: *"My friend, your lines do not rhyme.*" The jat smiled with
self-satisfaction and said: *"To hell with rhyme! Who cares for rhyme?
What matters is that you are going to collapse under the weight of the
kolhu."*

That is exactly what is happening in India's politics. The so-called
Rightists are collapsing under the weight of certain words which the
Leftists have heaped upon their heads without rhyme or reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
