+++
title = "02 CHAPTER 3 - The Sources Of Leftist Language"

+++
## CHAPTER 3 - The Sources Of Leftist Language

Leftist professors and publicists claim that their language got
formulated in the course of India's fight for freedom from British rule.
They also claim that this language was used in the field at various
stages of the struggle for freedom. This is a plain and a big lie. The
annals of that freedom struggle provide no evidence that this language
was used in India's politics till the late thirties of this century.
Some prominent words of this language were totally absent from India's
political parlance prior to that time. Some other words which we do find
in that parlance were used to convey meanings that were entirely
different from the meanings they acquired at a later stage. And even
when these words became current in their present-day sense their
consumption was confined to a small Leftist coterie inside and outside
the freedom movement. It was only after the attainment of independence
that this parlance spread like a plague, particularly during the period
when Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru dominated the Indian political scene.

The record has, therefore, to be put straight. We have to go back to the
actual political parlance which obtained in this country at different
stages of the struggle for freedom. In the process, we shall discover
not only the stage at which Leftist language was interpolated into
India's parlance but also the source from which this language was
smuggled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FIRST PHASE OF A LIBERAL LANGUAGE

India's fight for freedom started several decades before the Indian
National Congress was founded in 1885. It assumed the form of a
large-scale rebellion in North India in 1857. The rebellion failed and
the repression that followed was brutal as well as widespread. But what
is pertinent for our purposes at present is that throughout this period
the British were talking about the white man's burden in the midst of a
*"primitive society."*

For almost two decades after 1857, national effort had perforce to be
confined to religious revival, social reform and cultural renaissance.
The Indian National Congress, although founded by an Englishman, became
a part of this broad national effort. The religious, social and cultural
movements were more powerful and pervasive. In fact, it were these
non-political movements which shaped the political attitudes of
different people who participated in Congress activities stages of the
freedom movement.

The political parlance at this first stage consisted almost entirely of
such phrases as were current in 19th century British liberalism. A
majority of Englishmen and their press in this country did not look
kindly at what they regarded as *"the pretensions of natives and
niggers"*. They started dubbing the Congress as a *"Hindu organisation
dominated by Bengali Babus"*. Some Muslim politicians, who fancied
themselves as successors of erstwhile ruling race, picked up these
jibes. Their leader, Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, did some sabre-rattling on
behalf of his community. The Congressmen on their part tried to prove
that the Congress was not a Hindu but a National organisation. The
invited some prominent and willing Muslim gentlemen to preside over some
annual sessions of the Congress, and paid the railway fare and other
expenses of some Muslim delegates.

The only significant development at this stage was the juxtaposition of
the word *"Hindu"* against the word *"National"*. So far, the two words
had meant one and the same thing. This was the commencement of that
political parlance which in, due course, reduced the national society to
a mere *"majority community"* as against the *"Muslim minority"*. Both
Hindu and Muslim politicians were participating in this parlance. But
the word *communal* had not yet become an abusive political label. This
word was used in its normal and neutral sense and that, too, when some
one referred to the *communal question* for settling which some
constitutional devices had to be sought for and found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SECOND STAGE OF NATIONAL SELF-ASSERTION

The next stage was reached after the Partition of Bengal in 1905. The
radical nationalist forces which had been maturing in the meanwhile
leaped to be forefront. The old guard of the Congress felt the ground
slipping from under its feet. It swam with the current to a certain
distance. But basically it was not happy with this new turn of events.
The show-down came at Surat in 1907. The old guard was able to save the
situation for itself. However, the victory it won proved temporary as
was to be seen very soon.

Some new words now appeared in the political parlance of India. The old
guard started describing itself as *Moderates* while it denounced the
other side as *Extremists*. But the label which the new entrants used
for themselves was *Nationalists*. This description included the
revolutionaries with whom the Nationalists had close links and whom the
old guard as well as the British rulers dreaded as *Territories*.

The Nationalists had to pass through the fire of British repression. But
they survived the storm to capture the Congress after a few years. The
Moderates had to withdraw from the national organisation to form their
Liberal Federation. Meanwhile, the Nationalists had greatly impressed a
new generation of Muslim politicians by the methods they used and the
power they exercised over the mass mind. The Muslim politicians now
started thinking loudly of joining hands with the Nationalists in order
to settle their own parochial and pan-Islamic scores with the British.

It is a different story that the Nationalists led by Lokamanya Tilak
failed to diagnose the motivations of Muslim politicians, and made
several big concessions on issues of crucial importance when they signed
the Congress-League Pact at Lucknow in 1916. So far as the political
parlance of this period is concerned, the Nationalists were still known
as Nationalists. Their opponents of earlier years, the Moderates, had
suck into oblivion, particularly after the advent of Mahatma Gandhi on
the national political scene. Nobody had yet thought of calling the
Nationalists by any other name. No word of the present-day political
parlance had yet gained acceptance in the relevant writings and speeches
of this period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THIRD STAGE OF SOVIET SUBVERSION

The language of nationalism, which had triumphed after a long struggle,
was soon to be subverted by an alien and anti-national language. This
new language had been coined by Lenin. It started stealing into India in
the wake of the Bolshevik coup d'etat in Russia in November, 1917. In
subsequent years, the flow of finance from the Soviet Union became
progressively more plentiful for the promotion of this language in
india.

A Communist Party of India - A Section of the Communist International
had been floated in far-off Tashkent in October, 1920. The national
movement would not have noticed the party for quite some time but for
several conspiracy cases which the British government of India launched
against the Party with great fanfare between 1924 and 1929. The language
in which the comrades spoke in the courts attracted the attention of
old-time revolutionaries. Most of them were men of action rather men of
thought. Their battlecry so far had been Bande Mataram. Now they took to
shouting Inquilab Zindabad also.

Later on, the British government made another major contribution to the
spread of Leftist language. It imposed a ban on the Communist party and
proscribed the circulation of Communist literature thus bestowing an
aura of martydom and mystery on both. On the other hand it made the same
Communist literature easily available to revolutionaries rotting in its
jails in order to wean them away from the path of what it described as
*terrorism*. Many of these sterling patriots became convinced Communists
while they were still in prison. When they came out, they swelled the
ranks of the Communist Party and started serving the interests of
Communist imperialism. But in the eyes of the public at large, they
still retained the stature which they had earned in the service of the
motherland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CONVEYOR-BELTS OF COMMUNIST LANGUAGE

But, in spite of all these favourable factors, Communist language would
have remained confined to party cadres had it not been espoused and
popularised by an important leader inside the national movement. That
was Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru who had presided over a momentous session
of the Indian National Congress in 1929. Because of his westernised
upbringing and education, he had always felt ill-at-ease with the
language of nationalism which had its sources in India's own history and
cultural heritage. He was also dissatified with the language of 19th
century Western liberalism which he had so far shared with the British.
The Communaist language therefore, came to him as a great relief. He
lapped it up immediately and digested it in large doses.

Pandit Nehru also would have ploughed a lonely furrow in the national
movement if Communist thought and language had not in the meanwhile
sperad to all prestigious seats of learning in the West. We shall not go
into the reason of this spread-out. Suffice it to say that, in many
respects, communism was only a continuation of Capitalist
thought-processes with which the West had been familiar for a long time.
What is relevant for our purpose at present is that many Indians who
went to Western universities in the late twenties and early thirties
imbibed Communist thought and came back talking Communist language. Some
of them became professors in Indian universities and passed on the lore
to their students. Some others became journalists and political workers
who processed Indian politics in terms of Communist categories and made
Communist language popular among an increasing number of politically
conscious people. All this had a multiplier effect. And by the middle of
the thirties, Pandit Nehru had a solid bastion of support inside as well
outside the national movement, particularly among the English-educated
intelligentsia.

Thus by the time Pandit Nehru became Congress president for the second
time in 1936, the whole political atmosphere had became chock-full of
Communist catchphrases -- bourgeois and proletarian, class struggle and
class collaboration, revolution and counter-revolution, bourgeois
nationalsim and proletarian internationalism, bourgeois democracy and
proletarian dictatorship, progressive role and reactionary resistance,
fascist forces and the democratic front, etc. Many a periodical and
pamphlet published in English and other Indian languages was spreading
the Communist jargon with an accelerated speed.

This was a highly technical, almost an esoteric language. Lenin had used
common parlance words to convey his own Communist meanings and messages.
No one who was not conversant with the Leninist lore could decipher this
language with the help of a dictionary. It was small wonder, therefore,
that the Nationalists led by Mahatma Gandhi failed to understand the
nature, purpose and role of this language, though they suspected it as
something insidious. Some Nationalists picked up parts of this language
in order to sound in tune with the times. Some others were thrown on the
defensive when they were lambasted by this language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## COMMUNISTS IDENTIFIED : BUT NOT COMMUNIST LANGUAGE

The Communists were found out as a Soviet fifth-column by the Socialists
in 1939-40 and by the Indian National Congress as a whole during
1942-45. They were expelled from the national organisation in 1945. But
Communist thought and language were neither re-examined nor purged
simultaneously or in subsequent years. The dominance of Pandit Nehru for
17 years in the post-independence period widened the field for Communist
language. The only difference observable after the death of Pandit Nehru
is that while the patriarch was a sincere fellow-traveller, his progeny
plays the game purely for purposes of democracy.

Several political parties have been formed by factions which have walked
out of the Congress. But these splits have taken place solely on the
basis of personalities and seldom on the basis of ideology. The new
parties have severed their links with the Congress organisation but not
with is known as \`Congress culture.' And this culture consists almost
entirely of the same catch-phrases which were once popularised by Pandit
Nehru.

There has been only one political party which has grown outside the
Congress and which started with an ideology and language of its own. But
over the years, this party also has tended to shed its ideological
identity. It has picked up progressively India's prevailing political
parlance. This parlance is supposed to be the only gateway to popular
vote and political power which, we are told privately, will be used for
nationalist purposes. The road to hell is often paved with good
intentions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## LEFTIST LANGUAGE : A LANGUAGE OF IMPERIALISM

There is no truth whatsoever in the Leftist claim that India's
prevailing political parlance took shape in the course of India's fight
for freedom against British imperialism. On the contraty, this parlance
was imported from the Soviet Union by a Soviet fifth-column and with the
help of Soviet finances. And it became predominant only towards the fag
end of the freedom struggle. A close scrutiny of the Leftist language
shows that it has an affinity with the languages used earlier by
Islamic, Christian and British imperialism. That should surprise no one.
The language of imperialism is the same in all ages and everywhere.
India has been able to save herself from total subversion so far only
because the spirit of nationalism has surfaced again and again. But that
spirit cannot serve for long unless it evolves and speaks in its own
language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
