+++
title = "04 CHAPTER 5 - The History of Leftist Language"

+++
## CHAPTER 5 - The History of Leftist Language

Leftist language first came to India as the language of Communist
imperialism. Its main spokesman was M.N. Roy. In his *"India in
Transition"*, published in 1922, he laid down practically all
fundamental formulations which, in due course, became the stock-in-trade
of India's Leftist parties. The language of these formulations is still
the language of Leftism.

It will facilitate an understanding of Roy's formulations if we
summarise briefly the background of Indian nationalism as it had
developed prior to that period. There are certain key words and phrases
used by Roy whichg may cause confustion unless they are clarified in
advance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TWO SCHOOLS OF INDIAN NATIONALISM

The freedom movement against British imperialism since the Revolt of
1857 had witnessed a debate between two schools of thought. On the one
hand, there were those who regarded British rule in India as a divine
dispensation and aspired to remould India in the image of 19th century
Britain, particularly in the matter of political institutions. They
dominated the Indian National Congress till the Swadeshi Movement swept
them away. Roy refers to them as bourgeois liberals, modern
intellectuals, radical leaders, moderates, radical intelligentsia and
also as *denationalised* intellectuals -- a name bestowed upon them by
the opposite school of thought.

On the other hand, there were those who regarded the British rule as an
evil imposed upon India by force of arms and who wanted to build a free
India on the basis of values and visions enshrined in India's ancient
culture and spirituality. They came to the fore in the Indian National
Congress during the Swadeshi Movement and took command of the freedom
movement under Mahatma Gandhi. Roy refers to them as orthodox
nationalists, rdical nationalists, extremists and Hindu nationalists. He
makes a distinction between Hindu nationalism and Indian nationalism
which, according to him, is a more comprehensive term.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FUNDAMENTAL FORMULATIONS OF ROY

M. N. Roy had been sent abroad by Bengal revolutionaries in 1915 in
search of German arms. The Germans did not live upto their promise and
Roy, wandered away through China and Japan into the USA where he was
positively impressed by modern Western culture and civilisation. Next,
he went to Mexico where he came in contact with Communist thought. That
cured him completely of whatever love was still left in him for India's
ancient culture. Finally he landed in the Soviet Union in 1920 and
became a confidant of Lenin. He functioned as a leading luminary of the
Communist International for several years. Roy's ardour for an armed
revolution in India had not cooled. He tried to take a trainload of
Russia arms to the Pathans on India's north-west frontier. A number of
*muhajrin* joined him with great enthusiasm. They had left India during
the Khalifat agitation and were looking for foreign arms in order to
re-establish a dar-ul-Islam in this country. The plan failed because
king Amanullah of Afghanistan, who had promised a passage was bought
over by the British and blocked the path of this Communist-cum-Islamic
brigade. Ever since, the only hardware that remained in the hands of Roy
was his pen which the pushed with great prowess.

Roy pronounced as follows on India's history culture, people and
politics:

1.  India had never been a nation before the British conquest. At the
    time of the British conquest, that is towards the middle of the 18th
    century, the economic and political evolution of India was such that
    her people could be called *'rather a number of nationaliities
    inhabiting a continent than a composite national unit.'* (G.
    Adhikari (ed.), *'Documents of the history of the Communist Party of
    India'*, New Delhi 1971 p. 382 Itatics added).
2.  The Revolt of 1857 was a reactionary flare-up of decadent feudalism.
    *"Socially it was a reactionary movement because it wanted to
    replace British rule by revived feudal imperialism, either of the
    Moghuls or of the Maharattas. "* (ibid., p. 383).
3.  Indian people by themselves were incapable of evolving political
    consciousness, patriotism or nationalism. *"The overwhelming
    majority of the population lived in villages, steeped in ignorance
    and submerged in social stagnation. Politics, forms of government
    national subjugation or freedom remained outside their concern and
    beyond their comprehension."* (ibid., p. 383).
4.  The Western-oriented Indian intellectuals alone were pioneers of
    progress. *"The only section of the people showing any sign of life
    was the modern intellectuals educated in Western methods and
    thoughts. These *denationalised* intellectuals were instrumental in
    bringing to India for the first time in her long eventful history,
    political patriotism."* (ibid., pp. 383-84, Italics added).
5.  Evolutionary nationalism led by the Western-oriented intellectuals,
    was a revolutionary movement. *"The contittutional democracy or the
    evolutionary nationalism advocated by liberal bourgeoisie led by the
    intellectuals spelled doom to the old social heritage and religious
    orthodoxy. And these revolutionary forces were crystallizing in the
    Congress under radical leaders whose programme was not to revive the
    India of the rishis with its contended handicraft workers saturated
    with ignorance and dosed in the name of religion, but to build a new
    society on the ruins of the old."* (ibid., pp. 389-90, Italics
    added).
6.  the British Government was the best government which India had ever
    had in her long history. *"This struggle of the radical
    intelligentsia was not against an effete and antiquated political
    institution but for the democratisation of the existing government
    which...was the most advanced that the country had till then."*
    (ibid., p. 384).
7.  Orthodox nationalism advocated by the other school of Congressmen
    was a reactionary movement. *"Orthodox nationalism, in the social
    sense, was the resistance of forces of reaction against the ominous
    radicalism of the *denationalised* intellectuals who led the
    Congress. The same forces whose military explosion was the Munity of
    1857 could be discovered behind the political theories of the
    orthodox nationalism of half a century later."* (ibid. p. 390
    Italics added).
8.  Hindu nationalism of Swami Vevekananda was spiritual imperialism.
    *"Although its political philospher and leader were found
    subsequently in the persons of Aurobindo Ghose and Bipin Chandra
    Pal, respectively its fundamental ideology was conceived by a young
    intellectual of petit-bourgeois origin. He was Narendra Nath Dutt,
    subsequently known by the religious nomenclature of Swami
    Vivekananda...Like Tilak, Dutt was also a prophet of Hindu
    nationalism. He was also a believer in the cultural basis should be
    built the future Indian nation. He preached that Hinduism not Indian
    nationalism in should be aggressive. His nationalism was a spiritual
    imperialism."* (ibid. pp. 391-392).
9.  The revolutionaries inspired by Swami Vivekananda and the Swadeshi
    Movement were victims of reaction. *"Thus an intelligently
    rebellious element which otherwise would have been the vanguard of
    the exploited class in a social struggle had to give in to national
    pre-occupations nd contribute itself to a movement for the immediate
    overthrow of foreign rule, not for process forward but in order to
    go back to an imaginary golden age, the fountain-head of India's
    spiritual heritage... In their religiousness and wild spiritual
    imperialism, they embodied the reactionary social forces."*
    (ibid., p. 393).
10. The Non-Coperation movement led by the Mahatma Gandhi was
    exploitation of the ignorance of the Indian masses. *"The
    extremists, now called non-cooperators have had better success than
    moderates in drawing the masses under the influence of
    nationalism...But they could not develop the potentiality of the
    mass movement by leading it in aaccordance with its economic urges
    and social tendencies. Their tactics was to strengthen the
    nationalist movement by the questionable method of exhloiting the
    ignorance of the masses. And the best way of exploiting the
    ignorance of the masses was to make a religion of nationalism. This
    tactics led to the apperance of Mohan Das Karamchand Gandhi on the
    political horizon, and eclipse of all other political-socail
    tendencies in the shade of Gandhism."* (ibid., p. 394)&gt;
11. Gandhism was the most reactionary form of Indian nationalism. *"In
    Gandhism culminate all the social tendencies that have always
    differentiated the principal tendencies of Indian nationalism. In
    fact, Gandhism is the acutest and most desperate manifestation of
    the forces of reaction trying to hold their own against the
    objectively revolutionary tendencies contaned in the liberal
    bourgeois nationalism. The impending wane of Gandhism signifies the
    collapse of the reactionary forces and their total elimination from
    the political movement."* (ibid., pp. 394-395 Italics added).
12. Finally, Mahatma Gandhi was speaking essentially the same language
    as was spoken earlier by Lokmanya Tilak, Sri Aurobindo and Bipin
    Chandra Pal. *"Although somewhat unique in its idiosyncracies and
    fanaticism the Gandhi cult is not an innovation. Divested of the
    rebellous spirit and the shrewd politician in him Tilak would
    resemble Gandhi in so far as religious belief and spiritual
    prejudices are concened. But for his versatility in modern thought
    and characteristic looseness of conviction Bipin Chandra Pal would
    perchance join the Mahatma in the passionate denunciation of
    everything that adds to the material comfort of man. Had he been
    more of a monomaniac than a profound thinker with metaphysical
    preoccupations Aurobindo Ghose would subscribe to Gandhi's
    philosophy."* (ibid. pp. 396-397 Italics added).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CONTINUED CANNONADE

Gandhism did not wane nor did the *reactionary forces* collapse
immediately as anticipated by Roy in 1922. They continued to dominate
the Indian political scene for another two decades and more. On the
other hand Roy was expelled from the Communist International in 1929 for
a number of *counter-revolutionary crimes.* But Roy's formulations and
language became the bedrock of Leftist stance and slogans for all time
to come. This happened because these formulations were not a product of
any original thinking on Roy's part. His own mind was too poor for such
a performance. He was only repeating, parrot-like, the standard language
of Communist imperialism as he had learnt it from Lenin.

M.N. Roy's place as the mentor of the Communist Party of India was taken
over by R. Palme Dutt of the Communist Party of Great Britain. He had
already fired his first fusillade against Mahatma Gandhi in his Modern
India published from London in 1926. *"Gandhi failed,"* wrote Palme Dutt
*"as the leader of the national struggle because he could not cut
himself loose from the upper class interests and prejudices in which he
had been brought up. The **spirituality** of Gandhi is only the
expression of this class interest. All parasitic and propertied classes
have to weave around themselves a fog of confused language,
superstition, tradition religion, revivalism etc. in order to hide from
the masses the fact of their exploitation."* (p. 72).

Two years later, the Sixth Congress of the Communist International
declared a vertiable war on Gandhism. In an enumeration of *"ideologies
among the working class inimical to Communism,"* it proclaimed:
*"Tendencies like Gandhism in India, thoroughly imbued with religious
conception, idolize the most backward and economically reactionary forms
of social life, see the solution of social problems not in proletarian
socialism but in a reversion to these backward forms, preach passivity
and repudiate class struggle, and in the process of the development of
the revolution become transformed into an openly reactionary force.
Gandhism is more and more becoming an ideology directed against mass
revolution. It must be strongly combated by Communism."* The Communist
hysteria against Mahatma Gandhi went on mounting till R. Palme Dutt
wrote in 1931 that *"To all that is young and generous in India the name
of Gandhi is an object of cursing and contempt, the name of Judas."*
(Labour Monthly, London,, May 1931,, p. 264).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PERCOLATION OF THE POISON

The language of Communist imperialism was borrowed, lock, stock and
barrel, by the Congress Socialist Party which was formed inside the
Indian National Congress in 1934 under inspiration from Pandit Nehru who
was tallest among the native converts. Unlike the Communists, the
Socialists had no organisational or financial links with the Communist
International which had by now become a full-fledged instrument of
Soviet foreign policy. But they agreed with the Communists in their
evaluation of Indian history, society, culture and current politics. The
only point on which the two differed was the personality and role of
Mahatma Gandhi. The communists regarded him as the *"cleverest bourgeois
scoundrel."* The Socialists, on the other hand, had admiration for his
qualities of head and heart and were convinced that he alone could
mobilise the masses in the struggle for national liberation.

The Socialists have travelled far and in a different direction since
those days of dalliance with Communism. But their disenchantment is
confined only to forms of polity and society. They have never been able
to cure themselves of their love for the Leftist language in the context
of Indian nationalism. They continue to us such Leftist terms as
communalist, chauvinist, fascist, revivalist and reactionary towards all
those who regard Hindu society as the core and mainstay of the Indian
nation. All this has landed them in a love-hate relationship with the
Communists. They feel irresistibly drawn whenever the Communists dangle
the bait of a united front before them. But they feel uncomfortable when
the Communists reveal their true character as servitors of the Soviet
Union.

Meanwhile, the Communist Party of India itself has split into several
factions. The struggle between Stalin and Trotsky which ended with the
latter's defeat had led some small groups to part company with the
Communist Party. The scars, however, were too small to show. It was the
breach between the Soviet Union and Red China in the sixties which
really splintered the Communist Party into several factions.

On the other hand, some groups which left the indian National Congress
at different times and for different reasons have moved closer to the
Communists. The Forward Bloc founded by Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose was
the earliest to do so after years of bitter feud with its future
friends. In later years Sanjay Gandhi's supremacy in the Congress not
only stopped Communist infiltration and take-over of the Congress but
also forced some fellow-travellers out of it. Today, these *exiles* sing
the same songs as the Communists.

Taken together, the Leftists in India constitute a far-flung phalanx
which may not be solid within but which presents a united front without.
It is easy to spot them because they adorn themselves with labels like
communist, democratic, Leninist, Marxist, radical, revolutionary and
socialist, etc. in different permutations and combinations. There is
little hope that they can ever come to power without direct intervention
by the Soviet Union. But their potential for purveying the poison of
Leftist language is considerable. Indian nationalism, which remains
their topmost target, has to guard against them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
