+++
title = "06 CHAPTER 7 - The Place of Mahatma Gandhi"

+++
## CHAPTER 7 - The Place of Mahatma Gandhi

The language of British and Christian imperialism had stood fully
exposed for what they were in essence by the time tht Swadeshi Movement
swept forward after the Partition of Bengal in 1905. The language of
Islamic imperialism had revived but was not resounding enough as yet to
ring bells in the minds of national leaders. And the language of
Communist imperialism had not yet appeared on the scene.

The last two languages came into their own by the end of the twenties.
The freedom movement had to feel their full blast by the middle of
thirties. The leader who had emerged in complete command of the freedom
movement by that time was Mahatma Gandhi. And his role vis-a-vis these
two language has been a matter of controversy.

Mahatma Gandhi showed the same understanding of the languages of British
and Christian imperialism as had been shown earlier by the leaders of
the Swadeshi Movement. There were indications in his writings and
statements that he suspected the language of Communist imperialism as
something sinister, through he started faltering when this language
became the language of Leftism in the mouths of Pandit Nehru and the
Congress Socialists. But his response to the language of Islamic
imperialism was not at all what could be expected from a man of his
instinctive perceptions.

His failure vis-a-vis the language of Islamic imperialism can be
explained in various ways. But the fact remains that this failure made
the Muslims more and more aggressive and created a lot of resentment in
a section of Indian nationalists. These anti-Gandhi nationalists have
not been able to get reconciled to his role even after his dath in very
tragic circumstances. On the other hand, all sorts of Hindu-baiters have
been invoking his name and fame to put Hindu society in the wrong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## MAHATMA GANDHI IN HOSTILE HANDS

The Leftists had no use for Mahatma Gandhi during his life time. They
had hurled their choicest swear-words at him. But the Mahatma dead seems
to have become an asset for them. Not that they have revised their
estimate of his role in the past or acquired any respect for him in the
present. They are only using him as a stick to beat Hindu society into
shame.

Muslims, too, have staged a similar volte face. They had opposed him
tooth and nail during his life-time. The language which their press had
used for him provides a study in pornography. But after his death they
have been holding him up in order to harangue Hindu society. Not that
they hve changed their opinion about him or imbibed any of his
teachings. They are only using him as a device to put Hindu society on
the defensive.

The Gandhians present a very curious case. They claim to have inherited
the message of the Mahatma. But the only people with whom they feel at
home are Hindu-baiters. They avoid all those who are not ashamed of
being Hindus or who take pride in Hindu history and heritage. They
suspect that *"Hindu communalism"* has been and remains India's major
malady. The only point to which they never refer is that Mahatma Gandhi
was a proud Hindu with a profound faith in sanatana Dharma and that a
reawakening and rejuvenation of Hindu society was his most important
preoccupation.

The Hindu-baiters highlight the fact that the Mahatma was murdered by a
Hindu. But they hide the fact that it was the Hindus who had always
rallied round Mahatma Gandhi, who had adored him throughout his life,
who had followed him as their leader and who had stood by him through
thick and thin. It is tantamount to insinuating that Hindus have done
nothing in the whole of their history except murdering the Mahatma. The
only parallel is provided by the Catholic Church which has known the
Jews only as murderers of Jesus.

This exercise in employing the name of a great Hindu to malign Hindu
society has succeeded because whatever nationalists have come forward to
lead Hindu society in the post-independence period have chosen to ignore
all facets of the Mahatma's life and teachings except one, namely, his
handling of the Muslim problem. They have meditated, one must say rather
morbidly, on the one mistake he made in his life, namely, his
understanding ofIslam. They have never taken into account the sterling
services he rendered to Hinduism and Hindu society in so many spheres.
The only thing they remember with resentment is his failure in one
field, namely, his final inability to prevent partition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TWO SIGNIFICANT FACTS

The anti-Gandhi nationalists have never tried honestly to face the fact
that it was he and not they who had stirred the minds and hearts of
Hindu masses. It was he and not they who had mobilized Hindu society to
make sacrifices in the service of the motherland. Nor have the
denunciations of anti-Gandhi nationalists succeeded in doing the
slightest damage to his stature. In fact, his stature has risen higher
with the passing of time. He continues to be cherished by Hindu masses
as one of the greatest in their history. Reverence for him in the world
at large has also continued to grow. He is now regarded as a profound
thinker on problems created by an industrial civilisation and a
hedonistic culture. Hinduism has gained abroad because Gandhi is known
as a great Hindu.

On the other hand it must be admitted that the failure which the Mahatma
met vis-a-vis the Muslims was truly of startling proportions.
Hindu-Muslim unity was a goal which he had pursued with great dedication
throughout his life. He had paid high tributes to Islam, its prophet its
caliphs and its scriptures. He had espoused the cause of Khalifat in
order to win Muslim hearts. He had befriended even questionable
characters like Mohammad Ali because the latter enjoyed the confidence
of Muslim masses. He had gone out of his way to humour Jinnah who was
always cold and quite often nasty in his manners. He had ignored the
invectives that were hurled at him by the Muslim press and politicians.
He had even advised the British to hand over power to Muslims and quit.
he had always frowned at all efforts to organise Hindus in order to call
the Muslim bluff. In short, his policy towards Muslims had been full of
appeasement at the cost of Hindu society. But nothing had helped.
Muslims had continued to grow more and more hostile.

If we put these two facts together, we can perhaps draw some worthwhile
conclusions. First, it follows that Hindu society responds only to a
call which is deeply religious and cultural. Anti-Gandhi nationalists
have failed to move Hindu masses because their appeal has been purely
political. These nationalists have drawn most of their inspiration from
the modern West and not from India's own great past. Secondly, there
must be something very hard in the heart of Islam so that even a man of
an oceanic goodwill like Mahatma Gandhi failed to move it. He succeeded
with the British by making them feel morally in the wrong. He succeeded
with such sections of Hindu society as had nourished some grievances of
their own and had tried to turn away from the freedom movement. It was
only the Muslims with whom he failed miserably.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## IN JUSTICE TO MAHATMA GANDHI

There is no doubt that Mahatma Gandhi's failure vis-a-vis Muslims was
great and has had grievous consequences. But the failure can be
attributed to him only in so for as he was at the helm of affairs during
that particular period of Indian history. It is highly doubtful if Hindu
society would hve been able to prevent partition even if there had been
no Mahatma Gandhi. On the other hand there is ample evidence that Hindu
society would have failed in any case. In fact, the seeds of that
failure had been sown long before Mahatma Gandhi appeared on the scene.

The first thing to be done in this context is to put straight the record
of the freedom movement and find out how Hindu leaders who preceded
Mahatma Gandhi had functioned vis-a-vis the Muslim problem. For,
although the Mahatma dominated the freedom movement for more than
tweny-five years, he had appeared on the scene when thirty-five years
had already passed since the founding of the Indian National Congress in
1885.

Sir Syed Ahmed Khan was the first leader to start sabre-rattling on
behalf of his community. That was a year or two after the Congress came
into existence. There is no evidence that any Hindu leader called his
bluff at that time or at a subsequent stage. On the other hand, there is
ample evidence of how Hindu leaders tried to appease the bully. To top
it all, Hindus contributed quite a lot of money towards the
establishment of his Anglo-Oriental Mohammedan College at a Aligarh
which was to become the main seat of Muslim separatism at a subsequent
stage. Mahatma Gandhi was nowhere near the scene.

The Swadeshi Movement was the next step in the struggle for freedom. It
was immediately followed by the founding of the Muslim League. Muslims
not only boycotted the movement but also let loose an orgy of riots
which were particularly violent and beastly in Bengal. But there is no
record of Hindu leaders coming gorward to beat back the aggression. The
only Hindu response to this Muslim mayhem was to hail Siraj-ud-daulah,
Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan as national heroes. Again, Mahatma Gandhi was
not on the scene.

Then came the Lucknow Pact of 1916. Muslim leaders had made no secret
that Pan-Islamic causes rather than patriotism had made them move
towards a joint front with the Congress. But no Hindu leader cared to
look into the motivation of Muslims. Only a slight gesture from the
Muslim League was enough to elicit an enthusiastic response from the
Congress. Hindu leaders conceded not only separate electorates to
Muslims but also one-third representation in the Central Assembly to a
less than one-fourth of the total Indian population. It was Lokamanya
Tilak and not Mahatama Gandhi who was the leader of the Congress at that
time.

Once the legitimacy of Pan-Islamic cause was recognised by the national
leadership, it was only a short step to the Khalifat agitation. The
meeting that was held on June 1, 1920, under the auspices of the Central
Khalifat Committee, in order to solicit Congress support for the Sultan
of Turkey, was not attended by Mahatma Gandhi alone. Leaving aside
Motilal Nehru. Tej Bahadur Sapru and Jawahar Lal Nehru, whose support
for all Islamic causes was always a bygone conclusion, the others who
sat by the side of Mahatma Gandhi in that crucial meeting were Lala
Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandra Pal, Madan Mohan Malaviya, Satyamurti, C.
Rajgopalachari and Chintamani. The proceedings of that meeting exist in
cold print. Some of these Hindu leaders did oppose the proposal for a
Non-Cooperation Movement to be launched simultaneously with the Khalifat
agitation. But no one pointed out that the national movement should have
nothing to do with a Pan-Islamic platform. The same story was repeated
at the Special Session of the Congress at Calcutta in September that
year and at its Annual Session at Nagpur in December. Later on, Swami
Shraddhananda was to be lionised for lambasting the British Government
from the steps of the Jama Masjid at Delhi. He was speaking in support
of the Khalifat agitation.

The Congress and the Muslim League never came together again at an
all-Indian level after this brief period of six years which ended with
the suspension of the Non-Cooperation Movement in February, 1922.
Muslims made no secret of their belief that they had been betrayed by
Mahatma Gandhi. They let loose another orgy of riots all over the
country. It was in the midst of this bloodshed, and while Mahatma Gandhi
was behind prison bars that Deshbandhu C.R. Das led the Bengal
Provincial Congress into signing a Hindu-Muslim Pact which permitted
Muslims to kill cows during their festivals but forbade Hindus from
playing music before the mosques!

Justice demands that anti-Gandhi nationalists review Hindu history
vis-a-vis Islam and lay the blame where it belongs. They will soon find
out that Mahatama Gandhi was neither the first nor the last to accord
the status of a religion to Islam, the dignity of a deity to Allah, the
aura of an avatar to Muhammad, the sanctity of a scripture to the quran,
the holiness of saints to the sufis, the majesty of a place of worship
to the mosque and the rights of a minority to the Muslim millat. Most
Hindus are still chanting sarvadharma-sama-bhava vis-a-vis Islam in the
face of Muslim fanaticism, through over three decades have passed since
the death of Mahatma Gandhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE MAHATMA'S FAILURE : A FAILURE OF HINDU SOCIETY

There is ample evidence in the Mahatma's writings that he could see
quite clearly the pattern of perverse behaviour on the part of Muslims.
That was at the back of his statement repeated several times, that an
average Muslim was a bully and an average Hindu a coward. But he refused
to believe that this pattern was derived directly from the teachings of
the prophet of India.

That however, is the story of Hindu society in its centuries-old
encouter wtih Islam. Hindu society has always viewed Islam through the
eyes of its own spirituality. Islam had shown its full face to Hindu
society quite early not only in the devil-dance of its swordsmen but
also in the pronouncements and prolific writings of its mullas, sufis
and historians. But Hindu society had all along failed to draw the right
concludions. It had continued to regard Islam as a religion. The folly
has persisted till the present time.

Modern Hindu ansd Sikh scholars have done something worse. They have
presented Islam not only as a superior religion but also as a superior
social system. This is obvious in hundreds of books written by them
about the nirguna saints like Kabir and Nanak. These saints alone had
the courage to question the exclusive claims of Islam while they sang in
the advaitic tunes set by ancient Hindu spirituality. Islam had no
impact on their teachings. But modern scholars have paraded these saints
as monotheists who were in revolt against the multiplicity of Hindu gods
and goddesses, as iconoclasts who were against image-worship in Hindu
temples and as social reformers who denounced the so-called caste system
under the *"influence of an equalitarian Muslim society."* The saints
have thus been turned into tawdry social reformers. Falsehood can go to
farther.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE RELEVANT IN MAHATMA GANDHI

Sri Aurobindo has said in his Uttarpara Speech that India rises with the
rise of Sanatana Dharma. Mahatma Gandhi proved the aptness of this
observation. What is relevant in Mahatma Gandhi, therefore, is not his
failure in solving the Muslim problem but his success in re-affirming
the language of Sanatana Dharma which had been revived during the
Swadeshi Movement. I give below a few specimens.

*"The English have taught us that we were not one nation before and that
it will reaquire centuries before we become one nation. This is without
foundation. We were one nation before they came to India. One thought
inspired us. Our mode of life was the same. It was because we were one
nation that they were able to establish one kingdom."* (Hind Swaraj
Chapter ix)

*"I believe that the civilisation India has evolved is not to be beaten
in the world. Nothing can equal the seeds sown by our ancestry. Rome
went; Greece shared the same fate; the might of the Pharoahs was broken;
Japan has become westernised; of China nothing can be said; but India is
still, somehow or other, sound at the foundation."* (ibid., Chapter
xiii)

*"Hinduism is a relentless pursuit after truth and if today it has
become moribund, inactive, irresponsive to growth, it is because we are
fatigued. As soon as the fatigue is over, Hinduism will burst forth upon
the world with a brilliance perhaps never known before.*" (Young India,
24-4-1924)

*"What the divine author of the Mahabharata said of his great creation
is equally true of Hinduism. Whatever of substance is contained in any
other religion is always to be found in Hindusim, and what is not
contained in it is insubstantial or unnecessary."* (ibid., 27-9-1925)

*"Hinduism is like the Ganga,, pure and unsullied at its source but
taking in its course the impurities in the way. Even like the Ganga it
is beneficent in its total effect. It takes a provincial form in every
provinvce, but the inner substance is retained everywhere.*" (ibid.,
8-4-1926)

*"Our sages have taught us to learn one thing; **\`As in the Self, so in
the Universe.'** It is not possible to scan the universe as it is to
scan the self. Know the self and you know the universe."* (ibid.)

*"Now when we talk of brotherhood of men, we stop there and feel that
all other life is there for man to exploit for his own purposes. But
Hinduism excludes all exploitation."* (ibid., 26-12-1926)

*"Hinduism insits on the brotherhood of not only all mankind but of all
that lives."* (Harijan, 28-3-1936).

Such sayings of Mahatma Gandhi about Hinduism can be multiplied. He
affirmed, again, and again not only the fundamentals of Hindu
spirituality but also the framework of Hindu culture and social life. He
valued *"the spirit behind idol-worship"* and declared his determination
*"to defend with my life the thousands of holy temples which sanctify
this land of ours."* For him cow-protection was *"the dearest possession
of the Hindu heart"* and *"no one who does not believe in cow-protection
can possibly be a Hindu."* The sacred thread had a *deep meaning* for
him because it was *"the sign of the second birth, that is spiritual."*
He believed that Varnasharma was *"inherent in human nature, and
Hinduism had simply reduced it to a science."* He wrote several articles
in defence of the *"much-maligned Brahman"* and had *not a shadow of
doubt* in his mind that *"if Brahmanism does not revive, Hinduism must
perish."* There was no symbol of Sanatana Dharma which did not stir him
to the depths and which he did not trace back to its inner and eternal
spirit.

And he served Hinduism not by words alone. His whole life was an
uninterrupted hymn to Hinduism. He rendered many sterling services to
Hindu society. He staked his life in order to free Hindu society from
the stigma of untouchability. He wanted the Hindus to shed fear and be
brave. By all accounts his place should be secure in the mainstream of
Indian nationalism.

There was no lack of Hindu leaders during the Mahatma's life-time who
appealed in the name of political patriotism. They left Hindu society
cold and unresponsive. Nor has a purely political approach to Hindu
society succeeded after the passing away of the Mahatma. The one lesson
we learn from the freedom movement as a whole is that a religious and
cultural awakening in Hindu society has to precede political awakening.
The language of Indian nationalism has to be the language of Sanatana
Dharma before it can challenge and defeat the various languages of
imperialism. The more clearly Hindu society sees the universal truth of
Hindu spirituality and culture the more readily it will reject political
ideologies masquerading as religion or promising a paradise on this
earth.

Mahatma Gandhi stands squarely with Maharshi Dayananda, Bankim Chandra,
Swami Vivekananda, Lokamanya Tilak and Sri Aurobindo in developing the
language of Indian nationalism. His mistake about Islam does not
diminish the lustre of that language which he spoke with full faith and
confidence. On the contrary, his mistake carries a message of its own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
