+++
title = "02 Chapter One Hideaway Communalism Arun Shourie"

+++
Chapter One  
**Hideaway Communalism**  
Arun Shourie

**A case in which the English version of a major book by a renowned
Muslim scholar, the fourth Rector of one of the greatest centres of
Islamic learning in India, listing some of the mosques, including the
Babri Masjid, which were built on the sites and foundations of temples,
using their stones and structures, is found to have the tell-tale
passages censored out;**

**The book is said to have become difficult to get;**

**It is traced: And is found to have been commanded just 15 years a-o by
the most influential living Muslim scholar of our country today, the
current Rector of that great centre of Islamic learning, and the
Chairman of the Muslim Personal Law Board.**

**Evasion, concealment, have become a national habit. And they have
terrible consequences.  But first I must give you some background.**

The Nadwatul-Ulama of Lucknow is one of the principal centres of Islamic
learning in India. It was founded in 1894.  It ranks today next only to
the Darul-Ulum at Deoband.  The government publication, *Centres of
Islamic Learning in India*, recalls how the founders “aimed at producing
capable scholars who could project a true image of Islam before the
modern world in an effective way”; it recalls how “Towards fulfilling
its avowed aim in the matter of educational reform, it (the group)
decided to establish an ideal educational institution which would not
only provide education in religious and temporal sciences but also offer
technical training”; it recalls how “It (the Nadwa) stands out
today-with its college, a vast and rich library and Research and
Publication Departments housed in fine buildings-as one of the most
outstanding institutions for imparting instruction in the Islamic
Sciences”; it recalls how “A salient feature of this institution is its
emphasis on independent research”; it recalls how “The library of the
Nadwa, housed in the Central Hall and the surrounding rooms of the main
building, is, with more than 75,000 titles including about 3,000
handwritten books mostly in Arabic and also in Persian, Urdu, English
etc., one of the finest libraries of the sub-continent.” That was
written 10 years ago.  The library now has 125,000 books.

**Its Head**

Today the institution is headed by Maulana Abul-Hasan Ali Nadwi.  Ali
Mian, as he is known to one and all, is almost without doubt the most
influential Muslim teacher and figure today-among the laity, in
government circles, and among scholars and governments abroad.

He was among the founders of the Jamaat-e-Islami, the fundamentalist
organisation; but because of differences with Maulana Maudoodi, lie left
it soon.

Today lie is the Chairman of the Muslim Personal Law Board.

He is a founder member of the Raabta Alam-e-Islami, the Pan-Islamic body
with headquarters in Mecca, which decides among other things the amounts
that different Islamic organisations the world over should receive.

He has been the Nazim, that is the Rector, of the Darul Ulum
Nadwatul-Ulama since 1961, that is for well over a quarter of a
century.  The Nadwa owes not a small part of its eminence to the
scholarship, the exertions, tile national and international contacts of
Ali Mian.

Politicians of all hues ---Rajiv Gandhi, V.P. Singh, Chandrashekhar-seek
him out.

He is the author of several books, including the well known *Insaani
Duniya Par Musalmanon Ke Uruj-o-Zaval Ka Asar* (“The impact of the Rise
and Fall of Muslims on Mankind”), and is taken as the authority on
Islamic law, jurisprudence, theology, and specially history.

And he has great, in fact decisive, influence on the politics of Muslims
in India.

**His Father and His Book**

His father, Maulana Hakim Sayid Abdul Hai, was an equally well known and
influential figure.  When the Nadwa was founded, the first Rector,
Maulana Muhammad Monghyri, the scholar at whose initiative the original
meeting in 1892 which led to the establishment of the Nadwa was called,
had chosen Maulana Abdul Hai as the Madadgar Nazim, the Additional
Rector.

Abdul Hai served in that capacity till July 1915 when he was appointed
the Rector.

Because of his scholarship and his services to the institution and to
Islam, he was reappointed as the Rector in 1920.  He continued in that
post till his death in February 1923.

He too wrote several books, including a famous directory which has just
been republished from Hyderabad, of thousands of Muslims who had served
the cause of Islam in India, chiefly by the numbers they had converted
to the faith.

During some work I came across the reference to a book of his and began
to look for it.

It was a long, discursive book, I learnt, which began with descriptions
of the geography, flora and fauna, languages, people and the regions of
India.  These were written for the Arabic speaking peoples, the book
having been written in Arabic.

In 1972, I learnt, the Nadwatul-Ulama had the book translated into Urdu
and published the most important chapters of the book under the title
*Hindustan Islami Ahad Mein* (“Hindustan under Islamic Rule”).  Ali
Mian, I was told, had himself written the foreword in which he had
commanded the book most highly.  The book as published had left out
descriptions of geography etc., on the premise that facts about these
are well known to Indian readers.

**A Sudden Reluctance**

A curious fact hit me in the face.  Many of the persons who one would
have normally expected to be knowledgeable about such publications were
suddenly reluctant to recall this book. I was told, in fact, that copies
of the book had been removed, for instance from the Aligarh Muslim
University Library.  Some even suggested that a determined effort had
been made three or four years ago to get back each and every copy of
this book.

Fortunately the suggestion turned out to be untrue.  While some of the
libraries one would normally expect, to have the book-the Jamia Millia
Islamia in Delhi; the famous libraries in Hyderabad-those of the
Dairutual Maarifal-Osmania, of the Salar Jung Museum, of the Nizam’s
Trust, of the Osmania University, the Kutubkhana-i-Saidiya - did not
have it, others did.  Among the latter were the Nadwa’s library itself,
the justly famous Khuda Baksh Library in Patna, that of the Institute of
Islamic Studies in Delhi.

The fact that the book was available in all these libraries came as a
great reassurance.  I felt that if reactionaries and propagandists have
become so well organised that they can secure the disappearance from
every library of a book they have come not to like, we are in deep
trouble.  Clearly they were not that resourceful.

The fact that, contrary to what I had been told, the book was available
also taught me another reassuring thing: factional fights among Muslim
fundamentalists are as sharp and intense as are the factional fights
among fundamentalists of other hues.  For the suggestion of there being
something sinister in the inaccessibility of the book had come to me
from responsible Muslim quarters.

**‘This valuable gift, this historical testament’**

The book is the publication number 66 of the Majlis Tehqiqat wa Nashriat
Islam, the publication house of the Nadwatul-Ulama, Lucknow.

The Arabic version was published in 1972 in Hyderabad, the Urdu version
in 1973 in Lucknow.  An English version was published in 1977. I will
use the Urdu version as the illustration.

Maulana Abul-Hasan Ali Nadwi, that is Ali Mian himself, contributes the
foreword.

It is an eloquent, almost lyrical foreword.

Islam has imbued its followers with the quest for truth, with
patriotism, he writes.  Their nature, their culture has made Muslims the
writers of true history, he writes.

Muslims had but to reach a country, he writes, and its fortunes lit up
and it awakened from the slumber of hundreds and thousands of years. 
The country thereby ascended from darkness to light, he writes, from
oblivion and obscurity to the pinnacle of name and fame.  Leaving its
parochial ambit, he writes, it joined the family of man, it joined the
wide and vast creation of God.  And the luminescence of Islam, he
writes, transformed its hidden treasures into the light of eyes.

It did not stick away the wealth of the country, he writes, and vomit it
elsewhere as western powers did.  On the contrary, it brought
sophistication, culture, beneficient administration, peace, tranquility
to the country.  It raised the country from the age of savagery to the
age of progress, he writes, from infantilism to adulthood.  It
transformed its barren lands into swaying fields, he writes, its wild
shrubs into fruit-laden trees of such munificence that the residents
could not even have dreamt of them.

And so on.

He then recalls the vast learning and prodigious exertions of Maulana
Abdul Hai, his 8-volume work on 4500 Muslims who served the cause of
Islam in India, his directory of Islamic scholars.

He recalls how after completing these books the Maulana turned to
subjects which had till then remained obscure, how in these labours the
Maulana was like the proverbial bee collecting honey from varied
flowers.  He recounts the wide range of the Maulana’s scholarship.  He
recounts how the latter collected rare data, how a person like him
accomplished single-handed what entire academies are unable these days
to do.

He recounts the structure of the present book.  He recalls how it lay
neglected for long, how, even as the work of re-transcribing a
moth-eaten manuscript was going on, a complete manuscript was discovered
in Azamgarh, how in 1933 the grace of Providence saved it from
destruction and obscurity.

He writes that the book brings into bold relief those hallmarks of
Islamic rule which have been unjustly and untruthfully dealt with by
western and Indian historians, which in fact many Muslim historians and
scholars in universities and academies too have treated with neglect and
lack of appreciation.

Recalling how Maulana Abdul Hai had to study thousands of pages on a
subject, Ali Mian writes that only he who has himself worked on the
subject can appreciate the effort that has gone into the study.  You
will get in a single chapter of this book, he tells the reader, the
essence which you cannot obtain by reading scores of books.  This is the
result, he writes, of the fact that the author laboured only for the
pleasure of God, for the service of learning, and the fulfilment of his
own soul.  Such authors expected no rewards, no applause, he tells us. 
Work was their entire satisfaction.  That is how they were able to put
in such herculean labours, to spend their entire life on one subject.

We are immensely pleased, he concludes, to present this valuable gift
and historical testament to our countrymen and hope that Allah will
accept this act of service and scholars will also receive it with
respect and approbation.

**The Explanation**

Such being the eminence of the author, such being the greatness of the
work, why is it not the cynosure of the fundamentalists’’ eyes?

The answer is in the chapter *“Hindustan ki Masjidein”*, “The Mosques of
Hindustan”.

Barely seventeen pages; the chapter is simply written.  A few facts
about some of the principal mosques are described in a few lines each.

The facts are well-known, they are elementary, and setting them out in a
few lines each should attract no attention.  And yet, as we shall see,
there is furtiveness in regard to them.  Why? Descriptions of seven
mosques provide the answer.

The devout constructed so many mosques, Maulana Abdul Hai records, they
lavished such huge amounts and such labours on them that they cannot all
be reckoned, that every city, town, hamlet came to be adorned by a
mosque.  He says that he will therefore have to be content with setting
out the facts of just a few of the well-known ones.

A few sentences from what he says about seven mosques will do:

**“Qawwat al-Islam Mosque**

According to my findings the first mosque of Delhi is Qubbat all-Islam
or Quwwat al-Islam which, it is said, Qutbud-Din Aibak constructed in H.
587 after demolishing the temple built by Prithvi Raj and leaving
certain parts of the temple (outside the mosque proper); and when he
returned from Ghazni in H. 592, he started building, under orders from
Shihabud-Din Ghori, a huge mosque of inimitable red stones, and certain
parts of the temple were included in the mosque.  After that, when
Shamsud-Din Altamish became the king, he built, on both sides of it,
edifices of white stones, and on one side of it he started constructing
that loftiest of all towers which has no equal in the world for its
beauty and strength…

**The Mosque at Jaunpur**

This was built by Sultan Ibrahim Sharqi with chiselled stones. 
Originally it was a Hindu temple after demolishing which he constructed
the mosque.  It is known as the Atala Masjid.  The Sultan used to offer
his Friday and Id prayers in it, and Qazi Shihabud-Din gave lessons in
it…

**The Mosque at Qanauj**

This mosque stands on an elevated ground inside the Fort of Qanauj.  It
is well-known that it was built on the foundations of some Hindu temple
(that stood) here.  It is a beautiful mosque.  They say that it was
built by Ibrahim Sharqi in H. 809 as is (recorded) in *‘Gharabat
Nigar’*.

**Jami (Masjid) at Etawah**

This mosque stands on the bank of the Jamuna at Etawah.  There was a
Hindu temple at this place, on the site of which this mosque was
constructed.  It is also patterned after the mosque at Qanauj.  Probably
it is one of the monuments of the Sharqi Sultans.

**Babri Masjid at Ayodhya**

This mosque was constructed by Babar at Ayodhya which Hindus call the
birth place of Ramchanderji.  There is a famous story about his wife
Sita.  It is said that Sita had a temple here in which she lived and
cooked food for her husband.  On that very site Babar constructed this
mosque in H. 963…

**Mosques of Alamgir (Aurangzeb)**

It is said that the mosque of Benares was built by Alamgir on the site
of the Bisheshwar Temple.  That temple was very tall and (held as) holy
among the Hindus.  On this very site and with those very stones he
constructed a lofty mosque, and its ancient stones were rearranged after
being embedded in the walls of the mosque.  It is one of the renowed
mosques of Hindustan.  The second mosque at Benares (is the one) which
was built by Alamgir on the bank of the Ganga with chiselled stones. 
This also is a renowned mosque of Hindustan.  It has 28 towers, each of
which is 238 feet tall.  This is on the bank of the Ganga and its
foundations extend to the depth of the waters.

Alamgir built a mosque at Mathura.  It is said that this mosque was
built on the site of the Gobind Dev Temple which was very strong and
beautiful as well as exquisite…”

**“It is said”**

But the Maulana is not testifying to the facts.  He is merely reporting
what was believed.  He repeatedly says, “It is said that…”

That seems to be a figure of speech with the Maulana.  When describing
the construction of the Quwwatul Islam mosque by Qutubuddin Aibak, for
instance, he uses the same “It is said.”

If the facts were in doubt, would a ‘scholar of Ali Mian’s diligence and
commitment not have commented on them in his full-bodied foreward?
Indeed, he would have decided against republishing them as he decided
not to republish much of the original book.

And if the scholars had felt that the passages could be that easily
disposed of, why should any effort have been made to take a work to the
excellence of which a scholar of Ali Mian’s stature has testified in
such a fulsome manner, and do what has been done to this one? And what
is that?

Each reference to each of these mosques having been constructed on the
sites of temples with, as in the case of the mosque at Benaras, the
stones of the very temple which was demolished for that very purpose
have been censored out of the English version of the book! Each one of
the passages on each one of the seven mosques! No accident that.

Indeed there is not just censorship but substitution.  In the Urdu
volume we are told in regard to the mosque at Qanauj for instance that
“This mosque stands on an elevated ground inside the fort of Qanauj.  It
is well known that it was built on the foundation of some Hindu Temple
(that stood) here.” In the English volume we are told in regard to the
same mosque that “It occupied a commanding site, believed to have been
the place earlier occupied by an old and decayed fort.”

If the passages could have been so easily explained away by referring to
the “It is saids”, why would anyone have thought it necessary to remove
these passages from the English version-that is the version which was
more likely to be read by persons other than the faithful? Why would
anyone bowdlerise the book of a major scholar in this way?

**Conclusions**

But that, though obvious, weighs little with me.  The fact that temples
were broken and mosques constructed in their place is well known.  Nor
is the fact that the materials of the temples-the stones and idols--were
used in constructing the mosque, news.  It was thought that this was the
way to announce hegemony.  It was thought that this was the way to
strike at the heart of the conquered-for in those days the temple was
not just a place of worship; it was the hub of the community’s life, of
its learning, of its social life.  So the lines in the book which bear
on this practice are of no earth-shaking significance in
themselves.  Their real significance- and I dare say that they are but
the smallest, most innocuous example that one can think of on the
mosque-temple business-lies in the evasion and concealment they have
spurred. I have it on good authority that the passages have been known
for long, and well known to those who have been stoking the Babri Masjid
issue.^([1](#1))

That is the significant thing; they have known them, and their impulse
has been to conceal and bury rather than to ascertain the truth.

I have little doubt that a rational solution can be found for the Babri
Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi tangle, a solution which will respect the
sentiments, the essentials, of the religions of all.

But no solution can be devised if the issue is going to be made the
occasion for h show of strength by either side, if it is going to be
converted into a symbol for establishing who shall prevail.

The fate of Maulana Abdul Hai’s passages-and I do, not know whether the
Urdu version itself was not a conveniently sanitised version of the
original Arabic volume-illustrates the cynical manner in which those who
stoke the passions of religion to further their politics are going about
the matter.

Those who proceed by such cynical calculations sow havoc for all of us,
for Muslims, for Hindus, for all.

Those who remain silent in the face of such cynicism, such calculations
help them sow the havoc.

Will we shed our evasions and concealments? Will we at last learn to
speak and face the whole truth? To see how communalism of one side
justifies and stokes that of the other?  To see that these “leaders” are
not interested in facts, not in religion, not in a building or a site,
but in power, in their personal power, and in that alone? That for them
religion is but an instrument, an instrument which is so attractive
because the costs of weilding it fall on others, on their followers, and
not on them?

Will we never call a halt to them?

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, February 5, 1989**

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Several other modern Muslim historians and epigraphists
accept the fact that many other mosques including the Babari Masjid at
Ayodhya stand on the sites of Hindu temples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
