+++
title = "07 Chapter Six Historians Versus History Ram Swarup"

+++
Chapter Six  
**Historians Versus History**  
Ram Swarup

Wole Soyinka, African Nobel Laureate, delivering the 20th Nehru Memorial
Lecture on November 13, 1988, made an important though by no means a new
observation - that the colonial histories have been written from the
European viewpoint.  Speaking about Indian histories, he said that
“there is a big question mark on everything that the British historians
have written”.  He added that serious efforts are being made by
historians back home “to rewrite African history.”

We do not know what this project involves and how it is faring in
Africa, but in India efforts in this direction have yielded meagre
results.  Not that there has been a dearth of rewriters, but their
talent has not been equal to their zeal.

The phrase “re-writing of history” leaves a bad taste in the mouth and
it is offensive to our sense of truth.  Recent instances of rewriting
have not helped to improve the image of the task and they inspired
little confidence.  In most cases one did not know where legitimate
rewriting ended and forgery began.  In practical terms, it has meant
that history is written to support the latest party line, or the latest
dictator.

What does, therefore, the rewriting of history mean? How far can we go
in that direction? Does it mean saying good-bye to all sense of truth
and objectivity, or does it mean only restoring some neglected truths
and perspective? Some have looked at our present through the eyes of the
past, but will it be any better to look at our past through the eyes of
the present, or even go further and write about our past and present-in
the spirit of “socialist realism”-in terms of the future, in terms of
tasks conceived and planned by our *avante garde* for the future of the
country?

There are other related questions.  Is the European history of Asia and
Africa all wrong and does it need wholesale replacement? Or does it also
have some valuable elements, particularly in its methodology if not in
its conclusions, which should be retained and even further developed? In
the Indian context, is the British history of India monolithic, all
painted black by motivated historians? Or, is it also pluralistic and
contains many views, some of them highly appreciative of the country’s
culture, philosophy and artistic creations?

And also, looked at objectively, apart from the intentions of the
writers and even in spite of their jaundiced views, have not their
histories sometimes helped us to become better aware of our past and
made us in some ways rediscover ourselves in the limited sense in which
the words ‘past’ and ‘rediscovery’ are understood today?

To hold that all British history of India was wrong will be highly
unrealistic and will have few buyers.  True, many British, historians
were prejudiced.  But there were also others who had genuine curiosity
and in spite of their pre-conceived notions, they tried to do their job
faithfully in the spirit of objectivity.  In the pursuit of their
researches, they applied methods followed in Europe.  They collected,
collated and compared old manuscripts.  They desciphered old, forgotten
scripts and in the process discovered an important segment of our past. 
They developed linguistics, archaeology, carbon-dating, numismatics;
they found for us ample evidence of India in Asia.  They discovered for
us much new data, local and international.  True, many times they tried
to twist this data and put fanciful constructions on it, but this new
respect for facts imposed its own discipline and tended to evolve
objective criteria.  Because of the objective nature of the criteria,
their findings did not always support their prejudices and preconceived
notions.  For example, their data proved that India represented an
ancient culture with remarkable continuity and widespread influence and
that it had a long and well-established tradition of self-rule and
self-governing republics, and free institutions and free discussion.

However, while admitting these positive factors, it is also true that
the British historians distorted Indian history on some most essential
points.  The distortion was not conscious but was unconscious; however,
it was not less real and potent on that account.

**British Historians**

The mind of British scholars was shaped by their position as rulers of a
fast-expanding Empire and by its need to consolidate itself
ideologically and politically.  As rulers, they felt a new racial and
cultural superiority and, reinforced by their religion, developed a
strong conviction of their civilizing mission.  Many of them also felt a
great urge to bring the blessings of Christian morals and a Christian
God to a benighted paganhood, as long as the attempt did not endanger
the Empire.

The rulers had also more palpable political needs.  The subject people
should have no higher notion of their past beyond their present status,
which they should also learn to accept without murmur and even with
thankfulness.  The British rulers had an interest in telling the Indian
people that the latter had never been a nation but a conglomerate of
miscellaneous people drawn from diverse sources and informed by no
principle of unity; that their history had been an history of invaders
and conquerors and that they had never known indigenous rule; and that,
indeed, they were indifferent to self-rule and that so long as their
village-life was intact, they did not bother who ruled at the Centre.
All these lessons were tirelessly taught and dutifully learnt, so much
so that even after the British have left, these assumptions and
categories still shape our larger political thinking and historical
perspective.  That India is multi-racial, multi-national,
multi-linguistic, multi-cultural painfully trying to acquire a principle
of unity under their aegis is also the assumption of our own new leaders
and elite.

These were the basic attitudes and unspoken interests that shaped the
minds of the British historians, but within this framework there was
room enough for individual preferences and temperamental peculiarities. 
Some of them could show their genuine appreciation for Hindu language,
grammar, architecture, and other, cultural achievements, but this
appreciation would not go beyond a certain point, nor in a direction
which began to feed the people's wider national consciousness and pride
in themselves as an ancient nation.  In this respect too, our
intellectual elite follow the lead of the British scholars.  Many of
them-unless they are Marxists or Macaulayists - are not without a
measure of appreciation and pride for some of our old cultural
creations.  But this appreciation does not extend to that larger culture
itself which put forth those creations, and that religion and spirit in
which that culture was rooted and those people and that society which
upheld that religion and that culture.

We are told that the British highlighted Hindu-Muslim differences.  They
certainly did.  But they had no interest in telling the Indians that
their forefathers shared a common religion, that some of them got
converted under peculiar circumstances, that those circumstances were no
longer valid, and that they should not lose their consciousness of their
original and wider fold.  On the other hand, the way the British wrote
their history perpetuated the myth of a Muslim rule and a Muslim period
which could not but accentuate Hindu-Muslim differences and promote
Muslim separatism.

The main interest of the British was to write a history which justified
their presence in India.  They were imperial rulers and by their
situation and function they felt a bond of sympathy and affinity with
the rulers that had preceded them.  They held India by the right of
conquest; therefore, they had to recognise the legitimacy of this right
in the case of the Moghuls, the Afghans and the Arabs too.

But this justification was too crude and naked for the British
conscience.  To assuage it, the British offered a legal and moral
alibi.  They held that they were legitimate successors of the Moghuls
and represented continuity with India’s past.  The Moghuls were
presented as empire builders, those who united India and gave it law and
order, peace and stability - the natural blessings of an Imperial
order.  And the British themselves were merely the successors of the
Imperial rights of the Moghuls and upheld the Imperial authority of
Delhi.  Whatever elevated Moghul authority at Delhi, elevated their
imperial authority too.

Facts sometimes compelled the British historians to speak of cruelties
and vandalism of the Muslim rule but this did not stop them from
upholding its authority.  For they knew that the myth of Imperialism is
one and that the glory of the Moghul rulers and the myth of their
invincibility added to the glory and the myth of the British Empire
itself.

Thus all these factors made the British give a new boost to the Muslim
rule in India. While trying to legitimise their own rule, they also gave
to their predecessor a kind of legitimacy which they never had in the
eyes of the Indian people.  In fact, in the larger national
consciousness, the Muslim rule had as little legitimacy as the British
rule had later on.  Both were considered as foreign impositions and
resisted as such as far as time, opportunity and the prevailing power
equation allowed it.

But by the same token and for the same reason this resistance, long and
stubborn, was underplayed by British historians and presented as
“revolts” or “rebellions” against the legitimate Imperial authority of
the Centre.  They felt, and quite rightly from their viewpoint, that
Indian history should have nothing to show that its people waged many
battles and repulsed many invaders.  Thus, in this way, India came to
have a history which is the history of its invaders, whose dominion its
people accepted meekly.

**Muslim Historians**

Even before the British came on the stage, Muslim historians had written
similar histories.  Those histories were mostly annals written by
scribes or *munshis* employed by Muslim kings.  The task of these
annalists was to glorify Islam and their immediate patrons, a task which
they performed with great zeal and rhetoric.  In the performance of this
task, they resorted to no moral or intellectual disguise.  The glory of
Islam and the extension of *Darul-Islam* (the Muslim equivalent of the
British “Empire”) was self-justified and needed no artificial props. 
They spoke of the massacres of the infidels, of their forcible
conversions, of their temples raced and of similar tyrannies perpetrated
with great rejoice, as Sir H.M. Elliot points out.

**“Hindu” Historians**

The results were no better when the annalist employed happened to be a
Hindu.  Elliot again observes that from “one of that nation we might
have expected to have learnt what were the feelings, hopes, faiths,
fears, and yearnings, of his subject race,” but this was not to be.  On
the other hand, in his writing, there is “nothing to betray his religion
or his nation… With him, a Hindu is an ‘infidel’, and a Muhammadan ‘one
of true faith’,… With him, when Hindus are killed, ‘their souls are
despatched to hell’, and when a Muhammadan suffers the same fate, he
‘drinks the cup of martyrdom’… He speaks of the ‘light of Islam shedding
its refulgence on the world’.”

But what comes next intrigues Elliot even more.  Even after the tyrant
was no more and the falsification of history through terror was no
longer necessary (Elliot quotes Tacitus : *Teberii ac Neronis res ob
metum falsae*), he finds that there is still “not one of this slavish
crew who treats the history of his native country subjectively, or
presents us with the thoughts, emotions, and raptures which a long
oppressed race might be supposed to give vent to.”

This tribe of Hindu *munshis* or the “slavish crew” of Elliot have a
long life and show a remarkable continuity.  Instead of diminishing,
their number has multiplied with time.  Today, they dominate the
universities, the media and the country’s political thinking.

They were reinforced by another set of historians - those who carry the
British tradition.  One very important thing in common with them is that
they continue to look at India through the eyes of Muslim and British
rulers even long after their rule has ceased.

Elliot regards the problem with moral indignation but the phenomenon
involves deep psychological and sociological factors.  It is more
complex than the question of patronage enjoyed or tyranny withdrawn.

Hindus have lived under very trying circumstances for many centuries and
during this time their psyche suffered much damage.  Short term tyranny
may prove a challenge but long-term, sustained tyranny tends to benumb
and dehumanize.  Under continued military and ideological attack, many
Hindus lost initiative and originality; they lost naturalness and
self-confidence; they lost pride in themselves, pride in their past and
in their history and in their nation.  They learnt to live a sort of
underground life, furtively and apologetically.  Some tried to save
their self-respect by identifying themselves with the thoughts and
sentiments of the rulers.  They even adopted the rulers’ contempt for
their own people.

These attitudes imbibed over a long period have become our second
nature, and they have acquired an independence and dynamism of their
own.  We have begun to look at ourselves through the eyes of our rulers.

**Post-Independence Period**

One would have thought that all this would change after we attained
Independence, but this did not happen.  It shows that to throw off an
intellectual and cultural yoke is far more difficult than to throw off a
political yoke.

By and large we have retained our old history written by our rulers. 
The leaders of the nationalist movement are quite content with it,
except that they have added to it one more chapter at the end which
depicts them in a super-heroic role.  The new leaders have no greater
vision of Indian history and they look forward to no greater task than
to perpetuate themselves.

In fact they have developed a vested interest in old history which
propagates that India was never a nation, that it had not known any
freedom or freedom-struggle in the past.  By sheer contrast, it exalts
their role and proves something they would like to believe - that they
are the first nation-builders, that they led the first freedom struggle
India has ever known and, indeed, she became free for the first time
under their aegis.  This highly flatters their ego, and to give
themselves this unique status we find that their attacks on India’s past
are as vicious and ignorant as those of the British and Muslim
historians.  No wonder histories continue to be written with all the
contempt we learnt to feel for our past, and with all the lack of
understanding we developed for our culture during the days of foreign
domination.

A new source of distortion was opened during the period of the freedom
struggle itself.  Nationalist leaders strove to win Muslim support for
the Independence struggle.  In the hope of achieving this end, Indian
nationalism itself began to rewrite the history of medieval times. 
Under this motivation, Muslim rule became ‘indigenous’, and Muslim kings
became ‘national’ kings, and even nationalists, those who fought them
began to receive a low score.  R.C. Mojumdar tells us how, under this
motivation, national leaders created an “imaginary history”, one of them
even proclaiming that “Hindus were not at all a subject race during the
Muslim rule,” and how “these absurd notions, which would have been
laughed at by Indian leaders at the beginning of the 19th century,
passed current as history… at the end of that century”.

**Marxist Distortions**

Marxists have taken to rewriting Indian history on a large scale and it
has meant its systematic falsification.  They have a dogmatic view of
history and for them the use of any history is to prove their dogma. 
Their very approach is hurtful to truth.  But this is a large subject
and we would not go into it here, even though it is related intimately
to the subject under discussion.

The Marxists’ contempt for India, particularly the India of religion,
culture and philosophy, is deep and theoretically fortified.  It exceeds
the contempt ever shown by the most die-hard imperialists.  Some of the
British had an orientalist’s fascination for the East or an
administrator's paternal concern for their wards, but Marxists suffer
from no such sentimentality.  The very “Asiatic mode of production” was
primitive and any, “superstructure” of ideas and culture built on that
foundation must be barbaric too and it had better go.

Not many realize how thoroughly European Marx was in his orientation. 
He treated all Asia and Africa as an appendage of the West and, indeed,
of the Anglo-Saxon Great Britain.  He borrowed all his theses on India
from British rulers and fully subscribed to them.  With them he believes
that “Indian society has no history at all, at least no known history,”
and that what “we call its history, is the history of successive
intruders.” With them he also believes that India “has neither known nor
cared for self-rule.” In fact, he rules out self-rule for India
altogether and in this matter gives her no choice.  He says that the
question is “not whether the English bad a right to conquer India, but
whether we are to prefer India conquered by the Turk, by the Persian, by
the Russian, to India conquered by the Briton.” His own choice was
clear.

Indian Marxists fully accept this thesis, except that they are also
near-equal admirers of the “Turkish” conquest of India.  Indian Marxists
get quite lyrical about this conquest and find quite fulfilment in it. 
Let us illustrate the point with the example of M.N. Roy.  We are told
that he gave up Marxism but he kept enough of it to retain his
admiration for Muslim Imperialism.  He admires the “historical role of
Islam” in a book of the same name and praises the “Arab Empire” as a
“magnificent monument to the memory of Mohammad.” He hails Muslim
invasion of India and tells us how “it was welcomed as a message of hope
and freedom by the multitudinous victims of Brahmanical reaction.”

Earlier, Roy had spoken of “our country” which “had become almost
liberated from the Moslem Empire.” But that was long ago when he was
merely a nationalist and had not come under the influence of Marxism. 
Marxism teaches a new appreciation for Imperialism; it idealises old
Imperialisms and prepares a people for a new one.  Its moving power is
deep-rooted self-alienation and its greatest ally is cultural and
spiritual illiteracy.

Marxist writers and historians of a sort are all over the place and they
are well entrenched in the academic and media sectors.  They have a
great say in University appointments and promotions, in the awarding of
research grants, in drawing up syllabi, and in the choosing and
prescribing of text-books.  No true history of India is possible without
countering their philosophy, ideas and influence.

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, January 15, 1989**

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
