+++
title = "70 \"Islam as an Ethical and a Political Ideal\""

+++
Source: *Islam as an Ethical and a Political Ideal: Iqbal's maiden
English lecture*, ed. by S. Y. Hashimy (Lahore: Orientalia, 1955), pp.
53-101. Slightly edited for classroom use by FWP. Typos have been
corrected, and punctuation slightly adjusted in some cases for clarity.
All italics are those of the original text. Some extremely short
paragraphs have been joined into longer ones. Annotations in square
brackets, and paragraph numbers in double brackets, are by FWP. Iqbal no
doubt recited the Qur'anic verses in Arabic; the verse citations and
English translations given here are those provided by S. Y. Hashimy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Islam as an Ethical and a Political Ideal"

Iqbal's first speech in English (Lahore, April 1908)

\*[\[1\] Introduction](#introduction)\*  
\*[\[2\] The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and those of other
religions\]](#ethical_1)\*  
\*[\[3\] The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and the question of
slavery\]](#ethical_2)\*  
\*[\[4\] The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and Indian
Muslims\]](#ethical_3)\*  
\*[\[5\] The Political Ideal of Islam \[and peace and good
citizenship\]](#political_1)\*  
\*[\[6\] The Political Ideal of Islam \[and democracy and
equality\]](#political_2)\*

  
Introduction

\[\[1A\]\] There are three points of view from which a religious system
can be approached: (1) from the standpoint of a Teacher; (2) from that
of the Expounder; (3) from that of a Critical student. I do not pretend
to be a teacher whose word and action are, or ought to be, in perfect
harmony in so far as he endeavours to work out in his own life the
ideals which he places before others, and thus influences his audience
more by example than be precepts. Nor do I claim the high office of an
expounder who brings to bear a subtle intellect upon his task,
endeavours to explain all the various aspects of the principles he
expounds, and works with certain presuppositions, the truth of which he
never questions.

\[\[1B\]\] The attitude of mind which characterises a critical student
is fundamentally different from that of the teacher and the expounder.
He approaches the subject matter of his inquiry free from all
presuppositions, and tries to understand the organic structure of a
religious system just as a biologist would study a form of life, or a
geologist would examine a mineral. His object is to apply the methods of
scientific research to religion, with a view to discover how the various
elements in a given structure fit in with one another; how each factor
functions individually; and how their relations with one another
determine the functional value of the whole.

\[\[1C\]\] He looks at the subject from the standpoint of history, and
raises certain fundamental questions with regard to the growth and
formation of the system he proceeds to understand:

> 1\. What are \[the\] historical forces, the operation of which evoked
> as a necessary consequence the phenomenon of a particular system?  
> 2. Why should a particular religious system be produced by a
> particular people?  
> 3. What is the real significance of a religious system in the history
> of the people who produced it, and in the history of mankind as a
> whole?  
> 4. Are there any geographical causes which determine the original
> locality of the religion?  
> 5. How far does it reveal the inmost soul of a people, their social,
> moral, and political aspirations?  
> 6. What transformation, if any, has it worked in them?  
> 7. How far has it contributed towards the realisation of the ultimate
> purpose revealed in the history of Man?

\[\[1D\]\] I propose to look at Islam from the viewpoint of a critical
student. But I may tell you at the outset that I shall avoid the use of
expressions current in popular Revelational Theology, since my method is
essentially scientific and consequently necessitates the use of terms
which can be interpreted in the light of everyday human experience. For
instance, when I say that the religion of a people is "the sum total of
their life experience finding a definite expression through the medium
of a great personality," I am translating the fact of Revelation into
the language of science. Similarly, "interaction between individual and
Universal Energy" is simply another expression for the feeling of
Prayer, which ought to be described for the purpose of scientific
accuracy. It is because I want to approach my subject from a thoroughly
humane standpoint, and not because I doubt the fact of Divine Revelation
as the final basis of Religion, that I prefer to employ expressions of a
more scientific content.

\[\[1E\]\] Islam is, moreover, the youngest of all religions, the last
religious creation of humanity. The founder stands out clear before us.
He is truly a personage of history, and lends himself freely even to the
most scorching criticism. Ingenious legend has woven no screen round his
figure. He is born in the broad daylight of history. We can thoroughly
understand the inner spring of his actions. We can subject his mind to a
keen psychological analysis. Let us then, for the time being, eliminate
the supernatural element, and try to understand the structure of Islam
as we find it.

\[\[1F\]\] I have just indicated the way in which a critical student of
religion approaches his subject. Now, it is not possible for me in the
short span of a lecture to answer with regard to Islam all the questions
which a critical student of religion ought to raise and answer in order
to reveal the real meaning of this religious system. I shall not raise,
therefore, the question of the origin and development of Islam; nor
shall I try to analyze the various currents of thought in the
pre-Islamic Arabian society which found a final focus in the utterances
of the Prophet of Islam. I shall confine my attention to the Islamic
Ideal in its Ethical and Political aspects only.

  
The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and those of other religions\]

\[\[2A\]\] To begin with, we have to recognize that every great
religious system starts with certain presuppositions concerning the
nature of Man and the Universe. The psychological implication of
Buddhism, for instance, is the central fact of Pain as a dominating
element in the constitution of the Universe. Man, regarded as an
individuality, is helpless against the forces of pain, according to the
teachings of Buddhism. There is an indissoluble relation between pain
and individual consciousness which, as such, is nothing but a constant
possibility of pain. Starting from the fact of pain, Buddhism is quite
consistent in placing before man the ideal of self-destruction. Of the
two terms of this relation, Pain and the Sense of Personality, one (i.e.
Pain) is ultimate. The other is a delusion: a tendency to intensify the
sense of personality. According to Buddhism, then, *salvation is
inaction; renunciation of self and unworldliness are the principal
virtues*.

\[\[2B\]\] Similarly, Christianity, as a religious system, is based on
the fact of Sin. The world is regarded as Evil, and the taint of sin is
regarded as hereditary to man-- who, as an individuality, is
insufficient, and stands in need of some supernatural personality to
intervene between him and the Creator. Christianity, unlike Buddhism,
regards human personality as something real, but agrees with Buddhism in
holding that Man, as a force against Sin, is insufficient. There is,
however, a subtle difference in their agreement: we can, according to
Christianity, get rid of Sin by depending upon a Redeemer. We can free
ourselves from Pain, according to Buddhism, by letting this insufficient
force dissipate or lose itself in the Universal Energy of Nature. Both
agree in the fact of insufficiency, and both agree in holding that this
insufficiency is an Evil. But while the one makes up the deficiency by
bringing in the forces of a redeeming personality, the other prescribes
its gradual reduction where it is annihilated altogether.

\[\[2C\]\] Again, Zoroastrianism looks upon Nature as a scene of endless
struggle between the powers of Evil and Good, and recognises in man the
power to choose any course of action he likes. The Universe, according
to Zoroastrianism, is partly Evil and partly Good. Man is neither wholly
good nor wholly evil, but a combination of the two principles -- Light
and Darkness -- continually fighting against each other for universal
supremacy. We see, then, that the fundamental presuppositions with
regard to the nature of the Universe and Man in Buddhism, Christianity,
and Zoroastrianism respectively are the following:

> 1\) Buddhism: There is Pain in Nature; and Man, regarded as an
> individual, is Evil.  
> 2) Christianity: There is Sin in Nature; and the taint of Sin is
> natural to Man.  
> 3) Zoroastrianism: There is struggle in Nature; Man is a mixture of
> the struggling forces, and is free to range himself on the side of the
> powers of Good which shall eventually prevail.

\[\[2D\]\] The questions now are: (1) What is the Muslim view of \[the\]
Universe and Man; and (2) What is the central idea which determines the
structure of the entire system? We know that Sin, Pain, and Sorrow are
constantly mentioned in the Qur'an. The truth is that Islam looks upon
the Universe as a reality, and consequently recognises as reality all
that is in it. Sin, Pain, and Sorrow, and Struggle are certainly real,
but Islam teaches that Evil is not essential to the universe. The
universe can be reformed, and the elements of Sin and Evil can be
gradually eliminated. All that is in the Universe is God's: "Now,
surely, whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is in the earth, is
Allah's" (Qur'an 10:66). And the seemingly destructive forces of Nature
become sources of Life, if properly controlled by Man: "Most surely in
the creation of the heaven and the earth, and the alternation of the
night and day, and the ships that run in the sea laden with that which
profits men, and the water that Allah sends down from the cloud, then
gives life to the earth after its death, and spreads in all kinds of
animals, and the changing of the courses of winds and the clouds made
subservient between the heaven and the earth, there are signs for a
people who understand" (Qur'an 2:164). Man-- who is endowed with the
power to understand and control them: "We have made him (man) hearing
and seeing" (Qur'an 76:2).

\[\[2E\]\] This and similar other verses of the Qur'an, combined with
the Quranic recognition of Sin and Sorrow, indicate that the Islamic
view of the universe is neither optimistic nor pessimistic. Modern
psychometry has given the final answer to the psychological implications
of Buddhism: *Pain is not an essential factor in the constitution of the
universe, and pessimism is only a product of \[a\] hostile environment*.
Islam believes in the efficacy of well-directed action; hence the
standpoint of Islam must be described as melioristic, the ultimate
presupposition of all human effort at scientific discovery and social
progress. Although Islam recognises the fact of Pain, Sin, and Struggle
in nature, yet the principal fact which stands in the way of Islam is
neither Sin, nor Pain, nor Struggle. It is Fear, to which man is victim
owing to his ignorance of his environment, and want of absolute faith in
God. *The highest stage of man's ethical progress is reached when he
becomes absolutely free from fear and grief*. "They shall neither fear,
nor shall they grieve" (Qur'an 2:38).

\[\[2F\]\] The central proposition which regulates the structure of
Islam, then, is that there is Fear in Nature, and the object of Islam is
to free Man from Fear. This view of the universe indicates also the
Islamic view of the metaphysical nature of man. If fear is the force
which dominates man and counteracts his ethical progress, man must be
regarded as a Unit of Force and Energy, a Will, a germ of infinite power
-- the gradual unfoldment of which must be the object of all human
activity. *The essential nature of man, then, consists in will, and not
in intellect and understanding*. With regard to the ethical nature of
man, too, the teaching of Islam is different from those of other
religious systems: "And when God said to the Angels, 'I am going to make
a Viceroy on Earth,' they said, 'Art Thou creating one who spills blood
and disturbs the peace of the earth, and we glorify Thee, and sing Thy
praise.' God answered, 'I know what you do not know.'" (Qur'an 2:30).
These verses of the Qur'an, when read in the light of the famous
Tradition, "Every child is born a Muslim (peaceful)," indicates that,
according to the tenets of Islam, man is essentially good and peaceful
-- a view explained and defended in our own times by Rousseau, the great
father of modern political thought.

\[\[2G\]\] The opposite view, the doctrine of the depravity of man held
by the Church of Rome, leads to most pernicious religious and political
consequences. If man is essentially wicked, he must not be permitted to
have his own way. His entire life, then, must be controlled by an
external authority. This means priesthood in religion and autocracy in
politics. The Middle Ages in the history of Europe drove the dogma of
Romanism to its political and religious consequences; the result was a
form of society which required terrible revolutions to destroy it, and
to upset the basic presuppositions of its structure. Luther, the enemy
of despotism in religion, and Rousseau, the enemy of despotism in
politics, must always be regarded as emancipators of European humanity
from the heavy fetters of Popedom and Absolutism. Their religious and
political thoughts must be understood as a virtual denial of the church
dogma of human depravity.

\[\[2H\]\] The possibility of the elimination of Sin and Pain from the
evolutionary process, and faith in the natural goodness of man, are the
basic proposition of Islam, as of modern European civilisation -- which
has, almost unconsciously, recognised the truth of these propositions,
in spite of the religious system with which it is associated. Ethically
speaking, therefore, man is naturally good and peaceful. Metaphysically
speaking, he is a Unit of Energy which cannot bring out its dormant
possibilities owing to its misconception of the nature of environments.
*The ethical ideal of Islam, then, is to disenthrall man from fear* and
thus to give him a sense of his personality, and then to make him
conscious of himself as a source of power. The idea of man as an
individuality of infinite power determines, according to the teachings
of Islam, the worth of all human actions. *That which intensifies the
sense of individuality in man is good, and that which enfeebles it is
bad*. Evil is weakness. Give a man a keen sense of respect for his own
personality, and let him move fearless and free in the immensity of
God's earth, and he shall respect the personalities of others and become
perfectly virtuous.

\[\[2I\]\] It is not possible for me to show you in this lecture how all
the principal forms of vices can be reduced to fear. But you will see
the reason why certain forms of human activities, e.g.,
self-renunciation, poverty, slavish obedience which at times conceals
itself under the beautiful name of humility, and unworldliness -- modes
of activity which tend to weaken the forces of human individuality --
are regarded as virtues by Buddhism and Christianity, but are altogether
ignored by Islam. While the early Christians glorified poverty and
unworleliness, Islam looks upon poverty as a vice, and says: "Do not
forget thy share in this world" (Qur'an 28:77). The highest virtue from
the standpoint of Islam is "Righteousness," which is defined in the
following manner: "It is not righteousness that you turn your faces in
prayers towards east or west, but it is this: that one should believe in
Allah, the Last Day, and the Angels, and the Scriptures and the
Prophets; and give away wealth for His sake to the near of kin and
orphans, and the needy and the wayfarers and the beggars, and for the
redemption of captives; and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate; and
who perform their covenant when they have covenanted, and are patient in
distress and affliction." (Qur'an 2:177).

\[\[2J\]\] It is, therefore, evident that Islam, so to speak,
transvaluates the moral values of the ancient world, and declares the
preservation and intensification of the sense of human personality to be
\[the\] ultimate ground of all ethical activities. Man is a free,
responsible being; he is the maker of his own Destiny; and his salvation
is his own business. There is no mediator between God and man. God is
the birthright of every man. The Qur'an, therefore, while it looks upon
Jesus Christ as the Spirit of God, strongly protests against the
doctrine of redemption, as well as the doctrine of an infallible visible
head of the church -- doctrines which proceed upon the assumption of the
insufficiency of human personality, and tend to create in man the sense
of dependence which is regarded by Islam as a force obstructing the
ethical progress of man.

  
The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and the question of slavery\]

\[\[3A\]\] The Law of Islam is almost unwilling to recognise
illegitimacy, since the stigma is a great blow to the healthy
development of the spirit of independence in man. Similarly, in order to
give man an early sense of individuality, the Law of Islam has laid down
that a child is absolutely free at the age of fifteen. To this view of
Muslim ethics, however, there can be one objection. If the development
of human individuality is the principal concern of Islam, why should it
tolerate the institution of slavery?

\[\[3B\]\] The idea of free labour was foreign to the economic
consciousness of the ancient world. Aristotle looks upon it as a
necessary factor in human society. The Prophet of Islam, being a link
between the ancient and modern worlds, declared the principle of
equality; and though, like every social reformer, he slightly conceded
to the social conditions around himself, in retaining the name
"slavery," he quietly took away the whole spirit of the institution.
That slaves had equal opportunities with other Muhammadans is evidenced
by the fact that some of the greatest Muslim warriors, kings, premiers,
scholars, and jurists were slaves. During the days of the Early Caliphs
slavery by purchase was quite unknown. Part of public revenue was set
apart for \[the\] purpose of manumission; and prisoners of war were
either freely dismissed or freed on payment of ransom. 'Umar set all
slaves at liberty after his conquest of Jerusalem. Slaves were set at
liberty as a penalty for culpable homicide, and in expiation for a false
oath taken by mistake.

\[\[3C\]\] The Prophet's own treatment of slaves was extraordinarily
liberal. The proud aristocratic Arab could not tolerate the social
elevation of slaves even when they were manumitted. The democratic ideal
of perfect equality, which had found \[=formed?\] the most
uncompromising ideal in the Prophet's life, could only be brought home
to an extremely aristocratic people by a very cautious handling of the
situation. He brought about a marriage between an emancipated slave and
a free Quraysh woman, a relative of his own. This marriage was a blow to
the aristocratic pride of the free Arab woman; she could not get on with
her husband, and the result was a divorce, which made her the more
helpless, since no respectable Arab would marry the divorced wife. The
ever-watchful Prophet availed himself of this situation at \[=for?\]
social reform. He married the woman himself, indicating thereby that not
only a slave could marry a free woman, but also that a woman divorced by
him could become the wife of no less a personage than the greatest
Prophet of God. The significance of this marriage in the history of the
social reform in Arabia is, indeed, very great. Whether prejudice,
ignorance, or want of insight has blinded European critics of Islam to
the real meaning of this union is difficult to guess.

\[\[3D\]\] In order to show you the treatment of slaves by modern
Muslims, I quote a passage from the English translation of the
autobiography of \[the\] late Amir 'Abdu'r Rahman Khan of Afghanistan
(may his soul rest in peace): "For instance, Faramurz Khan, a Chitrali
slave, is my most trusted Commander-in-Chief at Herat; Nazir Ahmad Safar
Khan, another Chitrali slave, is the most trusted official of my Court;
he keeps my seal in his hands to put it on any document and food and
diet. In short, he has the full confidence of my life, as well as of my
kingdom, in his hands. Parwana Khan, the late Deputy Commander-in-Chief,
and Jan Muhammad Khan, the late Lord \[of the\] Treasury, two of the
highest officials of the kingdom in their lifetimes, were both of them
my slaves."

\[\[3E\]\] The truth is that the institution of slavey is a mere name in
Islam; the idea of individuality reveals itself as a guiding principle
in the entire system of Muhammadan Law and Ethics. The poet 'Umar
Khaiyyam has so beautifully expressed the spirit of Muslim ethics in one
of his quatrains that I cannot help reading it to you \[in Persian;
trans. here by Hashimy\]:

> So long as there lie (together) bones, veins, and energy  
> Never step out of the House of Fate;  
> Do not submit even if Rustam bin Zal be your foe,  
> Do not accept obligation of a friend even if he be Hatim of Tayy.

Briefly speaking, then, "a strong Will in a strong Body" is the Ethical
Ideal of Islam.

  
The Ethical Ideal of Islam \[and Indian Muslims\]

\[\[4A\]\] But let me stop here for a moment, and see whether we Indian
Muslims are true to this ideal. (1) Does the Indian Muslim possess a
strong will in a strong body? (2) Has he got the will to live? (3) Has
he got sufficient strength of character to oppose those forces which
tend to disintegrate the social organism to which he belongs? I regret
to answer my questions in the negative. You know, Gentlemen, that in the
great struggle for life it is not principally number which makes a
social organism survive; character is the ultimate equipment of man not
only in his efforts against a hostile natural environment, but also in
his contest with kindred competitors after a fuller richer, and ampler
life.

\[\[4B\]\] The life-force of the Indian Muhammadan, however, has become
woefully enfeebled. The decay of the religious spirit, combined with
other causes of a political nature over which he had no control, has
developed in him now a sense of dependence and, above all, the laziness
of spirit which an enervated people call by the dignified name of
"contentment" in order to conceal their own enfeeblement. Owing to his
indifferent commercial morality, he fails in economic enterprise; for
want of a true conception of national interest and the right
appreciation of the present situation of the community among the
communities of this country, he is working, in his private as well as
public capacities, on lines which, I am afraid, must lead to ruin. How
often do we see that shrinks from advocating a cause, the significance
of which is truly national, simply because his standing aloof pleases an
influential Hindu through whose agency he hopes to secure a personal
distinction. I tell you, Gentlemen, that I have got greater respect for
an illiterate shopkeeper who earns his honest bread, and has sufficient
force in his arms to defend his wife and children in times of trouble,
than the brainy graduate of high culture whose timid voice betokens
death \[=dearth?\] of soul in his body, and who takes pride in his
submissiveness, eats sparingly, complains of sleepless in \[=at\] night,
and produces unhealthy children for his community, if he does produce at
all.

\[\[4C\]\] Gentlemen, I hope I shall not be offending you when I say
that I have a certain amount of admiration for the Devil. By refusing to
prostrate himself before Adam, whom he honestly believed to be his
inferior, he revealed a high sense of self-respect, a trait of character
which, in my opinion, ought to redeem him from his spiritual deformity,
just as the beautiful eyes of a toad redeem him from his physical
repulsiveness. And, I believe, God punished him not because he refused
to make himself low before the progenitor of an enfeebled humanity, but
because he declined to give absolute obedience to the Will of the
Almighty Ruler of the Universe.

\[\[4D\]\] The ideal of our educated young men is mostly service; and
service begets, especially in a country like India, that sense of
dependence wshich undermines the force of human individuality. The poor
among us, of course, have no capital; the middle-class people cannot
undertake joint economic enterprises owing to mutual mistrust; and the
rich look upon trade as an occupation beneath their dignityl *Economic
dependence is the prolific mother of all the various forms of evils*.
Even the vices of the Indian Muhammadan indicate weakness of life-force
in him. Physically, too, he has undergone dreadful deteriorations. Go
and see the pale, faded faces of Muhammadan boys in schools and
colleges, and you will find the painful verification of my statement.
Power, energy, force, strength -- yes, physical strength is the Law of
Life. A strong man may rob others when he has got nothing in his pocket;
but a feeble person must die the death of a mean thing in the world's
awful scene of continual warfare.

\[\[4E\]\] But how to improve this undesirable state of things?
Education, you might say, will work the transformation. Now, Gentlemen,
I do not put much faith in education as understood in this country. The
ethical training of humanity is really the work of great personalities
who appear from time to time in the course of human history.
Unfortunately our present social environment is not favourable to the
birth of such personalities of ethical magnetism. An attempt to discover
the reason of this dearth of personalities among us will necessitate the
subtle analysis of all the visible and invisible forces which are now
determining the course of our social evolutions -- an inquiry which I
cannot undertake in this lecture. But you will, I think, admit that such
personalities are rare among us. Such being the case, education is the
only thing to fall back upon.

\[\[4F\]\] But what sort of education? There is no absolute truth in
education, as there is none in philosophy or science. Knowledge for the
sake of knowledge is the maxim of fools. Do you ever find a person
rolling \[=turning over\] in his mind the undulatory Theory of Light
simply because it is a fact of science? Education, like other things,
ought to be determined by the needs of the learner. *A form of education
which has no direct bearing on the particular type of character which
you want to develop is absolutely worthless*. I grant that the present
system of education in India gives you bread and butter. You manufacture
a number of graduates, and then you have to send titled mendicants to
the government to beg appointments for them. Well, if you succeed in
securing a few appointments in the higher branches of service, what
then? It is the masses who constitute the backbone of a nation. They
ought to be better fed, better housed; and properly educated. Life is
not bread and butter alone; it is something more. *It is the healthy
character that reflects the national ideal in all its aspects*.

\[\[4G\]\] For a truly national character, you ought to have a truly
national education. Can you expect free Muslim character in a young
boywho is brought up in an aided school in complete ignorance of his
social and historical traditions? You administer him doses of Cromwell's
History. It is idle to expect that he will turn out a truly Muslim
character. The knowledge of Cromwell's History will certainly create in
him a great deal of admiration for the Puritan Revolutionary; but it
cannot create that healthy pride in his soul which is the very lifeblood
of a truly national character. Our educated young men know all about
Cromwell, Wellington, Gladstone, Voltaire, and Luther. They will tellyou
that Lord Roberts worked in South African wars like a common soldier at
the age of eighty. But how many of us know that Muhammad II conquered
Constantinople at the age of twenty-two? How many of us have the
faintest notion of the influence of our Muslim civilisation over Modern
Europe? How many of us are familiar with the wonderful historical
productions of Ibn Khaldun, or the extraordinary noble character of
'Abdu'l-Qadir of Algeria? *A living nation is alive because it never
forgets its dead*.

\[\[4H\]\] I venture to say, Gentlemen, that the present system of
education in this country is not at all suited to us as a people: It is
not true to our genius as a nation. It tends to produce an un-Islamic
character. It is not determined by our national requirements. It breaks
away entirely with \[=from\] our past. It appears to proceed on the
false assumption that the ideal of education is the training of human
intellect rather than human will. Nor is this superficial system true to
the genius of the Hindus. Amongst them it appears to have produced a
number of political idealists whose false reading of history drives them
to the upsetting of all conditions of political order and social peace.

\[\[4I\]\] Gentlemen, you spend an immense amount of money every year on
\[the\] education of your children. Well, thanks to the King Emperor,
India is a free country; everybody is free to entertain any opinion he
likes. I look upon it as a waste. In order to be truly yourself, you
have to have your own schools, colleges, and your own universities
keeping alive your social and historical traditions, making you good and
peaceful citizens, and creating in you that free and law-abiding spirit
which evolves out of itself a nobler type of political virtue. I am
quite sensible of the difficulties that lie in your way. All that I can
say is that *if you cannot get over your difficulties, the world will
soon get rid of you*.

  
The Political Ideal of Islam \[and peace and good citizenship\]

\[\[5A\]\] Gentlemen, I beg your pardon for this degression, and I hope
you will give serious consideration to the painful criticism I have
ventured to make on the existing undesirable conditions of Muslim
society in India. And though I cannot promise to spare you in my
exposition of Islam as a political ideal, I think I must now say a few
words on the political aspects of the Islamic Ideal. Before, however, I
come to the subject, I wish to meet an objection against Islam so often
brought forward by our European critics. It has been said that Islam is
a religion that implies a state of war. Now, there can be no denying the
fact that war is an expression of the energy of a nation. A nation which
cannot fight cannot hold its own in the strain and stress of selective
competition, which constitutes an indispensable condition of all human
progress.

\[\[5B\]\] Defensive war is certainly permitted by the Qur'an, but the
doctrine of aggressive war against the unbelievers is wholly
unahthorised by the Holy Book of Islam. Here are the words of the
Qur'an: "Summon them to the Way of thy Lord with wisdom, and kindly
warning; dispute with them in the kindest manner. Say to those who have
been given the Book and to the ignorant, 'Do you accept Islam?' Then if
they accept Islam they are guided aright; but if they turn away, then
thy duty is only preaching, and God's Eye is on His servants" (Qur'an
3:19). All the wars undertaken during the lifetime of the Prophet were
defensive. His war against the Roman Empire in 628 began by a fatal
breach of international law on the part of the government at
Constantinople, who killed the Arab envoy sent to the court.

\[\[5C\]\] Even in defensive wars he forbids wanton cruelty to the
vanquished. I read to you the touching words which he addressed to his
followers when they were starting for a fight? "In avenging the injuries
inflicted upon us, disturb not the harmless votaries domestic seclusion;
spare the weakness of the female sex; injure not the infant at the
breast or those who are ill in bed; abstain from demolishing the
dwellings of the unresisting inhabitants; destroy not the means of their
subsistence, nor their fruit trees, and touch not their palms."

\[\[5D\]\] The history of Islam tells us that its expansion as a
religion is in no way related to the political power of its followers.
The greatest spiritual conquests of Islam were during the days of our
political decrepitude. When the rude barbarians of Monholia drowned in
blood the civilisation of Baghdad in 1258, and when the Muslim power
fell in Spain, and the followers of Islam were mercilessly killed and
driven out of Cordova by Ferdinand in 1236, Islam had just secured a
footing in Sumatra and was about the work the peaceful conversion of the
Malay Archipelago. In the hours of political degradation, says Arnold
(Preachings of Islam), Islam has achieved some of its most brilliant
conquests. On two historical occasions infidel barbarians have set their
foot on the necks of the followers of the Prophet: the Seljuq Turks in
the eleventh and the Mongols in the thirteenth centuries; and in each
case the conquerors have accepted the religion of the conquered. We
undoubtedly find, says the same learned scholar elsewhere, that Islam
has gained its greatest and most lasting missionary triumphs in times
and places in which its political power has been weakest, as in South
India, and in Eastern Bengal.

\[\[5E\]\] The truth is that Islam is essentially a Religion of Peace.
All forms of political and social disturbances are condemned by the
Qur'an in the most uncompromising terms. I quote a few verses from the
Qur'an:

> 1.) Eat and drink from what God has given you, but run not on the face
> of the earth in the manner of rebels. (Qur'an 2:260)  
> 2.) And disturb not the peace of the Earth after it has been reformed;
> this is good for you if you are believers. (Qur'an 7:85)  
> 3.) And do good to others as God has done good to you, and seek not
> the violation of peace in the Earth, for God does not like those who
> break the peace. (Qur'an 28:77)  
> 4.) That is the home in the next world which We build for those who do
> not mean rebellion and disturbance in the Earth, and (good) end is for
> those who fear God. (Qur'an 28:83)  
> 5.) Those who rebelled in cities and enhanced disorders in them, God
> visited them with His punishment. (Qur'an 11:10)

You will see, Gentlemen, from these verses, how severely all forms of
political and social disorders are denounced in the Qur'an.

\[\[5F\]\] But \[the\] Qur'an is not satisfied with the denunciation of
the evil of *Fasad* \['turmoil, agitation, rebellion'\]. It goes to the
very root of this evil. You know that both in ancient and modern times
secret meetings have been a constant source of political and social
unrest. Here is what the Qur'an says about such conferences: "O
Believers, if you converse secretly (that is to say, hold secret
conferences), converse not for the purpose of sin and rebellion" (Qur'an
58:9). The ideal of Islam is to secure social peace at any cost. All
methods of violent change in society are condemned in most unmistakable
language. Turtushi, a Muslim lawyer of Spain, is quite true to the
spirit of Islam when he says: "Forty years of tyranny are better than
one year of anarchy." "Listen to him and obey him, says the Prophet in a
tradition mentioned by Bukhari, "even if a Negro slave is appointed to
rule over you."

\[\[5G\]\] Muslim mentions another important tradition of the Prophet on
the authority of Arfaja who says, "I heard the Prophet say, 'When you
have agreed to follow one man, then if another man comes forward
intending to break your stick (weaken your strength), or to make you
disperse in disunion, kill him.'" Those amongst us who make it their
business to differ from the general body of the Mussalmans in political
views ought to read this tradition carefully; and if they have any
respect for the words of the Prophet, it is their duty to dissuade
themselves from this mean traffic in political opinion which, though it
perhaps brings a little personal gain to them, is exceedingly harmful to
the interests of the community. My object, Gentlemen, in citing these
verses and traditions is to educate your political opinion on strictly
Islamic lines.

\[\[5H\]\] In this country we are living under a Christian government.
We must always keep before our eyes the example of those early
Muhammadans who, when persecuted by their own countrymen, had to leave
their homes to settle in the Christian State of Abyssinia. How they
behaved in that State must be our guiding principle in this country
where an overdose of Western ideas have taught people to criticise the
existing government with a dangerous lack of historical perspective. Our
relations with the Christians are determined for us by the Qur'an, which
says, "And thou wilt find nearer in friendship of the believers those
who call themselves Christians; *this is because among them are learned
men and hermits, and because they are never vain*" (Qur'an 5:82).

  
The Political Ideal of Islam \[and democracy and equality\]

\[\[6A\]\] Having thus established that Islam is a Religion of Peace, I
now proceed to consider the purely political aspect of the Islamic ideal
-- the ideal of Islam as entertained by a Corporate Individuality. (1)
Given a settled society, what does Islam expect of its followers
regarded as a community? (2) What principles ought to guide them in the
management of communal affairs? (3) What must be their ultimate object;
and how is it to be achieved?

\[\[6B\]\] You know that Islam is something more than a creed, it is
also a community, a nation. The membership of Islam is not determined by
birth, locality, or naturalisation; it consists in the identity of
belief. The expression "Indian Muhammadans," however convenient it may
be, is a contradiction in terms, since Islam in its essence is above all
conditions of Time and Space. Nationality with us is a pure idea; it has
no geographical basis. But inasmuch as the average man demands a
material centre of nationality, the Muslim looks for it in the holy town
of Mecca, so that the basis of Muslim nationality combines the real and
the ideal, \[the\] concrete and the abstract. When, therefore, it is
said that \[the\] interests of Islam are superior to those of Muslims,
it is meant that the interests of the individual as a unit are
subordinate to the interests of the community as an external symbol of
the Islamic principle. This is the only principle which limits the
liberty of the individual, who is otherwise absolutely free.

\[\[6C\]\] The best form of government for such a community would be
democracy, the ideal of which is to let a man develop all the
possibilities of his nature by allowing him as much freedom as
practicable. The Caliph of Islam is not an infallible being; like other
Muslims, he is subject to the same law; he is elected by the people and
is deposed by them if he goes contrary to the law. An ancestor of the
present Sultan of Turkey was sued in an ordinary court of law by a mason
who succeeded in getting him fined by the town Qazi. Democracy, then, is
the most important aspect of Islam as a political ideal. It must,
however, be confessed that the Muslims, with their idea of individual
freedom, could do nothing for the political improvement of Asia. Their
democracy lasted only thirty years, and disappeared with their political
expansion. Though the principle of election was not quite original in
Asia (since the ancient Parthian government was based on the same
principle), yet somehow or other it was not suited to the nations of
Asia in the early days of Islam. It was, however, reserved for a Western
nation to vitalise the countries of Asia politically.

\[\[6D\]\] Democracy has been the great mission of England in modern
times, and English statesmen have boldly carried this principle to
countries which have been for centuries groaning under the most
atrocious form of despotism. The British Empire is a vast political
organism, the vitality of which consists in the gradual working out of
this principle. The permanence of \[the\] British Empire as a civilising
factor in the political evolution of mankind is one of our greatest
interests. This vast Empire has our fullest sympathy and respect, since
it is one aspect of our own political ideal that is being slowly worked
out in it. England, in fact, is doing one of our own great duties, which
unfavourable circumstances did not permit us to perform. It is not the
number of Muhammadans which it protects, but the spirit of the British
Empire, that makes it the greatest Muhammadan Empire in the world.

\[\[6E\]\] To return now to the political constitution of the Muslim
society: just as there are two basic propositions underlying Muslim
ethics, there are two basic propositions underlying \[its\] political
constitution: (1.) The Law of God is absolutely supreme. Authority,
except as an interpreter of the law, has no place in the social
structure of Islam. Islam has a horror of personal authority. We regard
it as inimical to the unfoldment of human individuality. The Shi'as, of
course, differ from the Sunnis in this respect. They hold that the
Caliph or Imam is appointed by God, and his interpretation of the law is
final. He is infallible, and his authority, therefore, is supreme. There
is certainly a grain of truth in this view; since the principle of
absolute authority has functioned usefully in the course of \[the\]
history of mankind. But it must be admitted that the idea works well in
the case of primitive societies, and reveals its deficiency when applied
to higher stages of civilisation. People grow out of it, as recent
events have revealed in Persia, which is a Shi'a country and yet demands
a fundamental structural change in her government in the introduction of
the principle of election.

\[\[6F\]\] (2.) There is no aristocracy in Islam. Says the Prophet, "The
noblest amongst you are those who fear God most" (Qur'an 49:13). There
is no privileged class, no priesthood, no caste system. Islam is a unity
in which there is no distinction; and this unity is secured by making
men believe in the two simple propositions: (1) the Unity of God; and
(2) the Mission of the Prophet. These propositions, which are certainly
of a super-rational character and are based on the general religious
experience of mankind, are intensely true to the average human nature.
Now, this principle of equality of all Believers made the early
Mussalmans the greatest political power in the world. Islam worked as a
leveling force; it elevated those who were socially low. The elevation
of the down-trodden was the chief secret of the Muslim political power
in India. The result of the British rule in this country has been
exactly the same; and if England continues true to this principle, it
will ever remain a source of strength to her, as it was to her
predecessors. But are we Indian Muslims true to this principle in our
social economy? Is the organic unity of Islam intact in this land?
Religious adventurers have set up different sects and fraternities which
are ever quarrelling with one another. And then, there are castes like
the Hindus. Surely we have out-Hindued the Hindu himself. We are
suffering from \[a\] double caste system, which we have either learnt or
inherited from the Hindus. This is one of the quiet ways in which the
conquered nations avenge themselves on their conquerors.

\[\[6G\]\] *As in the beginning of April 660 A.D. 23 years after the
Battle of Siffin, in the town of Mecca, a Muslim had stood up to tell
the pilgrims of that sacred soil how the unity of Islam had been split
up into various factions, so in the beginning of April in the town of
Lahore, the soil of which claims the bones of some of the greatest
personalities of Islam, I, an insignificant member of the community,
venture to stand up and place my finger on this dreadful wound in the
body-social. In this great assembly of educated Mussalmans I condemned
this accursed religious and social sectarianism. I condemn it in the
name of God, in the name of humanity, in the name of Moses, in the name
of Jesus Christ, and in the name of him -- a thrill of emotion passes
through the very fibre of my soul when I think of that exalted name --
yes, in the name of him who brought the final message of equality to
mankind. Islam is one and indivisible: it brooks no distinction in it.
There are no Wahhabis, Shi'as, Mirza'is, or Sunnis in Islam.*

\[\[6H\]\] Let all come forward and contribute their respective shares
in the great toil of the nation. Let the idols of class distinctions and
sectarianism be smashed forever. Let the Mussalmans of this country be
once more united into a great vital whole. How can you, in the presence
of violent internal dispute, expect to succeed in persuading others to
your way;s of thinking? The work of freeing humanity from superstitions
-- the ultimate ideal of Islam as a community, for the realisation of
which you have done so little in this land of myth and superstition --
will ever remain undone if the emancipators themselves are becoming
enchained in the very fetters from which it is their mission to set
others free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on Iqbal](../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#iqbal) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --
