+++
title = "96 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 13 -- \[A plea for mutual co-operation\]  


**\[A\]** No Indian who loves his country can look upon the prevailing
state of things except with the most excrutiating pain and anguish.
There are men in the public life of the country, who have given their
all in the hope that before they die they may see the Goddess of Liberty
ruling over their beloved native land. They have put up with all kinds
of humiliations, sufferings, and losses, and sacrificed every comfort
and convenience, and even neglected their children for **\[\[219\]\]**
the sake of this, the one single object of their life. Absorbed in this
their one passion, they have treated with supreme contempt all kinds of
calumnies, libels, and slanders, that have been heaped on their devoted
heads by the foreign rulers of the land, and also by some among their
own countrymen. They have seen their juniors rise over their heads to
the highest offices under the State and to the most alluring positions
in life. They have suffered insults and rebukes at the hands of men who
were not leven worthy of unloosening the strings of their shoes. They
have been followed like criminals, imprisoned and banished like common
felons, but have never lost hope.

**\[B\]** And after all this, they are told most seriously and
solemn\]y, both by Hindus and Mussalmans, that Hindu-Muslim unity is
impossible, which means that Swaraj is impossible, or in other words,
that they have been pursuing a shadow, a phantom, and living in \[a\]
fool's paradise and wasting their lives!

**\[C\]** Oh! how crushingly painful it is. Yet in the light of what is
happening, how plausible and apparently unanswerable! Amongst those who
hold that unity is impossible there are men of light and leading, men of
learning and scholarship, men of influence and position, even men who
have a record of great service and sacrifice in fields other than
political. On the other hand there are men who assure us that this is a
passing phase, that Hindus and Mussalmans can be made to, and will
eventually, forget what has happened at Multan, Saharanpur, Delhi,
Allahabad, Lucknow, Shahjahanpur, Lahore, A:mritsar, Amethi, Sambhal,
Gulbarga, and Kohat, that they will not only shake hands but embrace
each other in love and fraternity, as soon as Englishmen will have left
us, and that therefore, all that is wanted at present is a union which
will result in the expulsion of \[the\] foreigner. They do not tcll us,
however, how, in face of the prevailing distrust, this union is to be
brought about, how the foreigner is to be expelled, and lastly how the
expulsion of the foreigner, even if it was practicable, would, by
itself, solve the problem of Hindu-Muslim differences. Is it the
foreigner that loots and desecrates teinples ahd mosques? Is it he that
kills people and burns property? Is it his hand that strikes children
and women or dishonours the latter? No, they say, the hands are those of
the Indians, but the brains are of foreigners.

**\[D\] \[\[220\]\]** Assuming that to be so, how are we going to put
these brains out of operation? The reply is, by conceding Muslim demands
in almost every respect. Mahatmaji himself said that the average
Mussalman was a bully, and the average Hindu a coward, and also that
cowardice was worse than death; and yet the remedy he suggested was that
Hindus must concede to the Mussalmans and other minorities all that they
demanded in the political field. Applying that rule to the Punjab, the
result will be Muslims 55, Sikhs 33, and non-Muslims and non-Sikhs 12.
Is that the remedy? No, say the Muslims, we do not want concessions, we
want our rights; and the rights, as they view them, are what have been
stated above.

Some of their spokesmen add: "If you don't do that now, you won't have
Swarajya." Another says: "If you don't do that now, we shall declare
*Jehad* against you, when you have got it." Nationalist Muslim leaders,
men who advocate communal representation in all institutions in the land
and a fixed proportion of Government services, say "Oh! Don't listen to
Ziauddins**[/30/](#n30)** and Fazl-i-Husains, they represent nobody.
They are in alliance with the foreigner."

They forget, however, that the demands put forward by themselves are
exactly the demands of Ziauddins and Fazl-i-Husains, the difference
being no greater than that between tweedledum and tweedledee. The only
difference is that one is called M. A. Jinnah, Esquire, and the other
Dr. Ziauddin. These friends of ours forget that there are as many
Ziauddins and Fazl-i-Husains among the Hindus as among the Mussalmans,
and if the Hindu Nationalists had listened to them, there would have
been no movement for political freedom. And without that movement there
would have been no Shafis, Sarmas, and Saprus in the Government of
India; nor would there have been Fazl-i-Husains and Mahmudabads in the
Provincial Governments.

**\[E\]** At least this much credit must be given to the Hindu
Nationalists: that their efforts have been principally instrumental in
bringing the country near\[er to\] Swarajya than it would possibly have
been otherwise. The Muslim educated community, with a few honourable
exceptions, had in the past and until only a short while ago,
consistently opposed these efforts. The Hindus do not want any special
favours. All they ask for is justice and fair play. If the present
situation is in any way unfavourable to the Muslim community, they will
be only too willing to agree to any changes which the Muslims
**\[\[221\]\]** desire, subject only to one condition. They will not
willingly and voluntarily be parties to any compromise or arrangement
which will make real and lasting unity impossible.

For God's sake, don't threaten us with *Jehad*. We have seen many
*Jehads*! For the last twelve hundred years we have heard that cry every
day of our national existence. Yet, *Jehads* have not suceeded in
killing us, and God willing, no threat of *Jehad* will influence us by
one hair's breadth in our determination to continue to live. We are
prepared to subordinate our communal life to national life. For united
national existence, we would do anything, but we shall not submit. to
threats or to coercion. It is true that Muslim distrust of Hindus can
successfully block the avenues of Swarajya, but brother Muslims! don't
forget that active Hindu hostility may also be productive of some harm
to the Islamic world. Away, then, with these threats and distrust. Let
us live and struggle for freedom as brothers whose interests are one and
indivisible. Let us live and die for each other, so that India may live
and prosper as a Nation. India is neither Hindu nor Muslim. It is not
even both. It is one. It is India.

**\[F\]** To the Hindus, I will say, "If there are any among you who
still dream of a Hindu Raj in this country; who think they can crush the
Mussalmans and be the supreme power in this land, tell them that they
are fools, or to be more accurate, that they are insane, and that their
insanity will ruin their Hinduism along with their country. For God's
sake don't listen to them and don't be guilty of patricide. You have no
one outside India to help you. You are like a lonely waif in the world,
and your position is extremely delicate. Be sensible, and show your
readiness to listen to the dictates of justice, fair play, and
patriotism. Be even ready to make sacrifice, if such sacrifice does not
stultify you or nullify your desire for nationhood. Give up your pride
and listen to reason and common-sense. That is the only way to
salvation."

**\[G\]** To leaders like Mahatma Gandhi I would say in all humility:
"Sirs, do not put the cart before the horse. Do not assume the existence
of conditions which do not exist. Listen to the voice of experience and
caution. It is better to proceed slowly than to run away with
assumptions and presumptions which would not only do no good but might
land your country into pits. Do not try to change human nature simply by
resolutions and exhortations. Give **\[\[222\]\]** it time." I am
convinced that if in 1920 and 1921, Mahatma Gandhi had listened to the
voice of those who had greater experience of the public life of the
country, the reaction of 1923 and 1924 would not have been so terrible.
The assumption that seven crores of Muslims had accepted
Non-co-operation, was absolutely unwarranted. It was too much to expect
educated Muslims to give up opportunities of preferment and promotion
which they were just beginning to get, the Hindus being already much in
advance. This was a demand which was bound to, and did eventually,
strain thdr loyalty to the leaders. I don't blame them for "not
listening to the latter." Let us restart our work with greater regard to
the actualities of life and the possibilities of human nature, and we
may yet live to see our efforts proving fruitful. Amen!

**\[H\]** I have not said all that I wanted to say. I have deliberately
kept back some important and unsavoury facts that recently came to my
knowledge, in the hope that there will be no need to give publicity to
them.  


NOTES

**[/30/](#m30)** Dr. Zia-ud-din Ahmed (1879-1947) was a pro-government
Muslim leader. He was Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Muslim University, Aligarh,
1920-28, and Vice-Chancellor, 1935-38. Dr. Zia-ud-din Ahmed was knighted
in 1938.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
