+++
title = "Isolationism - voss"
+++

[[P13]]
Early Japanese Isolationism  
GUSTAV VOSS, S.J.

"THE LEITMOTIV of nearly all writing on Japan for decades was a note of breathless wonder at the 'miracle' of Japan's transformation into a modern state and society in [[fiftyears|fifty years]]."[^13_1] Europeans living in Japan during the first decade of the seventeenth century could and did admire a similarly astonishing transformation. They were impressed by the eagerness and skill with which Japan adopted Western ideas and techniques in the same short period of fifty years. The pace, of course, was not so rapid as in the last century, and the results achieved look small in modern perspective. They were not small, however, if seen against the background of sixteenth century Far Eastern-Occidental relations. Japanese intercourse with the West was limited to a few seafaring countries and was severely hampered by their ambitious colonial policies and unscrupulous methods of cutthroat competition for the lucrative Far Eastern trade. Furthermore, travel was slow and hazardous, and only relatively few commodities and industrial products were offered on the market. But in spite of these handicaps Japan was well on her way to become a "modern state and society" when she suddenly turned against the West and chose seclusion and national isolation.

[^13_1]: Nathaniel Peffer, *Basis for Peace in the Far East* (New York, 1942), pp. 143 f.

What were her motives and her reasons? The past is said to explain the present. And there is no way of telling which course present-day Japan might choose. Of course, she will never again return to the same rigid isolation that retarded, as she realizes today, real progress for more than two hundred years. She cannot go back. Politically, and especially economically, Japan is dependent on the world around her. But the motives and reasons that led to the self-imposed seclusion and isolation in 1639 are not altogether relics of the past. They are still operative today and may easily influence her future dealings with the West.

The law of seclusion passed in 1639 was Japan's last and most drastic measure of her fight against the Christian missions. She broke off nearly all foreign relations so as to put a stop to every contact with Christianity. That was the only reason. But the question still remains: What induced her to go to such extremes? Were mere political considerations the decisive motive, or religious convictions, or perhaps something still more fundamental, something closely bound up with traditional ideologies and, consequently, with the national character and mentality of the people? But the national character and the mentality of the people today are basically the same as in the seventeenth century, and the same ideologies, as a strong undercurrent of her national and cultural [[P14]] life, still influence and often determine the course of events in Japan. The proposed question about the motives for the seclusion, therefore, is quite timely. It resolves itself, it is true, into a question about the motives for the persecution of Christianity, but the problem, because of its ulterior implications, is of vital interest both to the student of profane history and international relations and to the missiologist and church historian.

The problem is not new. There has been much discussion about the principal causes that led to the persecution of Christianity. Many reasons have been advanced, for instance: fear of a military invasion that would reduce Japan to the state of a colony; the constant intermingling of trade, politics, and religion, an inevitable by-product of the *Patronado* system; the wily competition for Japanese markets between the Protestant Netherlands and England on one side, and the Catholic kingdoms of Spain and Portugal on the other; in addition to this, the rivalry between Portugal and Spain, and even among the missionaries of the different orders; and, last but not least, the never-ceasing enmity between Catholicism and the ancient religions of the empire that rallied all their resources in their fierce and antagonistic fight against the intruder from abroad.[^14_2]

[^14_2]: Cf. Ludwig Riess, "Die Ursachen der Vertreibung der Portugiesen aus Japan, 1614-1639," *Mittheilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Natur und Völkerkunde Ostasiens*, VII ([[TOky6|Tōkyō]], 1898), 1-52, hereafter cited as *MDGO*. Likewise, M. Steichen, *The Christian Daimyos* [trans. Francis McCullagh], [[Tokyt|Tōkyō]] [1904], 277-285; Léon Pagès, *Histoire de la religion chrétienne au Japon* (Paris, 1869-1870), Vol. II, Nos. 22, 23, 24, 26 (pp. 101 ff.).

## FROM JAPANESE SOURCES

In this connection it will be interesting to ascertain what contemporary Japanese writings have to say about the question of guilt. Dr. Masaharu Anesaki, in introducing some semipopular writings compiled mostly in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, points out that

> ... in the age of national seclusion consequent upon the Shimabara insurrection, it became a dogmatized impression or sentiment, both in the official circles and among the people that the Kirishitan religion was an evil doctrine and its propaganda nothing but a means of conquest. Any criticism of this public sentiment would have been regarded almost as an act of treason, and the dogma was more and more indurated during the subsequent two centuries.[^14_3]

[^14_3]: Masaharu Anesaki, "Exaggerations in the Japanese Accounts of the Kirishitan Propaganda," *Proceedings of the Imperial Academy*, IV ([[T6ky6|Tōkyō]], 1928), 85. Kirishitan is the Japanese approximation of the Portuguese *Christan* (*Christam*). The Chinese characters are merely phonetic without implying any particular meaning. At first, *Kirishitan* was used to designate both the Catholic religion and its followers; later, during the persecution, it was used to convey all kinds of abhorrent associations. Today it is the usual expression, also in non-Japanese writings, to cover the Christian mission, converts, and religion during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

Dr. Anesaki calls attention to the harsh sentiments against Christianity then prevalent in Japan and explicitly warns against rather common exaggerations [[P15]] in the writings of those times, yet in the passage just quoted he sees fit to single out two reasons for the dislike and hatred of Christianity. First, Christianity was considered an "evil religion" and, second, its propaganda was thought to be only a means for subduing and conquering Japan. In giving these two reasons nothing new is said regarding the question of guilt. Both are repeatedly mentioned in European records. Yet it is interesting to find them verified and confirmed by Japanese sources.

The documentation for this twofold accusation will form the main body of the present article. The material is taken, for the most part, from official documents compiled by the Japanese Inquisition. Among them the *Kirishito-ki* (Records of Christians, or, Records of the Christian religion) ranks first.[^15_4] It is perhaps the most valuable source material on the mission history of the seventeenth century extant in Japanese. All its documents are closely connected with the history and activities of the Inquisition Office (*[[Sh?imon-aratame yaku|Shūmon-aratameyaku]]*), erected at Edo (now [[Tōkyō|Tōkyō]]) in 1640. This office was to centralize, supervise and direct the fight against the foreign religion for the whole of Japan by a persecution which could not easily be surpassed in thoroughness and methodical procedure. Therefore, the officials of this office had, as a matter of fact, the best insight into the whole situation. Here merged all the channels of the most accurate information of what was actually going on. Here the plans were made which were to be carried out in every province of the country.[^15_5] Here also, it can be assumed, we will find the most reliable sources for the motives and causes leading to a persecution which demanded the greatest sacrifices from the whole nation.

[^15_4]: The references in this article to the *Kirishito-ki* are to the German translation, in *Kirishito-ki und Sayō-yoroku, Japanische Dokumente zur Missionsgeschichte des 17. Jahrhunderts*, by Gustav Voss, S.J., and Hubert Cieslik, S.J., Monumenta Nipponica Monographs ([[Tōkyō|Tōkyō]], 1940).
[^15_5]: Cf. Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, pp. 4 f.; M. Anesaki, "Prosecution of Kirishitans after the Shimabara Insurrection," *Monumenta Nipponica*, I ([[Tōkyō|Tōkyō]], 1938), 295 f., hereafter cited as *MN*.

The date of the compilation of the *Kirishito-ki* cannot be accurately fixed. Most of its documents were drawn up, as is evident from the text, about 1658. Some further entries have been added, the last however not later than 1670. This was the period when the violence of the persecution once more reached its zenith. However, it is not so much the time in which these documents were compiled, but rather their author who gives them their unusual significance; for most of them were written personally by, or at least under the direct surveillance of, Inoue Chikugo-no-kami, the organizer and first chief of the Inquisition Office.[^15_6] We can have no better testimony asserting the motives, inclinations, and aims of the official Japanese circles regarding Christianity and foreign policy. [[P16]]

[^15_6]: M. Anesaki, *Kirishitan shūmon no hakugai to senpuku* (The Extermination of Kirishitans and Their Survival) ([[Taky6|Tōkyō]], 1926), pp. 39 f.

What, then, do we learn from these documents? What were the causes responsible for the persecution and the subsequent policy of seclusion? Several are mentioned, some very explicitly and in unambiguous terms, others, rather by implication, the force of which can be fully grasped only from an accurate knowledge of the cultural and social setting of Japanese feudalism at the beginning of the Tokugawa era.

## THE PADRES CONFESS

Written by the very men who outlawed Christianity, the *Kirishito-ki* states over and over again that the work of the foreign missionaries was considered a threat to the safety of the nation and a clever disguise for a political scheme. This is, at first glance, the most emphatic accusation. A rather eloquent account about the Japanese conception of this threat can be found in the twelfth chapter which contains some of the "confessions" allegedly made and actually signed by some of the missionaries who were the last to come to Japan in 1643:

> They [the foreigners] are building ships and sending them all over the world. In case their strength is no match for a certain country, they go and lease one part of it. They... menace the people and the peasants. As soon as suitable places are found to live in, they begin to build fortresses and send silver, rice, and money to their home-countries. Finally they lay waste the land in a way which cannot be described. Or they bring about war, kill the people, and conquer the country. Thus they do not only intend to spread Catholicism, but also to conquer foreign countries. And all these things are carried out by the order of the Pope.[^16_7]

[^16_7]: "Confessions Which Inoue Chikugo-no-kami Made the Padres Write and Deliver," Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 94.

Inoue Chikugo-no-kami, the first Inquisitor, sums up in a special *Memorandum* some of these "confessions," apparently only those which are of a more political nature. In this paper, written in all probability for the higher authorities, the point in question is brought out more explicitly:

> The Pope, the head of the Christian religion, lives in Rome, a city in the country of Italy. He sends the padres out into the whole world to spread Christianity. When the converted countries obey the Pope, he finally sends governors to take over the administration. In this way he took possession of New Spain, [[Lugon|Luçon]], and many other countries. Since Japan, too, cannot be conquered easily by means of war, he sends the padres to teach Christianity, a religion referring always to the life to come. As soon, however, as Christianity will have gained a sufficient foothold, they will form an army and fight against the other Japanese religions, so as to subjugate all to the Pope.[^16_8] [[P17]]

[^16_8]: *Memorandum about the Confessions of the Captured Padres, Lay Brothers, and Catechists*. This is a document complete in itself, dated October 20, 1643; it was obtained from the *Sokkyo-hen*, a compilation of Japanese writings concerning the Christian era made by historians of the famous *Mitogaku* (Mito school) in 1860. The *Sokkyo-hen* was never printed as a whole, though some parts have been published in other collections.

The Inquisition, moreover, was interested in learning how these schemes were to be financed, and Inoue, in his *Memorandum*, reports the following information:

> The expenses of the different sects are all entered in a book. As soon as Japan will be subjected to the Pope, though many hundred years may pass by, the above-mentioned expenditures will be collected by order of the heads of the different sects. As long as the world exists, they are firmly resolved to go on sending missionaries so as to propagate Christianity and conquer Japan.[^17_9]

[^17_9]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 190. The different religious orders doing missionary work in Japan were, by a misunderstanding of Inoue, taken for different sects. The same mistake was made in chapter 13 of the *Kirishito-ki*.

The statements in these pretended "confessions" are clear in every detail. They certainly were an ideal weapon in the hand of the Inquisition. What, however, is their origin?

## ORIGIN OF THE "CONFESSIONS"

At the end of June, 1643, the last group of missionaries to come to Japan was captured the very moment it set foot on Japanese soil. It was led by Father Pedro Marquez, of the Society of Jesus, and consisted of himself and four other Jesuits and five catechists. The somewhat spectacular arrest took place in Kajime-Oshima, a small island in the north of Kyūshū. They were soon brought to Fukuoka and from there by way of Nagasaki to Edo, a journey which took exactly two months. In Edo they were handed over to the Inquisitor, Inoue Chikugo-no-kami, who personally subjected them to searching examinations. 

The sad, though extremely interesting history of this last missionary group cannot be told here. Did they apostatize, as some of the Japanese sources, including the *Kirishito-ki*, would have us believe? Other Japanese documents seem to throw doubt upon their apostasy; but all do relate, and this is certain, that some of them lived in prison for years and died a lonesome death, the last of the priests in 1685.[^17_10]

[^17_10]: The interesting circumstances of the arrest are told by Kaibara Ekken in *[[Chikuzenkoku zoku-ffodoki|Chikuzenkoku zokufudoki]]* (Second Series of the History of the Natural Features of the Province of Chikuzen), published in *Ekken Zenshū* ([[T6ky6|Tōkyō]], 1910-1911), p. 363. A similar account is contained in the *Sokkyo-hen*, Vol. IV, 4-7. The account given by Pierre Fr. X. de Charlevoix, S.J., in *Histoire du Japon* (Paris, 1754), Vol. V, 368, which has been repeated numberless times by writers dealing with the Japanese mission history, according to which this group of missionaries was captured in the north of Japan, cannot be substantiated. Sir Ernest Satow was the first to draw attention to the tragedy of this last missionary group to reach Japan. His account is printed as an appendix to and commentary upon an article by J. H. Gubbins, "Introduction of Christianity into China and Japan," *Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan*, First Series, VI (1878), 1-38. Satow's brief and sketchy account (pp. 55-62) aroused much controversy, e.g., the article by H. Thurston, S.J., "The Mystery of the Five Last Jesuits in Japan," *The Month*, CV (1905), 505-525; also Luis Delplace, S.J., *Le Catholicisme au Japon* (Brussels, 1909-1910), Vol. II, 236 ff.

Why were the prisoners brought from the far southwest corner of Japan all the way up to Edo? The *Kirishito-ki* gives the answer. It states that up to the [[P18]] time of Shōgun Hidetada and Shōgun Iemitsu the captured priests were, as a rule, burned alive.

> "Since however the padres who came to Japan were burned alive, killed in the pit, or beheaded, and since this was done without any critical inquiry into the Christian doctrine itself, many other priests followed them [to this country]."[^18_11]

[^18_11]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 78. The Japanese name for the torture of the "pit" is *tsurushi*, "hanging," or *anatsurushi*, "hanging in the pit," less frequently also called *sakasa-tsurushi*, "hanging upside down." All early missionary records unanimously describe this torture as one in which the victim, tightly bound, was hung from the gallows head downward into a pit. Over the opening of the pit boards were fitted around the victim's waist so as to exclude all light and air from the hole. At times, one hand of the victim was fastened to his side, while the other was left free to enable him to manifest his willingness to apostatize. Cf. L. Pagès, *op. cit.*, Vol. I, 785 f. These reports are confirmed by François Caaron, *A True Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of Japan and Siam*, reprinted from the English edition of 1663 by C. R. Boxer (London, 1935), p. 45. There is likewise a contemporary drawing showing details of this cruel torture. Caaron was head of the Dutch factory at Deshima for several years and must have been in a position to learn the truth in considerable detail. M. Anesaki explains this torture as consisting "in the burying of the body at the bottom of a pit so that only the head protruded." Unfortunately, he gives no references to substantiate his views. Cf. his article, "Psychological Observations on the Persecution of the Catholics in Japan," *Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies*, I (1936), 23.

The obvious implication of this statement is that the measures taken thus far had been wholly insufficient. They had made martyrs, but had not extinguished Christianity. Tortures and death penalties had failed, because they had been inflicted blindly on an enemy whose nature and strength the officials did not know and had not in any way endeavored to learn. 

Inoue would do it differently. He would try a more "scientific" procedure and employ methods that were as rigid and cruel as before, but moderately tempered by psychology. Torments were to be inflicted only after all other means of persuasion and of obtaining information had failed. The death penalty was to be the last resort.[^18_12]

[^18_12]: Cf. chapters 5 and 7 of the *Kirishito-ki*, which give detailed instructions as to how the judicial process of the Inquisition should be carried out. See Edward Hagemann, "The Persecution of the Christians in Japan in the Middle of the Seventeenth Century," *Pacific Historical Review*, XI (June, 1942), 151-160.

Two outstanding subjects needed attention. First of all, the Christian doctrine had never been examined. But how can an opponent be defeated as long as no one knows anything about him! Inoue used the first opportunity which offered itself to make up for the neglect in this matter. He summoned the captured priests from Kyūshū to Edo. They were the men to furnish all the information he wanted. The knowledge gained he intended to use against the priests themselves and, still more, against the uneducated lay Christians. 

Then, there was still the other topic which needed clarification: What was the ultimate reason for the missionaries' coming to Japan? To one familiar only with the religious and ethical doctrines of Buddha and Confucius, the life and attitude of the foreign priests was one big perplexing problem. 

The only plausible explanation was that they were sent to prepare the way for a military invasion. Therefore, what the Inquisitor wanted was some information or evidence [[P19]] about the designs which the Catholic countries were fostering with regard to Japan.

In this connection a passing but interesting remark is found in the *Dagh-register des Comptoir Nangasacque*, a reliable Dutch source. Therein is contained a rather elaborate account, written by Pieter Anthonius Overtwater, of the capture of the ten missionaries. Under the date of July 27, 1643, he makes en entry in the diary that on this day all the prisoners were sent to Edo, accompanied by a well-known apostate, Juan. He then goes on:

> The interpreter informed us why the apostate had to accompany them. Juan is supposed to give evidence that the Pope has given the authorization to dethrone non-Catholic kings. And he is to narrate, as an example generally known by everybody, the story of Queen Elizabeth of England and other facts. At the same time he has to prove that the Pope does not at all possess such a power. It is this question more than anything else which worries the Japanese officials.[^19_13]

[^19_13]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 171.

It would be too much to say that this account is to be taken word for word. There cannot be any doubt, however, that it reflects the general opinion then prevalent in Nagasaki as to why the prisoners were summoned to Edo. The official account of the Inquisition Office affirms, though not in so many words, this conclusion:

> Chikugo-no-kami erected a prison in his own mansion. Here the four padres were confined. They were frequently summoned before him and examined again and again as to the designs entertained in Europe and Luçon, whence the padres had come. He questioned them also about ships and about the Christian doctrine.[^19_14]

[^19_14]: *Ibid.*, p. 80.

The priests did not undergo just one trial, but were repeatedly brought before the court. At each appearance the same two crucial questions seem to have come up for further investigation, namely, the Christian doctrine and the secret designs of the Catholic countries regarding Japan. 

That these secret designs were thought to be political as well as religious is evident, for the Jesuits had just come from Manila and, therefore, ought to know something of such plans if any existed. These were to be revealed, if necessary by the use of the rack, as the *Kirishito-ki* openly states:

> They were all kept inside a stone wall. Frequently and insistently questioned, they had to give information about the Christian doctrines and the designs of the foreign countries upon Japan. Should they refuse such information they were to be tortured.[^19_15] [[P20]]

[^19_15]: *Ibid.*, pp. 81 f. The report on the Christian doctrine has been preserved. In chapter 13 of the *Kirishito-ki* is found a "Summary of the Christian Doctrine," which, though brief and disconnected, is a substantially correct compendium of numerous articles of faith and a fair account regarding some religious practices. There cannot be any doubt that this summary ultimately goes back to the reports given by the missionaries. It is too orthodox to have been compiled by a non-Catholic and yet too amateurish to have been written by one of the priests.

It was by cruel torture, the same document admits further on, that the padres were whipped into submission. They finally "gave a detailed account in writing about the plans which the foreign countries intended to carry out with regard to the propagation of Christianity in Japan."[^20_16]

[^20_16]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 89.

Such is the origin of the "confessions." No detailed examination of their genuineness can be given here. Suffice it to say that, because of the absurdity of many of the statements contained in them, no Catholic priest or missionary could have made them. It is beyond any doubt that the officers of the Inquisition wrote these "confessions" themselves and then made the prisoners sign them, as is evident from the arrangement of the document. But however sad the tragedy connected with these "confessions" may be, the fact stands that the officials had no doubt that the "confessions" revealed the full truth.

## CHRISTIANITY A POLITICAL MENACE

It is easy to understand why and how the Japanese rulers conceived the idea that the missionaries were only the advance guard of an armed force which was supposed to invade Japan as soon as the way would be sufficiently prepared. The commercial and colonial activities of the European nations filled them with apprehensions. India, New Spain, and the Philippines had been conquered. Once independent countries, they had been reduced to the state of mere tributary colonies. A letter by Gomez Perez Dasmarinas, the Spanish governor of Manila, to Hideyoshi, dated June 6, 1592, gives a long, impressive list of all the nations and territories which were paying homage to the Spanish crown. Boastfully Dasmarinas enumerates the multitudinous titles of his sovereign, Don Felipe II,

> ... king of Castilla, León, Aragón, the two Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarra, Granada, Cerdeña, Corcega, [[Murnia|Murcia]], Jaen, the Algarves, Aljecira, Jibraltar, the Eastern and Western Yndias, and the islands and mainland of the Ocean Sea; archduke of Austria; duke of Borgoña, Bravante, and Milan; count of Abspurg, Flandes, Bretaña, Tirol, etc [*sic*].[^20_17]

[^20_17]: E. H. Blair and J. A. Robertson, *The Philippine Islands* (Cleveland, 1903), Vol. VIII, 263 f.

Hideyoshi must have been impressed. But had not the traders and missionaries in many of these conquests played an important role?

Furthermore, by the first quarter of the seventeenth century, Western intercourse with Japan had undergone a radical change. It was no longer missionary endeavors but power politics that loomed largest. All the great maritime powers—Portugal, Spain, England, and Holland—were deep in nationalistic and economic rivalry for political as well as commercial advantages. They used every imaginable means to outwit and outrace each other in their mad rush for the riches of Japan. The Dutch merchants, for instance, envious of the profits [[P21]] made by the Portuguese and Spaniards, helped to prejudice the Japanese authorities against their Catholic rivals. Repeatedly they represented to the Shōgun that the missionaries had but one intention, that of turning Japan into the state of a colony under the cloak of Christianity. Yoshi S. Kuno says:

> They took advantage of Japan's suspicions regarding the motives of Christian priests and her fears of possible plots by Christian nations which might endanger her independence. The Dutch traders, in [[coöperation|coöperation]] with their home government in Europe, presented evidence to the shogunate government of asserted intrigues and schemes by Christian nations, and by Christian priests and Japanese converts, thereby gaining the confidence and trust of the shogun and his advisors.[^21_18]

[^21_18]: Yoshi S. Kuno, *Japanese Expansion on the Asiatic Continent* (Berkeley, 1940), II, 91.

The Portuguese, in turn, used the very same weapons. Don Rodrigo de Vivero, the retired governor of the Philippines who was shipwrecked off the coast of Japan and stayed in the country for about a year, made the following statement and request:

> The Dutch traders in Japan are, in fact, pirates. The Dutch people are both traitors to and national enemies of the King of Spain. The Great Ruler of Japan should not protect pirates and robbers. Therefore, all Dutch traders in Japan should be immediately expelled.[^21_19]

[^21_19]: *Ibid.*, p. 39. This request was made by Rodrigo de Vivero, not Sebastián Vizcaíno, as Kuno states. Cf. Ichirō Tokutomi, *Kinsei Nippon kokumin-shi* (A History of the Japanese People in Modern Times) (Tokyo, 1924), XIII, 283.

Such mutual accusations and calumnies seem to have been quite in accord with the trade practices of those times. The conventional rules of commercial fair play were often disregarded. Calumny, forgery, graft of all kinds, even robbery and piracy were commonly accepted methods to further one's own and harm the other's trade. No considerations of abstract justice were permitted to interfere with the ruthless competition for economic and imperialistic aggression. In Japan, the religious opposition between the Catholic and Protestant parties made the situation still worse. Tolerance, in the seventeenth century, was an unknown word and concept. That, added to the bitterness of feeling on both sides, had made them all the more determined to poison the minds of the always suspicious Japanese against each other. They did this for reasons of trade, not of religion, except that trade was a religion for the roving Dutch and English. But "the Spaniards and to a less extent the Portuguese shared their devotion in this matter, if in no other. *Credo in Commercium* was a universal faith."[^21_20] Japanese trade was the prize they all were fighting for. They were bickering and plotting and vying with each other to secure exclusive commercial rights.[^21_21] [[P22]]

[^21_20]: J. Brodrick, "Japanese and English in the Seventeenth Century," *The Month*, CLXXVIII (1942), 116.
[^21_21]: Cf. Harold M. Vinacke, *A History of the Far East in Modern Times* (2d ed., New York, 1936), pp. 79 f.

The missionaries—this must have been the impression of Japanese statesmen—seemed to take an active part in it. And they made no attempt to disguise it. When the first Spanish Franciscans from the Philippine Islands were sent to Japan in 1593, they went in the political capacity of ambassadors, and one of their leading motives was to break the Portuguese trade monopoly.[^22_22] What was to come after that? The Spaniards themselves made remarks which, on one occasion at least, were highly imprudent and fatal in their results.

[^22_22]: Henri Bernard, S.J., "Les débuts des relations diplomatiques entre le Japon et les Espagnols des Iles Philippines," *MN*, I (1938), 122 ff.

This is what happened. In October, 1596, the *San Felipe*, a Spanish ship from Manila, was stranded in Urado, a port in the district of Tosa. Hideyoshi, called Taikosama in the European records of those years, sent at once a special messenger, Ximonojo, who can be identified from Japanese sources as Masuda Nagamori, to investigate the incident. We have an accurate account with numerous details regarding the fateful disaster, written by Dr. Antonio de Morga, a royal official. In his book, *Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas*, published in Mexico as early as 1609, he relates that the Japanese counselors and favorites at the court of Miyako tried to set Hideyoshi against the Spaniards, by questioning the nonpolitical motives and aims of the missionaries. The captain of the *San Felipe*, Francisco de Sanda, unknowingly lent a helping hand to the agitators in Miyako. He showed a map of the world to Masuda

> ... in which could be seen all the countries which had been discovered, and España and the other kingdoms possessed by his Majesty, among which were Piru [Peru] and Nueva España. When the favorite Ximonojo asked how these distant kingdoms had been gained, the pilot replied that the religious had entered first and preached their religion, and then the soldiers had followed and subdued them. It is true that the said pilot imprudently gave those reasons which Ximonojo noted well and kept in mind, in order to relate them to Taicosama whenever a suitable opportunity should present itself, which he now [October, 1596] did.[^22_23]

[^22_23]: Blair and Robertson, *op. cit.*, XV, 120 f. The incident is well authenticated and can hardly be called "rumor," as E. H. Wildes does; cf. *Aliens in the East, A New History of Japanese Foreign Intercourse* (Philadelphia, 1937), pp. 29 f.

Quite naturally, these words were likely to make Hideyoshi suspicious of some ulterior purposes of the Kirishitan missions. Whether he fully believed them or not, it is certain that Masuda's report was at least partially responsible for the first execution of Christians which took place on February 5, 1597. Six Franciscans, three Jesuits, and seventeen Japanese Christians were crucified at Nagasaki. Hideyoshi had given the order.

Japan was on her guard. The "Report of the Council of the Indias" to Felipe III, dated Valladolid, May 30, 1606, states explicitly that Tokugawa Ieyasu "continues in the same suspicion that the predecessor had of the Spaniards, ... that they are people looking for conquests."[^22_24] In the course of years, further [[P23]]

[^22_24]: Blair and Robertson, *op. cit.*, XIV, 218 f.

incidents occurred which could well be interpreted as threats against the union and independence of the nation. There is, for instance, the embassy of Date Masamune to the king of Spain and to Pope Paul V (1613-1620). Though Date was acting, it seems, with the knowledge of the central government, he had his own ulterior motives in asking for the friendship and trade of Spain. The Shōgun, to say the least, was suspicious of Date.[^23_25] Further, to mention only one other incident which caused a flood of literature, the insurrection of Shimabara was almost exclusively blamed on the Christians. Wrongly so, because, in the beginning, this uprising was nothing but an economic rebellion. It started as a peasant revolt, caused by extreme taxation and the outright atrocities of the local ruler. Since Christianity had been deeply rooted in the district of Kyūshū for so many years, a great number of the insurgents happened to be Christians. Others joined the army of the discontented, Christians and non-Christians alike. Some of the latter may have been carried away, perhaps, by the hope of a successful active resistance against the bloody persecution. They were spurred on, moreover, by mysterious predictions regarding the special divine protection and guidance of their youthful leader Masuda Shiro. It was in this way that the at first purely agrarian rebellion became, to outward appearances, a "Christian" revolt, all the more so when in the course of the hostilities the commander in chief of the Shogunate army proclaimed an amnesty for all non-Christian deserters of the rebellious forces, as well as for all apostates from Christianity.[^23_26]

[^23_25]: Cf. the well-documented account by G. Mitsukuri, "Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der japanischen Christen im 17. Jahrhundert," *Historische Zeitschrift*, LXXXVII (1901), 194-223. Likewise, L. Pagès, *op. cit.*, II, Nos. 37-39, pp. 132 ff. Y. S. Kuno, who bases his account (*op. cit.*, II, 28-32) exclusively on Japanese sources, fails to mention any evidence damaging to Date. His presentation of the embassy is novel, but not quite convincing. That Date met with suspicion is clearly shown by L. Delplace, *op. cit.*, II, 106 ff. In this connection it is interesting to note that G. B. Sansom, *Japan, A Short Cultural History* (New York, 1943), p. 534, calls explicit attention to the fact "that there were strong reasons of domestic policy why the Tokugawa rulers should wish to close the country." It was a question of protecting their newly established authority against their great feudal rivals by preventing any possible alliance or even commercial intercourse with the foreigners from abroad.
[^23_26]: L. Riess, "Der Aufstand von Shimabara, 1637-1638," *MDGO*, V (1889), 200. Steichen, *op. cit.*, pp. 329-342, gives a good summary account of the insurrection which is based on the records of the missionaries and contemporary Japanese sources.

At the outset, the insurgents defied the large armies sent against them. This they did, Professor Kuno claims, with the material assistance of the Portuguese.[^23_27] Though this conspiracy is a question open to discussion, the fact remains that the Shimabara insurrection was used by the isolationists as a very handy argument to keep the unpatriotic sentiments of the Christian converts before the eyes of the Japanese public. The writer of the *Kirishito-ki* lays the blame for the rebellion exclusively on the Christians. In commenting upon the fact that in 1637 about three hundred Christian women and children from Nagasaki were exiled to Macao, he remarks that if the [[Shbgun|Shōgun]] "had not ban- [[P24]]

[^23_27]: Kuno, *op. cit.*, pp. 65 f.; cf. also, Wildes, *op. cit.*, p. 43.

ished those three hundred, there would have been at the time of the insurrection of Shimabara a similar uprising also in Nagasaki."[^24_28] The Christians were indiscriminately branded as revolutionists. Consequently, to meet any possible emergency from within or without, the government decreed the extermination of the dangerous subjects and furthermore enforced the law of seclusion.

[^24_28]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 82; cf. pp. 85, 87.

One reason for these extreme measures was the fact that in those years many Japanese Christians were living abroad. This was well known. In the *Memorandum* mention is made that there were several Japanese padres at Manila, and that in Macao, and in Manila as well, about seventeen or eighteen Japanese children were being trained for the priesthood.[^24_29] The Christians, therefore, seemed determined to return, and that at any cost.

[^24_29]: *Ibid.*, p. 190.

Nothing in particular, however, was known about the exact time, nor about the methods the missionaries might plan to use when reëntering the country. Every possible source of information, therefore, was taken advantage of by the authorities to get something definite to work on. The Dutch merchants in Nagasaki, the only Europeans who were allowed to continue trade with Japan, were, as might be expected, a most promising bureau for all such news. Every year the Dutch factory of Deshima had to send an embassy to the court of Edo to deliver the prescribed presents of friendship and to receive, as happened several times, some new change of contract. In the *Kirishito-ki* there is a detailed account of one of these official audiences in the palace of the Shōgun in 1659. On this occasion, a special "Message of the Shōgun" was read to the Dutch commander of the factory. Its second paragraph makes the stipulation that if the Dutch traders want to continue their trade relations with Japan, "they must report upon arriving at Nagasaki to the governor of that city whenever they shall have learned anything new about the Catholic religion."[^24_30] What kind of news Japan was anxious to learn is clearly brought out in the instructions read on a similar occasion two years later, in 1661:

[^24_30]: *Ibid.*, p. 56.

> Since we would like to know, whether the foreigners have conquered new territories and whether these have adopted the Catholic religion, and since we moreover would like to learn all that happened on the voyage [to Japan], a report must be delivered to the governor of Nagasaki as to what has been seen or heard.[^24_31]

[^24_31]: *Ibid.*, p. 58.

The Dutch traders, the "eyes and ears" of Japan in regard to the affairs of the outside world, were henceforward the sole agents of the isolated empire. But since they too were Christians, they were also suspected, just as the Portuguese and Spaniards had been. That was the main reason for their confinement on the tiny island of Deshima. They had to submit to the searching of their ships for crucifixes or Bibles. Even the Christian observance of Sunday was [[P25]] forbidden, and the residents of Deshima were ordered to work on that day. But less fear was felt of them, because they had come to Japan to make money, not to Christianize.[^25_32]

[^25_32]: Albert Hyma, *The Dutch in the Far East* (Ann Arbor, 1942), pp. 159 ff.

## CHRISTIANITY A RELIGIOUS MENACE

Judging from the material presented so far, one might be inclined to make mere economic and political motives responsible for the bloody tragedy in Japan. It might seem that "the foreign faith was proscribed primarily on political, not religious grounds."[^25_33] That Japan was concerned about the political menace is a fact. And she had good reasons to be concerned. If Spain and Portugal had considered the conquest of Japan feasible or within the bounds of possibility, they might have tried it.[^25_34] Such was the trend of the time. The Japanese statesmen were well aware of the danger, as the documents convincingly show. But the same documents also show the presence of other motives among which the strictly religious opposition to the imported religion ranks first. In the eleventh chapter of the *Kirishito-ki*, for instance, the Buddhist and especially Confucian reaction against the new religion becomes apparent. The whole chapter is devoted to "arguments" and "proofs" written to defame Christianity by ridiculing its doctrines and casting aspersions on its way of life. "In Japan there is no greater mischief than this religion."[^25_35] The greater part of the "confessions" quoted above is an outright attack on Christianity from purely philosophical and religious considerations. "One can easily see from universally known examples, that the evil teaching of Christianity is a fabrication of lies."[^25_36]

[^25_33]: Kenneth S. Latourette, *The Development of Japan* (4th ed., New York, 1941), p. 72.
[^25_34]: As late as 1610, the retired governor of the Philippines, Don Rodrigo de Vivero, who was shipwrecked near Japan, suggested to the king of Spain a military occupation of Japan. In his letter, dated Usuki, May 3, 1610, he discusses quite openly the advantages which the possession of this rich country would have for Spain. This letter has its repercussions even today. Cf. the article "Orient and Occident," by Professor Tetsuzō Tanikawa in the November issue of *Chuō-Kōron* (Central Review), LIII (November, 1938), 16 f., as quoted by *Cahiers d' Information*, No. 3 (January, 1939), 3. Furthermore, to mention one other example, there is extant a detailed plan for a proposed Spanish conquest of China which was to be launched from the Philippines. This plan was conceived at a general assembly of the various officials and a number of influential citizens of Manila. An official statement was drawn up by Father Alonso Sánchez, S.J., and on July 26, 1586, it was signed by the governor, the bishop, the superiors of several religious houses, and other notables of the islands. In this proposal, which was sent to the king, explicit mention is made of the Jesuit missionaries in China, who were to be withdrawn so "that they may give information to the Spanish armies about what they know of the country, its strength, and its military forces and supplies, and whatever other dangers or reasons for caution they have in mind. They will also serve as interpreters, and persuade the Chinese to allow the Spaniards to enter in peace, and to hear and receive the preachers, and to accept the religion sent to them by God. . . ." Cf. Blair and Robertson, *op. cit.*, VII, 208 f. An incident to illustrate the mixed "blessings" of the close association between missionary work and the colonizing efforts of Europe!
[^25_35]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, p. 88.
[^25_36]: *Ibid.*, p. 89.

That Christianity was considered an "evil religion" (*jakyō*) was stated as [[P26]] early as 1587 in the first decree of exile. This edict, promulgated by Hideyoshi upon the successful completion of his military campaign in Kyūshū, was the outgrowth of an intense anti-Christian agitation especially by Buddhist groups who were disturbed by their not infrequent defeats in religious disputations, and still more by the fact that the followers of the new religion had impudently presumed to destroy the sanctuaries of their deities. T

his Buddhist opposition to Christianity dated back to the very days of St. Francis Xavier. During his early stay in Kagoshima, the bonzes, in the name of the outraged deities of Buddhism, called upon the prince of Satsuma to expel the foreign creed. In the pages of the *Annual Letters* and in other missionary records, the never-ceasing enmity of the bonzes was called, time and again, the source of all the bitter hatred against the work of the missionaries.[^26_37] Other considerations, no doubt, entered into the decision of Hideyoshi henceforth to exclude the missionaries. It is possible that the fear of foreign military design on Japan was operative as early as 1587, but the religious motive may not be overlooked. 

The pronouncement that Japan as the "land of the gods" should not accept the evil religion of *Kirishitan* was put at the head of the document, and the missionaries are openly accused of planning the destruction of Buddhism; only those foreign traders who will not infringe upon the Buddhist religion will be allowed to carry on their business.[^26_38]

[^26_37]: Cf. Luis Frois, S.J., *Die Geschichte Japans* (1549-1578), nach der Handschrift der Adjubibliothek in Lissabon übersetzt und kommentiert von G. Schurhammer und E. A. Voretzsch (Leipzig, 1926), pp. 89 ff., 129 f., 220.
[^26_38]: For the text of the decree see Ichirō Tokutomi, *op. cit.*, Vol. V (Tōkyō, 1925), pp. 392 f. Cf. also H. Nagaoka, *Histoire des relations du Japon avec l'Europe aux XVIe et XVIIe siècles* (Paris, 1905), pp. 95 f. In a review of the book, *Kirishito-ki und Sayō-yoroku*, Professor K. S. Latourette expresses his doubts of whether at the inception of the persecution the motives were religious rather than political. He writes: "There was an early assertion that Hideyoshi conceived his enmity partly because of the unwillingness of the Spanish rulers of the Philippines to acknowledge him as overlord." He likewise calls attention to the serious proposal for the Spanish conquest of China made in Manila in 1586. Cf. above, note 34. Both arguments are frequently used to bolster the political motives. But against this it may be stated that the earliest quasi-official relations between Japan and the Philippines did not start before 1590, some years after Hideyoshi had "conceived his enmity" and it is more than doubtful whether the proposal for the conquest of China could have come to the knowledge of Hideyoshi. Both facts, however, may have had something to do with Hideyoshi's decision, some nine years later, to set an example by crucifying the first Christian martyrs of Nagasaki.

The idea that Japan is the nation of the Shintoistic deities and the land of Buddha recurs in almost every subsequent pronouncement against Christianity. As Dr. Anesaki points out, "the restoration of national pride quickened by the Taikō's Korean expedition (1592-1598) aroused anew the belief that Japan was the "Land of the Gods," a Shintō belief diametrically opposed to the Christian conception of deity. In fact, his personal ambition was mainly a manifestation of this general current of the age."[^26_39] Whether we can speak of [[P27]] Taikō Hideyoshi's lifetime as the beginning of a Shintō revival is a question open to discussion; but it is certain, as someone has said, that "the sacred fires of the great Shintoistic tradition were far from being extinct." They smoldered beneath the ashes and helped to forge the weapons intended to erase everything Christian and Occidental from the face of Japan. Both Shintoism and Buddhism, as well as the philosophy and ethics of Confucianism, played their part in furnishing motives and arguments for the rejection of Western thought and religion.

[^26_39]: M. Anesaki, "Psychological Observations on the Persecution of the Catholics in Japan," *Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies*, I (1936), 15. The Shintoistic mythology can easily be discerned in the following statement Hideyoshi made in a letter to the king of Korea sometime toward the end of 1590: "Although I was born to a family of low rank, my mother conceived me immediately after she had dreamed that the Sun had entered into her bosom. A physiognomist interpreted this dream and predicted that I was destined to extend my authority to all parts of the world wherever the sun shines." Kuno, *op. cit.*, I, 302. Cf. also p. 311.

As early as 1605, Ieyasu wrote to the governor of the Philippines, rejecting Spanish requests for an official authorization of mission work in Japan:

> This I cannot concede. For this region is called Xincocu (Shinkoku), or "dedicated to the idols" [Shintoistic deities]. These have been honored with the highest adoration from the time of our ancestors until now, and their acts I alone cannot undo or destroy. 
> 
> Consequently, it is not at all advisable that your religion be promulgated and preached in Japon; and if your Lordship wishes to preserve friendship with these kingdoms of Japon and with me, do what I wish, and never do what is displeasing to me.[^27_40]

[^27_40]: Blair and Robertson, *op. cit.*, XVI, 48.

In 1612, writing to the viceroy of Mexico, Ieyasu was even more explicit and more emphatic:

> Our country, Japan, is Shinkoku. . . . Since the founding of our nation, we have revered our gods and worshiped the Buddhist deities. Under divine protection and guidance, we have maintained due relations between ruler and ruled, and have followed the teachings of the doctrine of loyalty and righteousness. . . . The divine beings always keep watch over our nation. Under their guidance and protection we maintain our human relations, always practicing benevolence, justice, ceremonials, wise conduct, and sincerity. 
> 
> The religious laws and teachings of your country differ entirely from ours. They have absolutely no relation or connection with our national life and existence. . . . 
> 
> Therefore you may not consider as feasible the propagation of your religious teachings in our country. It would be best for you to abandon any plan to propagate them, because it will be found wholly impracticable.[^27_41]

[^27_41]: Kuno, *op. cit.*, II, 304 f.

The edict of expulsion promulgated soon after, in January, 1614, follows the same line of reasoning. The opposition of the heretical and evil teaching of the West to "the way of the gods" and "the true law" is set forth as the decisive reason for the absolute repudiation of the Western religion.[^27_42] That the foreigners also intended "to change the government of the country and obtain possession of the land" finds mention in one short phrase and is almost lost in the [[P28]] heated attacks on Christianity and amid the superabundance of Buddhist and Confucian quotations. This fact cannot be explained away by saying that the unctuous sermon style of the decree and the many Buddhist citations are just externals of the effusive chancery or court style. They are not. On the contrary, the unbiased reader will find in the edict an eloquent manifestation of the long pent-up grievances of the religious opposition. In this connection it may be noted that Ieyasu himself, quite unlike Hideyoshi, was a devout and zealous Buddhist.[^28_43] Almost all of his advisers were Buddhist, Confucian, and Shintō scholars, and the edict itself was drawn up by Suden, a well-known Buddhist monk.[^28_44] These are important facts. In considering them, together with the contents of the edict, it would seem that as late as 1614 religious rather than political motives had the greater weight.

[^27_42]: See an English translation by Sir Ernest Satow in *Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan*, First Series, VI (1878), 46 f.

[^28_43]: M. Anesaki, *Kirishitan Dendō no Kōhai* (Rise and Fall of the Kirishitan Missions) (Tōkyō, 1930), p. 265.
[^28_44]: Kuno, *op. cit.*, II, 39, 47.

However, as the persecution progressed, the political charges against the missionaries came more and more to the fore. They were repeated time and again, indeed so often and emphatically that the supposedly anti-Japanese spirit of Catholicism and the military scheme behind the missionary work seems to have been the main fear that haunted the rulers of Japan.

This fear was not purely imaginary, as we have seen. Still, it does not lack a certain incongruity.[^28_45] Granted the imprudent remarks and measures of some of the missionaries, granted other political incidents likely to arouse suspicion, all these were, after all, rather sporadic and only local affairs. Hideyoshi, Ieyasu, and Iemitsu, the rulers of Japan in those days, were shrewd and keen-sighted statesmen. They had achieved the unity and had framed the political structure of the country with the partial aid of these "unloyal and treacherous" Christians. Oda Nobunaga had trusted them, and the troops that fought in Korea (1592-1598) were in large numbers Christians.[^28_46] Christian *daimyōs* with thousands of followers fought for Ieyasu in the battle of Sekigahara (1600) by which he secured the supreme power for his house.[^28_47]

[^28_45]: In this connection it is interesting to note that the well-known Japanese scholar Arai [[Haukuseki|Hakuseki]] (1656--1725) did not believe in the political charges against the missionaries. In a report to the Shōgun about his investigations of Father Sidotti, written about 1710, he states that the missionaries did not have the intention of conquering Japan; but he goes on to say that their teaching would inevitably cause serious dangers to the state. This report is contained in an appendix to the *Seiyō-kibun*. Cf. *Arai Hakuseki Zenshū* (The Complete Writings of Arai [[Kakuseki|Hakuseki]]) (Tōkyō, 1906), IV, 796.
[^28_46]: Steichen, *op. cit.*, pp. 158 ff.
[^28_47]: *Ibid.*, pp. 223 f.

However, the suspicion against Christianity must have been rather widespread and of great concern to the leaders of the missionary work. Contemporary Christian writings in Japanese openly and emphatically refuted the allegation that the coming of Christianity was responsible for the civil disturbances and discord in the country, and they denied that the propagation [[P29]] of the faith was a ruse devised by the Europeans as an easy means to get political control over Japan.[^29_48] It is significant that the apologetic writers deemed it necessary to defend themselves in writing. One point of the defense is particularly interesting to note. Fabian Fukan points out, in denying all military or colonial intentions of the Catholic kingdoms on Japan, what the missionaries are doing for Japan: "They pray for the country and the welfare of its sovereign. To filial piety and obedience they assign the first place. The great ones they hold in respect, and the interest of the lowly they have at heart."[^29_49] Thus, in answering the charge of unpatriotic sentiments and designs, loyal devotedness to country and ruler are singled out as characteristics of the personal conduct as well as the teaching tenets of the missionaries. On the face of it, the statement might seem quite ordinary and of no particular importance. But seen against the ideological traditions of feudalistic (and modern) Japan, Fukan's statement may be considered a definite denial of the most serious accusation that could ever be made against any religion: that of neglecting loyalty and filial piety.

[^29_48]: Fabian Fukan, *Myōtei Mondō* (Questions and Answers of Myō[-shu] and [Yu-]tei), a manuscript dated about 1605. It is a Christian apology written to give a better understanding of Catholic doctrine and, at the same time, to refute the more common misunderstandings. The passages referred to may be found in the French translation by Pierre Humberclaude, "Myotei Mondō," *MN*, II (1939), 261 f., 263 f.
[^29_49]: *Ibid.*, p. 264.

## ANCIENT LOYALTIES *versus* CHRISTIANITY

It is a historical fact that the Christians were accused of such criminal neglect. In a recent article Professor Arimichi Ebisawa contrasts the traditional Japanese ideology as crystallized in *[[Bushidd|Bushidō]]* with the corresponding Christian virtues.[^29_50] Different causes and circumstances, he states, were responsible for the prohibition of Christianity. Yet what constitutes their undercurrent may perhaps be reduced to the seeming clash between some of the fundamental Christian doctrines and *chūkō*, the Japanese national idea of loyalty (*chū*) to state and ruler and of filial piety (*kō*) shown to one's ancestral deities and the existing family head.[^29_51]

[^29_50]: Arimichi Ebisawa, "Bushidō to Kirishitan to no rinri shisōteki kōshō," *Shigakku Zasshi* (Historical Review), L (1939), 289-325, 478-515. A free English translation: "Relations between the Ethics of Bushido and Christianity," appeared in *Cultural Nippon*, VII (November, 1939), 1-32; (December, 1939), 9-42. Subsequent references are to the Japanese version since the English translation, unfortunately, is in places rather defective.
[^29_51]: Ebisawa, *op. cit.*, p. 295.

Such a clash was inevitable. Several Christian publications for instance, in explaining the articles of faith to the Japanese converts, were, as might be expected, uncompromising in their demands to place loyalty to God before any other loyalty.

The *Doctrina Christiana* states that it is essential for every Christian never to disobey the will of God even at the sacrifice of his wealth, fame, parents, his own [[P30]] life, and so on. In the *Guia do Pecador* and *Contemptus Mundi* we likewise find remarks that one should love and revere the Lord Jesus Christ more than one's beloved family and relations. . . . The Christian converts must have been greatly embarrassed because of the conflicting views regarding both ancestor worship and filial piety, especially when their parents and the other members of the family professed a different faith.[^30_52]

[^30_52]: *Ibid.*, p. 488. The three books mentioned by Ebisawa are works of the ancient Japanese Jesuit Mission Press, published in 1592, 1596, and 1599. For a detailed description, cf. Johannes Laures, S.J., *Kirishitan Bunko. A Manual of Books and Documents on the Early Christian Missions in Japan*, Monumenta Nipponica Monographs (Tōkyō, 1940), pp. 16 ff., 26 f., 34 ff.

That they were on this account disturbed and slow to embrace Christianity was already observed by St. Francis Xavier. One of his sermon subjects, of course, was the existence and eternity of hell. He met with opposition, as he himself tells in his letter of January 29, 1552:

> Before their baptism the converts of Yamaguchi had serious doubts concerning the great goodness of God. They claimed that God could not be merciful, since He had not manifested Himself to them before our arrival, especially if it were true (as we preached) that all who did not adore God were doomed to go to hell. It seemed to them that God had no pity on their ancestors, since he let them go to hell, without giving them any knowledge of Himself. This was one of the great difficulties that kept them from worshipping God. . . .
>
> We preach that those who go to hell are irrevocably lost. About this the Japanese Christians grieve very much, and they do so because of their love for their fathers and mothers, wives and children, and others who died before them. They have pity for them, and many show their grief by tears.[^30_53]

[^30_53]: *Monumenta Xaveriana*, Monumenta Historica Societatis Jesu (Madrid, 1899-1900), Vol. I, 686, 694.

Though Xavier, as he himself states, gave a convincing explanation of the perplexing problem, such doctrines naturally were a stumbling block to the Japanese. There seemed to be no room in Christianity for ancestor reverence, not even for filial piety. Consequently, the religion from the West was decried as barbarous and radically opposed to the Japanese way of life. All the more since the new converts by their deeds and actions seemed to prove their disregard for tradition. They desecrated, damaged, and destroyed temples and shrines which were dedicated to the family gods and the ancestors of the Japanese race, and "their acts were scathingly criticised as prejudicial to the national virtue of filial piety."[^30_54] We remember that such acts of iconoclastic violence were a contributing cause to the first anti-Christian decree of 1587.

[^30_54]: Ebisawa, *op. cit.*, p. 484. *Cultural Nippon* (December, 1939), 15.

In the *Kirishito-ki*, likewise, Christianity is represented as altogether lacking both in the national virtue of *[[chakd|chūkō]]* and in the famous "five human relations" (*gorin*), the practical norms of Confucian ethics that are supposed to govern the social as well as the family life. The officers of the Inquisition are shocked to note that, according to the Christian teaching, "one can be saved [[P31]] in the life to come, even though one should kill one's (sovereign) lord and own parent"; that it is not a crime but rather a meritorious act to do away with pagans, "even though these should be one's own lord or parent."[^31_55] This is construed into a slashing argument against the existence and especially the goodness of God:

[^31_55]: Voss-Cieslik, *op. cit.*, pp. 89, 91.

> It is said that God is the original source of all good, the Lord of mercy and justice. This is an extremely pernicious and evil doctrine, mere fraud and deceit by which people are led into error; for there are countries . . . whose inhabitants are like monkeys in this that they have no knowledge of the proper relation between ruler and subject; nor do they have the proper respect of the child toward its parent. In these countries people look like men but they act like animals.
>
> Countries that do not respect the fundamental relation between lord and vassal, parent and child, husband and wife, and those between friends, are brutish and barbarous. . . . He who created such men must be a villain and merciless being.[^31_56]

[^31_56]: *Ibid.*, pp. 86, 90. The enumeration of the *gorin* is incomplete, since the brother-to-brother relation has been omitted. The close relationship between *gorin* and *chūkō* is obvious.

Reverence for such a being and worship of the God of a strange country were thought incompatible with the Japanese national spirit. In other words, *latria*, in the strict theological sense of the term as adoration of the one God and supreme Lord and Creator of the universe, and *[[chiik6|chūkō]]*, the highest expression of loyalty and filial piety, seemed irreconcilable.

A striking illustration of this view can be found in the propagandistic anti-Christian treatise *Ha-Deusu* (Anti-God) which was compiled in 1620, when the persecution had almost reached its peak. In dealing with the first of the Ten Commandments the writer makes the following observations:

> The First Commandment prescribes that if anything contrary to God's will should be demanded, one must refuse to obey even the orders of one's lord or father. It further enjoins that one must make light of one's life for the sake of faith in God. Such a commandment, at bottom, implies a secret scheme of overthrowing the state and of ruining Buddhism and the imperial regime. I wonder, therefore, why the Japanese did not immediately inflict punishment upon such a wicked-minded people.[^31_57]

[^31_57]: Ebisawa, *op. cit.*, p. 513. The complete text of the *Ha-Deusu* can be found in *Zokuzoku Gunsho Ruijū*, Vol. XII. For the reference in question see p. 684. It is interesting to note that the author of this violently anti-Christian piece of literature, written 1620, is the same Fabian Fukan who, in 1605, wrote the *Myōtei Mondō* in defense of the faith. Cf. above, note 48. For a detailed account of Fukan's life by Pierre Humberclaude, cf. *MN*, I (1938), 224-227.

Thus the Christians were attacked for not being loyal because of their worship of God, who claims the first right to obedience. Such an accusation was bound to have its effects. A doctrine that placed loyalty to God above loyalty to the national ruler could easily be represented as revolutionary to a Japanese to whom *Bushidō*, the way of the knightly *samurai*, was the all-inspiring ideal of Nipponese manhood, and who saw in *chūkō* and in the human relations of the *gorin* the loftiest expression of his religious patriotism and the [[P32]] perfect blend of the traditional virtues of the Japanese citizen.[^32_58] Christianity seemed full of revolutionary tendencies and intrigues.

[^32_58]: Leo Wieger, S.J., points out that Japanese Confucianism received its characteristic trait "by exalting above all the others the last of the Confuciist virtues, loyalty expanded into the meaning of loyalism. He thus allied it with Shintoism. Under that form, Confuciism became the code of Japanese chivalry, of the Samurai class, blindly devoted to the honour of their lord, ready to sacrifice their life for him at any moment. To adore a God would have appeared to those people an impropriety, to hope for happiness after death would have appeared to them a shameful haggling . . . . It was not the Buddhists, as has been generally but quite wrongly believed; it was the Confuciists, who sent them to the stake." *A History of the Religious Beliefs and Philosophical Opinions in China*, trans. E. Ch. Werner (Hsien Hsien, 1927), pp. 701 f.

The traditional loyalties, it can be seen from the foregoing discussion, did not constitute merely a religious issue. They entered into the make-up of all phases of Japanese social life and shaped—and that to a great extent—the political faith of the empire. The discussion about the causes leading to the almost complete breakup in the seventeenth century of Japanese-Occidental relations receives new light from this consideration. To try to reduce these causes to one single factor, be it political or religious, would be an oversimplification. Such an attempt loses sight of the close interrelation of the religious, social, economic, and political forces that were operative in feudalistic Japan.

Political reasons especially have been played up as mainly or even exclusively responsible for the persecution of Christianity and the seclusion of Japan. It can easily be seen why they should be advanced in preference to others. The political consequences of the anti-Christian and subsequently anti-Occidental policy of the government were of tremendous importance for the new politico-social structure of the Tokugawa regime. They were so drastic that they overshadowed everything else. It seems quite natural therefore to view the hermitic seclusion and rigid isolation and everything that led up to it, exclusively in the light of political, military, and economic reasons. And there is danger that one may be misled by the old familiar *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy.

It is true, the Japanese authorities themselves were rather suspicious, even afraid of the political and colonial implications of the Christian mission work. But what were the reasons? Were they purely political and military, or, perhaps, did not religious and ideological considerations enter into the genesis also of the political suspicion and the political charges against Christianity? From the material presented it would seem that doctrinal misunderstanding did play a rather important role, in so far as Christianity was thought to undermine the religious, as well as political, foundations of a feudalistic Japan that saw in the ancient loyalties the best guarantee for her national existence. 

Japan, it must be remembered, was a feudalistic state through and through. Its conservation depended, the military dictators were convinced, on unreserved and blind loyalty to state and ruler. This was all the more important at a time [[P33]] when national unity and autonomy became the guiding principles of Japanese politics.[^33_59] To place an invisible ruler beside the visible and to believe the invisible one superior was dangerous to the political and social order of the nation. There was no room for a divided allegiance, be it to Spain or Portugal or Rome, or to the God of a foreign land. A religion that preached a God who would not submit to national traditions and ambitions, who was not content with a subordinate place in the Nipponese pantheon of Shintoistic *kami* and Buddhist incarnations and refused to be absorbed by them, who, furthermore, upset the traditional hierarchy of loyalties by claiming superiority even over the state and ruler—such a religion was, to say the least, an extremely dangerous innovation. It could not expect toleration.

[^33_59]: Cf. Mitsukuri, *op. cit.*, pp. 196-208. Likewise Motoji Kurita, *[[S6g6|Sōgō]] Nippon-shi gaisetsu* (A Brief Synthesis of Japanese History) [Tōkyō, 1929], I, 462 f.

It can easily be seen that this was not exclusively a case of doctrinal misunderstanding. That loyalty and obedience to God should be incompatible with true family spirit, as well as with the Japanese citizen's loyal devotion to his country, was indeed a misunderstanding and misrepresentation of Christian doctrine. But there was no misunderstanding as to the fact that this Christian loyalty and devotion to God must take precedence over any claim the family and state might arrogate to themselves in the event of conflict. Friction was thus inevitable.[^33_60]

[^33_60]: Tasuku Harada, a prominent Protestant leader of this century, had this to say about the obstacles Christianity meets with in Japan: "One reason why the Japanese have opposed Christianity is that they have mistakenly thought that it makes light of the favors and mercies which we receive from rulers and parents . . . . The most determined opposition to Christianity has sprung, strange as it may seem, from distrust of its ethical principles. For Japanese critics assert that neither loyalty nor filial piety finds clear expression in Christianity; and since these two principles are the very central pillars of Japanese morality, a religion that slights them is considered not only unsuited, but a positive menace to the nation." *The Faith of Japan* (2d ed., New York, 1926), pp. 125, 152.

## CONCLUSION

This article is not intended to give an apodictic and final answer with respect to which of the several causes that led to the isolation of Japan was the decisive one. Such an answer can at best be given only when other important primary sources, not as yet accessible, have been published and carefully examined.[^33_61] But whatever the verdict of history in this regard will be, the various causes were *de facto* closely interrelated. They complemented each other. The political motive cannot be separated from the religious issues involved, and both the political and religious antagonism to Christianity were on their part strongly influenced and strengthened by the partly religious, partly nationalistic ideologies that were held sacred in the empire. [[P34]]

[^33_61]: Recent findings in private and public libraries in Japan hold out hope for further source material. Besides, there are still many unedited missionary letters and reports buried in the archives of the various missionary orders, among them important old manuscripts of comprehensive works dealing with Japanese history and culture of the centuries in question.

The same forces are operative in present-day Japan. Her attitude not only to Christianity but to the "West" in general is determined by similar if not identical considerations. The last decades especially were marked by a growing opposition to Western thought and Western liberalism. For a while, Japan had responded eagerly to the new ideals from Europe and America. But as the foreign fever gradually burned itself away, reactionaries began to voice the question "whether, after all, they could not be better served by a return to their old gods which . . . they had forsaken."[^34_62] Needless to say, this opposition will never again go so far as to exclude the material and industrial benefits Japan knows she can derive only from keeping in close contact with Europe and America. She will further welcome Occidental civilization, especially its material achievements. But she refuses to betray her own soul by sacrificing her own indigenous culture and sacred tradition. It might well be said that Japan is still afraid of foreign domination, afraid of being made a "spiritual colony" of the West.

[^34_62]: M. S. Kennedy, "The Reactionary Movement of 1932," *Contemporary Japan*, I (1932), 632.

The old religious beliefs are largely responsible for this concern to regain and purify and safeguard the cultural attainments of the past. The ancient religions, now as ever, have managed to keep a firm hold upon the people and the spiritual trends of the country. Shintō, as also (secondarily) Butsudō, "the way of the gods and the way of Buddha," are still the way upon which the empire will march toward spiritual, moral, and national greatness. The Western way of life would lead Japan astray. That is the theme song of today. This does not mean that Shintoism and Buddhism exert their influence upon Japanese thought and ideals by virtue of a genuinely *religious* appeal. They are conscious of their internal weakness and watch with forebodings the growing liberalism and religious indifferentism among the more educated Japanese. To stem this Western tide Shintoism as the national cult reduces everything to the exigencies of patriotism, and the various Buddhist sects have allied themselves ever more closely with the national and nationalistic ideologies. A flight into the realm of myth! But the leaders of both Shintoism and Buddhism know well that their great strength is the strength of tradition that dates back to the early beginnings of the nation. They are strong because they can claim to be the embodiment of a great past, the spiritual link binding every son of Japan to his home and land and to the traditions and virtues of his ancestors and national heroes. Now, as in the time of the first "Christian Century," they pose as the sole guardians of a sacred inheritance in which alone the ancient loyalties can be preserved.[^34_63] [[P35]]

[^34_63]: It is needless to say that this presents a rather delicate problem for Christian missionary work in Japan. But the problem is not of recent origin, nor is it restricted exclusively to Japan. Cf. Gustav Voss, S.J., "Missionary Accommodation and Ancestral Rites in the Far East," *Theological Studies*, IV (1943), 525-560.

The clash between the ideologies of East and West is aggravated by the fact that government-inspired tendencies seem to favor the apotheosis of the national spirit and even of the state and its ruler. The future development of these politico-religious trends is unpredictable. But even though they might become less extreme and return to proper proportions, they will still be a very decisive factor in Japanese-Occidental relations. Peaceful [[coiperation|coöperation]] in the future will call, therefore, not only for an elimination of friction in the spheres of politics and economics, but above all for a true cultural *rapprochement*. However, this must be based on a mutual and benevolent understanding especially of the different ideologies that underlie the Western and Eastern way of life.

GUSTAV VOSS, S.J.

*University of San Francisco*