+++
title = "ch2#11"

+++
**CHAPTER II**

Distortions in Indian History

**Introduction: roots of distortion**

India gained independence from the British in 1947, or more than fifty
years ago. But intellectually and educationally India continues be a
European colony. This is because, during the first forty years of her
existence as a free nation, the Congress Party and the intellectual
establishment, continued to encourage colonial institutions and
thinking. The result today is that there is an English educated elite
that identifies itself more with the West than with India and her
ancient civilization. And the Congress Party, especially after the death
of Sardar Patel, has identified itself more with foreign values rather
than Indian values. The Communists, who have always been hostile to
Indian nationalism, have now joined hands with anti-national forces,
which are fiercely anti-Hindu. This is reflected in the attitude and
behavior of the English educated intellectuals, including the media.

The signs of this are everywhere — from hostility to Sarasvati Vandana
and the Pokharan nuclear tests to begging a European woman of no
experience or service to the nation, to rule the country. As a result,
this colonial holdover consisting of the Congress, the Communists and
the Leftist intellectual class (including the media) have come together
to perpetuate anti-national values and interests. This naturally makes
them intensely anti-Hindu. It views with fear anything that has even a
suggestion of nationalism rooted in Indian history and tradition.

Since Indian nationalism can only exist as a product of the Hindu
Civilization, these forces hostile to Hinduism have combined to oppose
the rise of national awareness that is now sweeping the country. The
result is that they will go to any length to give a negative picture of
India and her past. The first step in this is to distort Indian history.
Fortunately for them, most of the distortion had already been done for
them by the British, and their successors during the Congress rule. So
all they had to do was to continue with the colonial version of Indian
history. As Swami Vivekananda pointed out more than a century ago:

*"The histories of our country written by English \[and other Western\]
writers cannot but be weakening to our minds, for they talk only of our
downfall. How can foreigners, who understand very little of our manners
and customs, or religion and philosophy, write faithful and unbiased
histories of India? Naturally, many false notions and wrong inferences
have found their way into them.*

"Nevertheless they have shown us how to proceed making researches into
our ancient history. Now it is for us to strike out an independent path
of historical research for ourselves, to study the Vedas and the
Puranas, and the ancient annals of India, and from them make it your
life's sadhana to write accurate and soul-inspiring history of the land.
It is for Indians to write Indian history."

As Swami Vivekananda pointed out, the goal of the British was to weaken
the Indian spirit, particularly the Hindu spirit, because the
nationalist movement in India was mainly a Hindu movement. The
nationalist movement, which rose to great heights during the Swadeshi
Movement following the Partition of Bengal, lost its direction and focus
in 1920 when Mahatma Gandhi sacrificed Swaraj for the sake of the
Khilafat. This in turn led to the anti-Hindu orientation of the Congress
under Jawaharlal Nehru. This was soon joined by the Communists, who
worked hand-in-glove with the Congress. The Communists now are little
more than camp followers of Sonia Gandhi and her party.

So it is in the interests of these anti-national forces to keep alive
the colonial version of Indian history. Thanks to the domination of the
Indian political scene by the Congress, Communist intellectuals and
fellow travelers were able to dominate the intellectual scene also. As a
result, the colonial version of history continues to be taught in Indian
schools and colleges. This has led to gross distortions in the history
being taught in Indian schools and colleges. These distortions may be
classified as follows:

1.  Distortion of ancient history through the ‘Aryan invasion’ and the
    Aryan-Dravidian wars, presenting the Vedic Age as an ‘age of
    conflict’
2.  Distortion of the Medieval history, by whitewashing the Islamic
    record and presenting it as the 'age of synthesis'.
3.  Distortion of the period of the Freedom Struggle, by whitewashing
    Congress blunders and suppressing the contribution of the
    revolutionaries, Sardar Patel and Subhas Bose.
4.  Distortion of post-independent India, by whitewashing the monumental
    blunders of Pandit Nehru and his successors to bring about dynastic
    rule under the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty at the cost of national
    interest.

It is worth taking a brief look at each one of them, beginning with the
ancient period. The first point to note that it was the ancient period
that gave India both its unity and its sense of the nation. The Medieval
period was a Dark Age, during which the Hindu civilization was engaged
in a desperate struggle for survival. In addition, the forces of
medievalism contributed nothing to Indian nationalism. They acted as a
negative force and held back progress, taking the country into a Dark
Age. They continue to act as a check against progress by holding on to
medieval ideas and practices.

The important point to note is that the ancient period was an age of
synthesis, when people of different viewpoints like the Vedic, Tantric,
Buddhistic, Jain and other sects lived in relative harmony. There was
also free exchange of ideas and unfettered debate. The Medieval period
was the age of conflict when Hindu society was engaged in a desperate
struggle for survival against the onslaught of Jihad — something like
what is happening in Kashmir today. What the Congress sponsored Leftist
(‘secularist’) historians have done is to exactly reverse this. They
have said that the ancient period was an age of conflict between Aryans
and non-Aryans, while trying to portray the Medieval period — dominated
by Jihad (or religious wars) — as a period of synthesis.

Ancient India: age of freedom and synthesis

History books today begin with the Aryan invasion of India, which is
said to have taken place in 1500 BC. Students are told that the ancient
civilization of the Indus Valley or the Harappan Civilization was
Dravidian that was destroyed by the invading Aryans. According to this
theory, the language of the Harappan seals, which contain a good deal of
writing, is some form of Dravidian language, unrelated to Sanskrit.
There are nearly 4000 of these with writing on them, but until recently,
no one could read them. Recently, the great Vedic scholar N. Jha made a
major breakthrough in deciphering it. Following the breakthrough, Jha
and I have read and published the writing on nearly 2000 seals. (We have
read many more that are yet to be published.) The language of the seals
is Vedic Sanskrit. This means the Harappan Civilization was Vedic.

This also means there was no Aryan invasion and no Aryan-Dravidian
conflicts either. In Sanskrit, ‘Aryan’ simply means cultured and not any
race or language. I am myself a so-called Dravidian who speaks Kannada.
Kannada, like all South Indian languages, is heavily influenced by
Sanskrit. South Indian dynasties going back time immemorial called
themselves ‘Aryas’ because they were followers of the Vedic culture.
South has always been a stronghold of Vedic culture and learning.
Sayana, probably the greatest Vedic scholar of the last thousand years
was a South Indian. (He was the brother of Vidyaranya, who helped
Harihara and Bukka found the great Vijayanagara Empire.)

The idea of Aryans and Dravidians as mutually hostile people was created
during the colonial period, in which Christian missionaries played an
active role. It was part of the British policy of divide and rule.
Bishop Caldwell was probably the most influential Dravidian scholar.
When criticized for his theories, he defended them "as not only of
considerable moment from a philological \[linguistic\] point of view
*but of vast moral and political importance."* By ‘moral and political’,
he meant Christian missionary and British colonial interests.

This shows that one of the main forces behind the Aryan invasion theory,
and of education policy in general, was the conversion of Hindus to
Christianity to make them accept British rule. According to the Aryan
invasion theory, the Vedas and Sanskrit language were brought by these
Indo-European invaders and not native to India. (This is now demolished
by science and also the decipherment of the Harappan writing.) Using
this false theory, the British could claim that India had always been
ruled by foreign invaders — first the Vedic Aryans, and later the
Muslims. The British claimed to be Aryans (as Indo-Europeans) and
therefore only the latest rulers of India, but related to their own
ancient Aryans who also were foreign invaders! Christian missionaries
took advantage of this by enjoying the patronage of colonial rulers. The
presented the Bible as ‘Yesurveda’ — or the Veda of Yesu (Jesus).

Many influential British officials felt that the conversion of Hindus to
Christianity would make them readily accept British rule. The most
influential of these was Thomas Babbington Macaulay who introduced the
English education system in India. He made no secret of his goal of
conversion of India to Christianity. In 1836, while serving as chairman
of the Education Board in India, he enthusiastically wrote his father:

*"Our English schools are flourishing wonderfully. The effect of this
education on the Hindus is prodigious. ...... It is my belief that if
our plans of education are followed up, there will not be a single
idolator \[Hindu\] among the respectable classes in Bengal thirty years
hence. And this will be effected without any efforts to proselytise,
without the smallest interference with religious liberty, by natural
operation of knowledge and reflection. I heartily rejoice in the
project."*

So religious conversion and colonialism were to go hand in hand.
Christian missions always supported the colonial government, with
missionaries working hand in glove with the British government. They
supported the Jallianwallah Bagh Massacre also, even though many
Englishmen were ashamed of it. In a real sense Christian missions were
not religious organizations at all but an unofficial arm of the British
Administration. (The same is true of many Catholic missions in Central
American countries. Many of them are in the pay of the American CIA.
This was admitted by a CIA director, testifying before the Congress.)

It was part of the Macaulayite education program to distort Indian
history to serve British colonial and Christian missionary interest. To
do this, he employed a German Vedic scholar now famous as Friedrich Max
Müller. Macaulay used his influence with the East India Company to find
funds for Max Müller's translation of the *Rigveda*. There can be no
doubt at all regarding Max Müller's commitment to the conversion of
Indians to Christianity. Writing to his wife in 1866 Max Müller himself
explained his purpose:

*"It \[the Rigveda\] is the root of their religion \[Hinduism\] and to
show them what the root is, I feel sure, is the only way of uprooting
all that has sprung from it during the last three thousand years."*

Two years later he also wrote the Duke of Argyle, then acting Secretary
of State for India: "The ancient religion of India is doomed. And if
Christianity does not take its place, whose fault will it be?" His job
was to uproot Hinduism by giving a negative version of the Vedas!

Unfortunately, the version of history being taught to children in Indian
schools and colleges, including the Aryan invasion, is the version
created by Macaulay and Max Müller. It is a tragedy. It is not only
anti-national but also totally false.

Unity of India is of untold antiquity

It was claimed by the British, and faithfully repeated by the Leftist
intellectuals, that the British unified India. This is completely false.
The unity of India, rooted in her ancient culture, is of untold
antiquity. It may have been divided at various times into smaller
kingdoms, but the goal was always to be united under a ‘Chakravartin’ or
a ‘Samrat’. This unity was cultural though not always political. This
cultural unity was seriously damaged during the Medieval period, when
India was engaged in a struggle for survival — like what is happening in
Kashmir today. Going back thousands of years, India had been united
under a single ruler many times. The earliest recorded emperor of India
was Bharata, the son of Shakuntala and Dushyanta, but there were several
others. I give below some examples from the *Aitareya Brahmana*.

*"With this great anointing of Indra, Dirghatamas Mamateya anointed
Bharata Daushanti. Therefore, Bharata Daushanti went round the earth
completely, conquering on every side and offered the horse in
sacrifice.*

"With this great anointing of Indra, Tura Kavasheya anointed Janamejaya
Parikshita. Therefore Janamejaya Parikshita went round the earth
completely, conquering on every side and offered the horse in
sacrifice."

There are similar statements about Sudasa Paijavana anointed by
Vasistha, Anga anointed by Udamaya Atreya, Durmukha Pancala anointed by
Brihadukta and Atyarati Janampati anointed by Vasistha Satyahavya.
Atyarati, though not born a king, became an emperor and went on conquer
even the Uttara Kuru or the modern Sinkiang and Turkestan that lie north
of Kashmir. There are others also mentioned in the *Shathapatha
Brahmana* and also the *Mahabharata.* This shows that the unity of India
is ancient. Also, the British did not rule over a unified India. They
had treaties with the rulers of hereditary kingdoms like Mysore,
Kashmir, Hyderabad and others that were more or less independent. The
person who united all these was Sardar Patel, not the British. But this
unification was possible only because India is culturally one. Pakistan,
with no such identity or cultural unity, is falling apart.

Medieval India: Dark Age and conflict

Harshavardhana was the last great Indian ruler of North India. Several
empires continued in the south like the Chalukya, the Rashtrakuta and
finally Vijayanagara. Islamic invasions into India began in the 8^(th)
century or about a century after Harsha’s death. Iran (or Persia)
collapsed within a single generation to the Islamic armies, as did the
eastern part of the Byzantine Empire of Constantinople. Arabs intruded
into Sind, but their hold did not last. It took the Islamic forces more
than 300 years before they could defeat the Hindu kingdom of
Afghanistan. Then the invasion of India began in earnest with the Mahmud
of Ghazni in the 10^(th) – 11^(th) centuries.

It should be understood that what Islam brought to India — and other
parts of the world — was a new kind of warfare that was unknown in
ancient times. It was called Jihad. The idea was not merely to conquer a
country but to totally destroy its history and civilization. Iran and
Egypt had great civilizations going back thousands of years, but they
have been totally wiped out. This is what is happening to Afghanistan
today and also what the Jihadists are trying to do to Kashmir.

To understand what these warriors brought to India, it helps to look at
what believers in Jihad have to say today. The most influential of these
was General Zia-ul-Haq, the former president of Pakistan and the father
of Taliban. According to him, "JIHAD FI-SABILILLAH is not the exclusive
domain of the professional soldier, nor is it restricted to the
application of military force alone." The book *The Quranic Concept of
War,* sponsored by him, tells us that "More than mere military campaigns
and battles, the Holy Prophet's operations against the Pagans
\[pre-Islamic Arabs\] are an integral and inseparable part of the divine
message revealed to us in the Holy Quran. ... The war he planned and
carried out was total to the infinite degree. It was waged on all
fronts: internal and external, political and diplomatic, spiritual and
psychological, economic and military."

This is what Jihad means: was total war — fought not only against
soldiers, but also against civilians, including women and children.
According to the Urdu instructional manual (called *Jihad*) carried by
the Pakistani militants in Kashmir, "The Quranic military strategy thus
enjoins us to prepare ourselves for war to the utmost in order to strike
terror into the heart of the enemy,… **Terror struck into the hearts of
the enemy is not only a means, it is the end in itself.** …Terror is not
a means of imposing decision upon the enemy; it is the decision we wish
to impose upon him."

So terrorism is not an exception but an integral policy of Jihad. This
is what we are seeing today in Kashmir, and this is also what Islamic
vandals like Muhammad of Ghazni and others brought to India. The famous
Alberuni, who accompanied Muhammad on his campaigns into India wrote:

"... Nasir-addaula Sabuktagin. This prince chose the holy war as his
calling. ... his son Yamin-addaula Muhammad \[of Ghazni\] marched into
India during a period of thirty years and more. God be merciful to both
father and son! Muhammad utterly ruined the prosperity of the country,
and performed there wonderful exploits, by which the Hindus became like
atoms of dust scattered in all directions. ... Their scattered remains
cherish, of course, the most inveterate aversion of all the Muslims.
This is the reason, too, why Hindu sciences have retired far away from
those parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to places
which our hand cannot yet reached."

So it was not just the wealth that was looted; Muhammad the Holy Warrior
was responsible for uprooting Hindu learning from the places he invaded.
This was part of the Jihad to uproot the civilization of India. Here is
one telling statistic that should give a true picture of the Islamic
rule of India, beginning with the invasions of Muhammad of Ghazni.
Pre-Islamic India was renowned for its universities. Great centers of
learning like Nalanda, Vaishali, Sarnath, Vikramashila, Taksha-shila,
and many more — they attracted students from all over Asia and the
world. Following the Islamic invasion of India, all these centers were
destroyed. In the centuries following, *during the next eight hundred
years,* *not a single university was established by any Muslim ruler.*
This was a Dark Age worse than what overtook Europe in the Middle Ages.
Only in the last century or so is India slowly coming out of this long
Dark Age.

This is the true picture of Medieval India, which was a long Dark Age.
As the distinguished American historian Will Durant says, "The Islamic
conquest of India is probably the bloodiest story in history."
Fortunately, Hindu learning survived in places like Sringeri, Benares,
Kanchi and a few other places. Also, Indian rulers, especially in
Vijayanagara, Mysore and several others protected scholars and artists.

The problem today is that Leftist historians (‘secularists’) claim that
none of this happened even though there are literally thousands of
ruined temples and monasteries all over India to prove it. One has only
to go to Hampi, the former capital of Vijayanagara to see the evidence.
Even Akbar allowed Rajputs and other Hindus to join his administration
only because he could not find enough foreigners. Otherwise, the policy
of the Delhi Sultans and the Moghuls was to import officials from
outside the country — just as the British did. All this is whitewashed
in Indian history books. For example, students are taught that Babar was
a tolerant ruler who loved India. But here is what Babar himself says in
his autobiography, the *Baburnama.*

"Chanderi had been in the daru'l-harb \[Hindu rule\] for some years and
held by Sanga's highest-ranking officer Meidini Rao, with four or five
thousand infidels, but in 934 \[1527-28\], through the grace of God, I
took it by force within a ghari or two, massacred the infidels, and
brought it into the bosom of Islam."

And when in a particularly happy mood, he wrote the following poem:

For the sake of Islam I became a wanderer;

I battled infidels and Hindus.

I determined to become a martyr.

Thank God I became a holy warrior.

And what did he find interesting in India? "Hindustan," he wrote, "is a
place of little charm. ... The one nice aspect of Hindustan is it is a
large country with lots of gold and money." In other words, he came to
India attracted by loot. For the better part of three hundred years, the
Moghuls ruled North India as foreign occupiers, using a foreign language
— Persian — in their administration.

This record of Medieval India has been whitewashed in history books in
use today. One of the clearest examples of history distortion occurred
during the Ayodhya-Ramjanmabhumi controversy. Secularist historians
repeatedly asserted that no Ram Temple had been destroyed at the site of
Babri Masjid. The first point is that Muslim writers have made no secret
of the fact that they destroyed the temple. Here is what Aurangazeb’s
granddaughter wrote in 1707, in her Persian work *Sahifah-i-Chihal
Nasa'ih Bahadurshahi:*

"... keeping the triumph of Islam in view, devout Muslim rulers should
keep all idolaters in subjection to Islam, brook no laxity in
realization of Jizyah, grant no exceptions to Hindu Rajahs from dancing
attendance on 'Id days and waiting on foot outside mosques till end of
prayer ... and 'keep in constant use for Friday and congregational
prayer the mosques built up after demolishing the temples of the
idolatrous Hindus situated at Mathura, Banaras and Avadh."

In addition to the matter of fact statement of the destruction, what is
striking is the tone of intolerance. She was after all Aurangazeb’s
granddaughter. In addition, we have archaeological evidence showing that
a temple existed at the site. After the demolition of the Babari Masjid
by *karsevaks* on December 6, 1992, archaeologists found a temple under
it and also a stone inscription. Here is what an important part of the
inscription says:

"Line 15 of this inscription, for example, clearly tells us that a
beautiful temple of Vishnu-Hari, built with heaps of stones... , and
beautified with a golden spire ... unparalleled by any other temple
built by earlier kings ... This wonderful temple ... was built in the
temple-city of Ayodhya situated in Saketamandala. ... Line 19 describes
god Vishnu as destroying king Bali ... and the ten-headed personage
(Dashanana, or Ravana)."

After all this, no one can argue that no temple was destroyed. The
distinguished archaeologist Professor B.B. Lal who carried out the
excavation at Ayodhya wrote a sixty-page report on his findings. But
this was suppressed, thanks to influential secularist historians like
Irfan Habib, Romila Thapar and R.S. Sharma. These secularists then put
out a propaganda pamphlet on Ayodhya denying that there ever was a
temple at Ramjanmabhumi.

While the secularist intellectuals are motivated by their hatred of
Hinduism, Muslim intellectuals are driven by fear of Hindu backlash.
They know very well that their rulers have persecuted the Hindus for
centuries. In fact it was this fear that led to the founding of the
Muslim League, with the goal of asking the British never to leave India.
Its first president Nawab Viqar-ul-Mulk, Mushtaq Hussain said that if
the British left, "then the rule of India would pass into the hands of
that community which is nearly four times as large as ourselves … Then,
our life, our property, our honor, and our faith will all be in great
danger. … woe betide the time when we become the subjects of our
neighbors, *and answer to them for the sins, real or imaginary of
Aurangazeb, and other Mussalman conquerors and rulers who went before
him."*

This is still the fear that haunts the Muslim intellectuals in India.
That is the reason why they begged the British to hold on to India and
protect them. It was this fear combined with the Congress appeasement
policy that led to the Partition. It was again this fear that made them
support the Congress dynasty from Nehru to Sonia Gandhi. And now, it is
the same fear that makes them turn themselves into a vote bank to be
manipulated by cynical politicians like Mulayam Singh and Laloo Prasad
Yadav.

This fear is baseless. Hindus are not a vindictive people. But the
Muslims and their newfound secularist allies cannot expect the Hindus to
accept falsehoods about their history and tradition simply to serve
their own interests. They cannot whitewash their terrible record and try
to put all the blame on the Hindu victims in the interests of their
version of ‘secularism’. This would be like blaming the Jews for the
Nazi atrocities. The only way of achieving peace and harmony is for the
Muslim leadership to acknowledge the crimes of their ancestors and learn
to live at peace with their Hindu neighbors. They should also give up
intolerant doctrines like *Jihad* as medieval barbarisms incompatible
with civilization. As the late K.M. Munshi wrote fifty years ago:

"If, however, the misuse of this word 'secularism' continues, ... if,
every time there is an inter-communal conflict, the majority is blamed
regardless of the merits of the question,... the springs of traditional
tolerance will dry up. While the majority exercises patience and
tolerance, the minorities should adjust themselves to the majority.
**Otherwise the future is uncertain and an explosion cannot be
avoided."**

This is exactly what happened at Ayodhya. If the country does not learn
its lessons, it will be repeated over and over again. The secularist
intellectuals, who were busy falsifying history, were not there to
defend the disputed structure at Ramjanmabhumi or protect the victims in
the riots that followed. In fact they were the first to run from the
scene. The lesson: history cannot be falsified forever. In the end truth
will always triumph — *satyameva jayate.* We should be prepared to face
the truth.

The Freedom Movement

Just as ancient and medieval history have been distorted under Congress
patronage, history of the Freedom Movement has also been dressed up to
favor the Congress and the Communists. This distortion has the following
three parts: (1) Building up the role of Gandhi and Nehru while
suppressing the contribution of others, notably Subhas Bose. (2)
Whitewashing Gandhi’s terrible blunder of supporting the Khilafat
Movement and the atrocities of the Mopla Rebellion that followed. (3)
Whitewashing the treachery of the Communists. We can next take a brief
look at each one of them.

It is commonly believed that it was the Congress Party through its
various movements like the Quit India Movement of 1942 that brought
freedom to India. This fails to explain the fact that the British
granted independence only in 1947 while the Quit India Movement had
collapsed by the end of 1942. The question that naturally arises is— why
did the British leave in such great hurry in August 1947? The answer was
provided by Prime Minister Clement Attlee, the man who made the decision
to grant independence to India.

When B.P. Chakravarti was acting as Governor of West Bengal, Lord Attlee
visited India and stayed as his guest for three days at the Raj Bhavan.
Chakravarti asked Attlee about the real grounds for granting
independence to India. Specifically, his question was, when the Quit
India movement lay in ruins years before 1947, where was the need for
the British to leave in such a hurry. Attlee’s response is most
illuminating and important for history. Here is what Attlee told him:

*In reply Attlee cited several reasons, the most important were the
activities of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose which weakened the very
foundation of the attachment of the Indian land and naval forces to the
British Government. Towards the end, I asked Lord Attlee about the
extent to which the British decision to quit India was influenced by
Gandhi’s activities. On hearing this question Attlee’s lips widened in a
smile of disdain and he uttered, slowly, putting emphasis on each single
letter — **"mi-ni-mal."** (Emphasis added.)*

The crucial point to note is that thanks to Subhas Bose’s activities,
the Indian Armed Forces began to see themselves as defenders of India
rather than of the British Empire. This, more than anything else, was
what led to India’s freedom. This is also the reason why the British
Empire disappeared from the face of the earth within an astonishingly
short space of twenty years. Indian soldiers, who were the main prop of
the Empire, were no longer willing to fight for the British. What
influenced the British decision was mutiny of the Indian Navy following
the INA trials in 1946. While the British wanted to try Subhas Bose’s
INA as traitors, Indian soldiers saw them as nationalists and patriots.
This scared the British. They decided to get out in a hurry.

(Attlee repeated his argument on at least two other occasions, including
once in the House of Commons. During a debate in the House of Commons,
he told Churchill that he would agree to the latter’s suggestion of
holding on to India if he could guarantee the loyalty of the Indian
armed forces. Churchill had no reply. The Labour Prime Minister was as
much an imperialist as Churchill, but more pragmatic, prepared to see
the writing on the wall.)

This will come as a shock to most Indians brought up to believe that the
Congress movement driven by the ‘spiritual force’ of Mahatma Gandhi
forced the British to leave India. But both evidence and the logic of
history are against this beautiful but childish fantasy. It was the fear
of mutiny by the Indian armed forces — and not any ‘spiritual force’ —
that forced the issue of freedom. The British saw that the sooner they
left the better for themselves, for, at the end of the war, *India had
some three million men under arms.* One would have to be extraordinarily
dense — which the British were not — to fail to see the writing on the
wall.

So, as the great historian R.C. Majumdar wrote, Subhas Bose with his INA
campaigns probably contributed more to Indian independence than Gandhi,
Nehru and their movements. The result of Subhas Bose’s activities was
the rise of the nationalist spirit in the Indian Armed Forces. This is
the reason why Nehru, after he became Prime Minister, did everything
possible to turn Bose into a non-person. He wanted no rivals.

This brings us to Mahatma Gandhi and his ill-fated Nonviolent
Non-Cooperation Movement. Most Indians have been made to believe that it
was the first of Gandhi’s movements for India’s freedom. This is
completely false. The Non-Cooperation Movement was for the restoration
of the Sultan of Turkey as the Caliph. This was known as the Khilafat
Movement, launched by Indian Muslims, led by Maulanas Mohamad Ali and
Shaukat Ali. *In fact, Gandhi postponed Tilak’s Swaraj Resolution by
nearly ten years in order to join the Khilafat.* (Lokamanya Tilak had
died in 1920 and Gandhi and the Ali Brothers launched the Khilafat in
1921. Gandhi even diverted a substantial part of the Tilak Swaraj Fund
to the Khilafat.) Indian history books omit the fact that the sole
purpose of the Non-Cooperation Movement was the restoration of the
Sultan of Turkey.

Gandhi promised the Ali Brothers that the British would be driven out
‘within the year’. The failure of the Khilafat agitation, whose goal was
to replace the British Raj with what Annie Beasant called ‘Khilafat
Raj’, led to a Jihad known as the Mopla Rebellion in which thousands of
innocent people were slaughtered. (Moplas are a Muslim sect of the
Malabar district in Kerala.) History books, controlled by the
Congress-secularist establishment rarely mention the Mopla Rebellion,
which was the main result of the Gandhi-Congress support for the
Khilafat Movement. What is so bad about it that they want to hide it?
Sir Sankaran Nair, an eyewitness to the Mopla horrors had this to say in
his book *Gandhi and Anarchy*:

*"For sheer brutality on women, I do not remember anything in history to
match the Malabar \[Mopla\] rebellion. ... The atrocities committed more
particularly on women are so horrible and unmentionable that I do not
propose to refer to them in this book."* (See *Gandhi, Khilafat and the
National Movement* by N.S. Rajaram for several eyewitness accounts*.*)

This brutality was to be equaled if not surpassed in the holocaust of
the Partition — now being re-enacted in Kashmir. What was Gandhi's
reaction to the Mopla outrages? He called the Moplas "God fearing" and
said they "are fighting for what they consider as religion, and in a
manner they consider as religious." This from the Apostle of
Nonviolence!

The message of the Khilafat was not lost on Muslim leaders like Mohammed
Ali Jinnah. (He had opposed the Congress support for the Khilafat.) He
correctly recognized that the Congress leaders would always back down in
the face of threat of violence. They would rather appease than fight on
principles. This happened repeatedly — in 1948 and 1972 in dealing with
Pakistan, and also in the 1950s in dealing with China and Tibet. Nehru
abandoned Kashmir to Pakistan (through the UN) and abandoned also Tibet
to China, sacrificing India’s national interests. As Congress ruled
India for forty years following independence, this practice of
appeasement gave India the label of a ‘soft state’.

The Congress’s appeasement policy reached its absurd limit, when the
Nehru Government succumbed to Gandhi’s blackmail and gave Pakistan 55
crore rupees at a time when Indian troops were fighting the Pakistanis
in Kashmir. I already noted that Gandhi had diverted a substantial sum
from the Tilak Swaraj Fund to the Khilafat, in addition to postponing
Tilak’s Swaraj Resolution in favor of the Khilafat Movement.

Another source of distortion of this period of history is rooted in the
treacherous role played by the Communists. This is a matter of record,
though Communist intellectuals, by monopolizing institutions like the
ICHR, are trying to whitewash their role. To understand their treachery,
we should recognize that Communist leaders in other colonized countries
were first and foremost nationalists who fought for freedom. Next, they
came from the masses. This is true of leaders like Mao of China, Ho Chi
Min of Vietnam, Fidel Castro of Cuba and several others. Indian
Communist leaders on the other hand come mostly from the English
educated elite. They have always looked to the West for everything. So
when India was fighting for her freedom, the Communists were agents of
foreign governments like Germany, Russia, Britain and finally even
Pakistan!

When the Second World War began, because of the Stalin-Hitler Pact, the
Communists found themselves on the same side as Nazi Germany. They were
ordered by Stalin to support Hitler’s war as a war against imperialist
countries like Britain and France. When Germany attacked Russia in June
1941, the Indian Communists made a 180-degree turn and began supporting
the British! This meant working against national leaders like Gandhi and
Subhas Bose, who were seen as enemies of the British. The great
historian R.C. Majumdar wrote:

*"During the great national upsurge of 1942, the Communists acted as
stooges and spies of the British Government… Mr. Joshi (of the Communist
Party) was placing at the disposal of India the services of his Party
Members… Joshi had, as General Secretary of the Party, written a letter
in which he offered ‘unconditional help’ to the then Government of India
and the Army GHQ to fight the 1942 underground workers and the Azad Hind
Fauz (INA) of Subhas Chandra Bose… Joshi’s letter revealed that the CPI
was receiving financial aid from the British Government, had a secret
pact with the Muslim League…"*

As part of their pact with the Muslim League, the Communists openly
supported the demand for Pakistan, "but went much further by saying that
every linguistic group in India had a distinct nationality and was
entitled … to secede." After independence, the Communists struck a deal
with the Nizam’s Government in Hyderabad and joined hands with the
Razakars to fight Hyderabad’s accession to India with Pakistan’s help.
When Sardar Patel sent troops into Hyderabad, Kasim Rizvi ran away to
Pakistan, handing over the bulk of his guns and other arms to the
Communists. The Communists kept up an armed insurrection in the
Telengana region for a few years until ordered to stop by the Soviet
dictator Stalin.

The Communists supported China’s attack on India and 1962 and also the
Chinese nuclear tests, while vehemently opposing India’s successful
tests at Pokharan. It is this formidable record of treachery that the
Communist intellectuals are trying to erase by controlling institutions
like the ICHR, NIEPA and NCERT. They have now joined hands with the
Sonia Congress in a desperate struggle for survival.

Independent India: Dynastic blunders

For over forty years after independence, India was ruled directly or
indirectly by the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. As a result, national interest
was often sacrificed for personal dynastic interests. On at least three
occasions, Nehru sacrificed India’s interests for the sake of
international glory for himself. First is his well-known blunder of
referring Kashmir to the United Nations when Indian troops were on the
verge of driving the Pakistanis out of Kashmir. The next was his
betrayal of Tibet to please China and gain glory for himself in Korea.
The third was his failure to settle the border with China because of his
preoccupation with his fantasy of Pancha Sheel. Nehru’s colossal blunder
in Kashmir is well known, so I will briefly discuss his fiasco in
dealing with Tibet and China.

But first I want to highlight an important but often overlooked point.
It was not Pakistan that created the Kashmir problem. Nehru created the
problem with his two blunders: referring Kashmir to the United Nations
and agreeing to the present cease fire line or the LOC. *At the very
least Nehru should have asked for the Indus River as the Line of
Control.* Similarly, what I want to next is explain that it was not
China but again Nehru that created the border problem with China with
his multiple blunders. With his blunder upon blunder Nehru sacrificed
thousands of lives— both soldiers and civilians. His grandson Rajiv
Gandhi contributed his own share of blunders by sending Indian troops
into Sri Lanka unprepared. Let me next examine the Chinese scene.

Nehru and the China-Tibet blunder

In the year 1950, two momentous events shook Asia and the world. One was
the Chinese invasion of Tibet, and the other, Chinese intervention in
the Korean War. The first was near, on India’s borders, the other, far
away in the Korean Peninsula where India had little at stake. By all
canons of logic, India should have devoted utmost attention to the
immediate situation in Tibet, and let interested parties like China and
the U.S. sort it out in Korea. But Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s Prime
Minister, did exactly the opposite. He treated the Tibetan crisis in a
haphazard fashion, while getting heavily involved in Korea. India today
is paying for this folly by being the only country of its size in the
world without an official boundary with its giant neighbor. Tibet soon
disappeared from the map. As in Kashmir, Nehru sacrificed national
interest at home in pursuit of international glory abroad.

India at the time maintained missions in Lhasa and Gyangtse. Due to the
close relations that existed between India and Tibet going back
centuries and also because of the unsettled conditions in China, Tibet’s
transactions with the outside world were conducted mainly through India.
Well into 1950, the Indian Government regarded Tibet as a free country.

The Chinese announced their invasion of Tibet on 25 October 1950.
According to them, it was to ‘free Tibet from imperialist forces’, and
consolidate its border with India. Nehru announced that he and the
Indian Government were "extremely perplexed and disappointed with the
Chinese Government’s action..." Nehru also complained that he had been
"led to believe by the Chinese Foreign Office that the Chinese would
settle the future of Tibet in a peaceful manner by direct negotiation
with the representatives of Tibet…"

This was not true, for in September 1949, more than a year before the
Chinese invasion, Nehru himself had written: "Chinese communists are
likely to invade Tibet." The point to note is that Nehru, by sending
mixed signals, showing more interest in Korea than in Tibet, had
encouraged the Chinese invasion; the Chinese had made no secret of their
desire to invade Tibet. In spite of this, Nehru’s main interest was to
sponsor China as a member of the UN Security Council instead of
safeguarding Indian interests in Tibet.

Because of this, when the Chinese were moving troops into Tibet, there
was little concern in Indian official circles. Panikkar, the Indian
Ambassador in Beijing, went so far as to pretend that there was ‘lack of
confirmation’ of the presence of Chinese troops in Tibet and that to
protest the Chinese invasion of Tibet would be an "interference to
India’s efforts on behalf of China in the UN". So Panikkar was more
interested in protecting Chinese interests in the UN than India’s own
interests on the Tibetan border! Nehru agreed with his Ambassador. He
wrote, "our primary consideration is maintenance of world peace… Recent
developments in Korea have not strengthened China’s position, which will
be further weakened by any aggressive action \[by India\] in Tibet." So
Nehru was ready to sacrifice India’s national security interests in
Tibet so as not to weaken China’s case in the UN!

It is nothing short of tragedy that the two greatest influences on Nehru
at this crucial juncture in history were Krishna Menon and K.M.
Panikkar, both communists. Panikkar, while nominally serving as Indian
ambassador in China, became practically a spokesman for Chinese
interests in Tibet. Sardar Patel remarked that Panikkar "has been at
great pains to find an explanation or justification for Chinese policy
and actions." India eventually gave up its right to have a diplomatic
mission in Lhasa on the ground that it was an ‘imperialist legacy’. This
led to Nehru’s discredited ‘Hindi-Chini Bhai Bhai’. Mao had no
reciprocal affection for India and never spoke of ‘Chini-Hindi Bhai
Bhai’ — or its Chinese equivalent. Far from it, he had only contempt for
India and its leaders. Mao respected only the strong who would oppose
him, and not the weak who bent over backwards to please him.

Sardar Patel warned Nehru: "Even though we regard ourselves as friends
of China, the Chinese do not regard us as friends." He wrote a famous
letter in which he expressed deep concern over developments in Tibet,
raising several important points. In particular, he noted that a free
and friendly Tibet was vital for India’s security, and everything
including military measures should be considered to ensure it. On
November 9, 1950, two days after he wrote the letter to Nehru, he
announced in Delhi: "In Kali Yuga, we shall return *ahimsa* for
*ahimsa.* If anybody resorts to force against us, we shall meet it with
force." But Nehru ignored Patel’s letter. The truth is that India was in
a strong position to defend its interests in Tibet, but gave up the
opportunity for the sake of pleasing China. *It is not widely known in
India that in 1950, China could have been prevented from taking over
Tibet.*

Patel on the other hand recognized that in 1950, China was in a
vulnerable position, fully committed in Korea and by no means secure in
its hold over the mainland. For months General MacArthur had been urging
President Truman to "unleash Chiang Kai Shek" lying in wait in Formosa
(Taiwan) with full American support. China had not yet acquired the atom
bomb, which was more than ten years in the future. India had little to
lose and everything to gain by a determined show of force when China was
struggling to consolidate its hold.

In addition, India had international support, with world opinion
strongly against Chinese aggression in Tibet. The world in fact was
looking to India to take the lead. The highly influential English
journal *The Economist* echoed the Western viewpoint when it wrote:
"Having maintained complete independence of China since 1912, Tibet has
a strong claim to be regarded as an independent state. *But it is for
India to take a lead in this matter.* If India decides to support
independence of Tibet as a buffer state between itself and China,
Britain and U.S.A. will do well to extend formal diplomatic recognition
to it."

So China could have been stopped. But this was not to be. Nehru ignored
Patel’s letter as well as international opinion and gave up this golden
opportunity to turn Tibet into a friendly buffer state. With such a
principled stand, India would also have acquired the status of a great
power while Pakistan would have disappeared from the radar screen of
world attention. Much has been made of Nehru’s blunder in Kashmir, but
it pales in comparison with his folly in Tibet. As a result of this
monumental failure of vision — and nerve — India soon came to be treated
as a third rate power, acquiring ‘parity’ with Pakistan. Two months
later Patel was dead.

Even after the loss of Tibet, Nehru gave up opportunities to settle the
border with China. To understand this, it is necessary to appreciate the
fact that *what China desired most was a stable border with India.* With
this in view, the Chinese Premier Zhou-en-Lai visited India several
times to fix the boundary between the two countries. In short, the
Chinese proposal amounted to the following: they were prepared to accept
the McMahon Line as the boundary in the east — with possibly some minor
adjustments and a new name — and then negotiate the unmarked boundary in
the west between Ladakh and Tibet. In effect, what Zhou-en-Lai proposed
was a phased settlement, beginning with the eastern boundary. Nehru,
however, wanted the whole thing settled at once. The practical minded
Zhou-en-Lai found this politically impossible. And on each visit, the
Chinese Premier in search of a boundary settlement, heard more about the
principles of Pancha Sheela than India’s stand on the boundary. He
interpreted this as intransigence on India’s part.

China in fact went on to settle its boundary with Mayammar (Burma)
roughly along the McMahon Line following similar principles. Contrary to
what the Indian public was told, the border between Ladakh (in the
Princely State of Kashmir) and Tibet was never clearly demarcated. As
late as 1960, the Indian Government had to send survey teams to Ladakh
to locate the boundary and prepare maps. But the Government kept telling
the people that there was a clearly defined boundary, which the Chinese
were refusing to accept.

What the situation demanded was a creative approach, especially from the
Indian side. There were several practical issues on which negotiations
could have been conducted — especially in the 1950s when India was in a
strong position. China needed Aksai Chin because it had plans to
construct an access road from Tibet to Xinjiang province (Sinkiang) in
the west. Aksai Chin was of far greater strategic significance to China
than to India. (It may be a strategic liability for India — being
expensive to maintain and hard to supply, even more than the Siachen
Glacier.) Had Nehru recognized this he might have proposed a creative
solution like asking for access to Mount Kailash and Manasarovar in
return for Chinese access to Aksai Chin. The issue is not whether such
an agreement was possible, but no solutions were proposed. The upshot of
all this was that China ignored India — including Pancha Sheel — and
went ahead with its plan to build the road through Aksai Chin.

This is still not the full story. On the heels of this twin blunder —
abandonment of Tibet and sponsorship of China, with nothing to show in
return — Nehru deceived the Indian public in his pursuit of
international glory through Pancha Sheel. Pancha Sheel, which was the
principal ‘policy’ of Nehru towards China from the betrayal of Tibet to
the expulsion of Dalai Lama in 1959, is generally regarded as a
demonstration of good faith by Nehru that was exploited by the Chinese
who ‘stabbed him in the back’. This is not quite correct, for *Nehru
(and Krishna Menon) knew about the Chinese incursions in Ladakh and
Aksai Chin but kept it secret for years to keep the illusion of Pancha
Sheel alive.*

General Thimayya had brought the Chinese activities in Aksai Chin to the
notice of Nehru and Krishna Menon several years before that. An English
mountaineer by name Sydney Wignall was deputed by Thimayya to verify
reports that the Chinese were building a road through Aksai Chin. He was
captured by the Chinese but released and made his way back to India
after incredible difficulties, surviving several snowstorms. Now
Thimayya had proof of Chinese incursion. When the Army presented this to
the Government, Menon blew up. In Nehru’s presence, he told the senior
officer making the presentation that he was "lapping up CIA propaganda."

Wignall was not Thimayya’s only source. Shortly after the Chinese attack
in 1962, I heard from General Thimayya that he had deputed a young
officer of the Madras Sappers (MEG) to Aksai Chin to investigate reports
of Chinese intrusion who brought back reports of the Chinese incursion.
But the public was not told of it simply to cover up Nehru’s blunders.
He was still trying to sell his Pancha Sheel and Hindi-Chini Bhai Bhai
to the Indian public. Even today, Nehru’s family members exercise
dictatorial control over the documents pertaining to this crucial
period. Even documents in the National Archives are not available to
scholars without permission from the Nehru-Gandhi family heirs. This is
to protect his reputation from being damaged by the truth.

The sorry catalog of blunders continued after Nehru’s death. In the
Bangladesh war, India achieved one of the most decisive victories in
modern history. More than 90,000 Pakistani soldiers were in Indian
custody. The newly independent Bangladesh wanted to try these men as war
criminals for their atrocities against the people of East Bengal. The
Indian Government could have used this as a bargaining chip with
Pakistan and settled the Kashmir problem once and for all. Instead,
Indira Gandhi threw away this golden opportunity in exchange for a scrap
of paper called the Shimla Agreement. Thanks to this folly, Pakistan is
more active than ever in Kashmir.

Kargil and its lessons: brush with disaster

This sad string of failures holds an important lesson in history. The
Congress has always been a party held together by a personality — first
the Mahatma, later Nehru, and now Sonia Gandhi. It is inevitable
therefore that force of personality rather than concern of national
interest should have influenced major decisions even at crucial points
in history. This was so in Kashmir, in Tibet, over the border dispute
with China, the Shimla Agreement, and most recently, the misadventure in
Sri Lanka. It is India’s misfortune that this personality dominated
entity should have controlled the fate of the nation for the better part
of half a century since independence. The question for the future is —
will history repeat itself or have the people of India learnt their
lesson. The Congress apparently has not. This is clear from its behavior
preceding the brief war with Pakistan over Kargil, when Sonia Gandhi
tried to takeover the Government in a coup under false pretences.

It is unnecessary to go into the details of this sordid episode, but a
basic question needs to be asked. There are complaints all around that
Sonia Gandhi is destroying the Congress party because of her
inexperience and her style of functioning. But the same Congressmen were
willing to bring down the Government and install her as Prime Minister —
just as Pakistani soldiers were infiltrating across the LOC in Kashmir.
The question is — what would have been the fate of Kashmir and India,
had the coup attempt succeeded, with the immature not to say
irresponsible Sonia Gandhi in the place of Vajpayee as Prime Minister,
with the likes of Jayalalitha and Subramanian Swamy in control? It does
not take much intelligence to see that Kashmir would have been lost,
giving Sonia Gandhi an excellent excuse to declare Emergency leading to
dynastic dictatorship. This would bring back European rule with a
vengeance.

At the very least, the episode involving the infamous tea party and the
coup attempt showed that there are people at the highest level who have
no conception of national security. Anyone who indulges in such a
reckless adventure, treating the nation and its interests in such a
lighthearted manner is unfit for high office.

This is what India escaped in April 1999 — no thanks to the Congress
party. Nehru may no longer be on the scene but his legacy of sacrificing
national interest for personal gain — or what N.R. Waradpande in a
forthcoming book on Nehru has called ‘assault on nationhood’ — continues
unabated. By no stretch of the imagination can the dynasty or its party
be called nationalistic. The behavior of the Congress party in
mindlessly supporting Sonia Gandhi’s coup attempt at the cost of
national interest shows both Nehru and his party in their true colors.

Corruption of national institutions

As I just noted, even some documents in the National Archives are not
available to scholars if the Nehru family members feel that they might
contain any damaging information. But the Congress, joined by the
Communists, went much further, especially when Indira Gandhi became
Prime Minister. Just as Nehru sought control of the 'commanding heights
of the economy' with his socialistic planning, he and his successors
built a centralized educational establishment that would perpetuate his
anti-Hindu view of Indian history and civilization. This led to
anti-Hindu forces dominating education for nearly fifty years.

The first minister of education was Maulana Azad — said to be a
'nationalist' Muslim and a close friend and open admirer of Nehru — at
least in public. Azad was an indolent man and an ineffective
administrator, but with a strong commitment to exalting the glory of
Islamic rule in India. (He had also a hand in sabotaging R.C. Majumdar’s
multi-volume work on the Indian Freedom Movement, which at times was
critical of the Congress.) So the official rewriting of Indian history
had begun — with its whitewashing of the horrors of Islamic rule
accompanied by the introduction of anti-Hindu propaganda — describing
Hinduism as full of inequities and Islam as egalitarian. Nehru himself
had set the trend with his glorification of Muhammad of Ghazni and
Babar.

Under this program of de-Hinduisation, vandals and terrorists like
Ghazni, Babar and Aurangazeb were treated as bringers of civilization
and equality, while portraying such freedom fighters as Shivaji, Rana
Pratap, Chandrashekar Azad and others as obstructionists standing in the
way of progress. But thanks to the official hospitality extended to such
historical revisions, the influential National Council for Educational
Research and Training (NCERT) came to be dominated by scholars who
pursued the Nehruvian agenda or were willing to cater to it. The same
was true of another influential educational body — National Institute
for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA). Independent minded
historians and other scholars who were not prepared to toe this official
line were removed or made ineffective.

A fateful event that played into the hands of the Secularists was the
appointment of Nurul Hassan as education minister in the Indira Gandhi
regime. He claimed to be a Marxist, but he pursued an anti-Hindu agenda
like a Muslim Fundamentalist. (After the creation of Pakistan, many
Muslim Fundamentalists pretended to be Marxists, and kept attacking
Hinduism for its ‘inequality’.) As a result, anti-Hinduism acquired a
stranglehold on education. NIEPA is a particularly influential body that
administers and oversees educational policy in India. NCERT controls
textbooks and other materials that are used in schools and colleges in
India. Both were now under the firm control of anti-Hindu forces.

Through his control of these two powerful bodies, Nurul Hassan became
education Czar in India. He extended patronage to the Marxist dominated
Jawaharlal Nehru University and Muslim separatist Aligarh Muslim
University. They were allowed to provide consultants and experts on all
educational matters. As a result, these two academically undistinguished
but politically opportunistic universities have come to command
resources and influence out of all proportion to their merit.

A single example should help give an idea of the dangers of this
centralized feudal educational policy. For over 20 years, H.S. Khan
headed the history and sociology division of the NCERT. He is known to
hold the view that India became civilized only through the introduction
of Islam. This incidentally is also the official Pakistani line. This
was also the view of Nurul Hassan who was of course the patron of H.S.
Khan. This is taking the Aryan invasion idea a giant step forward (or
backward).

In 1986, on Khan's initiative, textbook writers in all the states were
directed to change the version of history to accord with the anti-Hindu
model. Specific guidelines were issued to all the states instructing
them not to glorify any period of history — meaning any Hindu period —
as a Golden Age; the Gupta period therefore was not to be glorified
despite its great achievements. As a further step in de-Hinduisation and
rehabilitation of tyrannical Muslim rulers, Hindu leaders like Shivaji,
Chandrashekara Azad and Rana Pratap were not to be described as freedom
fighters against alien rule, but treated as terrorists who opposed
'civilized and civilizing' rulers like Aurangazeb. As a result, the
anti-Hindu agenda, which had been gaining strength since the early
1950s, accelerated dramatically under the feudal regime of Nurul Hassan.
Only now, following the rout of the Congress party in the 1999
elections, their monopoly has come under threat. This has made these men
and women resort to desperate measures like what is coming out in the
ICHR scandals.

What should be done?

From all this two points become clear. First, the history being taught
in Indian schools and colleges was created by colonial masters and their
willing servants to serve anti-national interests and damage India’s
heritage and culture. Second, institutions created to serve national
educational goals were dominated by self-serving individuals who are
hostile to national aspirations. The result is that institutions like
the ICHR fell into the hands of mediocre scholars with political
influence. They have contributed little of significance because of their
worship of the West and their inferiority complex. They have built no
Indian schools of thought, especially in history. This had been foreseen
by Sri Aurobindo long ago when he wrote:

"\[That\] Indian scholars have not been able to form themselves into a
great and independent school of learning is due to two causes: the
miserable scantiness of the mastery of Sanskrit provided by our
universities, crippling to all but born scholars, and our lack of sturdy
independence which makes us over-ready to defer to European \[and
Western\] authority."

There is another problem. In the fifty years after independence, the
Government and its agencies like the ICHR, NCERT and NIEPA have
supported only such scholars who are weak in scholarship and afraid of
thinking independently, but willing to toe the official line. They are
products of the Macaulayite education system, which was created to
produce colonial servants and not independent thinkers. When we look at
scholars doing independent work like Natwar Jha, David Frawley, R.C.
Majumdar, Shriakant Talageri, Sita Ram Goel and others, none of them has
received support from the Government. (I too have received no support
though I have worked closely with several distinguished scholars
including Jha and Frawley on important problems like the decipherment of
the Indus script.)

This shows that the Government has been supporting political favorites
rather than capable scholars. When we look at Government sponsored
scholars the picture is dismal. The only time anyone hears about them is
when there is a scandal or a political dispute like the ICHR scandal.
They have no important contributions that can be compared to, say, the
decipherment of the Indus Script. They are political hangers-on rather
than historians. They are able to get away with it because of their
monopoly hold over the establishment.

It is clear that a self-respecting nation like India cannot allow this
disgraceful state of affairs to continue. It cannot have its children’s
education controlled by men and women with slavish minds and a hostile
attitude towards the nation and its history and culture. The first step
is to break the monopoly of these people, which has already begun to
happen to some extent. But this is only because there is a Government in
power that is more nationalistic in orientation than previous
Governments. A more permanent solution should be found so that history
and education are not subject to the whims of politicians and special
interests.

So both the causes and the consequences of this domination by
anti-national interests are clear. The question now is how to remedy the
situation? The first step would be to rewrite history books based on the
latest findings and the primary sources. But this is not enough, for
history can change as more discoveries are made. To ensure a
free-spirited inquiry and unfettered research, there should be no
Government organizations that tell educators and scholars how to write
and teach history. This means disbanding organizations like NIEPA and
NCERT. They have become little more than centers for thought control and
political propaganda. The ICHR should be reorganized strictly as a
funding agency that invites and funds proposals. For any major research
program, several scholars and/or groups of scholars should be funded so
that independent schools of thoughts can flourish. It should never be
allowed to become the monopoly of a single ideological advocacy group as
happened under the Congress regime.

But ultimately, the nation’s education system should be changed to
encourage to independent and critical thinking. No subject or
personality should be placed beyond review and criticism. As Karl Popper
once observed: "If our civilization is to survive, we must break with
the habit of deference to great men. Great men make great mistakes."
This means that no one — be he Mahatma, Prophet or anything else — can
be put beyond the pale of review and criticism.

Popper of course was speaking in the context of the Western
Civilization. Indian sages have also expressed similar views. In his
*Vishnu-tattva-vinirnaya,* Sri Madhvacharya said:

*"Never accept as authority the word of any human. Humans are subject to
error and deception. One deludes oneself in believing that there was a
man who was free of error and beyond deception, and he alone was the
author of any text."*

And Bhagavan Buddha said: "Accept nothing on my authority. Think, and be
a lamp unto thyself."

This should be the guiding principle of education and intellectual life.

Additional reading

This is only a brief summary of the distortions deliberately introduced
into Indian history, first by the British and then by their followers in
the Government and the intelligentsia. I have written this section as a
guide for readers who want to follow up on the topics discussed in this
essay. The literature on the subjects discussed in this essay is huge,
but I will point to a few easily available works.

On ancient India, there have been so many new discoveries that most
books written before 1985 or so are more or less obsolete. The book
*Vedic Aryans and the Origins of Civilization* by N.S. Rajaram and David
Frawley (Voice of India, New Delhi) gives a picture of Vedic India based
on primary sources and scientific evidence. The two volumes by Shrikant
Talageri, *Aryan Invasion Theory, A Reappraisal* and *Rigveda— A
Historical Analysis* (Aditya Prakashan, Delhi) provide a comprehensive
study of the Vedic and Puranic sources. *The Myth of the Aryan Invasion
of India* by David Frawley (Voice of India) is a popular account of the
subject. *The Politics of History* by N.S. Rajaram (Voice of India) is a
systematic study of the colonial and missionary background to the Aryan
invasion theory. *Missionaries in India* by Arun Shourie (Harper
Collins, New Delhi) discusses in detail the Christian missionary
background to the British colonial politics.

For a detailed discussion of the decipherment of the Indus script and
its ramifications see *The Deciphered Indus Script* by N. Jha and N.S.
Rajaram (Aditya Prakashan, Delhi). For a popular account of the new
picture of ancient India based on the latest discoveries including the
decipherment, see *From Sarasvati River to the Indus Script* by N.S.
Rajaram (Mitra Madhyama, Bangalore).

When we come to the medieval period, there is no single work that is
satisfactory. The most comprehensive account is the eight-volume
*History of India as Told by Its Own Historians* translated by Elliot
and Dowson, recently reissued by DK Publishers of Delhi. Several works
by K.S. Lal, including *The Legacy of Muslim Rule in India, Twilight of
the Sultanate, Theory and Practice of Muslim State in India* and *Muslim
Slave System in Medieval India* (Aditya Prakashan, Delhi) are highly
informative. *Jihad: The Islamic Concept of Permanent War* by Suhas
Majumdar (Voice of India) is a brilliant study of the subject. The best
source for understanding the ideology of Islam (and Jihad) and its
application in India is *The Calcutta Quran Petition* by Sita Ram Goel
(Voice of India, Delhi). Sita Ram Goel has also written the two-volume
*Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them?* (Voice of India), which is a
monumental compilation relating to the temples destroyed in Medieval
India. His book *The Story of Islamic Imperialism in India* (Voice of
India) is a highly readable summary. Voice of India has also published
several volumes on the Ayodhya dispute. See for example *Profiles in
Deception: Ayodhya and the Dead Sea Scrolls* by N.S. Rajaram (Voice of
India). See *Negationism in India* by Koenraad Elst (Voice of India) for
a brilliant account of the falsification of history by secularist
historians.

For the modern period also there are few satisfactory books that view
the freedom movement objectively. The best by far is the three-volume
*History of the Freedom Movement in India* by R.C. Majumdar (Firma-KLM,
Calcutta). *The Tragic Story of Partition* by H.V. Seshadri (Jagarana
Prakashan) is an excellent account of the Congress blunders that led to
the tragedy. *Muslim Separatism, Causes and Consequences* by Sita Ram
Goel (Voice of India) is a valuable summary of the same topic but with
some new insights. *Gandhi, Khilafat and the National Movement* by N.S.
Rajaram (Sahitya Sindhu, Bangalore) offers a revisionist view as well as
eyewitness accounts of the sadly neglected Mopla Rebellion. For the
betrayal of Tibet and the India-China relations, *The Fate of Tibet* by
Claude Arpi (Har-Anand, New Delhi) is the best source. *India Betrayed:
Role of Nehru* by Brigadier B.N. Sharma (Manas, New Delhi) is a valuable
source on the India-China relations including the border problem.

For a thorough expose of the corruption of national institutions, see
*Eminent Historians* by Arun Shourie (Harper-Collins, New Delhi) and
also *Profiles in Deception* by N.S. Rajaram (Voice of India, New
Delhi).

On the subject of spirituality as the foundation of nationalism, there
are several works, from Sri Aurobindo and Swami Vivekananda to our own
times. A collection of essays on the Sri Aurobindo’s sayings on
nationalism called *India’s Rebirth* (Mira-Aditi Centre of Mysore) is
indispensable for understanding the spiritual foundation of nationalism.
These are further explored and expanded in *A Hindu View of the World*
by N.S. Rajaram (Voice of India, New Delhi). The two books by David
Frawley *Arise Arjuna* and *Awaken Bharata* (Voice of India, New Delhi)
expand on these themes as well as analyzing the contemporary Indian
scene.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**  
  
