+++
title = "02 Building an Army from Scratch"

+++



When Parliament was due to open in December 1965, four months after our separation from Malaysia, Brigadier Syed Mohamed bin Syed Ahmad Alsagoff, who was in charge of a Malaysian brigade stationed in Singapore, called on me and insisted that his motorcycle outriders escort me to Parliament. Alsagoff was a stout, heavy-built Arab Muslim with a moustache, a Singaporean by birth who had joined the Malayan Armed Forces. To my amazement he acted as if he was the commander-in-chief of the army in Singapore, ready at any time to take over control of the island. At that time the First and Second Singapore Infantry Regiments \(1 and 2 SIR\) of about 1,000 men each were under Malaysian command. The Malaysian government had placed 700 Malaysians in 1 and 2 SIR, and posted out 300 Singaporean soldiers to various Malaysian units.

I weighed up the situation and concluded that the Tunku wanted to remind us and the foreign diplomats who would be present that Malaysia was still in charge in Singapore. If I told him off for his presumptuousness, Alsagoff would report this back to his superiors in Kuala Lumpur and they would take other steps to show me who wielded real power in Singapore. I decided it was best to acquiesce. So for the ceremonial opening of the first Parliament of the Republic of Singapore, Malaysian army outriders “escorted” me from my office in City Hall to Parliament House.

Not long after this problem, at 4:00 pm on Tuesday, 1 February 1966, Keng Swee suddenly came to my office at City Hall with the troubling news that rioting had broken out at an army training depot at Shenton Way, next to the Singapore Polytechnic. When he learnt to his astonishment that 80 per cent of recent recruits to all units were Malays, Keng Swee had given instructions that all recruitment and training should cease and the position be frozen. The army commander misinterpreted this and, on his own initiative, had instructed the Chinese major to discharge all Malay recruits. The major assembled everyone in the parade square, asked the non-Malays to fall out and told the Malays that they were dismissed. For a few minutes the Malays were dumbfounded at this discrimination. When they had recovered from the shock, bedlam broke out as they attacked the non-Malays with poles, sticks and aerated water bottles, burnt two motorcycles, damaged a scooter and overturned a van. A police patrol car responding to an emergency call drove into a barrage of bottles and could not get past the overturned van. A fire-engine that arrived later was similarly attacked.

A huge crowd gathered along Shenton Way to watch. Polytechnic students left their classes for a bird’s-eye view of the mêlée from the balconies and rooftop. At about 2:45 pm, the riot squad arrived in their vans and lobbed tear-gas canisters into the crowd. Then specially trained riot police moved in, captured the rioters, bundled them into police vans and took them across the road to the CID \(Criminal Investigation Department\) building. They were held at the CID quadrangle pending instructions on whether to charge them and refuse bail, or to let them off on bail.

Keng Swee feared that if they were allowed to go they would start a riot between Malays and Chinese when they got home to Geylang Serai and other Malay areas and spread the story of how they had been dismissed. I immediately called the British high commissioner, John Robb, to my office. I asked him to alert the British military commander in case inter-communal riots got out of hand as the Singapore police and army were still nearly all Malays who would sympathise with the rioters. I told him that I intended to go to the CID building to sort out the problem myself. If it was possible to defuse it, I would let them go home, otherwise they might have to be charged and held on remand. In that case some 365 families would miss their sons that night and rumours would spread throughout Singapore of the Malays being oppressed.

John Robb said he would report the matter but was careful to point out that British forces could not interfere in an internal security problem. I said the commander-in-chief or the officer in charge of the British garrison should ensure that British troops were ready to prevent rioters from becoming uncontrollable and turning against the white families, as they had in the religious riot involving a Dutch girl in 1950.

I tested out my approach on Othman Wok, the minister for social affairs, and had him accompany Keng Swee and me to meet the men at the CID. At the quadrangle, speaking to them in Malay through a hand-held battery-powered loudhailer, I said that the major had misunderstood his orders, which were to take on only Singapore citizens. He mistakenly thought this meant no Malays were to be recruited whereas Malays who were Singapore citizens were eligible. Ten of them identified as ringleaders of the riots would be detained and charged by the police, but the rest could go home. They were not to spread rumours when they got home. If any one of those allowed to go home was subsequently identified as a rioter he would also be charged. I added that all those who were Singapore citizens had to report back to camp the following day for normal training. Only citizens were eligible and those who were not had to seek employment in Malaysia. The prospect of jobs brought applause and cheers. I had to make a decision on the spot; the least risky option was to hold and punish a few ringleaders but allow the majority to go home. I hoped they would behave themselves because of the prospect of jobs.

At a press briefing, I asked the reporters to report the matter tactfully, especially in the Malay paper. When I read the newspapers the next morning, I heaved a sigh of relief. Fourteen men were charged with rioting but the attorney-general later decided that it was best to withdraw the charges. This was a sharp reminder to the government that we had to deal with matters of race with the utmost sensitivity.

We had another anxious time in November 1967 when Chinese-Malay clashes broke out in Penang and Butterworth, a town on the peninsula opposite Penang island. The racial situation had deteriorated rapidly in Malaysia after Singapore’s separation. Chinese anger and resentment were mounting against their government’s Malay-language policy. It was sufficiently alarming for us to form a ministerial committee, with Goh Keng Swee as chairman and top officials from the police and the army as members, to make contingency plans in case racial riots broke out in peninsular Malaysia and spilled over to Singapore.

Tan Siew Sin, the Malaysian finance minister, had unwisely decided after the British pound was devalued that even for small change there would have to be an adjustment between the old coins issued by the British colonial government, which had been devalued by about 14 per cent, and the new Malaysian coins. This led to sporadic hartals \(stoppage of work in protest\), which in turn led to racial clashes. Chinese from rural areas were moving into the towns and we feared that if widespread racial conflicts broke out, the Malaysian armed forces would have difficulty dealing with trouble in many towns.

Concern that these riots could involve Singapore forced us to build up our armour quickly. In January 1968 we decided to buy French-made AMX-13 light tanks that the Israelis were selling at discounted prices because they were upgrading their armour. Thirty refurbished tanks arrived by June 1969 and another 42 in September 1969. We also bought 170 four-wheeled V200 armoured vehicles.



The British had made no offer to help us build an army as they had done with the Malayans in the 1950s. They had worked behind the scenes to get a fair deal for Singapore in Malaysia and incurred the displeasure of the Malaysians. Now they had to deal with a Malaysia more than a little unhappy with them. And because the Malaysians had sponsored us for membership both to the Commonwealth and the United Nations, the British must have guessed that the Malaysians would also want to be our military instructors, if for no other reason than to make sure we were not taught more than they knew about defence.

We had to get back our two regiments and restore their Singapore identity to ensure their loyalty. Goh Keng Swee, then finance minister, had offered to be defence minister immediately at independence. He was willing to build an army from scratch, although all he knew of military matters was learnt as a corporal in the British-led Singapore Volunteer Corps until it surrendered in February 1942. I told him to get going. Keng Swee contacted Mordecai Kidron, the Israeli ambassador in Bangkok, for help. A few days after separation on 9 August, Kidron flew in from Bangkok to offer assistance in military training, and Keng Swee brought him to see me. Kidron had approached me several times in 1962–63 to ask for an Israeli consulate in Singapore. He had assured me the Tunku had agreed and that we need not wait until Malaysia was established. I replied that if the Tunku had agreed, there should be no trouble in setting it up after Malaysia was formed, but if I did so before that, I would create an issue that would excite the Malay Muslim grassroots and upset my plans for merger. He was disappointed. As I had expected, when Malaysia came about, the Tunku could not and did not allow an Israeli consulate.

I listened to Kidron’s proposal on military training but told Keng Swee to put them on hold until Lal Bahadur Shastri, the prime minister of India, and President Nasser of Egypt replied to my letters seeking their urgent help to build up our armed forces.

I had written to Shastri for a military adviser to help us build up five battalions. Two days later, Shastri replied sending “sincere good wishes for the happiness and prosperity of the people of Singapore” but did not mention my request. Nasser, in his reply, extended recognition to Singapore as an independent and sovereign state, but he too did not refer to my request for a naval adviser to build up our coastal defence. I had half expected the Indian government might not want to take sides against Malaysia. India was after all a relatively close neighbour in Asia. But I was disappointed when Nasser, a good friend, opted out. Perhaps it was a case of Muslim solidarity with Malaysia’s Muslim leaders.

I told Keng Swee to proceed with the Israelis, but to keep it from becoming public knowledge for as long as possible so as not to provoke grassroots antipathy from Malay Muslims in Malaysia and Singapore. A small group of Israelis led by Colonel Jak Ellazari arrived in November 1965, followed by a team of six in December. To disguise their presence, we called them “Mexicans”. They looked swarthy enough.

We had to have a credible force to protect ourselves. I had no fear of the Tunku changing his mind but other powerful Malay leaders, like Syed Ja’afar Albar who so strongly opposed separation that he had resigned as secretary-general of UMNO, might persuade Brigadier Alsagoff it was his patriotic duty to reverse separation. The brigadier with his brigade based in Singapore could have captured me and all my ministers without difficulty. So we maintained a quiet, non-challenging posture, while Keng Swee as defence minister worked feverishly to build up some defence capability.

We faced another security risk from the racial composition of our army and police. Independent Singapore could not continue the old British practice of having a city three-quarters Chinese policed and guarded by Malay policemen and soldiers. The British had recruited mostly Malays born in Malaya, who traditionally had come to Singapore to enlist. Malays liked soldiering whereas the Chinese shunned it, a historical legacy of the predatory habits of soldiers during the years of rebellions and warlords in China. The question was whether the army and police would be as loyal to a government no longer British or Malay, but one the Malays perceived as Chinese. We had to find some way to induct more Chinese and Indians into the police and armed forces to reflect the population mix.

Shortly after separation, at the request of the Malaysian government, we had sent the 2nd battalion SIR to Sabah for Confrontation duties. We wanted to demonstrate our good faith and solidarity with Malaysia even though a formal defence treaty had not been concluded. This left their barracks, Camp Temasek, vacant. We then agreed to a Malaysian proposal that one Malaysian regiment be sent down to Camp Temasek. The 2nd battalion SIR was due to return from its duties in Borneo in February 1966, and arrangements were made at staff level for the Malaysian regiment to withdraw. The Malaysian defence minister requested that instead of reoccupying Camp Temasek, one Singapore battalion should be sent to the Malayan mainland to enable the Malaysian regiment to remain where it was. Keng Swee did not agree. We wanted both our own battalions in Singapore. We believed the Malaysians had changed their minds because they wanted to keep one battalion of Malaysian forces in Singapore to control us.

The Malaysians refused to move out, so the SIR advance party had to live under canvas at Farrer Park. Keng Swee saw me urgently to warn that if our troops were under canvas for too long, with poor facilities for their mess and toilets, there was the risk of a riot or a mutiny. He compared himself to a British general in charge of troops the majority of whom were Italians. The Malaysians could take advantage of this and, through Brigadier Alsagoff, mount a coup. He advised me to move from my home in Oxley Road into the Istana Villa in the Istana domain and to post Gurkha police guards around just in case. For the next few weeks, my family and I stayed there with a company of Gurkhas on standby.

Shortly afterwards, the British vacated a camp called Khatib in the north of Singapore, near Sembawang. We offered it to the Malaysians and they agreed in mid-March 1966 to move out of our camp to Khatib, where they remained for 18 months before withdrawing of their own accord in November 1967.

Their unreasonableness only made us more determined to build up the Singapore Armed Forces \(SAF\) so that they could not intimidate us in this way. It stiffened our resolve and made us dig our heels in.

Keng Swee, ever the intrepid fighter, had written in his paper to Defco \(Defence Council\):

“It is foolish to allow ourselves to be hypnotised by the disparity in the population ratios between Singapore and her neighbours. What counts is the fighting strength of the armed forces, not the size of populations. … After five years of conscription we can field an army of 150,000 by mobilising those on the reserve service. By using older persons and women for non-combatant duties we should eventually be able to field an army with a combat strength of 250,000 consisting of men between the ages of 18 and 35. The war-making potential of a small, vigorous, well-educated and highly motivated population should never be underestimated.”

This was an ambitious plan based on the Israeli practice of mobilising the maximum number possible in the shortest time possible. We thought it important for people in and outside Singapore to know that despite our small population, we could mobilise a large fighting force at short notice.

Ours was no easy task. We had to reorientate people’s minds to accept the need for a people’s army and overcome their traditional dislike for soldiering. Every Chinese parent knew the saying *hao han bu dang bing, hao tie bu da ding* \(a good lad does not become a soldier, good steel does not become nails\). We set up national cadet corps and national police cadet corps in all secondary schools so that parents would identify the army and police with their sons and daughters. We wanted the people to regard our soldiers as their protectors – a reversal from the days when army and police uniforms aroused fear and resentment as symbols of colonial coercion.

People must admire military valour. As Keng Swee said in sorrow, “The Spartan approach to life does not come about naturally in a community that lives by buying and selling.” I had to get people to change their attitudes. We also had to improve the physical condition of our young by getting them to participate in sports and physical activity of all kinds, and to develop a taste for adventure and strenuous, thrilling activities that were not without danger to themselves. Persuasion alone was not enough. We needed institutions, well-organised, well-staffed and well-directed, to follow up the exhortations and stirring speeches. The prime responsibility was that of the ministry of education. Only if we changed people’s thinking and attitudes could we raise a large citizen army like Switzerland’s or Israel’s. We gave ourselves a decade to accomplish this.

On the first anniversary of independence we mustered what little we had to boost our people’s morale. We had organised the People’s Defence Force \(PDF\) under the leadership of a motley collection of civil servants, MPs and ministers who had been put through a crash officer-training course. The soldiers were civilians, mostly Chinese-educated, recruited through the community centres. Several PDF platoons marched on our first National Day celebrations, 9 August 1966. They put up a brave show and were cheered enthusiastically by those behind the saluting dais and by the crowds lining the streets as they recognised their suntanned ministers and MPs in uniform, eager in their stride if lacking in martial bearing.

Our community leaders representing all races took part in the parade bearing banners or slogans. Chinese, Indian, Malay and British business leaders joined the contingent that marched past the president in front of City Hall. They were lustily cheered. There were units from the trade unions, the PAP and the statutory boards. The police and fire brigade were brought in to add to the uniforms on display. The Malaysians might not have been in awe of our military capability, but they could not but be impressed by the determination and the spirit with which we were building up our defence forces to protect our fledgling state.

Keng Swee’s original plan was to build up a regular army of 12 battalions between 1966 and 1969. Disagreeing with this plan, I proposed a small standing army plus the capacity to mobilise the whole civilian population who should be trained and put into reserves. Keng Swee argued that we had first to train a good number of regular and non-commissioned officers in his 12 battalions before we could train civilians on such a large scale.

I did not want money spent on the recurrent costs of a large army: it was better spent on the infrastructure we needed to raise and train national service battalions. National service would bring political and social benefits. Keng Swee took the professional military view that an immediate threat from Malaysia had to be countered by a solid regular fighting force raised in the next three years. I said the Malaysians were unlikely to attack us while British and Commonwealth forces were in Singapore. Their presence would be a deterrent even without a defence treaty. I wanted the defence plan to aim at mobilising as large a part of the population as possible, in order to galvanise the people in their own defence while they had this strong feeling of patriotism as a result of their recent experiences.

A revised plan Keng Swee put up in November 1966 would mobilise a large section of the population and keep the regular component of the armed forces at 12 battalions. I was keen to have our women do national service as Israeli women did, because that would reinforce the people’s will to defend themselves. But Keng Swee did not want his new ministry to carry this extra burden. As the other ministers in Defco were also not anxious to draft our women, I did not press my point.

The best deterrent to any Malaysian plan to regain control over Singapore was their knowledge that even if they could subdue our armed forces, they would have to keep down a whole people well trained in the use of arms and explosives. Besides integrating the people into a more united community through equal treatment of recruits regardless of their social background or race, we needed to attract and retain some of the best talents in the highest echelons of the SAF. Most important of all, we had to ensure that the SAF remained subordinate to the political leadership by keeping important functions such as manpower and finance under civilian officers in the defence ministry. Defco endorsed all these objectives.

In February 1967 I tabled legislation to amend the National Service Ordinance which had been passed by the British in 1952. Those who enlisted in the SAF as a full-time career would be guaranteed jobs in the government, statutory boards or private sector when they left full-time service to go into the reserves. There was full public support when the bill was passed a month later. I recalled the first call-up in 1954 under this same ordinance and the riots by Chinese middle-school students. This time we had no problems getting 9,000 young men registered in the first batch. I was right about the changed public attitude.

Meanwhile Keng Swee assembled a team and, with Israeli help, started the build-up. He made use of police personnel, communications equipment and other assets to kick-start the process. The assistant commissioner for police, Tan Teck Khim, became director \(general staff\).

We began training a select group in August 1967, the top 10 per cent of the batch registered. To counter the traditional prejudice against soldiery, we held send-off ceremonies for the recruits from community centres in every constituency. MPs, ministers and community leaders would attend and make short speeches before the recruits mounted the military trucks that took them to basic training camps. Over the years, we gradually broke down the resistance to soldiering.

It was a crash programme with everybody on crash courses. There was much confusion. Arrangements were never 100 per cent prepared and crisis management was the order of the day, but it was an urgent and crucial task that had to be accomplished in the shortest possible time. We had to achieve it with men of little experience and unexceptional ability. But the *esprit de corps* was excellent and they made progress.



While we made haste in the build-up we had another uneasy period in October 1968, after two Indonesian commandos were hanged for killing three Singapore citizens when they exploded a bomb at the Hongkong & Shanghai Bank in Orchard Road in 1964. When their appeals were dismissed by the Privy Council in London, Indonesian President Suharto sent his close aide, a brigadier general, to petition our president for clemency, and to commute the death sentence to imprisonment.

The cabinet had met earlier to decide what advice to give the president. We had already released 43 Indonesians detained for offences committed during Confrontation. In response to Indonesian pleas we had also released two Indonesians convicted and sentenced to death for carrying a time bomb in Singapore. But these persons had been arrested before they could do harm, unlike the other case, where three civilians had been killed. We were small and weak. If we yielded, then the rule of law not only within Singapore but between our neighbours and Singapore would become meaningless as we would always be open to pressure. If we were afraid to enforce the law while British forces were still in Singapore, even though they had announced that they would be withdrawing by 1971, then our neighbours, whether Indonesia or Malaysia, could walk over us with impunity after 1971. So we decided not to abort the due process of law by acceding to the petition. The two men were hanged on 17 October. I was in Tokyo then on an official visit. Some 20–30 Indonesians gathered near the Geihinkan \(the Japanese government guesthouse\) carrying placards and banners in protest when I drove by.

In Jakarta, an Indonesian crowd rampaged through the Singapore embassy, shattering pictures of the president of Singapore and generally wreaking havoc, but did not burn the embassy as they had done to the British. Our ambassador, P.S. Raman, formerly the director of Radio & Television Singapore, was a stout-hearted Tamil Brahmin and a Christian convert. He and his staff held themselves up with the same aplomb and defiance as Andrew Gilchrist, the British ambassador, had done when Indonesians rampaged through the British embassy in 1963. But unlike Gilchrist, the Singapore embassy staff did not have a bagpiper to add panache to a display of sang-froid.

The next day, ABRI, the Indonesian armed forces, announced that they would hold manoeuvres in their territorial waters off the Riau islands close to Singapore. The Indonesian marine commander said that he would personally lead a task force to invade Singapore. A thousand student demonstrators called on the commander of the Indonesian East Java forces to take revenge against Singapore. The press reported that the Indonesian army believed communist China had pressured Singapore to hang the two men. A week later, the Indonesian government announced a curtailment of trade with Singapore, imposing restrictions on exports. Our intelligence assessed that while there would be no open aggression, sabotage was probable. In the event none took place.

It was a more serious crisis when a tense racial situation enveloped Singapore following bloody race riots in Kuala Lumpur on 13 May 1969, a few days after their general election. It spread alarm among both Chinese and Malays in Singapore; everyone feared that the racial clashes would spill into Singapore, and they did. Malaysian Chinese who had fled to Singapore recounted stories of brutalities inflicted on their relatives there. As news spread of Malay atrocities and the bias of the Malaysian armed forces in dealing with the situation, anger and alarm rose in Singapore.

Taking advantage of their greater numbers in Singapore, the Chinese took revenge for what had happened in Kuala Lumpur. On 19 May, 20–30 Chinese youths assaulted several Malays in a Malay area near Sultan Mosque at Sultan Gate. When I returned to Singapore from America on 20 May, I was told that a Malay had been shot and killed by a group of thugs not very far from Raffles Institution. The clashes went on intermittently for several weeks.

On 1 June I visited the Malay settlement at Geylang Serai, the site of serious race clashes. Lim Kim San as minister of defence accompanied me in a Land Rover driven by a Malay policeman, with the police superintendent for the area sitting beside the driver. Both Kim San and I immediately noticed the sullen, unfriendly looks of our SIR Malay soldiers deployed on the ground. Even the police superintendent, a Malay officer I had known personally for several years, looked sour. I felt strongly that something was amiss. I sensed that the Malays were terrified. The situation was different from the 1964 race riots when the police and army, largely Malays, were controlled by Malay leaders in Kuala Lumpur, and had been especially protective of the Malays and punitive towards the Chinese. This time the Malays in Singapore were fearful. Although the police were still largely Malay, Singapore’s Chinese leaders who were now in charge of the government might be against them and direct the police and army accordingly. I was determined to make it clear to all, in particular the Chinese, now the majority, that the government would enforce the law impartially regardless of race or religion.

Because of strong police action, 684 Chinese and 349 Malays were arrested but there was not enough evidence to proceed against all. Only 36 persons were charged in court, 18 Chinese and 18 Malays. The most serious charge was against a Chinese for attempted murder. He was found guilty and sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. One Chinese and 3 Malays had been killed, 11 Chinese and 49 Malays injured.

We were shocked to find how race relations in Singapore had become so polarised. Even Malays who had served in our police and armed forces for many years had become very race-conscious, easily swayed by racial pulls during the race riots in Malaysia.

I wanted to be sure that the police and army were not weakened by communal pulls. I also wanted an explanation why so many Malay soldiers were deployed in Geylang Serai where a Chinese minority would have been more reassured by a mixed-race force. I decided we had to review the racial mix of new recruits into the SAF.

Kim San looked into this and found that in spite of the 1966 incident at the Shenton Way army training depot, we had over-recruited Malays into the SAF. George Bogaars, then permanent secretary of the defence ministry and one of our most trusted officers, had been director of Special Branch where he learnt to distrust the Chinese-educated because nearly all communists were Chinese-educated. He preferred Malays when recruiting non-commissioned officers and warrant-officers for the SAF to train our national servicemen, believing the Chinese-educated were prone to Chinese chauvinism and communism. This bias had to be redressed, a sensitive task which we entrusted to a team headed by Bogaars. A young lieutenant-colonel, Edward Yong, implemented a plan that over several years reduced the proportion of Malays, mainly by recruiting more non-Malays.



I had invited the five-power Commonwealth defence ministers \(Malaysia, Britain, Australia, New Zealand\) to attend our celebrations for the 150th anniversary of the founding of Singapore. Razak, representing Malaysia, attended our National Day parade on 9 August 1969. Kim San arranged for a squadron of AMX-13 tanks and V200 armoured vehicles to roll past in the parade. It had a dramatic effect on the people in Johor when they saw it on television that night, and elsewhere in Malaysia the following day in their newspapers which carried photos of the tanks. The Malaysians had no tanks then. At my dinner that night, Razak told Keng Swee that many people in Malaysia were concerned over our armour, but he himself was not. He said there was anxiety in Johor whether Singapore intended to invade the state and suggested that Kim San as defence minister should go to Kuala Lumpur to convince people that Singapore’s intentions towards Malaysia were not hostile. Keng Swee’s note to Defco concluded, “One bright spot in this whole melancholy episode \[the race riots in Kuala Lumpur\] is the salutary effect our armour has had on the Malay political base.”

It was as well that we had decided to buy tanks and armoured vehicles. The 13 May 1969 race riots in Kuala Lumpur polarised race relations in Malaysia, resurrecting my fear that with Tun Abdul Razak now in charge and the Malay Ultras on the ascendant, the Tunku could be shunted aside, and the Ultra leaders could decide to send the army marching down to take Singapore back into the Federation forcibly. I asked Yong Pung How \(my friend from Cambridge days then living in Kuala Lumpur, later chief justice of Singapore\) when he visited Singapore what the Malaysian public’s perception of the SAF was. He said that in 1966, people thought it was all a joke. But this was no longer the case. Word had passed round the cocktail circuit in Kuala Lumpur that the Singapore Armed Forces Training Institute \(SAFTI\) trained good soldiers and British high commission officials had confirmed this.

By 1971, we had 17 national service battalions \(16,000 men\), with 14 battalions \(11,000 men\) in the reserves. We had infantry and commando units, artillery units with mortars, a battalion each of tanks, armoured personnel carriers, field engineers, signals, field maintenance, field hospital and field supply, and a heavy transport company. We had established schools for basic military training and officer cadets, the artillery, engineers, bomb disposal units and naval training. Our air force had a squadron each of Hunters, Strikemaster trainer aircraft, Alouette helicopters and transport aircraft.

Until we could achieve a credible defence capability in the 1970s, we had to rely on the British military presence. We had hoped they would stay on for 5 to 10 years, to provide a shield behind which we could build up our own forces. But the British announced their withdrawal in January 1968. This forced us to try to build up one fighter squadron and a small navy capable of coastal defence against infiltrators before the British left in 1971. These modest objectives drew down considerable resources from our strapped economy with limited trained manpower. We sent our first batch of six trainee pilots to Britain for training in August 1968, seven months after the withdrawal announcement. By September 1970, we had one squadron of 16 fighter planes \(Hawker Hunters\) operational in Singapore.

The Israelis helped us plan our naval build-up and the New Zealanders trained our sailors for our fast patrol boats. Two squadrons of three boats each were operational in less than two years. Then we progressed to missile gunboats.

While the Israelis were competent, not only in transmitting military skills but also in imparting the doctrines upon which they based their training, their methods were the exact opposite of the British who had built 1 and 2 SIR in a gradual step-by-step approach, training the officer corps from platoon commanders to company commanders and finally, after 15 or 20 years, to battalion commanders and lieutenant-colonels. The Israelis insisted from the very start that our officers learn from them and take over as instructors as soon as possible. Unlike the Americans who, under President Kennedy, sent about 3,000 to 6,000 men in the first batch of “advisers” to help Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem build up the South Vietnamese army, the Israelis sent us only 18 officers. Every job they did was understudied by a Singaporean counterpart, from platoon commanders to company commander, up to director \(general staff\). We coopted police officers and former Singapore Volunteer Corps officers from British days, those with some military or paramilitary experience. Some were government servants, others were from the private sector. We offered them full-time appointments. The British army placed great store on spit and polish and square bashing to *inculcate discipline* and obedience to orders from superiors. The Israelis emphasised military skills and high motivation. Smartness on parade and military tattoo the SAF never learnt from the “Mexicans”. Whatever smartness the SAF had came from British officers in charge of 1 and 2 SIR in their early years.

Once the Israeli officers led by Ellazari had started work and he had us hooked, Kidron demanded a quid pro quo, that Singapore recognise Israel officially and exchange ambassadors. He was persistent in pressing for this. I told Keng Swee that this was a non-starter. We would anger the Malay Muslims in Singapore and Malaysia whose sympathies were with their Muslim brothers, the Palestinians and the Arabs. We could not agree to do this even if the Israelis decided to withdraw. When they knew that it was a non-starter, Tel Aviv sent a message that they understood our position and they would be helpful, but that they hoped we would eventually allow them an embassy in Singapore.

When the Arab-Israeli Six-Day War broke out in June 1967, we were relieved the Israelis were not defeated or our SAF would have lost confidence in their Israeli instructors. When the UN General Assembly was debating the resolution to condemn Israel, Rajaratnam, our foreign minister and an Afro-Asian champion, was all for it. Keng Swee saw me to press Raja to direct our UN delegate not to vote in favour of the resolution or the Israelis would leave.

As I could not attend the cabinet meeting, I stated my position in a note. We had to stand up for the right of small nations to exist. Freedom of navigation of all international highways, like the Straits of Tiran and the Straits of Malacca, was vital and the UN should play a role in preserving peace or resolving the problem after hostilities. I added that I did not believe the Israeli advisers would leave even if we were to vote for the Afro-Asian resolution. I was in favour of abstaining in the vote. The cabinet agreed with my view. We abstained and the Israelis did not leave. However, now that the Israeli presence in Singapore was well-known, we allowed them a diplomatic mission. They wanted an embassy. We decided to allow them a trade representative office first, in October 1968. The following May, after Malay Muslims in Singapore and the region had become accustomed to an Israeli presence, we allowed them to upgrade it to an embassy.



Our reservists had to be ever ready for combat. We changed their title in January 1994 from “reservists” to “operationally ready NS men” to emphasise their combat readiness. For a few weeks each year, they do in-camp training in their same units to build up camaraderie. Once every few years, they are sent to Taiwan, Thailand, Brunei or Australia for brigade-level field exercises or battalion-level live firing exercises. Annual in-camp training is taken seriously by everyone, including employers who have to lose the services of their executives and men for a few weeks each year.

To be effective, the SAF has to mobilise and involve the whole society in defence activities. So school principals, teachers, parents, employers and community leaders are brought into a supporting network under a concept called “Total Defence”. This keeps morale high.

National service has had a profound impact on Singapore society over the last 30 years. It has become a rite of passage for our young men and a part of our way of life that has helped to unify our people. They learn to live and work closely with each other, regardless of race, language or religion. Food taboos of Muslims and Hindus are respected, as are all religious rites, from Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim, Sikh to Christian and Zoroastrian. Whether your father is a minister, banker, professional, labourer, taxi-driver or hawker, your military standing depends on your performance.



To have both brains and brawn, Keng Swee and I started to induct some of our ablest students into the SAF in 1971. We selected some of the best officer cadets each year for SAF overseas scholarships to study at Oxbridge and other universities in Britain where they did a full academic course in the humanities, sciences, engineering or the professions. During their student years they received full pay as lieutenants, besides a scholarship that paid for all fees, board and lodging and other needs abroad. They had to sign a bond to serve for eight years after graduation. But within that period, they would be sent to America or Britain on two, often three courses: first, specialist training whether in artillery, armour or signals; in mid-career, staff and command in America or Britain; and finally a course in public or business administration at a top American university such as Harvard or Stanford.

At the end of eight years, they could opt to stay in the SAF, transfer to the public service as administrative officers, the top grade of civil servants, join a statutory board, or leave for the private sector. They would do their annual national service training of two to three weeks. Through this scheme, which I proposed and Keng Swee refined, we recruited some of our best students into the SAF. Without a yearly intake of about ten of our best students, the SAF would have the military hardware but without the brain power to use them to best advantage.

The quality of the early batches was reassuring. By 1995 four former SAF scholars, having risen to senior positions, entered politics and later became cabinet ministers: my son, Brigadier General Lee Hsien Loong, Brigadier General George Yeo, Lieutenant-Colonel Lim Hng Kiang and Rear-Admiral Teo Chee Hean.



Singapore’s limited size was a severe constraint. As our build-up expanded, we needed training areas overseas to deploy a brigade, and later a division. I made a breakthrough in 1975 when President Chiang Ching-kuo allowed our infantry, armour and artillery to train in Taiwan. We also held combined arms exercises in Taiwan with Siegfried Schulz, a retired general of the Federal Republic of Germany, who accompanied our senior officers on “staff rides” to teach them the finer points of field manoeuvres.

President Marcos and the US Defence Department allowed the Republic of Singapore Air Force to use US training facilities at Clark Air Base in the late 1970s. When the Americans left Clark in the 1990s, we moved our training to a US Air Force base in Arizona and to Australia. We had to find unconventional solutions to our problems.

A country’s defence capability has to be continually upgraded as new technology, especially information technology, is incorporated into weapon systems. This requires a sound economy that can afford to pay for new weaponry and a highly educated and trained people who can integrate the various arms into one system and operate them efficiently and effectively.

A credible defence capability helps to lower the risk of rash political acts. Whenever they were displeased with us Malaysian leaders regularly uttered threats in the press to cut off our water supply.

In 1990, when I stepped down as prime minister, *Military Technology*, an international defence journal, wrote, “In 1965, when Singapore became an independent nation, it had virtually nothing in the way of armed forces to defend itself. By 1990, the Singapore Armed Forces \(SAF\) had grown into a respected and professional force operating modern defence systems that was capable of defending the territorial integrity and independence of the state.” Since then, the SAF’s capability and readiness have continued to be rated highly by defence journals including *Jane*’s and *Asia Pacific Defence Reporter*.

Such an outcome was far from my thoughts in April 1966 when I flew to London hoping for assurance from Prime Minister Harold Wilson that British forces would remain in Singapore for some years.




