+++
title = "03 Britain Pulls Out"

+++



Denis Healey laughed when Keng Swee and I asked him in October 1966 to sell us a squadron of Hawker Hunter fighter aircraft. He wagged his finger at us and asked what we were up to; British forces would look after us. We left London reassured that the RAF would stay in Singapore.

We badly needed the confidence British forces generated. If they were to leave suddenly before we had any capacity to defend ourselves, I did not think we could survive. Their presence gave people a sense of security, without which we would not get investments and be able to export our goods and services. That was the only way we could create enough jobs to absorb our school leavers and prevent massive unemployment. In January that year I had met Harold Wilson, the British prime minister, at an emergency Commonwealth prime ministers’ conference in Lagos on Rhodesia’s unilateral declaration of independence. In between meetings, we discussed the future of British forces in Singapore. He told me that he might have to take away 25,000 of the 50,000 troops guarding Malaysia. Although he said no decision had yet been taken, my impression was that he was moving towards troop reduction.

To get a better understanding of British intentions, I visited London in April 1966 to discuss their defence planning. It was disturbing to discover a growing lobby for withdrawal from east of Suez, both in the Labour and Conservative parties and among their top leader writers and commentators. Healey \(corroborated by British pressmen\) said that there were strong advocates in the cabinet for a quick phased withdrawal, with George Brown, No. 2 to Wilson, leading the group. Paul Johnson, the *New Statesman* editor, went so far as to name the year, 1968. This point of view would easily win support from the Labour Party and Labour MPs. Iain MacLeod, a former Conservative minister and now the shadow minister for finance and economic affairs, told me that there were many “Europeans” \(those favouring integration with Europe\) in his party who were keen on withdrawal.

Wilson, I felt, was committed, at least over this term of office, to carry on with Singapore and Malaysia, and there must have been a quid pro quo from the Americans for Britain to stay. Friendly ambassadors told me that the Americans were helping the British to support the value of the pound sterling, on condition that the British continued to maintain their presence east of Suez. The Americans had good reason to want the British to stay. By January 1966, their forces in South Vietnam had reached 150,000, and the US Air Force was bombing selected targets in North Vietnam. Later George Brown confirmed to me that the “quid” was US support for the British pound sterling, then overvalued and under pressure.

Denis Healey, the defence secretary, was the most important leader I had to meet after Wilson. I liked him personally. He had a powerful intellect, like a computer which kept on putting out new solutions as more data was fed in, ready to abandon fundamental positions taken earlier. His supple mind and facility with words made him a congenial dinner companion, full of interesting and useful gossip about people I wanted to know more about. But he could be biting in his assessments. He once said of a Commonwealth prime minister, pointing to both sides of his forehead, “He is wood from here to here.”

From him I had a good run-down of the position of the Labour ministers. He believed it was possible but difficult for the British government to maintain their military presence in the Far East into the 1970s. In the cabinet, most ministers favoured a phased withdrawal within the next five years; only Harold Wilson, Michael Stewart and Healey himself – “a formidable combination” – were keen on keeping British forces east of Suez in the next decade. I was reassured for I had met Michael Stewart, the foreign secretary, and found him a steady, dependable man.

Healey said there was a strong body of opinion in the Labour Party that wanted complete withdrawal of British forces from their overseas commitments, believing these forces in the Far East to be less an instrument for the maintenance of peace and security, and more a cat’spaw in the squabbles of regional governments. He warned that Britain’s military policy on the Far East might well change in the life of the present government. This uncertainty over the duration of their military presence was a constant worry. Keng Swee and I agreed that whatever the British finally decided, we had to build up a visible defence capability as soon as possible, to make it apparent to our people and our neighbours that we were not defenceless.

The day before my departure, on Monday, 25 April, I had a final meeting with Harold Wilson. He asked about the contribution of British bases to the economy of Singapore. I assessed it at about 20 per cent of the gross domestic product \(GDP\). A run-down of the bases would result in the repatriation of appreciable numbers of Malaysians and Indians. This would be a dislocation of the economy, but I feared most the effect on the morale of our people. It had taken immense effort to get them “off the fence” and to convince them that communism was not the inexorable wave of the future. The withdrawal of British troops and the closure of the bases would lead to a serious erosion of morale. People could be resigned to the inevitability of China’s might.

I concluded that Wilson and his government could not do much to help Singapore settle its defence and economic treaty with Malaysia. Their influence had declined, especially with the easing of Confrontation by Indonesia. The visit was as satisfactory as I could have hoped. All the British leaders, particularly Wilson and Healey, stressed that they were badly shaken by the separation, that we should not have taken so drastic a step without consulting them, and at a time when they were defending us against Indonesia’s Confrontation. There was a great deal of heart searching then as to whether they should stay on in Southeast Asia. They underlined it to emphasise the gravity of the situation. For the immediate future, I was reassured that Singapore had friends in the Labour government and in the opposition Conservative Party leadership. It would give us a few years – time, I hoped, to get some defence forces built up, revive our economy, resume trade with Indonesia and, most important of all, get investments in industry.

Wilson showed friendliness in every way during the week I spent in London that April. He had given me lunch at 10 Downing Street with key cabinet ministers and Opposition House of Lords leader, Peter Carrington, and their wives present. In an impromptu speech, he spoke in the warmest terms. In reply I thanked him for his friendship and support.

Soon after I left London, Wilson came under pressure from his Labour Party to cut back on overseas defence commitments. At a Parliamentary Labour Party meeting in June 1966 he had to appeal to their socialist sentiments:

“Frankly if we had only ourselves to think of, we would be glad to leave Singapore as quickly as possible. We cannot, however, say, as we do in Aden, that we are not wanted by the local government and local population. Lee Kuan Yew, as good a left-wing and democratic socialist as any in this room, certainly wants us to stay there. Let us remember in the political battles of Southeast Asia and in his own electoral struggles he has shown tremendous courage in fighting communism in an area the communists would dearly like to control.

“The government of Singapore, as we understand it, is the only democratic socialist government, as we understand the phrase, in Southeast Asia.

“His social record, in his housing programme for example, defies challenge in anything that has been done in the most advanced social democratic communities.”

After London, I attended a Socialist International conference in Stockholm to keep in touch with British and European socialist party leaders. There I met George Brown over lunch. He spoke in frank and blunt terms; he wanted to pull out from Southeast Asia, the sooner the better. He admitted that he was in a minority, but he intended to persist. Brown said Wilson and Healey had a warm regard for me and the Singapore government, but he was fed up that this was made an excuse for British policy east of Suez. He had wanted to include a firm declaration to pull out in a defence review published in October 1965, but had been outvoted. I argued that if Britain had pulled out, the Americans would not have backed sterling. Then the pound would have been devalued and Labour would have lost the second election. He muttered resentfully that the Lyndon Johnson-Harold Wilson agreement would do Britain no good in the long run.

In July 1966 Healey visited Singapore and told me that troop levels in Singapore and Malaysia would be cut to the position it would have been if there were no Confrontation. He had been to Kuala Lumpur. With a straight face, he said he had told the press that there was no anti-British feeling there and no reason other than Britain’s economic difficulties had prevented aid to Malaysia. He winked and said the Malaysians had learnt that what he called their “Hate Britain Month” had caused a bad impression and was counterproductive. \(The Malaysian leaders had reacted angrily to criticism in the British media of their race and language policies and they had gone sour over the British.\) By the time he arrived, it was “Love Britain Month”.

He was jovial, full of bonhomie, and reassuring. There were times when I felt that the British would be able to stay for a decade, into the 1970s. At other moments, I feared that time was fast running out on Wilson and Healey. The mood among British Labour MPs was strongly in favour of cutting defence spending overseas to concentrate resources on Britain itself.

Healey made a second visit to Singapore on 22 April 1967. He made clear that Britain would be out of mainland Asia by the late 1970s. I urged that confidence in the general security of the area be maintained and that there should be no sudden changes.

Healey explained that the decision to pull out had been taken for economic, not military, reasons and was therefore unlikely to be changed. There was no other way of resolving Britain’s financial problem. There was also fear of Britain becoming involved in a “Vietnam” war. The British were aghast at the blood-letting in Vietnam.

At another meeting, two days later, he tried to soften the blow by talking of significant aid to Singapore; after all, he was talking about cuts, not total withdrawal. He realised the significance of the confidence factor and would try to persuade his colleagues on this. But he had to make long-term plans for British defence and it was not possible to do that bit by bit. He asked about our plans for the naval dockyard. I told him of our intention to have Swan & Hunter \(a British firm of shipbuilders\) take over and “civilianise” it and that I had already persuaded them to take over our civilian Keppel dockyard, to familiarise themselves with our conditions.

Both Harold Holt, the prime minister of Australia, and Keith Holyoake, the prime minister of New Zealand, had cabled to warn me that heavy reductions in British forces were under consideration and that this would lead to disengagement and dismantlement of the existing framework of Commonwealth defence arrangements.

Among the British military commanders in Singapore there was no expectation of a precipitate withdrawal. In May, a month after Healey’s visit, Keng Swee and I had a working dinner with Sir Michael Carver, British commander-in-chief Far East. Carver was most reassuring. He said the principal role of Singapore’s defence forces should be the prevention of a coup from within or from the outside. In the event of sustained hostilities we would have to depend on allies. His attitude assured me that he expected British forces to stay in Singapore for some time.

In case Carver’s political masters were thinking otherwise or were under pressure to do the unthinkable, I wrote to Harold Wilson on 26 May that any talk about “significant aid” had ominous implications. The danger of economic dislocation was secondary compared to the grave danger of damaged confidence when it became known that the British had decided to move out by the mid-70s. Wilson sent a comforting reply and then invited me to London for preliminary talks.

When Keng Swee and I met Healey in June 1967, he gave a detailed list of the force reductions up to 31 March 1968 and the run-down from 1968 to 1971. After 1971, Britain would have an amphibious force in Southeast Asia, a sort of “policeman on the beat”.

Discussions on the economic implications were handled by Keng Swee. Like me, he was more worried over the security than the economic implications of a run-down of British forces. We both felt that we could somehow manage the economic run-down if we had security, and confidence was not shaken. I asked an official from the ministry of overseas development who had dealt with problems related to the run-down of British forces in Malta whether abandoned airfields could be put to civilian use. In British experience, he said, abandoned airfields were either reverted to agriculture or in a few instances made available for light industry. I did not think agriculture or light industry at all promising for Singapore and asked that our Economic Development Board be given early access to the three British airfields, Tengah, Seletar and Changi, to decide how we could use them later.

British military regulations required them to destroy surplus military equipment, but Healey agreed to revise the regulations so that such equipment could be handed over to Singapore for training and other uses. He and his team bent over backwards to help. These two meetings were a great relief. We felt confident we could sort out our problems by the mid-70s. I could not have asked for more. Swan & Hunter had confirmed that the prospects for the naval dockyard at Sembawang were very good, and a committee comprising the Navy Department, Swan & Hunter and the Singapore government could plan its conversion to commercial use.

In a private discussion on 26 June 1967, Wilson promised that this would be the last defence review for the present Parliament. Healey separately also promised there would be no further defence reviews. My impression was that Wilson, even more than Healey, wanted to keep open Britain’s options east of Suez. What he wanted of me in London was not so much to argue the merits of staying east of Suez but to work on Labour backbenchers and cabinet ministers who were against staying.

I spoke to Labour backbenchers at the House of Commons later that afternoon. The Afro-Asian scene had changed rapidly, I said. Nehru was dead, Sukarno was discredited and Mao was involved in the madness of the cultural revolution. Half a million American troops were in South Vietnam. The days of the white man’s control of Asia had passed. Instead some Asians insisted upon Asian solutions to Asian problems so that the big Asian countries could settle their problems with the smaller ones. The smaller ones had the right to ask their friends from the West to help redress the balance.

I spent hours talking to Wilson’s ministers. A scheduled half-hour meeting with Jim Callaghan, then chancellor of the exchequer \(whom I had met several times over the previous 15 years\), went on to one and a half hours. From time to time, whenever the division bells rang, he went out to the lobby to vote but asked me to stay. At the end, he said, “I was for naming a date by which Britain should be off but I will think over what you have told me. At the moment I have an open mind.” He asked me to see Roy Jenkins, then home secretary. Roy Jenkins listened to me quietly and said that he would support naming no dates, but that Britain must be off the mainland by 1975.

The minister most opposed to our position was Dick Crossman, then Leader of the House. For one hour, he hectored and berated me for misleading and beguiling his colleagues into staying east of Suez. He set out to shock me by being deliberately rude. He wanted Britain to get out quickly, by 1970. He and his group of MPs wanted savings for more old-age pensions, cheaper interest for home loans and more votes. In his frustration he said, “You don’t have to worry about me for I am a minority voice in the cabinet for the time being but I am winning, and more and more the Party is coming around to my point of view.” Our high commissioner, A.P. Rajah, who was present, thought Crossman was letting off steam because my arguments had strengthened the hand of those who wanted to stay.

I believed we were all right this time, but there was no guarantee of no further knocks on the pound, which would lead to another fit of depression in the British cabinet, another defence review and further watering down of their forces. This danger was beyond the control even of the British government. The sad fact was the malaise of the British, and the leadership was not inspiring their people. Both Labour ministers and backbenchers were despondent: they had had to do all the things they had said they did not want to do, including the stop-go economic policy for which they had criticised the Conservative government.

President Lyndon Johnson’s papers showed that he had urged Wilson in Washington in June 1967 “not to take any steps which would be contrary to British or American interest and to the interest of the free nations of Asia”. But Johnson did not push as hard as his aides had urged in their submissions to him before the meeting. Robert McNamara, Johnson’s defence secretary, had written to Johnson as early as December 1965 that America placed a higher value on British presence and commitment in the Far East than in Europe.

The British Defence White Paper published in July 1967 announced their intention to reduce forces in Southeast Asia by 50 per cent by 1970/71 and to withdraw completely by the mid-70s. A dismayed Harold Holt wrote to Wilson and made his views known to me: “We see the UK government as having taken historic decisions to reduce its world role and contract, to a significant degree, from any kind of international responsibility that Britain has carried for many, many years” and that the Australians must now “rethink our whole situation”.

Soon afterwards, Wilson invited me to speak at his Labour Party annual conference in October 1967. I agreed, knowing he wanted me to talk his party into not opposing his staying on in Singapore. I was their main guest speaker, a fraternal delegate at their eve-of-conference rally on Sunday, 1 October, at Scarborough. I expressed the hope that Singapore’s long association with the British over a period of 150 years could allow them to make the disengagement in a way “to give us the best chance of continuing security and stability”, and that given a little time and no little effort, we would live as well in the mid-70s without British base expenditure as we were doing then. I knew the delegates would be preoccupied with Vietnam. Since I could not ignore the subject, I said, “I do not want to sound like a hawk or a dove. If I have to choose a metaphor from the aviary, I would like to think of the owl. Anyone looking at what is happening in Vietnam must have baleful eyes. It need never have been thus. And perhaps it was not the wisest place, nor the safest ground in Asia to have made a stand. But enormous sacrifices have already been expended and in blood, both Vietnamese and American.” For that anti-Vietnam audience this was the furthest I could go to hint that if the Americans pulled out, there would be severe repercussions for the rest of Southeast Asia.



Barely six weeks later, without any warning, on Sunday, 18 November 1967, Keng Swee received a message from Callaghan, as chancellor of the exchequer, similar to one he must have sent to all Commonwealth finance ministers, that the British were devaluing the pound sterling from US$2.80 to US$2.40. That meant we had lost 14.3 per cent of the reserves we kept in London in sterling. Britain’s currency came under selling pressure soon after the Labour government took office in 1964 but we had not moved out our reserves. Their forces were defending us against Indonesian Confrontation, and we did not want to be blamed for precipitating a devaluation. Wilson, in a television broadcast that same Sunday evening, said, “We are now on our own; it means Britain first.” This was ominous. But Healey was reassuring when he said in the House of Commons on 27 November, “I believe that the whole government share my view, that we must, above all, keep faith with our forces and with our allies in making these cuts. We can have no reversal of the July decisions. … That is why my Rt Hon Friend the chancellor \(Callaghan\) said last Monday that the reductions must be made within the framework of the defence policies announced last summer. Let me tell the Rt Hon Gentleman that these cuts mean no acceleration in the run-down or the redeployment of our forces.”

I wrote to thank Healey for his assurance. I was wrong: he could not speak for the government. Wilson, the prime minister, was out to save his government. He meant it when he said it was “Britain first”. Wilson also said “no area of expenditure can be regarded as sacrosanct”. I wrote to Wilson on 18 December to recount how the Singapore government had faithfully supported sterling and lost S$157 million as a result of this devaluation \(the Currency Board S$69 million, the Singapore government S$65 million, statutory boards S$23 million\). My letter ended: “I would be loath to believe that temporary difficulties could disrupt the trust and confidence we have in each other’s good intentions, goodwill and good faith. I shall stand by my statement at Scarborough and on our part we shall see that the last of the British forces will be given a ceremonial send-off when they leave their bases in the mid-70s.”

This was a forlorn hope. In the first major crisis of his government Wilson had no time to save friends and allies, however faithful. Instead of replying, he sent George Thomson, the Commonwealth relations secretary, to see me on 9 January 1968. Thomson was apologetic and defensive. Devaluation, he said, had given the British government a chance once and for all to put the economy right. The defence cuts would mean a fundamental change in the historic role of Britain and its long-term defence structure. The British would remain in Europe, though their capability could be used to help allies outside Europe. I asked about Healey’s statement on an amphibious capability in Singapore. That was to be scrapped. No naval forces would be stationed in Southeast Asia after 1971. Asked how firm the decision to pull out by 1971 was, Thomson said it was very firm but they would take into account the views of their Commonwealth partners. Thomson was gentle and friendly in his demeanour. His sympathies were with us. It was an unpleasant task Wilson had given him. To soften the blow, Wilson invited me for discussions at Chequers, the official country home of the prime minister.

In my frustration and anger at this total disregard for undertakings given solemnly, I said that we too could put Singapore’s interests first and foremost and protect our sterling balances by moving them out of London. Nevertheless I decided to go to London and see Wilson at Chequers.

Wilson changed the venue from Chequers to 10 Downing Street on a Sunday. When I arrived at 5:30 pm, his three senior ministers were present: Denis Healey \(defence\), George Brown \(foreign affairs\) and George Thomson \(Commonwealth relations\). Wilson held out some hope by saying that the cabinet had agreed not to take a final decision until I had met him.

I said any precipitate announcement that all British troops would be off the mainland of Asia by 1971 would shake the confidence of investors, especially those from Hong Kong, and make them go further afield. To restore confidence, Singapore would have to go for massive arms expenditure to make its defence credible. I argued that the British armed services owned valuable real estate in Singapore, homes and barracks worth over £55 million. If the run-down took place over three years, they would not fetch half this price on the open market.

Wilson reiterated what Healey had told me a year earlier in Singapore, that the decision to withdraw was made on economic grounds and could not be altered. The decision on timing, March 1971, was fairly unanimous and his ministers present represented the cabinet view. He was anxious to discuss aid to give real economic relief to Singapore. I replied that security was my main concern, for without it there would be no investments, which we needed much more than aid.

Wilson left the arguments for early withdrawal to Healey while he sat back, sucked at his pipe and looked on sympathetically. From Wilson’s body language, I knew it would be impossible to keep him to his original undertaking to stay till the mid-70s.

The British ministers sympathised with my plight. The most supportive was George Brown. Remembering his strong views when we met in Stockholm in 1966, that British forces should be out of Singapore, I was surprised when he asked how much time I needed. I named 31 March 1973. Years later he told me that US President Johnson had persuaded him that while the Vietnam War continued, America could not replace British forces in the Arabian Gulf and Singapore, and that the British contribution was politically invaluable.

At about 7:00 pm, Roy Jenkins, who had replaced Callaghan as chancellor of the exchequer, joined us. He pitched in on a related subject, that Singapore’s economic position stood out from those of other countries in the region. We were doing well. The position in Britain was quite serious. He compared British and Singapore reserves to show that, per capita, the figure for Britain was smaller than Singapore’s. He criticised the Singapore government for investing its budgetary surplus elsewhere without informing the British government. He was on the offensive. We had never taken any of our reserves out of sterling. But we had not given any undertaking to put our budgetary surpluses into sterling. He had scored a point, that we were not as helpful as we could have been and could not expect special consideration now.

We talked through dinner, repeating arguments again and again as we drank liberal glasses of claret – Jenkins’ favourite wine. We finished at 10:50 pm after five and a half hours. Wilson, summing up, said the British government accepted the need to help maintain confidence in Singapore. But he emphasised that there could be no permanent security for Singapore except in the framework of a wider regional defence agreement with other Commonwealth countries concerned. It was inadvisable for Singapore to make hasty decisions on the purchase of military equipment before the possibility of such an arrangement had been explored in greater detail. His government would do all they reasonably could, consistent with their overriding aim \(total withdrawal by 1971\), to help Singapore maintain security and hoped that the Singapore government would take full account of British advice.

The next day, Monday, 15 January 1968, in the House of Commons, Healey announced that British forces east of Suez would withdraw in 1971, but he shifted the actual date for final withdrawal from March to December 1971. This difference of nine months was significant because a general election would have to be held before December 1971. In other words, the decision on the final date of withdrawal could either be confirmed by a new Labour government or postponed by a Conservative government. I had to be satisfied with this concession. Defence correspondents reporting Healey’s speech noted that he had left this opening. My trip to London had not been altogether in vain.

But Wilson knew this was the end of an era. In the debate he quoted from Kipling’s “Recessional”:

Far-called our navies melt away

On dune and headland sinks the fire

Lo, all our pomp of yesterday

Is one with Nineveh and Tyre.

During those five days in London in January 1968 I worked hard to prolong the British presence. Besides discussions with Wilson, I took my case to Conservative Party leaders, primarily Ted Heath, Reginald Maudling and Iain MacLeod. They were most sympathetic and supportive; if they were the government, they would have wished to stay longer without naming a withdrawal date. That made a difference to the actual final outcome. British television and press gave me extensive coverage. I was able to put across a reasoned, not an angry, case. I tugged at the heartstrings of the British people, that our long and fruitful association should not end in an unseemly way which would damage Singapore’s future. I had put on the best face possible. But Keng Swee, who flew back to Singapore ahead of me, voiced his frustrations to the press at Singapore airport: “The Labour Party has gone back on its word – a disgraceful breach of an undertaking given to us.”

I saw no point in venting my spleen. My other colleagues, including Raja, Chin Chye and Sui Sen, were deeply disappointed and apprehensive of the implications for our security and economy. But they did not berate the British. Angry words would only annoy British ministers and ruffle British service commanders in Singapore who, after all, were loyal Britishers. I needed goodwill and cooperation from the British to execute the withdrawal with the minimum of friction and the maximum of goodwill, and not have military workshops stripped bare as had happened in Guinea \(West Africa\) when the French left in the 1960s.

This sudden turn of events added to the pressure on us. Our economic problems would mount, as would unemployment. Our defence problems had widened with the need for an air force. How were we to build up an air force from scratch and have a squadron of fighter aircraft operational by the end of 1971? When we saw Healey a second time about buying a squadron of Hawker Hunters, he readily agreed. He would also help build up our capability to operate them, a total change from his attitude in October 1966, less than two years earlier, when he had wagged his finger at us for harbouring “mischievous” thoughts.

The British media were sympathetic but on the whole pessimistic about Singapore’s future. Singapore would lose about 20 per cent of its GDP with the end of British military spending, and without British military protection, they saw the future as precarious. The chairman of the Daily Mirror Group, Cecil King, was at my press conference on my return to Singapore from London in January. He told my press secretary, Alex Josey, that his heart went out to me but the situation was hopeless. With high unemployment and no security after the withdrawal of the British, the economy must decline. King was not alone in holding such a pessimistic view of Singapore’s prospects.



To fill the vacuum that followed the ending of the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement \(AMDA\), the British had proposed a Five-Power Defence Arrangement \(FPDA\) that would be consultative, not a binding defence obligation. I knew the Australians were fearful that the Indonesians would have the wrong impression, that the five powers – the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore – were ganging up against Indonesia. In February 1968 Paul Hasluck, Australia’s external affairs minister, when in Singapore, had told me that Australia would maintain its force levels till the end of 1971, after which his government was uncertain. In other words, the Australian forces could leave together with the British. I stressed to him that it was necessary to make clear to everyone that it was not the intention of the Western allies to leave a vacuum in the area after 1971, which could be filled by either Russia or China or anybody else. He stressed that Malaysia-Singapore cooperation was fundamental to Australian defence planning. I assured him that we regarded any attack on Malaysia as a threat to Singapore, but I encouraged him to make it clear to the Malaysians that any bilateral agreement with Australia that excluded Singapore was simply not on. I described how on my trip to Melbourne for Prime Minister Harold Holt’s memorial service in December 1967, Razak was on the same aircraft but virtually ignored me. But after McEwen, the Australian deputy prime minister who was acting as prime minister before John Gorton took over, had rebuffed him in blunt terms when he tried for a bilateral agreement between Australia and Malaysia, Razak was all reasonableness and accommodation as he spent three hours in the aircraft with me discussing Malaysia’s defence and security. Singapore-Malaysia bilateral relations on defence improved considerably after this.

Indeed, Razak told Kim San and Keng Swee in March 1968 that the security of both countries was inseparable, that Malaysia could not afford heavy military expenditure and Singapore, being a small island and very vulnerable to sneak attacks, should concentrate on its air defence capability while Malaysia with its long coastline would concentrate on its navy. This way we would complement each other. “As two separate territories, we talk to one another as equals. Wherever we can agree, we work together. If we cannot agree, well, we wait a while.”

Shortly after the race riots in Kuala Lumpur in May 1969, followed by the suspension of the Malaysian Parliament, Razak had to represent Malaysia in Canberra at a meeting of prime ministers of the five powers, to discuss defence arrangements after the British pull-out in 1971. Before the conference started, the Australian permanent secretary of defence told us that his prime minister, John Gorton, would not be attending the conference. In a private discussion, the permanent secretary in their external affairs department said Gorton doubted the Malaysian government’s ability to contain the situation and believed further racial trouble would break out and Singapore would be “sucked into” the conflict. Gorton had totally lost confidence in Malaysia. He did not want to commit Australia to any defence arrangement with Malaysia. The Australians were already most unhappy that the British were leaving the region and they did not want to be saddled with responsibility for the defence of Malaysia and Singapore. Gorton foresaw disaster and was fearful of the electorate’s reaction to any new commitments Australia might make for the defence of Malaysia and Singapore.

At the last moment, however, he came to open the conference but left immediately after his speech. He stressed the need for racial harmony in the area and for a categorical assurance from Malaysia and Singapore that their defence was “indivisible”. Razak and his Malaysian officials looked extremely depressed.

That night I talked to Razak in his hotel room. I decided to set aside my reservations and support his bid that, after 1971, the commander for the Five-Power Defence Arrangement should be responsible to representatives of the five powers and not just to Singapore and Malaysia as Australia proposed. This cheered Razak. Towards the end of the conference Gordon Freeth, the Australian external affairs minister, clarified that if Malaysia were attacked, Australian troops could be deployed in either East or West Malaysia.

The Conservatives in Britain had been aghast at withdrawing their forces east of Suez. In January 1970 Edward Heath, as Leader of the Opposition, visited Singapore. I arranged for him to have discussions with all key ministers to get a comprehensive view of our economic development and progress in our defence build-up, and an overview of the political and social situation. I arranged for the RAF to give him a bird’s-eye view of the island from a helicopter. He was impressed and told the press he would “halt” Labour’s policy of withdrawal from east of Suez. He said, “There won’t be any question of British forces having been withdrawn and British forces coming back. It will be a question that British forces are still here and we as a Conservative government will halt the withdrawal.” He added he was “immensely impressed with the really remarkable achievements which had been brought to the island. … The basis for all of this is confidence in the future and peace and stability in the whole area.” I hoped the British service commanders would take note and not be too hurried in their withdrawal.

Five months later, in June 1970, the Conservative Party won the general election and Edward Heath became prime minister. His defence minister, Peter Carrington, visited Singapore that same month to announce that withdrawal would proceed as planned, but that Britain would retain some of its forces in Singapore on an equal basis with the Australians and New Zealanders. Privately, Carrington told me that Britain would not leave behind any fighter or transport squadrons. There would be only four Nimrod surveillance aircraft, a flight of Whirlwind helicopters, and a battalion would be stationed at Nee Soon, one of their camps. There would be five frigates/destroyers stationed throughout east of Suez and the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement would be replaced by a “political commitment of a consultative nature”. The British made it clear they wanted to participate, not as the leader, but as a partner “on an equal basis” in the Five-Power Defence Arrangement being planned.

In mid-April 1971, the five prime ministers met in London to finalise the political arrangements to replace AMDA. The operative words read, “In the event of any form of armed attack externally organised or supported, or the threat of such attack against Malaysia or Singapore, the governments would immediately consult together for the purpose of deciding what measure should be taken jointly or separately in relation to such attack or threat.” To “immediately consult” was better than not consulting.

On 1 September 1971, the integrated air defence system was established. On 31 October 1971, the AMDA was replaced by the FPDA. The old era of underwritten security had ended. From now on we had to be responsible for our own security.

But security was not our only concern. We had to make a living, to persuade investors to put their money into manufacturing plants and other businesses in Singapore. We had to learn to survive, without the British military umbrella and without a hinterland.




