+++
title = "08 The Communists Self-destruct"

+++



On the morning of 17 November 1965, the superintendent of Changi Prison noticed that Lim Chin Siong, who normally greeted him, was strangely silent. The leader of the communist united front in the 1950s and ’60s, and once PAP member of the Legislative Assembly, had been detained since a 1963 security operation. Lim was trembling. His clothes were dishevelled, his trousers torn, and he appeared to have been in a fight. He wanted to be transferred to another part of the prison. His fellow detainees asked and were allowed to interview Lim in the superintendent’s presence. Looking upset, Lim muttered, “They will beat me up, they will poison … I will finish myself or they will. … Ideological differences.” He again asked to be moved and was transferred to another section of the prison.

He was taken ill the next day and was brought first to the prison hospital, then to the General Hospital. At about 3:00 am a detective saw him near a medical trolley looking for something. Questioned, he replied he was looking for a knife. At 6:15 am Lim got up and went to the toilet. A warder and a detective waited outside. When Lim did not come out after 3 minutes, they knocked on the door. There was no response. The warder looked into the toilet from an adjacent one and saw Lim hanging from a cistern. He kicked the door open, rushed in and lowered him. Lim had used his pyjamas to hang himself. The doctors resuscitated him.

The communists in detention were confused and divided by the reverses they had suffered: first, their setback in September 1962 when they lost the referendum on merger with Malaysia, and second, their defeat in the September 1963 elections. The Barisan Sosialis, their united-front party, won only 13 out of 51 seats and 33 per cent of the votes and emerged as the second largest party. When Singapore was separated from Malaysia, Dr Lee Siew Choh, the Barisan Sosialis chairman, denounced Singapore’s independence as “phoney”. He had lost his seat in the 1963 election and was not a member of Parliament when it met in December 1965. On behalf of the Barisan MPs he declared that they would boycott Parliament. A short while later he announced that they would abandon constitutional politics and “take the battle to the streets”. He was imitating the madness of the Cultural Revolution in China gleaned from Radio Beijing broadcasts. As Red Guards took to the streets in China, he ordered his Barisan cohorts to mount demonstrations at hawker centres and mobile night bazaars \(*pasar malam*\), and wherever there were crowds. Like the Red Guards, they too carried banners and placards and clashed with the police. The police broke up their assemblies and charged the demonstrators in court for mischief and rioting.

Instead of winning public support, these tactics further split and destroyed the Barisan. On 1 January 1966 Lim Huan Boon, the Barisan opposition leader in Parliament, announced his resignation as MP. He said that Singapore was independent; the Barisan’s policies were irrelevant and in the interests of international communism, not of the people. The following day the party expelled him. He responded that the Barisan had broken faith not only with the democratic system but also with the people who had elected them. A week later two more Barisan MPs resigned, declaring that the party under Lee Siew Choh’s leadership was at a dead end, and it was a fallacy to think that Singapore’s independence was “phoney”. Two days after that another Barisan MP, S.T. Bani, then in detention, resigned, renounced communism and quit politics for good. The communist united front was in total disarray.

Lee Siew Choh had not only rendered the communist united front ineffective, he had in effect surrendered the constitutional arena to the PAP. It was a costly mistake, one that gave the PAP unchallenged dominance of Parliament for the next 30 years.

I sensed a fundamental change in the attitudes of the people. They realised Singapore was on its own. The British would soon leave; the Malaysians had no love for us; the Indonesians wanted to destroy us. Politics was now no longer a game of mass rallies and demonstrations. It had become a matter of life and death. All Chinese know the saying: big fish eat small fish, small fish eat shrimp. Singapore was a shrimp. People worried over their survival. They knew only the PAP had been tried and tested and had the experience to lead them out of danger.

In the Bukit Merah by-election in January 1966, the PAP won with an overwhelming majority of 7,000 out of 11,000 votes. The Barisan call for blank votes got less than 400. In succession we won six more by-elections, all unopposed, to fill Barisan resignations, and brought in higher-quality, better-qualified MPs, many of them Chinese-educated Nanyang University graduates. They helped to move the Chinese-speaking towards the political centre.

In January 1968, soon after the British announced their decision to withdraw their forces, I called for a general election. The Barisan boycotted the election. It was another major mistake, one that was to keep them out of Parliament for good. We were returned unopposed in 51 constituencies and won the remaining seven with over 80 per cent of valid votes cast. Singapore’s future looked so bleak that the opposition parties abandoned the field to us. After winning all the seats, I set out to widen our support in order to straddle as broad a middle ground as possible. I intended to leave the opposition only the extreme left and right. We had to be careful not to abuse the absolute power we had been given. I was sure that if we remained honest and kept faith with the people, we would be able to carry them with us, however tough and unpalatable our policies.

It is impossible in Singapore’s political climate of the 1990s to imagine the psychological grip the communists had on the Chinese-speaking in the Singapore and Malaya of the 1950s and ’60s. The communists made these people believe that what had happened in China would also come to pass in Malaya, that communism was the wave of the future and those who opposed them would be buried by history. They had then a hardcore following of some 20–30 per cent of the electorate that we could not win over for many years, despite the economic benefits we brought them over the next decade.

We had formed and shaped our political strategies and tactics during our struggles as the opposition party from 1954 to 1959, and in government from 1959 to 1965. The skilful and tough methods of the unyielding communists, followed by the equally ruthless communal methods of the UMNO Ultras, were unforgettable lessons on political infighting. Street fighting with them was like unarmed combat with no holds barred, in a contest where winner took all. We learnt not to give hostages to our adversaries or they would have destroyed us. Even after we had reduced the communist strength in the united-front organisation, their lurking presence in the underground had to be taken into our political calculations. At any time they could resort to violence or choose to rebuild their open-front organisations, or both. Weekly intelligence reports from the Internal Security Department made us ever mindful of their presence in Singapore and their secret network that linked them to armed groups in peninsular Malaya.

After the Barisan became ineffective, the communists reverted to violence and terror. They reappeared as the Malayan National Liberation Front \(MNLF\), an adjunct of the Malayan Communist Party \(MCP\), exploding several bombs in Jurong and Changi, two ends of Singapore, in the 1970s. Among those killed was the 6-year-old daughter of a British serviceman.

By the 1970s, they had been reduced to some 2,000 guerrillas on the Thai side of the Thai-Malaysian border, a few hundred scattered in the jungles of peninsular Malaysia, and some terrorist squads in the towns. Could we have defeated them if we had allowed them habeas corpus and abjured the powers of detention without trial? I doubt it. Nobody dared speak out against them, let alone in open court. Thousands were held in detention camps in Malaya, and hundreds in Singapore. The British had banished thousands to China in the 1940s and ’50s.



Among those not banished was Lim Chin Siong. The price he paid when communism failed him was his attempted suicide. This was recounted in detail by the superintendent of prisons in December 1965 during the trial of two Barisan Sosialis editors of the party’s Chinese-language tabloid. They were charged with sedition because they wrote that the “PAP regime” was “plotting to murder comrade Lim Chin Siong”. The defence brought many witnesses to give false evidence to support their absurd allegation that there had been a conspiracy to murder Lim at the General Hospital. The two editors were convicted.

In July 1969, three and a half years after his suicide attempt, Lim asked to see me. I had not met him since he led the Barisan split from the PAP in June 1961. When he came to Sri Temasek, my official residence, on the evening of 23 July, he looked a disillusioned man. He had decided to give up politics for good and wanted to leave for studies in London. He would like his girlfriend and fellow detainee, a former trade union worker of the Singapore Factory and Shop Workers’ Union in the 1950s who had been released earlier, to accompany him. I readily agreed and wished him well in his new life in London. He had wasted the best years of his life, ending up disgusted with his former comrades and bitter at their blinkered and unthinking refusal to face reality.

In an open letter to Lee Siew Choh, he wrote, “I have completely lost confidence in the international communist movement”, and resigned from all posts in the Barisan. Lee immediately denounced Lim as a “spineless and barefaced renegade traitor” and expelled him from the party. Lim’s unhappy break from the party he had founded marked the final disintegration of the Barisan as a political force.

After more than a decade in Britain Lim returned to Singapore in the 1980s. We never met again although we exchanged greetings in New Year cards. When he died in 1996, his former comrades forgave him. Although in 1969 they had denounced him as a “spineless and barefaced renegade traitor”, hundreds of former communists and their supporters attended his wake. At the funeral service he was praised as “a hero of the people and nation”. Some 500 other sympathisers held another memorial service in Kuala Lumpur, more to show the world they were still strong and firm in their beliefs than to honour him. Lim had been the wiser to have acknowledged earlier than they did that communism was a lost cause. In an open letter of condolence to his wife I expressed my respect for his personal honesty and his dedication to his cause.

The communist battle in Singapore and Malaysia was lost years before the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and well before China abandoned them in the 1980s. However, one communist cadre held out after more than 20 years in detention, a believer who refused to give up even after communism collapsed worldwide – Chia Thye Poh. He was a determined man with stubborn if misguided convictions. Although a member of the MCP, he strenuously denied having any links with or sympathy for communism in spite of his membership being confirmed to our Internal Security Department \(ISD\) by several MCP members, two of whom he directly reported to.

He was released in 1989 to reside on Sentosa, a resort island, where he worked as a part-time translator, and was finally freed from all restrictions in 1998. He was not able to accept that his vision of the future had failed. He continued to deny his communist links, playing on the human rights sentiments of the Western media. His detention, in spite of Western media pressure, served to discourage other communist cadres from reactivating their cause under cover of exercising their democratic rights. They were formidable opponents. We had to be as resolute and unyielding in this contest of wills.



We were reminded from time to time that the communists never give up. The switch to English in our schools had dried up their supply of Chinese-educated recruits so they tried hard to enlist the English-educated. Knowing how skilful, resourceful and tenacious the communists were in their methods of infiltration and manipulation, we were determined that they should not be given any chance to make a comeback by rebuilding their front organisations, especially in the trade unions. Their ability to penetrate an organisation with a few cadres and take control of it was fearsome.

A small group of English-educated pro-Marxist activists made use of the Workers’ Party in 1985, writing articles for the party paper, the *Hammer*, and helping to produce it from behind the scenes. They declined to take charge of the publication openly although requested by the party to do so. This put the ISD on alert. The group included some University of Singapore graduates associated with Tan Wah Piow, a pro-communist student activist who had fled to London in 1976. Others in Tan’s group had gone to China to work for the CPM clandestine radio. The ISD considered these pro-Marxist English-educated activists an incipient security problem, and in 1987 recommended that they be detained. I accepted the recommendation. I did not want a couple of pro-communist cadres including Tan, on whom we had hard evidence of links with the CPM, to rebuild their influence using innocent but disaffected activists. Their new united front included a Roman Catholic who had given up becoming a priest to dabble in liberation theology.

Because of Singapore’s experience of communist infiltration and subversion, the ISD is always alert to any clandestine penetration of open organisations, especially trade unions and old boys’ associations. To make it difficult for them to manipulate non-political bodies, we require all who enter the political arena to form their legitimate vehicle, a political party. This forces them out into the open and makes them easy to monitor. In this way we have prevented our trade unions from being infiltrated and kept our social, cultural and trade organisations free from communist influence. One important reason why we will not allow the remnant communist cadres in Thailand to come back without squaring their accounts with the ISD is so they will not pass their infiltration and subversion skills to a younger generation of cadres, now English-educated.



The most prominent and senior communist leader we allowed to return to Singapore from China was Eu Chooi Yip, Keng Swee’s old friend and contemporary in Raffles College. Keng Swee had met him on many occasions when he went to China in the late 1980s and was convinced he had given up communism. Keng Swee asked me whether I would allow Chooi Yip to return. I did, and in 1989 he returned to Singapore with his wife and two daughters. Soon after that P.V. Sharma also asked to return from China where he had been living after he was banished. He was a former president of the Singapore Teachers’ Union who had been arrested in 1951, at the same time as Devan Nair and Samad Ismail, and banished to India where he was born. From India Sharma had gone to China. Sharma also returned with his wife and children.

Eu Chooi Yip was the direct superior in the MCP of Fang Chuang Pi, the leader of the communists in Singapore whom I had met in the 1950s and named the Plen, short for “plenipotentiary” of the communists. In mid-1990, Chooi Yip asked through Keng Swee if I would allow the Plen’s son to work in Singapore. I agreed after Keng Swee assured me the son was not a security risk. An ISD officer interviewed the young man and confirmed that he was no communist. He was born in late 1965 in the Riau islands where his father was in hiding after leaving Singapore in 1962. At the age of 5, he was sent to China and grew up and attended schools in Changsha, Hunan province, where the MCP radio station, “The Voice of the Malayan Revolution”, was sited. He did engineering in Qinghua University, one of the best in China. He and his father must have believed he would have a better future in Singapore than in China. He came to Singapore in November 1990 to take a job that Keng Swee had secured for him as an engineer in a government-linked company.

Shortly after his son arrived in Singapore, the Plen sent me a letter through a Singapore Chinese journalist “to seek reconciliation”. He also sent me a video documentary entitled *Glorious Peace Settlement*. It was typical MCP propaganda: surrender and the laying down of arms were called a “glorious peace settlement”. I watched the Plen in uniform with a red star cap talking to his uniformed men about the success of peace talks, then the CPM leader Chin Peng visiting the camp, watching a dreadful concert. After that the Plen made a speech and interrupted himself to lead the applause. I turned off the video.

The Plen followed up with another letter about his return to Singapore. I replied in March 1992 that I was no longer prime minister but knew the government’s policy was not to deal with the CPM as a group. Any member of the CPM who wanted to come back to Singapore must cut his links with the party, make a full disclosure of his past CPM activities and satisfy the Internal Security Department that he had done so. I added that it was on these terms that the government had allowed Eu Chooi Yip, his superior in the party, to return to Singapore from China. The Plen replied immediately to express his disappointment. He found this unacceptable, and there the matter rested. His end game had come when the CPM formally stopped their armed insurrection by signing an agreement with the Malaysian government’s representative in Haadyai in south Thailand in December 1989, and the Thai government allowed him and his followers to reside in a “peace village” near there.

However, some 15 or 20 of the Plen’s followers quietly returned, gave a full account of their past activities to our ISD and settled down to a new life in a very different Singapore. Like Eu Chooi Yip, Sharma and the Plen’s son, they too felt they would be better off here than in China or Thailand.

When I arrived in Beijing in August 1995, our ambassador handed me a letter from the Plen. He wanted to meet me. Our first meeting had been in 1958 when I was just an assemblyman. Through an emissary, he had asked to see me, so I met him quietly on a road next to the Legislative Assembly and took him into a committee room. He assured me his party supported me and wanted to work together with the PAP. I asked for evidence that he was in charge of the MCP organisation in Singapore. He said I had to take his word for it. I suggested he prove his credentials by getting a city councillor of the Workers’ Party I believed to be a communist cadre to resign. He agreed and asked for time. A few weeks later the councillor resigned. It was an impressive display of his capacity to control his members even while he was on the run from the police. We met again on three other occasions before I formed the government. Our final meeting was on 11 May 1961 when I was already prime minister. He promised me support and cooperation if I gave the communists more room to organise. I gave him no such undertaking and he ordered his united-front organisations to bring down the PAP government before vanishing.

That final meeting was in an unfurnished flat in an uncompleted HDB building in Whampoa, lighted only by a candle. This time, on 23 August at 9:00 pm, I received him at Diaoyutai, in the VIP state guesthouse of the People’s Republic of China. I wondered whether he saw the irony of the situation, that he was calling on me in Beijing where I was the honoured guest of the communist government and party that had been the inspiration for his life’s struggle.

It was an older and stouter Plen, no longer the gaunt features, the lean and hungry look of an angry, hunted revolutionary from the underground. At our last meeting he served me warm beer. On this occasion I offered him a choice of beer, wine, or maotai. He thanked me but said that for health reasons he would drink plain Chinese tea. We spoke in Mandarin. He complimented me on my fluency. I returned the compliment over his command of English. He thanked me for allowing his son into Singapore in 1990 and letting him take a job. Choo and my principal private secretary, Alan Chan, sat in, and the Plen agreed to my tape-recording our conversation.

He spoke as though his position was still that of the 1950s and wanted to discuss the terms on which he and his 30 or so comrades could return to Singapore. First he tried the friendly approach, that I had a duty to resolve the old problems. As the CPM and PAP had been friends, could they not be friends again? I said we could, but as individuals. He said there must be some justice for his people. It was unfair that he could not return to Singapore. I said he could, but he must first close his accounts with the ISD by demonstrating that he had cut off his links with the CPM.

When the soft approach failed, he talked tough, reminding me that he had been responsible for my safety and had done much to protect me. I replied that it was a risk I had to take; his men could have killed me but the price would have been high. Moreover, I had been fair in giving him notice in a public speech to leave before Malaysia Day, September 1963, because after that the Malaysians would be in charge of security.

He said the Malaysian Special Branch had invited him to return; why could I not be as generous as the Malaysian government? I told him the obvious: the CPM could not win over its Malay mass base, unlike Singapore’s Chinese base. I suggested he accept the Malaysian government’s offer. He was not amused.

When I asked how he knew I was coming, he said it was a coincidence, that he had come to see his uncle and had learnt of my visit from television. This was most improbable. A retired official of the Chinese foreign ministry had given his letter to our ambassador. The Plen must have been told by a Chinese comrade of my visit and awaited my arrival. He also denied what Lim Chin Siong had already revealed to the ISD, that after our final meeting in 1961, he had personally met and ordered Lim to break up the PAP and bring down the government.

Before leaving, he produced a camera and asked for pictures to be taken with my wife and me. I was happy to have a memento of the mysterious underground leader who from his hideout in Singapore could direct his subordinates in the open front with such total command. He had once inspired awe and fear in me. Shorn of the mystery and power of the underground, he looked a harmless elderly man.

Despite ruthless methods where the ends justified the means, the communists failed, but not before destroying many who stood up against them, and others who after joining them decided that their cause was mistaken.




