+++
title = "09 Straddling the Middle Ground"

+++



The PAP has won 10 successive general elections since 1959, a period of 40 years. It has not gone flabby or effete. How did we do it? Between 1959 and 1965, we had fearful clashes, first with the communists and then the Malay communalists. On independence, we faced dire threats, Indonesia confronting us and Malaysia determined to bypass us. This series of events forged a bond of trust between that generation of voters and the old guard PAP leaders.

Our critics believed we stayed in power because we have been hard on our opponents. This is simplistic. If we had betrayed the people’s trust, we would have been rejected. We led them out of the depths of despair in the 1960s into an era of unprecedented growth and development. We took advantage of the expansion in world trade and investments to move from Third World to First World standards in one generation.

We had learnt from our toughest adversaries, the communists. Present-day opposition leaders go on walkabouts to decide where they will do well, based on the way people respond to them at hawker centres, coffee shops, food courts and supermarkets, and whether people accept the pamphlets they hand out. I have never believed this. From many unhappy encounters with my communist opponents, I learnt that while overall sentiment and mood do matter, the crucial factors are institutional and organisational networks to muster support. When we went into communist-dominated areas, we found ourselves frozen out. Key players in a constituency, including union leaders and officials of retailers’ and hawkers’ associations and clan and alumni organisations, would all have been brought into a network by communist cadres and made to feel part of a winning team. We could make little headway against them however hard we tried during elections. The only way we could counter their grip of the ground was to work on that same ground for years between elections.

To compete against the self-improvement night classes at the pro-communist unions and associations, we formed the People’s Association \(PA\). We brought into the PA, as corporate members, many clan associations, chambers of commerce, recreational clubs and arts, leisure and social activity groups. They provided advice and services in more than one hundred community centres we set up to conduct literacy classes in Chinese and English, and courses in sewing, cooking and repairing motorcars, electrical instruments, radios and television sets. By competing against and outdoing the communists, we gradually won back part of the ground they had cultivated.

During my constituency tours in 1962 and 1963, I had assembled activists in smaller towns and villages all over the island. They were the local leaders of various associations and clubs who constituted themselves as welcoming committees for their area to discuss with me and my team of officials road improvements, street lights, standpipes and drains to alleviate flooding. After my visits, work teams would follow up, providing the funds to execute such projects.

While in Malaysia, after the race riots in 1964, we formed “goodwill committees” to keep communal relations from boiling over. Committee members were drawn from grass-roots leaders of the different communities in the area.

I built on these “welcoming” and “goodwill” committees by coopting their more active and promising members into management committees \(MCs\) of community centres and into citizens’ consultative committees \(CCCs\). MCs of the community centres organised recreational, educational and other activities. CCCs, with funds we provided, did local improvement projects, the smaller public works. They also raised their own funds, to provide welfare grants and bursaries for the needy.

Community leaders at that time were reluctant, even fearful, to identify themselves openly with a political party. They preferred to be associated with the government. It was a hangover from the colonial period, especially during the years of the Emergency when the communists were active and any identification with political parties competing against the MCP could bring retribution. By creating semi-government institutions like the MCs and CCCs we mobilised a wide spectrum of elders who were respected in their own communities. They worked with our MPs between elections, and during election time their influence and support flowed through into the voting, even though some of them stayed neutral rather than campaign actively.

Later, as the population moved into HDB high-rise blocks, I formed residents’ committees \(RCs\), each serving a precinct of six to ten blocks. This made for closer interaction between leaders and the residents of these blocks. Hence in our HDB new towns, there is a network that leads from the RCs to the MCs and CCCs on to the prime minister’s office, the nerve centre. Opposition leaders on walkabouts go through well-tended PAP ground. Naturally there are floating voters. But there is a hard core of local leaders who know that their PAP MP, backed by the government, will attend to their needs whether during or between elections.

A turning point was the general elections in 1968, soon after the British had announced the withdrawal of their forces. We won all seats by an overwhelming majority. By 1972, four years later, the people were relieved and happy that we had accomplished a near miracle. In spite of the withdrawal of British forces, and with it the loss of 20 per cent of our GDP and some 50,000 jobs, we had high economic growth and lower unemployment. American multinational companies were creating thousands of jobs in electrical and electronic factories. When I called for elections in September 1972, 57 out of 65 seats were contested. We won them all, scoring 70 per cent of the votes.

We were to repeat this total sweep again in 1976, winning 37 seats uncontested and all the 38 contested seats. The standing of the PAP leadership and the progress we had achieved made it difficult for the opposition. People had full confidence in the PAP leadership and were not interested in having an opposition. They wanted to get on with economic growth, leave their squatter huts for new flats they would buy with rising incomes from well-paid jobs, and send their children to the better schools we were building. The tide was rising for all. We had a fourth clean sweep in 1980 – 37 seats unopposed, and the remaining 38 contested seats with 77.5 per cent of votes cast.

The non-communist opposition politicians who emerged to fill the vacuum left by the communists were mostly opportunist types. During elections, they espoused programmes that would appeal to their pro-communist following. But as long as they were not led by English-educated professionals who could lend respectability to a communist front, as David Marshall’s old Workers’ Party had done, they posed no danger. It was in this context that J.B. Jeyaretnam, a lawyer, appeared in a revived Workers’ Party. As its candidate in the 1972 election, he advocated abolishing the Internal Security Act. Earlier, in the late 1960s, he had promised re-merger with Malaya. He aspired to be Marshall’s successor but was not as sharp or as eloquent.

But Jeyaretnam did break the PAP’s spell of unprecedented total support in a by-election in 1981, a year after the general elections. Devan Nair had resigned his Anson seat to become the president. I left the arrangements for the campaign to the new assistant secretary-general, Goh Chok Tong. Our candidate, a keen PAP activist, was not a good public speaker. I did not take part in the by-election campaign, leaving it completely to Goh and the younger leaders. They were confident we would win, but when the votes were counted on polling day, we had lost. It was quite a shock. I was disturbed, not by the defeat, but because I had had no signal from Goh that we might lose. I worried about his political sensitivity. James Fu, my press secretary, told me that people on the ground resented the over-confident attitude of the party leaders in the campaign. One reason for the loss was obvious. A large number of Singapore port workers in several blocks of flats had to be moved to make way for a container-holding area but were not given alternative accommodation. The Port of Singapore Authority and the Housing and Development Board pushed this responsibility to each other.

Jeyaretnam \(JBJ\) was all sound and fury. He made wild allegations of police high-handedness and repeated every grievance disgruntled people channelled through him without checking the facts. That he had no principled stand suited us, because he was unlikely to become a credible alternative. I decided he was useful as a sparring partner for the new MPs who had not gone through the fight with the communists and the UMNO Ultras. Besides, he filled up space on the opposition side of the political arena and probably kept better men out. His weakness was his sloppiness. He rambled on and on, his speeches apparently unprepared. When challenged on the detailed facts, he crumbled.

People, however, wanted an opposition voice in Parliament. The sense of crisis of the 1960s and ’70s had passed. Singaporeans were now more confident and wanted the PAP to know that they could not be taken for granted. In the 1984 election we lost two seats, to JBJ in Anson and to Chiam See Tong, another lawyer and the secretary-general of the Singapore Democratic Party \(SDP\), in Potong Pasir. Chiam took a shrewder line than JBJ, more in tune with the sentiments of the population, that the PAP was doing a fair job, but could do better and should listen more to criticism. He improved his public standing. He and the people who made up the SDP were not the types to be used by the communists for their front activities. We treated him differently, extending him respect and latitude. We hoped that if he expanded, those who opposed us could gravitate towards a non-subversive opposition.

These opposition figures were unlike the formidable adversaries we had met in Lim Chin Siong and his comrades who were serious men, committed to their cause. Jeyaretnam was a poseur, always seeking publicity, good or bad.



Without much of an opposition in Parliament I missed a foil to project issues. I made up for it with a major annual speech. On a Sunday evening a week or so after my eve-of-National-Day telecast, I would speak at an indoor National Day rally of about 1,200 community leaders. It was televised live. With only notes, I would speak for one to two hours on the important issues of the day. But I would have read extensively on the subjects days before and mulled over how to simplify my presentation. Television polls showed I had high viewership. I had learnt how to hold the audience, both those at the National Theatre and over television, and get them to follow my thought processes. I would speak first in Malay, then Hokkien \(later Mandarin\) and last in English, my master language. I had better rapport with my audience when I expressed my thoughts as they formed and flowed in my mind, whereas if I had a script, I could not get my message across with the same conviction and passion. This annual speech was an important occasion when I set out to move the people to work together with the government and overcome our problems.

During election time in the 1970s and ’80s, I spoke in the evenings at mass rallies in the constituencies, and at Fullerton Square in the heat of the tropical sun at 1–2 pm, to reach out to office workers. Sometimes there would be a heavy shower and I would be drenched while the crowds sheltered under umbrellas or took cover on the “five-foot-way” \(covered walkway\) of offices around the square. The people stayed and I carried on. Although wet, I never felt the cold; my adrenaline was pouring out. The spoken word on television made a far greater impact than the written script in newspapers. My dominance of the public platform was my strength throughout my political life.



When dealing with the opposition, I had two preoccupations: Were they being used by the communists? And was this a “black operation”, one funded and run by a foreign intelligence agency to cause mischief? It was this latter concern which led to our investigation of Francis Seow, a former solicitor-general. The Marxist group described earlier had gained influence in the Law Society. They canvassed for him and got him elected as president. With Seow as president, the Law Society became politicised, criticising and attacking government legislation not on professional but on political grounds, something it had never done as a professional organisation constituted by law to maintain discipline and standards in the legal profession.

Around that time, in 1987, a counsellor in the US embassy called Hendrickson met Seow to encourage him to lead an opposition group at the next election. The ISD recommended that we detain and interrogate Seow to get to the bottom of the matter. I agreed. We had to put a stop to this foreign interference in Singapore’s domestic politics and show that it was off-limits to all, including the United States. Under interrogation, Seow admitted in a sworn affidavit that he had been asked by Hendrickson to lead a group of lawyers to contest the elections against the PAP. He also admitted that he had been to Washington to meet Hendrickson’s superior in the US State Department, who had assured him of refuge in America were he to run into difficulties with the government. We published his admissions made in the sworn affidavit. Then we released Seow, two months before the general elections. He contested but lost. He was on a charge for fraudulent income tax returns at that time but we gave him permission to travel to the United States to consult a cardiologist in New York and to attend a human rights conference. He did not return for his trial. Instead his lawyers submitted several medical reports from two doctors: the first, Dr Jonathan E. Fine, who signed himself as “Executive Director” on letter paper headed “Physicians for Human Rights”, stated that it was inadvisable for Seow to travel internationally; the second doctor stated that Seow was unable to undertake any air travel until treated for his heart condition. When the prosecution produced evidence that Seow had made at least seven air trips from December through January, the court directed that Seow submit more detailed medical reports. When Seow failed to provide further medical reports, his lawyers, an English Queen’s Counsel \(QC\) and a Singapore advocate, asked the court to discharge them. One doctor later admitted that in fact he had not examined him and that he had not renewed his medical licence to practise. Seow had no standing at the Bar, having been disciplined by the Law Society for financial misconduct. What was left of his credibility in Singapore was destroyed. When human rights groups in America puffed him up as a major dissident figure, Singaporeans were not impressed. Several years later we learnt that the US government had indeed given Seow political asylum.

We had good reason for wanting to investigate Francis Seow. We knew he owed a Singapore bank some S$350,000. The loan was not repaid for many years. In 1986, as the date for election approached, the bank demanded payment. He was able to pay. Where did the money come from? We had seized his books to check for income tax and it was clear that he did not have the funds to settle this loan. He swore in an affidavit that it was paid by his girlfriend, or his fiancée as he called her, Mei Siah. She told Keng Swee in Bangkok in 1989, after Seow had fled from Singapore, that she was asked to lend Seow the money by a Singapore businessman. A CEO of a major company who kept Mei Siah as his mistress for a number of years told us that she was a grasping sort, extremely tight with money, and would never have parted with S$350,000 for anyone, and that she still had not paid him more than the sum of S$350,000 she owed him. This suggested that the money came from some interested agency.



One imperative is to confront directly those who accuse me of corruption or misusing the power of my office. I have always met head-on all such allegations. At election time in many developing countries, allegations of bribery and corruption are standard fare and are never confronted for fear of greater damage if the minister who sues cannot stand up to cross-examination in court. I proceed only after taking the opinions of counsel both in Singapore and in London because, should my action fail, I have personally to carry the heavy costs: my own lawyers’ and those of my opponents. On the other hand, I have never been sued for defamation because I have not made any false defamatory statements. When I said something disparaging about my opponents, I had ample evidence to back my statements and my opponents knew that.

My first libel action to uphold the office of prime minister was in 1965 against Syed Ja’afar Albar, then secretary-general of UMNO. We were then still in Malaysia. He had said in the *Utusan Melayu*, a Malay newspaper owned by UMNO, “The Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, is an agent of the communists and the Djakarta regime who have the evil intention to destroy Malaysia. Lee Kuan Yew has the evil intention to destroy Malaysia and to pit the Malays and Chinese in Malaysia against each other.” Albar and the *Utusan Melayu* had no defence, apologised in court, and paid my legal costs.

I also brought actions against opposition candidates who accused me of corruption in election speeches. An example was in 1972 when one of them said in Chinese that whenever people wanted to buy or transfer their HDB homes, they went to Lee & Lee, the law firm where my wife was a senior partner. Most of these candidates were men without assets, who did not defend themselves and accepted bankruptcy.

J.B. Jeyaretnam, a lawyer, was an exception. At an election rally in 1976 he alleged that I had procured the grant of favours to Lee & Lee and to my family, that I had been guilty of nepotism and corruption and was unfit to be prime minister. I was awarded damages and costs. Jeyaretnam appealed all the way to the Privy Council in London, and lost. More than a decade later, in 1988, again at an election rally, Jeyaretnam insinuated that I had advised Teh Cheang Wan \(a minister of national development\) to commit suicide; that I wanted to avoid a full investigation into allegations of corruption because they would have discredited me. He could have raised Teh’s suicide two years earlier but waited until election time. I won damages and costs.

I took action against an American-owned weekly based in Hong Kong, the *Far Eastern Economic Review*, and its editor Derek Davies. He had refused to withdraw and apologise for quoting a renegade priest, Edgar D’Souza, who said that the government had attacked the Catholic Church by detaining 16 Marxist conspirators. I went into the witness box and was aggressively cross-examined by the *Review*’s QC for over two days. When it was the turn of the editor to reply, Derek Davies did not give evidence because he would have been cross-examined. Nor did he call D’Souza to support what he had printed. The judge found against the *Review* and its editor.

Another case was against the *International Herald Tribune* \(*IHT*\), a newspaper owned by the *New York Times* and the *Washington Post*, for publishing on 2 August 1994 a libellous article by Philip Bowring, a columnist formerly from the *Far Eastern Economic Review*. Bowring wrote, “In the Chinese case, history almost seems to consist of a battle between the corporatist needs of the state and the interests of the families who operate it. Dynastic politics is evident in ‘Communist’ China already, *as in Singapore* \(my italics\), despite official commitments to bureaucratic meritocracy.” My son Loong had been elected to Parliament in 1984 and it was clear what Bowring meant. The *IHT* admitted in its paper that the words were defamatory, and meant that I was advancing the interests of the Lee family at the expense of the corporatist needs of the state. It apologised and paid damages and costs.

On 2 June 1996 the Chinese-language *Yazhou Zhoukan* \(*Asian Weekly*\) quoted a lawyer, Tang Liang Hong, alleging corruption in my purchase of two flats. The weekly immediately admitted liability and paid a large sum in settlement. But Tang refused to apologise and retract his allegation. Six months later, at a rally right at the end of the election campaign, Tang aggravated the libel by saying that once he had entered Parliament, he would raise the same issue and that “This is their death blow.” The trial judge noted that the day after the libel was published, Tang transferred a substantial sum of money from his wife’s bank account to his bank account in Johor Bahru, which was out of Singapore’s jurisdiction, to exhaust her overdraft facility. The judge said, “It was a clear piece of evidence of a devious mind.” As Tang had absconded from Singapore and did not appear at the trial, judgement was in my favour. On the appeal, Tang’s London QC did not challenge the defamatory meaning of the words. The appeal was dismissed.

My opponents waited for elections to get under way before they uttered their slanders, hoping to inflict maximum damage. Had I not sued, these allegations would have gained credence. Western liberal critics argue that my reputation is so unassailable that nobody will believe the outrageous things said about me, so I should ignore them magnanimously instead of suing vindictively. But outrageous statements are disbelieved only because they are vigorously refuted. If I failed to sue, that would be cited as proof that there was something in it.

In Tang’s case, my purchase of the two flats had for a time been a hot political issue. Had I not sued Tang after his statements in *Yazhou Zhoukan*, in the subsequent general elections he would have gone to town with more wild claims. By then it would have been too late to rebut him, and even PAP supporters would have wondered whether I had done something wrong. But because Singaporeans knew I would challenge any defamatory untruth, when Tang defamed me, he immediately prepared for its consequences by moving all his funds out of Singapore.

There is another important reason for suing those who have defamed me. Since the 1950s we have established a political climate under which politicians have to defend any allegation of misconduct or wrongdoing.

Opposition MPs also sued when they were defamed. Chiam See Tong won damages against two PAP ministers, Howe Yoon Chong and S. Dhanabalan, who settled the cases out of court. Jeyaretnam sued Goh Chok Tong, then minister for trade and industry in 1981, but failed. He appealed to the Privy Council but lost. Voters have come to expect any allegation of impropriety or dishonesty to be challenged in the courts. PAP ministers have been able to command the respect of people because they are ready to be scrutinised and cross-examined in court for any alleged wrongdoing. Those who allege that my libel actions were designed to silence the opposition do not understand how readily an allegation of dishonesty or corruption would be believed in a region where corruption, cronyism and nepotism are still a plague.

Some critics have alleged that our judges were compliant. The judges who heard these cases were senior members of the bench with their standing and reputation to uphold. Their judgements were published in the law reports and cited as precedents that can stand the scrutiny of over 2,000 lawyers at the Bar, and of teachers and students at the National University of Singapore law faculty. The allegation that we use the judiciary in defamation suits to bankrupt our political opponents came to a head when the *International Herald Tribune* of 7 October 1994 carried an article by Christopher Lingle, an American lecturer at the National University of Singapore, attacking me: “Intolerant regimes in the region reveal considerable ingenuity in their methods of suppressing dissent … Others are more subtle: relying upon a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposition politicians.” I sued the editor, the publisher and the writer. With the foreign media present in strength to give them wide publicity, both the editor and publisher, through their lawyers, admitted it was untrue and apologised for it. The court awarded damages and costs against the *IHT*. To avoid being cross-examined in court, Lingle fled from Singapore when the writ was issued.

Far from oppressing the opposition or the press that unjustly attacked my reputation, I have put my private and public life under close scrutiny whenever I appeared as a plaintiff in court. Without a clear record, it would have been an unnecessary hazard. Because I did this and also gave the damages awarded to deserving charities, I kept my standing with our people.



To straddle the middle ground and win elections, we have to be in charge of the political agenda. This can only be done by not being beaten in the argument with our critics. They complain that I come down too hard on their arguments. But wrong ideas have to be challenged before they influence public opinion and make for problems. Those who try to be clever at the expense of the government should not complain if my replies are as sharp as their criticisms.

At the same time, the PAP has sought to reach out to those outside the party, to a new generation of Singaporeans who are better-educated and informed, and who want to participate in the national debate. The large PAP majorities in Parliament, and the poor quality of opposition MPs, led the public to feel that alternative views were not being adequately aired in Parliament. We changed the constitution in 1990 to provide for a small number of non-elected MPs, called Nominated MPs \(or NMPs\), to reflect independent and non-partisan views. The scheme has turned out well. It has enabled non-PAP people who are of good quality to enter Parliament. The NMPs have played a constructive role airing carefully considered criticisms of government policies, and the government has taken them seriously. One, Walter Woon, moved a private member’s bill, which Parliament passed to become the Maintenance of Parents Act.

After the 1984 election we created a Feedback Unit to give the public a channel to express opinions on policies through forums and feedback sessions. MPs with a sympathetic ear chair these meetings to solicit views, not to persuade people. This encouraged people to speak up. Not all contrary opinions led to reversals of policies, but the feedback helped the government to improve its policies.



After separation from Malaysia in 1965 and as British forces started to withdraw in 1968, elections were referenda on the level of our support, not whether we would win. The percentage of votes for the PAP began to trend downwards in the mid-1980s, mainly because the younger voters, whose number was increasing, had not been through the early struggles and were not so committed to the PAP. They wanted an opposition to check the PAP, to pressure the government for more concessions and to soften hard policies. It was bound to lead to less than adequate men getting elected, as indeed happened.

When Prime Minister Goh called general elections in 1991, the opposition changed tactics. Instead of fielding more candidates of poor ability, they allowed the PAP to win a majority of seats uncontested on nomination day. They knew that the people wanted some opposition MPs, but also wanted to be sure they had a PAP government. They called it their by-election strategy. It worked. Low Thia Khiang of the Workers’ Party, a Nanyang University graduate and a Teochew, won the mainly Teochew constituency of Hougang. He turned out to be a good grassroots leader. The SDP led by Chiam won three seats, becoming the largest party in the opposition, with Chiam the official leader of the opposition. The new SDP MPs were lacklustre and did not measure up. Chiam was constructive and could have built up a sizeable political party had he been a shrewder judge of people. In 1992 he proudly produced a plausible young lecturer as his prize candidate for a by-election. Within two years, his protégé had ousted him as the leader and forced him to form a new party.

In the 1997 election, out of 83 seats, the PAP lost only to Low Thia Khiang and Chiam, who by then represented a new party. The PAP’s share of valid votes cast rose by 4 per cent to 65 per cent, reversing the downward trend. We defeated the two SDP MPs who had won in 1991 but had disappointed their voters. The PAP had countered the opposition’s “by-election” strategy with the electoral carrot that priority for upgrading of public housing in a constituency would be in accord with the strength of voter support for the PAP in that constituency. This was criticised by American liberals as unfair, as if pork barrel politics did not exist elsewhere.

The present PAP leaders are in the process of forging their bonds with a younger generation. The regional financial meltdown of 1997–99 was a test for this generation that has not known hardship. Together, people and leaders overcame the problems and emerged the stronger. This crisis and the periodic difficulties with Malaysia have made Singaporeans acutely aware of the realities of life in Southeast Asia.

Will the political system that my colleagues and I developed work more or less unchanged for another generation? I doubt it. Technology and globalisation are changing the way people work and live. Singaporeans will have new work styles and lifestyles. As an international hub of a knowledge-based economy in the information technology age, we will be ever more exposed to external influences.

Will the PAP continue to dominate Singapore’s politics? How big a challenge will a democratic opposition pose in future? This will depend on how PAP leaders respond to changes in the needs and aspirations of a better-educated people, and to their desire for greater participation in decisions that shape their lives. Singapore’s options are not that numerous that there will be unbridgeable differences between differing political views in working out solutions to our problems.




