+++
title = "10 Nurturing and Attracting Talent"

+++



On the night of 14 August 1983, I dropped a bombshell in my annual National Day Rally address. Live on both our television channels, with maximum viewership, I said it was stupid for our graduate men to choose less-educated and less-intelligent wives if they wanted their children to do as well as they had done. The press named it the “Great Marriage Debate”. As I had expected, the speech stirred a hornet’s nest. My wife Choo had warned me there were many more women with only O levels than women with university degrees. It caused a drop of 12 percentage points in votes for the PAP in the election the following year, more than I had anticipated.

It had taken me some time to see the obvious, that talent is a country’s most precious asset. For a small resource-poor country like Singapore, with two million people at independence in 1965, it is the defining factor. The Chinese here were mostly the descendants of agricultural labourers from the southern provinces of China, many brought in by labour contractors as indentured workers to do heavy manual work such as loading and unloading cargo and pulling rickshaws. Early Indian immigrants also came as indentured labourers to work on rubber estates, build roads and dig trenches and drains. Most were from the lower castes. There were small groups of Indian merchants and clerks. The ablest were Sindhi merchants and Hindu Brahmins, in particular their priests. Their descendants have high ability. Malays as a rule were better in the arts than the sciences.

It was our good fortune that under the British Singapore had been the regional centre for education, with good schools, training for teachers, King Edward VII Medical College and Raffles College \(teaching arts and science\). These two colleges, both of a high standard, were later merged to form the University of Malaya in Singapore. The brightest of the English-educated students in Malaya and the Borneo territories studied at Singapore institutions, staying in boarding schools run by the Christian missions. The best students trained in Singapore as doctors, teachers and administrators. They were the cream of some six million Chinese and Indians from Malaya, the Borneo territories and even the Dutch East Indies, which later became Indonesia. Singapore also had the best Chinese schools in the region, and successful Chinese parents in the region sent their sons here for schooling and later to Nanyang University, when it was teaching in Chinese. Until the Japanese Occupation and the rise of independent governments after the war, the Chinese moved freely between the countries of *Nanyang* \(South Seas or Southeast Asia\). Many stayed on for the better jobs. They added an extra layer of talent.

After several years in government I realised that the more talented people I had as ministers, administrators and professionals, the more effective my policies were, and the better the results. My mind flashed back to Prince Sihanouk. He was talented. When he made his films, he had to be author, scriptwriter, director, actor and producer. Cambodia did not have enough educated and talented people and the few they had Pol Pot later killed. That was one reason for the tragedy in Cambodia.

What decided me to make that Great Marriage Debate speech was a report on my desk analysing the 1980 census figures. It showed that our brightest women were not marrying and would not be represented in the next generation. The implications were grave. Our best women were not reproducing themselves because men who were their educational equals did not want to marry them. About half of our university graduates were women; nearly two-thirds of them were unmarried. The Asian man, whether Chinese, Indian or Malay, preferred to have a wife with less education than himself. Only 38 per cent of graduate men were married to graduate women in 1983.

This lopsided marriage and procreation pattern could not be allowed to remain unmentioned and unchecked. I decided to shock the young men out of their stupid, old-fashioned and damaging prejudices. I quoted studies of identical twins done in Minnesota in the 1980s which showed that these twins were similar in so many respects. Although they had been brought up separately and in different countries, about 80 per cent of their vocabulary, IQ, habits, likes and dislikes in food and friends, and other character and personality traits were identical. In other words, nearly 80 per cent of a person’s makeup was from nature, and about 20 per cent the result of nurture.

The capabilities of most children were between those of their two parents, with a few having lower or higher intelligence than either. Therefore male graduates who married less-educated women were not maximising the chances of having children who make it to university. I urged them to marry their educational equals, and encouraged educated women to have two or more children.

Graduate women were upset that I had spotlighted their plight. Non-graduate women and their parents were angry with me for dissuading graduate men from marrying them. I was attacked in a flood of comments and letters to the press for being an elitist because I believed intelligence was inherited and not the result of education, food and training. A professional couple challenged my alleged assumption that low-income families would produce less-brainy children. \(I had made no such claim.\) “Look at Lee Pan Hon, the violinist. He came out of the slums of Chinatown. If he hadn’t been given the opportunity, he would never have developed his creativity.” \(Lee Pan Hon was talent-spotted by Yehudi Menuhin for his school in Britain. Later he became a first violinist in the Manchester Orchestra.\) “This whole thing smacks of elitism.” A woman wrote, “I am an unmarried, successful professional woman aged 40. I have remained single because I prefer it this way. I am deeply insulted by the suggestion that some miserable financial incentives will make me jump into bed with the first attractive man I meet and proceed to produce a highly talented child for the sake of Singapore’s future.” Even Toh Chin Chye, then a PAP backbencher, derided my views, saying that his mother never went to school, his father was a clerk with only secondary school education, and if he had to depend on his parents’ educational background, he would have had no chance.

I supported my views by releasing analyses of statistics for the past few years of the educational background of parents of the top 10 per cent of our students in examinations at ages 12, 16 and 18. These figures left little doubt that the decisive factor for high performance was a pair of well-educated parents. I also put out 1960 and 1970 data that showed most of our top students who won scholarships for universities abroad had parents who were not well-educated: storekeepers, hawkers, taxi-drivers and labourers. I compared them to the 1980 and 1990 data that revealed over 50 per cent of the best 100 scholarship winners had at least one parent who was a professional or self-employed. The conclusion was obvious, that the parents of these scholarship winners of the 1960s and ’70s would have made it to university had they been born a generation later when education was universal and scholarships, bursaries and study loans were freely available to bright students.

This controversy was widely reported by the Western media. Liberal Western writers and commentators mocked me for my ignorance and prejudice. But one academic spoke up for me – R.H. Herrnstein, professor of psychology at Harvard. In an article, “IQ and Falling Birth Rates”, in the *Atlantic Monthly* of May 1989, he wrote, “In our time Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore has said, ‘Levels of competence will decline, our economy will falter, our administration will suffer, and society will decline’ because so many educated men are failing to find educated women to marry and are instead marrying uneducated women or remaining unmarried. But Lee is an exception, for few modern political leaders dare to talk in public about the qualitative aspect of low fertility.” A few years later, Herrnstein co-authored *The Bell Curve* which set out the data that showed intelligence to be inherited.

To help ease this problem of unmarried graduate women, we set up a Social Development Unit \(SDU\) to facilitate socialising between men and women graduates. I personally chose Dr Eileen Aw, a doctor at the National University of Singapore. Then in her late 40s, she was married to a doctor and had two children at the university. Soft-spoken and approachable, with a knack for putting young people at ease, she was just the person for the job. The SDU was initially received with disdain by graduates, both men and women. The international press had another field day ridiculing our matchmaking efforts and SDU activities, from symposiums, seminars and computer classes to cruises and Club Med holidays.

The fact was that parents were alarmed at the swelling numbers of their graduate daughters remaining unmarried and were desperate for help. One night in 1985, after a reception at the Istana, Choo told me that the women of her generation had been discussing the plight of their professionally trained daughters and commiserating with each other. They lamented the passing of the age when women had marriages arranged by their parents with the help of professional matchmakers. When most women received little formal education, the bright women and the less bright had equal chances of being “married off” since there were no O levels or university degrees to grade them. This practice of arranged marriages was no longer acceptable to educated women.

It was as much the fault of mothers of graduate sons as of the sons themselves. Non-graduate mothers preferred non-graduate daughters-in-law who would be less intimidating. It was most difficult to erase this cultural prejudice, that a male who was not seen to be the main breadwinner and head of the household was to be pitied and ridiculed. This was so with the Chinese, more so with the Indians, and most of all with the Malays.

The same problem extended through all educational levels. A large number of A level \(or high school\) women could not find college or A level men to marry. So too with O level women. Women want to marry up, men want to marry down. The result was that the least-educated men could find no women to marry, because the women who remained unmarried were all better-educated and would not marry them. To complement the SDU, I asked the executive director of the People’s Association to form a Social Development Section \(SDS\) for those with secondary education. Membership rapidly expanded and by 1995 was 97,000. Thirty-one per cent of SDS members who met through its activities got married. Traditional methods of choosing marriage partners had been ruptured by universal education: the government had to provide alternatives to the family matchmakers of old.

The 1980 census figures also revealed that better-educated women had compounded our problem by having much fewer children than the less-educated. The tertiary-educated had 1.6, the secondary-educated also 1.6, the primary-educated 2.3, and the unschooled 4.4. To replace themselves, parents must have 2.1 children. We were more than doubling our less-educated, and not replacing our better-educated.

To reverse this reproductive trend, Keng Swee, then minister for education, and I decided in 1984 to give graduate mothers who have a third child priority in choosing the best schools for all their children, a much-prized objective of all parents. It was a sensitive and divisive issue. The egalitarians in cabinet led by Raja were outraged. He disputed that brighter parents had brighter children. Even if it were true, he argued, why hurt people’s self-esteem? Eddie Barker was unhappy not because he agreed with Raja, but because it was offensive to less-bright parents and their children. Younger ministers were divided between the views of their older colleagues. Keng Swee, ever the hard-headed realist, agreed with me that we had to jolt male graduates from their outdated cultural prejudices into recognising the folly of marrying down. We carried a majority in cabinet.

Keng Swee and I had expected non-graduate mothers to be angry because they would be discriminated against, so we were taken aback when graduate mothers protested instead. They did not want this privilege. However, the message to young men did sink in: more married their equals though the progress was slow. After the elections, I agreed that Tony Tan, who had taken over from Keng Swee as the new minister for education, reverse this decision and cancel the priority for graduate mothers. I had awakened our people, especially tertiary-educated young men and women, to the starkness of our plight. But since women graduates were embarrassed by this privilege, it was best to remove it.

In its place, I gave special income tax concessions to married women – this time to graduate, polytechnic, A level and O level mothers, enlarging the pool and lessening the sense of elitism. They qualified for substantial income tax rebates on either their or their husband’s income for their third and fourth child. These concessions did encourage more third and fourth births.

Many critics blamed the government for thoughtlessly implementing the “Stop-at-Two” policy in the 1960s. Was it wrong? Yes and no. Without that policy, family planning might never have brought population growth down, and we would not have solved our unemployment and schooling problems. But we should have foreseen that the better-educated would have two or fewer children, and the less-educated four or more. Western writers on family planning had not drawn attention to this already familiar though less stark outcome in their own mature countries because it was not politically correct to do so. Had we found out on our own sooner, we would have refined and targeted our campaign differently, encouraging with incentives the better-educated women to have three or more children right from the start of the family planning drive in the 1960s. Unfortunately we did not know and did not change our policy until 1983 when analysis of the 1980 census revealed the reproductive patterns of the different socioeconomic groups.

Since that speech in 1983, I have regularly released the statistical analysis of the educational backgrounds of parents of the top 10 per cent of students in national examinations. Singaporeans now accept that the better-educated and more able the parents, the more likely are the children to achieve similar levels. My speech was intended to shake up our young men and women and their parents, and make them do something to redress the seriousness of the situation. The open discussion it stimulated made some difference. However, Keng Swee, the trained statistician, upon studying the figures for a couple of years after my shock tactics, told me dolefully that we would not be able to solve this problem soon enough to save most of our graduate women from their fate. The figures, although improving, revealed it would take many years to reverse the trend. Our bright women would suffer, and so would Singapore. By 1997, 63 per cent of graduate men married fellow graduates, as against 38 per cent in 1982. Also, more graduate women were marrying non-graduates rather than remaining single. It is difficult to override a deep-rooted cultural bias. Intellectually I agreed with Keng Swee that overcoming this cultural lag would be a slow adjustment process, but emotionally I could not accept that we could not jolt the men out of their prejudices sooner.

Difficulties over our talent pool were aggravated when the rich Western countries changed their policies on Asian immigration. In the 1960s, when the United States was fighting the war in Vietnam, it did not want to be seen as anti-Asian. It decided to accept Asian immigrants, reversing more than a century of its whites-only policy. Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the big countries with small populations, soon followed suit. They had long barred Asian immigration. When they changed their rules to admit better-qualified Asians, we lost a large part of the inflow of Chinese and Indians from Malaysia. Many middle-class professional Chinese and Indian Malaysians migrated permanently to Australia, New Zealand and Canada. Fewer foreigners also came to Singapore for their education. They now had their own universities, and many could afford to study in Australia, New Zealand, Britain, the United States and Canada.

Not all leaders shared my view of the bad effects of this change in policy. When I told Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Razak in the early 1970s that Malaysia was suffering a brain drain, losing many well-educated Chinese and Indians to Australia and New Zealand, he replied, “This is not a ‘brains drain’. It is a ‘trouble drain’; it drains trouble out of Malaysia.”

Our shortage of talent was aggravated from the late 1970s when some 5 per cent of our better-educated began emigrating. Too many of our bright students became doctors. Many emigrated because they felt they did not have the success their level of professionalism deserved. Some students who had studied in Australia, New Zealand and Canada migrated there because their careers in Singapore were not advancing rapidly enough. Unlike Japanese or Koreans, Singaporeans were educated in English and faced negligible language or cultural problems when they settled overseas.

To get enough talent to fill the jobs our growing economy needed, I set out to attract and retain entrepreneurs, professionals, artistes and highly skilled workers. In 1980 we formed two committees, to get them placed into jobs and to integrate them socially. With the help of student counsellors in our missions in Britain, the United States, Australia, New Zealand and Canada, a team of officers would meet promising Asian students at their universities to interest them in jobs in Singapore. We concentrated on recruiting Asian students because Singapore offered an Asian society with a higher standard of living and quality of life than their own countries, and they could assimilate easily into our society. This systematic search for talent worldwide brought in a few hundred graduates each year. It made up for the loss each year through emigration of 5–10 per cent of our better-educated to industrialised countries.

For the exceptionally bright, we tried to “green harvest”, an American corporate practice of offering jobs even before graduation, on the basis of their performance before their final examinations. By the 1990s this inflow through active recruitment was three times the outflow. We began offering a few hundred scholarships to bright students from China, India and the region in the hope that some would remain because of the better job opportunities; those who returned to their countries could still be useful for our companies that went abroad.

We also set up two task forces specially to attract talent from India and from the region, but were more successful in attracting Indian than Malay talent. There were too many privileges for bumiputras and pribumis \(indigenous Malays and Indonesians\) in their home countries for them to consider leaving.

A new phenomenon is the increasing number of Caucasian men marrying our women, especially the tertiary-educated. Singapore graduate men were fearful of marrying them but Caucasian graduates were not. Many of these women were forced to emigrate by our rules that allowed a Singapore male citizen to bring in a foreign bride, but not the other way around. We gave that permission only if the foreign husband had regular employment. We changed this policy in January 1999: this will add to the cosmopolitan character of Singapore. Furthermore, quite a number of our men who were educated abroad have married Caucasian, Japanese and other Asian girls they met at university. Their children are valuable additions to our talent pool. The old clear-cut barriers to interracial marriage have been breached by the intermingling of people as they travel to and work in countries not their own. We have to change our attitudes and take advantage of what was once considered foreign and not assimilable talent. We cannot allow old prejudices to hamper our development as an international centre for trade, industry and services.

Besides natural conservatism, the other problem is fear of competition for jobs. Both at professional and lower levels there is resistance to the inflow of talent. Singaporeans know that more foreign talent will create more jobs. But they want this to happen in some other sector, not their own.

Without foreign talent, we would not have done as well. In my first cabinet of ten, I was the only one born and educated in Singapore. Keng Swee and Chin Chye were born in Malaya, Raja in Ceylon. Our present chief justice, Yong Pung How, came from Malaysia, as did our attorney-general, Chan Sek Keong. The list could roll on. Thousands of engineers, managers and other professionals who came from abroad have helped us to grow. They are the extra megabytes in Singapore’s computer. If we do not top up with foreign talent, we will not make it into the top league.




