+++
title = "11 Many Tongues, One Language"

+++



Both Choo and I had been educated in English-language schools. When we met students from China while studying in England, we became conscious of how deculturalised we were, almost like the Chinese students from the Caribbean. We felt a sense of loss at having been educated in a stepmother tongue, not completely accepting the values of a culture not our own. I felt separated from the mass of the ordinary Chinese who spoke dialect and Mandarin. My world of textbooks and teachers was totally unrelated to the world I lived in. We were like hundreds of Raffles College graduates, not formally tutored in their own Asian cultures, but not belonging to British culture either, lost between two cultures.

Choo and I decided we should not inflict this cultural handicap on our three children, and sent them to Chinese schools to become a part of this vibrant, vigorous, self-confident community, even if their English suffered. We remedied this by having Choo speak to them in English while I spoke to them in Mandarin, to improve my Mandarin\!

It turned out well for all three, educated in Chinese, imbued with the values that made them filial children and good citizens, and equally fluent in English. They did well in school, winning prizes which their schools and the Chinese press publicised to encourage other parents to send their children to Chinese schools. This convinced the Chinese-speaking that I would not exterminate Chinese education in Singapore. Those born and bred in homogeneous societies may not understand why the language medium in which I chose to educate my children had political implications.

Singapore never had one common language. It was a polyglot community under colonial rule. The British left the people to decide how to educate their children. The government provided a limited number of English-language schools to train people to be clerks, storekeepers, draughtsmen and such subordinate workers, and Malay-language primary schools for Malays. The Indians ran their own Tamil and other Indian-language schools or classes. The Chinese set up schools financed by successful members of their community, to teach in Chinese. Because the different races were taught their own languages, their emotional attachment to their mother tongue was deep. They were like the five million people in Quebec tenaciously holding on to French in a continent of 300 million English speakers.

When we formed the government in 1959 we decided on Malay as the national language, to prepare the way for merger with Malaya. We realised English had to be the language of the workplace and the common language. As an international trading community, we would not make a living if we used Malay, Chinese or Tamil. With English, no race would have an advantage. But it was too sensitive an issue for us to make immediate changes. To announce that all had to learn English when each race was intensely and passionately committed to its own mother tongue would have been disastrous. So we left the position as it was, with four official languages – Malay, Chinese \(Mandarin\), Tamil and English.

The necessity for a common language was vividly highlighted in the Singapore Armed Forces. We were saddled with a hideous collection of dialects and languages and faced the prospect of going into battle without understanding each other in any of the four official languages. Many could speak only dialects, requiring special Hokkien-speaking platoons. The Chinese were speaking one of more than seven different Chinese dialects at home but learning Mandarin and English in school, neither of which they used at home.

Not wanting to start a controversy over language, I introduced the teaching of three mother tongues, Mandarin, Malay and Tamil, in English schools. This was well received by all parents. To balance this, I introduced the teaching of English in Chinese, Malay and Tamil schools. Malay and Indian parents welcomed this but increasing numbers preferred to send their children to English schools. A hard core of the Chinese-educated did not welcome what they saw as a move to make English the common working language, and expressed unhappiness in Chinese newspapers.

Barely eight weeks after separation, the Chinese Chamber of Commerce publicly asked the government to guarantee the status of the Chinese language as one of the official languages in Singapore. The Chamber’s treasurer, Kheng Chin Hock, a Chinese-language champion from pre-Malaysia days, stressed that Chinese was used by more than 80 per cent of the population in Singapore. I scotched this move before it could grow into a campaign, for once the Chinese Chamber got going, every Chinese school management committee and the two Chinese teachers’ unions would surely work up the ground. On 1 October, I restated that all four major languages in Singapore were official and equal. I reminded activists like Kheng in the Chinese Chamber that they had been conspicuous by their silence on language and other vital issues when Singapore was controlled by the Malaysian police and the Malay Regiment. Five days later, under the full glare of television lights, I met the committees of all four chambers of commerce. I left the Chinese representatives in no doubt that I would not allow anyone to exploit the Chinese language as a political issue. That put an end to their attempts to elevate the status of the Chinese language.

Nevertheless, opposition continued to come from students at the Chinese-language Nanyang University and Ngee Ann College. In October 1966, when I declared open a library built at Nanyang University \(shortened in Chinese to “Nantah”\), 200 students protested. Several days later, Ngee Ann College students demonstrated outside my office and clashed with the police, after which they staged a sit-in at their college. After I deported the Malaysian leaders of the two demonstrations, student agitation diminished.


We waited patiently as year by year parents in increasing numbers chose to send their children to English schools, in the face of determined opposition from the Chinese teachers’ unions, Chinese school management committees, Chinese newspaper owners, editors and journalists, leaders of clan associations and the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. Every year, around the time when parents had to register their children, these groups would mount a campaign to get parents to enrol their children in Chinese schools for the sake of their culture and identity. They berated those who chose English schools as money-minded and short-sighted.

Many Chinese-speaking parents were deeply attached to their language and culture. They could not understand why their children were allowed to be educated completely in Chinese under the British, yet under their own elected government had also to learn English. But for better job prospects, many sent their children to English schools. These conflicting pulls provided fertile ground for agitation.

Towards the end of 1970, the major Chinese paper, *Nanyang Siang Pau*, turned rabidly pro-communist and pro-Chinese language and culture. It mounted an attack on the government, accusing it of trying to suppress Chinese language, education and culture, and portraying me as the oppressor in a government of “pseudo foreigners who forget their ancestors”. We had to arrest Lee Mau Seng, the general manager, Shamsuddin Tung Tao Chang, the editor-in-chief, and Ly Singko, the senior editorial writer, for glamorising communism and stirring up chauvinistic sentiments over Chinese language and culture. Proof that they were doing so only for Singapore came from the Malaysian editions of the same paper that did not carry this campaign.

Nantah graduates were another source of opposition. In both the 1972 and 1976 general elections they raised the issue of Chinese language and culture. When I tried to get the medium of instruction in Nantah changed from Chinese to English, Ho Juan Thai, the president of their students’ union, instigated his fellow students to use Chinese instead of English in their examination papers. The university removed him from his post as union leader. After graduating, he contested the 1976 general election as a Workers’ Party candidate, accusing the government of exterminating Chinese education and urging the Chinese-speaking to oppose the government or risk losing their cultural identity. He knew we would not act against him during the campaign. When he lost, getting only 31 per cent of the votes, he fled to London.

The opposition to English as the one common language was unremitting. The irony was that I was as keen and anxious as anyone to retain the best features of Chinese education. When I acted as legal adviser for the Chinese middle school student leaders in the 1950s I was impressed by their vitality, dynamism, discipline and social and political commitment. By contrast, I was dismayed at the apathy, self-centredness and lack of self-confidence of the English-educated students. The nub of the problem was that in our multiracial and multilingual society, English was the only acceptable neutral language, besides being the language that would make us relevant to the world. But it did seem to deculturalise our students and make them apathetic.

However, my education in the English school system gave me one political advantage – it made me at home in the world of both the English- and the Malay-educated, and I was not confined to the Chinese-speaking. It made it easier for me to be accepted as a leader of more than just the Chinese because I was perceived by the Malays and Indians as a Malayan \(later Singaporean\) nationalist, not a Chinese chauvinist. And because I learnt Chinese later, and they saw my intense efforts to master both Mandarin and the Hokkien dialect, I was able to relate to the Chinese-educated and have them accept me as their leader.



In the 1950s the Chinese-educated felt a burst of pride at the resurgence of China and the Chinese language. The merchants in the Chinese Chamber of Commerce were prosperous with the rubber boom which resulted from the Korean War. In 1953 the Chamber proposed a Chinese-language university in Singapore for Chinese students in Southeast Asia. Since Chinese high school graduates were forbidden from going to communist China for further studies, they believed such an institution in Singapore would attract many students. It drew support from Chinese merchants in Singapore, Malaya and the Borneo territories. The leading spirit was a wealthy rubber merchant, Tan Lark Sye, who personally donated S$5 million, but the project involved the whole Chinese community and generated so much spontaneous enthusiasm that taxi drivers, hawkers and trishaw riders all contributed one day’s earnings. When Nanyang University was opened by the British governor in March 1956, traffic crawled bumper to bumper all the way from the city to its campus in Jurong, 20 miles to the northwest. It became the symbol of Chinese language, culture and education – a symbol the communists captured through their influence with sympathisers in the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, clan associations and school management committees.

But Nantah faced problems. There were few jobs for its graduates. As students switched to English schools, they increasingly went to the University of Singapore, which taught in English. Better students from the Chinese schools took the English-language Cambridge school certificate examinations as private candidates, to be eligible for admission to the University of Singapore or some overseas university on a government scholarship. Nantah responded by lowering both requirements for admission and pass standards for graduation, further diminishing its academic reputation and the market value of its graduates. What finally propelled me to action was a report from the People’s Association that when applying for jobs, Nantah graduates had produced their school certificates and not their Nantah degrees.

I decided to make English the language of instruction at Nantah. With the unanimous agreement of the Nanyang University Council, in 1975 I sent the minister for education, Dr Lee Chiaw Meng, to be vice-chancellor. He was Chinese-educated but had a PhD in engineering from London University. His task was to convert Nantah into an English-language university. It proved too difficult; the staff were basically Chinese-educated and could not teach in English. Although they had taken their PhDs in American universities, they had reverted to using Chinese and lost their English fluency.

The situation was so bad that in 1978 our MPs who were Nantah graduates asked me to intervene before the university disintegrated. The one whose judgement I had learnt to depend upon was Ch’ng Jit Koon, a minister of state. He had excellent interpersonal skills and had worked closely with me for many years, including helping to look after my constituency. He convinced me that to allow Nantah to continue as it was would make for a bigger problem. With the careers of so many students blighted, the Chinese-speaking would blame the government for not doing more to save them, and also for allowing Nantah to collapse. Ho Kah Leong, Chin Harn Tong, Lee Yiok Seng, all parliamentary secretaries and Nantah graduates, strongly supported Ch’ng’s views.

Most of my cabinet colleagues were against intervention as politically too costly. Chin Chye and Eddie Barker were set against it. Even Keng Swee, usually robust and strong-minded, and Kim San, a pragmatist, were not enthusiastic. They would go along with me if I chose to intervene, but why stir up a hornet’s nest? They remembered our troubles with the Chinese schools and Nantah in the sixties. I was taken aback when Ong Pang Boon, Chinese-educated from Confucian High School, Kuala Lumpur, also expressed doubts. He agreed with our Nantah graduate MPs on the seriousness of the situation but was concerned over the political backlash from Nantah donors and supporters in Singapore and Malaysia. But I could not accept the prospect of several hundred students each year wasting their future. Since Nantah could not convert its teaching from Mandarin into English, I persuaded the Nantah council and senate members to move the whole university – staff and students – into the campus of the University of Singapore. Both teachers and students would be forced to use English, subsumed within the larger numbers of English-speaking staff and students at the Bukit Timah campus.

Whatever their misgivings, Nantah staff and students were immersed in an English-speaking environment from the beginning of the 1978 academic year. The majority of Chinese-speaking parents and students accepted this change from a Chinese-language to an English-language university as unavoidable. The most emotional opposition came from Nantah alumni. Those in Singapore understood, even if they did not openly support the change. The Malaysian alumni were angry and bitter in their denunciation of what they deemed an act of betrayal. On my part I was sad not to have been able to move earlier, thereby saving several thousand Nantah graduates from their poor economic status, handicapped by their inadequate command of English.

It was a painful adjustment, more for the students than for the staff. University of Singapore staff took over the bulk of the teaching until Nantah staff revived their English fluency. I spoke to the students twice to sympathise with their difficulties and encourage them to persevere. About 70 per cent of them eventually passed their final joint campus examinations. I had a survey conducted among the graduates, whether they would prefer to receive a University of Singapore degree, a Nantah degree or a joint degree. The overwhelming majority wanted a University of Singapore degree. I decided to merge the universities as the National University of Singapore \(NUS\) and award them NUS degrees. The Nantah campus became Nanyang Technological Institute, attached to the NUS. In 1991 it became Nanyang Technological University \(NTU\). Some Nantah alumni wanted it renamed Nanyang University. This is no longer an issue of great moment. The old name can be restored if that is the wish of the graduates of Nantah and NTU. Employers know that the present NTU graduates are up to standard whatever the name of their institution.

I had the political strength to make those changes in Nantah because, unlike many champions of the Chinese language who sent their children to English schools, my three children were completely educated in Chinese schools. When I addressed students and staff of Nantah on the campus in the late 1960s I could say that I never sacrificed my children’s education for a political purpose. I was convinced that Chinese schools were good for them because they were able to master English at home. However, for their university education, I said I would not send them to a Chinese-language university. Their future depended upon a command of the language of the latest textbooks which would be in English. Every parent, whether Chinese- or English-educated, would come to this same conclusion. Because I said this at Nantah and had it reported in the press, I was able to influence the choice of parents and Chinese school students when they sought university places.

Had my children not done well in Chinese schools, I could not have spoken with that same authority. Years later I asked the three of them whether they regretted having gone to a Chinese, not an English, school. They were unanimous that they were better off for having been in Chinese schools.

Nantah produced a total of 12,000 graduates. Had all of them been educated in English, they would have had more satisfying careers and made bigger contributions to Singapore and Malaysia. The problem was one of face. Such high hopes had been pinned on Nantah at its founding, but the tide of history was against it. No country in Southeast Asia wanted a Chinese-language university. On the contrary, they were phasing out Chinese-language schools. Employment opportunities for Chinese-educated high school and university graduates were rapidly declining. Even Chinese banks were switching to English to remain in business.



After the two universities were merged, I made all Chinese schools switch to English as their main language of instruction, with Chinese as their second language. This caused soul-searching among the Chinese-educated, including PAP MPs. None could accept the need to reduce the teaching hours of Chinese in these schools, yet all agreed the students had to master English to be able to continue their studies in polytechnics and the university without spending an extra year for remedial English. I sympathised with them in their dilemma, but once they accepted English as our working language, these consequences had to follow.

As these changes were taking place, I feared we were losing something valuable in the Chinese school system. I wanted to preserve what was good in the Chinese schools: the discipline, self-confidence and moral and social values they instilled in their students, based on Chinese traditions, values and culture. We had to transmit these same values to students in the new bilingual schools or we would deculturalise them. When we use English as the medium of instruction, Confucian values of the family could not be reinforced in schools because both teachers and students were multiracial and the textbooks were not in Chinese.

In addition, the traditional moral values of our students were being eroded by increasing exposure to the Western media, interaction with foreign tourists in Singapore and their own overseas travel. The values of America’s consumer society were permeating Singapore faster than the rest of the region because of our education in the English language.


The changed values and attitudes of younger teachers compounded this problem. The older generation of teachers had known hardship and seen how difficult it was to bring stability and harmony to Singapore’s multiracial society. As I wrote to Keng Swee when he took over the education ministry in 1979, “They teach a philosophy of life, imbue their students with a sense of determination, duty and responsibility, and their teachers have got greater drive and thrust than the majority of the English-medium teachers.” The younger teachers, all educated in English with Chinese as their second language, were no longer as steeped in these traditional values.

We wanted to preserve the distinctive traditional values of our different cultures. The Japanese have been able to absorb American influence and remain basically Japanese. Their young, having grown up in affluence, appear less dedicated to the companies they work for than their fathers, but they are essentially Japanese and more hardworking and committed to the greater good of their society than Europeans or Americans. I believed that if the Japanese could do this, so could we.

I decided to preserve the best nine of the Chinese schools under a special assistance plan, or SAP. These SAP schools would admit students in the top 10 per cent passing the primary school leaving examination. They would teach Chinese at the first language level but have English as the medium of instruction as in other schools. We provided them with additional teachers to enable the pupils to learn English and Chinese through special immersion programmes. The SAP schools succeeded in retaining the formality, discipline and social courtesies of traditional Chinese schools. The ethos in these schools was, and still is, superior to that of the English-language schools, which tended to be more slack in these matters. Today most SAP schools, including the once communist-controlled Chinese High School, are premier institutions with modern facilities to match their proud history and traditions.



After the Nanyang and Singapore University joint campus solution in 1978, I decided the time was right to encourage our Chinese to use Mandarin instead of dialects. It would make it easier for students to master English and Mandarin in school if they spoke Mandarin at home and were not burdened by dialects. I launched a “speak Mandarin” campaign for a month every year.

To emphasise the importance of Mandarin, I stopped making speeches in Hokkien. We stopped all dialect programmes on television and radio, but for the older generation, we still broadcast the news in dialects. Unfortunately, at election time we had to speak in dialects, or opposition candidates would have an advantage. As late as the run-up to the January 1997 general election, some of the most rousing responses were to speeches in Hokkien. Dialects are the real mother tongues for the older generation.

It was difficult to change the language habits of Chinese families that interfered with the learning of Mandarin. Until the 1970s about 80 per cent still spoke dialect at home. Young workers interviewed on television were not fluent in Mandarin because they reverted to dialect at home and in their workplace. I used my standing with the people to persuade them to make the switch. They knew that my three children had mastered Mandarin, English and Malay and respected my views on how to educate children. During our walks in public parks and gardens, parents would often be talking to their children in dialect until they noticed Choo and me, when they would look embarrassed and switch to Mandarin, abashed for not heeding my advice. The switch was especially difficult for the grandparents, but most managed speaking to their grandchildren in dialect and understanding their replies in Mandarin. Without this active promotion of Mandarin, our bilingual policy would have failed for Chinese students. Mandarin-speaking families increased from 26 per cent in 1980 to over 60 per cent in 1990, and are still increasing. However, English-speaking homes increased from 20 per cent in 1988 to 40 per cent in 1998.

The opening of China brought a decisive change in the attitudes of Chinese to learning Mandarin. Professionals and supervisors who knew both English and Mandarin commanded a premium: there were no more grumbles about speaking Mandarin and not dialects. We had made the right decision in 1965 at independence to teach Mandarin as a second language. That seven different major south Chinese dialects were spoken in Singapore made it easier to persuade all to convert to Mandarin. Had we been like Hong Kong with 95 per cent speaking Cantonese, it would have been difficult if not impossible. For many Chinese Singaporeans, dialect is the real mother tongue and Mandarin a stepmother tongue. However, in another two generations, Mandarin can become their mother tongue.

Bilingualism in English and Malay, Chinese or Tamil is a heavy load for our children. The three mother tongues are completely unrelated to English. But if we were monolingual in our mother tongues, we would not make a living. Becoming monolingual in English would have been a setback. We would have lost our cultural identity, that quiet confidence about ourselves and our place in the world. In any case, we could not have persuaded our people to give up their mother tongues.

Hence, in spite of the criticism from many quarters that our people have mastered neither language, it is our best way forward. English as our working language has prevented conflicts arising between our different races and given us a competitive advantage because it is the international language of business and diplomacy, of science and technology. Without it, we would not have many of the world’s multinationals and over 200 of the world’s top banks in Singapore. Nor would our people have taken so readily to computers and the Internet.




