+++
title = "14 Managing the Media"

+++



In the 40 years since 1959, the Singapore press has evolved away from the norms set by the colonial government. We brought this about by laying down out-of-bounds markers, mostly for our English-language pressmen. They had been influenced by the British editors and reporters who used to be their superiors in the Straits Times group. It took many years before a younger generation of journalists in the 1980s recognised that the political culture of Singapore was and will stay different from the Western norm. However, our journalists are exposed to and influenced by the reporting styles and political attitudes of the American media, always sceptical and cynical of authority. The Chinese and Malay press do not model themselves on newspapers in the West. Their cultural practice is for constructive support of policies they agree with, and criticism in measured terms when they do not.

By the 1990s our journalists aged below 40 had all gone through similar Singapore schools. Yet differences between the English, Chinese and Malay press continue; the cultural gap has not been bridged. These differences are evident in their editorial comments, headlines, selection of news and choice of readers’ letters for publication. Chinese-educated readers do not have the same political and social values as the English-educated. They place greater emphasis on the interests of the group than those of the individual.

The main English newspaper, the *Straits Times*, when owned by the British, openly promoted their interests. It enjoyed the patronage of British commercial firms that fed it with advertisements and of the colonial government which provided it with news and revenue from publishing official notices. No local English-language newspaper could ever reach even a fraction of its circulation and influence.

The Chinese-language newspapers were left to their own devices. Their owners, wealthy Chinese merchants, used them to advance their interests. To attract readers, they played up news about China, Chinese education and culture, and the war in China. The two main papers, the *Nanyang Siang Pau* and the *Sin Chew Jit Poh*, were owned by two wealthy Chinese families with right-wing but opportunistic editors working through young Chinese journalists of whom most were left-wing and quite a few were Communist Party cadres.

The vernacular papers – Chinese, Tamil and other languages – catered to their readers’ communal interests and did not have any Singapore identity. The Malay paper, *Utusan Melayu*, printed in the Arabic script \(Jawi\), made itself the vehicle of pan-Malay-Indonesian nationalism.

Almost from the start, the *Straits Times* was bitterly hostile to the PAP. It saw the non-communist leadership as a Trojan horse for the Chinese-speaking communists. The *Nanyang Siang Pau, Sin Chew Jit Poh* and several smaller Chinese papers strongly supported the PAP because of its left-wing policy and the united front we had with the communists. Many of the Chinese journalists were pro-communist. The *Utusan Melayu* was friendly in spite of our links with Chinese-speaking communists because Yusof Ishak, its owner and managing editor, was my friend and had appointed me the paper’s lawyer. He was later to become the first president of Singapore. My early experiences in Singapore and Malaya shaped my views about the claim of the press to be the defender of truth and freedom of speech. The freedom of the press was the freedom of its owners to advance their personal and class interests.

As the first general election for a self-governing Singapore approached in May 1959, the *Straits Times* became vehemently anti-PAP to prevent us from winning and forming the government. We decided to meet it head-on. Raja had worked for the *Straits Times* as a senior writer. He confirmed our view that the paper was run for British interests. It was managed by a big, burly, thuggish-looking but competent English newspaperman called Bill Simmons. Simmons took seriously my open threat to settle scores with the paper if, in spite of its opposition, we won. It was preparing to move its editorial staff to Kuala Lumpur after the election should this happen. I fired my first salvo in mid-April, two weeks before polling day: “It is an open secret that *Straits Times* editorial staff would scoot to Kuala Lumpur.” I listed the flagrantly biased reporting by its white expatriate journalists, warning that we would give it to them as hard as they were giving it to us.

Next day, Raja followed up with an attack on the English-language *Singapore Standard*, owned by the two Chinese millionaire Aw brothers of Tiger Balm \(an ointment panacea for all aches and pains\) fame. The *Standard* had turned against the PAP. Raja, who had been its associate editor for five years, was told either to change policy or quit. He quit.

I said we had to tolerate locally owned newspapers that criticised us; we accepted their bona fides, because they had to stay and suffer the consequences of their policies. Not so “the birds of passage who run the *Straits Times*”: they would run to Malaya from where they would proclaim their readiness to die for the freedom of the press in Singapore. They used their most senior local man, Leslie Hoffman, a Eurasian, to rebut me: “I am no bird of passage. I, who am responsible for the policy and editorial content of this newspaper, intend to remain in Singapore, even if Mr Lee and the People’s Action Party came to power, and even if they use the Preservation of Public Security Ordinance against me. … My home will be in Singapore.”

Brave words indeed. Before polling day, Hoffman had left for Kuala Lumpur. A few days earlier, addressing an IPI \(International Press Institute\) annual assembly in West Berlin, he said that my threats were “the outpourings of a group of power-mad politicians”. He claimed the *Straits Times* was “written, produced and controlled by Malayans who were born there, who had been there all their lives and who are genuine in their nationalism and loyalty to their country”. He knew this was totally untrue. He called upon the IPI “to stop once and for all an attempt by a party to get popular support and backing for its declared intention to curtail press freedom”. That was exactly what we had the right to do, to seek a mandate to deal firmly with foreign, in this case colonial, interests in the press. It was our declared policy that newspapers should not be owned by foreigners.

We won the election. The *Straits Times*, its owners and senior editors moved to Kuala Lumpur. They proved our point that they were cowardly, out to preserve British interests, not to uphold press freedom or the right to information. After we became independent in 1965, the *Straits Times* moved back to Singapore, did a complete turnaround and supported the PAP. This did not increase my respect for it. When Malaysia’s pro-Malay policies forced the Straits Times group to sell its Kuala Lumpur operations to UMNO, the ruling party, it was the PAP government that allowed the British shareholders to continue owning and publishing the newspaper in Singapore. Simmons came to make peace, and the paper became a purely commercial concern, now without a political agenda. Leslie Hoffman did not return to Singapore but settled in Australia.

Because I wanted competition, I encouraged other newspapers to set up. Several did but failed. After more than a hundred years of British rule, the *Straits Times* dominated the market. The *Singapore Standard* had folded up in the 1960s. A newspaper called the *Eastern Sun* was launched in 1966 by Aw Kow, the son of one of the Tiger Balm Aw brothers, known more as a playboy than a serious newspaper baron. After secret negotiations with high-ranking officials of an agency of the People’s Republic of China based in Hong Kong, they lent him S$3 million. It was repayable over 5 years, with interest at the ludicrous rate of 0.1 per cent per annum. The undeclared condition was that the newspaper would not oppose the People’s Republic of China on major issues and would remain neutral on minor ones. The *Eastern Sun* incurred heavy losses because of poor management. In 1968 it received a further subvention of S$600,000. In 1971 we exposed this “black operation” funding by a foreign power. Aw Kow admitted it was true. His outraged and humiliated editorial staff resigned, and the paper closed down.

The *Singapore Herald* was another “black operation”. This time the money came from a non-communist source. It started in 1970 as a wholly foreign-owned newspaper employing Singaporean editors and local and foreign journalists. At the start I wondered why two foreigners, nominal owners, wanted to start an English-language newspaper to work up issues against the government through its editorials and its news presentation on matters like national service, press restraint and freedom of speech. It was losing money. The ISD reported that the largest shareholder was a Hong Kong firm, Heeda & Company, a registered partnership with two dummy names. The paper soon exhausted its S$2.3 million working capital, and Chase Manhattan Bank in Singapore extended to it unsecured loans of S$1.8 million. Pressed for an explanation, the bank’s chairman, David Rockefeller, phoned me from New York to claim that his second vice-president and manager of his branch in Singapore was unaware of the bank’s standing rule not to lend money to newspapers\! I was sceptical.

I asked the paper’s newly appointed Singaporean editor who had put up the money in the name of Heeda & Company of Hong Kong. He said he thought I knew it was Donald Stephens, the Malaysian high commissioner to Canberra and former chief minister of the state of Sabah, Malaysia. I asked whether he believed Stephens, who had become Fuad Stephens after his conversion to Islam, would risk losing a million and a half dollars in a newspaper which took on the Singapore government. He agreed this was difficult to believe.

When I disclosed this conversation in a public speech in mid-May 1971, Stephens, whom I knew well from our Malaysia days, wrote to me from Canberra: “I feel I should tell you that my only motive in putting money into the *Herald* is because I have been in the newspaper business before and because I believe Singapore to be a country where my investments would be safe. … I am not getting younger and I thought if I were to retire before very long I will be able to get a living out of my investments in the *Herald*.” He did not explain why he did not first inform me about his investment and seek my support and blessings. A newspaper influences the politics of a country. When a foreigner, British newspaper baron Roy Thomson, considered starting a newspaper in Singapore in the mid-1960s, he first discussed it with me. I discouraged him because I did not want a foreigner not rooted in Singapore to decide our political agenda.

As the *Herald* was running out of funds, a Hong Kong newspaperwoman, Aw Sian, Aw Kow’s sister but unlike him a serious businesswoman, mysteriously came to the rescue with S$500,000. She was a hard-headed woman who owned a Hong Kong Chinese newspaper. She produced to me receipts for the money she remitted, but had no share certificates. I asked whether she intended to put more money into the paper. She replied “no”, and immediately left for Hong Kong.

The Press Foundation of Asia, an affiliate of the International Press Institute, issued a statement asking us not to cancel the paper’s licence and invited me to speak at the IPI annual assembly at Helsinki in June 1971. Before leaving for Helsinki, I cancelled the printing licence of the *Singapore Herald*.

Had I not attended, the assembly would have passed resolutions condemning Singapore in my absence. I stated my position on the role of the media in a new and young country like Singapore. I needed the media “to reinforce, not to undermine, the cultural values and social attitudes being inculcated in our schools and universities. The mass media can create a mood in which people become keen to acquire the knowledge, skills and disciplines of advanced countries. Without these, we can never hope to raise the standards of living of our people.”

I recounted how, with Singapore’s different races, languages, cultures and religions, press reports and photographs had caused riots with loss of lives, and cited two examples. In the “jungle girl” riots in 1950, the *Singapore Standard* had headlined a report of a Dutch girl, converted to Islam by her Malay foster mother, kneeling before an image of the Virgin Mary. The anti-Chinese riots on Prophet Mohammed’s birthday in July 1964 resulted from a sustained campaign by a Malay newspaper, falsely alleging day after day that the Malay minority were oppressed by the Chinese majority.

I said I did not accept that a newspaper owner had the right to print whatever he liked. Unlike Singapore’s ministers, he and his journalists were not elected. My final words to the conference were: “Freedom of the press, freedom of the news media, must be subordinated to the overriding needs of Singapore, and to the primacy of purpose of an elected government.” I stayed resolutely polite in response to provocative questions.

A few years later, in 1977, we passed laws to prohibit any person or his nominee from holding more than 3 per cent of the ordinary shares of a newspaper, and created a special category of shares called management shares. The minister had the authority to decide which shareholders would have management shares. He gave management shares to Singapore’s four major local banks. They would remain politically neutral and protect stability and growth because of their business interests. I do not subscribe to the Western practice that allows a wealthy press baron to decide what voters should read day after day.



In the 1980s Western-owned English-language publications became a significant presence in Singapore. Our English-reading public was expanding with the teaching of English in our schools. We have always banned communist publications; no Western media or media organisation has ever protested against this. We have not banned any Western newspaper or journal. Yet they frequently refused us the right of reply when they misreported us. We decided in 1986 to enact a law to restrict the sale or distribution of foreign publications which had engaged in the domestic politics of Singapore. One of our tests for “engaging in the politics of Singapore” was whether, after they had misreported or slanted stories on Singapore, they refused to publish our reply. We did not ban them, only restricted the number of copies they sold. Those who could not buy copies could get them photocopied or faxed. This would reduce their advertising revenue but did not stop their reports from circulating. They could not accuse us of being afraid to have their reports read.

The first publication to breach this law was the American weekly *Time* magazine. In an article in October 1986 it reported that an opposition MP had been found guilty by Singapore courts on charges of disposing of assets to defraud creditors and of giving false evidence. My press secretary sent a letter to correct three errors of fact in the report. *Time* refused to publish it and instead proposed two versions, both of which changed its meaning. My press secretary wanted the letter published unedited. When it refused, we restricted the sale of *Time* magazine from 18,000 to 9,000 and then subsequently to 2,000 copies. After this, *Time* published our reply in full. We lifted the restriction – eight months later.

The *Asian Wall Street Journal* \(*AWSJ*\) in December 1986 printed an untrue story about our proposed second securities market, SESDAQ \(Stock Exchange of Singapore Dealing in Automated Quotation Systems\). It alleged that the government was setting it up in order to dispose of dud government-owned companies to its citizens. The Monetary Authority of Singapore \(MAS\) wrote to rebut these false allegations. The *AWSJ* not only refused to print this letter but claimed its article was fair and accurate, that such a dud company did exist and that our letter had defamed its correspondent. The MAS wrote again to point out further errors in the journal’s letter, and asked it to name the dud company and to indicate which specific passages in our letter had defamed its correspondent. We asked that it publish the correspondence so that readers could judge for themselves. It refused to name the dud company or point out the supposedly defamatory passages. In February 1987 the government restricted the *AWSJ*’s circulation from 5,000 to 400 copies and released the letters between the MAS and the *AWSJ*. The Singapore newspapers published them. We invited the journal’s correspondent to sue if he had indeed been defamed. He did not.

To our amazement, a US State Department spokesman, as reported in the *AWSJ*, expressed regret at the restrictions on both the *AWSJ* and *Time* magazine. Our ministry of foreign affairs asked the State Department to confirm the reported remarks which, if true, represented “an unprecedented interference in Singapore’s internal affairs”. Its spokesman did so, but maintained the US government did not take sides in either of these two cases. We asked the State Department whether, on the same grounds of impartiality, it would express regret over the refusal of the *AWSJ* to publish the exchange of letters. The State Department repeated that it did not take sides; it was merely expressing concern because of its “fundamental and long-standing commitment to the principles of a free and unrestricted press” – which meant that “the press is free to publish or not publish what it chooses however irresponsible or biased its actions may seem to be”. Our ministry of foreign affairs pointed out that we were not obliged to follow US laws on the press. Singapore had its own laws and reserved the right to reply to wrong reporting. Foreign publications had no right of sale and circulation in Singapore. We gave them this privilege, but on our terms, one of which was the right of reply. The State Department did not reply.

Two weeks later, the *AWSJ* wrote to our ministry of communications and information offering to distribute its journal free of charge to all paying subscribers who had been deprived by its restriction. It was willing to “forego its sales revenue in the spirit of helping Singapore businessmen who had complained of lack of access to the journal”. The ministry agreed, provided it left out the advertisements to prove that the journal’s motive was not to increase circulation but to justify its higher advertising charges. It declined the offer, arguing that advertisements were an integral part of a paper, and that there would be additional costs and scheduling problems. We offered to defray one-half of the additional costs of removing the advertisements. The *AWSJ* rejected our offer. We responded, “You are not interested in the business community getting information. You want the freedom to make money selling advertisements.” It did not reply.

In September 1987 American-owned *Asiaweek* cocked a snook at us. The press secretary to the minister for home affairs had written to point out errors in an article in its magazine. *Asiaweek* printed parts of this letter as an article \(“A Distortion of Facts, You Say?”\), attributing it to the press secretary. It not only deleted significant parts but added more than 470 words of its own, lengthening it by more than half, without the press secretary’s consent and without disclosing this to its readers. The press secretary wrote to protest against this alteration of his letter and asked that his original and subsequent letters be published unaltered. *Asiaweek* refused. We restricted the magazine’s circulation from 11,000 copies to 500. A month later, it published the letters unaltered. We lifted the restriction, after a year.

In December 1987 the American-owned *Far Eastern Economic Review* published an account of a meeting between me and the Catholic archbishop of Singapore regarding the arrest of 22 persons involved in a Marxist conspiracy. The article was based on statements made by a renegade priest who had not been present at the meeting. The *Review* alleged that I had called a press conference without the archbishop’s knowledge, tricked him into attending it and prevented a comment by him from being publicised. It said the arrest constituted an attack on the Catholic Church.

My press secretary wrote to ask why it published an article based on statements of a person not present at the meeting without checking the facts with the archbishop or me. The editor, Derek Davies, printed this letter but did not answer the question. We wrote to repeat the question. The editor printed the letter and added at the same time that what the priest had said was true. He claimed that a newspaper could legally print anything it wished, true or false, so long as it was able to quote a source who had actually made the statement. It was under no obligation to check its facts to satisfy itself as to the truthfulness of its source, or to verify the assertions with other witnesses, nor could it be held answerable for any lies and libels thereby published. Davies was brazen and defiant. We restricted the *Review* from 9,000 to 500 copies, and I took out a writ for libel against him and the weekly.

He then published another letter from the renegade priest giving a new account of my meeting with the archbishop. We wrote to ask which of its two versions of the meeting was correct. The weekly printed an edited version of my press secretary’s letter, suppressing much of it, claiming the subject matter was *sub judice*. However, when the Singapore government bought advertisement space in the *Review* for the letter, it was published, the *sub judice* excuse abandoned.


I won my libel action in 1989 when Davies did not go into the witness box to give evidence and be cross-examined. Davies left the *Review* soon afterwards.

Before our issue with the *AWSJ* was settled, I was invited to speak to the American Society of Newspaper Editors at a meeting in Washington DC in April 1988. I accepted. I quoted the US State Department’s *aide-mémoire*, “that where the media are free, the marketplace of ideas sorts the irresponsible from the responsible and rewards the latter”, and pointed out that the US model was not universally valid. The Philippine press was based on the US model. It enjoyed all the freedoms but it had failed the Filipino people. “A partisan press helped Filipino politicians to flood the marketplace of ideas with junk, and confused and befuddled the people so that they could not see what their vital interests were in a developing country.” I stated my position:

“Singapore’s domestic debate is a matter for Singaporeans. We allow American journalists in Singapore in order to report Singapore to their fellow countrymen. We allow their papers to sell in Singapore so that we can know what foreigners are reading about us. But we cannot allow them to assume a role in Singapore that the American media play in America, that is, that of invigilator, adversary and inquisitor of the administration. No foreign television station had claimed the right to telecast its programmes in Singapore. Indeed America’s Federal Communications Commission regulations bar foreigners from owning more than 25 per cent of a TV or radio station. Only Americans can control a business which influences opinion in America. Thus Rupert Murdoch took up US citizenship before he purchased the independent TV stations of the Metromedia group in 1985.”

Through these cases, Singaporeans realised that what the foreign press wanted was to sell their papers to our growing English-reading public. They did this by being tendentious at the expense of the facts. Naturally they did not like their slanted articles straightened out. When they discovered that if they twisted our arm, we could tweak their noses in reply, biased reporting became less frequent.

In July 1993 the *Economist*, an influential British weekly, published an article which criticised us for prosecuting a government officer and the editor and a reporter of a newspaper under the Official Secrets Act. We sent a letter to the editor to correct errors in the article. It published the letter, claiming it had “virtually not been touched, practically in full”. But it left out a key sentence: “The government will not acquiesce in breaches of the Official Secrets Act, nor allow anyone to flout, challenge and gradually change the law, as has happened in Britain with Clive Ponting’s case and Peter Wright’s book, *Spycatcher*.”

This was the whole point of the letter; we were not going to allow our press to challenge and gradually alter by precedent the law governing official secrets. The British press had succeeded in doing this when Ponting, a civil servant, released secret information about the sinking during the Falklands war of the *Belgrano*, an Argentinean warship, and when Wright, an MI6 officer, broke their secrecy rules by publishing his book. We sent a letter asking the editor to remedy the omission. The editor quibbled and refused. We gazetted the publication and capped its circulation at 7,500 copies. We made clear that circulation would be progressively restricted and released the exchange of letters. Then the *Economist* published our letter, including this sentence. After a decent interval, we lifted the restriction.

Apart from replying to attacks in the media itself, I was ready to meet my critics face to face. In 1990 Bernard Levin of the London *Times* wrote a bitter attack on me and criticised the Singapore judiciary. He alleged “misrule” and a “frenzied determination to allow no one in his realm to defy him”. To sue Levin in England, where I was not widely known and did not have any voters, would have been pointless. Instead, I wrote to invite him to a live television debate in London on his allegations. Levin’s editor replied that no television station would be interested. I had taken the precaution of first writing to the chairman of the BBC, my friend Marmaduke Hussey, who had agreed to provide half an hour and a neutral moderator. When I informed the London *Times* of this offer, the editor on Levin’s behalf backed off, arguing that my response should be in the same medium in which Levin had attacked me, namely the *Times*. I wrote to regret Levin’s unwillingness to confront me. When the *Times* refused to publish my letter, I bought a half-page advertisement in the British daily, the *Independent*. Interviewed on the BBC World Service, I said, “Where I come from, if an accuser is not prepared to face the person he has attacked, there is nothing more to be said.” Levin has not written about Singapore or me since.

In another instance, I readily agreed to a tape-recorded exchange with a vehement critic, William Safire, who, over many years, had repeatedly denounced me as a dictator like Saddam Hussein. In January 1999, when we were both at Davos, he questioned me for an hour. He wrote two articles in the *New York Times* based on the interview and also published the transcripts verbatim on the *Times’* Internet website. Singapore newspapers reprinted his articles. From the recorded comments of Americans and others who read the full text on the Internet, I did not lose in the exchange.

If we do not stand up to and answer our critics from the foreign media, Singaporeans, especially journalists and academics, will believe that their leaders are afraid of or unequal to the argument, and will lose respect for us.

Advances in information technology, satellite broadcasting and the Internet will enable Western media networks to saturate our domestic audience with their reports and views. Countries that try to block the use of IT will lose. We have to learn to manage this relentless flood of information so that the Singapore government’s point of view is not smothered by the foreign media. The turmoil in Indonesia and the disorders in Malaysia in 1998 following the currency crisis are examples of the prominent role played by the foreign media networks, both electronic and print, in their domestic debate. We must work out ways to make sure that in the midst of this cacophony of voices, that of the Singapore government is heard. It is important for Singaporeans to know the official position of their government on major issues.




