+++
title = "15 Conductor of an Orchestra"

+++



My ministers and I remained friends and political colleagues for three to four decades. Several of us had been together since we met as students in England to discuss the future of Malaya and Singapore, then returned home and worked together to build mass support in the trade unions and in the PAP. Our commitment to a common cause and to each other was deep. We had abiding political convictions, or we would not have undertaken the risk of challenging both the British and the communists at the same time, and later the Malay Ultras. The strongest bonds that bound us were forged during our early struggles when often we looked like being swept away by overwhelming forces. Differences on policy we kept within the cabinet until we had resolved them and reached a consensus. Then we would put forth a clear line which people could understand and accept. Once a decision had been taken in cabinet, we made a point of abiding by it.

We knew each other’s strong and weak points, and worked well as a team. When the old guard ministers were in agreement the rest in the cabinet would usually concur. I had an easy relationship with my colleagues. I was able to put my views on matters within their portfolios without ruffling their feathers. At the end of the day, they knew that I would have to stand before the voters to persuade them to give us a mandate for another term and I needed a convincing case to present.

Running a government is not unlike conducting an orchestra. No prime minister can achieve much without an able team. While he himself need not be a great player, he has to know enough of the principal instruments from the violin to the cello to the French horn and the flute, or he would not know what he can expect from each of them. My style was to appoint the best man I had to be in charge of the most important ministry at that period, usually finance, except at independence when defence became urgent. That man was Goh Keng Swee. The next best would get the next most important portfolio. I would tell the minister what I wanted him to achieve, and leave him to get on with the task; it was management by objective. It worked best when the minister was resourceful and could innovate when faced with new, unexpected problems. My involvement in their ministries would be only on questions of policy.

All the same I had to know enough about their portfolios to intervene from time to time on issues I thought important – a fledgling airline, an airport extension, traffic jams, dispersal of communal enclaves, raising the academic performance of our Malays, and law and order. Some interventions were crucial, and things might have gone wrong had I not intervened. Ultimately, responsibility for a government’s failure rests with the prime minister.



***Singapore Airlines and Changi Airport***

Any enterprise that promised growth and employment we had to nurture. I suspected that the Malaysians wanted to break up Singapore’s joint airline with Malaysia called Malaysia-Singapore Airlines \(MSA\). The Tunku told the press in September 1968 that he was unhappy with Singapore’s retention of all the foreign exchange earnings of MSA, the failure to establish engineering and other facilities in Kuala Lumpur, and the preponderance of Singaporeans over Malaysians on the staff.

I replied through the press that the agreement between the two governments specifically required the airline to be operated “on the basis of sound commercial principles”, that the foreign exchange earned was distributed in profits in accordance with the shares held, and that the facilities and staff reflected the company’s origin, namely Singapore. The real dispute was over flights to uneconomic Malaysian destinations, which we would not agree to unless the losses were borne by Malaysia.

This open quarrel came at a crucial time, when Britain’s commitment to the defence of Malaysia was coming to an end, and the Australian and New Zealand positions were undecided. Ghazali Shafie wrote to me about the dispute. He was an able if flamboyant permanent secretary of the Malaysian foreign ministry who had good access to the Tunku and Razak and had helped solve many difficulties when I was negotiating merger with them. I replied that the airline problem in itself was not all that important. But if we kept on bickering we would endanger our security because in the next 12 to 24 months the British, Australians and New Zealanders would be deciding on their post-1971 defence position. I suggested that he help get the two governments on a new approach, one of quiet, common-sense accommodation. That would encourage the British, Australians and New Zealanders to continue some commitment after 1971. Ghazali did help to moderate the public altercation. The airline carried on with a new chairman acceptable to both sides. But it was clear the Tunku wanted to split MSA and have their own airline to fly to their state capitals, so I agreed to help them build up workshops at Kuala Lumpur airport and to train their workers to repair the Fokker Friendship aircraft used on domestic routes.

I took a personal interest in MSA. I knew the Malaysians wanted to bypass Singapore wherever possible after the break-up of this joint airline. With only Paya Lebar International Airport and the three RAF airfields at Changi, Tengah and Seletar, all on our small island republic, we had nowhere to go except international. I had earlier told the airline’s management to build up international destinations. I regularly met our man in MSA, Lim Chin Beng, then the director of administration and customer services. A steady, reliable man with a good grasp of the airline industry, he was promoted to managing director in 1971. He too knew that the Malaysians wanted to break off and leave us without any flights to Malaysia except to Kuala Lumpur. He worked hard to get more landing rights on potentially profitable international routes. In the meantime he had to keep up the morale of the pilots and workers and their confidence in the future of a Singapore-owned and Singapore-based airline. The chairman and managing director of the company faced perpetual pressures from both the Malaysians and us, which only ended when the airline split up in October 1972 into Singapore Airlines \(SIA\) and Malaysia Airline System \(MAS\). We agreed that MAS would take over all the internal routes and SIA all the external routes.

We got landing rights to Hong Kong in 1966, Tokyo and Sydney in 1967, Jakarta and Bangkok in 1968. The most important destination was London but the British were reluctant to give us landing rights. In August 1970, before leaving for the Non-Aligned Summit in Lusaka, I asked Ngiam Tong Dow, permanent secretary \(communications\), about the state of negotiations with the British for landing rights in London. When he said it was very difficult, I told him to let NTUC Secretary-General Devan Nair know this. I had earlier agreed to Devan’s proposal that if the British negotiators were difficult, he would get the unions at the airport to apply pressure by going slow on servicing British aircraft. As soon as the NTUC mounted a go-slow on BOAC aircraft at Paya Lebar, the British high commissioner, Arthur de la Mare, came to see me at my office. I asked him to get his government to be reasonable. A British airline could land in Singapore but a Singapore airline was denied landing rights in London. Within weeks, we obtained landing rights in London, and flew on one of the main trunk routes of the world: London-Singapore-Sydney. This opening enabled Singapore Airlines to go international. The fact that Edward Heath was then prime minister could have made it easier.

At a dinner in July 1972, with all union leaders and top management present, and before SIA was launched, I spelt out the need for a Singapore airline to be competitive and self-supporting; it would close down if it incurred losses. We could not afford to run an airline just to show the flag like other countries did. Right from the beginning, management and union clearly understood that their survival depended on being profitable. Cooperation between union and management helped SIA succeed.

Freed from constant bickering, SIA concentrated on its international routes and flew further afield year by year. By 1996 it had one of the largest and most modern Boeing and Airbus fleets in Asia, flying to nearly all continents. It was the most profitable airline in Asia, and for its size, one of the most profitable in the world.

Central to SIA’s growth was my decision to build Changi Airport. In February 1972 the cabinet had accepted the recommendation of a British aviation consultant that we build a second runway at Paya Lebar, to be operational by 1977–78. The Serangoon River would have to be diverted for this to be done. There were engineering problems because of the doubtful load-bearing qualities of the soil below the riverbed, but it would entail the lowest land acquisition costs and require the least resettlements. The report added that it would not be possible to have two runways ready by 1977 if we moved from Paya Lebar to a new airport on the former RAF base at Changi. Then came the October 1973 oil crisis. Air fares increased with the price of fuel and the world economy slowed down. I asked for a new assessment, this time by American consultants. They recommended we keep to the planned schedule for Paya Lebar. I was not satisfied and wanted the option of moving to Changi reconsidered.

I had flown over Boston’s Logan Airport and been impressed that the noise footprint of planes landing and taking off was over water. A second runway at Paya Lebar would take aircraft right over the heart of Singapore city. A committee of senior officials again studied the alternative of building two runways at Changi by 1977 and recommended we stay with the Paya Lebar second runway. But once built, we would be saddled with the noise pollution for many years. I wanted a thorough reappraisal before giving up on Changi so I appointed Howe Yoon Chong, the chairman of the Port of Singapore Authority with a reputation as a bulldozer, to chair a top-level committee.

When I was in Washington in April 1975 I received a letter from Keng Swee, who was acting prime minister in my absence. The committee believed the first Changi runway could be ready by 1980 and the second by 1982, whereas the second Paya Lebar runway could only be ready by 1984 because of the need to divert the Serangoon River and compact the soil of the riverbed. Saigon and South Vietnam had just fallen to the communists. Growth in Southeast Asia was likely to slow down as communist insurgencies spread throughout the region. But to base decisions on a pessimistic scenario might well bring it about. I mulled over the problem for a couple of days. The new airport at Changi would cost us S$1 billion. We would still need to spend another S$400 million to expand Paya Lebar’s passenger and freight-handling facilities between 1975 and 1982. I sent Keng Swee a message to proceed.

For an airport of that size, the building period was usually ten years. We completed Changi Airport in six. We demolished hundreds of buildings, exhumed thousands of graves, cleared swamps and reclaimed land from the sea. When it opened in July 1981, it was Asia’s largest airport. We wrote off over S$800 million worth of investments in the old airport and spent S$1.5 billion on Changi, with two runways, the second ready by 1984.

Changi is a beautiful site at the easternmost corner of the island. The approach to the city from the east coast runs along a new 20 kilometre expressway built on land reclaimed from the sea, with no problems of congestion, beautiful glimpses of the sea on one side and vistas of HDB estates and private condominiums on the other. The airport and the pleasant 20-minute drive into the city made an excellent introduction to Singapore, the best S$1.5 billion investment we ever made. It helped Singapore become the hub airport of the region. The competition is keen and relentless. Newer and grander airports in Hong Kong and Kuala Lumpur with state-of-the-art equipment require Changi to be upgraded and refurbished regularly to stay competitive.

Two men played key roles in making Changi Airport a success. Howe Yoon Chong was forceful in executing policies. He had encouraged me to move the airport from Paya Lebar to Changi by assuring me he had a team that could do it in time. He did, with the resources of the Port of Singapore Authority, its chief engineer, A. Vijiaratnam, and Lim Hock San, a promising officer who implemented the project and became director of civil aviation in 1980. When I was invited to open Changi Airport ceremonially in 1981, I asked Yoon Chong, then minister for defence, to go in my place. He deserved to have his name on the plaque.

The other man who played a key role was Sim Kee Boon, the shrewdest of our permanent secretaries. He organised the management of the airport. Building a fine airport has been done by many wealthy countries using foreign contractors. The challenge is in running it so that a passenger has a smooth and swift passage through customs, immigration, baggage collection and transport into the city. If he has to make a connecting flight, then there must be facilities for rest, recreation and work. Changi has all these – rest and shower rooms, a swimming pool, business and fitness centres and a science discovery and amusement area for children. As head of the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore, Kee Boon made Changi into a world-class airport, winning top ratings in travellers’ magazines almost every year.



***Fighting Traffic Congestion***

By 1975 traffic jams at peak hours were unbearable. I had read a paper proposing that, to reduce congestion, we charge a fee for cars entering the central business district \(CBD\) at peak hours. I asked our officials to examine this idea. They found it feasible. They proposed gantries with notices to warn all motorists entering the Area Licensing System \(ALS\), which covered the CBD at a restricted time, to display a licence on their windscreen. I had the plan discussed publicly in the media for several months. We refined the proposals, for example allowing cars with four passengers to go through without a licence and settling for a charge of S$3 per day, less if bought on a monthly basis. The plan eased rush hour traffic jams and was well received.

I knew this was but a temporary respite. Incomes were rising and the number of cars registered yearly was rising exponentially. I believed the answer was to limit the growth of the car population to the rate the roads could take without massive traffic jams. No matter how many underground passes, flyovers and expressways we built, the car population would increase to clog them all up. I proposed that a new car owner had to bid for a certificate to purchase and put the car on the road. The number of certificates available each year would depend on road capacity. We calculated that the roads then could accommodate a 3 per cent annual increase of vehicles. The minister for communications took a bill for this to a parliamentary select committee to hear all representations. We settled on a scheme whereby a person had to bid for a certificate of entitlement \(COE\) to use a new car for 10 years.

It proved effective in limiting the yearly vehicle increase to 3 per cent. Bids for COEs started low but soon rose to astronomical heights. In 1994 it exceeded S$100,000 for a car of over 2,000 cc; this was in addition to other heavy import taxes. COEs became unpopular and endless letters to the newspapers by would-be car owners argued that the bids were being manipulated by car dealers and speculators. Responding to public requests, the government prohibited car dealers from bidding for COEs in their own names for transfer to their customers and also made the certificates non-transferable. These changes made no difference. When the economy boomed and the stock market rose, so did COE bids, and vice versa, as when Singapore suffered in the economic crisis of 1997–98.

By trial and error, I learnt that if I wanted to get an important proposal accepted at all levels, I should first float my ideas with my ministers, who would then discuss them with the permanent secretaries and officials. After I got their reactions, I would have the proposal discussed among those who had to make it work. If, like the transport system, it concerned large numbers of people, I would then get the issue into the media for public discussion. Hence, before we decided on an underground mass rapid transit \(MRT\), we had a public debate for a year on the merits of an MRT as against an all-bus system using dedicated roads. We also had American consultants advise us on the two options. They convinced us that an all-bus system would not provide as satisfactory a solution, because in wet weather the buses would slow down and clog up the system. This would not happen with trains.

The MRT did not reduce the demand to own cars which increased every year although we slowed it down with COEs and the ALS. In 1998 we introduced electronic road pricing \(ERP\). Every vehicle now has a “smart card” at its windscreen, and the correct toll is automatically deducted every time it passes under gantries sited at strategic points in the city. The toll amount varies with the stretch of road used and the time of day. Technology has made it possible to fine-tune the ERP system and extend it to all roads that have become congested. Since the amount a person pays the government now depends upon how much he uses the roads, the optimum number of cars can be owned with the minimum of congestion.



***Delicate Malay Issues***

Some sensitive matters, however, could not be publicly debated. One such issue was what to do with the concentrations of Malays in poor conditions that from colonial days had existed in and beyond what the British had designated as “Malay settlements”. At separation in August 1965 the Tunku had offered free land in Johor to Singapore Malays who felt abandoned. Few took up his offer. But their segregation had contributed to isolation and disaffection because these settlements tended to be depressed areas which had become ghettos: muddy, winding, unpaved lanes between shanty huts of wood with zinc or thatched roofs. The most troubling concentration was in Geylang Serai, which together with Kampong Ubi and Kampong Kembangan formed the biggest Malay settlement where over 60,000 Malays lived with no piped water or sanitation. People collected water from public standpipes sited on the side of lanes and carried it home in buckets or paid a water carrier to do so. There was no power supply although some private operators sold electricity illegally. In September 1965, one month after separation, I told residents that in ten years all their shacks would be demolished and Geylang Serai would be another and a better “Queenstown”, then our most modern high-rise housing estate.

We kept this promise. As part of our long-term plan to rebuild Singapore and re-house everybody, we decided to scatter and mix Malays, Chinese, Indians and all others alike and thus prevent them from congregating as they had been encouraged to do by the British. On resettlement, they would have to ballot for their new high-rise homes.

Meanwhile, to prevent another ugly situation from arising should there be another race riot, I decided to extend, in waffle-grid fashion, four roads that went through the Geylang Serai Malay settlement area, at the same time widening the existing lanes and lighting up the highways. In six to seven years, one large ghetto became nine small pockets. The most difficult part was the initial resettlement which began in February 1970. When we announced it, there was apprehension among the Malay residents. Our Malay MPs played a critical role in mediating between government officials and residents. The press and radio helped to publicise the government’s compensation package and the alternative accommodation offered. By then the *Utusan Melayu* had ceased to circulate in Singapore and could not work up unfounded fears as it had done in 1964 over the resettlement at Crawford.

The most politically sensitive building to remove was a dilapidated *surau* \(a small mosque\). Every house of worship, however insignificant, had a committee of religious elders and activists who collected tithes and donations for its maintenance. When the time came for the *surau* to be demolished, they squatted in the premises and refused to leave. They read the government’s actions as anti-Islam. Our Malay MPs arranged a meeting in September 1970 at City Hall, where my office was, for the *surau* committee and members to make representations to senior officials from the Public Works Department and the Housing and Development Board. With the help of our Malay MPs, we persuaded them to allow the old wooden building to be demolished, giving them the assurance that a new one would be built close to the existing site. The next day, our Malay MPs and the president of MUIS, the Muslim governing body for Singapore, addressed some 200 of the congregation at the *surau* after Friday prayers. Our MP, Rahmat Kenap, a doughty former trade union leader who had been unshaken when roundly denounced during the 1964 race riots as a *kafir* or infidel by UMNO leaders, reassured the congregation with the government’s pledge to build a new mosque to replace an existing one. They finally agreed to move out. This paved the way for the demolition and rebuilding of some 20 other small mosques in the settlement. We offered alternative sites and found a solution for financing their new mosques. I gave MUIS the responsibility for building replacement mosques and set up for them a building fund which received S$l per month from each Muslim worker through our CPF system. This gave our Malays pride in building their mosques with their own funds.

Moving the house owners was less difficult. They were given compensation at set rates, according to whether the houses were built with or without government approval, plus a “disturbance allowance” of S$350 per family, which at the time was more than a month’s salary for a labourer. They were given priority in the new housing estates and the freedom to choose the locality of their new homes. In spite of all these concessions, a group of 40 families refused to vacate their premises until we brought them to court.

When the roads were finally completed and brightly lit I was greatly relieved as I drove through the area one night, happy at the visibly improved security and social ambience. After Geylang Serai, it was easier to integrate the other Malay settlements.

Although we mixed the races by making them ballot for their flats, we found that they were collecting together again. When owners sold their flats and were able to buy resale flats of their choice, they soon recongregated. This forced us in 1989 to put percentage limits \(25 per cent for Malays, 13 per cent for Indians and other minorities per block\) beyond which no minority family could move into the neighbourhood.

This quota ceiling limited the pool of buyers for certain resale flats and so depressed their prices. When a Malay or Indian is not allowed to sell to a Chinese because the Chinese quota has already been filled, the flat invariably sells at a price lower than the market rate because the smaller numbers of Malay or Indian buyers are not able to pay the higher price which the Chinese majority can. However, this is a small cost for achieving our larger objective of getting the races to intermingle. Dhanabalan, an Indian, as minister in charge of the HDB, Jayakumar, minister for law, another Indian, and Ahmad Mattar, minister for the environment, a Malay of Arab descent, fully agreed with me that to allow re-segregation would be retrograde and would reverse what we had achieved. Our other Malay and Indian MPs also shared this view. This made it easier to implement this policy.

When this task was completed by the 1980s, I decided it would be necessary to change the election laws to have joint candidates contesting two or more constituencies. After much discussion in cabinet, we took the matter to Parliament. Three or four single-member constituencies were amalgamated into single group representation constituencies \(GRCs\) to be contested by three or four candidates as a group or team which had to include one candidate from a minority community, an Indian or Malay. Without this arrangement, the Chinese majority in all constituencies would most likely return Chinese candidates. In the 1950s and ’60s, people had voted for the party symbol, regardless of the candidate’s race. In the 1980s, after the PAP had established itself as the dominant party and was seen as likely to be returned in office, people voted more for the MP than for the party. They preferred one who empathised with them, spoke the same dialect or language and was of the same race. All candidates who have campaigned know this only too well. It was going to be difficult if not impossible for a Malay or Indian candidate to win against a Chinese candidate. To end up with a Parliament without Malay, Indian and other minority MPs would be damaging. We had to change the rules. One advantage of a GRC is that Chinese candidates cannot make Chinese chauvinist appeals without losing the 25–30 per cent non-Chinese vote. They need a Malay or an Indian who can win over the minority votes to be a member of their GRC team of candidates.



Another racially sensitive problem that troubled me was the consistently poorer performance in mathematics and science of a larger percentage of Malay students compared to other students. I decided that we could not keep these differences in examination results secret for long. To have people believe all children were equal, whatever their race, and that equal opportunities would allow all to qualify for a place in a university, must lead to discontent. The less successful would believe that the government was not treating them equally. In 1980 I brought the Malay community leaders into my confidence in order to tackle the problem of Malay underachievement openly and sensitively. I provided the leaders, including newspaper editors, with the examination results for the previous 10–15 years and highlighted the fact that the same differences in results had existed in British colonial Singapore before the war. It was not something new.

After the community and media leaders had got over their initial shock, we invited them to seek solutions with the government’s full support. I told them of studies that showed a 15–20 per cent improvement in student performance when the parents and students were motivated to make that extra effort. Their reaction was positive. In 1982 the Malay leaders with the assurance of government support formed Mendaki \(Majlis Pendidikan Anak-Anak Islam – Council on Education for Muslim Children\), with representatives from Malay social, literary and cultural bodies and PAP Malay MPs. We provided them with the premises. As with the mosque building fund, to finance Mendaki we deducted 50 cents from each Malay’s monthly CPF contribution. The contributions increased gradually, with increased incomes, to S$2.50. The government matched it dollar for dollar.

I invariably consulted my Malay colleagues including Othman Wok and Rahim Ishak before deciding on policies affecting the Malays. Both were practical in their outlook. I also consulted Yaacob Mohamed when Islamic issues were involved. He had been a preacher in Kelantan and was well respected as a man of some religious learning. Ahmad Mattar was a realist and accepted this as the best way to get results.

Not all my older ministers were comfortable with this move towards community-based self-help groups. Raja was the most strongly opposed to it. He was a total multiracialist and saw my plan not as a pragmatic acceptance of realities, but as backsliding. He did not want to use natural racial bonds to reach out to parents who could best motivate their children. He feared the risk of strengthening communal pulls.

While I shared Raja’s ideal of a completely colour-blind policy, I had to face reality and produce results. From experience we knew that Chinese or Indian officials could not reach out to Malay parents and students in the way their own community leaders did. The respect these leaders enjoyed and their sincere interest in the welfare of the less successful persuaded parents and children to make the effort. Paid bureaucrats could never have the same commitment, zest and rapport to move parents and their children. On such personal-emotional issues involving ethnic and family pride, only leaders of the wider ethnic family can reach out to the parents and their children.

A few years after Mendaki got into its stride, the efforts of Malay community leaders plus the extra tuition in the evenings showed in a steady increase of Malay students passing examinations, with substantial progress in mathematics. In 1991 a group of young Muslim graduates formed the Association of Muslim Professionals \(AMP\). They had objectives similar to Mendaki’s but wanted to work independently of the government. Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong encouraged them with financial support. With more of their community leaders helping the less successful Muslim youths, the results improved.

Our Malay students scored higher than the international average in the Third International Mathematics and Science study in 1995. Of the 1987 cohort of Malay students, only 7 per cent made it to polytechnics and universities. By 1999 this figure had quadrupled to 28 per cent while the national percentage had only doubled. A Malay girl on scholarship graduated summa cum laude in English from the University of California at Berkeley in 1996. One Malay student topped his graduating architecture class in 1999 at the National University of Singapore, winning a gold medal. Another won a government scholarship to Cambridge where he obtained first class honours in physics and went on to take his PhD in 1999. And a Malay was elected president of the students’ union at the Nanyang Technological University in 1998–99. We now have a growing Malay middle class of managing directors of MNCs, IT consultants, start-up entrepreneurs, forex dealers, bank managers, engineers, lawyers, doctors and businessmen in tourism, food, contracting, furniture and clothing trades.

The progress achieved by Mendaki also encouraged the Indian community to form the Singapore Indian Development Association \(SINDA\) in 1991. The following year, the Chinese formed the Chinese Development Assistance Council \(CDAC\) to help their weaker students, smaller in percentage terms than the Malay underachievers but larger in total number. The Eurasian Association soon did likewise.



***Rule of Law***

Law and order provide the framework for stability and development. Trained in the law, I had imbibed the principle of equality of all before the law for the proper functioning of a society. However, my experience of life in Japanese-occupied Singapore, followed by a disorderly period when the British Military Administration tried to reestablish the rule of law, made me pragmatic, not ideological, in my approach to problems of crime and punishment.

After being called to the Singapore Bar in 1951, my first case was to defend four rioters charged with the murder of an RAF sergeant during the “jungle girl” Muslim riots against whites in December 1950. I got all four men acquitted, but it left me with grave doubts about the practical value of the jury system for Singapore. Seven men, deciding by majority verdict, made for easy acquittals. The jury system had also been tried in India, failed and was abolished.

Soon after I became prime minister in 1959, I abolished the jury system for all cases except murder. I retained this exception to keep in line with the law in Malaya at that time. In 1969, after separation from Malaysia, I asked Eddie Barker as minister for law to move a bill in Parliament abolishing the jury system for murder trials. During a parliamentary select committee meeting, David Marshall, then our most successful criminal lawyer, claimed he had 99 acquittals out of the 100 cases he defended for murder. When I asked if he believed the 99 acquitted had been wrongly charged, Marshall replied his duty was to defend them, not judge them.

A *Straits Times* court reporter who had watched many jury trials gave evidence to the same select committee that superstitious beliefs and a general reluctance to take responsibility for severe punishment, especially the death sentence, made Asian jurors most reluctant to convict. They preferred acquittal or conviction on a lesser charge. The reporter said he could predict that whenever a pregnant woman was a member of the jury there would be no conviction on a murder charge, for otherwise her child would be born cursed. After the bill was passed and jury trials were abolished, there were fewer miscarriages of justice arising from the vagaries of jury sentiments.

After what I had seen of human conduct in the years of deprivation and harshness of Japanese occupation, I did not accept the theory that a criminal is a victim of society. Punishment then was so severe that even in 1944–45, when many did not have enough to eat, there were no burglaries and people could leave their front doors on latch, day or night. The deterrent was effective. The British used to have whipping with a cat-o’-nine-tails or rattan in Singapore. After the war, they abolished whipping but retained caning \(with rattan\). We found caning more effective than long prison terms and imposed it for crimes related to drugs, arms trafficking, rape, illegal entry into Singapore and vandalising of public property.

In 1993 a 15-year-old American schoolboy, Michael Fay, and his friends went on a spree, vandalising road and traffic signs and spray-painting more than 20 cars. When charged in court, he pleaded guilty and his lawyer made a plea for leniency. The judge ordered six strokes of the cane and four months in jail. The American media went berserk at the prospect of an American boy being caned on his buttocks by cruel Asians in Singapore. They raised so much heat that US President Clinton appealed to President Ong Teng Cheong to pardon the teenager. Singapore was placed in an impossible position. If we did not cane this boy because he was American, how could we cane our own offenders? After discussion in cabinet, the prime minister advised President Ong to reduce the sentence to four strokes.

The American media was not satisfied. However, not all Americans disapproved of Singapore’s punishment for vandalism. While driving in New Hampshire soon after the Michael Fay story hit the headlines, my daughter Ling was arrested for not stopping when a police car flashed its blue light at her for speeding. The police officer was taking her to the police lockup when she said in reply to his questioning that she came from Singapore and that he probably disapproved of her country because of the Fay case. He said the boy deserved the caning, drove her back to her car, and wished her good luck.

Fay survived the four strokes and returned to America. A few months later the American press reported that he came home late and intoxicated one night and charged at his father, bringing him down in a scuffle. A month later he was badly burnt sniffing butane when a friend struck a match. He admitted that he had been a butane addict while in Singapore.

These measures have made for law and order in Singapore. Singapore was rated No. 1 by the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report 1997, as a country where “organised crime does not impose significant costs on businesses”. The International Institute for Management Development in their World Competitiveness Yearbook 1997 also rated Singapore No. 1 for security, “where there is full confidence among people that their person and property is \[sic\] protected”.



***Small Steps Towards IT***

The digital revolution is changing the way we live and work. The Internet and its multiple offspring will require all who want to be in the mainstream of the new economy to be computer-Internet literate.

I was an early enthusiast of the use of computers, which became an important factor in increasing our productivity. In 1973, when my son Loong completed his Mathematics Tripos II at Cambridge, I encouraged him to do a postgraduate course in Computer Science because I thought it a valuable tool for calculations and storing data. I also asked the Public Service Commission to offer outstanding students postgraduate courses in computers. One of them, Teo Chee Hean, as minister for education in 1997, started a programme for teachers to use computers as a teaching tool with one computer for every two students.

In 1984 I decided that the government pay all employees through GIRO. Many clerical and manual workers preferred to receive cash, saying they did not want their wives to know their pay. I met these objections by opening Post Office Savings Bank \(POSBank\) accounts for them so that they could draw cash from automatic teller machines. This did away with police escorts for transporting cash on pay days, twice a month. The private sector followed suit. We then encouraged the payment of taxes and licence fees by GIRO.

But while I spearheaded the early drive for computerisation and payments by electronic transfer, I did not myself use a PC although they had become common. When younger ministers e-mailed each other in the mid-1990s, I had my e-mail printed out and responded by fax. Left “out of the loop”, I decided at 72 to take instructions. For the greying generation, it was not easy. It was many months before I could work my MS Word and e-mail without help every now and again from my secretaries. Even much later I would lose a file into a black hole because I had clicked the wrong icon. Or the PC would accuse me of having “performed an illegal operation” and threaten to shut down. At the office secretaries would help out. At home, I would ring up Loong, who after listening to my tale of woe, would guide me step by step on the phone to retrieve my hours of hard work that had been lost. When this failed he would come on Sunday to search through my C disk for the missing file or solve some other mystery. It was more than a year before I was comfortable with my PC. One benefit was the ease with which I could amend and rearrange sentences and paragraphs on screen when writing this book. Now I would not travel without my laptop to access my e-mail.



***A Chief Justice and a President***

Selecting the right man for a key constitutional position, like the chief justice or the president of the republic, is vital. A wrong choice could mean years of public embarrassment and endless problems. It is easier to decide who is the ablest than to predict who has the character to measure up to the job. I knew both the chief justice and the president intimately for many years before their appointments. One was an unqualified success; the other was an unfortunate accident that could have been avoided.

The chief justice sets the tone of the judiciary. When we were about to join Malaysia in August 1963, the last British chief justice, Sir Alan Rose, retired in order to allow me to nominate the first Singaporean chief justice. For this appointment, I looked for someone with a philosophy of society that was not at odds with mine. The inarticulate major premises of the chief justice and his understanding of the objectives of a good government are of vital importance.

I had one memorable exchange with Sir Alan. When several communist rioters were to be tried in our courts in the early 1960s, I feared that their case would be heard by an expatriate British judge who might be insensitive to the political feelings of the time. I asked to see the chief justice and explained to him that the government would be vulnerable to the charge of being a stooge of the British government if this were to happen. He looked at me quizzically and said, “Prime Minister, when I was chief justice in Ceylon I had to act as officer administering the government in place of the governor-general. He was away during a period of turmoil. You need have no fear that you will be embarrassed.” He understood the need for political sensitivity.

It was with some care that I chose Wee Chong Jin to be the new chief justice. He was then a high court judge appointed by a British governor. He came from a middle-class background, was Cambridge-educated like me, a Catholic and an anti-communist. He was strong on law and order. Sir Alan recommended him as having the firmness to keep discipline in the courts and have them follow the norms he set.

He remained chief justice till the age of 72 in 1990. I had extended his term beyond retirement at 65 because I could not find a suitable successor. Wee knew his law and presided with authority in his courts both at first instance and on appeals. Cast in the mould of chief justices of the British era, he concentrated primarily on his judgements and the workings of the Supreme Court but did not give as much attention to the lower courts or to the workings of the judicial system as a whole. Because of a great increase in litigation, the old system, both in the lower and higher courts, had become congested. The wheels of justice turned slowly, work piled up and cases took 4–6 years to come to trial. It was nearly as slow in the lower courts which handled the majority of cases.

I had decided in 1988 to resign as prime minister at the end of 1990. Knowing that my successor, Goh Chok Tong, had no association with the legal profession and would have difficulty deciding on a suitable chief justice, I searched for the right person to appoint before I stepped down. I met all the judges separately and got each one of them to list for me, in order of merit, three persons whom he considered suitable for the office, excluding himself. Then with each judge, I went through the list of members of the Bar; we also considered outstanding lawyers from the Malaysian Bar. Four judges, A.P. Rajah, P. Coomaraswamy, L.P. Thean and S.K. Chan, placed Yong Pung How first on their list, rating him the best.

Pung How was then chairman of the Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation \(OCBC\), the largest Singapore bank. After the 1969 Kuala Lumpur race riots, he had left a thriving law practice of which he was a senior partner and moved with his family to Singapore where he became chairman of a new merchant bank. We had been fellow students at the Cambridge Law School for three years and I knew the quality of his work. I had borrowed his lecture notes for the 1946 Michaelmas term which I had missed. They were comprehensive and orderly and gave me a good synopsis of the lectures. Six months later, in June 1947, I took a First in the first-year law examinations; so did Pung How. We kept in touch after we returned home. In the late 1960s he was appointed chairman of Malaysia-Singapore Airlines by the two governments that jointly owned it. I renewed close interaction with him when he was seconded by the OCBC in 1981 to be managing director of the Government Investment Corporation which we had formed to manage and invest Singapore’s reserves. He was thorough, meticulous and scrupulously fair in his presentation of the alternatives for an investment, although he expressed his preferences. This was an important judicial quality.

I had offered to make him a judge of the Supreme Court in 1976 when he was vice-chairman of the OCBC; he declined. Over lunch in early 1989, I asked him to consider becoming chief justice. My argument was that he had already reached the top position in our biggest bank and his efforts there could only benefit several thousand employees and many more shareholders. As chief justice he would be able to bring the administration of justice up to date and bring untold benefits to the whole society and our economy. If he agreed, he would first have to be a Supreme Court judge for a year to get himself back into the law before he took up the appointment as chief justice. He asked for time to think it over. It would mean a change of lifestyle. He would also lose financially. In the bank, he was paid over S$2 million a year; as a judge, he would earn less than S$300,000, one-seventh of his banker’s remuneration. After a month, he accepted my offer out of a sense of duty; Singapore had given him his second home.

I made him a judge of the Supreme Court on 1 July 1989, and in September 1990, when Chief Justice Wee retired, I appointed Yong Pung How chief justice. He had suffered through the years of Japanese occupation and experienced the race riots in Malaysia. He also had strong views on the administration of the law to ensure order in society. His views on a multiracial society and how it should be nurtured and governed and his approach to law and order in such a society in this part of the world were not different from mine.


He understood that to cope with the new workload, antiquated practices had to be abandoned and new procedures adopted to deal with all cases with dispatch, in the lowest to the highest courts. I suggested that he personally visit the lower courts, even sit with the magistrates and district judges to have first-hand knowledge of their work, assess their capabilities, tighten up the system and bring in additional talent. Work discipline needed to be restored. Lawyers had complained to me that several magistrates and district judges would leave their cars just outside the city limits to avoid paying the small fee charged during peak hours. After the licensing period was over they would adjourn their courts and drive their cars into the city centre. Such was the slackness of the system.

Yong Pung How turned out to be an outstanding chief justice. He gave leadership to the judges and set a high tone for the Bar. Within a few years he had reformed and updated the courts and their procedures, and reduced the backlog and the delays in cases awaiting trial. He amended the rules and practices that lawyers took advantage of to procrastinate and postpone their cases. To cope with the increased litigation he recommended the appointment of additional judges of the Supreme Court and as many judicial commissioners \(senior lawyers discharging the duties of a judge\) as the work required. His selection methods were systematic and fair. After meeting a large cross-section of lawyers who were recognised as leading members of the Bar, he short-listed 20 and sought the assessments of each of the existing judges and judicial commissioners on their overall integrity, legal ability and likely “judicial temperament”. Then he made his recommendations to the prime minister.

For appointments to the Court of Appeal, he asked each judge and judicial commissioner to name two of their number whom he thought the most suitable, excluding himself. The two he finally recommended were the unanimous choice of all their peers. His methods, known to all the judges and senior lawyers, raised the standing and prestige of all judges and judicial commissioners.

He introduced information technology into the courts to speed up their work; lawyers can now file their court documents and make searches through their computers. By 1999 the reputation of our courts brought visits by judges and chief justices from developing as well as developed countries to study his reorganisation. The World Bank recommended Singapore’s system, both at high court and subordinate court levels, for other countries to learn from.

World rating agencies have given Singapore high marks for its judicial system. Throughout the 1990s the World Competitiveness Yearbook published by the Swiss-based Institute for Management Development placed Singapore at the top in Asia for “confidence in the fair administration of justice in the society”. For 1997–98, it put Singapore within the top 10 globally, ahead of the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and most OECD countries. From 1995, when it began rating the legal systems in Asia, the Hong Kong-based Political and Economic Risk Consultancy Ltd rated Singapore’s judicial system as the best in Asia.



I was less fortunate in my choice of president. I had worked with Devan Nair since 1954 when I moved his election as president in Parliament in 1981. In the afternoon of 15 March 1985 I was shocked when told that Devan had acted in a bizarre manner while visiting Kuching in Sarawak, an East Malaysian state. The Sarawak state physician had phoned Nair’s personal physician, Dr J.A. Tambyah, on 14 March to ask him to take the president back because of his behaviour. Nair had been uninhibited with women, including the wife of an assistant minister who accompanied him in a car, women at dinners and nurses who looked after him. He outraged their modesty, propositioned them, fondled and molested them. After informing our director of medical services, Dr Tambyah flew at once to Kuching, where he found Nair had collapsed and lost control of himself, and accompanied him back on 15 March.

That same evening, at about 9:00 pm, I saw Mrs Nair at the Istana Lodge. To help me break the unhappy news, I brought Choo who knew her well. My note to the cabinet the following day read:

“Mrs Nair was collected and could barely suppress her disgust and anger at the news that Devan had misbehaved in Kuching and collapsed. She told my wife and me that Devan was a changed man, that he had been drinking heavily from time to time, and for the last few months had consumed a bottle of whisky every night. She had sent the servants off early so that they would not know that he would get totally drunk and incapable, when he would often beat her. She knew this would happen in Sarawak and had refused to go.

“In the weeks before his Sarawak visit, Devan Nair had been driving a car alone out of the Istana. He had disguised himself with a wig and had gone out without his security officer or his driver to meet a German woman. One morning, after he had been out for the night, Mrs Nair went to Changi Cottage to check. She discovered liquor bottles, glasses with lipstick marks and cigarettes. Devan Nair had also brought the German woman to the Istana Lodge for dinner. When Mrs Nair remonstrated, there was a row and he had beaten her. He was not in control of himself and his temper in his drinking bouts.”

Seven of our best specialists examined and treated him. The most senior of them, a psychiatrist, Dr R. Nagulendran, in a report of 23 March wrote, “He \(Nair\) suffers from ALCOHOLISM \[sic\] characterised by many years of alcohol consumption; periodic bouts of heavy and continuous drinking; psychological dependence on alcohol; lapses of memory; intermittent hallucinations; impotency; personality changes; disruption of matrimonial harmony.”

Under the constitution, the president could not be charged for any crime. If he killed someone while driving under the influence of alcohol, there would be public outrage. The cabinet discussed these developments at several meetings and decided that he had to resign before he was discharged from hospital and could resume his activities, or Parliament would have to remove him from office. The old ministers, especially Raja, Eddie Barker and I, were upset at having to remove an old colleague from so prominent a public office. We felt keenly for his family but concluded that we had no choice; leaving him in office would cause greater harm. On 27 March, when he had recovered sufficiently to understand the implications of what he had done, Raja and I saw him at the Singapore General Hospital. After some hesitation, he agreed to resign.

The following day, 28 March, Nair wrote to me:

“About a year ago, I knew myself for a confirmed alcoholic. It was only then that the DECEPTION \[sic\] began. I occasionally thought of confiding in you, but put things off in cowardly fashion. The last time I was on the verge of confiding in you was when we met some two weeks ago in my office, before I left for Kuching. I had missed my last chance to come clean. This proved my undoing.”

A fortnight later, in a letter dated 11 April, Nair wrote:

“I could still remember a few other things besides, including some of my aberrant conduct in Singapore during the fortnight before I left for Kuching. What frightens me, however, is that I simply cannot recall most of the reports on how I had behaved in Kuching. And yet they must be true, because several witnesses have attested to my conduct and to the remarks I made. What confuses me further is that on at least two occasions, of which I have clear memories, the reports contradict them. I am not a liar, but then there were the witnesses. Some of them may be liars, as I tend to believe, but not all of them can be liars. In the old days they talked of one being possessed. Was I possessed? Or was it a Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde situation?

“Perhaps there has been some brain damage. Almost certainly my brain functions must have been impaired, but to what extent remains to be seen. And to what extent can what has been impaired be repaired or even restored? That too remains to be seen.”

I had two roles: my first, as prime minister, was to protect the dignity of the office of president and Singapore’s reputation; my second, as a personal friend, made me want to save him. After several days in hospital we sent him off to Changi Cottage to dry him out. He insisted on going to an *ashram* \(retreat\) in India, to meditate and cure himself the Hindu way. I did not think he would get better that way and urged him to go for treatment. After considerable persuasion by Raja, Eddie and some other old friends including S.R. Nathan, another close friend from NTUC days \(later our president\), he agreed to go to the Caron Foundation in the United States. A month later the treatment appeared successful.

Nair insisted that we give him a pension. There was no provision in the constitution for any pension for the president. The cabinet decided to offer a pension to Devan on compassionate grounds, but on condition that a panel of government doctors saw him from time to time. Eddie Barker settled it with Nair, and moved the resolution in Parliament. After it was passed Nair turned it down, denying that he had agreed to the condition. The government did not remove the condition and Nair became embittered.

One and a half years later, in a letter published in the *Far Eastern Economic Review* \(*FEER*\) of 29 January 1987, he denied that he was ever an alcoholic. The permanent secretary \(health\) sent Nair and the FEER a letter dated 14 February 1987, signed by all seven doctors who had managed Devan Nair’s case in March and April 1985, confirming their diagnosis of alcoholism. No doctor has contradicted these findings.

In May 1988 Nair intervened in the case of Francis Seow, a former solicitor-general who had admitted that he had obtained from a US State Department official an assurance of asylum if he needed it. Nair attacked me, saying this was what I had done when I lobbied for international support while fighting the Malay extremists in Malaysia, meaning that I would have fled from Malaysia in case of trouble. When Nair refused to withdraw his allegations, I sued him and tabled a command paper in Parliament containing the documents relating to his alcoholism.

After these documents were published, Nair left Singapore and has not returned. Eleven years later \(1999\), in Canada, in an interview, he said that he had been wrongly diagnosed and that I had got the doctors to slip him hallucinatory drugs to make him out to be an alcoholic. As Dr Nagulendran had warned us, there were “personality changes”.

My mistake in Nair’s appointment was to assume, without checking, that all was well with him. After his collapse, I consulted one of his closest NTUC friends, Ho See Beng. See Beng, an MP, confirmed that Nair had been drinking heavily before he was appointed president by Parliament. Asked why he had not warned me of this risk, he replied that Nair was never comatose. Had misplaced loyalty not prevented See Beng from warning me of this risk we would all have been spared much pain and embarrassment.

But all said and done, Devan Nair played a significant part in the building of modern Singapore. He stood up to be counted when the communists attacked the PAP in the 1960s, and he initiated the modernisation of the labour movement that made the NTUC an important partner in the development of our economy.





Part II

**In Search of Space – Regional and International**




