+++
title = "05 CHAPTER V THE FRUSTRATION OF ISLAM IN INDIA"

+++
**CHAPTER V**  
**THE FRUSTRATION OF ISLAM IN INDIA**

Long ago, some 12 or 13 years before Partition, I had a chance to pass
by a meeting of Muslims in Delhi. The chaste Urdu and the weighty voice
of the man making the speech at the moment, made me stand and stare. It
was a bearded mullah wearing a fez. He was narrating some history which
was new for me.

The mullah mentioned several dates on which some decisive battles had
been fought and won by the armies of Islam. I was not familiar with the
names of the heroes and generals who had led those armies. But I knew
the names of the countries which, according to the mullah, had been
conquered and converted *en masse* to Islam in rather short spans of
time - Arabia, Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco,
Iran, Khorasan, Turkistan and so on. There were repeated references to
swords and spears and horses and hoofs and countless clashes in which
human blood had flowed copiously. In between, some one from the audience
stood up and shouted *‘nãra-i-takbîr’*. And the whole assembly roared
back *Allãh-o-Akbar* with full-throated frenzy.

Then the speaker moved to Sind and Hind. He recounted the many
‘miracles’ which Islam had wrought here with the might of its sword as
well as the spell of its Sufis, for more than a thousand years. I knew
some of those ‘miracles’ from my own text-books of history, though I had
never suspected that they could be made to sound so superhuman as in the
mouth of this mullah. And then, all of a sudden, the mullah’s voice sank
and became almost a whimper. His face too must have fallen, though I
could not see it from the distance at which I was standing. He was now
telling, in very mournful tones, how Islam had failed to fulfil its
mission in this *‘kambakht* (unfortunate) *mulk* (country)’ which was
still crawling with *kufr* (infidelism) in spite of all those arduous
endeavours undertaken by the heroes of Islam. A funeral silence fell on
the audience, and no one now stood up any more to invite another
*nãra-i-takbîr*. I moved away from the meeting and sat down in another
part of the same park where the mullah’s voice reached me no more. But
after some time the atmosphere was rent again by another bout of
*Allãh-o-Akbar*. I wondered what spell the mullah had spread over his
audience again.

One thing that had puzzled me a good deal in the mullah’s speech was his
description of the great Gañgã as a *dahãnã* (rivulet) instead of as a
*daryã* (river). I had not seen the Gañgã so far with my own eyes. But
my text-books of geography had told me that it was a mighty river, one
of the four or five biggest and longest in the world. The mullah’s
description of it did not fit with a known fact. He was a middle-aged
man, and sounded rather well-read in history and geography. I thought
that he should have known better.

It was many years later that one day Professor Balraj Madhok cited to me
the famous couplet of Altaf Husain Hali in which the Gañgã had been
contemptuously described as a *dahãnã*.[¹](#1) I was suddenly reminded
of the speech I had heard as a school boy. But by now I had acquired a
good knowledge of medieval Indian history. A new image of medieval India
had also emerged in my mind by reading K.M. Panikkar’s *A Survey of
Indian History*. It was no more the India of Muslim monarchs ruling
leisurely over a large empire, building mosques and *mazãrs* and
*madrasas* and mansions, and patronizing poets and other men of letters.
On the contrary, it was the story of the long-drawn-out war which took a
decisive turn to the disadvantage of Islamic imperialism with the rise
of Shivaji. The war had ended in a victory for the Hindus by the middle
of the 18th century. A few months earlier, I had finished a Hindi
translation of Kincaid’s *The Grand Rebel* which I had named
*Shaktîputra* Shivãjî. I had fully concurred with Kincaid’s conclusion
that the British had taken over India not from the Muslims but from the
Hindus.

Shri H.V. Seshadri has also quoted that couplet of Hali in *The Tragic
Story of Partition*.[²](#2) He has also given a brief outline of the
long war of liberation which Hindu society had fought and won against
Islamic imperialism. He writes: “For 800 years Hindusthan waged a
relentless freedom struggle - probably the most stirring saga of crusade
for national freedom witnessed anywhere on the face of this earth. From
Maharana Kumbha to Maharana Pratap Simha and Rajasimha in Rajasthan,
from Hakka and Bukka to Krishnadevaraya in the South, from Chhatrapati
Shivaji to the Peshwas in Maharashtra, from the various martyr Gurus of
the Sikhs including Guru Govind Singh to Banda Bairagi and Ranjit Singh
in the Punjab, from Chhatrasal in Bundelkhand to Lachit Barphukan in
Assam, countless captains of the war of independence piloted the ship of
freedom and steered her through perilous tides and tempests. As a result
of their ceaseless and crushing blows, the conquering, sword of Islam
lay in dust, shattered to pieces.”^([3](#3))  
 

**TWO VERSIONS OF MEDIEVAL INDIAN HISTORY**

Obviously, there is a deep divide between the two versions of medieval
Indian history - Hindu and Muslim. Hindu society may like to forget the
first phase of this history during which it suffered defeat after defeat
in spite of a succession of great heroes who tried to blunt the sword of
Islam, and block the path of Islamic invasion. But Hindu society cannot
help taking pride in the phase which opened with the rise of Shivaji,
and unfolded further under Chhatrasal, Banda Bairagi, Surajmal and
Ranjit Singh. On the other hand, the mullah’s gaze is galvanized on the
period when the sword of Islam swept over the length and breadth of the
Hindu homeland. He cannot help feeling humbled when he moves to a later
period, and finds the hordes of Islam in hasty retreat before a Hindu
counter-attack. The feeling in Hindu society at the end of it all is one
of fulfilment; the feeling in the mullah’s mind, on the other hand, is
one of utter frustration. Islam had suffered in India a second and
serious defeat after its first and total rout in Spain.

The political pundits have so far failed to lay their fingers on the
forces which led to India’s Partition, firstly because they have
confined their purview to a brief period of 90 years - from 1857 to
1947. They would have to travel back in time for more than 900 years
before they can hope to discover the springs of that deep-seated split -
spiritual and cultural - which culminated in the formation of Pakistan.
Secondly, they make a serious mistake when they pit a so-called Hindu
revivalism against a so-called Muslim revivalism, and put both of them
on par as equally guilty parties for making a mess of it all. They would
have to undertake a deeper probe into the intrinsic character and
inherent dynamics of each ‘revivalism’, before they can hope to acquire
an adequate insight into the interaction of powerful and mutually
hostile historical forces.  
 

**HINDU AND MUSLIM ‘REVIVALISM’**

Hindu ‘revivalism’ in the 19th century was essentially a resurgence of
the national spirit of a people who were native to the land, and who had
suffered terribly and for a long time from successive foreign invasions.
Hindu society was aspiring to reform and renew itself in the image of
its ancient ideals which had endowed it with strength and stability and
kept it immune from alien inroads. In the process, Hindu society had an
inalienable right to pronounce its own judgments on imported ideologies
which had coerced and corrupted it, as also on ‘heroes’ of the histories
enacted by its inveterate enemies.

On the other hand, Muslim ‘revivalism’ was the frenzied reaction of a
foreign fraternity which had finally failed to convert a majority of the
native population to its own criminal creed, and which was, therefore,
feeling terribly frustrated. The diehard descendants of Muslim swordsmen
and sufis were now reviving dreams of an empire which their forefathers
had built with so much bloodshed but which had been lost in the last
round. They were calling upon their confused comrades and converted
victims to revert to those medieval mores when Islam had moulded the
pagan and peace-loving people of Arabia into a brotherhood of bandits.
In the process, they were fast becoming the inmates of a lunatic asylum
crowded with some of the most desperate characters.

The history of Arab and Turkish aggressions against India would have
been no different from the history of earlier aggressions by the Greeks,
the Sakas, the Kushanas, and the Hunas but for the presence of a new
factor. A culturally superior and temperamentally compassionate Hindu
society would have tamed these latter-day barbarians as well, and turned
them into civilized members of its own household. What made the big
difference and complicated matters was that the Arabs and the Turks had
themselves become victims of the vicious ideology of Islam, and lost
their own cultural identity before they came to this country.  
 

**THE PRISON-HOUSE OF ISLAMIC THEOLOGY**

Islam was born as a totalitarian and terrorist cult, which it has
remained ever since. Its only ‘religious’ achievement was to rationalize
the lowest human passions, and stamp them with the supernatural seal of
an almighty Allah. It was, therefore, inevitable for it to become an
ideology of imperialism with a clean conscience. The followers of Islam
thus found it easy to feel convinced that they were carrying out the
commandments of Allah while they invaded other countries, indulged in
mass slaughter, converted the conquered people by force, misappropriated
other people’s properties, captured and sold into slavery countless men
and women and children, and destroyed every vestige of culture and true
spirituality. They could not but regard as legitimate rewards from Allah
the loot and the slaves which they took whenever they were victorious.

But what made matters much worse, the same theology prevented the
Muslims from coming to terms with reality in moments of defeat. They
refused to renounce their claim to ill-gotten gains, and tended to
become ever more fanatical and frantic in their efforts to recover what
they were made to disgorge. The theology had laid down that Allah had
mandated the whole world to the *millat*, and entrusted all its wealth
and population to the custody of Islam. How could Allah wish otherwise?
Every setback had, therefore, to be interpreted and proclaimed as due to
a temporary estrangement of Allah simply because the *millat* had turned
away from practising the pieties prescribed by the Prophet and the first
four caliphs. The *millat* had only to return to those old mores, and
Allah would restore to it whatever he had taken away in a fit of wrath.
As the *millat* could not live without Allah, Allah also could not
maintain himself without the *millat*. That is how the argument runs in
commentary after commentary on the Quran and the Hadis. That is why the
*millat* has alternated between a riotous living at other people’s
expense, and an equally riotous return to piety.  
 

**THE PIETY OF ISLAM**

There are many myths afloat about the piety of early Islam, particularly
among those Hindus who want to prove that Islam is as good a religion as
their own. Many people get impressed by the piety exhibited and exhorted
by the Mullah and the Sufi. They do not know that Islamic piety has
always been an inherent function of Islamic fanaticism. The more pious a
Muslim, the more dangerous he becomes for his fellow human beings. It
was the piety of Islam which made its swordsmen behave as they did, both
in victory and defeat. It was the piety of Islam which installed the
Mullah and the Sufi at the centre of the *millat*, and enabled them to
control its mind as well as its heart.

When the armies of Islam rode roughshod over the Hindu homeland, the
swordsman of Islam was very likely to relax and retreat from callous
carnage after some time. He was likely to get satiated after the first
few rounds of slaughter and pillage, or feel some sympathy for fellow
human beings, or balk at the destruction of beautiful temples and
monasteries, or turn away from burning the sacred and secular literature
of non-Muslims, or acquire respect for the spirituality and culture of a
people who had behaved so differently from his own comrades-in-arms. It
was the Mullah and the Sufi who would not let him relax. They threatened
him with hell if he tried to turn away from the work assigned by Allah.
The more heinous the crimes which a Muslim monarch or mercenary
committed, the higher the place in heaven which the Mullah and the Sufi
reserved for him. The greater the slaughter and rapine in which a Muslim
army indulged, the more plentiful the wines and houris which were
promised to the *ghãzîs*.

But the sweep of the sword of Islam could not continue for ever. The
Hindus who had been caught unprepared for this sort of ‘religion’ and
this sort of ‘heroism’, were not made of clay. They organized a
resistance for many years, and finally mounted a counter-attack. The
swordsman of Islam was a mortal man in spite of all the praises which
Muslim historians and poets had heaped upon him for his invincibility.
He fell back as soon as he came in contact with equally sharp or
superior steel, then threw away his sword, and finally accepted defeat.
It was the Mullah and the Sufi who refused to get reconciled to the new
reality. They compiled some more commentaries on the Quran and the Hadis
and called upon the *millat* to conquer India once again. This time the
claim was advanced on no better a basis than the right acquired from an
earlier ‘conquest’.

Ever since, the Mullah has sedulously maintained and spread the myth of
a Muslim empire in India which was ‘stolen slyly’ by the ‘wily’ British.
As an after-thought, he adds that Islam has a message for India and that
its ‘spiritual mission’ in India is still unfulfilled. Shri Seshadri has
quoted a passage from the preface to F.K. Khan Durrani’s *Meaning of
Pakistan* which reveals the mind of the Mullah. It says: “There is not
an inch of the soil of India which our forefathers did not once purchase
with blood. We cannot be false to the blood of our forefathers. India,
the whole of it, is therefore our heritage and it must be reconquered
for Islam. Expansion in the spiritual sense in an inherent necessity of
our faith and implies no hatred or enmity towards the Hindus. Rather the
reverse. Our ultimate ideal should be the unification of India,
spiritually and politically, under the banner of Islam. The final
salvation of India is not otherwise possible.”[⁴](#4) Perversity loses
all limits once the human mind passes under the spell of Islam. India is
to be enslaved again for the ‘spiritual salvation’ of Hindu society!

There have been many Mullahs and Muslim scholars in India, Pakistan and
the wide world of Islam who have been making similar statements, every
now and then. The heroics conveyed was heralded by Shah Waliullah, soon
after the Mughal empire started crumbling in the first half of the 18th
century. It acquired a feverish pitch after Ahmed shah Abdali, whom
Waliullah had invited to wipe out the Marathas and the Jats, also failed
to save the situation. The heroes of Islam had disappeared. But the
heroics had remained.

The harangues of Waliullah and company were addressed not to an
advancing army but to a demoralised crowd of stragglers beating a fast
retreat. The retreat would have soon become a rout if the British had
not intervened at a critical juncture. The British did not steal any
empire from Islam. On the contrary, they saved the residues of Islamic
imperialism from being reduced to their real status vis-a-vis a
resurgent Hindu society. The residues used the respite to reassemble
their ranks, and get ready for another rearguard action. This is the
unmistakable impression left on one’s mind by a reflective reading of
Indian history during that period. The rest is only secularist
make-belief relished by the Mullah and the Marxist.  
 

**THE ‘SPIRITUAL MISSION’ OF ISLAM**

The ‘spiritual mission’ of Islam needs no comment. The residues of
Islamic imperialism were not in search of spiritual solace which they
could share with their ‘countrymen’. On the contrary, they were missing
the very mundane monopolization of power and pelf which they had enjoyed
earlier. This becomes quite clear as one reads the Presidential Address
of Janab R.M. Sayani delivered in 1896 at the 12th Session of the Indian
National Congress in Allahabad. Speaking of Muslim psychology, he had
said: “Before the advent of the British in India, the Musalmans were the
rulers of the country. The Musalmans had therefore all the advantages
appertaining to it as the ruling class. The sovereigns and the chiefs
were their co-religionists and so were the great landlords and great
officials. The court language was their own. Every place of trust and
responsibility, or carrying influence and high emoluments was by
birthright theirs. The Hindus did occupy some position but the Hindus
were tenants-at-will of the Musalmans. The Hindus stood in awe of them.
Enjoyment and influence and all good things of the world were theirs. By
a stroke of misfortune, the Musalmans had to abdicate their position and
descend to the level of their Hindu fellow-countrymen. The Hindus, from
a subservient state, came into land, offices and other worldly
advantages of their former masters. The Musalmans would have nothing to
do with anything in which they might have to come into contact with the
Hindus.”^([5](#5))

A spectre had started haunting the residues of Islamic imperialism - the
spectre of British withdrawal from India leaving the Muslims to find
their natural and normal place in a nation which had regained its
freedom and initiative. That explains the pathetic appeals of the Muslim
League to the British rulers to divide India before they quit.

Had our national leaders understood the historical situation and had
they perceived the paralysis behind the heroics, there would have been
no partition, no Pakistan, and no Bangladesh. Why and how the national
leaders failed to face and defeat a frustrated Islamic fraternity is a
story still to be told.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Hati had mourned in his most famous poem that though the
invincible armada of Islam had crossed many mighty rivers and seas, it
got drowned in the rivulet that was the Gañgã!

[²](#2a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 2.

[³](#3a) Ibid., p. 1-2.

[⁴](#4a) Quoted in Ibid., p. 250.

[⁵](#5a) *History and Culture of the Indian People*, edited by R.C.
Majumdar, Volume XI, *The Struggle for Freedom*, Bombay, 1981, pp.
296-97.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


