+++
title = "11 CHAPTER XI THE BEHAVIOUR PATTERN PATENTED BY ISLAM"

+++
**CHAPTER XI**  
**THE BEHAVIOUR PATTERN PATENTED BY ISLAM**

On August 4, 1920, Mahatma Gandhi had written as follows in his *Young
India*: “My advice to my Hindu brethren is: Simply help the Mussalmans
in their sorrow in a generous and self-sacrificing spirit without
counting the cost and you will automatically save the cow… *Islam is a
noble faith*. Trust it and its followers. We must hold it a crime for
any Hindu to talk to them about cow-protection or any other help in our
religious matters, while the *Khilafat* struggle is going on.”^([1](#1))

But one day during his 21 days fast in September 1924, he confessed his
error to Mahadev Desai in the following words: “My error? Why, I may be
charged with having committed a breach of faith with the Hindus. I asked
them to lay their lives and their property at the disposal of the
Mussalmans for the protection of their Holy Places. Even to-day I am
asking them to practise *Ahimsa*, to settle quarrels by dying but not by
killing. And what do I find to be the result? How many temples have been
desecrated? How many sisters came to me with complaints? As I was saying
to Hakimji \[Ajmal Khan\] yesterday, Hindu women are in mortal fear of
Mussalman goondas. I had a letter from… *How can I bear the way in which
his little children were molested*? How can I now ask Hindus to put up
with everything patiently? I gave the assurance that the friendship with
Mussalmans was bound to bear fruit. I asked them to befriend them,
regardless of results. It is not in my power to make good that
assurance. And yet I must ask the Hindus even to-day to die rather than
kill. I can only do so by laying down my own life. I can teach them the
way to die by my own example.”^([2](#2))

This was the behaviour pattern of a gentleman who had put his trust in
the pledges given by the foremost Muslim leaders in India while they
were seeking his support for a Pan-Islamic cause. The gentleman had
discovered that he had been duped. But still he was in no mood to call
for a repudiation of his reading of Islam, or for revenge. Many people
at that time had found fault with this behaviour pattern, as many other
people continue to do today. But no one has ever questioned the
sincerity of the Mahatma’s motives. And it has been conceded by everyone
that he was not out to deceive the Muslims, that he had no ulterior
designs, and that he never harboured any intention of using the other
party as a pawn for his own purposes.

On the other hand, we have the behaviour pattern exhibited by Abdul
Bari, the leading Mullah from Firangi Mahal in Lucknow, and the topmost
spokesmen for the Muslims during the Khilafat agitation. In September
1920, he had advised the Muslims as follows: “The Muslim honour would be
at stake if they forget the co-operation of the Hindus. I for my part
will say that we should stop killing cows, irrespective of their
cooperation, because we are children of the same soil. As a maulvi I say
that in voluntarily stopping cow-killing we shall not offend against the
canons of our religion. Nothing has so helped the Hindu-Muslim unity as
the Hindus’ co-operation with us on the Khilafat question.”^([3](#3))

The same Abdul Bari spoke in a different tone in September 1923.
Professor Francis Robinson reports: “Abdul Bari, the erstwhile apostle
of Hindu-Muslim unity, came to the fore again. *Now he spoke the
language of the zealot*. He urged the Muslims to sacrifice cows without
regard to Hindu feelings, and declared: ‘If the commandments of the
Shariat are to be trampled under foot then it will be the same to us
whether the decision is arrived on the plains of Delhi or on the
hilltops of Simla. We are determined to non-cooperate with every enemy
of Islam, be he in Anatolia or Arabia or at Agra or Benares.”^([4](#4))

The immediate provocation for Abdul Bari’s outburst was the Shuddhi
Movement started by Swami Shraddhananda in the summer of 1923. Swamiji
in turn had been led to pursue this path in response to a book, *Fãtimî
Dãwat-i-Islãm*, by Hasan Nizami, another Muslim Mullah hailing from the
*dargah* of Nizam-ud-Din Awliya, the famous Sufi of Delhi. Swamiji had
written a pamphlet, *The Hour of Danger*, in which he had warned Hindu
society to be on its guard against mischievous Muslim machinations.
According to his biographer, J.T.F. Jordens, “In his pamphlet the Swami
went on to show how Nizami in his own introduction referred to his
consultations with many Muslim leaders, including the Agha Khan, and how
all had agreed that the publication of his work should remain a
carefully kept secret, within the Muslim community. The single purpose
of the pamphlet was to describe all the means, fair and foul, by which
Hindus could be induced to become Muslims. It said that the attack
should strongly concentrate on the untouchables because ‘if all
untouchable castes become Muslims then the Muslim part (of the
population) will become equal to that of the Hindus’. The Swami felt
that he had uncovered a giant conspiracy. His pamphlet consisted
practically entirely of quotations from Nizami’s work, showing how all
Muslims should be involved in the fight for the spread of Islam: how
pirs, fakirs, politicians, peasants, zamindars, hakims, etc. could be
used and what their allotted task should be. It also stressed the need
for secrecy and for an extensive spy network.’^([5](#5))

Abdul Bari clean forgot that Swami Shraddhananda had unconditionally
supported the Khilafat agitation under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi.
It was Swamiji who had bared his breast in Chandni Chowk on March 30,
1919, and dared the British soldiers to try their bullets on him. It was
Swamiji whom the Muslims of Delhi had invited to address them from the
*mimbar* of the Jama Masjid on March 31, 1919. Abdul Bari should have
denounced Hasan Nizami who had hatched a plot against the Hindus without
any provocation whatsoever on the part of the latter. But the
self-righteous Mullah and the authoritative interpreter of the Shariat,
had done just the opposite. He had joined his voice with that of the
other Mullahs in egging upon a Muslim fanatic to murder Swami
Shraddhananda. The Mullahs of Deoband had offered special prayers for
the soul of the assassin.

In fact, the Mullahs had been fretting and fuming ever since Mahatma
Gandhi had withdrawn in February 1922 the Non-Cooperation Movement which
he had led in support of the Khilafat agitation. They were in search of
an excuse for reversing their *fatwa* against cow-killing and for
co-operation with the Hindus. That *fatwa* had gone against the whole
history of Islam in India in spite of the brave face which the Khilafat
leaders had put on it.^([6](#6)) The Shuddhi Movement had provided that
excuse and the Mullahs had plumped for it. They were swift to terminate
what Ishtiq Husain Qureshi has called “A Brief Honeymoon”.^([7](#7)) Now
they incited Muslim mobs to stage riots all over the country. Hindus
were to be taught how to behave towards the ‘master race’.

This was the behaviour pattern of hoodlums who got extremely annoyed
with the donkey which had carried them so far but which did not have the
strength left to carry the load any farther. This was the behaviour
pattern of gangsters who felt frustrated because the victims of their
deep-laid designs had seen through their wiles and refused to be duped
any longer. But, at the same time, these Mullahs were in the forefront
of Muslim society. Leading politicians like the Ali Brothers had bowed
before them in reverence. The behaviour pattern of the exponents and
custodians of Islam, therefore, cannot but lead us to the inescapable
conclusion that Islam itself has always been, and remains, a thinly
veiled theorisation of gangsterism.  
 

**RABINDRANATH ON HINDU-MUSLIM UNITY**

One aspect of this behaviour pattern had been noticed by the great poet,
Rabindranath, who was reported as follows in an interview to *The Times
of India* published on April 18, 1924: “Another very important fact
which according to the poet was making it almost impossible for
Hindu-Mohammedan unity to become an accomplished fact was that the
Mohammedans could not confine their patriotism to any one country. The
poet said that he had very frankly asked many Mohammedans whether, in
the event of any Mohammedan power invading India, they would stand side
by side with their Hindu neighbours to defend their common land. He
could not be satisfied with the reply he got from them. He said that he
could definitely state that even men like Mr. Mohammed Ali had declared
that under no circumstances was it permissible for any Mohammedan,
whatever his country might be, to stand against any other
Mohammedan.”^([8](#8))  
 

**LALA LAJPAT RAI ON THE SAME THEME**

At about the same time Lala Lajpat Rai came to the conclusion that this
behaviour pattern had its primary source in the Quran and the Hadis.
Lalaji wrote as follows in a confidential letter to Deshbandhu C.R. Das:
“I have devoted most of my time during the last six months to the study
of Muslim history and Muslim Law and I am inclined to think that
Hindu-Muslim unity is neither possible nor practicable… Assuming and
admitting the sincerity of the Mohammedan leaders in the
Non-Co-operation Movement, I think their religion provides an effective
bar to anything of the kind. There is no finer Mohammedan than Hakim
\[Ajmal Khan\] Sahab, but can any Muslim leader override the Koran? I
can only hope that my reading of the Islamic Law is incorrect and
nothing would relieve me more than to be convinced that it is so… I do
honestly and sincerely believe in the necessity and desirability of
Hindu-Muslim unity. I am also fully prepared to trust the Muslim
leaders, but what about the injunctions of the Koran and the Hadis? The
leaders cannot override them.”^([9](#9))  
 

**SARAT CHANDRA SUMS UP THE SUBJECT**

Shri Sarat Chandra Chatterji, the noted Bengali novelist and a
Congressman of long standing, had commented on the overt behaviour of
Muslims ever since Islam arrived in India. Pained by the humiliations
which Muslim hooligans had heaped on Hindus in the countryside of East
Bengal, he had written as follows in October, 1926: “If we go by the
lessons of history we have to accept that the goal of Hindu-Muslim unity
is a mirage. When Muslims first entered India, they looted the country,
destroyed the temples, broke the idols, raped the women and heaped
innumberable indignities on the people of this country. Today it appears
that such noxious behaviour has entered the bone-marrow of Muslims.
Unity can be achieved among equals. In view of the big gap between the
cultural level of Hindus and Muslims which can hardly be bridged, I am
of the view that Hindu-Muslim unity which could not be achieved during
the last thousand years will not materialise during the ensuing thousand
years. If we are to drive away the English people depending upon this
elusive capital of Hindu-Muslim unity, I would rather advise its
postponement.”^([10](#10))  
 

**HINDU FAILURE TO UNDERSTAND ISLAM**

In an article in Young India dated May 29, 1924, Mahatma Gandhi had
himself noted that *“my own experience confirms that the Mussalman as a
rule is a bully”*. Only he did not trace this Muslim behaviour pattern
to the tenets of Islam which continued to be a “noble faith” for him
till he himself was consumed by the flames ignited by this faith. But
the Mahatma was neither the first nor the last Hindu to commit this
mistake about Islam. Hindu society has been a wilful victim of this
folly ever since Islam arrived India on the shoulders of Arab armies in
the second half of the 7th century AD.

This imperialist ideology of terrorism has been in India for the last
thirteen centuries and more. But with the exception of Swami Dayananda
and the Arya Samaj, no Hindu thinker or organization has made a serious
or systematic study of its mind or methods. The Hindu response to Islam
has invariably been a series of slogans - Ram and Rahim are one and the
same, Allah and Ishwar describe the same Supreme Power, Kashi and
Ka‘abah are equally holy, the mosque is a variation of the *mandir* even
when the former has been built on the site and with the debris of the
latter, *namãz* is another name for *upãsanã* (worship), in short, Islam
is as good as *Sanãtana Dharma*.

What is worse, Hindu society has fallen into an inveterate habit of
white-washing and wishing away the dark deeds of Islam by dressing them
up in Hindu verbiage. Hindus never allow the spokesmen of Islam to speak
for themselves. Instead, they interpret Islam in terms of the Indian
spiritual traditions, and try their utmost to force this diabolical
creed into divine moulds. And they flaunt this habit as a *sine qua non*
of their liberalism and large-heartedness, their capacity to digest and
transform into nector even the most potent poison.

Hindu society has never paused to find out how Islamic theologians
respond to its cherished slogans and sentiments. It has always been in a
hurry to sell some patent prescriptions like *sarva-dharma-samabhãva* so
that the slogans may be put into practice unilaterally. That is why all
Hindu slogans have so far fallen on deaf ears, or have invited contempt
from the Muslims who know their *Dîn* A to Z. That is why all Hindu
prescriptions have proved to be costly mistakes. That is why a great
Hindu like Mahatma Gandhi who succeeded against all other odds, ended as
a total and tragic failure when it came to the followers of Islam.

We blamed the British for Hindu-Muslim conflict so long as the British
controlled this country. Then we lulled ourselves into the fond belief
that the ‘communal problem’ had been finally solved by the Partition in
1947, and that we could settle down to solving the problems of poverty
and social injustice. But the belief has been shattered by the
increasing frequency of riots staged by Muslim hooligans. And the
British are no more there to take the blame except for those morons who
will continue to explain in terms of British machinations everything
that goes wrong in India till the end of time.  
 

**IT IS ISLAM THAT SEPARATES THE MUSLIMS FROM THE HINDUS**

The Muslims in India are, by and large, the same people as the Hindus,
except for a microscopic minority which takes pride in its descent from
foreign forefathers. The Muslims in India share a lot with the Hindus in
such externalia as race, language, dress, mores and manners. What is it,
then, which divides the Muslims from the Hindus and sets them as a
people apart? A correct answer to this question will go a long way in
putting the problem in its proper perspective.

The answer is obvious as well as inescapable, unless we fall victim to
the Marxist metaphysics according to which the Hindus are the haves and
the Muslims the have-nots, and the conflict between the two is a
disguised form of class conflict. There should be no doubt that it is
Islam which divides the Muslims from the Hindus. Hindus would have to
understand Islam if they want to understand Muslim Separatism, and thus
rise to the challenge with an adequate response.  
 

**THE ESSENCE OF ISLAM**

We give below the conclusions which cannot be avoided if we study the
corpus of Islam from its original sources - the Quran, the Hadis, the
biographies of the Prophet, and the compendia from the four leading
schools of Islamic law - without getting caught in the casuistries which
19th and 20th century Islamic apologetics has woven round this creed:

> 1\. The Kalima or the confession of faith (*îmãn*) in Islam proclaims
> that there is no god except Allah, and that Muhammad is the Prophet
> (*rasûl*) of Allah. Which means that all Hindu Gods and Goddesses are
> non-existent or false, and that all Hindu sages and saints (*rishis*
> and *munis*) whether born before or after Muhammad was made the
> Prophet by Allah, are impostors or have been superseded.
>
> 2\. Allah says that the Quran is the last as well as the best
> revelation which has superseded all earlier revelations of divine
> truth, and ruled out any future revelation till the end of time. Which
> means that all Hindu guides to spiritual seeking (*Šruti*) have become
> null and void, and that Hindus who continue to look up to them are no
> more than misguided fools.
>
> 3\. Allah also says that he has perfected the code of human conduct in
> the life-style (*Sunnah*) of die Prophet, both for becoming virtuous
> in this life and for entering paradise hereafter. Which means that all
> Hindu codes of conduct (*Dharmašãstras*) have become invalid, and can
> lead only to vice in this life and hell hereafter. Nor do Hindus have
> a right to evolve any code of conduct in future.
>
> 4\. The Quran as well as the Sunnah informs us that the age preceding
> the prophethood of Muhammad was an age of ignorance (*jãhiliyyah*),
> and that all cultural creations of that age have either to be so
> converted as to fit into the framework of Islamic culture, or
> destroyed root and branch. Which means that the entire culture which
> Hindus have inherited from their hoary past has either to be forced
> into Islamic moulds or to be wiped out altogether.
>
> 5\. Islam assures us that Allah has bestowed the whole world together
> with all its wealth and population upon his Chosen People, the
> congregation of Muhammad (*Ummat al-Muhammadî*), and that the lives,
> properties, and honour of the infidels (*kãfirs*) stands forfeited in
> favour of the believers (*mu‘mins*). Which means that Hindus have
> become squatters in their ancestral homeland, and that Muslims have an
> unalienable right to drive them away, kill them, plunder them, enslave
> them, and dishonour them in every way till they agree to be converted
> to the only true faith.

In short, Islam divides the human family into two factions - the
believers and the infidels-, human history into two periods - the age of
ignorance and the age of enlightenment-, and the inhabited earth into
two camps-, the lands of the believers (*Dãr-ul-Islãm*) and the lands of
the infidels (*Dãr-ul-harb*)-, and postulates a permanent war between
these divisions. The believers are called upon to wage an unceasing war
(*jihad*) on the infidels till the latter are converted or killed off.
The age of enlightenment should strive in the same way till everything
belonging to the age of ignorance is remoulded or replaced. And the
*Dãr-ul-Islãm* should continue to send missions to the *Dãr-ul-harb*
till the latter is conquered and converted into *Dãr-ul-Islãm*.

One can well imagine the behaviour pattern of those who pass under the
spell of Islam. They cannot but look upon their non-Muslim neighbours as
enemies to be attacked on the slightest pretext, to be converted by all
means, and to be eliminated if they (non-Muslims) prove intractable.
*The Tragic Story of Partition* has given a detailed account of the
behaviour pattern which started unfolding as soon as Islam bared its
fangs during the Khilafat agitation. But being a typical Hindu who
cannot help honouring Islam as a religion, the author has failed to
trace the behaviour pattern back to the belief system.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Emphasis added.

[²](#2a) Mahadev Desai, *Day to Day with Gandhi*, Volume 4, p. 165.
Emphasis added.

[³](#3a) Cited by H.V. Seshadri from Ram Gopal, *Indian Muslims*, p.
138.

[⁴](#4a) Francis Robinson, op.cit. p. 339.

[⁵](#5a) J.T.F. Jordens, *Swami Shradhananda: His Life and Causes*, New
Delhi, 1981, Pp. 140.41.

[⁶](#6a) The Mullahs in India have always regarded cow-slaughter as one
of the noblest (*azîm*) practices of Islam. As late as 3 April 1986, Ali
Mian of Lucknow, the top-most Mullah, has harangued the Muslims in India
not to give up this practice (Arun Shourie, A Secular Agenda, New Delhi,
1993, p. 346).

[⁷](#7a) Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi, *Ulema in Politics*, Chapter X.

[⁸](#8a) Quoted by A. Ghosh in, ‘Making of the Muslim Psyche’ in
Devendra Swamp (ed.), *Politics of Conversion*, New Delhi, 1986, p. 148.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 147.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 148.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


