+++
title = "04 CHAPTER 2 THE JUDGMENT MISSES THE MAIN POINT"

+++
**CHAPTER 2**

**THE JUDGMENT MISSES THE MAIN POINT**

It is not for laymen like us to discuss the correctness or otherwise of
a High Court judgment.  It should better be left to those who are
conversant with the law and can enter into the intricacies of
interpretation and logical construction.  For all we know, it is perhaps
impossible to impugn a book under the existing law, if it is assumed at
the very outset that the book is a sacred scripture cherished as such by
a certain community.

It must, however, be said to the credit of Justice Basak that he took
considerable pains to establish such an assumption in respect of the
Quran.  He cited authorities like the *Encyclopaedia Britannica* in
order to certify that the Quran is the basic textbook of Islam.  He did
not stint in using his own stock of literary and philosophical
flourishes for fortifying the fundamental Muslim belief that the Quran
has a divine source.

But the Writ Petition had not contested the point that Muslims revere
the Quran as divine revelation.  In fact, the Petition had stated quite
clearly that “the Quran, particularly in its Arabic original, moves
Muslims to tears and ecstasy” - a sign of extreme devotion.  The real
issue raised by the Petition was not what Muslims believe about the
Quran but what behaviour pattern the Quran inculcates in its votaries
vis-à-vis the unbelievers.

We find that Justice Basak neither faced this issue squarely nor ignored
it completely in his judgment.  He was not required to face it after he
had constructed the legal concept that the Quran is  sacred scripture. 
He could have cited the relevant law which exempts scriptures from legal
review, and gone straight ahead to draw the logical conclusion that no
court in India can sit in judgment on the contents of the Quran.  He,
however, chose to make three observations which, though brief, are
significant.

Firstly, in para 24 of his judgment, he observed, “In the faith of
Muslims, and according to the theory propounded in the book itself, the
Koran is the revealed word of God.  This postulates God, and indeed the
kind of God who has something to say to us and who takes the initiative
in saying it.  Religion in this view is not a human searching after God;
it is God who acts, and is known because and in sofar as, and only as,
he chooses to disclose himself.” The same view of the Quran is repeated
and further elaborated by him in paras 25 and 26 which follow.

Secondly, he said in para 29 of his judgment that “Some passages
containing interpretations of some chapters of the Koran quoted out of
context cannot be allowed to dominate or influence the main aim and
object of the book”.  The Advocate-General of Bengal and the
Attorney-General of India had also made the allegation that the Writ
Petition had quoted some passages of the Quran out of context, though
they had not said that these passages were “interpretations of some
chapters of the Koran”.

Thirdly, Justice Basak concluded in para 37 of his judgment that “This
book is not prejudicial to maintenance of religious harmony”.  He added
that “Because of the Koran no public tranquility has been disturbed upto
now and there is no reason to apprehend any likelihood of such
disturbance in future”.

The third observation is of too general a nature to be discussed
properly till we have a clear picture of Islamic theology propounded by
Muslim scholars on the basis of Quranic pronouncements.  We shall take
it up at a later stage.  For the present we shall confine ourselves to
the first two observations, namely, that the Quran is the word of God,
and that the Writ Petition had quoted some passages containing
interpretations of some chapters of the Quran out of context.  The two
points conveyed in these observations are interrelated.

The passages which the Writ Petition has quoted from the Quran are not
“interpretations” but the very words of Allah conveyed through the
Prophet.  They have been translated into English by a translator viewed
as competent by Muslims, and published by an orthodox Muslim publishing
house.

Nor have these passages been culled at random from different chapters of
the Quran with a view to making the book sound sinister.  On the
contrary, they provide an almost exhaustive list of Allah’s sayings on a
subject of great significance, namely, what the believers should believe
about and do to the unbelievers.  The fact that these saying are
scattered over as many as 30 chapters is explained by the peculiar
manner in which the Quran has been compiled.  Most chapters in it happen
to combine “revelations” received by the Prophet on different dates at
different places, and regarding varied subjects.

There is no question of these passages dominating or influencing the
“main aim and object of the book”.  The Quran provides no other passages
which abrogate or run counter to these passages.  In fact, these
passages embody, more or less completely, one of the two main themes of
the Quran, the other theme being as to how Muslims should become a
militant brotherhood (*ummah*) on the basis of uniform beliefs and
behaviour.

As regards the observation that these passages have been quoted out of
context, it would have carried weight if the legal luminaries had come
out with what they knew or thought to be the proper context, at least
for one passage as an illustration.  In the absence of an illustration,
one cannot help suspecting that the plea about “out of context” was no
more than a stereotyped remark which is often made by those who run out
of relevant arguments.

The observation sounds all the more astounding because finding the
context of the passages cited in the Writ Petition, presents no
problem.  The meanest mullah in any village mosque can tell us as to
when and in what situation the Prophet received which particular
“revelation” from Allah.  Islam is not a mythical religion, howsoever
chock-full it may be of magic and miracles.  It is a historical creed
which was floated less than fourteen hundred years ago.  Moreover, the
pious scholars of Islam have been more than meticulous in preserving a
record of what “revelation” the Prophet received on which occasion.

We have several orthodox biographies of the Prophet and as many as six
authentic collections of the Prophet’s Traditions (*Hadis*). 
Commentators on the Quran have used this wealth of first-hand historical
material for connecting most of its verses to concrete situations in
which the Prophet had received guidance from Allah in the form of
“revelations”.  The oft-quoted authentic editions of the Quran, in
original Arabic as well as translations, also carry detailed information
about the context of every *sUrah* and *Ayats* in it.  And all this
literature is available in English translations made by pious Muslim
scholars or renowned Western Islamologists.  The government lawyers
could have consulted some of this literature and brought it to the
notice of Justice Basak, if they were really interested in the context
of Quranic passages.

**Context is the Key to the Quran**

Apart from the failure on the part of the concerned lawyers to provide
the context, no one can quarrel with the proposition that passages from
the Quran cannot be understood properly unless the context is known. 
Only we do not see our way to accepting the implied proposition in
Justice Basak’s observation that the context is likely to elevate in any
manner the meaning of passages cited in the Writ Petition.

The language of the passages under reference is far from being ambiguous
or allegorical.  It is precise and plain in every instance.  Nor do the
passages embody any abstract principles.  On the contrary, they contain
concrete rules of conduct.  There is plenty of evidence, as we shall
see, that all imams and sufis and ulema and qazis have always stood for
a literal and matter-of-fact acceptance of these passages.  They have
always frowned upon those who show a taste for allegorical
interpretations (*ta’wIl*).

**The Quran in Context**

The Quran has 114 *sUrah* (chapters) and more than 6,200 *Ayats*
(verses).^([1](#1)) The bulk of the material in it consists of stories
and doctrines borrowed bodily from the Bible and the Judeo-Christian
lore floating around in Arabia in the Prophet’s time.  Many rituals and
social forms as well as norms have been taken over from the Pagan Arab
traditions, and transformed in a manner so that they look like original
contributions of Allah.  The only “revelations” which stand apart from
this general mass, are those which Allah relays at certain critical
junctures in the Prophet’s career.  As the Quran has been compiled
neither in a chronological nor in a thematic order, these key
“revelations” lie scattered (or secreted?) in many chapters.  But
biographers of the Prophet in the modem West have sorted them out, and
connected them to the concrete contexts in Muhammad’s life as a prophet
spread over 23 (610-632 CE) years.^([2](#2))

We list below, in a chronological order, the occasions when Allah either
commanded his prophet to do what the latter had already decided to do,
or confirmed and justified what his prophet had already done:

1.  *Allah’s command to preach Islam publicly*: The Prophet had launched
    the Islamic brotherhood in Mecca as a secret society which converts
    to his creed were asked to join.  They performed their new rituals
    either inside their homes, or outside the city limits of Mecca. 
    This went on for three years.  Seeing that the number of converts
    had reached a certain number, and that some of the well-known
    desperados of Mecca had joined the secret society, he felt confident
    about proclaiming publicly what Islam stood for.  Allah obliged him
    with appropriate “revelations” immediately (Quran, 74.1-3).

2.  *“Revelation” from Satan*: But the Prophet had overestimated his
    strength.  It was not before long that the Pagans of Mecca started
    offering stiff resistance to his public preaching so that the spread
    of Islam got stopped and some of the converts started going back to
    the Pagan fold.  The Meccans organised a boycott of the Prophet’s
    clan, BanU HAshim, and he found himself in a difficult situation. 
    He felt dejected and yearned to be reconciled with his people.  So
    Allah permitted him to proclaim that the ancient Goddesses of the
    Arab Pagans - al-LAt, al-ManAt, and al-‘Uzza - could also intercede
    for Allah’s favours.  This “revelation” is found in the Quran
    (53.1-23) except that the original verse 21 has been replaced with
    new verses (21-23).  Allah had found his prophet in serious trouble
    with the latter’s followers who had flocked to the fold of Islam
    because till then he had denounced these Goddesses as “false” and
    “filthy”.  Two orthodox Muslim biographers of the Prophet - Ibn
    IshAq and at-Tabari - have narrated the incident, and preserved the
    original verse 21 which praises the three Goddesses as “exalted
    birds whose intercession Allah approves”.  Two more verses
    (22.52-53) were “revealed” by Allah at the same time in order to
    assure the Prophet and his flock that this was not the first
    occasion when Satan had succeeded in mixing his own “untruth” with
    Allah’s “truth”.

3.  *“Revelations” against the Jews*: The Prophet had migrated to Medina
    because that city had a large population of Jews whom he expected to
    confirm his prophethood.  Most of what he had been “revealing” so
    far, was derived from the Jewish scripture.  But he discovered very
    soon that the Jews had nothing but contempt for him and his creed. 
    They made fun of him so that he was in danger of getting discredited
    even in the eyes of his own Muslims, not to speak of the Arab Pagans
    whom he was striving to convert.  He became increasingly hostile to
    the Jews and thought of denouncing them as renegades who had fallen
    from the path blazed by Abraham.  Allah obliged him by “revealing” a
    large number of verses (2.1-100; 3.111-12, 118-20) which mouthed the
    Prophet’s new message to the Muslims and pronounced Abraham as the
    first Muslim.  So far Muslims had prayed facing the Jewish Temple in
    Jerusalem.  Allah changed the qiblah from Jerusalem to Ka‘ba at
    Mecca (2.142-45, 149-50).  Muslims were now commanded to fight the
    Jews, subjugate them (9.29) and harass them in every way.

4.  *Formation of the Islamic Brotherhood*: The first brotherhood
    (*ummah*) which the Prophet had founded immediately after he settled
    down in Medina, consisted of converts to Islam from Mecca
    (*mUhAjirUn*) and Medina (*anSArs*) and the Jews of Medina.  The
    text of the agreement between the Muslims and Jews for a defensive
    alliance against the common enemy - Meccan Pagans - is available in
    some biographies of the Prophet.^([3](#3)) But he had to disown and
    denounce the Jews before long for reasons related in 3 above.  Now
    the Prophet was out to form a new brotherhood consisting of Muslims
    alone.  Accordingly, Allah sent down “revelations” commanding his
    prophet to form a Muslim *Ummah* (2.143; 3.110) which had inherited
    dominion over the whole earth from the earlier scriptuaries
    (7.128) - the Jews and the Christians - who had fallen from the true
    path shown by his earlier prophets.  Henceforward, Muslims were the
    Chosen People (10.13-14) entrusted with the mission of spreading the
    “only true faith”.

5.  *Sword in the service of Allah*: The Prophet had decided to use the
    sword (*jihAd bil saif*) when he saw that the Pagans of Mecca were
    refusing to come round and convert to his creed by means of
    “peaceful persuasion”.  He had sought help from Abyssinia and Ta’if,
    but failed.  He was preaching to pilgrims from outside Mecca when
    some leading people from Medina met him at Aqaba, and rescued him
    from his plight by inviting him to their own city.  During his early
    days in Medina, the Prophet apprehended attacks from the Quraish of
    Meeca.  So he formed the Muslim-Jewish alliance as a defensive
    measure.  Allah came forward with “revelations” (22.39-41)
    permitting the Prophet to fight in self-defence, and promising
    help.  But no attacks came from Mecca so that the Prophet was left
    free to break his alliance with the Jews and form his own Muslim
    *Ummah*.  Allah obliged immediately by converting the permission
    into a command (2.216; 4.76-77, 84, 8.39, 66- 66).  War against the
    Pagans now became obligatory on all Muslims.  Muslims were to go out
    and attack the infidels in regular military formations (4.71; 8.15;
    9.123; 61.4). As the Muslims succeeded in the raids on Arab
    settlements and caravans, the Prophet used the plunder obtained for
    building a formidable military machine at Medina.  Lust for loot
    attracted to his fold desperados from all over Arabia; they joined
    the Muslim *Ummah* in droves.  The Prophet went on elaborating this
    doctrine of “war in the way of Allah” (*jihAd fI sabIlallah*) till
    it became a total and permanent war for establishing Islam all over
    the world.  And Allah went on sending down appropriate “revelations”
    as and when the Prophet needed them in his campaign of slaughter and
    rapine till he died after giving a call for world conquest.  Allah
    had purchased the lives and properties of the Muslims in exchange
    for dominion in this word and paradise hereafter (2.244-45; 9.111). 
    Avoiding *jihAd* became a great sin and violation of the covenant
    with Allah (2.218; 3.156; 4.74, 77, 95; 9.24, 38-39, 81.84).
    Becoming a martyr (*shahId*) became the highest merit for every
    Muslim (2.154; 3.157, 169-70,195, 198; 22.58; 33.16-17). It is
    significant that all these “revelations” about *jihAd* bil saif were
    received by him after his migration to Medina.

6.  *Bloodshed in the Sacred Months justified*: An expedition which the
    Prophet had sent to Nakhla was successful in obtaining some plunder,
    after the earlier ones he had sent elsewhere had failed in this
    respect.  But the leader of this expedition which was mounted in the
    Sacred Month of Rajab killed a man from Medina, which was a serious
    violation of the ancient Arab tradition that no blood was to be shed
    in the four Sacred Months of which Rajab was the last.  The incident
    invited not only strong comments from Arab Pagans everywhere but
    also murmurs of disapproval from the Muslims in Medina.  The Prophet
    kept quiet for some time.  But he had a justification up his
    sleeve.  Allah confirmed his prophet’s reasoning in a “revelation”
    (2.217) so that the plunder could be distributed among the Muslims
    and their murmurs silenced.

7.  *Ransom for prisoners of war*: The Muslim army had captured a number
    of Pagans from Mecca in the Battle of Badr.  The Prophet got two of
    them killed because they had mocked or otherwise insulted him after
    he proclaimed his prophethood in Mecca.  About the rest of the
    prisoners, he faced a controversy as to whether they should be
    killed or released after exacting ransom from the Quraish.  Abu Bakr
    was in favour of ransom, while ‘Umar wanted them to be slaughtered. 
    The Prophet decided to ransom them out but wanted to pacify ‘Umar at
    the same time.  Allah was quick to come to the rescue of his
    prophet.  In a sudden “revelation” he reprimanded the Prophet for
    “not committing slaughter in the land” but pardoned him for
    accepting ransom (8.67-70) because he was in need of it.

8.  *Division of plunder*: The Muslims who participated in the Battle of
    Badr, had collected a lot of plunder, particularly from the bodies
    of the enemies killed.  They deposited every bit of it with the
    Prophet but kept on demanding that it should be distributed among
    them without delay.  Their mouths were watering in expectation of a
    rich share.  The Prophet was keen to keep a part of the plunder for
    himself but could not make up his mind about how to say it.  Allah
    took him out of the tight corner by an appropriate “revelation”
    (8.1, 41) which established the Islamic institution of *khams*, “the
    sacred one-fifth”.  In times to come, as the Islamic empire expanded
    over large areas, khams became the principal source of revenue for
    every Islamic state.^([4](#4))  Other sources of state revenue were
    tapped much later in the history of Islam.

9.  *Expulsion of BanU Qaynuqa‘ Jews from Medina*: Success in the Battle
    of Badr encouraged the Prophet to implement a scheme which he had
    had in his mind ever since he turned against the Jews.  He wanted to
    massacre the Jews of Medina and seize the rich properties they
    possessed in various forms in their three settlements around the
    city.  But the Jews had allies among the Arab tribes of Medina, some
    of whom had converted to Islam while others had remained Pagans.  So
    the Prophet decided to test the alliance by besieging one of the
    Jewish tribes - BanU Qaynuqa‘.  The Arab allies incited the Jews not
    to yield, but did not make any effort to raise the siege.  The
    Jewish tribe was starved into surrender.  The Prophet tried to do
    what he had in his mind.  But at this point the Arab allies
    intervened, and saved the Jews from slaughter and rapine.  The
    Prophet had to rest content with expelling the BanU Qaynuqa‘ from
    Medina.  He had also to allow them to take away whatever movable
    properties they could.  It was certainly a setback for him.  But
    Allah was quick to approve the “compromise” in a new “revelation”
    (3.12-13, 19-20).

10. *Defeat suffered by Muslims at Uhud*: Another setback to the Prophet
    came soon after the “compromise” regarding BanU Qaynuqa‘.  An army
    of the Quraish from Medina defeated the Muslims at Uhud near Medina,
    killed some of their stalwarts like Hamza, and even wounded the
    Prophet himself.  The Muslims had to run away from the battlefield
    to which they had gone in hope of victory and plunder.  The Pagans
    and the Jews in Medina started making fun of him and his blind
    followers.  The Prophet was now called upon not only to console his
    flock, but also to explain away their defeat in terms of their lack
    of firm faith.  Allah sent down the appropriate “revelations”
    (93.139-57, 164-72).

11. *Cutting of date-palms and instituting Fai‘*: A few months after
    defeat of the Muslims at Uhud, the Prophet got another opportunity
    to further unfold his scheme against the Jews of Medina and retrieve
    some of his reputation.  The Jewish tribe of BanU NazIr was accused
    by him of being in league with a tribe of Pagan Arabs who had
    massacred a party of Muslims sent by the Prophet in response to an
    invitation from the Pagans for converting them to Islam.  He asked
    BanU NazIr to leave Medina immediately.  The Jews refused, and the
    Muslims led by the Prophet besieged their settlement.  In order to
    force the Jews to surrender, the Prophet ordered his followers to
    cut down the date-palms around their settlement and bum the roots of
    the trees.  The Jews appealed to the Prophet in the name of Moses
    who had forbidden cutting of date-palms.  They thought that their
    appeal would have effect as the Prophet was in the habit of citing
    Moses every now and then and the Quran “revealed” so far was full of
    stories about Moses.  But the Prophet received a “revelation”
    telling the Jews that the law of Moses had been violated in
    obedience to a specific order from Allah repudiating the disobedient
    ones (59.2-5). BanU NazIr had to surrender and accept banishment
    from Medina.  But this time they had to leave their properties, the
    whole of which the Prophet appropriated for himself in obedience to
    a simultaneous “revelation” (59.6-8) in terms of which Allah
    ordained that plunder obtained without an armed conflict belonged
    solely to Allah and his prophet.  The latter “revelation”
    established the institution of fai‘ which enriched many Muslim
    monarchs and commanders in the subsequent history of Islam.

12. *Marriage with Zainab*: The Prophet’s first wife Khadija had
    presented to her husband a young slave, Zaid bin al-HAris, whom he
    had freed, converted to Islam, and adopted as his son when he
    appointed himself a prophet in Mecca.  Later on, he had married Zaid
    to a beautiful young girl, Zainab hint Jahsh.  The couple had
    migrated to Medina along with the Muslims of Mecca, and lived in a
    house near those of the Prophet’s other wives.  One day, the Prophet
    went to see Zaid and found that the latter was not in his house. 
    Zainab invited him inside.  He saw her scantily clad, and her
    ravishing figure riveted his attention.  He fell in love with her
    and pined for having her as his lawfully wedded wife.  The Prophet’s
    agony became known to Zaid who offered to divorce her so that she
    could enter the Prophet’s harem.  But the Prophet rejected the
    offer, somewhat angrily.  According to a hallowed Arab tradition,
    the wife of a son, even if the son happened to be an adopted one,
    was to be treated as a daughter by the father, marriage with her
    being tantamount to incest.  The Prophet’s longing for her, however,
    remained unabated.  Finally, Allah had to intervene with
    “revelations” (33.4-5, 59.37-40) which ordained that the Prophet
    should follow his heart’s desire in matters of sex, and that Zaid
    was not his own son but the son of his (Zaid’s) natural father.  The
    dilemma stood resolved.  Zaid divorced Zainab and the Prophet
    married her.  He celebrated the occasion with a spectacular feast. 
    It was, however, a great scandal, and tongues in Medina continued
    wagging for quite some time.  ‘A’isha got an opportunity to mouth
    the scandal when someone accused the Prophet of concealing certain
    “revelations” which did not suit his convenience.  Referring to
    verses regarding Zainab and Zaid, she is reported to have remarked,
    “If the Prophet had concealed anything of the revelation, it would
    have been those verses he ought to have hidden.”^([5](#5)) 
    Incidentally, these “revelations” made adoption unlawful in Islam
    for all time to come.

13. *Renunciation of her ‘day’ by Saudah*: The Prophet had remained
    monogamous so long as his first wife, wealthy and influential
    Khadija, was alive.  After her death, he had married Saudah, a widow
    of mature age, an year before his migration to Medina.  In the next
    five years, he married five other women - ‘A’isha, Hafsa, Zainab
    bint Khuzayma, Umm Salama, and Zainab bint Jahsh.  He used to spend
    a day and night with each of his six wives.  Thus every wife had her
    turn, and each of the six days was named after a wife -’day of
    Saudah’, day of ‘A’isha, and so on.  He was, however, getting tired
    of Saudah, and no more relished her company.  He decided to divorce
    her and allot her ‘day’ to his favourite ‘A’isha.  Saudah offered to
    renounce her ‘day’ in favour of ‘A’isha, and pleaded with the
    Prophet to let her remain his wedded wife.  Allah “revealed”
    immediately (33.51) that the Prophet was free to do with his wives
    as he pleased.  The Prophet did not divorce Saudah, and ‘A’isha
    gained another ‘day’ to keep him company.

14. *‘A’isha rescued from scandal*: In the same year that the Prophet
    married Zainab, there was another scandal which also became the talk
    of the town in Medina.  ‘A’isha had accompanied the Prophet in an
    expedition, but was left behind by mistake on the return march
    during the night.  She had gone a little distance away from the army
    camp to answer the call of nature when she dropped her necklace
    somewhere.  She went out again in search of the necklace but by the
    time she returned, she found that the army had broken camp and
    marched towards Medina.  It was assumed by everyone concerned that
    she was inside her *howda* on her camel.  She had to reach Medina
    next the morning riding on the camel of Safwan, who was also in the
    same expedition but who too had been left behind searching for his
    camel which had wandered away in the night.  Tongues in Medina
    started wagging again including those of a few prominent companions
    of the Prophet.  It was suspected that the very young wife of an old
    man was involved in romance with a youth of her own age.  The
    Prophet was in a fix; in fact, he shared the suspicion for a few
    days.  But no evidence of ‘A’isha’s guilt was forthcoming from any
    quarter.  Instead, Safwan had stabbed a person whom he found
    spreading the rumour.  The Prophet was too fond of ‘A’isha to be
    swayed by ‘Ali’s considered opinion that he should divorce her, and
    that there was no dearth of beautiful young women wanting to join
    his harem.  Moreover, she was the daughter of ‘Abu Bakr who had
    stood by him through thick and thin, and who ranked next to him in
    the hierarchy of the Muslim *Ummah*.  So Allah had to be called in,
    and ‘A’isha pronounced innocent (24.1-20). Allah also prescribed
    whipping for those found guilty of accusing married women of
    adultery without producing four eyewitnesses.  These “revelations”
    have complicated the Islamic law regarding adultery, and it has
    become extremely difficult to settle cases involving this offence
    one way or the other.

15. *Massacre and plunder of BanU Qurayza Jews of Medina*: Of the three
    settlements of Jews in Medina, the Prophet had already dealt with
    two - BanU Qaynuqa‘ and BanU NazIr.  He was in search of an excuse
    for dealing with the third settlement, that of the BanU Qurayza. 
    His opportunity came soon after he was finished with the Battle of
    the Trench in which a Mececan and allied army besieging Medina had
    been repelled.  The Prophet and his flock were in a mood of
    triumph.  Allah sent the angel Gabriel to them immediately, asking
    them not to lay down arms without finishing the BanU Qurayza who
    were reported to have had some negotiations with the foes from
    Mecca.  So BanU Qurayza were besieged, and starved into surrender. 
    Now the Prophet asked them as to the treatment they deserved.  They
    named as arbitrator, Sa‘d b. Mu‘Az, leader of an Arab tribe of
    Medina which was allied to the Jews at one time but had converted to
    Islam in the meanwhile.  Sa‘d at this time was in a terrible temper
    because he had been mortally wounded in the Battle of the Trench. 
    According the judgment he pronounced, all adult males of BanU
    Qurayza were to be put to death, their women and children sold into
    slavery, and their properties plundered.  The Prophet issued orders
    accordingly.  The market place in Medina was drenched in the blood
    of 900 Jews who were slaughtered non-stop during the night by the
    Prophet’s stalwarts, particularly ‘Ali and Zubayr; their women and
    children were sent to Egypt to be sold as slaves in exchange for
    horses and arms.  The properties which the Prophet and his *Ummah*
    divided among themselves were quite rich.  In addition, the Prophet
    acquired a beautiful Jewish girl, RehAna, who agreed to become his
    concubine instead of converting to Islam and becoming one of his
    wives.  Allah blessed the dreadful enterprise in “revelations”
    (33.13-14, 26-27) which descended without delay.

16. *Retreat from Hudaibiya*: In the sixth year of his migration to
    Medina (628 CE), the Prophet announced that he would proceed to
    Mecca in order to perform ‘*Umrah* i.e. the Lesser Pilgrimage.  He
    was accompanied by a large number of Muslims.  They carried no arms,
    only animals for sacrifice.  The Prophet announced that he wanted to
    perform the ritual peacefully.  The Muslims were all dressed like
    pilgrims.  But the Meccans were not prepared to trust the Prophet,
    and came out of the city prepared for battle.  Muslims were encamped
    at Hudaibiya, a place a few miles outside Mecca.  Finding the
    Meccans in a belligerent mood, they took a vow - the Pledge of the
    Tree - to die to the last man in defence of the Prophet.  The
    Prophet, however, negotiated a treaty of peace with the Meccans and
    retreated to Medina with his flock.  Muslims were greatly
    disappointed by this failure to enter Mecca.  Some of them expressed
    their unhappiness rather loudly.  But Allah pacified them with
    “revelations” which. described the retreat from Hudaibiya as a real
    victory, promised to the Muslims greeter victories in near future,
    and assured that they would be enriched with plenty of plunder
    (48.1, 18-2 1, 24-27).

17. *Silencing the Prophet’s clamorous wives*: The ruler of Egypt had
    presented to the Prophet a beautiful Coptic girl, Mary, whom the
    latter had made a concubine and kept in a garden house.  As the
    Prophet started visiting Mary more and more frequently, he aroused
    great jealousy among his wives.  The climax came when one day his
    wife Hafsa returned to her room unexpectedly from a visit to her
    father’s (Umar’s) house, and found the Prophet in her own bed with
    Mary.  The scandal spread in the Prophet’s harem, and his wives were
    up in arms.  He tried to pacify them with the help of Abu Bakr and
    ‘Umar, but failed.  Finally, he got annoyed with them, started
    living separately, and did not visit any of them for 29 days.  He,
    however, got tired of this self-imposed seclusion, and yearned for
    reconciliation with his wives.  Allah obliged him immediately with
    the needed “revelations” (66.1-5), addressed to his wives, appealing
    to them to calm down or face a collective divorce.  The poor wives
    had no choice except falling silent.

18. *Breach of pledge with Pagans*: The Prophet had performed ‘Umrah at
    Mecca in the year following the conquest of that city.  But he had
    yet to perform *Hajj*.  He avoided the ceremony next year because
    while performing ‘*Umrah*, he had been pained to see crowds of Pagan
    Arabs intermingling with Muslims around the Ka‘ba and elsewhere in
    Mecca.  Conversions to Islam had increased by leaps and bounds after
    his spectacular victories.  But a large number of Pagans had
    remained loyal to their ancestral faith, and the Prophet was bound
    by the Treaty of Hudaibiya to permit them to perform the traditional
    pilgrimage to their holy city.  This “sorry situation” had forced
    the Prophet to postpone performing *Hajj* in the subsequent season. 
    He had sent Abu Bakr to lead the faithful in the pilgrimage.  He
    was, however, feeling uncomfortable with the treaty with the Pagans,
    particularly after the submission of Ta’if which had made him all-
    powerful over the whole of Arabia.  So Allah facilitated his breach
    of pledge with “revelations” (9.1-5, 28-29) which “released” him
    from his treaty obligations.  He sent ‘Ali to read Allah’s commands
    to the people, Muslims as well Pagans, gathered at Mecca.  Allah had
    allowed only four months to the Pagans to “walk around in the land”;
    they were to he slaughtered by the Muslims if seen anywhere after
    that period.  The whole of Arabia was reserved exclusively for
    Muslims, and so it has remained till today.

This repeated coincidence between the Prophet’s convenience on the one
hand and Allah’s commands on the other, makes it more than obvious that
*Allah of the Quran is no other than the Prophet himself*.  Many people
around the Prophet must have seen through the game.  But it needed a
privileged person like ‘A’isha to expose it in so many words.  When
Allah approved of his wife Sauda renouncing her ‘day’ in favour of
‘A’isha (33.51), the latter could not contain herself and quipped, “I
find that Allah is prompt to proclaim commandments in accordance with
your desire (*maIN dEkhtI hUn kE woh allah ta‘la Ap kI ArzU ke muwAfiq
jald hukam farmAta hai*).^([6](#6)) The same comment by ‘A’isha is
recorded in a slightly different Urdu translation in another Hadis
collection, “Allah excels even you in fulfilling your wish (*allah ta‘la
Ap kI khwAhish pUri karnE mEn Ap sE bhI sabqat lE jAtA hai*).”^([7](#7))

We find far more clinching evidence to the same effect in biographies of
the Prophet and Hadis collections.  According to Ibn IshAq, Muslims had
constructed a hut for him to retire into at night on the eve of the
Battle of Badr.  Next morning, after he had “straightened the ranks”, he
returned to the hut and prayed, “O Allah! if this band \[i.e. the Muslim
army\] perishes today Thou will be worshipped no more.”^([8](#8))
At-Tabari has a slightly longer passage in the same context.  The Urdu
translation we have before us, reads, “*KhudAwandA agar yEh mErI jamA‘t
halAk hO gayI tO duniyA mEN phir tErA kOI parastAr na rahEgA* (O Allah!
if this band of mine perishes, then there will remain no worshipper of
yours *in the world*).”^([9](#9)) Here the “band” is defined
specifically as “Mine” and “the world” as a whole is supposed to stand
threatened with the disappearance of Allah’s worshippers.  A modem
writer has referred to the same passage without mentioning the source
from which he has quoted it.  According to him, “The Prophet’s
well-known remarks on the morning of the day of Badr were, ‘Almighty
Allah, if these *310* perish today, there would he none left to worship
Thee on earth.”’^([10](#10)) Thus he follows at-Tabari except for
substituting the word “these” for “mine”, and mentioning specifically
the number of Muslim swordsmen who were present at Badr.  Sir Muhammad
Iqbal, the renowned poet of Islam in modern times, goes still further. 
In his famous poem, Shikwah (Grievance), he sings:

*tujhkO mA‘lUm hai lEtA thA kui nAm tirA,*  
*quwwat-i-bAzu-i-Muslim nE kiyA kAm tirA.*

(Did anyone mention your name before we \[appeared on the scene\]?  It
was the might of the Muslim muscle which made you click.)

I can multiply references to similar statements by stalwarts of Islam in
medieval and modern times, particularly from the orthodox Hadis
collections.  We are thus led to the following conclusions:

1.  No one in the whole world bothered about Allah before Islam appeared
    on the scene.

2.  If the Muslim swordsmen who fought at Badr had been killed, Allah
    would have been worshipped no more anywhere in the world.

3.  It was the might of the Muslim mailed fist which first established
    and later on maintained Allah’s position.

Obviously, these claims are too tall or wild to be accepted.  If Allah
stands for God or some other name of the Divine, he was certainly known
and worshipped by many people in all parts of the world since time
immemorial.  In fact, Allah was the name of the Great God whom the Pagan
Arabs had known and worshipped, particularly at the Ka‘ba in Mecca, for
ages before Islam was born in 610 CE.  Nor can it be conceded that Allah
as God would have been forgotten if the handful of Muslim swordsmen at
Badr had perished.  A large part of the world has remained unconquered
by the sword of Islam, and continues to worship the Divine known by
numerous names.  On the other hand, if Allah is the gangster known as
Jehovah in the Bible which Prophet Muhammad made him mean after
hijacking him from the Pagan Arab Pantheon, a large number of
“revelations” in the Quran itself state loud and clear that he was known
and worshipped ever since the first man, Adam, was created by him.  All
biblical prophets received “revelations” from him, and he had had the
Jews and the Christians as his Chosen People at least for three thousand
years before Prophet Muhammad tried to monopolize him for the Muslim
*Ummah*.  The Jews and Christians have continued to worship him till
today, and taken together they exceed the number of Muslims in the
world.

The three conclusions mentioned above should, therefore, be rewritten as
follows:

1.  No one in the whole world would have bothered about Prophet Muhammad
    if Muslim armies had not succeeded in imposing him first on Arabia
    and subsequently on other countries known as Islamic lands at
    present.

2.  If the Muslim swordsmen who fought at Badr had perished, no one
    would have adored Prophet Muhammad any more.

3.  It has been the might of the Muslim mailed fist which first
    established and then maintained Prophet Muhammad’s position.

**Authorship of the Quran**

There is thus no substance at all in the Muslim belief or Justice
Basaks’ judgement that the Quran is the “word of God,” unless God is
another name for Prophet Muhammad.  Allah of the Quran is no divine
source of “revelations”.  On the contrary, the source of those
“revelations” is wholly human.  The Quran betrays, throughout its
chapters and verses, the infirmities such as are native to ordinary and
uncultivated human nature.  The only difference which imparting a divine
character to the Quran makes, is that it puts a heavenly stamp on
monstrous monologues of an earthly person.  What would have been
dismissed out of hand as passing failure of normal human reason and
natural moral sense, has thus acquired the authority of inviolable laws
established for all time to come.

We should like to quote at some length from Maxime Rodinson, a modem
biographer of the Prophet, who is well-known for being more than
sympathetic to Islam and its institutions:

“May any Muslims who read these lines forgive my plain speaking.  For
them the Koran is the book of Allah and I respect their faith.  But I do
not share it and I do not wish to fall back, as many orientalists have
done, on equivocal phrases to disguise my meaning.  This may perhaps be
of assistance in remaining on good terms with individuals and
governments professing Islam; but I have no wish to deceive anyone....
*I do not believe that the Koran is the book of Allah*.  If I did, I
should be a Muslim.  But the Koran is there, and since I, like many
other non-Muslims, have interested myself in the study of it, I am
naturally bound to express my views.  For several centuries the
explanation produced by Christians and rationalists has been that
Muhammad was guilty of falsification, by deliberately attributing to
Allah his own thoughts and instructions.

“We have seen that this theory is not tenable.  The most likely one, as
I have explained at length, is that Muhammad did really experience
sensory phenomena translated into words and phrases and that he
interpreted them as messages from the Supreme Being.  He developed the
habit of receiving these revelations in a particular way.  His sincerity
appears beyond a doubt, especially in Mecca when we see how Allah
hustled, chastised and led him into steps that he was extremely
unwilling to take.  But it is said that in Medina, as Buhl has very
aptly expressed it,

When we see how his later revelations sometimes come to the aid of his
less elevated inclinations, we observe how he becomes increasingly
cautions in producing revelations to back him up, and how these,
obviously enough, often contain conclusions at which he has himself
arrived after reflection and meditation on the needs of the situation or
even as a result of suggestions made by those close to him, it is very
hard for us to believe that they appeared in the same innocent fashion
as in the earlier period.

“Had the inspired visionary been transformed into an impostor, driven by
necessity to produce convenient revelations at the appropriate moment
and at no other, in the way that mediums have been known to resort to
fraud in similar cases?  ‘A’isha certainly remarked sarcastically on one
occasion on the Lord’s readiness to answer her husband’s wishes.  There
are a number of difficult occasions, when we find him hesitating to make
up his mind, asking advice and thinking things over, before the
revelation suddenly descends from heaven and solves the problem along
lines of what human (*sometimes all too human*) cogitation might have
suggested.  ‘Umar boasted innocently of having three times given advice
which turned out miraculously to correspond with the dictates of
heaven... Even Muslim tradition tells the story of a secretary of the
Prophet’s, AbdullAh ibn Sa‘d, who was taking down the sayings of the
Koran at his dictation.  At one point, when the Prophet broke off, the
secretary continued aloud to the end of the sentence as he thought it
should read, and Muhammad absentmindedly incorporated ‘Abdullah’s
suggestion into the divine text. (A prey to doubts of the Prophet’s
inspiration, ‘Abdullah abjured Islam and fled to Mecca.  When the city
fell the Prophet wanted to kill him, but he finally escaped with his
life after his foster brother ‘UthmAn interceded for him.)

“All this is true, but does not necessarily imply deliberate deception. 
*Man's capacity for self-deception is infinite*.  It is obvious to
non-Muslims that the words which Muhammad heard, by which his
experiences (in themselves almost inexpressible) were translated in so
miraculously perfect a fashion, were dictated to him by his
unconscious.  He himself suspected it; he had doubted their source, he
was afraid that human inspiration might have formed some part of it,
and, as we have seen, he even admitted at a later stage that Satan
himself had managed to insert his own orders.

“With success achieved, his own faith acknowledged, strengthened and
confirmed by thousands of disciples, it was only natural that he should
have fewer and fewer doubts about the promptings of his inner voice; and
that these, too, should have conflicted less and less with the results
of his conscious deliberations and with the urge of those strong
instincts which were fostered by the comfort of his position, by the
intoxicating influence of success and by the consciousness of
power... There was nothing surprising in the fact that Allah should
suddenly command him to take reasonable decisions which his own human
reflections, or the advice of shrewd companions, had already urged. 
*Besides what could be more natural than that the Master's orders should
correspond with the lawful wishes of his faithful
servant*?...”^([11](#11))

The observation of Rodinson in the last line of the above citation is
confirmed by a Tradition of the Prophet himself: “A Muslim saw in a
dream that he met a person from a People of the Book \[i.e. a Jew\] who
said, ‘You would have been an excellent *ummah* if you had not practised
idolatry and not said - what Allah pleases and Muhammad pleases.’ He
came to the Holy Prophet and reported the dream.  The Prophet replied,
‘By Allah! I also think alike.  You should start saying - what Allah
pleases, *then* Muhammad pleases.”^([12](#12))  But the Quran has
retained verses which equate obedience to Allah with obedience to the
Prophet, and promise reward and punishment accordingly (4.80; 5.92; 8,
1, 20, 46; 24.52, 56; 33.36, 71; 47.33; 49.14).

The Jew was commenting on the Islamic confession of faith (*Kalimah*) -
There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is *the* Prophet of Allah. 
Mixing the name of Muhammad with that of Allah, must have sounded
sacrilegious and a pollution of pure monotheism to the Jews - an
idolization of Muhammad so to say.  Their misgivings proved true.  Islam
started by substituting Muhammad for the idols of the Pagan Arabs, and
that is what it has remained till our times.

**Why Quran and Hadis are interchangeable**

This identification of Allah with the Prophet alone can explain why
orthodox Islam has placed the Quran, the word of Allah, on the same holy
pedestal as the HadIs, the word of Muhammad.  “The sources of Islam,”
observes Ram Swarup,” are two: the Quran and the *HadIs* (Sayings or
‘Traditions’), usually called the *Sunnah* (‘customs’), both having
their centre in Muhammad.  The Quran contains the Prophet’s
‘revelations’ (*wahy*): the *HadIs*, all that he did or said, or
enjoined, forbade or did not forbid, approved or disapproved.  Muslim
theologians make no difference between the Quran and the *HadIs*.  To
them, both are works of revelation or inspiration.  The quality and
degree of the revelation in both works are the same; only the mode of
expression is different.  To them, the *HadIs* is Quran in action,
revelation made concrete in the life of the Prophet.  In the Quran,
Allah speaks through Muhammad; in the *Sunnah*, he acts through him. 
Thus Muhammad’s life is a visible expression of Allah’s utterances in
the Quran... No wonder that Muslim theologians regard the Quran and the
*HadIs* as being supplementary or even interchangeable.  To them, the
*HadIs* is *wahy ghair matlU* (‘unread revelation’, that is, not read
from the Heavenly Book like the Quran but inspired all the same); and
the Quran is *hadIs mutwAtir*, that is, the Tradition considered
authentic and genuine by all Muslims from the beginning.”^([13](#13))

It is this fixed and frozen image of the Prophet which is meant when a
Muslim proclaims his *DIn* (fundamental faith).  In fact, the Prophet
produced a “revelation” (33.21) presenting himself as the perfect model
for those who look forward (with hope) for the Day of Judgment.  For a
pious Muslim, human life is lived best when it conforms to Muhammad’s
conduct even in minor matters such as defecating, urinating, brushing
one’s teeth, licking one’s fingers after meals, combing one’s hair,
cutting one’s beard to a specific size, and so on.  Islam leaves no room
at all for individual initiative or judgment, not to speak of
innovation.  In case of doubt, a pious Muslim must go to a *mufti*
(jurisconsult) and obtain a *fatwa* about how the Prophet would have
conducted himself in a situation which, according to all known sources,
the Prophet is not known to have faced.  The exercise is eulogized by
Islamic scholars as *qiyAs*, that is, laying down the law by analogy.

It is the same identification of Allah with the Prophet which has given
currency to the patent Muslim slogan, “(you can) be reckless (in your
utterances) about Allah but when it comes to Muhammad, beware! (*bA
khudA dIwAnA bAsh o bA muhammad hoshiyAr*).” Allah can be discussed, but
Muhammad is a closed book.  The only freedom of expression which one can
exercise vis-à-vis Muhammad is the freedom to praise him.

Orthodox as well as liberal Muslims agree that Muhammad occupies the
centre of Islam.  “Urdu poetry,” writes a liberal Muslin “abounds in
irreverent references to the Almighty.  But there exists not a single
couplet which takes similar liberties with Prophet Muhammad.  Even
scholars of Islam in the West, bar a few exceptions, have not quite
understood the impact, over the centuries, of the Prophet of Islam on
the Muslim mind…  In 1985, the great scholar, Annemarie Schimmel
published a classic entitled *And Muhammad is His Messenger: The
Veneration of the Prophet in Islamic Poetry*.  She drew not only on
works of scholarship but also on poetry, music, folklore and literature
to show the central place he has occupied in Muslim life and thinking
since the down of Islam.”^([14](#14))

**The Judgement suffers from Syllolisation**

Coming back to Justice Basak’s judgement, we find that it is a syllogism
which assumes arbitrarily in its major and minor premises what it has to
prove in its conclusion.  In other words, the conclusion has not been
inferred from the evidence presented but deduced hypothetically.

The Writ Petition had placed before the court 85 *Ayats* from the Quran
which command Muslims to practise a particular behaviour pattern towards
non-Muslims.  The first point to be considered by the court was whether
there was substance in the Petitioners’ plea that the behaviour pattern
prescribed by the Quran was inimical to public peace, communal harmony,
and religious beliefs of those who did not subscribe to Islam.  The
belief system which produces that behaviour pattern should have been
evaluated only after evaluating the behaviour pattern in terms of
natural justice and common sense.

Justice Basak, however, chose to proceed the other way around.  He
started by accepting the Muslim claim that the Quran was the word of
God.  That was his major premise.  His minor premise was that if the
*Ayats* sounded obnoxious, they must have been tom out of their proper
context and interpreted to mean what they did not really mean.  The
conclusion he drew became unavoidable.  How could a belief system based
on the word of God prescribe an ungodly behaviour pattern?  So the Quran
and the creed embodied in it, posed no threat to public peace or
communal harmony or to the religious beliefs of non-Muslims. *Quod erat
demonstrandum*.

We have before us another case which came before the court of a
metropolitan magistrate in Delhi in 1983 but the judgement on which was
pronounced an year after Justice Basak pronounced his judgement in
Calcutta on 17 May 1985.  Two persons had been charged under Section
153A of the Indian Penal Code for publishing in a poster 24 *Ayats* of
the Quran and stating that riots in India cannot be stopped so long as
those *Ayats* remained in the Quran.  All the 24 *Ayats* are included in
the Writ Petition which had been filed in the Calcutta High Court, and
which Justice Basak had adjudged.  The metropolitan magistrate, Shri
Z.S. Lohat, however, drew a contrary conclusion.  He pronounced on 31
July 1986, “With due regard, to the Holy Book of ‘Quran Majeed’, a close
perusal of the Ayets shows that the same are harmful and teach hatred
and are likely to create differences between Mohammedans on one hand and
the remaining communities on the other.”^([15](#15))

With due respect to the dignity of a High court judge, we find the
procedure adopted by the metropolitan magistrate far more apt.  ‘Shri
Lohat studied the *Ayats* placed before him and inferred that what the
accused had stated about the effect of those *Ayats* on communal harmony
was correct.  He did not even mention the Muslim claim that the book
containing those Ayats was the word of God, though he referred to the
Quran as “Holy Book”.  
 

**Footnotes: **  

[¹](#1a) There are five different systems of numbering the verses which
number 6,239 in KUfah version, 6,204 in Basrah version, 6,225 in ShAmI
version, 6,219 in Makkah version, and 6,211 in MadInah version.  It has
323,671, or according to other authorities, 338,606 *hurUf* or letters,
and 77,934, or according to other authorities, 79,934 *kalimAt* or words
(T.P. Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, 1885, New Delhi reprint, 1976, p.
489).

[²](#2a) We recommend two modem biographies of the Prophet which have
been reprinted by Voice of India - *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam* by
D.S. Margoliouth, New Delhi, 1985; and *The Life of Mahomet* by Sir
William Muir, New Delhi, 1992.

[³](#3a) This document was cited and the Muslim-Jewish alliance invoked
by Maulana Abut Kalam Azad when he harangued the Muslims in India to
join hands *with* the Hindus and *against* the British during the
Khilafat agitation (1920-22) without informing anyone why the alliance
had broken down soon after it was sealed.  No other mullah came out with
the truth.  They were depending upon Hindu ignorance of the history of
Islam, particularly of the Prophet.

[⁴](#4a) K.S. Lal, *Theory and Practice of Muslim State in India*,
Aditya Prakashan, New Delhi, 1999, pp. 95-110.  Chapter IV of the book
deals with Income of the Muslim State in medieval India.  It has a
section on *khams*.

[⁵](#5a) Cited by Maxime Rodinson in *Mohammed*, Second (revised)
edition, London, 1971, p. 207 with reference to TirmidhI, *sahIh*, kitAb
44 (‘tafsIr al-qurAn), on sUrah al-azhAb, hadith 9a to 11 (ed.  Cairo,
1292 H., vol.  II, p. 209f).

[⁶](#6a) *Sahih Muslim SharIf*, Arabic text with Urdu translation by
Allama Wahid-uz-Zaman, Aitqad Publishing House, Delhi, 1986, Volume IV,
p. 80.

[⁷](#7a) *Sunan Ibn MAjah*, Arabic text with Urdu translation by Maulana
Abdul Hakim Khan Akhtar Shahjahanpuri, Aitqad Publishing House, Delhi,
1986, Volume I, p. 557.

[⁸](#8a) Ibn IshAq, *SIrat RasUl Allah*, translated by A. Gillaume, OUP,
Karachi, Eighth Impression, 1987, p. 300.

[⁹](#9a) *TArIkh-i-Tabari*, Volume I, *SIrat an-Nabi*, Translated into
Urdu by Saiyyad Muhammad Ibrahim, Nafis Academy, Karachi, n.d., p. 163. 
Emphasis added.

[¹⁰](#10a) Brigadier S.K. Malik, *The Quranic Concept of War*, Lahore,
1979, First Indian reprint, New Delhi, 1986, p. 81.  Emphasis added.

[¹¹](#11a) Maxime Rodinson, *Mohammed*. Second (revised) edition,
London, 1971, pp. 217-20.  Emphasis added.

[¹²](#12a) *Sunan Ibn MAjah*, op. cit., p. 589.

[¹³](#13a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam Through HadIs:Faith or
Fanaticism?*, published in the U.S.A., 1983, reprinted by Voice of
India, New Delhi, 1984 and 1987, pp. vii-viii.  This publication and its
Hindi translation were banned by the Delhi Administration in 1990 and
1991.

[¹⁴](#14a) A.G. Noorani in a review of *In Search of Muhammad* by
Clinton Bennett, The Statesman, 24 May 1999.  Noorani’s credentials as a
liberal Muslim are guaranteed by his quoting a length, in the same
review, from Ziaduddin Sardar’s *The Future of Muslim Civilisation*.
Sardar attacks orthodox Muslims for interpreting Islamic injunctions
mechanically and literally, thus losing “right of the individual
freedom, the dynamic nature of many Islamic injunctions, and the
creativity and innovation which Islam fosters within its framework”.

[¹⁵](#15a) For proceedings of the case in the court of Shri Z.S. Lohat,
see *Freedom of Expressions: Secular Theocracy Versus Liberal
Democracy*, compiled by Sita Ram Goel and published by Voice of India,
New Delhi, 1998, pp. 1-9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


