+++
title = "10 CHAPTER 8 MUSLIM UMMAH IS A MILITARY MACHINE"

+++
**CHAPTER 8**

**MUSLIM *UMMAH* IS A MILITARY MACHINE**

The teeming tomes on orthodox Islamic theology devote plenty of space to
non-warlike subjects, such as faith, purification, prayers, alms,
fasting, pilgrimage, marriage, divorce, business transactions,
inheritance, gifts, bequests, vows, oaths, crime, punishment,
government, hunting, food, drink, dress, decoration, greetings, magic,
poetry, visions, dreams, virtue, last day, repentance, etc.  But the
rules laid down for every Muslim, everywhere and at all times, are the
same.  In the final analysis this uniform pattern of belief and
behaviour erases the individual in man and turns him into a member of a
close-knit collective, the *Ummah*.

The *Ummah*, however, acquires an altogether new colour when juxtaposed
with *jihAd*, on which subject also the tomes wax no less eloquent.  It
looks too much like a military machine to pass as a peaceful society. 
The rules laid down by the Shariat read like a manual compiled for use
in military barracks - waking up every morning to the call of a bugle,
rolling up the bed, sweeping the floor, pressing the uniform, polishing
the shoes, rushing for a bath, moving the body in different ways in mass
drills, sharing meals in the mess-hall, drinking from a common canteen
and, finally, facing the court martial for mistakes made in any part. 
One is amazed as well as amused when this mechanical conformity to a set
pattern of external exercises is presented by the spokesmen of Islam as
the very essence of universal spirituality and morality.

**Prayers of Military Parade?**

D.S. Margoliouth cites several early Muslim sources regarding what the
Muslim ranks looked like, on the eve of the Battle of Badr: “Of the
battle that followed we have no clear or detailed account: but we know
at least some of the factors which brought about the result.  The
discipline of the salat or ‘prayer’, in which the Moslems were arranged
in rows, and had to perform after a leader certain bodily exercises, and
falling out of line was threatened with divine punishment, had served as
a rough sort of drill, and Mohammed before the battle discharged the
duty of making the troops fall into line.  The Meccan general ‘Utbah,
son of Rabiah, was struck with their appearance; they were keeling on
their knees, silent as though they were dumb, and stretching out their
tongues like snakes.  They were all subject to the single will of their
Prophet, who was aware that the general should not risk his life; for
him therefore in the rear of the army a hut was built, where attended by
his most trusted counsellors, he could issue orders; and to which camels
were tied ready to be used by the leaders for flight in case of
disaster.”^([1](#1))

**Observations of Count Keyserling**

This militarization of everyday Muslim life was noticed with keen
interest by Count Keyserling (1880-1946 CE) during his travels in
Islamic countries.  He summed up his over-all impression in his *The
Travel Diary of a Philosopher*.  “Islam is a religion,” he wrote, “of
absolute surrender and submissiveness to God - but to a God of a certain
character - a War-Lord who is entitled to do with us as he will and who
bids us stand ever in line of battle against the foe… The ritual of this
belief embodies the idea of discipline.  When the true believers every
day at fixed hours perform their prayers in serried ranks in the mosque,
all going through the same gestures at the same moment, this is not, as
in Hinduism, done as a method of self-realization, but in the spirit in
which the Prussian soldier defiled before his Kaiser.  This military
basis of Islam explains all the essential virtues of the Musalman.  It
also explains his fundamental defects - his unprogressiveness, his
incapacity to adapt himself, his lack of invention.  The soldier has
simply to obey orders.  All the rest is the affair of Allah.”^([2](#2))

**Congregational or Friday Prayers**

“In the early days of Islam”, writes Professor K.S. Lal, “the main
features of the Friday service were prayers in congregation with
worshippers standing in straight linear rows.  Attendance was compulsory
and military discipline was maintained. The sermon was like the order of
the day; it comprised advice, reprimand and directions on religious and
political obligations of the faithful.  A sense of awe pervaded -
raising the number of worshippers…”^([3](#3)) Small wonder that great
importance is attached to congregational or Friday prayers in Islam. 
“The ahadis declare that namaz said in congregation is twenty-five times
superior to namaz said alone at home. Muhammad was very strict about
attendance in congregational prayer.”^([4](#4)) The Prophet is reported
to have said that he felt like burning down the houses of those who did
not attend the Friday prayers. In the history of Islam in India, Friday
“sermons result in working up the feelings of the namazis, and
sabre-rattling and street riots generally take place on Friday after the
afternoon prayers”.^([5](#5))

**Islam divides the Human Family**

The picture becomes perfectly clear when we contemplate the
thought-categories which form the very foundations of Islamic theology. 
The thought-categories are derived from the Quran which the theologians
quote at every turn and on every subject.

Islamic theology divides the human family into two incompatible
factions.  There are the *mu’mins* (believers) on the one hand.  They
are Allah’s favourites to whom he has promised victory in this world and
paradise hereafter.  On the other hand, there are the *kAfirs*
(unbelievers) whose lives, liberties, properties and honour Allah has
forfeited in favour of the faithful. *Mu’mins* can have a clean
conscience when they slaughter and plunder and enslave the *kAfirs* by
every means and in every way.  They are only fulfilling Allah’s
inexorable Will.

**Islam polarises the Inhabited World**

The same theology divides the inhabited world into two irreconcilable
camps.  On the one hand, there is the *dAr-ul-IslAm*, the lands held by
Muslims where the Shariat rules.  This is the base from which the
*mu’mins* operate.  On the other hand, there is the *dAr-ul-harb*, the
lands in which *kAfirs* live and which the *mu’mins* should subject to
non-stop war.  The mu’mins should spare neither their persons nor their
properties in the effort to convert every *dAr-ul-harb* into a
*dAr-ul-IslAm*.

**Islam bifurcates Human History**

Again, Islamic theology bifurcates human history into two sharply
defined periods.  The period before the proclamation of Muhammad’s
prophethood is the Age of Ignorance (*jAhiliya*), and the period that
follows is the Age of Illumination (*ilm*).  Everything that prevailed
in the Age of Ignorance is to be destroyed outright or to be converted
in such a manner that it looks as if it came into existence after the
dawn of the Age of Illumination.  The norms of ignorance and
illumination are determined not by any objective or comparative
criteria, but by dictums of the Quran and Hadis.

**Believers are Better Human Beings**

It is nowhere stated in Islamic theology that the *mu’mins* have to be
better human beings in terms of mind or morals.  They have only to swear
by a certain phantom named Allah and a certain historical person called
RasUl (prophet), and they become qualified to kill all those who refuse
to swear in the same manner.  They are exempted from prayers, fasting,
pilgrimage and the rest and all their sins and crimes stand pardoned, if
they engage themselves in killing the *kAfirs*.

**Islam incompatible with Peace**

Mahatma Gandhi was no specialist of Islamic theology.  He accepted the
modem Muslim apologist’s interpretation that Islam means peace.  But he
saw no sign of Muslim adherence to this interpretation.  “Islam was
born,” he observed, “in an environment where the sword was and still
remains the supreme law…  The sword is yet too much in evidence among
Mussalmans.  It must be sheathed if Islam is to be what it means –
peace.”

Professor Jadunath Sarkar, on the other hand, had devoted a life-time to
the study of Islam in theory and practice.  He could not avoid reaching
a very grim conclusion.  “The murder of infidels (*kafir-kushi*),” he
wrote, “is counted a merit in a Muslim.  It is not necessary that he
should tame his own passions or mortify his flesh; it is not necessary
for him to grow a rich growth of spirituality.  He has only to slay a
certain class of his fellow beings or plunder their lands and wealth,
and this act in itself would raise his soul to heaven. A religion whose
followers are taught to regard robbery and murder as a religious duty,
is incompatible with the progress of mankind or with the peace of the
world.”^([6](#6))

If the aforesaid authorities on Islam, including the great savant and
historian from Bengal, had been brought to the notice of Justice Basak
before he pronounced that the Quran “is not prejudicial to the
maintenance of harmony between different religions” and that “Because of
the Quran no public tranquility has been disturbed upto now and there is
no reason to apprehend any likelihood of such disturbance in future”,
his verdict might well have been different.  The whole history of Islam,
particularly in India, runs counter to this pronouncement.  The people
of Bengal know it in their bones what the Quran stands for.  The stream
of refugees from Bangladesh (erstwhile East Pakistan) has not yet ceased
to flow.  
 

**Footnotes: **

------------------------------------------------------------------------


