+++
title = "11 CHAPTER 9 THE PETITION HAS SERVED A GREAT PURPOSE"

+++
**CHAPTER 9**

**THE PETITION HAS SERVED A GREAT PURPOSE**

By filing the Writ Petition for a ban on the Quran, Chandmal Chopra has
invited attention to a subject which Hindus have neglected for long and
at great cost to themselves.  They have yet to examine critically the
claim of the Quran as a sacred scripture and of Islam as a religion.  If
Hindus now take up this study in all seriousness and educate themselves
about the character of Islam, the Petition will have served its purpose.

**Mahatma Gandhi on Hindu Psychology**

The panic shown by the State and Union governments in the face of
violent Muslim mobs, points towards a psychology from which Hindus have
yet to free themselves.  “The thirteen hundred years of imperialistic
expansion,” wrote Mahatma Gandhi, “has made the Mussalmans fighters as a
class.  They are, therefore, aggressive.  Bullying is the natural
excrescence of an aggressive spirit.  The Hindu has an age-old
civilization.  He is essentially nonviolent… Predominance of the
non-violent spirit has restricted the use of arms to a small minority;
not knowing their \[arms’\] use nor having an aptitude for them, they
\[Hindus\] have become docile to the point of timidity or
cowardice.”^([1](#1))

He was convinced that Muslims will not stop being bullies so long as
Hindus continue to be cowards.  He saw no hope for a healthy
relationship between the two communities till this imbalance was
corrected.  “But my own experience,” he observed “confirm the opinion
that the Mussalman as a rule is a bully and the Hindu as a rule is a
coward…  If the Hindus wish to convert the Mussalman bully into a
respecting friend, they have to learn to die in the face of the heaviest
odds…  Hindus must cease to fear the Mussalman bully.”^([2](#2))

**How the Quran became a “Holy Book” for Hindus**

The story of how Hindus came to accept the Quran as a “holy book” is
long and painful.  There are very few Hindus now who know the story. 
Generation after generation of Hindus has been brainwashed by slogans of
secularism and *sarva-dharma-samabhava* to believe that they have always
revered the Quran, and accepted Islam as a *dharma*.

But history is a witness that during the centuries of Islamic invasions
and rule, Hindus hated Islam as barbarism and fought the Muslim
marauders tooth and nail.  They had, however, also to live for several
centuries as terrorized subjects of Islamic military states which ruled
in most parts of India at one time or the other.  Under the Islamic
“law” that prevailed, it was a crime punishable with death to question
the final prophethood of Muhammad, the divinity of the Quran, and the
monopoly of Islam as a religion.  Medieval Muslim historians have
mentioned in passing some prominent instances of Hindus attracting the
supreme penalty for committing one or the other of these “crimes”.  Many
more cases must have remained unmentioned.  Small wonder that Hindus
under Muslim domination, had to pretend all the time that they harboured
nothing but the highest sentiments for the Quran.  Pretension tended to
become belief as it was passed down by one generation to another.

**Pioneering Work of Swami Dayananda**

Some Hindus did try to have a close look at the Quran when the nightmare
of Muslim rule was over.  The pride of place in this respect goes to
Swami Dayananda, the founder of the Arya Samaj.  He tore through the
theology of the Quran and brought up to the surface the criminal
psychology camouflaged by it.  At the same time, he made an appeal to
the Muslims to reflect upon how they would feel if the *kAfirs* started
doing to them what the Quran has prescribed for the *kAfirs*.  Some
subsequent scholars of the Arya Samaj followed the lead given by Swamiji
and did commendable work.  Hindus started waking up and wondering
whether the Quran was at all worthy of the reverence expected from them.

**Political Expediency triumphs over Truth**

But it proved to be a passing phase.  The leaders of the Freedom
Movement against British rule which was surging forward and which
aroused emotions deeper than the “controversy about the Quran”, were
eager to draw the “Muslim minority” into the national struggle in order
to be in a better position to bargain with the British.  They thought
they could win over the Muslims by praising the Prophet, by holding up
the Quran as a holy book, by espousing Pan-Islamic causes, and by
looking the other way when faced with facts of history.  Starting with
the Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, this flattering of Muslims by praising
Islam culminated in Mahatma Gandhi’s *sarva-dharma-samabhava* - the
opiate which lulled the Hindus into a deep slumber such as they had
never known vis-à-vis Muslim aggression.

Some national leaders even made a bold bid to revise medieval Indian
history.  Muslim heroes were presented as national heroes.  On the other
hand, Hindu heroes who had fought against Islamic imperialism were “cut
to size”.  Lala Lajpat Rai propagated the proposition that “the Hindus
and Muslims have coalesced into an Indian people, very much the same way
as the Angles, Saxons, Danes and Normans formed the English people of
to-day” and that “the Muslim rule in India was not a foreign
rule.”^([3](#3))

These were leaders of great stature.  They had made great sacrifices. 
Their words carried a weight which specialists of the subject like
Professor Jadunath Sarkar could not command.  Thus the atmosphere became
highly discouraging for any serious and comparative study of religions. 
On the other hand, puerile nonsense like the *Essential Unity of All
Religions* by Dr. Bhagwan Das became very popular.  Anyone who
questioned the pious proposition that the Quran was as good as the Vedas
and the Puranas, ran the risk of being nailed down as an “enemy of
communal harmony”.  There were quite a few casualties in the public life
of India caused by this euphoria for the Quran.

**Blinded by the Make-Beliefs**

The experiment was a stupendous failure as it was bound to be, based as
it was on no more than mere make-beliefs.  Every concession made to the
“Muslim minority” helped only to whet its appetite for more.  It staged
street riots whenever the “Hindu majority” showed some resistance to its
mounting demands.  In the event, it opted for a separate nationhood and
established another Islamic state on the soil of India.

But instead of laying the blame where it really belonged, the political
leadership blamed British imperialism for creating the “communal divide”
and “Hindu communalism” for “deepening the crisis” which culminated in
Partition.  This Big Lie was sold on a large scale after independence
when political power passed into the hands of self-alienated Hindus who
paraded themselves as “progressive”, “leftist”, “revolutionary” etc.,
and who harboured an incurable animus against everything native and
national.  Once again, the Quran came out quite unscathed.

**Muslims start the Game Again**

That part of the “Muslim minority” which had voted for Pakistan but had
chosen to stay in India, restarted the old game when India was
proclaimed a secular state pledged to freedom of propagation for all
religions.  It revived its tried and tested trick of masquerading as a
“poor and persecuted minority”.  It cooked up any number of Pirpur
Reports.^([4](#4)) The wail went up that the “lives, liberties and
honour of the Muslims were not safe” in India, in spite of India’s
“secular pretensions”.  At the same time, street riots were staged on
every possible pretext.  The “communal situation” started becoming
critical once again.

**History to be Re-written**

And once again, the political leadership came out with a make-belief. 
The big-wigs from all political parties were collected in a “National
Integration Council”.  It was pointed out by the leftist professors that
the major cause of “communal trouble” was the “bad habit” of living in
the past on the part of “our people”.  Most of the politicians knew no
history and no religion for that matter.  They all agreed with one voice
that Indian history, particularly that of the “medieval Muslim period”,
should be re-written.  That, they pleaded, was the royal road to
“national integration”.

**Muslim History is the best Commentary on the Quran**

Hindus who had suffered from the Islamic onslaught in medieval times had
written no history of what they went through.  It was only the medieval
Muslim historians who had preserved with meticulous care and great glee
the record of what the *ghAzis* had done to the *kAfirs* and *mushriks*,
again and again.  Historians like Zia-ud-din Barani^([5](#5)) believed
that the treatment meted out to the Hindus by the Muslim swordsmen was a
part the divine plan which was unfolding according to promises Allah had
made in the Quran.  Thus the best and the most honest commentaries which
the Hindus could read on the Quran, were the histories written by
medieval Muslim historians.

A determined effort was now launched by Stalinist professors,
particularly of the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) in New Delhi, to
keep away these commentaries from the Hindus.  Muslim historians,
particularly of the Aligarh school, came forward to lend wholehearted
cooperation.  If the Quran could be divorced from the history it had
created in the past, it could retain intact the hallow which Hindus
accorded to it in the present.  Professional historians in most places
fell into line.  It was too bad to become known as a “Hindus
communalist” in the All India History Congress which had, meanwhile,
been captured by the Stalinist and Muslim “historians”.

**Warning from a Veteran Historian**

The only voice which was heard against this nation-wide exercise in
*suppressio veri suggestio falsi* in the field of medieval Indian
history, was that of the veteran historian, R.C. Majumdar.  For him,
this “national integration” based on a wilful blindness to recorded
history of the havoc wrought by Islam in India, could lead only to
national suicide.  He tried his best to arrest the trend by presenting
Islamic imperialism in medieval India as it was, and not as the
politicians in league with Stalinist and Muslim historians were
tailoring it to become.

“Political necessities of the Indians during the last phase of British
rule,” he wrote in 1960, “underlined the importance of alliance between
the two communities, and this was sought to be smoothly brought about by
glossing over the differences and creating an imaginary history of the
past in order to depict the relations between the two in a much more
favourable light than it actually was.  Eminent Hindu political leaders
even went so far as to proclaim that the Hindus were not at all a
subject race during the Muslim rule.  These absurd notions, which would
have been laughed at by Indian leaders at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, passed current as history owing to the exigencies of
the political complications at the end of that century.  Unfortunately
slogans and beliefs die hard, and even today, for more or less the same
reasons as before, many Indians, specially Hindus, are peculiarly
sensitive to any comments or observations even made in course of
historical writings, touching upon the communal relations in any way. 
*A fear of wounding the susceptibilities of the sister community haunts
the minds of Hindu politicians and historians, and not only prevents
them from speaking out the truth, but also brings down their wrath upon
those who have the courage to do so*.  But history is no respecter of
persons or communities, and must always strive to tell the truth, so far
as it can be deduced from reliable evidence.  This great academic
principle has a bearing upon actual life, for ignorance seldom proves to
be a real bliss either to an individual or to a nation.  In the
particular case under consideration, ignorance of the actual relation
between the Hindus and the Muslims throughout the course of history - an
ignorance deliberately encouraged by some - may ultimately be found to
have been the most important single factor which led to the partition of
India.  The real and effective means of solving a problem is to know and
understand the facts that gave rise to it, and not to ignore them by
hiding the head, ostrich-like, into sands of fiction.”^([6](#6))

**A Voice in the Wilderness**

But his voice remained a voice in the wilderness.  Fourteen years later,
he had to return to the theme and give specific instances of
falsification. “*It is very sad,” he observed, “that the spirit of
perverting history to suit political views is no longer confined to
politicians, but has definitely spread even among professional
historians…  It is painful to mention though impossible to ignore, the
fact that there is a distinct and conscious attempt to rewrite the whole
chapter of the bigotry and intolerance of the Muslim rulers towards
Hindu religion*.  This was originally prompted by the political motive
of bringing together the Hindus and Musalmans in a common fight against
the British but has continued ever since. A history written under the
auspices of the Indian National Congress sought to repudiate the charge
that the Muslim rulers broke Hindu temples, and asserted that they were
the most tolerant in matters of religion.  Following in its footsteps, a
noted historian has sought to exonerate Mahmud of Ghazni’s bigotry and
fanaticism, and several writers in India have come forward to defend
Aurangzeb against Jadunath Sarkar’s charge of religious intolerance.  It
is interesting to note that in the revised edition of the *Encyclopaedia
of Islam*, one of them, while re-writing the article on Aurangzeb
originally written by William Irvine, has expressed the view that the
charge of breaking Hindu temples brought against Aurangzeb is a disputed
point.  Alas for poor Jadunath Sarkar, who must have turned in his grave
if he were buried.  For, after reading his *History of Aurangzib*, one
would be tempted to ask, if the temple-breaking policy of Aurangzeb is a
disputed point, is there a single fact in the whole recorded history of
mankind which may be taken as undisputed?  A noted historian has sought
to prove that the Hindu population was better off under the Muslims than
under the Hindu tributaries or independent rulers.”^([7](#7))

**Falsification of History becomes State Policy**

This caravan loaded with synthetic merchandise has, however, continued
to move forward.  Eight years later (1982), it was reported that
“History and Language textbooks for schools all over India will soon be
revised radically.  In collaboration with various state governments the
Ministry of Education has begun a phased programme to weed out
undesirable textbooks and remove matter which is prejudicial to national
integration and unity and which does not promote social cohesion.  Ale
Ministry of Education’s decision to re-evaluate textbooks was taken in
the light of the recommendations of the National Integration Council of
which the Prime Minister \[Indira Gandhi\] is Chairman.  The Ministry’s
view was that history had often been used to serve narrow, sectarian and
chauvinistic ends.”^([8](#8))

Feeding people on such palpable falsehoods can sometimes produce a
complete collapse of their mental and moral faculties.  An instance is
provided by Shalini Saran’s article, *Akbar, The Great Unifier,
published in Readers Digest* (Indian edition) of October, 1985.  She
hails Akbar by asserting that “Centuries before his time, this versatile
emperor helped make us one nation”.  One of her strong arguments in
support of this thesis is that “Akbar could be ruthless in his drive for
unity: after the fall of Chitor, he ordered all its 30,000 inhabitants
massacred.”

It did not occur to her that Akbar had arrived in India only 14 years
before he invested Chittor in 1568.  He was at that time too much of a
foreigner to fancy any idea of an Indian nation.  His invasion of Mewar
was a copy-book exercise of earlier Islamic invasions – a *jihAd* as
depicted in Chapter 6 above.  Every Islamic imperialist from Alauddin
Khilji onwards had tried to reduce this defiant Rajput state to slavery.

She is also blissfully oblivious of what Akbar’s contemporaries have
recorded as his reason for slaughtering so many non-combatants in cold
blood.  Abul Fazl and Badayuni have not tried to hide the truth that
Akbar was inspired by the time-honoured tenets of *jihAd* which enjoin a
total destruction of “infidels” after they have been defeated.  The
“infidels” in this instance had also aroused Akbar’s ire by offering a
very stiff resistance.

Shalini Saran’s eulogy of Akbar will make the most blatant apologist of
Islamic imperialism blush with embarrassment.  But she is not alone. 
She represents a whole tribe who depend entirely upon their ideological
predilections for concocting India’s history.  Only they do not extend
that bias to the British period.  Holding the British responsible for
everything that went wrong, is still the progressive platform.

Though, by the logic of this tribe, the best promoters of India’s unity
were the British.  They did far more and succeeded to a much greater
extent in imposing a unity on India.  By that logic, General Dyer of the
Jallianwala Bagh fame comes out with flying colours as the foremost
builder of an Indian nation.  He was also very ruthless in gunning down
unarmed people who were not impressed by the “benefits of the British
Raj”.

**The Fundamental Failure**

These perverse efforts to re-write medieval Muslim history in India are
bound to fail in solving the “communal problem” because the psyche which
created that history continues to pulsate in the Quran.  *The Quran
cannot be re-written by re-writing that history*.  On the other hand, an
honest presentation of that history can help immensely an understanding
of the Muslim behaviour pattern which is shaped by the Quran.  Let there
be no mistake that Hindus will never be able to tackle the “Muslim
minority” unless they understand the source of its behaviour pattern.

But Hindus have so far failed to study the Quran with any seriousness
whatsoever.  That is why they have readily conceded the Muslim claim
that the Quran is a “religious scripture full of lofty messages, moral
and spiritual”.  They have confused the language of the Quran with the
language of Hindu spirituality so that Allah passes for the *ParmAtman*
and the Prophet for the *Purushottama*.  They feel puzzled when Muslims
“fail” to live upto their expectations.  But they never care to examine
the assumptions on which those expectations are based.  On the contrary,
they appeal to the Muslims in the name of the Quran.  Muslims cannot be
blamed if they feel amused at this presumptuousness on the part of
“accursed infidels”.

It is high time for Hindu scholarship to come forward and make a serious
study of the Quran with the help of Islamic theology and history.  It is
high time for Hindus to have a close look at the character of Allah
which is the seed from which everything else in Islam has sprouted.  The
results will be very rewarding.

“Hindus have fought Muslim invaders,” writes Ram Swarup, “land locally
established Muslim dynasties but neglected to study the religious and
ideological motives of the invaders.  Hindu learning, or whatever
remained of its earlier glory, followed the old grooves and its texts
and speculations remained unmindful of the new phenomenon in their
midst.  For example, even as late as the thirteenth century, when Malik
Kafur was attacking areas in the far South, in the vicinity of the seat
of Sri Ramanujacharya, the scholarly dissertations of the disciples of
the great teacher show no awareness of this fact.”

He continues: “Hindus were masters of many spiritual disciplines; they
had many Yogas and they had a developed science of inner exploration. 
There had been a continuing discussion whether the ultimate reality was
*dvaita* or *advaita*.  It would have been very interesting and
instructive to find out if any of these savants of Yoga ever met, on
their inner journey, a Quranic being, Allah (or its original, Jehovah of
the Bible), who is jealous of other Gods, who claims sole sovereignty
and yet whom no one knows except through a pet go-between, who appoints
a favourite emissary and uses the latter’s mouth to publish his decrees,
who proclaims crusades and *jihad*, who teaches to kill the unbelievers
and to destroy their shrines and temples and to levy permanent tribute
on them and to convert them into *zimmis*, into hewers of wood and
drawers of water.  Even today, the question retains its importance.  Is
the Allah of the Quran a spiritual being?  Or, is he some sort of a
mental and vital formation, a hegemonistic idea?  Does he represent
man’s own deepest truth and reside in his innermost being?  Or, is he a
projection of a less edifying source in man’s psyche?  Is he discovered
when a man’s heart is tranquil, desireless and pure?  Or, does he
originate in a fevered state of the mind?  Is his source the Samadhi of
the Yogic *bhumi* or some sort of a trance of a non-Yogic *bhumi*?  In
the *Yoga-darshana*, this distinction is fundamental but it is not much
remembered these days.”^([9](#9))

**Hindus should Appeal to a Higher Court**

The “law” which prohibits Hindus from having a public discussion on the
Quran, embodies a disability which was once imposed upon them at the
point of the sword.  The law courts cannot be helpful so long as that
lawless law remains on the statute book.  Its repeal is a task to be
undertaken by an informed public opinion.  India is a democracy in which
the sword of Islam is not supposed to have any sway.

There is, however, a court higher than the Calcutta High Court or the
Supreme Court of India.  That is the court of human reason, of human
values, of human conscience, of human aspiration for a purer and loftier
life.  The Quran should be brought before that court.  The devotees of
the Quran should be invited to defend it in that court rather than in
the streets.

It was not so long ago that the Bible enjoyed a stranglehold similar to
that of the Quran over vast populations in the West.  The theocracies
propped up by the Bible in Europe and America had enacted similar sagas
of slaughter and pillage for several centuries.  But a sustained Western
scholarship showed up the Bible for what it was.  “It would be more
consistent,” proclaimed Thomas Pain, “that we call it \[the Bible\] the
work of a demon than the word of God.” The spell of Jehovah was broken. 
The god of the Bible, according to Thomas Jefferson, “is cruel,
vindictive, capricious and unjust”.  The rest is history.  Christianity
is now seeking a refuge in countries like India where its rout in the
West remains unknown.

A similar scholarship will not only put the Quran and its Allah in their
proper place but also restore the image of Hindu spirituality which has
suffered due to an adulteration of religious language by the gibberish
of the biblical or prophetic creeds.  The Muslim mullah and the
Christian missionary had an upper hand so long as Islamic and
Christian-Western imperialism prevailed in this country.  A class of
Hindu scholars learnt from them how to process Hindu spirituality and
culture in terms of Islamic and Christian monolatries.  It is that class
which still passes for what is known as India’s “intellectual elite”. 
In fact, that class has grown stupendously in numbers as well as
influence, after India attained independence; it had been created by a
system of education which we have chosen to continue.

Islamic and Christian imperialisms have been defeated and dispelled from
the greater part of the ancient Hindu homeland.  There is no reason why
aggressive and inhuman ideologies brought in by those imperialisms
should continue to flourish.  They shall stand exposed as soon as Hindus
evolve appropriate methods for processing those ideologies in terms of
their own spirituality and culture.

“Hitherto,” observes Ram Swarup, “we have looked at Hinduism through the
eyes of Islam and Christianity.  Let us now learn to look at these
ideologies from the vantage point of Hindu spirituality - they are no
more than ideologies, backing as they are in the integrality and
inwardness of true religion and spirituality.  Such an exercise would
also throw light on the self-destructiveness of the modern ideologies of
Communism and Imperialism, inheritors of the prophetic mission or
‘burden’ in its secularized version, of Christianity and Islam.  The
perspective gained will be a great corrective and will add a new
liberating dimension; it will help not only India and Hinduism but the
whole world.”

He concludes: “A fateful thing has been happening.  The East is waking
up from its slumber.  The wisdom of Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism and
Confucianism is becoming available to the world.  Already, it is having
a transforming effect on the minds of the people, particularly in
countries where there is freedom to seek and express.  Dogmas are under
a cloud; claims on behalf of Last Prophethood and Only Sonship, hitherto
enforced through great intellectual conditioning, brow-beating, and the
big stick, are becoming unacceptable.  Religions of proxy are in
retreat.  More and more men and women now seek authentic experience. 
Borrowed creed will not do.  Men and women are ceasing to be obedient
believers and are becoming seekers.  They no longer want to be anybody’s
sheep, now that they know they can be their own shepherds.  An external
authority, even when it is called God in certain scriptures, threatening
and promising alternately, is increasingly making less and less
impression; people now realize that Godhead is their own true, secret
status and they seek it in the depth of their own being.  All this is in
keeping with the wisdom of the East.”^([10](#10))  
 

**Footnotes: **

------------------------------------------------------------------------


