+++
title = "15 (3) NOTICE FROM CHANDMAL CHOPRA"

+++
**(3)**

**NOTICE FROM CHANDMAL CHOPRA**

From:  
C.M. Chopra.

<div align="right">

25, Burtolla Street,  
Calcutta - 7.  
16th March, 1985.

</div>

To  
The Secretary,  
Department of Home,  
Government of West Bengal,  
Writers’ Building,  
Calcutta - 1.

Dear Sir,

**Sub: The Islamic book - Koran - forfeiture of - request for**

In terms of Section 95 Cr.  P.C. read with Sections 153A and 295A I.P.C.
every copy of a book is liable to be forfeited to the Government if the
book contains words or sayings which promote, on ground of religion,
disharmony, enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious
communities or which outrage the religious feelings of any class of
citizens of India or insult the religion or religious beliefs of that
class of people.  This is so whether the book is classic or epic,
religious or temporal, old or new.

 Now the Islamic religious book, Koran (or Qur’an), which is available
throughout India, whether in the original Arabic or in its translations
in Urdu, Bengali, Hindi, English or any other language, is blatantly
guilty of each one of the above offences and thus squarely deserves to
be declared forfeited to the Government in terms of the above provisions
of law.

For example, the Koran incites violence by saying, “Believers! make war
on the infidels who dwell around you.  Let them find harshness in you”
(Surah 9: ayat 123) or by saying, “Do not yield to the unbelievers, but
fight them strenuously with this Koran” (Surah 25: ayat 52) or by
saying, “If you do not fight He will punish you sternly and replace you
by other men” (Surah 9: ayat 39) or by saying, “When the sacred months
are over, slay the idol-worshippers, wherever you find them.  Arrest
them, besiege them and lie in ambush everywhere for them” (Surah 9: ayat
5).

Similarly this book promotes religious enmity, hatred and ill-will when
it says, “Believers! know that idolaters are unclean” (Surah 9: ayat 28)
or when it says, “Therefore We stirred among them, i.e. the Christians,
enmity and hatred which shall endure till the Day of Resurrection”
(Surah 5: ayat 14) or when it says, “Believers! take neither Jews nor
Christians for your friends.  They are friends with one another. 
Whoever of you seeks their friendship shall become one of their number. 
Allah does not guide the wrong-doers” (Surah 5: ayat 51).

The above are but a few examples.  Actually, the Koran abounds, or
overflows with such offensive sayings, some more of which were set out
in some three annexures to the letter dated 20th July, 1984, addressed
to you in this behalf by a fellow citizen, Sri Himangshu Kishore
Chakraborty, M.A., (Cal.) of 12/A/4, Pashupati Bhattacharya, Road,
Behala, Calcutta - 34.

It is a matter of regret that inspite of being a blatantly offensive
book, the book is still being widely circulated and has not been
declared as forfeited to the Government by you inspite of Mr.
Chakraborty’s request in the said letter dated 20th July, 1984 and his
reminder dated 14th August, 1984.

Now you are finally requested to take necessary steps in this behalf
within 7 days of the receipt hereof, failing which such legal steps will
be taken as may be advised to us.  This may please be treated as notice
demanding justice.

<div align="right">

Yours faithfully,  
Sd/-  
(C.M. Chopra)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------


