+++
title = "Groups"
+++

## Semigroup, monoid
**Semigroup**: \\(<S,+>\\): closed under binary operation \\$+\\$. **Monoid**: semigroup with identity element e.

### Function characteristics
Consider functions on ordered semigroups. Some of these have some notable properties.

#### Subadditivity
\\(f(a + b) \leq f(a) + f(b)\\).

## Group G
**Group** (G): monoid with inverses. Commutative group. Cayley tables.

No element can have 2 inverses: \\(a_1^{-1}aa_2^{-1} = a_2^{-1} = a_1^{-1}\\). \\((ab)^{-1} = b^{-1}a^{-1}\\). Unique solution for ax=b: \\(x=a^{-1}b\\).

For examples \\(Z_{n}^{+}\\) and \\(Z_{n}^{*}\\), see Number Theory survey.

### Order of a group
Number of elements in the group, \\(\phi(G)\\).

### Subgroups
\\(H \leq G\\). Eg: p prime: \\(\set{\pm 1} \leq Z_{p}^{*}\\).

#### Cosets of subgroup
Left coset of subgroup H containing g: gH or g+H; may not be group. Also, right coset of H containing g. Normal subgroup: N for which gN = Ng. Eg: 2Z or 2+Z has 2 cosets: evens and odds.

#### Cardinality
(Lagrange): If \\(H \leq G: |H| | |G|\\): Take \\(a \in G-H\\); then \\(aH \inters H = \nullSet\\); repeat with \\(a' \in G-H-aH\\) etc.. So, if \\(H < G\\), \\(|H| \leq |G|/2\\).

So, this is an easy partial-test to see if H is a group.

#### Quotient/ factor group
\\(G/N\\): cosets; with Coset product: (aN)(bN) = abNN = abN; eN identity. Eg: Z/nZ isomorphic to \\(\{0, .. n-1\}, \oplus_n\\).

**Product group**: G*H.

### Multiplicative order ord(a) of element a
\\(ord(a) = argmin_{n}: a^{n}=e\\). \\(ord(A) | \phi(G)\\).

### Cyclic group G generated by a
Every \\(a \in G\\) generates some subgroup of G.

G is cyclic if some generator generates G. Then G is non degenerate. Eg: \\(Z_{4}\\); \\(\omega\\) in \\(\omega^{n}=1\\).

#### Number of generators
If there is a generator g, there are at least \\(\phi(Z_{\phi(G)}^{\*})\\) of them: \\(Z_{\phi(G)}^{\*}\\) excludes all numbers which divide \\(\phi(G)\\); so for any \\(a \in Z_{\phi(G)}^{\*}\\), can't write \\((g^{a})^{b} = e\\) for any \\(b < \phi(G)\\).

#### Periodic group
Every element has finite order. All finite groups are periodic.

## Group homomorphism
It(a) maps elements of two groups (G,H) : \\(a(g.h)=a(g).a(h)\\). Image a(G). **Kernel** of homomorphism: ker(a) = G elements mapped to \\(1_{H}\\). Isomorphic groups: homomorphism is invertible. ker(a) and a(G) measure closness to homomorphism. ker(a) is a normal subgroup. a(G) isomorphic to G/ker(a).

## Special groups
### Symmetric group on X
\\(S_{X}\\) or Sym(X) or \\(S_{n}\\) is a group of permutations/ bijective functions on X, under composition. Not commutative for \\(n>2\\). **Transposition** only switches 2 elements. Every permutation f is a product of transpositions. Even and odd permutations. The product is not unique, but oddness is same: Consider number of pairs \\(i<j\\), where \\(f(j)<f(i)\\). Sign of Permutation: Sgn(f) is +1 or -1. Cycle.

### Elliptic curve groups
See topology survey.

### Bilinear groups
Groups with efficiently computable bilinear maps. \\(G_{T}\\): target group; \\(g_{1}, g_{2}\\) generators of \\(G_{1}\\) and \\(G_{2}\\). Bilinear map/ pairing operation: \\(p: G_1 \times G_2 \to G_{T}\\). Not necessarily 1 to 1.

Bilinearity property: \\(p(g_{1}^{a}, g_{2}^{b}) = p(g_{1}, g_{2})^{ab}\\); can be seen as bilinear map amongst exponents: \\(p'(a, b) = ab\\). \\(p(xz,y) = p(z,y)p(x,y)\\).

Can efficiently compute bilinear map \\(Z_{p} \times Z_{p} \to Z_{p}\\). \why

No efficient way to make multilinear maps known.


