+++
title = "52 CHAPTER III ESCAPE FROM DEGRADATION"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER III

ESCAPE FROM DEGRADATION

  

 "What justification have the Musalmans of India for demanding the
partition of India and the establishment of separate Muslim States? Why
this insurrection? What grievances have they?"—ask the Hindus in a
spirit of righteous indignation.

 Anyone who knows history will not fail to realize that it has now
been a well established principle that nationalism is a sufficient
justification for the creation of a national state. As the great
historian Lord Acton points out :—

> "In the old European system, the rights of nationalities were neither
> recognised by Governments nor asserted by the people. The interest of
> the reigning families, not those of the nations, regulated the
> frontiers, and the administration was conducted generally without any
> reference to popular desires. Where all liberties were suppressed, the
> claims of national independence were necessarily ignored, and a
> princess, in the words of Fenelon, carried a monarchy in her wedding
> portion."

 Nationalities were at first listless. When they became conscious—

> "They first rose against their conquerors in defence of their
> legitimate rulers. They refused to be governed by usurpers. Next came
> a time when they revolted because of the wrongs inflicted upon them by
> their rulers. The insurrections were provoked by particular grievances
> justified by definite complaints. Then came the French Revolution
> which effected a complete change. It taught the people to regard their
> wishes and wants as the supreme criterion of their right to do what
> they liked to do with themselves. It proclaimed the idea of the
> sovereignty of the people uncontrolled by the past and uncontrolled by
> the existing state. This text taught by the French Revolution became
> an accepted dogma of all liberal thinkers. Mill gave it his support.
> 'One hardly knows,' says Mill, 'what any division of the human race
> should be free to do, if not to determine with which of the various
> collective bodies of human beings they choose to associate
> themselves.' "

 He even went so far as to hold that—

> "It is in general a necessary condition of free institutions that the
> boundaries of governments should coincide in the main with those of
> nationalities."

 Thus history shows that the theory of nationality is imbedded in the
democratic theory of the sovereignty of the will of a people. This means
that the demand by a nationality for a national state does not require
to be supported by any list of grievances. The will of the people is
enough to justify it.

 But, if grievances must be cited in support of their claim, the
Muslims say that they have them in plenty. They may be summed up in one
sentence, that constitutional safeguards have failed to save them from
the tyranny of the Hindu majority.

 At the Round Table Conference, the Muslims presented their list of
safeguards, which were formulated in the well-known fourteen points. The
Hindu representatives at the Round Table Conference would not consent to
them. There was an impasse. The British Government intervened and gave
what is known as "the Communal decision." By that decision, the Muslims
got all their fourteen points. There was much bitterness amongst the
Hindus against the Communal Award. But, the Congress did not take part
in the hostility that was displayed by the Hindus generally towards it,
although it did retain the right to describe it as anti national and to
get it changed with the consent of the Muslims. So careful was the
Congress not to wound the feelings of the Muslims that when the
Resolution was moved in the Central Assembly condemning the Communal
Award, the Congress, though it did not bless it, remained neutral,
neither opposing nor supporting it. The Mahomedans were well justified
in looking upon this Congress attitude as a friendly gesture.

 The victory of the Congress at the polls in the provinces, where the
Hindus are in a majority, did not disturb the tranquillity of the
Musalmans. They felt they had nothing to fear from the Congress and the
prospects were that the Congress and the Muslim League would work the
constitution in partnership. But, two years and three months of the
Congress Government in the Hindu Provinces have completely disillusioned
them and have made them the bitterest enemies of the Congress. The
Deliverance Day celebration held on the 22nd December 1939 shows the
depth of their resentment. What is worse, their bitterness is not
confined to the Congress. The Musalmans, who at the Round Table
Conference joined in the demand for Swaraj, are today the most ruthless
opponents of Swaraj.

 What has the Congress done to annoy the Muslims so much? The Muslim
League has asserted that under the Congress regime the Muslims were
actually tyrannized and oppressed. Two committees appointed by the
League are said to have investigated and reported on the matter. But
apart from these matters which require to be examined by an impartial
tribunal, there are undoubtedly two things which have produced the
clash: (1) the refusal by the Congress to recognize the Muslim League as
the only representative body of the Muslims, (2) the refusal by the
Congress to form Coalition Ministries in the Congress Provinces.

 On the first question, both the Congress and the League are adamant.
The Congress is prepared to accept the Muslim League as one of the many
Muslim political organizations, such as the Ahrars, the National Muslims
and the Jamiat-ul-Ulema. But it will not accept the Muslim League as the
only representative body of the Muslims. The Muslim League, on the other
hand, is not prepared to enter into any talk unless the Congress accepts
it as the only representative body of the Musalmans of India. The Hindus
stigmatize the claim of the League as an extravagant one and try to
ridicule it. The Muslims may say that if the Hindus would only stop to
inquire how treaties between nations are made, they would realize the
stupidity of their view. It may be argued that when a nation proceeds to
make a treaty with another nation, it recognizes the Government of the
latter as fully representing it. In no country does the Government of
the day represent the whole body of people. Everywhere it represents
only a majority. But nations do not refuse to settle their disputes
because the Governments, which represent them, do not represent the
whole people. It is enough if each Government represents a majority of
its citizens. This analogy, the Muslims may contend, must apply to the
Congress-League quarrel on this issue. The League may not represent the
whole body of the Muslims but if it represents a majority of them, the
Congress should have no compunction to deal with -it for the purpose of
effecting a settlement of the Hindu-Muslim question. Of course, it is
open to the Government of a country not to recognize the Government of
another country where there is more than one body claiming to be the
Government. Similarly, the Congress may not recognize the League. It
must, however, recognize either the National Muslims or the Ahrars or
the Jamiat-ul-Ulema and fix the terms of settlement between the two
communities. Of course, it must act with the full knowledge as to which
is more likely to be repudiated by the Muslims—an agreement with the
League or an agreement with the other Muslim parties. The Congress must
deal with one or the other. To deal with neither is not only stupid but
mischievous. This attitude of the Congress only serves to annoy the
Muslims and to exasperate them. The Muslims rightly interpret this
attitude of the Congress as an attempt to create divisions among them
with a view to cause confusion in their ranks and weaken their front.

 On the second issue, the Muslim demand has been that in the cabinets
there shall be included Muslim Ministers who have the confidence of the
Muslim members in the Legislature. They expected that this demand of
theirs would be met by the Congress if it came in power. But, they were
sorely disappointed. With regard to this demand, the Congress took a
legalistic attitude. The Congress agreed to include Muslims in their
cabinets, provided they resigned from their parties, joined the Congress
and signed the Congress pledge. This was resented by the Muslims on
three grounds.

 In the first place, they regarded it as a breach of faith. The
Muslims say that this demand of theirs is in accordance with the spirit
of the Constitution. At the Round Table Conference, it was agreed that
the cabinets shall include representatives of the minority communities.
The minorities insisted that a provision to that effect should be made a
part of the statute. The Hindus, on the other hand, desired that the
matter should be left to be regulated by convention. A *via media* was
found. It was agreed that the provision should find a place in the
Instrument of Instructions to the Governors of the provinces and an
obligation should be imposed upon them to see that effect was given to
the convention in the formation of the cabinets. The Musalmans did not
insist upon making this provision a part of the statute because they
depended upon the good faith of the Hindus. This agreement was broken by
a party which had given the Muslims to understand that towards them its
attitude would be not only correct but considerate.

 In the second place, the Muslims felt that the Congress view was a
perversion of the real scope of the convention. They rely upon the text
of the clause**[/1/](#n01)** in the Instrument of Instructions and argue
that the words "member of a minority community" in it can have only one
meaning, namely, a person having the confidence of the community. The
position taken by the Congress is in direct contradiction with the
meaning of this clause and is indeed a covert attempt to break all other
parties in the country and to make the Congress the only political party
in the country. The demand for signing the Congress pledge can have no
other intention. This attempt to establish a totalitarian state may be
welcome to the Hindus, but it meant the political death of the Muslims
as a free people.

 This resentment of the Muslims was considerably aggravated when they
found the Governors, on whom the obligation was imposed to see that
effect was given to the convention, declining to act. Some Governors
declined, because they were helpless by reason of the fact that the
Congress was the only majority party which could produce a stable
government, that a Congress Government was the only government possible
and that there was no alternative to it except suspending the
constitution. Other Governors declined, because they became active
supporters of the Congress Government and showed their partisanship by
praising the Congress or by wearing Khadi which is the official party
dress of the Congress. Whatever be the reasons, the Muslims discovered
that an important safeguard had failed to save them.

 The Congress reply to these accusations by the Muslims is twofold.
In the first place, they say that coalition cabinets are inconsistent
with collective responsibility of the cabinets. This, the Musalmans
refuse to accept as an honest plea. The English people were the first
and the only people, who made it a principle of their system of
government. But even there it has been abandoned since. The English
Parliament debated**[/2/](#n02)** the issue and came to the conclusion
that it was not so sacrosanct as it was once held and that a departure
from it need not necessarily affect the efficiency or smooth working of
the governmental machine. Secondly, as a matter of fact, there was no
collective responsibility in the Congress Government. It was a
government by departments. Each Minister was independent of the other
and the Prime Minister was just a Minister. For the Congress to talk
about collective responsibility was really impertinent. The plea was
even dishonest, because it is a fact that in the provinces where the
Congress was in a minority, they did form Coalition Ministries without
asking the Ministers from other parties to sign the Congress pledge. The
Muslims are entitled to ask 'if coalition is bad, how can it be good in
one place and bad in another?'

 The second reply of the Congress is that even if they take Muslim
Ministers in their cabinet who have not the confidence of the majority
of the Muslims, they have not failed to protect their interests. Indeed
they have done every thing to advance the interests of the Muslims. This
no doubt rests on the view Pope held of government when he said:

> "For forms of government let fools contest;  
> What is best administered is best."

 In making this reply, the Congress High Command seems to have
misunderstood what the main contention of the Muslims and the minorities
has been. Their quarrel is not on the issue whether the Congress has or
has not done any good to the Muslims and the minorities. Their quarrel
is on an issue which is totally different. Are the Hindus to be a ruling
race and the Muslims and other minorities to be subject races under
Swaraj? That is the issue involved in the demand for coalition
ministries. On that, the Muslims and other minorities have taken a
definite stand. They are not prepared to accept the position of subject
races.

 That the ruling community has done good to the ruled is quite beside
the point and is no answer to the contention of the minority communities
that they refuse to be treated as a subject people. The British have
done many good things in India for the Indians. They have improved their
roads, constructed canals on more scientific principles, effected their
transport by rail, carried their letters by penny post, flashed their
messages by lightning, improved their currency, regulated their weights
and measures, corrected their notions of geography, astronomy and
medicine, and stopped their internal quarrels and effected some
advancement in their material conditions. Because of these acts of good
government, did anybody ask the Indian people to remain grateful to the
British and give up their agitation for self-government? Or because of
these acts of social uplift, did the Indians give up their protest
against being treated as a subject race by the British? The Indians did
nothing of the kind. They refused to be satisfied with these good deeds
and continued to agitate for their right to rule themselves. This is as
it should be. For, as was said by Curran, the Irish patriot, no man can
be grateful at the cost of his self-respect, no woman can be grateful at
the cost of her chastity and no nation can be grateful at the cost of
its honour. To do otherwise is to show that one's philosophy of life is
just what Carlyle called 'pig philosophy '. The Congress High Command
does not seem to realize that the Muslims and other minorities care more
for the recognition of their self-respect at the hand of the Congress
than for mere good deeds on the part of the Congress. Men, who are
conscious of their being, are not pigs who care only for fattening food.
They have their pride which they will not yield even for gold. In short
"life is more than the meat."

 It is no use saying that the Congress is not a Hindu body. A body
which is Hindu in its composition is bound to reflect the Hindu mind and
support Hindu aspirations. The only difference between the Congress and
the Hindu Maha Sabha is that the latter is crude in its utterances and
brutal in its actions while the Congress is politic and polite. Apart
from this difference of fact, there is no other difference between the
Congress and the Hindu Maha Sabha.

 Similarly, it is no use saying that the Congress does not recognize
the distinction between the ruler and the ruled. If this is so, the
Congress must prove its bonafides by showing its readiness to recognize
the other communities as free and equal partners. What is the test of
such recognition? It seems to me that there can be only one—namely,
agreeing to share power with the effective representatives of the
minority communities. Is the Congress prepared for it? Everyone knows
the answer. The Congress is not prepared to share power with a member of
a community who does not owe allegiance to the Congress. Allegiance to
the Congress is a condition precedent to sharing power. It seems to be a
rule with the Congress that if allegiance to the Congress is not
forthcoming from a community, that community must be excluded from
political power.

 Exclusion from political power is the essence of the distinction
between a ruling race and a subject race; and inasmuch as the Congress
maintained this principle, it must be said that this distinction was
enforced by the Congress while it was in the saddle. The Musalmans may
well complain that they have already suffered enough and that this
reduction to the position of a subject race is like the proverbial last
straw. Their decline and fall in India began ever since the British
occupation of the country. Every change, executive, administrative, or
legal, introduced by the British, has inflicted a series of blows upon
the Muslim Community. The Muslim rulers of India had allowed the Hindus
to retain their law in civil matters. But, they abrogated the Hindu
Criminal Law and made the Muslim Criminal Law the law of the State,
applicable to all Hindus as well as Muslims. The first thing the British
did was to displace gradually the Muslim Criminal Law by another of
their making, until the process was finally completed by the enactment
of Macaulay's Penal Code. This was the first blow to the prestige and
position of the Muslim community in India. This was followed by the
abridgement of the field of application of the Shariat or the Muslim
Civil Law. Its application was restricted to matters concerning personal
relations, such as marriage and inheritance, and then only to the extent
permitted by the British. Side by side came the abolition, in 1837, of
Persian as the official language of the Court and of general
administration and the substitution of English and the vernaculars in
place of Persian. Then came the abolition of the Qazis, who, during the
Muslim rule, administered the Shariat. In their places, were appointed
law officers and judges, who might be of any religion but who got the
right of interpreting Muslim Law and whose decisions became binding on
Muslims. These were severe blows to the Muslims. As a result, the
Muslims found their prestige gone, their laws replaced, their language
shelved and their education shorn of its monetary value. Along with
these came more palpable blows in the shape of annexation of Sind and
Oudh and the Mutiny. The last, particularly, affected the higher classes
of Muslims, who suffered enormously by the extensive confiscation of
property inflicted upon them by the British, as a punishment for their
suspected complicity in the Mutiny. By the end of the Mutiny, the
Musalmans, high and low, were brought down by these series of events to
the lowest depths of broken pride, black despair and general penury.
Without prestige, without education and without resources, the Muslims
were left to face the Hindus. The British, pledged the neutrality, were
indifferent to the result of the struggle between the two communities.
The result was that the Musalmans were completely worsted in the
struggle. The British conquest of India brought about a complete
political revolution in the relative position of the two communities.
For six hundred years, the Musalmans had been the masters of the Hindus.
The British occupation brought them down to the level of the Hindus.
From masters to fellow subjects was degradation enough, but a change
from the status of fellow subjects to that of subjects of the Hindus is
really humiliation. Is it unnatural, ask the Muslims, if they seek an
escape from so intolerable a position by the creation of separate
national States, in which the Muslims can find a peaceful home and in
which the conflicts between a ruling race and a subject race can find no
place to plague their lives?  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** "In making appointments to his Council of Ministers, our
Governor shall use his best endeavours to select his Ministers in the
following manner, that is to say, to appoint in consultation with the
person who in his judgement is most likely to command a stable majority
in the Legislature, those persons (including so far as practicable,
members of important minority communities) who will best be in a
position collectively to command the confidence of the Legislature. In
so acting, he shall bear constantly in mind the need for fostering a
sense of joint responsibility among his Ministers."

**[/2/](#m02)** See the announcement on 22nd January 1932 by the British
Prime Minister on the decision of the cabinet to agree to differ on the
Tariff Question and the debate on it in Parliament.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
