+++
title = "01  Chapter 1         Sanatana Dharma: Anusmriti and Anudhyâyana"

+++
Chapter 1  
Sanatana Dharma: Anusmriti and Anudhyâyana

**Repeated and Cherished Recollection  
and Meditation on Sanatana Dharma**

1\. I take refuge in the great Sanatana dharma, the mother of many
religions.

Spiritual Teachings: Âtma and *Anâtma*

2\. The ancient sages studied man and for that they started with
themselves; they turned their gaze inward and found there a vast
internal life. Going still deeper, they discovered, beyond their more
external being, another life or principle which takes another language
to describe it; they found it self-existent, bodiless, pure, luminous
and conscious; they found that it is in some way unborn and undying;
that it does not come along with the body nor does it die with it; that
it is beyond sorrow and decay; that it shines from within and it knows
itself as self-evident. They found that it is their very essence, their
true Self; they called it *âtman*, which is pure, immortal, and
untouched by evil.

3\. They found that this innermost truth of their being is also the
truth of all beings, that it is inside as well as outside, that it
pervades all; that the *âtman* is also *brahman*, that the immanent
divine principle is also the transcendental principle and divine ground
of all.

4\. By the same token, they saw in man the other side of the coin, the
principle of *anâtma*. They saw how man gives himself deceptive
identities, how he confuses himself with various physico-mental
constructs (*nâma-rûpa*); how there is nothing in him which is abiding,
which he can own or call his own; that everything is a concatenation, a
link in a chain; that nescience (*avidyâ*) and ego reign everywhere;
that they have deep roots in man; that they are not only in our
attachments and hatreds - in the more *tâmasika* and *râjasika* part of
our nature - but they inform our *sâttvika* nature too, our good
intentions and high principles, which become worse when they pretend to
be better than they are. Think of all the make-believe, ego and even
dishonesty of much that goes under the name of our charities, our
high-minded ideals, missions and theologies. So, to much the seers had
to say that This too is *anâtma*, that This too is not I, that This too
is not That - the neti neti (Not this, Not this) of the Upanishads.

5\. The two views, looking at the same thing from two angles, found
their eloquent expression in two traditions known as Brahmanic and
Shramanic, or, to put it differently, Rishi and Muni traditions. Both
studied man in his more internal and metaphysical being and the two
views were complementary. The two together gave us a great science of
man, a veritable spiritual anthropology, which is different from the
anthropology that we know today, the one based on the lower,
psycho-physical definition of man.

6\. Concentrating on the Âtmic truth, the Vedic seers found that though
it resides in all, it is also beyond them all; that its truth is beyond
all that a man has seen or heard, beyond his speech and mind, beyond his
power to describe, imagine or conceive, and certainly beyond expounding
(*avyâkrita*), for there could be no simple Yes or No to various
queries.

7\. They taught that though this truth is beyond number, gender,
definitions, descriptions and indications, yet it is a man's most
intimate reality. It is the eye of his eyes, and ear of his ears, and in
fact he is *It* and *It* is also all this. They taught that this reality
is realized in the "cave" of one's heart, and they also described it as
*sat, chit, ânanda*..

8\. They taught that though this truth is Unmanifest, the Nameless and
Formless (*nirâkâra* and *nirguNa*), it supports all manifestations,
names and forms. They saw in the world a great moral and spiritual order
(*rita*), which knows no transgression, which sets up from within forces
of self-correction and redress when violated. Sanatana dharma believes
that truth triumphs, and that which is true never lacks true. being.

9\. Sanatana dharma teaches a passage from the unreal to the real, from
darkness to light, from death to immortality. It holds that the world is
supported by *abhayam, ritam, yajñam*, austerity.

  
Gods

10\. A deepened spiritual anthropology or rather anthroposophy
(*âtma-vâda*) gave a lofty theology (*deva-vâda*). Indeed no great
thinking about Gods is possible without deep thinking about man.
Religious ideologies which are poor in *âtma-vâda* are also poor in
*deva-vâda*. Their gods lack both immanence as well as true
transcendence. Sanatana dharma saw Gods within; and the more it saw them
within, the more it saw them outside and also beyond; it saw them
filling the world, *îSâvâsyam idam*; it also saw that its fullness,
*pûrNam idam*, derives from the fullness of that, *pûrNam adah*. True
spiritual transcendence like true spiritual immanence, both are
attributes that properly belong only to Yogic Gods.

11\. As it saw in the Self all Godly attributes, it saw in Gods the
truth and powers of the Self; indeed, it taught that one who worships a
God as other than himself becomes his sacrificial animal, his
draught-animal. He is driven and ridden by him.

12\. Sanatana dharma worshipped God under many symbols and celebrated
each Name with a thousand Names. The Names represented attributes of
Gods as well as the attributes of the soul, one representing and echoing
the other. It found the loftiness of Gods in the depths of the soul. It
celebrated soul's yearning for God - its pangs of separation and its
delights of union - in a thousand songs all over India. It taught love
of God who has no form; it also taught that he takes on the form in
which he is worshipped; it also made God incarnate on earth for the sake
his devotees. \[It is a lawful spiritual and psychic process and has
little to do with those theologies which arbitrarily proclaim a man of
mere historical interest a God or saviour or intercessor.\]

13\. Sanatana dharma teaches us that true Gods are met when man goes
beyond his sensuous mind, beyond his ordinary desires and hankerings; he
sees them by himself becoming, in some sense, God-like.

14\. There are a thousand places where man could make contact with his
deity. Sanatana dharma teaches worship of him in his various pre-eminent
manifestations (*vibhûtis*).

15\. It also gives us "visible Gods" (*pratyaksha devatâ*) to worship.
The sky, the Sun, Ganga and Kavery, father, mother and teachers are
visible Gods and they are to be regarded as such.

  
Worship, "Forms" of God

16\. Though Nameless, this reality is also the source of all names and
attributes. Sanatana dharma teaches worship of him under various names
and attributes. He is worshipped as the Path, the Abode, the great
Shelter, the Witness, the Foundation, etc.

17\. Sanatana dharma teaches that God is without form though he upholds
many forms. All forms proclaim him. Sanatana dharma gives us Gods of
many spiritual and transcendental forms. He is *tapas-svarûpa,
satya-svarûpa, vijñâna-svarûpa*. He is *vijñâna-ghana* (concentrated
consciousness); he is the embodiment of delight (*ânandamaya*); he is
*Sânta, Siva, advaita*. Religions which lack inferiority and Yoga have
only a vague idea of these transcendental forms.

18\. In Sanatana dharma, man is conceived in the image of Gods, while
some religious ideologies conceive their God in the image of human
passions and preferences. No wonder, such a God has chosen people,
preferred spokesmen and habitually indulges in acts of wrath and
vengeance.

19\. To give human form to a God for purposes of worship presents no
great problem. In fact, it may even help spiritually in focussing the
mind. But to give him unregenerate human passions and worship him is the
real hurdle on the spiritual path. Images on the altar are no problem;
but idols in the mind and heart are the great enemies.

20\. No wonder that while the followers of this god could not claim
better morals than their neighbours, they found their religion best
fulfilled in destroying the shrines of the latter.

21\. Not only under many symbols, but the deity is also worshiped in
many ways, Sanatana dharma tells us. There are many paths that lead to
him, and one's path is often defined by one's own special endowment, his
*svadharma*, his nature *svabhâva*, his aptitude (*charit*). He is
worshipped through Yoga, through austerities, through disinterested
service, through devotion and wisdom. Some may worship him through many
costly sacrifices, but he is as easily pleased with a leaf, a flower, a
fruit, or water offered to him with devotion.

  
Exclusive Gods

22\. In Sanatana dharma Gods are conceived in various ways: as single,
as multiple, and as one in all and beyond all.

23\. The Gods thus conceived take no particular pride in being single or
singular and do not object to being multiple, for they know that they
are both.

24\. A God of this conception does not deter partners for he does not
become less by having them.

25\. A God of the conception of Sanatana dharma says: "Those who worship
other Gods also worship me," but a God conceived in exclusive ideologies
says: "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me." The Gods of Sanatana
dharma are not "jealous"; they live in friendliness; they represent each
other; in each one can see all. A God of this conception does not abhor
"other" or "strange" Gods, for there are no "others" and no "strangers"
here; He is in all and all are in Him.

26\. In Sanatana dharma one does not love one god by hating another; nor
does he need to hate the gods of others for loving his own. It teaches
that Jehovah can be loved without hating Jupiter and Allah loved without
hating Al-lat and Al-uzza.

27\. Sanatana dharma teaches *advaita*; it says God alone is, But this
teaching is different from the teaching of "only one god". The concept
of "god alone" is not the same thing as the concept of "the only god."
The latter is particularistic, negative and pretentious. Its motive is
to deny "other" gods, or more exactly the gods of others.

28\. But as Sanatana dharma denies no legitimate spiritual expressions,
it fully admits national deities and ancestral Gods (*kula-devatâ*). It
has no difficulty in admitting the God of one's "fathers", the "God of
Abraham, and of Isaac. and of Jacob."

  
Prophets and Saviours

29\. Cults of exclusive gods have often given birth to cults of
exclusive prophets. A god of this kind says to his chosen people: "I
shall be your God and you shall be my people; I shall raise amongst you
a prophet and I shall speak to him and he will tell you what I intend
you to do. If you do not obey him I shall punish you."

30\. Sanatana dharma rejects this approach and these categories. It
preaches neither exclusive gods, nor exclusive prophets. Sanatana dharma
accepts the fact of gifted God-men but rejects exclusive communicants.
The truths it teaches are experiential and open to all. 'Come and See
for yourself' is its call. It rejects the doctrine of the *only prophet*
(put forth under the guise of *the last prophet*) or the *only saviour*.

31\. By this token, Sanatana dharma cannot be a proxy religion. It
teaches that one cannot live on truths seen by others. It teaches you
direct and personal perception of truth. The voices and visions of one
man cannot become standard or authority for all.

  
The Revelation

32\. Sanatana dharma teaches that different parts of man's mind and
being project their own "revelations" and "truths", and they share the
qualities of their source. An impure source gives impure revelations; it
gives boastful and self-regarding gods, and self-proclaimed saviours and
intermediaries; it gives birth to *dvesha* and *moha* dharmas, to
ideologies of hate and delusion which launch you on fierce and
aggressive deeds. Sanatana dharma teaches that mind has to be purified
through *Sîla* and *samâdhi* before it can receive higher truths without
distortion; it teaches that even Yogic *dhyâna-bhûmis* require constant
purification and uplifting for contact with higher spiritual truths.

33\. So according to Sanatana dharma the source of higher truth is not
an agitated mind under excitement of some special idea or mission, but a
purified and illumined *buddhi* or *dhî*.

34\. Not without reason, the representative figure of Sanatana dharma is
a seer, a sage not a missionary or a crusader, a martyr or *shahid*.
Similarly, in Sanatana dharma only those. who are good and are men of
knowledge and wisdom are regarded as 'saints'; in prophetic ideologies,
saints are knight of the church or *ummah*, its sappers and miners, and
even its storm-troopers.

  
Denial of God

35\. According to Sanatana dharma God is dishonoured and denied in many
ways: He is denied when he is made in the image of man and personifies
his unregenerate passions and preferences; when he is made to seek sole
communicants; when he is made to "abhor" other Gods; when he is denied
in his "manyness" and in his various manifestations; or when he is
denied in the Gods of one's neighbours and consequently in the
neighbours themselves - denying the Gods of one's neighbours is often a
prelude to denying those neighbours themselves, prelude to attacking
them, enslaving and subjugating them in the name of one's own special
God. Bad and undeveloped theologies have been a great source of
imperialist wars, domination and oppression.

36\. God is denied when he is made into an all-time male and denied in
women and denied female expression. Theologies which have lacked
Goddesses have also been great oppressors of women. Historically, they
have also been great persecutors of "infidels".

  
Moral Code

37\. Different available moral codes have derived from what men have
thought of their deity, of themselves and of their neighbour. If
divinity and even morality are external to man, then his moral code too
is external. It is made up of Commandments, and compliance with them is
secured by threats of hellfire and promises of a paradise.

38\. Sanatana dharma however believes that man is spiritual and moral in
his essence; that compassion, truthfulness, disinterestedness reside in
his soul, therefore it expresses these luminous and divine qualities in
his action too; that if man is depraved and sinful by nature, he neither
needs nor is he capable of a developed moral action. What does a sinner
need morality for? His moral code has to be rudimentary and it is good
enough for a man of this definition. In any case, such a man is looking
for a saviour and even an underwriter, not for sinlessness - a state
which is impossible for him by definition.

39\. Similarly, a limited physical-vital view of man does not need much
ethics. If a man live only for himself and for a day, he owes little to
others and to tomorrow. Only a higher vision of man gives and can
sustain a higher system of ethics.

40\. An ordinary man's moral code is prudential in intention. He
refrains from doing many things unto others lest they also do them unto
him; he also sometimes does good unto them expecting they would do the
same unto him. But Sanatana dharma teaches that one should be good and
do good for its own sake. One does good because it is one's nature.
However, it also knows that the law has its limitations. Forgiveness and
patient bearing (*kshmâ*) under all circumstances cannot be laws of
ethical behaviour for all, while mutuality and reciprocity are. Sanatana
dharma also holds *daNDa-nîti*, the science of administering justice, in
high esteem; it teaches punishment where it is due though it does not
forget the divine in those it has to punish and its penal code has been
humane and based on deep understanding. It also teaches that the
*âtatâyins*, aggressors and invaders of various grades, are to be
opposed with resolve and force. Are we not aware of ideologies and
forces that are aggressive in their very creed and premises, which treat
others harshly in the name of one principle while they expect to be
treated indulgently in the name of another principle?

41\. Broadly speaking, Sanatana dharma has spoken of four aims of man's
pursuit (*purushârtha*). The first two, physical well-being and
acquisition of wealth, even for their fulfilment, have to accept the
guidance of the third, the ethical law, the *dharma*. Dharma in turn is
rooted in the fourth, *moksha*, the principle of liberation in man from
the pull of his lower nature. There can be no lasting ethical behaviour
without cultivating dispassion and a taste for higher life. A Hindu
sannyasin takes the vow of fearlessness; he takes no offence and offers
no injury to anyone.

  
Neighbour

42\. An ethical code defines a man's behavior, his duties and
obligations towards his neighbour. But who is a neighbour? According to
prophetic religions, a man belongs to a body of believers, and he has no
other existence. They do not have a concept of man as such and their
definition of a neighbour excludes non-believers. In this view, a
believer owes nothing to them. In fact, he is taught to deny them, to
deny their Gods and their God-men, and it is his special obligation to
destroy their temples and their groves. In this he fulfils his God's
most favorite command.

43\. But Sanatana dharma's definition of a neighbour is very inclusive.
It includes all men, in fact, all living beings, and even all elements;
it includes Gods and angels; it includes beings who have gone before and
those who are yet to come; beings on all planes and in all modes of
existence. Sanatana dharma teaches, that man owes duties towards them
all, that he is indebted to them. It preaches that he pays his debts to
them. Therefore he is asked to make daily "sacrifices" to them, to offer
his daily oblations to Gods, to ancestors, teachers and rishis of old,
to men; in fact to all orders of beings including Gandharvas, Nâgas,
Yakshas and Rdkshasas, and to all elements (*bhûtâni*) including oceans,
rivers, mountains and heavenly bodies. Therefore, when a Hindu eats his
food, he mentally offers and invokes all beings on different planes
living in different modes (*âbrahma-stamba-paryantam*). He eats the
"remains" of this food. He eats sinfully who eats for himself.

  
Animals

44\. Our sister animal creation has failed to receive sympathetic
recognition at the hands of man. It has been under the curse of the
Biblical God. He put the fear and dread of his followers upon every
beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air and told them that
every thing that moveth was their food and under their domination.
Modern European thought carries forward that tradition. And though it
derives man from the animals, it has not led to the teaching that
animals may be treated like men but on the other hand to the opposite
teaching that men may be treated like animals.

45\. While modern secular thought sees animals in man, Sanatana dharma
saw Gods and the power and presence of Gods in animals. It saw Agni in
goats, VaruNa in rams and sheep, Sûrya in horses, and Soma in cows and
calves. It taught kindly treatment of animals; it taught *jîva-dayâ*.

46\. Widespread vegetarianism in Hinduism is a practical expression of
this *jîva-dayâ*, of the sense of larger unity.

  
Ecological Ethics

47\. Modern materialist thinking which is linear and which holds that
everything is for man's use and manipulation is losing credit. Man is
being forced to define his attitude towards elements like the earth, the
waters, the air, the sky, the rivers. Are they dead? Or, living? Are
they strangers? Or, close relatives - father, mother, brothers, sisters,
and friends? Are the oceans, the atmosphere merely great sinks, huge
waste-dumps? Are the minerals, the plants, the great animal
sister-creation there just for human exploitation? Have they no life and
rights of their own. Sanatana dharma takes the view that they have their
own rights and we have duties towards them. It says that we should
cherish them and live in togetherness. If we violate this law and
continue to injure them, we create karmas that will strike back in ways
we can hardly imagine.

48\. The ethical thinking of Sanatana dharma derives from this larger
conception of man. Man belongs to a great community and many forces,
mostly invisible. He is a meeting-point of many influences; he derives
his sustenance and even his being from many planes, many sources. He
belongs to a whole universe of interconnections; he is part of a common
and larger biosphere, and beyond that of a larger psycho-sphere, a
larger cosmic moral and spiritual order (*rita*). Man is more than
ecologic; he is cosmic in his being.

49\. Sanatana dharma teaches that there is an interchange going on
between Gods and men, between heaven and earth, between men and men,
between the past, the present, the future, and they each owe one to the
other. It thinks of life as a yajña, an interchange, between different
forms and modes, and transformation.

50\. Sanatana dharma teaches that only such a large view of man and his
ethics can provide the basis of a truly great and compassionate culture.

  
Dharma

51\. Sanatana dharma believes that man is capable of higher moral action
only when he grows into the qualities and powers of the Spirit: that he
grows morally when he grows spiritually; therefore it teaches an ethics
of personal spiritual growth. It teaches the ten-fold laws and qualities
of dharma: contentment (*dhriti*), forgiveness (*kshamâ*), self-control
(*dama*), purification (*Saucha*), sense-control (*indriya-nigraha*),
wisdom (*dhî*), knowledge (*vidyâ*), truthfulness (*satya*), and
abstention from anger (*akrodha*).

52\. Therefore, Sanatana dharma seeks "rebirth", a new life in *daivyî
sampad*; it teaches you to cultivate your hidden powers, new powers of
the soul, like *Sraddhâ, vîrya, smriti, samâdhi* and *prajñâ*. It
teaches an upward and inward look.

53\. Sanatana dharma teaches man to embrace the Vast, the plenum
(*bhûman*) and reject the Small (*alpa*).

54\. Sanatana dharma regards God as the inner-controller, and moral
action as spontaneous and natural. In being moral, a man is being true
to himself.

  
According to one's Readiness

55\. While teaching highest *âtma-dharma*, Sanatana dharma makes
allowance for different capacities, different talents, different
starting-points, and different needs. A man starts from where he is, and
he moves along his *svadharma*, his bent of mind, his capacity of the
moment. Thus his starting-point, his route are his own, and he reaches
his destination in his own way.

56\. Besides the principle of *âdhâra-bheda*, there is also the
principle of ishTa. Here one chooses one's deity too. The seeker starts
according to his spiritual readiness, and he thinks of God in the form
most dear to him and most in affinity with his inner nature.

57\. By its very nature such teaching cannot be put in a creed or
*Kalmah* or formula; it cannot be exported and sold by vendors of
religion; it cannot be had at the stalls of missionaries, nor can it
belong to the kitbag of invading armies. One has to grow into it. That
is true conversion. All other conversions are political and military and
they have no spiritual significance.

58\. By the same token these truths cannot be borrowed or stolen; one
cannot make them one's own by stealing or robbing, or by cunning
adapting and adopting. For learning them, one has to go fuel in hand
(*samid-pâNi*) in humble seeking and supplication. These truths are for
the seekers; Vedas cannot be stolen.

59\. It also follows that creeds of undeveloped spiritual vision can
neither have nor do they need a developed ethical code.

  
Many Lives, Many Planes, Moksha

60\. All these teachings have a meaning when the background and the
foundation is a vast (*brihat*) and even an undying life. Sanatana
dharma teaches that there are many lives, many births, many
incarnations; it tells us how a soul drops one body and puts on another;
it tells us how when a man apparently dies, he draws unto itself all
that he has done and thought and desired, in short, all the
"impressions" and "proclivities" of this life and restarts on another
journey in another body.

61\. Sanatana dharma teaches not only many lives but also many "modes"
of life on many planes or *lokas*, and many kinds of beings on different
*lokas* with different powers and possibilities. It tells us that life
on some of these planes is grossly physical while on others it is more
mental, psychic and spiritual. It tells us of the worlds of Fathers,
Gandharvas, Prajâpati, Gods, Brahmâ. It teaches that man is also born on
these planes and among their denizens.

62\. Though Sanatana dharma has spoken extensively of these lokas and
birth in these planes, we need not go into them here. For the principle
of all these births and lokas is that man becomes what he thinks,
desires, acts, aspires to; that man is *Sraddhâmaya* and that he is
shaped according to the faith, desires and aspirations of his heart; it
says that the doer of good becomes good and the doer of evil becomes
evil. ,

63\. It further says that on this journey of self-formation, there is.
no discontinuity, no moral or spiritual break. One makes his start, and
the *sâdhanâ* of this life is taken up in the next. On this path there
is no loss of effort, nor any transgression, where goodness and virtue
are one's protectors in this as well as future life. Dharma is undying
and even a bit of it protects a man from great fear.

64\. Sanatana dharma also teaches *moksha*. It says that at one time or
the other, some more contemplative types realize that all this coming
and going is no part of their true self and adds nothing to it. They
reject all that is *not-self (an-âtma)*. They become aware of forces
which stain the natural purity of the soul, which keep man bound to
lower forms of life, the lower pull (*kleSas, âsravas, saMyojanas,
lesyas*). They develop *nirveda*, a distaste for this world, or rather
for worldliness. Hindu spiritual teachers have spoken a good deal of
this *nirveda*. They say that without this great turning away, one
cannot develop longing for emancipation. They have seen that the forces
that keep men in bondage are powerful. They have seen everything - one's
eyes, one's ears, one's mind, etc. on fire, burning (*âdîpta*) with
attachment, with aversion, with delusion; and blinded (*andha-bhûta*) by
them. They say that a man should work with zeal for his emancipation
(*apavarga*), get out of this cycle and become a non-returner, nivritta,
*anâgâmin*. Renunciation has an honoured place in man's spiritual
growth.

65\. A man who has broken his fetters and cut the knots of his heart
develops another vision: that a man in his soul already holds all his
lives, past and future, terrestrial and celestial; that he is already in
touch with all the *lokas* and their beings, that nothing is too distant
for him and that no one is a stranger, that Gods, angels and ancestors
are kith and kin, that there is *sâdriSya* and *ekâtmatâ* between them
all; that he is all, knows all, belongs to all.

66\. Sanatana dharma has done a lot of thinking on life and death, on
what is a noble life and a noble death, on rebirth and the law of karma,
on what might be called *pâra* or post-mortal states, on the two paths
of light and darkness (*archi mârga* and *dhûma mârga*), on *mârga-yâna*
and *deva-yâna*, on birth in celestial realms, on *moksha* and
*nirvâNa*. These are important questions and intimately related to man's
being. Cultures which don't raise these questions are spiritually poor-

  
One Life, One Judgement, Hell, Heaven

67\. The perspective of certain religious ideologies has been different.
According to them, there is nothing to account for a man's present
birth. He begins suddenly and his end is as "sudden" as his beginning.
He dies and is dormant till a particular day when he is raised more or
less as he was in his body as well as in his mind or in his affections
and appetites and desires, and is judged once for all and condemned or
rewarded for an eternal punishment or reward. In this view, a man's life
is at best merely an interlude between two blanks. He came from nothing;
there were no inputs from a past life, nor does he leave any traces or
proclivities of a future life. No past shaped his present life and he is
shaping no future life for him. There is a single life, a single
judgement and an eternal punishment, but in cases where man belonged to
a right religious *ummah* eternal reward. But in Sanatana dharma, as we
have seen, the perspective is very different. There are more than one
life and, of course, there is no single judgment. In fact, there is no
judgment at all as such, for the idea is to help and not to judge and
condemn. The inner dynamics of incarnation is not reward or punishment
but self-improvement, and ultimately self-discovery and self-recovery,
*moksha*.

68\. In these ideologies, there are no "other" worlds properly speaking.
The first place to which a man goes after his death is the purgatory, a
sort of detention-camp and a place of torment for the expiation of sins
not sufficiently paid for here in this world. Here men wait in torment
until the day of Judgement when they are judged for all time and most of
them condemned and go to hell and a small minority saved and sent to
heaven.

69\. In these ideologies the reward itself is conceived in most sensuous
terms. There is no concept of a higher life, concept of a man released
from its lower nature. Their paradise reproduces the present in all its
unregenerate aspects and hardly adds any new dimension; it gives widest
scope for fulfilling a man's worst passions, his appetites,
concupiscence, his revenge. It provides pleasures dreamt here but often
denied; it is one of the greatest pleasures of the heaven of prophetic
religions that, from its balcony, the believer can watch his enemies,
the pagans, the unbelievers, the heretics roasting in hell.

70\. Another *piece de resistance* is their hell. Its tortures have been
described with such great fervour and flourish that for centuries it has
held believers in great fear. It gave birth to an ideology of "religious
terrorism," as it has been aptly described. Indulgences were and are
still sold and bought. Poor men do everything and submit to everything
to procure some relief from the tortures of future life for themselves
and their dear ones.

71\. It also encouraged the cult of Saviours and Mediators. The hotter
the fire of the hell, the greater the demand for a Saviour or Mediator.

  
Modern Western Thought

72\. Sanatana dharma and modern European thought disagree in many
things, in their method, approach as well as conclusions. But they agree
in one most important thing: they are not dogmatic and they do not
punish dissent and both allow reason freedom to question and inquire.
\[In India where this freedom was never under question, we do not even
see the importance of the problem. But in the West, this right was won
the hard way. There the Church claimed that it had all the knowledge,
spiritual as well as secular; it knew who is God and whom He has
begotten; it knew when the world began and when it was to end; it knew
that the earth was flat and the sun and the moon were set in the
firmament to give light upon the earth. These were dogmas and to
question them was dangerous and invited burning at the stake.\]

73\. But here the agreement ends and both have followed their own
characteristic methods of inquiry. One has looked inside, the other
outside; one has wanted to know that by knowing which all this is known;
it thought that by knowing oneself, one would know all. The other
studied the outside world and thought that in this way man would also
know himself. There was also another difference in their method: one
method was discursive and analytical, the other concentrative and
intuitive.

74\. The two also disagree in their conclusions and approach and temper.
One derives the higher from the lower while the other sees even in the
lower the play of the higher. As a result, one derives man from animals,
the other derives him from Gods and says that man's roots are above
(*ûrdhva-mûla*), and that he is a soul that has come down into an
earthly body and has lost the memory of his true home. Similarly, one
school is reductionist in approach while the other allows different
levels and multiple dimensions. Sanatana dharma has found out a
transcendental dimension; modern secular thought denies it altogether;
the former takes into account man's spiritual nature and gives it a high
place, the latter treats him mainly as a body, though sometimes
grudgingly as a mind too regarding it as the body's appendage.

75\. In conformity with its basic approach, modern thought explains the
world mainly in physical terms. This view is not new and as a school of
thought is quite old and found in all cultures wherever any
philosophical thinking was done. What is new is the intellectual
prestige the view has acquired in scientific circles as a result of
certain marvellous achievements in the field of technology by following
its quantitative approach. The view has also the support of our senses
and empirical mind and therefore has a universality of its own. In India
too this school of thought has existed from very ancient days though it
did not belong to the mainstream.

76\. The physical view of the universe went along with a physiological
and biological view of man, and also supported a particular ethical
theory of man's conduct. It said that the highest aim of man is to
fulfil his desires and those desires are mainly of his body. This view
holds, to put it in the language of the Gita, that the world is without
moral basis, without spiritual governance, without Gods, and that its
motive force is lust and greed. Modern philosophical thought works on
these premises and accepts these views of the world, of man and his
ethics.

77\. Sanatana dharma rejects these views. It rejects the view which
identifies man with his body alone or even with his mind. It accepts
man's physical and physiological being but it regards it as only the
first definition of man. Beyond this man, *annamaya purusha*, the sages
found other dimensions which constitute man's deeper being.

78\. They therefore also rejected the ethics based on this
identification. They denied that the highest aim of man is merely to
fulfil the desires of this body, "to make it happy and wait upon it."
They called it an asuric doctrine.

79\. They in fact rejected all such views of the world, man and his
conduct which deny worlds other than the world of the senses and
pragmatic mind, which deny the hereafter, which deny sowing and reaping,
which deny law of karma and the path of dharma, which deny higher
motivation and larger life. India has known its Chârvâks and Jâbâlis,
but has found their definition of man, and consequently their ethical
thinking too, as inadequate and unacceptable.

80\. Sanatana dharma teaches that materialism and hedonism in their
exclusive demands are very unsatisfactory, that cultures based on a
purely psycho-physical definition of man are neurotic, that they cannot
provide the basis of a truly stable society. These cultures lack vision
and sympathy; they are violent. Think of all their meat industries and
their slaughterhouses and even their laboratories and experiments. See
how they kill whole species for food, for entertainment, for commercial
profits. Think of all the tears and sighs involved. They must be leaving
karmas behind, must be setting up forces of nemesis somewhere. These
cultures are also wasteful and self-destructive. Think of their poisoned
food, poisoned soil, poisoned waters and air; how they mine away their
soil, how they exploit whole continents and peoples, how they use away
in a decade nature's assets accumulated over thousands of years - to
feed the ever-hungry Market, the new Moloch-God. And behind and
supporting all this wastefulness and cruelty, one can also see the
*mindlessness* of the whole prevailing system, its forgetfulness
(*vismriti*) of any higher dimension. Think of its sensation-seeking,
its entertainments, its education, its health systems based on a narrow
definition of man.

81\. Sanatana dharma also rejects the stupendous egocentricity of modern
Europe which regards all human past as "primitive", all Asia as
"outmoded", and believes that it has been the centre and secret meaning
of all human endeavour and that man's history by an inner law has been
leading up to it and it has now reached its finale!

82\. Time and space of Hindu thinking were vast. It is only recently
that modern Europe attained those scales - though it still regards them
too physically and has no idea of psychic time and space. However, the
old Biblical chronology of creation it had inherited from Christianity
is still active. It has come by the backdoor and it is now applied to
the history of civilization giving it five or six thousand years, the
same it once gave to creation. This view suits Europe's ego, but
Sanatana dharma rejects it. It believes that man's history is long and
he has seen and known many civilizations which have come and gone and
reappeared more than once. It believes in cycles, in patterns, in
repetition. It also believes that civilizations had more than one centre
and that fortune smiled on different peoples and regions and they
created great civilizations at different times. But in this matter too,
the West was moved by its Biblical bias. It concentrated its
archaeological labours in the Palestinian land and its neighbourhood,
believed to be the place where the Garden of Eden was and where lived
Adam and Eve. In this way the first site of creation also became the
first and foremost site of civilization.

  
Universality

83\. Sanatana dharma is a soul religion, therefore it is universal.
Wherever there is sincere seeking, it comes into play. Therefore though
it found its most profound and continuous expression in India. it
belongs to all whose spiritual quest is sincere.

84\. Its truths have been confirmed in every age, but one has to work
for them in order to make them one's own. These truths are closed to the
sensuous mind, but they are revealed to a *sâttvika buddhi*; they are
closed to the foolish, but they are revealed to the pure (*Suchivâna*)
and the wise (*vijña*).

85\. By its very nature, Sanatana dharma cannot be a religion of a
chosen people or a favourite church or *ummah*. It expresses man's
secret seeking for truth, therefore it belongs to all seekers. It
rejects the approach which divides humanity into believers and infidels
or heathens, and regards this division spiritually untenable.

86\. Its sympathy is not limited to humanity; its compassion reaches out
to all beings, all creatures. It teaches compassion for all beings on
all planes, those who are living, and those who have gone and those who
are yet to come.

87\. Sanatana dharma believes that a tribal god belonging to a
particular *ummah* trying to become the god of all through conquest has
no universality. A true universal God is met in the inferiority of one's
soul where what is intimately individual is also truly universal.
Similarly, a god who owns and rules the world but has lost his soul or
inwardness is no true god.

  
Repository of Many Religions:  
Religious Renewal of the World

88\. Last centuries have been dominated by ideologies, religious as well
as secular, which were based on denial and exclusion. They denied truths
they did not know; they denied peoples and continents they did not
control; they denied their neighbours' Gods; they denied and maligned
mankind's whole religious past; they dismissed it as "age of ignorance";
they described their human ancestors as "benighted", or as is the
fashion of modern anthropology - a development of Christian theology -
"primitive". They saw nothing good in anyone before them or beside them
or after them. Modern Europe's social sciences, philosophies and
ideologies - its sociology, anthropology, its Darwinism and Marxism -
all are merely carrying forward the old bias of its narrow,
self-centered Christian theology. They are blackening with a big brush
man's whole heritage, in fact, the whole of past humanity itself and
quite a part of present humanity as well. But now this thinking is
facing difficulties and there is a growing realization among the more
perceptive thinkers that this view of mankind and its past is
inadequate. Hinduism which views human history in great time cycle can
help this process of rethinking.

89\. Sanatana dharma teaches that one's world is relative to one's
consciousness, the world of a predominantly physical mind is physical;
it is dead and inert and lacks inner movement. But there is another mind
which views things differently; its world is animate, conscious; it is
also made up of "things", but those things are powers, personalities;
they have mana in them; they are internally linked and one could stand
and signify another. However, during the last millennium, the physical
mind has been dominant. It has given rise to ideologies which see the
world that way, dead, inert, and passive. Under their auspices, we have
learnt to deny many cultures, continents and peoples as "animists", or
as "ancestor worshippers". Hinduism rejects this approach; it accepts
the world-view of these cultures as valid and believes that something of
it is needed by the modern man for his own self-renewal, that man must
relearn that world-view of great spiritual truth, and that he needs
these ancient views to cure his own deadness and rootlessness.

90\. Sanatana dharma was known in many lands under different names. But
at one stage or the other, it came under the attack of monolatrous
creeds which lacked internality but were moved by a fanatic idea. Many
countries lost all memory of it but India has been able to preserve it
though in a form badly damaged. Thus India has come to preserve
spiritual traditions which many ancient cultures and countries have
lost. Today Hinduism represents not only India but the ancient wisdom of
humanity and therefore in a most vital way that humanity itself. In
Hinduism many ancient countries can still rediscover their religious
past, their old Gods and their old spiritual traditions.

91\. And while it reveals their past, it is also a pointer to their
future; while linking them up with their roots, it tells them that they
can best develop by following their own inner light. No borrowed gods,
saviour and prophets would do.

92\. Hindu dharma is the dharma by knowing which many ancient religions
become known; it is the illuminator, interpreter (*bodhaka, prakâSaka*
and *vâchaka*) of many a religion of the world, both past and present.
It also fulfils man's deeper religious seeking at any point of time.

  
The Great Refuge

93\. I offer my obeisance to Sanatana dharma of the Vedas and the
Upanishads, the PurâNas, the Epics and many Âgamas.

94\. I take refuge unto this dharma which has been nourished from
generation to generation by great sages and teachers.

95\. I take refuge in Sanatana dharma, whose precepts and practices are
pure, which is auspicious in its beginning, auspicious in the middle,
and auspicious in the end; whose roots are deep, whose fruits are sweet.

96\. I take refuge in Sanatana dharma whose teaching is pure, whose
desires, aspirations and works are pure.

97\. I pay my obeisance to Sanatana dharma which gives us a vision of a
higher life, a great and immortal life, a life renewed by a higher
truth, a life which goes beyond its present limitations.

98\. May I be a sharer in its truth! May I be a worthy sharer in its
heritage! May it be given to me to serve it with all my heart and mind.

99\. God grant me that I make its truth my own. Make me a participant in
its truth. May I become worthy of it. Expand me and deepen me. Take the
veil off from thy face and reveal thy face and thy inner truth.

100\. I pay my obeisance to Sanatana dharma which teaches oneness of men
and Gods, oneness of all life. May I be one with Gods! May I be one with
our ancestors! May I be one with those who have gone before me! May I be
one with those who have yet to come. May I serve those who are
immediately around me, and also those who are hid from my sight. May I
serve all beings on all the planes!

101\. I pay obeisance to Sanatana dharma which has power to heal and
reconcile, power to awaken, and re-form. May this dharma restore my
people and my country! May it bless all humanity and all beings! May all
be auspicious towards each other.

102\. Sanatana dharma protects those who protect it. Therefore protect
and serve it in order to deserve and claim its protection.

103\. Sanatana dharma is as wide and profound as its subject. Like its
Gods, it has a thousand names and facets, but only some of them have
been indicated here.

  
Hindu Dharma, Hindus, India

104\. India was the place where Sanatana dharma flourished. Its people
were called Hindus and their religion came to be known as Hindu dharma.
Hindu dharma went abroad from time to time and vitally influenced the
cultures and religions of many lands and regions of the globe, but India
remained its home par excellence, and it never tried to set up a foreign
Empire. Its influence was purely spiritual, cultural and intellectual.

105\. Hindu Dharma raised fundamental questions and made profound
answers. It discussed Gods and the discussion was most intimate and
profound and we find nothing like it anywhere. It also discussed man - a
most important question but altogether neglected in many religious
ideologies, particularly prophetic ones - and asked many questions about
him. Is he one or multiple? Is the visible man the only one, or has he
also an invisible dimension? And after great investigation, the answer
it gave was that man is made up of many sheaths (*koshas*), one inside
the other; that he comes from higher sources; that much of him, his
form, his beginning and end and his resting-place are indiscernible.
Similarly, it raised questions about living, dying and immortality; it
raised questions about the quality of life, about suffering and death,
and about the way to overcome them; it discussed the law of karma and
found that its working was inscrutable. It discussed man's own internal
enemies, and friends, the forces that bound man and those which
liberated him.

106\. It raised other similar questions centering on the same theme. It
raised the question about *purusha* and *prakriti*; it raised questions
about *bhakti* and *mukti*, about *karma* and *dharma*, about *saMsâra*
and *nirvâNa*, about *pravritti* and *nivritti*, about what is action
and what is inaction, what is *yajña* (sacrifice) and what is worship,
about *Sîla, samâdhi* and *prajñâ*, about *yama* and *niyama*, about
*tapasyâ*; it spoke of the two lives, one that is worthy, righteous and
good and the other which is merely pleasant (*Sreyas* and *preyas*); it
shoved how life could be uplifted, how man could develop an upward and
inward look. It spoke about *vyakta* and *avyakta*; it asked questions
about Gods, about ancestors, about different spheres and planes
(*lokas*), about the "invisible" worlds corresponding to the "invisible"
man and vice versa. In the same vein, it asked questions about the four
*purushârthas*, about the four *varNas* and *âSramas*.

107\. The truths that Hindu dharma taught were profound and recondite,
but they were made available to the least of its members. It was done
through epics and the Puranas, through songs and psalms, through stories
and parables. What the village minstrel sang in direct and simple
language was what the Upanishads taught in cryptic and terse language.
The same truths were conveyed both through Sanskrit as well the more
ordinary medium of discourse. No antagonism was ever felt between
Sanskrit and Prakrit, or any other local language in use. The source was
the same, the inspiration was the same, the message was the same.

  
Reason and Religion

108\. Hindu dharma was a great reconciler. It reconciled various
viewpoints, various doctrines. It knew how to look at things from
various angles and viewpoints. It knew no conflict between science and
religion, between rationalism and spiritualism. It was so because it was
not dogmatic either in its reason or its religion. Its spirituality did
not deny reason, nor its reason denied spirituality. And why should
they? Both are great truths of man's being and both are needed and they
reinforce each other. But where one or the other or both lack in depth,
conflict is inevitable. In cultures where spirituality and philosophy
were undeveloped or underdeveloped, the two have been either in conflict
or they have lived in uneasy coexistence.

  
VarNa-âSrama Dharma: Social System

109\. Hindu dharma has also been described as *varNa-âSrama dharma*
which represents an important facet of ancient Hindu thinking. The old
sages saw that men are broadly divided into four psychological types
(*chaturvarNa*), a very different thing from the castes-system with
which it is often confused. They found that these psychological
differences were natural and their variety matched the variety of man's
needs. Similarly, they thought of man passing through four stage: as a
student when he should be acquiring knowledge both vocational and
liberal; then as a householder when he enters life, marries, earns and
creates wealth for himself and for others and supports all other
activities of the society; and at the end he retires from these
activities and in the last two stages becomes an intense seeker of truth
and spends his time in self-reflection. All these stages or *âSramas*
were important but in a certain context the householder was declared
superior to all for he supported and protected the rest. This ordering
involved no iniquity for each man was also all others at different
times.

All this thinking and ordering derives from what these sages thought of
man. They found that each man is a multiple being: he is physical,
mental and spiritual and that all these parts should find fulfilment.
From this also came the celebrated four aims (*purushârthas*) of Hindu
conception we have already mentioned. Man should work for his physical
and economic well-being; he should hand down the torch of life from one
generation to another; he should also earn and create wealth; he must
also search and follow values and discover the meaning of life. Man was
both spirit and body, though he was more of the one at one stage than of
the other. The sages followed this natural law and made their
recommendations accordingly. The four *âSramas* and the four orders were
conceived to fulfil the fourfold nature of man and the four aims of
life.

The society had the same needs as its individuals: physical, mental and
spiritual. Similarly, its members were endowed with different talents
and the results were best when their work, talents and training went
together. The *varNa-âSrama dharma* was meant to serve this end as best
as it could. The society needed creators of wealth and in the Indian
scheme they also owned the best part of it; it also needed its warriors,
defenders and protectors and also its thinkers, teachers and priests.
For what is a society without them? - an easy prey and a bountiful
reward for various aggressive forces around. \[It is also the class
which accustomed invaders and practised imperialists most hate and would
like to destroy and discredit - they only care for hewers of wood and
drawers of water who are leaderless and whose resistance has been
broken.\]

In all this ordering of the society, there was no iniquity. Dharma set
limit and informed all relations. Its inherent justice can be seen from
the fact when we remember that Hindu social order neither knew slavery
nor serfdom as a system. It did not live on Imperialist and feudal
occupation of other peoples' lands, nor on forced tributes, or the "holy
fifth," or *jazia*. The society produced its wealth by its own members
living in self-governing communities. Only that wealth was praise-worthy
which was honestly earned and shared (*Suddha-sudhana*).

Now the *âSrama* system hardly exists, and only its memory remains.
*VarNas* were never castes which followed their own laws. But even
castes too have lost their old vocational and cultural relevance; they
exist, and sometimes even too insistently, mainly politically and they
have grown their own vested interests. They are a hot subject and need
more mention.

  
Castes and Communities

110\. No society is a mass; it has always a social configuration. Any
developed human society follows the law of differentiation. So did the
Hindu society. For better self-articulation, it divided itself in many
segments; but in all its diverse expressions, it remained one in spirit.
In its caste and community organizations, we see pluralist Hinduism in
action. Various people had various talents, various aptitudes and were
variously endowed and they all served social needs which were also
various. They had also special vocations and special rules and usages
(*niyam*), but they all shared deeper truths taught by Hindu dharma.
Rules of ethical conduct (*Sîla*) like harmlessness (*ahiMsâ*),
truthfulness (*satya*), non stealing (*asteya*), hospitality
(*âtithya*), and inner disciplines of the spirit like *Saucha* (internal
and external purity), *yama* and *indriya-nigrah* (self-control) were
shared truths of all. So were yoga and various other modes of worship.
They had shared deities and shared incarnations, and even when they went
to different temples, the Gods on the altar were the same. They all
remembered their ancestors and performed *Srâddha-karma*. They all
offered *tarpaNa* for Bhishma, the adopted great-great ancestor of all.
They all reverenced and worshipped the mother Earth, the rivers, the Sun
and the sky. All this constitutes oneness and unity at a deep, psychic
level. But deep things are difficult to see and show and we have learnt
to be satisfied with the externals. As a result caste has now become
Hinduism's badge and flag, its defining mark. It owes to the fact that
during its lean years Hinduism lost its right to self-definition. That
right passed on to our rulers and they have been defining it for us.
There was a time when Hinduism was described in terms of its spiritual
wisdom, its Yogas, its philosophy and practices of self-transcendence
and self-exceeding, its law of karma and dharma, its mighty and manifold
creations; but now it is presented as a system of idolatry, polytheism
and castes. For example, once Hinduism was known for its *brahma-vâda*,
now its detractors present it as a doctrine of *brâhmaNa-vâda* and we
have lapped up such definitions.

111\. To an external eye, different castes in their more outer
circumstances might have looked different, but in their inner attitude
and approach, they shared a common life, a common spirit shaped by Hindu
spirituality and ethical system. High or low, they all followed as best
as they could different attributes of Hindu dharma - often ten have been
named by law-givers. Thus in the midst of a great variety of conditions,
one could easily see deeper Hindu shaping influences at work. These
influences were so deep that they left an impress behind even on those
who were converted; they remained closer to their older brothers than to
the those whose fold they had to join.

112\. The contribution of Hindu thought in the social field was great
indeed. It taught us how to create a society of more or less
self-governing communities; it gave us "communitarian democracy," the
foundation of a true democracy. In this society, no one was rootless, no
body belonged to an anonymous mass; everyone had a niche, a place where
he was not a stranger; as a member of a great community, no one could be
pushed around and he had the protection of the community. And yet no
community was a law unto itself. Each followed the guidance of dharma.
Never was there a society so free from coercive state apparatus. Every
one belonged, everyone had security, dignity, a vocation. The world
needs this system or something like it - and much advanced thinking is
veering round to this view - in order to overcome the rootlessness and
the atomization that is becoming man's lot under new forces at work.

113\. Hindu dharma taught respect for all classes. It cherished its
*tapasvins* and intelligentsia, it cherished its soldiers and
administrators, it cherished its producers, traders and artisans and
workers. A Vedic verse prays for lustre and light (*rucha*) to reside
"in our Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras." Everyone was
honoured. In the old system, caste represented the principle of security
and continuity - one was employed as soon as one was born; it
represented the principle of vocation, of training, of excellence, of
pride, of dedication; it represented the principle of co-operation,
conciliation, culture, and dignity; it was also a great centre of
national power and national expression. It is very much later that caste
acquired negative characteristics. It is only a recent phenomenon when
under a different ideological conditioning one caste is maligned in the
name of another, and caste is being used by powerful vested interests
for the fragmentation of the society. Old India had castes but no
casteists; new India has casteists but no worthwhile castes. In old
India, all people and castes united in defending their society, in
defending temples, Brahmins and cows - still worthy objects of
protection by a great and compassionate people and civilization.

114\. The caste in India was different from the class or estate in the
West. Caste was not economic in concept or organization; it was social
and cultural. Different castes produced poets, saints and God-men highly
honoured by all. Castes were not also as a rule economically or
politically disadvantaged. They had often their own rich; they had their
Rajas and chiefs and some of them produced at different times great
rulers for the whole country. Traditionally the Brahmins were the
poorest (and as a class they remain so even at present) for their
philosophy was self-abnegation - anyone who lived a mental life, whether
a student, a scholar or a sannyasin, was expected to live in voluntary
poverty.

115\. There was a time when the caste system was not static and castes
often rose and fell in social status. It was also the time when no caste
was "depressed" though there were social differences. Castes became
static and depressed during the period of a protracted foreign rule. The
old Hindu social system raised the lowest and treated even the Sudras
like the Brahmins; the foreign rulers lowered the highest and treated
even the Brahmins like the Shudras. Under foreign domination the status
of every community became depressed and those on the margin or those who
offered persistent resistance became even more depressed. Under these
pressures, entirely new classes arose. The sweeper class with its
present functions is phenomenon of this period. Among them and the
tribals, one finds many Rajput gotras.

116\. Thus the caste that old India knew was different from what is said
about it. The caste of modern persuasion and understanding is a
Western-Christian construct of the last few centuries. It was conceived
as an aid to foreign rule. But the old stereotype continues to dominate
and we have even made it our own. It continues to serve old interests
while it has created quite some new ones of its own. Old Imperialist
forces trying to stage a comeback are doing their best to keep political
casteism alive.

  
Women

117\. Hindu dharma reverenced women; therefore, it had no difficulty in
conceiving Goddesses. Hindus also learnt to give their women the honour
they gave to their deities. Hindu lawgivers taught that women must be
honoured by their fathers, brothers, husbands and brothers-in-law, who
desire their own welfare; that Gods are pleased where women are
honoured, but where they are not honoured sacred rites yield no rewards.

  
Hindus

118\. Once Hindus were rich in crops and flocks; their baskets and
stores were full; their fields yielded abundantly; they were great
organizers, great merchants and entrepreneurs; they were truthful and
honest in their dealings; they were noble and generous in character;
they were brave and chivalrous they neither oppressed nor suffered
oppression; they were wise and valorous; they avoided fault-finding, and
only saw and encouraged what was good in others. They worshipped light
and followed its lead -*jyotiragrâH*.

119\. They were also versed in many fields of knowledge and sciences;
they were masters of many arts and crafts; they knew much, they were
curious, inventive and dexterous, they were great ship-builders and
navigators and explorers.

120\. While Hindu dharma flourished, India was also great and happy and
creative. It was the mother of many religions; it was the land of many
chants, *stavans, bhajans* and *kîrtans*, and night-vigils; the land of
many philosophies, austerities, *tapasyâs*, reflections; the land of
purity and spiritual discrimination; the land where Gods were sung and
invoked under various names; the land of much *dâna, dakshiNâ* and
service. It was the land where the incomparable Mahabharata and the
Ramayana were written, works of awakened souls writing about similar
souls, depicting dharma in action, showing human characters shaped in
the truths of the spirit and embodying higher powers, showing Gods and
men in constant interchange, showing them coming down and going back,
giving the spiritual history of the nation which belongs as much to the
past as to the future. It was the land where women, the elders and the
wise were honoured and children cherished. It excelled not only in
spiritual sciences and religious, philosophical and ethical domain, but
in every field of human endeavour. Its creations in astronomy,
mathematics, logic, grammar, linguistics, education, agriculture, music,
law, medicine, health and hygiene, tank-digging, method of
resource-conservation, architecture, social and political thought and
organizations, handicrafts, textile and steel were equally outstanding.

  
Self-Alienation

121\. The causes that govern the fall and rise of nations and cultures
are difficult to comprehend. Perhaps they have their appointed destiny.
A time came when Hinduism also went down. Its very virtues became its
weakness. It became too pacific; it neglected its weaponary; it failed
to take into account the new rules of warfare its enemies practised; it
neglected to study its neighbours now under a very different ideological
orientation. During the last several centuries, it came under the
attack, both physical and ideological, of monolatrous creeds. Under this
attack, it lost its self-confidence; it became apologetic. A demoralized
Hinduism accepted the superiority of the invaders and became their
admirer; it accepted their standards, their criterion, their judgment.
Hinduism itself became a dirty word, a word of reproach and shame and
dishonour; Hindus became a song of others, and even fell down in their
own esteem. They lost pride in their heritage, and they became
self-alienated. Many of their sons and daughters even learnt to deny
themselves in various ways. May we learn to look at ourselves with pride
again!

122\. A country cannot be defeated politically unless it is defeated
culturally. Our alien rulers knew that they could not conquer India
without conquering Hinduism - cultural India's name at its deepest and
highest, and the principle of its identity, continuity and reawakening.
Therefore Hinduism became an object of their special attack. Physical
attack was supplemented by ideological attack. They began to interpret
for us our history, our religion, our culture and ourselves. We learnt
to look at us through their eyes. From them we picked up views and
slogans that served them. During these years, they set for us our
intellectual agenda. Under their auspices, we learnt to distrust
"brahmanism", the pride of our culture. Thus a whole class of
self-alienated people grew up to carry the tradition of the old
conquerors. The old order continues under native auspices and has
therefore become even more powerful. May we again learn to use our eyes
to look at us - and also at others!

123\. The long period created an atmosphere of mental slavery and
imitation. It created a class of people Hindu in their names and by
birth but anti-Hindu in orientation, sympathy and loyalty. They knew all
the bad things and nothing good about Hinduism. Hindu dharma is now
being subverted from within. Anti-Hindu Hindus are very important today;
they rule the roost; they write our histories, they define our nation;
they control the media, the academia, the politics, the higher
administration and higher courts. They are now working as clients of
those forces who are planning to revive their old Imperialism. Once
Hinduism identified and defined India; now they are busy denying and
destroying that identity and definition.

124\. During this period our minds became soft. We became escapists; we
wanted to avoid conflict at any cost, even conflict and controversy of
ideas, even when this controversy was necessary. We developed an
escape-route. We called it "synthesis". We said all religions, all
scriptures, all prophets preach the same things. It was intellectual
surrender, and our enemies saw it that way; they concluded that we are
amenable to anything, that we would clutch at any false hope or idea to
avoid a struggle, and that we would do nothing to defend ourselves.
Therefore, they have become even more aggressive. It also shows that we
have lost spiritual discrimination (*viveka*), and would entertain any
falsehood; this is *prajñâ-dosha, drishTi-dosha*, and it cannot be good
for our survival in the long run. People first fall into delusion before
they fall into misfortune.

125\. During these years millions of its sons and daughters were
enslaved and sold in foreign lands. In the country itself, they were
reduced to the status of second-grade citizenship; under those
pressures, invaders were the head and Hindus the tail. Under various
pressures, many of its sons and daughters were forced to leave their
ancestral fold. But in the days when we are free again, we have done
nothing to reclaim them. May the Hindu society become decided and strong
enough to receive them again!

126\. There was a time when boundaries of cultural India extended far
beyond its physical borders. But even physical India has been
contracting for centuries. We have now got used to thinking of India
without Afghanistan, without Punjab and Sindh, and lately without
Kashmir too. We have got used to the idea of its enemies planning its
dismemberment, subvert it from within and threaten it from outside. We
have become used to the idea of a shrinking and shrunken India. May the
old concept of Bharatavarsha with its ancient dimensions return!

127\. Even today, the old iniquity pursues us. India is subjected to
large-scale infiltration, organized subversion, planned terror and
blasts; Hindus are subjected to systematic proselytizing, political
blackmail and electoral manipulation. Hindus have become refugees in
their own country and they remain second-grade citizens. Let Hindus
learn to assert themselves and let the concept of India as a land of the
Hindus be restored!

128\. Finding Hindus soft, forces traditionally hostile to them have
again become active. They are making use of all divisive forces, and
aiding and organizing terroristic organizations. They are mobilizing
local fifth-columns, anti-Hindu Hindus, casteists and opportunists,
elements for a war of subversion from within while they work in perfect
safety from abroad. Old forces of bigotry and Imperialism are trying to
stage a comeback. They use the language of human rights, radicalism and
equity to achieve reactionary ends. No doubt they will be defeated.

129\. I offer my obeisance to Hindu dharma which has suffered much,
overlooked much, excused much, but when necessary also fought with great
valour. I invoke that unconquerable (*durdamya*) spirit, that *kshâtra*
dharma which knows no defeat and which when roused must prevail.

  
Civilizational Principle

130\. Hinduism enunciated truths of the spirit; it taught the art and
philosophy of higher life, of deeper self-culture, of self-exceeding; it
was never an ideology of self-aggrandizement; it spoke of man and the
human family and knew not itself as anything apart; it even gave itself
no name, no separate designation. It knew no *ummah* principle and it
gave itself no role as a vanguard of an ideology, religious or secular.
Hindu society was organized for peaceable and harmonious ends, not for
continued confrontation with the rest of the world in the shape of
pagans and unbelievers. But at one stage when it found itself faced with
narrow ideologies - aggressive, embattled and organized on the principle
of a militant church or *ummah* - it too, in self-protection, had to
imbibe a minimum "national" identity. But it still fully retains its
humanist and universalist core and remains rooted in its old vision of
human and cosmic unity. Hindus need an identity not merely to cope with
narrow ideologies, they also need it in order to serve humanity. And
humanity itself needs a Hindu society with a recognizable face for its
own spiritual rediscovery.

131\. Hinduism once represented a great civilization, but now its
revival is being treated as *communalism*, not only by its enemies but
even by its many self-alienated sons and daughters. Let Hindu dharma
recover its self-confidence, its self-identity (*âtma-smriti*), its
unique civilizational principle (*prajñâ*). May it rise again and make
its contribution to the world! Its revival and message are needed, by
religious humanity for its own self-revival.

  
Initiation into a particular sampradâya

132\. Hinduism in its great fecundity and profundity has given rise to
many *sampradâyas* (orders). It is how it should be. A great truth with
many facets is lived like that in all its plurality. A *sampradâya*
makes necessary adaptation possible. But sometimes, it has also led to
unhappy results. The new *sampradâya* forgets its larger identity. It
begins to make unwarranted claims. In the process, it itself becomes
rootless and begins to play a negative role. Therefore, when a Hindu
joins a particular *sampradâya*, the following could be the part of his
vow.

133\. Hindu dharma has many facets; it is inexhaustible; it is a great
ocean. One drop from it is enough to for me.

134\. The Sanatana dharma has been well explained (*svâkhyâta*) by a
succession of great sages and teachers. It has been confirmed by them in
their lives.

135\. I belong in the first instance to this great unbroken tradition.
Now I join this *sampradâya* in order to live some of its truths more
intensely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
