+++
title = "02  Chapter          2         Cultural Self-Alienation Among the Hindus1"

+++
Chapter 2  
Cultural Self-Alienation Among the Hindus[1](#1)

When two cultures meet on unequal military terms - as the Hindu culture
met the West and earlier met Islam - it gives rise to grave problems of
self-identity for the defeated party. When India finally realized that
she had lost in the military and diplomatic contest and that the British
were supreme, she was overwhelmed and filled with a deep sense of
inferiority. Under such circumstances, as it usually happens, other
non-military forces came into play. Different people sought
psychological rehabilitation in different ways. Some retired into their
shell and became apathetic; a majority met the situation by
self-repudiation and wholesale imitation. They disowned their nationhood
and their culture and adopted the ways and attitudes of the victors whom
they regarded as their superiors. They saved their self-respect through
self-alienation.

This self-alienation was an important component of the intellectual
ferment that followed the British conquest of India. It was very
pervasive and attacked all strata of the society, particularly the
intellectual elites. Even people who eventually came to fight the
British politically surrendered to them culturally. This surrender gave
rise to what may be called the politics of self-alienation and, fed by
many sources, it became increasingly more powerful. Today it seems to
dominate.

  
Reawakening

But when the initial shock was over, and the military presence became
less obtrusive though not less real, and some kind of civic life
returned, and we also became more familiar with the victor, a maturer
reaction and strategy emerged. A military-political inferiority was
accepted but reassertion took place at the religious-spiritual level.

This reassertion was the beginning of greater things in future. It was
to sustain us even in our political struggle.[2](#2) Leaders like
Dayananda, Vivekananda, Aurobindo and Gandhi went deeper into the truths
of their spirituality and felt renewed by it. They saw in Hinduism an
incomparable truth, or, at least, a truth by which alone India could
rise.

For them, India's struggle was more than political; for them, it had a
rich spiritual content and had a deeper intent. India was fighting for
*svarâjya*, for *svadharma*, for self-recovery. To many it was
sufficient if the British political control was withdrawn and replaced
by a Government controlled by the Indians themselves. But to these
leaders, this was not sufficient. They wanted the country to realize its
full potential, to wake up to its soul-life. Aurobindo thought that
India was rising for the *Sanatana Dharma*. Gandhi said that he would
not like to live in an India which had ceased to be Hindu.

In this concept there was no parochialism and there was no rejection of
any truth the West had to offer. In fact, the West could not be wished
away and it had to be fully taken into account. What they opposed was
mechanical imitation. In the place of this imitation, Aurobindo, taught
what he called "assimilative appropriation" (*âtmasât-karaNa*). We
borrow whatever is necessary but what we can assimilate and transform in
the light of our own *svadharma*. This keeps out bastardisation of the
culture. Let it be made clear that this view is not syncretic which says
that we should create a new entity by borrowing and combining what is
good anywhere, and for anyone. Cultures like individuals are organisms
and do not behave that way.

Though these people presided over India's national struggle, their
spirit was universal in the highest degree. Even Sri Aurobindo who saw
in India the very image of the Divine Mother said at the peak-time of
the struggle that "we do not recognize the nation as the highest
synthesis." A nation is the highest synthesis in the European thought,
but in the Indian thought, as he said, there is a still higher
synthesis, *humanity*. Beyond this lies another synthesis, the synthesis
of the living, suffering and aspiring world of creatures, the "synthesis
of Buddhism", as Aurobindo called it. He yet recognized another
synthesis, the "highest" one, "the Hindu Synthesis", the synthesis of
Vedanta.[3](#3)

Thus nationalism to these leaders of the nation was only a temporary
phase. "We must live as a nation before we can live in humanity," said
Sri Aurobindo. In traditional Hindu spirituality, it was all God,
compassion and humanity, and the truth of its own self-identity was
neglected. The new leaders came and provided a corrective. And thus was
born Indian nationalism. It was carved out of a larger truth and it
retained the impress of its original source; it remained rooted in the
Hindu vision of human and cosmic unity.

It is obvious that in such a conception of Indian nationalism, there
could be no place for rancour against the British, nor any unthinking
rejection of the West. India's struggle for freedom was rooted in Hindu
spirituality which has a universality of its own. This universality of
course has nothing to do with the universality of the multi-nationals or
with the universality of hedonistic consumerism; nor with crusading and
proselytizing religions trying to become universal through wars of
conquest and organized falsehood; nor has it to do with the vague
internationalism under Marxist auspices made popular by Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru. Indian world-view is not economic or political or
ecclesiastical. India's message, to itself as well as to the world, as
propagated by its leaders, ancient and recent, was that of their
spiritual self-recovery and self-discovery.

  
II  
Hindus Learn to Look at Themselves through Borrowed Eyes

The two approaches - the approach of self-discovery and creative
response and the approach of self-alienation and imitation - both were
inherited from the immediate history of the freedom struggle though they
derive their strength from the deeper sources in the psyche. The two
views are basic and their impact can be seen all along the line. They
inform our thinking, our way of regarding ourselves and others. One
ideology regards the society culturally, the other economically; one
regards it as a community and as a habitat, the other as a guild and a
mart; for one the problem is of helping the society to find its roots,
for the other to remake it in the image of a chosen pattern; the one
serves, the other manipulates.

Illustrating the difference between the two approaches, when Gandhi
toured the country, he saw in the lives of our villagers a hidden
nobility and dignity; but when Chandra Shekhar did his *padayâtrâ*, he
saw in the same people nothing but illiteracy, poverty and depravity.
Aurobindo illustrates the same difference. He did no *padayâtrâ* but in
the inmates of his jail, most of them poor and illiterate, he saw the
visage of Narayana, putting to shame by their humility and simplicity
his own intellectual achievements.

Once the approach of Aurobindo and Gandhi formed a powerful current and
the freedom struggle was waged under its auspices. But increasingly its
hold became weak and in our own times it seems to have lost altogether.
The earlier revolutionaries were inspired by the Gita: the gospel of the
latter-day would-be revolutionaries was the Manifesto of Karl Marx. Some
see in this change a triumph of Nehru over Gandhi. They, of course, do
not mean Nehru as a person for Nehru was merely a symbol and he
represented, in his own way, a typical response, the response of a
defeated nation trying to restore its self-respect and self-confidence
through self-repudiation and identification with the ways of the
victors. The approach was not altogether unjustified at one time. It had
its compulsions and it had also a survival value for us. But its
increasing influence can mean no good to us.

We, however, believe that deeper Indian nationalism, which is also in
harmony with deeper internationalism, may be weak just now, but it has
the seed-power and it is bound to come up again under propitious
circumstances. Meanwhile, let us try to understand the forces which give
strength and sustain the politics of self-alienation.

  
Satellite Ideology

A dominant ruling people or race also creates a dominant ideology. It
gives birth not only to economic and political compradores but also to
intellectual compradores. In India, too, we developed a local satellite
ideology derived from the dominant imperialist ideology. It believed
what it had been taught, namely, that India was not a nation but only a
name for a geographical region occupied by successive waves of invaders,
that its past was dark, its religion degraded and superstitious, and
that its social system was a tyranny of castes and creeds.

This Western-Missionary view of India was increasingly adopted by a
growing intelligentsia and became a veritable part of its intellectual
equipage. The intellectual and cultural conquest of the West has proved
more spectacular and durable than its military conquest.

Started by the British, this intellectual programming received powerful
reinforcement from Marxism, a new ideology arising in the West. In fact,
it was old imperialism establishing itself under new slogans. It was a
new name for old facts. In the new dress, it became even more effective;
it remained about the same in its larger aims, yet it acquired a radical
look into the bargain.

Little do we realize how completely European is the orientation of Marx
and Engels. In *Das Capital of Marx* or the *Selected Works* of Marx and
Engels, the great civilization of China is not mentioned even once
though one might say that China is lucky in this indifference. India
appears only as an appendage of the British Empire. Taking his cue from
die-hard imperialist writers, Marx tells us that India is no nation and
it has no history. She is "the predestined prey of conquest", he says.
"Indian society has no history at all, at least no known history. What
we call its history, is but the history of successive intruders," he
adds. Here we have Macaulay, Mill and Bishop Heber in their most
uninhibited form.

With this kind of understanding, the next step was inevitable. To Marx,
the British conquest of India was a blessing. The question, as he puts
it, "is not whether the English had a right to conquer India, but
whether we are to prefer India conquered by the Turk, by the Persian, by
the Russian, to India conquered by the Briton".

The Indian Marxists have borrowed this thesis wholesale except that
while Marx preferred a British conquest, his Indian disciples prefer a
Turkish conquest. This is part of the compulsion of their secular
conscience - a conscience which accepts no other compulsion. Read M.N.
Roy and other Marxist historians (they dominate our universities) who
tell us how Islamic conquest brought a new message of brotherhood and
equality to a degraded Hindu India, and how it completed the work begun
by Buddhism.[4](#4) Here anything can be anything and imperialism is a
beautiful thing if the victim is Hinduism.

Here we find a complete convergence of Imperialism and Marxism. We
should keep it in mind. Today, Marxism represents the most systematic
and sustained attack on deeper India, on the India of Gandhi,
Vivekananda and Aurobindo.

  
III  
Politics of Self-alienation

Some present political analysts divide Hindu intellectuals into two
categories: liberal and communal. But this division is falsely
flattering to one and unfair to the other. For if we closely examine the
names that sail under the two categories, we find that many of the
so-called "liberal" Hindu intellectuals are plain Hindu-baiters while
many of the so-called "communal" Hindu intellectuals are plain patriots.

Nor is this categorization exhaustive. It does not take into account
even the more important shades. For example, where will we place in this
*schema* persons like Dayananda, Vivekananda, Aurobindo and Gandhi who,
though they led the movements of the day for national awakening, yet
spoke for the whole humanity and its future? They were more than
"liberal"; they were seers.

And where will we place Nehru, the "only nationalist Muslim" of Sadder
Patel's description? he will have to belong to the category of liberal
Hindus - we owe it to his importance and position. But where will we
place the prolific crowd of P.N. Haksars, Mulk Raj Anands, Nikhil
Chakravartys, Romila Thapars, Inder Gujrals, Rajni Kotharis, Kuldip
Nayars, etc., a class by themselves waiting to be named, a class of
Hindus by accident of birth but anti-Hindu by their freely chosen role?
(The role may not be as freely chosen as it looks at first though, for
it may be the result of an equally accidental Marxist or secularist
conditioning. But it is there.)

We also come across a further and related distinction between two types
of Hindu communalism - negative and positive. Negative communalism, we
are told, consists in being merely anti-Muslim in varying degrees, while
positive Hindu communalism consists in appealing in the name of a
positive Hindu identity. But since the positive Hindu identity is
extremely shadowy due to lack of internal homogeneity among Hindus,
positive Hindu communalism is not viable. Therefore, as an inescapable
conclusion, for a viable communalism, the Hindus are left only with the
negative kind; this however is not desirable.

In this way of thinking, not only positive Hindu communalism, however
free from anti-Muslim bias, but even Indian nationalism which has any
Hindu orientation is a priori condemned to failure; for, it is argued,
Indian nationalism makes "contradictory demands." In order to mobilize
the people in a Hindu land, it need to invoke Hindu symbols. But that is
"bound to further alienate the Muslims."

Under the circumstances, it has been seriously propagated that Hindus
should give up their symbols and even Hinduism itself in order to
placate the Muslims. In fact, many Hindu elites go about condemning
Hinduism in order to prove their Indian nationalism and make it more
convincing to the Muslims and to themselves. Thus we have another
variety of nationalism - the super-positive nationalism of those Hindu
who hate Hinduism for and on behalf of Muslims as well.

But there were others like Gandhi and Aurobindo who saw and acted
differently. They did not feel that their Hinduism contradicted their
nationalism. In fact, it gave them strength to be great nationalists and
great humanists.

Sri Aurobindo was a trenchant exponent of both Hinduism and Indian
nationalism. He invoked Hindu symbols, comparing India with Mother
Goddess. There is no evidence that he was ill-disposed towards the
Muslims, but he refused to give up his Hinduism simply because it might
make the Muslims feel crossed. Nor was there any question of his
ignoring the Muslims, but there was also no intention on his part of
giving them a veto either. His position on the Muslim question was
clear. "We do not shun, we desire the awakening of Islam in India even
if its first crude efforts are misdirected against ourselves; for all
strength, all energy, all action is grist to the mill of the
nation-builder. In that faith we are ready, when the time comes for us
to meet in the political field, to exchange with the Musalman, just as
he chooses, the firm clasp of the brother or the resolute grip of the
wrestler," he had said.

Aurobindo had probably another reason for his stand on Islam. He
believed that Islam's role in the deeper destiny of India was
peripheral. In this sense, he had a vision of India very different from
the one that holds the field today. He believed that Sanatana dharma
represents the soul of India and that India was rising for the sake of
the Sanatana dharma. Vivekananda held a similar view and had expressed
his belief that India means Hindus and Hindu means India. Such a vision
of or role for India is now unmentionable.

  
Homogeneity

It has been observed that Hindus are not a homogeneous community in the
same sense in which the Muslims are. It is probably true. It is not that
the Muslims do not have their internal conflicts - in fact they are
quite cut-throat; but they do have a keener sense of belonging to a
Muslim brotherhood.

On the contrary, a Hindu, generally speaking, belongs to a caste before
he belongs to the Hindu community. This places him at a disadvantage
vis-a-vis societies which have a keener sense of fraternity.

The difference arose because Hindus were organised on different
principles. Hinduism was organised for peaceable and harmonious internal
coexistence, not for continued confrontation with external enemies in
the shape of unbelievers. It is no accident of history that though
Hinduism knew internal feuds like any social polity, it never crossed
its borders to wage wars against people simply because they worshipped
different Gods. By its very philosophy and organising principles, the
Hindu society was not conceived as a Church Militant or as an *Ummah* on
the march in the service of Jehovah or Allah. In fact, its very
conception of deity is fundamentally different - but that is a question
we need not discuss here.

Organised on such non-military principles, there is no wonder that
Hinduism did not even have a name for itself. This agreed with its
nature and genius. In this sense, it was like many "pagan" societies
which are taught to live their spirituality, good or bad, unconsciously.

While leaving Goa for farther East, Francis Xavier said: "I want to be
where there are no Moslems or Jews. Give me out-and-out pagans." Here,
Francis Xavier was formulating his experience that Pagan societies
without self-conscious identities are an easy prey of crusading and
proselytizing fraternities with their divinely conceived roles. This
realization is being forced on the Hindus. They are realizing that they
are at a disadvantage vis-a-vis those fraternities which have
self-conscious identities. Therefore, the Hindus too are now in the
process of acquiring as much self-conscious identity as is necessary for
their survival. Whether they will succeed is another matter. But this
has already made the opposed parties with vested interest in a weak
Hinduism cry, *Hindu Backlash*. Marxist and secularist writers, whose
work is convergent with Muslim politics and designs, are full of this
cry.

  
Unassimilable Identities

The lack of homogeneity in the Hindu society may be admitted and it is a
sorry lack in the present context. But this lack is not, however, the
main problem. Indian society allows a unity in which the principle of
diversity finds full place. In Indian society, different communities
followed their own customs and usages. True, there were certain dominant
ideas and values but there was no forced conformity. In Indian society,
the problem has never been of diverse communities and diverse customs.
But after the advent of Islam, the problem has been and is of
unassimilable elements.

We are often told that the Muslims in India are "a self-conscious
minority" and that they are convinced that "they have a
religious-cultural-linguistic heritage which is worth defending whatever
the price". But is this all that this Muslim "self-consciousness"
amounts to - just defence of its religious-cultural-linguistic identity?
If we believe this, we are fooling ourselves. This Muslim
"self-consciousness" has already led to one partition of the country,
and it is preparing for another. This "self-consciousness" has greater
aims and convictions and greater historical dynamism. It is supported by
a deeper and far-reaching ideology, it has at its back the whole
theology of *dar'l-harb* and *dar'l-Islam*. Its unfolding takes time but
its aim is fixed. To think of "Indian" Muslims without taking into
account the Islamic theology and ideology, without taking into account
Arabia and Pakistan, is like thinking of "Indian" Communists without
taking into account the Communist ideology and the Leninist-Stalinist
tactics and the "vanguard role" of Soviet Russia. Refusing to see the
problem in its larger perspective is to deceive ourselves, in which lies
great peril for the future of the nation.

  
Some Problems Hinduism Faces and Some Remedial Measures[5](#5)

1. Hinduism[6](#6) faces some grave problems that need serious
attention:

\(a\) it lacks ideological cohesiveness;

\(b\) it lack leadership. Its elites are becoming illiterate about their
spiritual heritage and history and indifferent about their future
destiny;

\(c\) it is weak organizationally. Its has no recognized centres where
it could take stock of its sorry situation and think of remedial
measures;

\(d\) it is poor financially. Great poverty has overtaken its religious
institutions. Most of its temples are in a state of near-destitution.
Its religious priests and *ârchâryas* (scholars) have hardly any
prestige left and they are badly neglected;

\(e\) Hindu society is badly divided into castes and denominations. Once
when Hinduism was spiritually vibrant and politically strong, these
divisions expressed natural, and healthy diversity; but now in its
present weak state, they are used by its enemies for its disintegration.
Election politics is being utilized for the dismemberment of the great
Hindu society;

\(f\) Hinduism is ceasing to be a practising religion. Awareness of a
larger God-life is becoming dim; worship, studies, *sâdhanâ, japa*,
spiritual meditation and reflection are fast declining.

In short, it is a situation painful for the lovers of Hinduism and
pleasing for its enemies.

2\. There are many great Hindus (like Vinoba) who accept and cherish
Hindu scriptures, the Gita and the Upanishads, but they have little use
for its history, its national and corporate life. They forget that this
side too is important and needs nourishing. Upanishads repeatedly speak
of the physical and mental vehicle or abode of a spiritual truth, the
*adhishThâna* that holds that truth. How can the Hindus contribute
anything to the world, if they lose their national life and identity?

3\. The problems of Hinduism are internal as well as external. The
attack comes both from inside and outside. While the forces of
self-alienation are increasing within the society, external enemies have
intensified their attack. The two forces interact and reinforce each
other. All unfriendly elements like Communism, Islam, Christianity have
powerful international links, ideological, financial and organizational.
The entry of Arab money on a large scale in the last few years spells a
most ominous development - it spells the return of Medieval days.

  
II

1\. India has been held together by Hinduism. But now this bond is under
great ideological attack and is weakening. As a result, the social
fabric of the nation is falling apart and fissiparous forces are on the
increase. The moral quality of the nation is also deteriorating.
Ashramas, religious orders, temples, *kîrtans, kathâs*, pilgrimages are
still doing useful work. They generate spiritual life at the
grass-roots. But these institutions are losing their elan, inwardness
and vision. A general rootlessness is growing, and these institutions
are not drawing the new generation. This puts into jeopardy the very
future of Hindu society.

2\. The Hindu philosophy and *sâdhanâ* are individual. Hindu mode of
worship helps an individual ethically and spiritually, but it does not
raise his collective consciousness. For example, one could go to all the
temples of the land, listen to *kîrtans* and *bhajans*, read all the
scriptures without ever hearing the word 'Hindu'. But it is different
with religions like Islam and Christianity which are organized round the
idea of a tribe, a church, an ummah. They may help one very little
ethically and spiritually, but they do give him a sense of communal
solidarity. Their social organization is also aggressive, in keeping
with their aggressive philosophy. This puts deep and universal but
passive religions like Hinduism, Buddhism and Taosim at a disadvantage
vis-a-vis those ideologies which are aggressive in their philosophy and
tribal in their social organisation.

3\. But with all its lapses and shortcomings, Hinduism is the only
adequate religion of the Spirit. In contrast, Islam and Christianity are
not religions; they are *ideologies* and, in their true essence,
political creeds. They are not based on any deep truth of the Spirit but
are built on a passionate and fanatic idea. If Hinduism awakens to its
own truth, it can defeat these irrational and unspiritual forces. But
while Hindus sleep the thieves are on the prowl.

  
III

1\. While a Hindu has a truly cosmic sense, his neglect of the social
dimension and corporate life is stupendous. Hindus do not have a sense
of belonging to a larger whole. The Communist movement is frankly
world-wide. There is a strong ecumenical movement among the Christians.
Whatever may be their differences in Europe, they work with real
co-operative zeal in the lands of the heathens. If there is any
competition, it is in the interest of selling the same product.
Similarly, there is a powerful pan-Islamic movement among the Muslims.
And in spite of their mutual cut-throat conflicts sanctioned by their
history, there is a real ideological appeal; they readily rally against
infidel countries, particularly if those countries are weak. Islam
teaches its adherents to hate kafirs and to keep exerting against them
(*jihâd*), collectively and individually and under all circumstances.

2. All these ideologies have their World-Centres. Communists[7](#7) have
their Comintern working overtly or covertly; the Catholics have their
Vatican, a much older centre, having much expertise in and long
tradition of subverting non-Catholic societies. The Protestants with
about similar aims and strategies in the Third World are also united in
their World Council of Churches. The Muslim Caliphate was abolished
after the First World War and the Muslim powers have been in bad shape
for over a century. But a very active and aggressive pan-Islamic
movement is emerging. An Islamic International, a kind of Muslim
Vatican, *R'abitah al-' alam al-Islâmiya*, is in the offing. It is oiled
by petrodollars. Because of its present military weakness and
dependence, it cannot do much mischief yet in Europe and America, but
its immediate targets are the poor and weak countries of Africa and
Asia. All these totalitarian ideologies are a threat to pacific and
tolerant religions, and pluralist and democratic societies.

Hindus, however, have no centre, no common platform where they could
meet together, take stock of the situation and take untied counsel.
Hinduism is just a sprawling body without a head. How long could it hope
to continue to exist in that way under the new threats that are
maturing?

3\. These international forces work through local agencies. Decisions
taken at their World-Centres are converted into local plans and
programmes. They sponsor "liberation fronts", demands for separate
"homelands". They work in the name of civil rights, human rights,
minority rights, democracy and freedom. They float political parties and
maintain an extensive agit-prop apparatus. They create entrenched
interests, and privileged enclaves. They bribe, buy and blackmail. They
train and finance local propagandists, ideologues and terrorists.

They infiltrate the universities and the media. In India, they already
control our academic and intellectual life; they define for us our
national ideology and write our history. Thanks to their work and their
eminent position, Hinduism has already become a dirty word and the Hindu
elites have learnt to be apologetic and ashamed of their identity.

  
IV

1\. Communists run many Schools, in India and abroad, where they train
their followers in their philosophy and ideational framework. Christians
maintain hundreds of Seminaries where they teach Christian
"apologetics"; they also maintain Missionary Seminaries where they train
their recruits specifically for missionary work in native lands. Muslims
have their al-Azhar and their Deoband; many new Madrasas are also coming
up and a lot of *tablighi* work is going on.

2\. Hindus, however, do not have even a single centre like this. Let
them fill up this lacuna. Let them have at least one good and
well-endowed Study-Centre or Seminary for self-training, for studying
and projecting Hindu ideation and Hindu values and to defend them
against the onslaught of inimical forces. At this centre, let them study
themselves and study others. Let this centre identify problems facing
Hinduism; let it draw the attention of different Hindu leaders, monks,
scholars, and teachers to these problems. This centre should initiate,
activate, energize and coordinate; in short, it should work as a gadfly
and play the role of an vanguard.

It should discuss the dangers that Hinduism faces and suggest remedial
measures. It should engage in the task of meeting such dangers as are
posed by such ideologies as Communism, Islam and Christianity. It should
aim at developing what Sri Aurobindo calls an "aggressive defence."

3\. The scope of work of the proposed Centre or Seminary could be as
wide and various as the problems that Hinduism faces.

  
V

Let us, here, name some of the more empirical problems for illustrative
purpose without any claim to completeness.

  
1. Temples

\(a\) Hindus temples have been under unprecedented attack for a thousand
years. They suffered desecration, destruction, confiscation of their
property and iniquitous taxation under the Muslim rulers. Under the
British, the more physical methods ceased but fiscal methods were
adopted for undermining "heathenism". A large part of the land and
properties of the temples were taken away under all kinds of pretexts.

\(b\) After independence, the temples have fared no better. Their
properties have not been restored to them and they continue to exist in
deepening poverty. In the South where there are still many noble
structures left, the temples are under the control of a Government which
takes pride in being "secular", and whose secularity is thoroughly
anti-Hindu in orientation.

\(c\) Hindus should study the problem of the temples in all its
ramifications. They should run their religious institutions themselves.
They should build temples once destroyed, and build new temples where
they are needed. They should rejuvenate the temple life and they should
take all measures to put the temple institution on a sound financial
footing.

\(d\) Temples should become more active in the teaching of the culture
which upholds them. They should become more than mere places of formal
worship. They should become centres for promoting Hindu *dharma*.

\(e\) Wherever possible, the temples should have more open space, more
halls for such religious activities as *kîrtanas* and *kathâs* and
religious discourses. Such activities make a religion more living.

\(f\) With these activities is connected the institution of wandering
monks bards and *bhajan-maNDalîs*. Once this was a very living
institution but like other religious institutions of the Hindus it is
also declining now. Let us do our best to revive it too.

  
2. Priests

Inevitably the priests too have suffered along with the temples. They
have become indigent and illiterate. Thanks to their indigence and
illiteracy, they have suffered in prestige too. It is a great national
loss. Effort should be made to rehabilitate them and raise them
educationally and financially..

  
3. Other Functionaries: Hindu *saMskâras*

What is happening to priests in the temples is happening all along the
line to all the priestly functionaries connected with such events as
birth, wedding, death, *Srâddha*, etc. Illiteracy and poverty have
overtaken them. Many times these functionaries are not available at all.
They are dying out fast as a class. Hindu leaders must give their
attention to this problem too.

Hindu *sathskâras* are profound and deeply significant. They teach one
to see the infinite and the eternal in the finite and the perishable.
They widen the vision and they are deeply integrative. Their profound
significance should be explained and every effort should be made to make
the Hindus familiar with them, reflect on them and perform them.

The performance of Hindu *sathskâras* need not be costly at all for they
can be performed "internally" as well. But their outer performance is
also important, particularly of reeducative and social purpose.
Therefore, means should be found whereby not even the poorest have to go
without having to perform them for lack of even small funds..

  
4. Foreign Funds

\(a\) While we have said that the Hindus should re-build their temples
and look after their priests, we know it is easier said than done. There
are sharp limitations. Here we come up face to face with a political
question. While Hindus have no Government of their own, they have to
compete with the so-called "minorities" who have scores of Governments
and rich nations at their back. As a result, while even many of the most
renowned temples remain in a dilapidated condition and cry for most
urgent repairs, it is possible for hundreds of thousands of mosques all
over India to get a face-lift almost simultaneously. Similarly, while
most of the temples go without proper daily *pûjâ*, it is possible for a
million mosques to acquire a public address system from one corner of
India to another, literally in one morning. Common sense will tell us
that some great planning is at work and simple arithmetic should show
that huge funds are involved.[8](#8)

\(b\) Hindus suffer a similar disadvantage vis-a-vis Christian
missionaries. According to Government figures, 4,340 million rupees came
openly last year (1980) alone for subverting Hindu culture and the
country's political set-up. The missionaries have already monopolized
several important spheres of national life. And since money begets
money, a lot of property is passing into the hands of Christian
institutions.

\(c\) Hinduism in India is a target of a cold-war. The aggressor is
well-equipped. Hindus have hardly any defence. They do not have even a
Government of their own. They should raise the question of "foreign
funds" and even the question of the nature of the Indian Government in a
big way..

  
5. Social Evils

\(a\) They are galore; here we mention only a few of them. Vulgarity is
creeping in the celebration of our festivals like Deepawali, Holi,
Ramaleela, Durga Puja. These have become occasions for gambling,
drinking, vulgar film music. Vulgarity is also creeping in celebrations
connected with wedding.

\(b\) Cinemas are becoming great moral and social pollutants. They teach
crime and cynicism. New literature and journalism wallow in obscenity.
There is great vulgarity in advertisements.

\(c\) Our women are not receiving due respect. The old are being
neglected. The spirit of cherishing and reverence are on the wane. Faith
and fidelity are going out of relations. The sense of meaninglessness is
on the increase. The spirit of excellence, vocation and *sâdhanâ* is
yielding place to commercialism, cynicism and nihilism.

The spiritual leaders of the society have to meet these problems as best
as they can..

  
6. Beautification of our Land

The spiritual values Hinduism teaches are comprehensive. They include in
their ambit social and ecological values too. Hinduism teaches
simplicity and Suchi; it teaches us reverence for the elements, for
animals and plants. We have been taught to see life in rivers and woods;
taught to see even divine figures behind the Himalayas, the Ganga, the
Yamuna, the Godavari, the Kavery. Let us accept them as symbols and
start a movement for keeping them clean. Let us start reforestation; let
us see that our mountains are not denuded..

  
7. Ideational, Cultural and Educational Work

\(a\) A great spiritual culture also throws up a great system of ideas.
A great spiritual truth also seeks an ideational vehicle. When the
ideational work is neglected, spiritual truths also become weak.

Hitherto Muslims, Christians and Communists have been writing for us our
history, philosophy and religion - and increasingly we are accepting
their version. Let us, for a change, look at Islam, Christianity and
Communism from the Hindu angle. It is a great task, a necessary task.
Let us look at their scriptures, their revelations, their concepts of
God and Prophetism from the vantage point of the Yoga. We should not
accept them at their words. Let us look at them a little more
critically.

\(b\) Since we have neglected the role of ideation, hostile ideas have
taken possession of our intellectuals. Therefore, there is great need
for more intellectual understanding of ourselves and of our opponents.
Deeper and more sustained ideological and spiritual work alone could
meet the challenge of hostile ideas.

The absence of self-understanding and self-articulation is doing havoc.
For example, our history was once written from the British-Christian
view-point; now it is bring written from a "secular" viewpoint, adding
another source of distortion. Similarly, galore of books are coming on
"Hindu" castes as if Hinduism has nothing else and as if Christians and
Muslims have no castes of their own. But to promote this view of
Hinduism is part of a larger mischievous plan..

  
8. Vanavasis and Harijans

Mischievous elements are active amongst them. Christians were already
active in the field. Now Muslims, armed with Arab money, have also
joined the game. We must give our best thought to the problem. More work
is needed amongst them..

  
9. Islam, Christianity and Communism

\(a\) All of them pose a danger. They have their own quarrels, but they
all unite in subverting India. Islam has already taken away a big chunk
of the Indian land and population; it is now coveting the remaining part
too. Muslims are fanning our differences; they are buying up our
politicians and intellectuals.

\(b\) Throughout 800 years of Muslim domination, we fought Muslims, many
times bravely; *but we never fought Islam. We never studied it. And yet
it is not Muslims but Islam that is our problem*. And it is a continuing
problem. We must look at it more closely. We must study its origin, its
history, its inspiration, its founder, its scriptures more critically.

\(c\) We should understand the Muslim society, it castes and creeds, its
ashrâfs and its *arzâls*. We should find out who came from outside as
invaders and who became converts under compulsion from the great Hindu
society. While isolating the foreign elements, we should help the local
converts to come back to their ancestral fold and accord them a warm
welcome, as Gandhiji desired.

\(d\) Muslims love to talk of their grievances. Let us for a change also
talk of ours. Let us make a directory of the temple they have destroyed;
let us prepare an account of the nations they have enslaved and
exploited and. millions of men and women they have slayed; let us tell
them about their predatory imperialism.

\(e\) For ourselves we must also realize that these facts of their
history are not incidental, but they are related to the basic tenets of
their religion; they are the natural expression of an undeveloped and
distorted spirituality.

\(f\) Let us also become aware of what is happening in the faraway
corners, in Assam, Arunachal, Meghalaya, Ladakh; what silent nibbling is
going on there; the large-scale conversion and infiltration.

\(g\) We must show determination in stopping large-scale infiltration of
men and women numbering into millions from Bangladesh. It is a planned
invasion - there is no doubt about it..

  
10. Conclusion

These are some examples of the kind of problems that demand our
attention. It is obvious that these problems are not temporary but they
have a deeper source. It is also obvious that they need more than
agitational approach. No *ad-hocism* or temporizing will do. The
situation demands not sentimentalizing but realistic appraisal. It
demands deep-sighted and far-looking work. It demands vision, faith and
perseverance. It requires a mind which is not seeking quick results and
push-button solutions, but can work for distant aims. It demands work at
a deeper level; it demands spiritual and ideational preparation.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) An edited version of an article that appeared in three
installments in *The Times of India*, July 2-4, 1987.

[2](#2a) It had happened earlier also. During the medieval ages,
religious revival preceded military revival (or defence). Kabir, Nanka,
Tulsi, Chaitanya, Ramdas gave birth to Shivaji and Govind Singh. Saints
paved the way for heroes.

[3](#3a) Semitic religions have no concept of man or humanity. They
divide humanity into *believers* and *non-believers*, the faithful and
the infidels. No wonder these religions also lack the concept of
*jîva-dayâ*, compassion for all living beings, a conception which is
such a living part of all Indian traditions, Buddhist, Jain and
Vaishnava. Vedânta goes still further. It teaches us to see God in the
visage of all, to regard them as our own *âtman*, to serve them as the
manifestation of Vâsudeva. It teaches us not to be put off by human
suffering but to accept it too with a glad heart and see in it the
*lîlâ* or play of Nârâyana.

[4](#4a) Marxist writers are not "indiscriminately" anti-imperialist.
They are selective in their anti-imperialism. They have their favoured
imperialism about which they can be very lyrical. M.N. Roy calls the
"Arab Empire", a "magnificent monuments to the memory of Mohammad".
According to him, Islam had already "played out its progressive role
before it penetrated India". Here its flag was planted on the "banks of
the Indus and the Ganges not by revolutionary Saracen heroes, but by
Persians demoralized by luxury and the barbarians of Central Asia who
had embraced Islam". But, for M.N. Roy, even this corrupted Islamic
imperialism was good enough for degraded India, for he tells us that "it
was welcomed as a message of hope and freedom by the multitudinous
victims of the Brahman cal reaction which had overthrown the Buddhist
revolution and had consequently thrown the Indian society into chases"
(*The Historical Role of Islam*, Delhi Reprint, 1981, pp.88-89).

[5](#5a) A paper circulated among concerned friends in September (1st),
1981.

[6](#6a) *Hinduism* is a comparatively recent but now popular name for
ancient *Sanatana Dharma*. In its comprehensiveness, it includes many
spiritual traditions, disciplines and denominations; it includes what
the Gita calls the two *nishThâs* of SâMkhya and Yoga, both equally
ancient and both taught by the same divine teacher; it includes what the
Buddhist and Jam sacred literature so repeatedly and lovingly mentions -
the two traditions of *SramaNa* and *brâhmaNa*; it includes Saivaism,
Sâktaism, Vaishnavism (which includes Sikhism of Guru Nanak), and many
other paths, *panther* and *sampradâya*.

[7](#7a) This was written before the breakdown of the Soviet Union as
the World-Centre of Communism.

[8](#8a) One million mosques (only a portion of the total number of
mosques) multiplied by Rs.5000 (cost of a public address system on the
lower side) gives us the figure of five hundred crores.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
