+++
title = "04  Chapter          4         Indo-European Encounter: An Indian Perspective"

+++
Chapter 4  
Indo-European Encounter: An Indian Perspective

*India and Europe*[1](#1) originally came out in German in 1981. The
English translation which was originally published by the State
University of New York in 1988 has now been brought out in an Indian
edition and made available to readers in India. The English translation
is a much enlarged version of the original German edition and the Indian
edition carries a special Preface by the author. The book contains 604
pages divided into three sections sub-divided into twenty-four chapters.
The first section divided into ten chapters deals with "India in the
History of European Self-Understanding". It is probably the best portion
of the book and very useful to an Indian reader. It presents valuable
historical material well digested and analysed. It deals with important
sub-topics like India as seen by the Greeks of the Classical period,
India as approached by the missionaries as Europe entered its modern
period, India as seen by the Europe of Deism and the Enlightenment, and
shows how its own internal controversies were given an edge or even
shaped by Indian presence. It gives us the history of Indology, it tells
us what some of the greatest European thinkers like Voltaire, Herder,
Hegel, Schelling and Schopenhauer thought of India. In this sense, the
book is also Europe's own self-portraiture.

The second section, again divided into ten chapters, deals with "The
Indian Tradition and the Presence of Europe". It discusses mainly
Neo-Hinduism, or Hinduism as modified by the influence of European
concepts and categories, a Hinduism unable to speak for itself but which
used European categories of thought for its self-presentation and
self-assertion. This section maintains the erudition of the first but
lacks its sweep.

The third section called "Appendices" contains additional material added
to the English edition. This section deals with certain key concepts
such as "Experience" and "Tolerance". If one was inclined to regard them
as Indian contributions to the East-West Dialogue, one must be ready for
disappointment for the author finds the two concepts "ambiguous" and
questionable. Following the inclination of the book, the author at the
end (Chapter 24) adds an important discussion on the "Europeanization of
the Earth", a subject on which the author also spoke on January 4, 1989
at the India International Centre, New Delhi.

After this brief summary, let me deal with some important points of
discussion more fully. I keep close to the language of the author even
in places where I do not directly quote him. I take full advantage of
his erudition and freely draw from his researched material but I offer
my own conclusions and a different schema.

  
II

*India and Europe* opens with the "Philosophical View of India in
Classical Antiquity", or India in the old Greek tradition. It assumes
that Classical Greece provides Europe's antiquity and that the two are
related in some special way. It is a debatable point but it has been
assumed here as axiomatic. The fact is that at the time when Greece
represented a living culture, it did not know Europe, nor Europe of that
time knew Greece.

The Greeks knew themselves as Hellenists, not Europeans. And whenever
they sought the origins of, or influences upon, their own philosophy and
religion, they thought of Egypt, Chaldea and India, not of Europe. They
received little from Europe and they bequeathed not much to it, at least
at the time when they represented a living culture. In fact, Christian
Europe as it was taking shape first grew in opposition to and later in
forgetfulness of Greek culture. Christian Europe in its early period
used Greek language and Greek philosophy to establish itself; then it
attacked ferociously Greek culture. Christian Europe in its early period
used Greek language and Greek philosophy to establish itself; then it
attacked ferociously Greek religion and culture; it destroyed Greek
literature, its schools and libraries.[2](#2) The work of destruction
was so complete that even the memory of Plato and Socrates was
obliterated and for a thousand years Christian Europe grew in complete
ignorance of what it calls its classical antiquity.

When Greek learning revived again, it was too late for it to exert a
living influence on anyone. It had died as a living tradition and it was
now a thing belonging to museums and libraries and was a topic only for
learned dissertations. But even in this form, it began to invite fierce
opposition. The Reformation was a revolt against the classical
Renaissance, a "reaction of backward minds", or a "protest of antiquated
spirits", as Nietzsche saw it. The call to go back to the Bible and to
Jehovah was in a very deep sense a repudiation of the Greek tradition,
whether spiritual or intellectual. Today what Europe calls the Greek
learning is not the learning as it was seen by the Greeks, but as it is
understood by the Europeans through their own categories of thought. To
the Greeks, Homer and its Gods were great realities, part and parcel of
their lives; to Europeans of the Renaissance period, they were legends
and interesting tales.

Even earlier, during the first centuries of Christianity, it was clear
that the Greek and Christian approaches to the life of the spirit were
incompatible and Christianity waged a relentless war against the
Greco-Roman approach; and when the Greek learning revived again, the old
incompatibility was still there undiminished. But if the Greek learning
still found a certain receptivity the reason was that by this time, it
was totally misunderstood and misconceived. For any truly classical
revival, Christian soil was very inhospitable indeed.

This however does not mean that modern Europe had no link with old
Greece. An unknown link connected the two intimately and the link was
established when Sanskrit was discovered. When this discovery was made,
it became obvious that India, Greece, Rome and Europe had great
linguistic, spiritual and ethnic affinity and even a common ancestry
derived probably from India and Sanskrit. But this suggestion was soon
resisted by rising European colonialism. To counter such a suggestion,
it postulated on the other hand a third, conjectural source still more
remote in time and also far removed from India. But according to all the
testimony available at present, the old affinity between these regions
and peoples, particularly in its spiritual dimension, is still best
represented by India. The Christian interlude in Europe and the Muslim
interlude in Iran are merely distorters or aberrations of this old
affinity.

But while one need not subscribe to Professor Halbfass's unproved
assumption that old Greece represents modern Christian Europe's
classical antiquity, there should be no difficulty in readily agreeing
that the author's treatment of the subject of "India in Greek Tradition"
is able and competent. It brings together many traditions on the subject
within the confine of one chapter and it is useful for interested
readers. One could of course still point out some obvious omissions. For
example, Apollonius of Tyna, the great sage of the Greek world who is
reputed to have come to India to meet its sages, is mentioned just to be
told that his biography by Philostratus is "legendry". There is nothing
improbable in a saint of the Greek world visiting India, but even if the
biography is legendry, it is known to have been written by 220 AD, and
even as a legend it is a good witness and tells us where India stood in
the estimation of Greek sages and philosophers of an early date. It
tells us that the Pythagoreans of Greece and the Naked Philosophers of
Egypt had derived their doctrines from the "Wise men of India".

Professor Halbfass follows a scholar's methodology in determining the
extent of Indo-Greek contact. He is determined to find a document, some
written mention, some journey relating to this contact before he would
admit it, but by their very nature such evidences can only be very rare
considering the time that has lapsed and the changes that have been
wrought. But if Professor Halbfass had followed a more inward method or
criterion of looking at Greek literature, he would have easily found
plentiful evidence of a living Indo-Greek contact, particularly at the
deeper level of the spirit. Both shared a common spiritual approach;
both intuited man and his world in the same way; both expressed their
spiritual intuition in the language of *Gods*; both taught *âtma-vâda*,
and the theory of Two Selves and Two Ways; both taught the theory of
*karma*, rebirth and *moksha*. In fact, the Greece of Pythagoras, Plato
and Plotinus has more in common with Hindu India than with Christian
Europe.

  
III

Then a long period of more than a thousand years intervened - a period
of triumph and consolidation of Christianity in Europe. Already
Christianity had successfully fought Greek as well as several Eastern
spiritual influences in the shape of Mithraism, Gnosticism, etc. An
ideological iron-curtain fell on Europe and its spirit underwent a
process of systematic Semiticization. Thanks to this sustained
conditioning, the European spirit became incapable of appreciating and
understanding Indian spirituality. This spiritual impediment was
reinforced by a physical one when Islam triumphed in the Middle East and
swayed over the sea and land routes connecting the Mediterranean with
India.

During these long years of lost contact, India became a legend. But
contact was resumed when a new route to India was discovered and Vasco
da Gama landed in 1498 at Calicut with soldiers, missionaries and
traders. Thus the first modern contact was
military-cum-missionary-cum-commercial, and any subsequent academic
intellectual interest grew out of this and it contained the qualities of
the first encounter.

*India and Europe* includes a very interesting chapter on the
"Missionary Approach to Indian Thought". Most missionaries had a very
dim view of Hinduism which they regarded as unmitigated evil. St. Xavier
thought that Brahmins, a highly revered class, stood between
Christianity and the heathens and that this class should be destroyed.
He requested the king of Portugal to use the secular arm for the
conversion of the Hindus.

But there were certain missionaries who had a livelier idea of the
difficulties and their situation. They proposed the strategy of using
Hinduism against Hinduism, a strategy which has its Biblical precedent
in the practice of St. Paul. Robert Di Nobili, representing this school,
made a distinction between the social customs of the heathens and their
religious ceremonies. He preached that while the former could be
accepted, only the latter should be opposed. He also pointed out that
the Brahmins were mainly teachers and priests and their function was
social and educational and not religious; and therefore they need not be
opposed but only neutralized and, in fact, the respect accorded to them
could be used to promote Christianity. He himself pretended that he was
a Romanic Brahmin and the teacher or Guru of a lost Veda, *Jesurvedam*,
which he offered to teach to his fellow-Brahmins in India.

While most missionaries saw Hinduism as a handiwork of the devil, some
also saw in it the remnants of an old monotheism, probably borrowed from
Christian and Judaic sources, but now distorted and defaced beyond
recognition. B. Ziegenbalg (1682-1719), a Lutheran missionary, wrote
back to his patrons in Europe about this original monotheism which had
been subsequently lost because Hindus "allowed themselves to be seduced
by the devil and their ancient poets into believing in a multitude of
gods".

  
V

These reports reaching Europe had an unintended effect; they were used
to support a very different line of reasoning - a line of reasoning
which was even anti-Christian. In order to understand this, we shall
have to understand the Europe of those days.

After the Crusades came to nothing, Europe was in an intellectual
ferment and was learning to question some of its cherished ideas and
dogmas. A pamphlet "On the Three Impostors" (Moses, Jesus and Muhammad)
came out in 1598 and had a wide clandesting circulation When the Greek
learning was revived, stoicism, the old Greek religion, was also
rediscovered. Many advanced thinkers saw that it was deeply religious
and highly ethical, and yet it had no revelation and no mediator; it
also spoke in the language of reason and conscience and it had a
universality of approach quite unknown to Christianity.

Under these new influences, a school grew in Europe which spoke of a
"natural religion" and "natural theology". It said that man's "reason"
and "conscience" were enough to account for God and morality and they
needed no revelation and no mediators. Thomas More (1478-1535), an
English statesman and author, expressed this idea of a "rational
religion" and "natural theology" in his famous *Utopia*.

This view also agreed with man's enlightened commonsense. Therefore,
when reports reached Europe from the Far East of a religion -
Confucianism - which had no heaven-mongering and yet was highly ethical
and humane, it had a warm reception in certain highly intellectual
circles. Leibnitz (1646-1716), the German philosopher and mathematician,
thought that Chinese missionaries should visit Europe in order to
instruct the Westerners about the questions of "natural theology" and
commonsense.

It was at this time and in this climate that India entered Europe. India
was already known for its natural theology. Quite early even Shahrastani
(1086-1153) in his *Kitb al-Milal wa'n-nihal* had noticed that prophets
were unknown to the Brahmins and that they tended towards a kind of
rationalism which does not depend on revelation.

India not only taught high morals like the Chinese, but unlike them it
also did not neglect the metaphysical dimension. Some, like
Schopenhauer, were in search of a "philosophy which should be at once
ethics and metaphysics". India did not disappoint them. Schopenhauer
(1788-1860) found it in the Upanishadic *tat tvam asi*, "that thou art".
Earlier J.G. Herder (1744-1803) had found that Indians' morals were
"pure and noble", and their concept of God "great and beautiful". Indian
thought satisfied those who sought spiritual transcendence without an
anthropomorphic God who is always thundering, threatening, and promising
and also an ethics embodying man's innate moral nature and not arbitrary
commandments from an external agency. This thought, in one of its lower
expressions and movements known as Deism, made a wide appeal in Europe.
It even affected many European administrators and residents abroad.
William Carey, a Baptist missionary, complained that "India swarms with
Deists".

  
V  
Original Home of All Religions

It did not take long for the question to acquire another dimension, the
dimension of time. India gave a religion which was not only *rational*
but was also *prior* to all other religions. In 1760, Voltaire acquired
a copy of *Ezourvedam*, a forgery of the Jesuits (most probably of Di
Nobili). But even this served an unintended purpose. Voltaire with his
acumen saw even in this document the voice of an ancient religion. While
he praised Brahmins for having "established religion on the basis of
universal religion", he also found that India was the home of religion
in its oldest and purest form. He described India as a country "on which
all other countries had to rely, but which did not rely on anyone else".
He also believed that Christianity derived from Hinduism. He wrote to
and assured Frederick the Great of Prussia that "our holy Christian
religion is solely based upon the ancient religion of Brahma".

This view was held by many European thinkers and writers. F. Majer
(1771-1818) said: "It will no longer remain to be doubted that the
priests of Egypt and the sages of Greece have drawn directly from the
original well of India." And again: "Towards the Orient, to the banks of
the Ganges and the Indus, it is there that our hearts feel drawn by some
hidden urge - it is there that all the dark presentiments point which
lie in the depths of our hearts... In the Orient, the heavens poured
forth into the earth."

J.G. Herder also saw in India the "lost paradise of all religions and
philosophies", the "cradle of humanity", the "eternal home", the
"eternal Orient ... waiting to be rediscovered within ourselves". This
is high praise, indeed, but it does not mean that he ever thought that
India supplanted the West. Any such thought was far from his mind. What
he meant was that India represented humanity's childhood, its innocence,
as Hellenism represented its "adolescence" and Rome its "adulthood".
Similarly, while Indians were "the gentlest branch of humanity",
Christianity was the religion of "purest humanity".

The thesis of Indian origins of Christianity found a warm reception in
many quarters and it continued to be propagated by Rosicrucians,
Theosophists and individual scholars and philosophers like Schopenhauer,
L. Jacolliot, A. Lillie and F. Nork.

But the traditional Christianity did not yield easily and it argued
furiously for the primacy of the Mosaic-Christian Revelation. A. Dacier,
J. Bouchet and Th. La Grue argued for the priority of Biblical
Chronology. Even Newton was involved in the controversy and argued for
the primacy of the Biblical Chronology. But the growing knowledge of
history and older civilizations was against them.

Orthodox Christians took recourse to another line of argument. While
yielding a certain chronological priority to India they upheld
Christianity's moral and spiritual primacy. They said that even if India
had known some kind of religion at an early date, its essential truths
were badly corrupted and it needed the living waters of Christianity to
revive them. To them, India offered a classic example of a tradition
that had been unable to safeguard its original purity against its pagan
superstition and priestly fraud, and disgusting barbarism - a warning
and reminder to others. An article on "Brahmins" in *Encyclopaedia* says
that a Christian could not fail to see the 41 effect of divine wrath" in
such decay and deprivation. Professor Halbfass informs us that India's
example was often cited to illustrate the theme of the eclipse and
suppression of "natural light" through superstition and ritualism, and
that this theme enjoyed a great popularity among thinkers of the
Enlightenment.

  
VI  
A New Phase

Soon the Indo-European encounter entered a new phase. Indian texts began
to be translated into European languages. Works of Roger, Dow, Holwell,
Wilkin's translations of the *Bhagavad Gita* and the *Hitopdesha* and W.
Jones' *Shakuntala* created a taste for Indian thought. Western scholars
read in translations such things as: "Vishnu is in you, in me, in all
beings"; or "See all men in your own soul"; or "Banish the delusion of
being different". Though later on, the missionary writers tried to
dismiss such teachings under the label of "pantheism", many Western
thinkers heard such sublime thoughts and ethics for the first time and
were deeply stirred. The stir was Europewide, but it was most
conspicuous in Germany. F. Schlegel, one of the pioneers of the Oriental
Renaissance, wrote about India: "Here is the actual source of all
languages, all the thoughts and poems of the human spirit; everything,
everything without exception comes from India." Later on, of course, he
changed his views when he became a Roman Catholic and not to India but
to Biblical Mesopotamia gave the palm of being the "cradle of mankind",
but his contribution to the Oriental Renaissance remained outstanding.

Another great name belonging to this movement was that of Schopenhauer.
His interest in Indian religion was first aroused by reading Anquetil
Dupperon's Latin translation of *Oupnekhat* (1801-1802), itself a
translation from a Persian version. He was deeply moved and he found its
reading "the most rewarding and edifying", and its philosophy "the
solace of my life and will be the solace of my death". After this he
continued to take a deep interest in India. In Indians, he found the
"most noble and ancient people", and their wisdom was the "original
wisdom of the human race". He spoke of India as the "fatherland of
mankind", which gave the "original religion of our race" and "oldest of
all world view". He thought of the Upanishads as the "fruit of the most
sublime human knowledge and wisdom", documents of "almost superhuman
conception" whose authors could "hardly be thought of as mere mortals".
He expressed the hope that European peoples "*who stemmed from Asia ...
would also re-attain the holy religions of their home*" (Italics added).

  
Sanskrit

Europe's discovery of Sanskrit also worked in the same direction. F.
Sassetti had observed as early as the second half of the sixteenth
century that Sanskrit and Europe's classical languages were related in
some way. Jones also saw the basic similarities between these languages
and soon some basic concepts of linguistics and history were
revolutionised. The discovery of Sanskrit proved a great event in
Europe's intellectual history. It upset Europe's self-image; it showed
that its Semitic association and identification were brief and
accidental and that its linguistic and, therefore, its philosophic,
religious and cultural roots lay elsewhere. Europe's close affinity with
India could no longer be a matter of speculation; it was written all
over in the languages of Europe, classical or modern. J.G. Herder asked
himself. "All the peoples of Europe, where are they from?" And he
answered: "From Asia."

Sanskrit was found to be the oldest of all Aryan languages and therefore
also their ancestor. Hegel, no admirer of India, admitted: "It is a
great discovery in history - as of a new world - which has been made
within rather more than the last twenty years, respecting the Sanskrit
and the connection of the European languages with it. In particular, the
connection of the German and Indian peoples has been demonstrated."
German Oriental Renaissance was erected on Bopp's linguistic foundation.

The enthusiasm for Indian culture was widespread. Amaury de Riencourt in
his *The Soul of India* tells us that philosophers like Schelling,
Fichte, Hegel, Schopenhauer and Schleiermacher, poets such as Goethe,
Schillar, Novalis, Tieck and Brentano, historians like Herder and
Schlegel, all acclaimed the discovery of Indian culture with cries of
ecstasy: "India, the home of universal religion, the cradle of the
noblest human race, of all literature, of all philosophies and
metaphysics." And he adds that "this enthusiasm was not confined to
Germany. The entire Romantic movement in the West put Indian culture on
a lofty pedestal which the preceding Classical Movement had reserved for
Greece and Rome."

Tolstoy, a late-comer, was also deeply influenced by Indian religious
thought. Like Wagner, his introduction to it was through Burnouf and
Schopenhauer. Beginning with his *Confessions*, there is no work of his
"which is not inspired, in part by Hindu thought", to put it in the
words of Markovitch quoted by Raymond Schwab in *The Oriental
Renaissance*. He further adds that Tolstoy also "remains the most
striking example, among a great many, of those who sought a cure for the
western spirit in India".

Thus we see that India's influence was widespread throughout Europe, but
it was the greatest in Germany. In fact' Germany was called "the India
of the Occident". Hugo said that "Germany is to the West what India is
to the East, a sort of great forbear. Let us venerate her". These words
(September 1870) might have been said though in order to flatter Germany
in the hope that she would spare Paris which her armies had besieged.

  
Importance of Indian Influence

While the Oriental Movement expanded the West's intellectual horizon and
influenced it at a deeper level, it was also used in the current
controversies and polemics of the day. Some used it in support of the
forces of Enlightenment and rationalism to give themselves an example of
high-minded religion and ethics which did not depend on revelation and
dogmas; others used it against the naive rationalism of the eighteenth
century.

Some found that the Bible's Hebraic tradition with its
narrow-mindedness, intolerant monotheism, its coarse materialism and
lack of mysticism had a corrupting influence on European culture and
they found their answer in Indian religious culture which was both
rational and mystical.

Oriental Renaissance was also used against classical Renaissance,
particularly in Germany. For long, Germans had been accused,
particularly by Latin people, of being Teutonic barbarians who destroyed
the great Mediterranean culture. In return, the Germans by identifying
themselves with the more ancient Indian culture rejected the cultural
superiority of the Latin races and especially of French Classicism. Thus
by identifying themselves with ancient India and by claiming a new
lineage, the Germans restored their self-respect and equality with their
accusers.

  
VII  
Opposition

Thus the Oriental Renaissance came to tread over too many toes and its
results were disturbing even to many Orientalists who had intended their
labour to yield a different kind of harvest. For example, H.H. Wilson, a
celebrated Indologist, Boden Professor, translator of the *Rg Veda* and
the *ViSNu PurâNa*, speaking at the University of Oxford in 1840, said
that the objects of Indian studies were "to contribute to the religious
enlightenment of a benighted, but intelligent and interesting and
amiable people"; another object was "to confute the falsities of
Hinduism". Earlier William Carey had said that the purpose of
translating Sanskrit texts was to show they were "filled with nothing
but pebbles and trash". But the results were just the opposite. Many of
the best minds of Europe thought that these texts were sublime, and the
possessors of those texts could not be benighted and needed no foreign
aid in religious enlightenment. Some also used these texts to show the
inadequacy of Christianity.

Oriental Renaissance began to invite opposition. Missionaries were one
obvious source of it. Another source was Imperialism. European powers
were becoming self-conscious imperialists and they could not rule with a
clean conscience over peoples who were proud possessors of great
cultures. Therefore they opposed views which exalted the ideological
status of their colonies. Another source, a natural result of
Imperialism, was growing Eurocentricity. Europe became less and less
inclined to believe that anything worthwhile could be found anywhere
outside of Europe. Therefore, the Oriental Movement began to be
downgraded. It was called "romantic", and even "fanatic"; its
fascination for India was a form of "Indo-mania". Others dealt with it
in a more intellectual, but equally hostile way. They admitted a certain
antiquity and even priority for Indian people and their culture, facts
which could no longer be denied, but they saw in it no reason for
departing from their low estimate of India. Hegel, for example, admitted
that India "was the centre of emigration for all the western world", but
he said that it was merely a "physical diffusion". "The people of India
have achieved no foreign conquests, but have been on every occasion
vanquished them-selves."

Similarly, though he admitted the fact of India's cultural spread
arguing that Sanskrit lies at the foundation of all those further
developments which form the languages of Europe Greek, Latin, German -
but he also found in this cultural diffusion only "a dumb, deedless
expansion", which "presented no political action". No wars, no forcible
conversions, no cultural impositions; therefore, worth nothing much,
nothing creditable!

Others dealt with the problem in other ways. They retained old facts but
gave them a new rendering; or they retained some facts and changed
others and offered a new combination. For example, Indians were allowed
to possess the Vedas, the oldest literature of the Aryans, but the
Aryans themselves were made to migrate, this time from Europe to India
as conquerors. Thus the tables were turned. Migration remained but its
direction changed. India which was hitherto regarded as the home of
European languages and people now became the happy hunting ground of the
same people who came and conquered and imposed their will and culture on
India. The theory of Aryan invasion was born. History was written in
support of the new hegemony and power relations.

Other scholars made other kinds of attempts. Considering that Europe's
religious and philosophical tradition was a late corner, some European
thinkers had derived it from India, a common enough practice in the
academic field in such matters. But William Jones now offered the
hypothesis of a *third unknown source*. He said that India was not the
original home of the religious and philosophic tradition of the West,
but itself represented an old offshoot of an original source common to
both East and West. "Pythagoras and Plato derive their sublime theories
from the same fountain with the sages of India", he said. As the
attitude in Europe changed, the *hypothesis* was lapped up and it was
accepted as fact.

The hypothesis of a third lost source began to be applied to many fields
but more particularly to linguistics. Some scholars even began to
reconstruct this common source and invented "Indo-European roots". These
roots were a logical construct and the already existing Sanskrit roots
could have done as well, but possibly a psychological motive was at
work. Though Sanskrit had the oldest literature, the idea that it could
have some sort of a primacy in the Aryan family of languages was not
acceptable. Therefore they accepted the next best hypothesis that both
Sanskrit and European languages had a common source still more ancient
but now lost. To own a filial relationship with India was no matter of
pride for Europe; so the next best thing under the circumstances was to
make this relationship collateral and push it as far back in the past as
possible. Things may change and India's social status may improve after
its political and economic status improves.

  
Hegel

Europe, at the head of a far-flung empire, had to assert its superiority
at all levels: military, commercial, religious and philosophical. It
could not countenance a view which exalted the peoples of the Orient in
any way Missionaries were always on the war-path but on the level of
philosophy, Hegel led the attack and his attack was as unsparing and
ungenerous as that of the former. But while the missionaries used the
language of theology, Hegel used the high-winded language of
intellectuality, or just sheer "confused, empty verbiage", according to
Schopenhauer.

Herder had thought that India represented man's living past, his
*innocence*, but Hegel believed that the World-Spirit (*Weltgeist*)
moved from East to West, and in the Oriental tradition, Europe faces, in
a sense, its own petrified past. He believed that the Occident had
already superseded the Orient and the Orient has to be "excluded from
the history of philosophy". In fact, Hegel himself gave us a "philosophy
of history", a scheme which brought non-European cultures and thought in
historical subordination to Europe. After Hegel, many European scholars
have engaged in this labour and in Marx it touched new heights and
achieved much concrete, political results.

According to Professor Halbfass, Hegel and others "reflected Europe's
historical position at the beginning of the 19th century. It claims
intellectual, moral and religious superiority over the rest of the
world." The author tells us that Hegel "even tries to justify the
historical necessity of Europe's colonial activities". In his *The
Philosophy of History*, Hegel praises the British for undertaking "the
weighty responsibility of being the missionaries of civilization to the
world".

Following Hegel's lead, though the lead was hardly necessary, Indian
philosophy began to be berated. Professor Halbfass writes a whole
chapter entitled "On the Exclusion of India from the History of
Philosophy". But there is nothing surprising about it. In the same
spirit and with the same level of understanding, Indian religion, art,
sciences and technology, social and political thought were also either
omitted or berated. But what is really incomprehensible is that India's
own elites under the spell of Europe have shown no appreciation and
commitment to their country's intellectual and creative contribution.

In a sense, this omission is no deprivation but in fact a blessing.
Exclusion does no harm and inclusion brings no honour. In fact,
inclusion is far worse than exclusion. The fact is that Europe is not
spiritually prepared to take Indian higher thought into its purview and,
therefore, it is better that it is left out altogether. But on occasions
when Europe does speak about it, it speaks vaguely about something it
does not comprehend. For example, take Hegel himself. Speaking about
Yoga, he says that the "ascent to Brahman is brought about by utter
stupefaction and insensibility". The comment is simply laughable.
Similarly, he often speaks, probably more than any other European
philosopher, of *consciousness*; but he does not seem to be aware, even
conceptually, of a state of consciousness which is liberated from its
own images, thoughts, stored impressions, its opacity, duality and ego,
a state of consciousness about which Indian Yogas speak. In this state,
the consciousness is joyful (*viSoka*), and luminous (*jyotishmatî*),
truth-bearing or truth-filled (*ritam-bharâ*), and those who attain it
live on truth (*rita-bhuj*), and dwell in truth (*rita-sad*).

  
VIII

India entered Europe as a widening and deepening force and it was looked
upon with respect and admiration by some of its greatest thinkers like
Voltaire, Schelling and Schopenhouer, But the vested interests and
forces of narrowness and obscurantism were powerful and they banded
together and made a determined stand. Eventually the
Euro-Colonial-Missionary forces triumphed, represented by
soldier-scholars like J.S. Mill, Hegel, Macaulay, Marx and many others.
They were thoroughly Eurocentric and they looked at India and other
countries of the East with contempt and condescension. But they became
popular not only in the West but in India and Asia as well. They taught
several generations of Indians how and what to think of themselves and
of Europe. The Indian elites began to look at their country and people
through European eyes and European categories. They even borrowed the
West's contempt for their own people. Traditional India, during its
recovery and reaffirmation, finds itself most fiercely opposed by these
elitist forces at home. These forces have intimate intellectual,
organizational and financial links with the West.

  
Neo-Hinduism

This *anti-Hinduism* of the Hindus, their Missionary-Macaulayite-Marxist
view of themselves, their own culture, religion and history, is the most
powerful legacy the European contact has left behind. But Professor
Halbfass does not discuss this at all. On the other hand, he discusses,
in the second section of his book, what he calls Neo-Hinduism, a
Hinduism shaped by and during the presence of Europe but which is not
anti-Hindu and which, in fact, defends Hinduism though not in its native
idiom but in the borrowed idiom of Europe. According to Professor
Halbfass, Neo-Hinduism took shape "in a historical setting created by
Europe", and it "has difficulties speaking for itself"; it "speaks to a
large extent in a European medium".

To some extent, this is true; but the limitation is not all on the side
of Neo-Hinduism. If it is to engage in a dialogue with the West, it must
speak in the idiom best understood by the listener. Though the West is
an acute linguist and it has mastered many languages but it is not so
nimblewitted in understanding the peoples who spoke them.

Moreover, Neo-Hinduism does more than justify Hinduism; it also
justifies Christianity, Islam and many other non-Indian cults. As it
uses Western categories to defend Hinduism, in the same spirit it uses
traditional Indian categories to promote Semitic religions. In its
insatiable desire for "synthesis" and similarities, it seeks and finds
Vedânta in the Bible and the Quran and in Das Kapital too; it says that
Jesus and Muhammad and Marx all are incarnations and Rishis, and that
they all say the same thing. The net result is that Semitic prophets are
as popular among the Hindus as their own. Western Rationalism had
rejected Christianity not only for its miracles but even more so for its
exclusive claims which offend rationality, but it is now coming back
under Hindu auspices and promotion.

  
IX  
Hindu Passivity

At more than one place, Professor Halbfass gives us what he regards as a
basic characteristic of the Indo-European dialogue or encounter. In this
encounter, he tells us that while Europe's role was active, that of
India was passive; that while she never went out to study or preach or
proselytize, the West has been, on the other hand, in search of India in
a variety of ways. It has looked there for analogies and origins; it has
even used India for its own self-definition; it has tried to define its
identity "by demarcating it against, and reflecting it in, the otherness
of India". India, on the other hand, has never tried to find Europe, but
discovered it when she was herself discovered, and "started responding
to it while being discovered, subdued and objectified by it".[3](#3)

What Professor Halbfass has said so graciously has been said less
civilly by many others. H.U. Weithrecht, for example, makes no such
intellectual ado and states quite brutally that India's contact with the
outer world "has been mainly through immigration of foreign invaders".

We thank Professor Halbfass for his civility and we also think that
there should be no difficulty in agreeing with his observation in a
broad way. But what he says has many unstated implications and it also
raises some deeper questions which should not go unmentioned.

The author presents the East-West encounter as an intellectual
enterprise in which the West played, on the whole, the part of a
disinterested pursuer of knowledge and truth. It wanted to know others
and it went out in search of this knowledge. Perhaps, sometimes it was
too eager and, therefore, indiscreet and even aggressive, but all this
was in the pursuit of knowledge. History however does not support this
rosy view and reveals a different story. It tells us that the East-West
encounter was a very cruel affair and the intellectual component was the
least important part of it. Its main expressions were piracy, gunboat
diplomacy, political domination, religious arrogance, economic
enslavement and cultural genocide. These things have not even been
mentioned by the author.

And looking at "knowledge" the encounter generated, we find that though
its quantum is impressive its moral worth is very little. It abounds in
censuses, surveys, reports, maps, charts, atlases, tables, chronicles,
archives, transactions and other such data useful for ruling over a
country; it contains laborious studies of castes and creeds and other
social divisions so that these could be used for "divide and rule", and
even studies of history and religions so that these could be used for
subversion. All this is "knowledge" of a sort but it is worthy of
administrators and generals and, not of scholars and philosophers of
cultures and civilizations. Data-collection is not knowledge and
knowledge is not wisdom.

But even those works pretending to study other peoples' cultures are
most of the time worthless. Take, for example, the *Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics*, in twelve volumes; it is written by more than 450
scholars, Europe's best minds, great linguists and top-notch
theologians. The volumes study world cultures, past and present. But
with all their scholarship, they constitute a hate-book, a declaration
of war against all non-Christian cultures and peoples. They prove that
European intellect is profoundly inadequate for dealing with other
peoples' cultures. It has neither the necessary sympathy nor the insight
for this kind of task.

While on the subject, we may also make a comment or two on the intellect
of the West. In contrast to its eastern counterpart, it is supposed to
be objective but facts show that it can be quite credulous and careless
about facts. For example, we know how for centuries, it believed in a
legendary Prester John, the ruler of "the three Indies", the
"illustrious and magnificent king ... and a beloved son of Christ", the
centre of many legends whose support the Christian world hoped to gain
against Islam. Similarly, we now know the story of Barlaam and Josaphat,
two fictional characters in a story of Siddhartha Buddha taken over and
after suitable adaptations converted into two real saints of Christendom
whose feast day falls on 27th November. We also know how strong is its
belief in Apostle Thomas visiting India which though found to be a myth
continues to be promoted for extraneous reasons. All these facts do not
speak for an alert, objective and disinterested European intellect.

Now let us also give some thought to the author's perspicacious
observation that India's role in the intellectual encounter has been
passive. This is true, at least apparently. India's behaviour conforms
to its basic attitude in the matter. India believes that there is such a
thing as higher learning; and in this kind of learning, one learns best
about others by learning about one-self. This kind of learning about
others does not analyse, compare and judge all the time, but it
*accepts* them as they are. This method gives a benign, a compassionate
knowledge of others. In fact, in this kind of knowledge, there are no
others. India has known mankind in this benign sense from the beginning.
In this sense, India can also have no true xenology of European fancy
though the author discusses it at length in a whole chapter, Traditional
Indian Xenology (Chapter 11), where one can also see Indology at work in
all its intellectual irresponsibility.[4](#4) Hindus have their own
pride but they have no concept of an *ummah*, and a divinely ordained
mission, and therefore no true xenology though they could have words
indicating praise and censure and even hostility. In point of fact,
Hinduism has concerned itself with humanity, with man, nay with all
beings, animate and inanimate, past and present and future, on all
planes, visible and invisible.[5](#5) "The European Tradition and
Presence of India", which could discuss Neo-Christianity and Neo-Europe,
modifying their idiom under the influence of Indian thought. There is no
dearth of data, but there is a reluctance to acknowledge that kind of
data under the inertia of an old habit of thinking. For this reason,
even Gandhi appears most briefly and perfunctorily in the book though he
earned a wide audience in Europe and America, and not as an Indian
political leader but as a Hindu thinker and saint; he is also treated as
a representative of Neo-Hinduism, and not one who contributed to the
shaping of a Neo-Christianity.

The fact is that India has been exerting a great influence though it
often remains unacknowledged and unnamed. For example, India's
*Pañchatantra* began to be translated from an early date and it saw more
than fifty translations and its stories are found in two hundred
adaptations though without any knowledge of their Indian origin. The
Indian influence has been silent but sure. For example at present, the
Hare Krishna movement and the Saiva Siddhanta are visible but partial
forms of a great invisible but abiding influence. Under this influence,
many are taking to vegetarianism, hundreds of thousands of Western
brothers believe in the Law of Karma, and in rebirth, and millions have
participated in some kind of meditation sessions. Traditional
Christianity has hitherto spoken the language of dogma, authority and
superiority, but under this new influence, even it is forced to speak
the language of "experience" and reluctant "plurality". The Bible does
not even know the word "consciousness", but under the influence of
Indian thought, even the televangelists are embracing the word though
without realizing that the word properly belongs to a different
spiritual ethos and has little meaning in the Christian tradition.

  
X  
Experience

Such overwhelming evidence of the influence of Indian spirituality has
made it difficult to avoid its discussion altogether. So the author
turns to it at the end of his book and in two separate chapters
discusses two key concepts, Experience and Tolerance, concepts quite new
to Christian-Western vocabulary. Dean W.R. Inge says that the "centre of
gravity in religion has shifted from authority to experience". Professor
Halbfass also finds the word "most significant" and "most conspicuous in
works on Indian religion and philosophy, and in the so-called dialogue
between India and the West". But apparently he does not think much of
it. He quotes H. Cox who speaks slightingly of a "gluttony of
experience". He also regards the term "most ambiguous and evasive" and
seems to agree with H.G. Gadamer who says that the word is the "most
obscure of all philosophical concepts" and also "among the least
clarified concepts".

For that matter what concept is not ambiguous in philosophy? Is
"experience" more ambiguous that the concepts of "East and West", or
"encounter", "tradition", "Europe" and "understanding", concepts which
are so much used by the author and some of which even decorate the title
of his book? Most scholars do not seem to share this view and they have
found the word good enough and clear enough for ordinary use. William
James, the celebrated American philosopher and psychologist, wrote his
famous *The Varieties of Religious Experience* (1902). Similarly, only
recently, about a decade ago. Sir Alister Hardy, a zoologist,
established a Religious Experience Research Unit (RERU) at the
University of Oxford, England.

  
Tolerance

Professor Halbfass's discussion on "tolerance" is also out of focus. He
uses his erudition to confuse the straight meaning of the word. In this
discussion, he introduces one Paul Hacker (1913-1979) and gives him a
place quite disproportionate to the importance of his ideas. Paul Hacker
says that "Hinduism has inclusivism instead of tolerance", and that
"what seems to be tolerance to the Europeans, is almost always
inclusivism". According to him the terms "tolerance" and "intolerance"
are "inappropriate for the description of Hinduism". H. Von Glasenapp,
who missed tolerance in Hinduism paraphrased Hacker's "inclusivism" as
"non-violent fanaticism".

Professor Halbfass discusses "tolerance as a modern European idea", and
finds it inapplicable to traditional Hinduism because it "does not
recognize the idea of man, and of human freedom and equality, which
constitute the background of the modern concept of tolerance". Here, it
is obvious that he neglects to take advantage of a larger perspective
that is needed in discussing such inter-civilizational issues.
Particularly, a deep culture like Hinduism based on a profounder
definition of man and a wiser under-standing of what makes for true
human freedom and equality needs more than this kind of cavalier
judgement.

The author discusses the modern context of Europe's idea of tolerance
without mentioning a word about its practice of intolerance in dealing
with Asian and African countries. Tolerance, as a "modern European idea
and ideology", acquired "special significance in connection with the
tensions between different Christian denominations since the period of
Reformation", he says. Thus the question is treated as an
intra-Christian question, a question of relationship between different
denominations of Christianity. The larger question of how Christianity
views other religions is simply glossed over. There is not a word about
the vast missionary apparatus, a living monument of intolerance,
doctrinal and practical. Perhaps, this apparatus and its work are
included in the modern "European idea of tolerance". It seems that
Professor Halbfass's view, in this matter again, has failed to rise
above the Western-Christian horizon.

The argument that treats tolerance as a "modern European idea or
ideology" is of one piece with the arguments of missionaries. For
example, Searle Bate in his *Religious Liberty: An Inquiry*, a
missionary-sponsored work, argues that since Hindus did not practise
persecution, they did not know tolerance! For the very lack of
persecution itself "did not raise clear issues of compulsion or
liberty". And he further adds that "it is only in the political
development of recent years \[that is when the British were leaving\],
in the missionary introduction of fresh Christian undertakings, that the
issue of religious liberty had become apparent". According to this view,
if Hindu India questions some of these "Christian undertakings", it will
prove that it lacks and denies religious liberty. But when India was
under the British and no such questions were raised, that was true
religious liberty of "modern European idea or ideology".

  
XI  
Europeanization of the Earth

In the last chapter, Professor Halbfass discusses the concept of the
"Europeanization of the Earth", a conviction and predilection which
philosophical Europe too has shared with religious and political Europe.
Christian Europe has always believed that it has the divinely ordained
mission of bringing all heathendom under the domain of the Church;
similarly at the dawn of modern period, Imperial Europe felt heavily the
"white man's burden of civilizing the world"; philosophical Europe too
felt that it had an equally "onerous task of understanding others" under
its "idea of truth which requires and authorizes it to understand other
cultures", to put it in the language of M. Merleau-Ponty.

The thought found its first most powerful expression in Hegel and lately
in E. Husserl. Professor Halbfass tells us that Hegel believed that the
European horizon transcends the Asian horizon, that Asian thought is
comprehensible and interpretable within European thought but not vice
versa, and that European thought has to provide the context and
categories for the exploration of all traditions of thought. Europe has
an "innate entelechy" which urges it on towards an "absolute idea", a
universality beyond the reach of other cultures.

Husserl believes that Europe has acquired the spirit of "true
philosophy" and "pure science", "autonomous thinking" and an "attitude
of pure theory" and "freedom from prejudice"; and, therefore, is
especially equiped to understand other cultures while other cultures
lacking in these qualities cannot understand Europe. "European mankind"
has a "universal human mission". Its culture "comprehends and cancels
other cultures".

Not that other cultures lack reason altogether, but it is of a merely
human, pre-philosophical kind. "As animal reason is to human reason,
pre-philosophical reason is to philosophical reason." This philosophical
reason provides to the West a kind of "self-transparent omniscience".
This gives the West a great advantage over others. Others will have to
Europeanize themselves, "whereas we, if we understand ourselves
properly, will never, for example, Indianize ourselves", Husserl says.
Naturally, the "Europeanization of all foreign parts of the world" is
the destiny of the earth. God made Europe in His own image, and now the
rest of mankind will be made in the image of Europe. M. Heidegger also
refers to the "complete Europeanization of the earth and of mankind",
but he is less proud about it. Recently, Dr. Francis Fukuyama, a scholar
and official of the United States, wrote an essay, *The End of History*,
which was widely discussed. It celebrated the "triumph of the West, the
Western idea".

But what does "Europeanization of mankind" exactly mean? Does it mean
that European rationalism will triumph over Asian intuition? And
European sciences, forms of knowledge and technology and even social and
economic forms replace sciences, forms of knowledge, technology and
social and economic forms developed elsewhere? Let us remember that
developed cultures like India, China and Egypt were masters of many
sciences.

A measure of Europeanization in the sense of some dominant European
influences is quite on the cards. The last several centuries belonged to
Europe and the rest of mankind was on the retreat. In these days,
economic and political colonialism went hand in hand with intellectual
colonialism. Many Western ideas and ideals were successfully planted.
Even highly developed cultures like those of India and China were under
a tremendous psychological pressure to accept the world-view, the
value-system, intellectual fashions and preferences and political and
social forms of the West. Many Afro-Asian countries tried to go western
in the hope of acquiring the West's power or even approval, but without
success. They were deindigenized without being Europeanized. Some of
these countries like Brazil and Mexico failed even in the more external
forms. They tried to adopt Western patterns of industrialization but
their harvest has been colossal debts, inflation, economic bankruptcy
and great social upheaval. It is clear that whatever the adjustments it
is necessary for the non-European countries to make, the path of
imitation is hardly the path of their salvation.

Then there is also the question of desirability. Thanks to the West's
glamour and its technological achievements in many fields, it is not
widely and fully realized that Europeanization has also meant the
externalization of the Spirit and its impoverishment. The
Europeanization of the earth started long ago. It started with the
Europeanization of Europe itself; let us remember that there was a time
when Europe was not Europeanized in the modern sense; its
Europeanization started with the Semiticization of its religious feeling
and thinking, and then invaded other departments and expressions of its
life; Europe began to lose its roots; and while it underwent inner
contraction, it started on the path of outer expansion, recognizing on
the way no one else but itself. It began to seek Europeanization of the
earth.

But will it do any good to anybody? What will happen if the Afro-Asian
countries also became consumers and polluters on the Europeans scale?
What the earth, including Europe, needs is not Europeanization, but a
new philosophy, a new life-style which is in harmony with man's
spiritual nature and ecological system.

Europeanization of the earth may satisfy the West's ego, but the
satisfaction will be short-lived. The West does not realize how deep is
man's, including its own, present spiritual crisis. In the depth of this
crisis, it is not above learning from developed Hindu-Buddhist culture
of Asia. This culture could teach us innerness, respect for plurality,
ways of frugal, harmonious and compassionate living.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Wilhelm Halbfass, *India and Europe: An Essay in Philosophical
Understanding*, Motilal Banarasidass Publishers Pvt. Limited, Delhi,
1990.  

[2](#2a) Even before it was adopted as an official religion,
Christianity indulged in destroying the shrines of the Pagans. Christian
mobs under the leadership of their bishops and saints went about seizing
and destroying the temples of their neighbours. Two Hindu temples too
became the object of their iconoclastic furies. The temples were built
by an Indian colony settled in the Canton of Jaron on the upper
Euphrates The Indians had built two temples with the images of deities
18 and 22 feet high. St. Gregory the Illuminator (240-332 AD) destroyed
them in 304 AD, according to the Syrian writer, Zenob.

When Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire,
destroying Pagan temples became a state policy. Theodosius, the fanatic
Christian Emperor ordered that the Pagan temples be destroyed and he
appointed officers of high rank who were directed to shut Pagan temples
and confiscate their property for the benefit of the Church.

The phenomenon enveloped the whole Empire. There was a respite during
the time of Julian, but the Christians were already powerful. The altar
of Cybele at Pessinus was overturned almost in the presence of the Pagan
Emperor. Similarly, in the city of Caesarea in Cappadocia, the Pagan
temple, the only one that had survived, was destroyed by Christians
during the reign of this Pagan Emperor. The attacks were organized by
the most pious Christians, monks and bishops. Gibbon tells us that the
"holy Martin, bishop of Tours, marched at the head of his faithful
monks, to destroy the idols, the temples, and the consecrated trees of
his extensive diocese". In Syria, "the divine and excellent Marcellus",
as he is described by Christian chroniclers, a bishop, destroyed many
stately temples within the diocese of Apamea. He was accompanied by
numerous troops of soldiers and gladiators, and "he successfully
attacked the villages and country temples." He was slain by furious
villagers.

In Alexandria, the great temple of Serapeum, with its stately halls and
exquisite statues, "displaying the triumph of the arts", as Gibbon
describes, it was destroyed under the leadership of Theophilus, a
*saint*, and friend of St. Jerome. Ale Serapeum also preserved treasures
of ancient learning and housed the famous Alexandrian library. All were
reduced to ashes. A church was built in honour of Christian martyrs on
the site of the ruined temple.

Libanius, a contemporary writer, rails at these "black-garbed" monks
"who ate more than elephants". Poor elephants! they are temperate
animals."

Many temples were appropriated by the Christians. The temple of Venus at
Carthage, whose sacred precincts formed a circumference of two miles was
converted into a Christian church. The same thing happened to the
majestic Pantheon at Rome. Built by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa (63-12 BC)
and
reconstructedinthe2ndcenturyADbyHadrian,itbecameaChristianchurchinthe
7th century.

St. Sophia, the church at Constantinople, was built by Constantine in
325. Enlarged, rebuilt, destroyed at various epoch, the present
structure is virtually that erected by Justinian. Over 1 0,000 workers
were employed for seven years, and the rich materials used were taken
from nearly every celebrated Pagan temple in all parts of the Empire.
Its altar was made of molten gold weighing 320,000 lbs. In 1453, Turks
conquered Constantinople, and the church was converted into a mosque.

  
Ancient rites suppressed

The ancient rites were abolished. These including luminaries, garlands,
frankincense, and libation of wine were especially enumerated and
condemned. The offender was subjected to the forfeiter of the house or
estate where those ceremonies were performed. And as Gibbon says even
"the harmless claims of the domestic genius, of the household gods, are
included in this proscription." The ruse of these "profane and illegal
ceremonies" subjected the offender to the forfeiture of the house or
estate where they have been performed.

We are told by Gibbon how "The monks (a race of filthy animals, to whom
Eunapius is tempted to refuse the name of men) are the authors of the
new worship, how in these shrines, and instead of the Gods conceived in
beautiful images, were worshipped the salted and pickled heads of the
so-called martyrs, those infamous malefactors".

There were laws against Judaizing Christians, against Paganism, against
folk practices. Lex Visigothorum, XH, 2, 16, (642-52) deplores
"pretended belief in Christ" and prescribes penalty for those who "have
renounced a good religion for a bad one." It says that a "cruel and
astounding act of presumption should be extirpated by a still more cruel
punishment". The Edict declares that whenever it is proved that a
Christian born of Christian parents has practised circumcision or any
other Jewish rite, "he shall be put to an ignominious death by the zeal
and cooperation of Catholics, under the most ingenious and excruciating
torture that can be inflicted"...

The precept of King Childebert 1 of France (c. 533-58) threatens such of
his people "which does not keep the precepts of bishops." It declares:
"We order that any men who, once admonished, shall not at once cast out
images and idols, dedicated to the devil, made by men, from their
fields, or shall prevent Bishops from destroying them, shall not he
free..."

Again, Lex Visigothorum VI, 2, 4, (642-52) declares punishments for
"magicians and invokers of tempests". "Such persons" shall be publicly
scourged with two hundred lashes; shall be scalped; and shall be dragged
by force through ten villages of the neighbourhood, as a warning to
others.

In other places, this infringement was put to a profitable use. Lombard
Italy: Liutprant 84.I (727) says that anybody going to a soothsayer
"shall pay half his price in the Sacred Palace, according as he is
valued.. and he shall also do penance according to the Church canons. In
the same way he who worships at a tree which the rustic call holy and at
springs, or performs sacrifice or incantation, shall similarly pay half
the price." Any one who does not denounce them or conceals them suffers
the same penalty.

Pope Gregory the Great writes to Mellitus, Abbot of France on his way to
England to tell Bishop Augustine "that the temples of idols in that
nation should not be destroyed, but that the idols themselves that are
in them should be ... since, if these same temples are well built, it is
needful that they should be transferred from the worship of idols to the
service of true God."  

[3](#3a) Is it really true? Has Europe, particularly Christian Europe,
been really so alert and curious as Professor Halbfass claims? According
to E.R. Bevan, far into the medieval ages Christian Europe drew its
conception of India mainly from books written before the middle of the
third century BC and the additions of this period "never equalled in
substance or interest the older books" (*The Cambridge History of
India*, p.383).

[4](#4a) Here the author follows the lead of Indology quite
uncritically. The discussion is set in the framework of the theory of
Aryan invasion as already a proven fact. We are told of the Aryans as "a
closely knit group of conquerors and immigrants who gradually took
possession of the Indian sub-continent", and of aboriginals who were
"vanquished and subdued by Agni", an Aryan God. We are told that the
conquerors had already "a clearly recognizable, though somewhat mythical
awareness of the surrounding world of foreign or hostile powers or
groups or people". How this awareness was both clear and mythical at the
same time is not explained but treating it so makes it easier to regard
myths and parables as history. We are also told that according to the
testimony of the Vedas themselves, the subdued people were "excluded
from the Aryan community and its ritual performances" (and blamably not
"compelled to come in"), and were described as *dasyu* or *dâsa*, and as
*aSraddha, ayajña, avrata, anyavrata* and *akarman*.

In this scheme, the pre-Vedic conquest proves the Vedic epithets which
in turn prove a pre-Vedic conquest. But, really, have the epithets to be
applied to a conquered people? They could as well be applied by
moralists to the members of their own society who in their eyes were not
worshipful and observant enough. Manu does it often and advises that
even kings and Brahmins who do not perform sacrifices (*ayajña*) are not
to be honoured (3.120). But in all probability and in most cases they
were applied by Rishis to all mankind, to man at large, to his inner
life, his seeking and struggle, to his soul which seeks kinship with
Gods but which is also subject to the opposite pull of impiety, lack of
faith, worship and spiritual effort.

Taking a leaf from the Orientalists' book, could we argue that the words
like gentiles, heathens, infidels, pagans, servants, slaves and serfs
which abound in. European religious and social literature assume a
conquered people? Could we also hold that the Biblical words like
*sklero-trachelos* and qesheh oreph (stiff-necked) are physical
descriptions of those people as "noseless" (*anâsa*) dasyu of
Orientalists? Could we further say that the Bible's words like ignorant
(*agnoeo*), unbelieving (*apeitheo*), heedless (*aphron*), unrighteous
(*adikos*), lawless (*anomia*) and accursed (*anathema*) are not moral
judgements but epithets applied to conquered peoples of various grades?

But even if we take the Vedas to be history, we must apply a chosen
criterion consistently and not pick and choose according to our
convenience. In a Rg verse (7.6.3) which speaks of the foolish, the
faithless, the rudely-speaking, the niggardly, of men without belief,
sacrifice and worship (*nyakritu, grathina, mRdhra-vâc, paNi, aSraddha,
avriddha, ayajña*), we are also told that "Far, far away has Agni chased
those dasyus, and, in the east, has turned the godless westward", a
direction which is just the opposite of what the Orientalists have been
telling us - not eastward and southward but westward. Why neglect this
testimony?

Let me take another example of this intellectual irresponsibility.
Beginning from the beginning and tracing the tradition of Indian
Xenology, Professor Halbfass quotes P. Thieme to show that "while in
Greece the word for foreigner (xenos) becomes the words for 'guest' or
'host' the corresponding word in India \[ari\] becomes a term for the
enemy" (p. 175). Well, we do not know whether the word ari in the Vedic
lore ever meant a stranger which in time began to mean an enemy, but
such things are possible and words do change their meanings in response
to many factors (for fuller discussion, see our *The Word As Revelation:
Names of Gods*, Voice of India, New Delhi). A word of a living language
responds, among other things, to the collective experience of its
speakers. A stranger is not always a friend and sometimes he comes as a
guest but stays back as the master as the experience of native
American-Indians proves and the word has to incorporate and convey such
new meanings too.

But turning away from these larger speculations, let us turn to the
concrete case in hand. We are not sure whether such a change of meanings
as suggested by Thieme took place in India but it did take place in
Europe. If Professor Halbfass had carried his etymological investigation
a little further, he would have found that the Greek word *xenos*, a
stranger, is akin to Latin *hostis*, a stranger, a guest, an enemy,
acquiring in Medieval Latin the sense of 'army' (from the plural
*hostes*, enemies) giving us the word 'hostile' in English; it is also
the parent of the word 'hostage', a person kept in pledge. Akin to this
was also the Latin *hostia*, an expiatory victim offered to a deity, a
sacrifice. The sense is still actively retained in the Church's most
important rite, the *eucharist*, in which they eat (*substantially*,
Christian theologians insist) the flesh of the sacrificed victim, Jesus
Christ, the Son of God. Perhaps the word retains the memory of the days
when they sacrificed their first-born to their God, perhaps later
replaced by a stranger, then by a living animal and then by a
consecrated bread or wafer, the host. The word reveals the steps in
European Xenology and its etymology helps in constructing European
history. Or, this would if India has its Occidentalists and they were as
bright as Europe's Orientalists.  

[5](#5a) But increasingly faced with a world of strong nation-states and
religious ecclesias organised on *ummah* principles, Hindus like other
Pagan peoples found themselves at a great disadvantage (for example,
while not successful in converting the Muslims, St. Xavier said: Give me
out and out pagans). Therefore they tried to develop a measure of
political nationalism and religious solidarity (*sañgaThana*) of their
own under the leadership of people like Swami Dayananda , Swami
Vivekananda, Lokamanya Tilak, Sri Aurobindo and Mahatama Gandhi, but
these sentiments still retain the full imprint of universality.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
