+++
title = "14 CHAPTER XII SEX SLAVERY"

+++
**CHAPTER XII**  
**SEX SLAVERY**

In the preceding pages it has been seen how women and children were
special targets for enslavement throughout the medieval period, that is,
during Muslim invasions and Muslim rule. Captive children of both sexes
grew up as Muslims and served the sultans, nobles and men of means in
various captives. Enslavement of young women was also due to many
reasons; their being sex objects was the primary consideration and hence
concentration on their captivity.

*Psychology regarding Sex*

Islam originated in the Arabian peninsula which is by and large stony
and sandy. There is no luxuriant herbage, there are no lofty trees or
winding rivers. Muhammad used to say that “three things gladden the eye
of the gazer: green fields, running water, and fair faces.”^([1](#1))
Since green fields and running water were denied to the medieval Arab,
he concentrated on deriving comfort and society mainly in fair faces.
This phenomenon became prominent in the course of Islamic history
throughout the world.

In the campaigns launched by Muslims, it was easy to capture women, more
so after their menfolk had been massacred. The Prophet's one great aim
was propagation of his religion and as Margoliouth observes, “Abu Bakr
(the chief campaigner for Muhammad’s creed) probably was aware that
women are more amenable to conversion than men… slaves than freemen,
persons in distress than persons in prosperity and
affluence.”^([2](#2)) Women slaves turned concubines could increase
Muslim population by leaps and bounds when captured in large
numbers.^([3](#3)) Hence there was particular keenness on enslaving
women from the very beginning of Islam.

This was also encouraged by the injunctions of the Quran. Muslims are
allowed four wives besides they are allowed to cohabit with any of their
female slaves.  Surah iv:3 says, “Then marry what seem to be good to you
of women”; Surah iv:29, “Take what your right hand possesses of young
women”, and Surah xxxiii:49, “Verily we make lawful for thee what thy
right hand possesses out of the booty God hath granted thee.” Muslims
are allowed to take possession of married women if they are slaves.
Surah iv:28 declares, “Unlawful for you are… married women, save such as
your right hand possesses”, that is, female slaves captured in
war. Manucci’s observation on the seventeenth century India is
significant in this regard. He says that “all Muhammadans are fond of
women, who are their principal relaxation and almost their only
pleasure”^([4](#4))

From the teachings of the Quran quoted above, it will be seen that while
Muhammad restricted the number of lawful wives, he did not restrict the
number of slave girls and concubines.^([5](#5)) All female slaves taken
as plunder in war are the lawful property of their master, and the
master has power to take to himself any female slave married or
single. T.P. Hughes adds that “there is absolutely no limit to the
number of slave girls with whom a Muhammadan may cohabit, and it is the
*consecration* of this illimitable indulgence which so popularizes the
Muhammadan religion amongst uncivilized nations, and so popularizes
slavery in the Muslim religion”.^([6](#6))

Then there was the life and thought of the Prophet himself. Muslims try
to imitate, as far as possible, the life-style of Muhammad. He is the
model, the paradigm of every pious Muslim.^([7](#7)) There is nothing
unusual in this phenomenon. The followers of Mahavira, Buddha, Christ or
Guru Govind Singh live, as far as in them lies, the life that their
Masters lived. Their teaching was mostly oral but their words were
lovingly collected by devoted men as guides to their own personal
conduct. So did the followers of Muhammad collect the *hadises* and
tried to imitate his way of life. Company of women had a very important
place in Muhammad’s life. William Muir writes that “Aisha used to say:
‘the Prophet loved three things-women, scents, and food; he had his
heart’s desire of the two first, but not of the last”.^([8](#8)) This is
put by Margoliouth as “the three things about which he cared were scent,
women, and prayer…”^([9](#9)) According to these aphorisms and sayings
attributed to the Prophet, the place of women was prominent in his mind,
a preoccupancy in his psyche.^([10](#10)) It is well-known that his
matrimonial affairs gave him the means of establishing a princely harem.

Besides the urge of following in his ways, Muhammad's idea of Paradise
inspired the Muslims even more in craving for the company of women. The
Paradise in the Quran provided “Rest and passive enjoyment; verdant
gardens watered by murmuring rivulets, wherein the believers… repose
(quaffing) aromatic wine such as the Arabs loved from goblets placed
before them or handed round in silver cups replendent as glass by
beautiful youths… ‘Verily! for the Pious is a blissful abode; Gardens
and Vineyards, and damsels with swelling bosoms, of an equal age, and a
full cup…’ These damsels of Paradise are introduced as *‘lovely
large-eyed girls resembling Pearls bidden in their shells, a reward for
that which the faithful have wrought… ‘Verily! we have created them (the
houries) of a rare creation; We have made them virgins, fascinating, of
an equal age’*.”^([11](#11))

Abode in such a Paradise of “carnal image”, says Gibbon, was the reward
of the faithful in the next world. In this world Muhammad encouraged the
Muslims to take slave women without restraint. From very “early period
Muhammad admitted slave girls to be lawful concubines, besides ordinary
wives. Bond-women with whom cohabitation is thus permitted are here
specified by the same phrase as was afterwards used for female slaves
taken captive in war, or obtained by purchase, viz. *‘that which your
right hand possesses.’* …(It was) an inducement to fight in the hope of
capturing women who would then be lawful
concubines.”^([12](#12)) Margoliouth working with the same scriptural
source materials, also avers that “It was then \[early years of
publicity of Islam\] too, that coveting the goods and wives (possessed
by Unbelievers) was avowed without discouragement from the
Prophet.”^([13](#13))

*Special interest in Sex*

In brief, the climatic conditions of Arabia the birth-place of Islam,
Muhammad’s life-style as a model for Muslims, and injunctions in the
Quran and the Hadis, determined Muslim psychology about women. Islam
permits polygamy with unbelievable liberality. A man can have four wives
at any point of time, that is, if he chooses to have a fifth one, he can
divorce one of the already at hand and keep the number within the legal
limits of four. Besides, he can have as many slave girls or concubines
as he pleases. It is related in the Hadis that Muhammad said that “when
the servant of God marries, he perfects half his religion… Consequently
in Islam, even the ascetic orders are rather married than
single.”^([14](#14)) In Islam there is provision for temporary marriage
(*muta*), multi-marriages, divorce, remarriage of widows, concubinage -
in short, there is freedom from all inhibitions and reservations in
matters of sex. The insistence is on everybody marrying and celibacy is
frowned upon. According to a tradition derived from Ibn Abbas and quoted
by Ibn S’ad, popularly known as Katib al-Waqidi the Prophet’s
biographer, Muhammad said that “in my *ummah*, he is the best who has
the largest number of wives.”^([15](#15))

It has been repeatedly said Musalmans are allowed by the Quran and the
Hadis to have four wives. The aphorisms and maxims current about this
phenomenon indicate that all wives could not have been procured in the
normal way; some would have been purchased, some others captured. One
aphorism says, “One quarrels with you, two are sure to involve you in
their quarrels; when you have three, factions are formed against her you
love best; but four find society and occupation among themselves,
leaving the husband in peace.”^([16](#16)) According to another, “Wives
there be four: there’s Bedfellow, Muckheap \[dirty\], Gadabout \[idle\]
and Queen O’ women. The more the pity that the last is one in a
hundred.”^([17](#17)) Yet another says, “A man should marry four wives:
A Persian to have some one to talk to; a Khurasani woman for his
housework; a Hindu for nursing his children; a woman from Mawaraun nahr,
or Transoxiana, to have some one to whip as a warning to the other
three.”^([18](#18)) The mention of so many nationalities in the sayings
show that obtaining wives and concubines through all kinds of means -
capture, purchase, enslavement - was in vogue among medieval Muslims.

In later times, this encouragement to polygamy was taken advantage of by
Muslim conquerors. That Muhammad restricted the number of lawful wives
but did not restrict the number of slave concubines, came handy to
Musalmans. He “thus left upon the minds of his followers the inevitable
impression that an unrestricted polygamy was the higher
state…”^([19](#19)) Hazrat Umar, the second Caliph, was the first to
allow instant divorce (by the pronouncement of *talaq, talaq, talaq*,
three times) called *talaq-i-bidat* (innovative form of divorce), “to
meet an extraordinary situation brought on by wars of conquests”. Those
wars brought in such an influx of women that constant divorce became
necessary to falicitate quick acquisition of fresh spouses by divorcing
the old ones. “Victory over an enemy would seem to have been consummated
only when the enemy’s daughter was introduced into the conqueror’s
harem”^([20](#20)) - a precept so enthusiastically practised by Muslim
conquerors and rulers in India.

It is therefore no wonder that from the day the Muslim invaders marched
into India to the time when their political power declined, women were
systematically captured and enslaved throughout the length and breadth
of the country. Two instances pertaining to two extreme points of time
would suffice as examples. When Muhammad bin Qasim mounted his attack on
Debal in 712, all males of the age of seventeen and upwards were put to
the sword and their women and children were enslaved.^([21](#21)) And
after the Third Battle of Panipat (1761), “the unhappy prisoners were
paraded in long lines, given a little parched grain and a drink of
water, and beheaded… and the women and children who survived were driven
off as slaves - twenty-two thousand, many of them of the highest rank in
the land, says the *Siyar-ut-Mutakhirin*.”^([22](#22))

These two instances have been chosen from two points of time on either
extremity of Muslim rule in India. And now onwards this pattern of
mentioning only two examples, one from the earlier period and the other
from the later, will be adhered to. There are reasons for adopting this
model. Persian chroniclers were not scientific historians. They often
give isolated and disjointed bits of information. This characteristic is
also found in their references to issues pertaining to our area of
study. For example, while most of the chroniclers give detailed
information about the enslavement of women in times of war, only a few
like Abul Fazl and emperor Jahangir write about how they were captured,
lifted or seduced by nobles and officers in times of peace. Of the women
captured in war, some were appropriated by the king, many were presented
by the king to the nobles, and many others were sold. But all writers do
not give satisfactory information on all these points for the whole of
the medieval period. Ibn Battuta gives details of “presentation”
ceremonies of slave captives in the time of Muhammad bin Tughlaq, and
Bernier and Manucci in the time of Jahangir and Shahjahan. Detailed
account of the Slave Markets and prices of slave girls are mainly given
by the fourteenth century chronicler Ziyauddin Barani, although some
others also refer to them but only casually. Many writers, especially
European travellers, describe the treatment meted out to slave girls and
girls turned concubines, but the accounts of Pelsaert and Manucci are
the most detailed. Many women from Hindu rulers’ families were forcibly
married by Muslim kings throughout the medieval period and yet only
Shams Siraj Afif narrates in detail of the marriage of Firoz Shah’s
mother to Malik Rajjab, a cousin of the king, and emperor Jahangir tells
how he demanded daughters of Hindu kings.

In this background, it would be an unremitting task both in volume and
repetition to give all anecdotes, facts and figures of enslavement and
concubinage of captive women in the central and provincial kingdoms and
independent Muslim states found mentioned in the chronicles. This would
only lead to repetition resulting in the book becoming bulky. Therefore,
two examples - one from the Sultanate period and the other from the
Moghul times - would be enough as samples of the system that prevailed
throughout. These will suffice to being out the panorama of Muslim
indulgence in sex slavery in the medieval period.

The special interest of Muslims in sex slavery was universal and
widespread and a plethora of evidence is available in contemporary
Persian chronicles. In fact, Muslim historians derive extra delight in
narrating anecdotes and stating facts about Muslim indulgence in sex and
allied activities. Two incidents from the lives of the first two
Sultans, Qutbuddin Aibak and Shamsuddin Iltutmish, may be mentioned here
as examples.

On the arrival of Qutbuddin Aibak at Karman (situated between Kabul and
Bannu), Tajuddin Yaldoz received him with great kindness and honour and
gave him his daughter in marriage. A fete was held on the occasion and
poetical descriptions in Hasan Nizami’s *Taj-ul-Maasir* follow – “of
stars, female beauty, cup-bearers, curls, cheeks, eyes, lips, mouths,
stature, elegance, cups, wine, singers, guitars, barbets, trumpets,
flutes, drums, of the morning, and the sun.”^([23](#23)) And again, when
Aibak, some years later tried to remove Yaldoz form his kingdom, he
marched to Ghazni and occupied the throne. But only for forty days, for
during this period he was “wholly engaged in revelry”, wine and riot,
and the affairs of the country through this constant festivity were
neglected, and the “Turks of Ghaznin and Muizzi Maliks” invited Yaldoz
back to his capital. Aibak was incapable of opposing him and retired to
Delhi.^([24](#24))

The following anecdote is related of Sultan Shamsuddin Iltutmish. He was
greatly enamoured of a Turkish slave girl in his harem, whom he had
purchased, and sought her caresses, but was always unable to achieve his
object. One day he was seated, having his head anointed with some
perfumed oil by the hands of the same slave girl, when he felt some
tears fall on his head. On looking up, he found that she was weeping. He
inquired of her the cause. She replied, “Once I had a brother who had
such a bald place on his head as you have, and it reminds me of him.” On
making further inquiries it was found that the slave girl was his own
sister. They had both been sold as slaves, in their early childhood, by
their half-brothers; and thus had Almighty God saved him from committing
a great sin. Badaoni states in his work, “I heard this story myself,
from the emperor Akbar’s own lips, and the monarch stated that this
anecdote had been orally traced to Sultan Ghiyasuddin Balban
himself.”^([25](#25))

*Forcible Marriages*

Forcible marriages, euphemistically called matrimonial alliances, were
common throughout the medieval period. Only some of them find mention in
Muslim chronicles with their bitter details. Here is one example given
by Shams Siraj Afif (fourteenth century). The translation from the
original in Persian may be summarised as follows. Firoz Shah was born in
the year 709 H. (1309 C.E.). His father was named Sipahsalar Rajjab, who
was a brother of Sultan Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq Ghazi. The three brothers,
Tughlaq, Rajjab, and Abu Bakr, came from Khurasan to Delhi in the reign
of Alauddin (Khalji), and that monarch took all the three in the service
of the Court. The Sultan conferred upon Tughlaq the country of Dipalpur.
Tughlaq was desirous that his brother Sipahsalar Rajjab should obtain in
marriage the daughter of one of the Rais of Dipalpur. He was informed
that the daughters of Ranamall Bhatti were very beautiful and
accomplished. Tughlaq sent to Ranamall a proposal of marriage. Ranamall
refused. Upon this Tughlaq proceeded to the villages (*talwandi*)
belonging to Ranamall and demanded payment of the whole year’s revenue
in a lump sum. The Muqaddams and Chaudharis were subjected to coercion.
Ranamall’s people were helpless and could do nothing, for *those were
the days of Alauddin, and no one dared to make an outcry* (italics
ours). One damsel was brought to Dipalpur. Before her marriage she was
called Bibi Naila. On entering the house of Sipahsalar Rajjab she was
styled Sultan Bibi Kadbanu. After the lapse of a few years she gave
birth to Firoz shah.^([26](#26)) If this could be accomplished by force
by a regional officer, there was nothing to stop the king. In the
seventeenth century, Jahangir writes in his Memoirs that after the third
year of his accession, “I demanded in marriage the daughter of Jagat
Singh, eldest son of Raja Man Singh (of Amer).”^([27](#27)) Raja Ram
Chandra Bundela was defeated, imprisoned, and subsequently released by
Jahangir.^([28](#28)) Later on, says Jahangir, “I took the daughter of
Ram Chandra Bandilah into my service (i.e. married her).”^([29](#29))

The reason for including such cases of ‘royal marriages’ in the study of
sex slavery is obvious. The language of the above citations shows that
such wives, or such secondary wives, are always mentioned as having been
taken into service or included among female servants, or as obtaining
glory by entering the king’s harem. This style of language is not used
in describing the marriages of Nur Jahan or Mumtaz Mahall. Such wives
were no more than concubines. Concubinage was very common among Muslim
royalty and nobility. Among the Muslim rulers children born of
concubines were considered equal to children by marriage, although this
is not explicitly laid down in the Quran. The custom must have asserted
itself in the first century of Islam.^([30](#30)) The children of such a
union belonged to the master and were therefore free but the status of
the concubine was thereby raised only to that of ‘mother of
children’.^([31](#31)) As an example, the case of Sultan Sikandar Lodi
(1489-1517) may be cited. His mother Zeba was originally a Hindu by the
name of Hema or Amba. Bahlul Lodi was attracted by her beauty while he
was governor of Sarhind. He married her after ascending the throne of
Delhi. He had nine sons. Zeba’s son was not the eldest nor was she
originally more than a Hindu concubine.^([32](#32)) Although sons of
concubines are very freely mentioned without any
inhibitions,^([33](#33)) Hindu concubines themselves had little
influence on the Muslim psyche. This is evident from the fact that while
the mothers of Firoz Tughlaq and Sikandar Lodi were both originally
Hindu, their sons became Muslim bigots.

There were some marriages which were not forced, but the wedded women
were not accorded due regard even by their own people. In the homes of
Muslim ruling classes such women were treated no better than slave girls
or concubines. The cases of Rani Ladi and Deval Rani are appropriate
examples. Muhammad bin Qasim had captured Rani Ladi, consort of Raja
Dahir, during his invasion of Sind. Later on he married her. Thinking
that she could wield some influence with her people, he sent her to
persuade the people of Alor fort to cooperate with the powerful
invader. But “the men standing on the top of the ramparts jeered at her
saying: ‘You have mixed with the *chandals* and defiled yourself. You
prefer their rule to ours.’ They then began to abuse her.”^([34](#34))
Deval Devi was the daughter of Raja Karan Baghela of Gujarat and his
queen Kamala Devi. Kamala Devi was captured in the sack of Gujarat
(1299), and married by Alauddin Khalji. According to the Islamic law,
kafir women could be married to Muslims even while their husbands were
alive,^([35](#35)) for marriage is annulled by
captivity.^([36](#36)) Later on her daughter Deval Devi was also
captured in another campaign (1308) and brought to
Delhi.^([37](#37)) There she was married to Alauddin’s son Khizr Khan
who had fallen in love with her.^([38](#38)) After the assassination of
Khizr Khan in the politics of succession, she was married by Qutbuddin
Mubarak Khalji (1316-20) against her Will.^([39](#39)) With the murder
of Qutbuddin at the hands of Khusrau Khan she was taken into the
latter’s harem. In short, this princess was treated as nothing more than
a chattel or transferable property in the Khalji ruling
house.^([40](#40)) Although such ‘wives’ were treated more or less as
slave girls or concubines, they sometimes brought with them scores of
*bandis* for service in the harem. The best example for the Sultanate
period is to be found in Malik Muhammad Jaisi’s *Padmavat*. The story of
Padmini may be allegorical, but the important fact is that Padmini and
her companions and *bandis* are said to have been carried in 1,600
litters (actually Rajput warriors who rescued Ratan Singh) to the palace
of Alauddin Khalji.^([41](#41)) For the Mughals, it has already been
said that Akbar had 5,000 women in his harem who in turn had their own
entourage of *bandis*. To the conquering and ruling Mughals there was no
dearth of such women.

*Distribution of Slave Girls*

Marriages brought servants and *bandis*, but the largest number of slave
girls was collected during raids, campaigns and wars throughout the
medieval period. We have briefly seen the achievements of Muslims in
this regard from the time of Muhammad bin Qasim onwards. It was a
consistent policy to kill all males, especially those capable of bearing
arms, and enslave their hapless women.^([42](#42)) Al Biladuri writes
that “the governors (who succeeded Qasim) continued to kill the enemy,
taking whatever they could acquire…”^([43](#43)) Most of the captives
were distributed among nobles and soldiers. Two examples of this custom
may be given, one from the Sultanate and the other form the Mughal
period.

Muhammad bin Tughlaq became notorious for enslaving women and his
reputation in this regard spread far and wide. Ibn Battuta who visited
India during his reign and stayed at the Court for a long time
writes: “At (one) time there arrived in Delhi some female infidel
captives, ten of whom the Vazir sent to me. I gave one of them to the
man who had brought them to me… My companion took three girls, and - I
do not know what happened to the rest.”^([44](#44)) On the large scale
distribution of girl slaves on the occasion of Muslim festivals like Id,
he writes: “First of all, daughters of Kafir (Hindu) Rajas captured
during the course of the year, come and sing and dance. Thereafter they
are bestowed upon Amirs and important foreigners. After this daughters
of other Kafirs dance and sing… The Sultan gives them to his brothers,
relatives, sons of Maliks etc. On the second day the *durbar* is held in
a similar fashion after Asr. Female singers are brought out… the Sultan
distributes them among the Mameluke Amirs…”^([45](#45)) Thousands of
non-Muslim women were distributed in the above manner in later
years.^([46](#46))

Shahjahan attacked the Portuguese in Hugli in 1632, and captured many
women. One such was Maria de Taides “one of the sisters living in the
palace of king Sahajahan.”^([47](#47)) Maria de Taides was later married
to Ali Mardan Khan.^([48](#48)) One Thomazia Martins also had been taken
captive during the fall of Hugli. Many more like these were distributed
among the nobles.

*Jauhar during attack*

How did the Indian women react to such a desperate situation?  When
Sindh lay prostrate before the armies of Muhammad bin Qasim, “Raja
Dahir’s sister Bai collected all the women in the fort (of Rawar) and
addressed them thus: ‘It is certain that we cannot escape the clutches
of these Chandals and cow-eaters… As there is no hope of safety and
liberty, let us collect fire-wood and cotton and oil (and) burn
ourselves to ashes, and thus quickly meet our husbands (in the next
world). Whoever is inclined to go and ask mercy of the enemy, let her
go… But all of them were of one mind, and so they entered a house and
set fire to it, and were soon burnt to ashes.”^([49](#49)) Thereafter,
throughout the medieval period, as soon as it was certain that there had
been a defeat and the men had been killed, women perished in the fire of
Jauhar (*jiva har*, taking of life). In some cases it was practised by
Muslim women also,^([50](#50)) because of the influence of Hindu
practice. The Jauhar at Chittor during Akbar’s invasion may be mentioned
as an instance in the Mughal period. On the night of 23 February 1568,
Rajput commander Jaimal’s death had so discouraged the people of Chittor
that they resolved to perform the rite of Jauhar. Flames broke out at
various places in the fortress and the ladies were consumed in them. The
Jauhar took place in the house of Patta who belonged to the Sisodia
clan, in the house of Rathors of whom Sahib Khan was the chief, and the
Chauhans whose chief was Aissar Das. “As many as three hundred women
were burnt in the destructive fire.”^([51](#51))

But all were not that brave or lucky to escape capture in this manner.
During Jujhar Singh Bundela’s resistance in Orcha in the time of
Shahjahan, many women were captured and treated most cruelly. Jujhar
Singh abandoned his fort of Chauragarh and hastened towards the Deccan.
He put to death several of his women whose horses had foundered. The
remaining ones made for Golkunda (December, 1634) but were taken by
surprise. They had not the time to perform the full rites of Jauhar, but
stabbed a number of women. The Mughals picked up the wounded women and
made away with them.^([52](#52)) It was in this fashion that women used
to be captured and distributed for service in the harems of the Muslim
elite.

*Behaviour of Stave Girls*

Slave girls may be divided under three categories on the basis of their
character and conduct. One set comprised of the ambitious, cunning and
crafty who tried to wield influence in the harem. Just the opposite were
the simple, docile and submissive. In between were those who were keen
to exercise ascendancy but through beauty and tact; they were otherwise
loyal and lovable.

During the very beginning of Muslim rule in India the domineering and
intriguing figure of Shah Turkan attracts our attention. According to
Minhaj Siraj, the author of the contemporary chronicle
*Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, “Shah Turkan was a Turkish hand-maid, and the head
\[woman\] of all the Sultan's (Iltutmish’s) *haram*.”^([53](#53)) She
manipulated to prefix the title of Khudawand-i-Jahan to her name and
rise to the position of “the greatest \[of the ladies\] of the sublime
*haram*, and her place of residence was the royal
palace”.^([54](#54)) She used to confer lavish presents upon the nobles
of the court in order to win support for her son for the throne. She
caused royal orders and decrees to be issued in her name and tortured
many favourite ladies of Iltutmish after his death.^([55](#55)) For the
later Mughal period, there is the classic example of Lal Kunwar and her
lay-in-waiting Zohra, both concubines of the Mughal emperor Jahandar
Shah (1712). Lal Kunwar was a vulgar, thoughtless, dancing girl from the
streets.^([56](#56)) She received a large allowance and imitated the
style of Nur Jahan, the famous queen of Jahangir.^([57](#57)) “All the
brothers and relatives… of Lal Kunwar received *mansabs* of four or five
thousand… and were raised to dignity in their tribe.”^([58](#58))
Naturally, talented and learned men were driven away from the court.
Zohra was a melon seller and a friend of Lal Kunwar. At the latter’s
instance she was called into the harem by Jahandar Shah. She was highly
ambitious and scheming like Lal Kunwar. She was, however, shown her
place by the servants of Chin Qulich Khan, a retired general of
Aurangzeb. The incident is interesting to narrate. Once Zohra was going
on an elephant with her retinue, an insolent lot. Chin Qulich also
happened to go that way and was met by her equippage. His men stepped
aside, but Zohra called out: “Thou, Chin Kalich Khan, must surely be the
son of some blind father, not to move out of the road.” These words
unhinged the general’s temper, who made a sign to his people to chastise
that vulgar woman’s servants. After dealing with her servants and
eunuchs, “they dragged Zohra herself from the elephant to the ground,
and gave her several cuffs and kicks.”^([59](#59)) Arrogant and crafty
women like Shah Turkan, Lal Kunwar and Zohra were rather common in the
Muslim harems. Nor uncommon were women who were not that uncultured
although they were equally unscrupulous. Aurangzeb could imprison his
brother Prince Murad through the active cooperation of one of his
concubines,^([60](#60)) and Udaipuri-Mahall, a Georgian slave girl and
concubine of prince Dara Shukoh, willingly went over to Aurangzeb on the
latter’s ascension to power.^([61](#61))

On the other extreme were women of unquestioned fidelity. Akbar was told
that because of the practise of monogamy among Christians, fidelity of
their women was taken for granted. “The extraordinary thing is,” he said
to the Christian Fathers in retort, “that it occurs among those of the
Brahman (i.e. the Hindu) religion. There are numerous concubines, and
many of them are neglected and unappreciated and spend their days
unfructuously in the private chamber of chastity, yet in spite of such
bitterness of life they are flaming torches of love and fellowship.” On
hearing about such noble souls the seekers after wisdom were filled with
surprise in the august assemblage.^([62](#62)) Devotion of such women
was well known. Jahangir narrates the story of Lal Kalawant - the singer
also know as Miyan Lal^([63](#63)) – “who from his childhood had grown
up in my father’s service… (He) died in the 65th or 70th year of his
age. One of his girls (concubines) ate opium on this event and killed
herself. Few women among the Musalmans have shown such
fidelity.”^([64](#64)) Rupmati of Sarangpur, because of her love for her
paramour Baz Bahadur “bravely quaffed the cup of deadly poison and
carried her honour to the hidden chambers of annihilation,”^([65](#65))
rather than be captured by Adham Khan. Before her, Deval Rani, though
not so lucky, was an equally determined character. Loyalty of Hindu
concubines was proverbial, but Muslim ones were not devoid of it.
Akbarabadi-Mahall and Fatehpuri-Mahall, shared Shahjahan’s captivity in
the Agra Fort and they were present by his beside when he breathed his
last in January, 1666. Rana-i-Dil was originally a dancing girl before
she became a favourite concubine of Prince Dara Shukoh. After his
execution, Aurangzeb desired to possess her, but she
refused.^([66](#66))

Extreme cases of shrewish and termagant women on the one hand and those
known for sacrifice and devotion on the other were few. Muslim harems
mainly contained attractive women with normal behaviour. In medieval
times mutilation and castration were common punishments meted out to men
in war and peace and their beautiful women were taken into the harems of
the elites. Besides, “silver bodied damsels with musky tresses” were
purchased in the slave markets of India and abroad. The harems were thus
filled with an assortment of beauties from various countries and
nationalities, although Indian women predominated. They were renowned
for their beauty, delicacy and femininity. From the time of Amir
Khusrau, many a poet in medieval India has extolled their beauty and
charm. So also have the Europeans.  Orme, along with many others,
affirms that “nature seems to have showered beauty on the fairer sex
throughout Hindustan with a more lavish hand than in most other
countries.”^([67](#67)) Their faithfulness and devotion matched their
charm. In the harem these amenable creatures were an asset and were
welcome in ever larger numbers.

*Concubinage*

Slave girls had two main functions to perform, domestic service and
providing sex if and when required. In medieval Muslim society sex
slavery and concubinage were almost interchangeable terms. For the
polygamous Muslim men of means slave girls and maids were as much in
demand as *kanchanis* or dancing girls, concubines or even free born
women. Whether they were purchased in the open market,^([68](#68)) or
captured during war, or selected during excursions, or came as maids of
brides, in short whatever their channel of entry into the harem, the
slave girls kept in the palace of the king or *mahals* of the nobles
were invariably good looking. Their faces determined their place in the
harem and in the heart of the master. Their being a little sexy was an
additional attractions,^([69](#69)) but those with bad breath and odour
in the armpits were avoided as unpleasant smell was repugnant to kissing
and caressing.^([70](#70)) They used to be elegantly attired. Their
garments were sometimes gifted to them by their masters or mistresses.
It was a custom that the princesses did not wear again the dresses they
put on once, and gave them away to their *bandis*.^([71](#71)) Some
favourite slave girls were taught to sing and play on musical
instruments. Many of them were trained to recite verses, *naghmas* and
*ghazals*. The habit of speaking elegantly in correct diction and
immaculate pronunciation was so familiar to the females of Muslim
society that maids too were readily distinguished by their refined
language. Placed as they were, they knew how to win the hearts of their
masters who gave them lovely and caressing names like Gulab, Champa,
Chameli, Nargis, Kesar, Kasturi, Gul-i-Badam, Sosan, Yasmin, Gul-i-Rana,
Gul Andam, Gul Anar, Saloni, Madhumati, Sugandhara, Koil, Gulrang,
Mehndi, Dil Afroz, Moti, Ketki, Mrig Nain, Kamal Nain, Basanti etc.,
etc. Elaborating on their ethnic status Manucci adds that “All the above
names are Hindu, and ordinarily these …are Hindus by race, who had been
carried off in infancy from various villages or the houses of different
rebel Hindu princes. In spite of their Hindu names, they are however,
Mahomedans.”^([72](#72)) As a rule, “being kafir is a defect in both
*ghulam* and *bandi* as by nature the Musalman detests to associate with
or keep company of a kafir.”^([73](#73)) Obviously, the number of such
converted slave girls was so large that even Hindu names of all of them
could not be changed to Islamic ones. For instance, while under
Aurangzeb women and children of the Rajputs and Marathas^([74](#74))
were regularly enslaved during raids and invasions, even nobles of
lesser note indulged in reckless enslavement throughout. Sidi Yaqut of
Janjira or Zanjira (Zanj is used for black African), once took a Maratha
fort and seven hundred persons came out. Notwithstanding his word to
grant quarter to the garrison “he made the children and pretty women
slaves, and forcibly converted them to Islam… but the men he put to
death.”^([75](#75))

Francisco Pelsaert gives a succinct description of the sex-play of a
nobleman in his harem. and the role of slave girls therein. He writes
that “each night the Amir visits a particular wife, or *mahal*, and
receives a very warm welcome from her and from the slaves (i.e. slave
girls), who (are) dressed specially for the occasion… If it is the hot
weather, they… rub his body with pounded sandalwood and rosewater. Fans
are kept going steadily. Some of the slaves chafe the master’s hand and
feet, some sit and sing, or play music and dance, or provide other
recreation, the wife sitting near him all the time. Then if one of the
pretty slave girls takes his fancy, he calls her to him and enjoys her,
his wife not daring to show any signs of displeasure, but dissembling,
though she will take it out on the slave girls later
on.”^([76](#76)) But the wife could not get rid of her by dismissing or
selling her. As per the Islamic law the mistress could quarrel with the
husband, could even reproach him, but she could not free a slave girl or
get rid of her.^([77](#77)) Manumitting a *ghulam* or *bandi* was the
privilege of the master only.

But except in exceptional cases, where the maid’s beauty and
blandishments so excited the jealousy of the mistress that she treated
her severely, a slave girl’s life was not of unmitigated suffering. In
this scenario, the *bandis* were both maids and companions of their
mistresses. The mistress in distress poured out her heart to her slave
girl and the maid sought the advice of the former regarding her
problems. Young and beautiful girls, whether ladies or maids, did wish
to be married. And marriage was not shut out for either. A slave girl
could be married with the permission of the master. If the master liked
a maid, he just took her as his own wife.^([78](#78)) Slave girls could
be easily swapped by admiring masters. Prince Aurangzeb readily gave his
concubine Chhatar Bai in exchange for Hira Bai with whom he had fallen
passionately in love.^([79](#79)) Begums like Mumtaz Mahall and Nur
Jahan married off a large number of slave girls to deserving
men.^([80](#80)) But all were not so lucky and many of the slave girls
had to wait in vain for matrimony. Manucci writes that some of them
suffered from insomnia, hallucinations and hysteria, and marriage
brought them back to “perfect health.”^([81](#81)) Manucci helped many
maids to marry.

But all slave girls were not married. They were not captured, purchased
or enticed to be married. They were there in the Muslim harems to do
service and be enjoyed by the masters. They could be sold, distributed
or exchanged. Therefore most of them were unhappy. And they were never a
scarce commodity; fresh arrivals or rivals were always replacing old
ones. Hence the desire for self-preservation dominated their psyche. A
change on the throne meant passing over to a new master, and if and when
a ruler or noble lost power, slave girls sought shelter in fending for
themselves. An example of this scenario given by us elsewhere pertains
to the slave girls in the harem of Saiyyad Abdulla Khan of Saiyyad
Brothers fame.^([82](#82)) On the fall of Abdulla Khan from power, “when
in 1720, the intelligence of his captivity reached Delhi, his women, of
whom he had gathered a large number around him, were in dismay: some of
noble birth, remained in their places, but a good many made the best of
time, and before the arrival of the royal guard (who would have taken
them away also in escheat), they seized whatever they could, and
disguising themselves with old veils and sheet, they took their
departure.”^([83](#83)) This is the version of Khafi Khan. Mir Ghulam
Husain Khan, the author of *Siyar-ul-Mutakherin*, also throws light on
some other facets of the situation and therefore he needs to be quoted
at some length. “The ladies of Abdullah-Khan’s family,” writes he, “far
from quitting the house, remained within their own apartments, and
covering themselves from head to foot with the veil of decency and
modesty, sat weeping in a circle, without anyone offering to move or to
escape the dismal scene around them… But some of the inferior females
availed themselves of the confusion to carry off whatever came to hand,
and stole away in disguise, wearing dirty clothes and common veils.
These had disappeared before the government officers thought of taking
possession of the palace of the Saiyyads. Some of these women were taken
up by the police officers, but others effected their escape… One
Abdullah-Khan, of Cashan in Persia, to whom Abdullah-Khan, his old
friend and master, had intrusted the care of his seraglio, no sooner
heard of the disaster that had befallen his benefactor, entering the
sanctuary of the women, seized and carried away whatever persons and
effects he chose…”^([84](#84)).

The above narrative correctly depicts the role of men and women slaves
in a Muslim harem. Everything went off well in days of prosperity. When
misfortune struck, the noble ladies suffered in silence, the
ever-exploited slave girls fled without remorse, and the ‘confidant’ men
slaves did not miss the opportunity to carry away women and indulge in
unbridled sex slavery.”^([85](#85))

*Hijras*

Early in the eighteenth century Muslim rule in India set on its path of
decline. The harems of royalty and nobility began to suffer from a
financial crunch. Many slave girls in these establishments, unable to
bear the rigours of penury, left their palaces and mansions and took up
quarters in the cities to fend for themselves. Thousands of eunuch
guards of the harems also took to the streets when their services were
dispensed with or starvation knocked at their doors.^([86](#86))

In their effort to provide means of livelihood for themselves many slave
girls adopted the profession of dancing girls and prostitutes and
hundreds of eunuchs, thrown out of employment, turned *bhands* and
*hijras*. Prostitution is practised the world over, *hijras* are a
people peculiar to India. Basically, and historically, they have come
down or ‘descended’ from the medieval eunuchs.

A typical and complete *hijra* was Sultan Qutbuddin Mubarak Khalji
(1316-1320). He occasionally dressed himself in female attire,
embroidered with laces and adorned with gems, and went about dancing in
the houses of the nobles like a typical *hijra*. Similarly, Hasan Kangu,
the ruler of Malabar, often used to come to court (*darbar-i-am*)
dressed in the fashion of females. He bedecked his arms and neck with
jewellery and ornaments and used to ask his nobles to treat him to
sexual passivity.^([87](#87)) In short, the courts of Qutbuddin and
Hasan Kangu presented licence and obscenity of the *hijras* in utter
nakedness.

In the polygamous Muslim society some men possessed a plurality of women
leaving many other men to remain unmarried. This led the latter to
entice, abduct and enslave girls wherever possible as well as to make
love to beardless boys (*amrads*) and *hijras*. Thus need combined with
perversion contributed to the proliferation of *hijras*. This is amply
reflected in a brief survey of life in Delhi in *Muraqqa-i-Dihli* (Album
of Delhi) written by Dargah Quli Khan who visited the metropolis in
1738-39 and often walked through its streets. Like in the fourteenth, in
the eighteenth century also one found in the city of Delhi boys dancing
in a world of lecherous sinners soliciting their hearts’ desire.
*Amrads* were as much in demand as courtesans.^([88](#88)) During and
after the decline of the Mughal empire, *hijras* did not remain confined
to cities like Delhi or Agra. They spread far and wide but especially
where the scions or governors of the Mughals established independent
states like in Avadh or Hyderabad. A good number of *hijras* are found
in Lucknow and in Hyderabad, as well as in cities like Bombay where
‘composite culture’ and a respectable presence of Muslims obtains.

These unfortunate *hijras*, who have continued as a legacy of the Muslim
slave system, still play a pernicious and parasitical role in Indian
society. Their aggressive demand for benefaction makes them detested.
There are many negative aspects of Muslim slave system of which probably
the *hijra* is the worst. But in medieval times *hijras* were as
essential a part of Muslim society as any other section. In Delhi and
its environs there are extant a number of mausoleums, called Gumbads, of
the Saiyyad and Lodi period. It is an interesting fact that with Bare
Khan Ka Gumbad (Dome and Tomb), Chhote Khan Ka Gumbad, Dadi ka Gumbad,
and Poti Ka Gumbad, there is also the famous Hijre Ka
Gumbad.^([89](#89))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Margoliouth, *Muhammad*, 149.

[²](#2a) Margoliouth, 97. For role of women in spreading Islam see also
Arnold, *Preaching of Islam*, 234.

[³](#3a) Arnold, 365.

[⁴](#4a) Manucci, II, 240; also 336-338, 391-93. 467; Lal, *The Mughal
Harem*, 164 and n. 49, 50, 51.

[⁵](#5a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, 464.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., 600.

[⁷](#7a) A devout Muslim Uwayah Qami lived in the valley of Urfa. He
told Umar and All that “when I learnt that a tooth of the Prophet had
been martyred (in the Battle of Uhud) I broke one of mine. Then I
thought that perhaps some other tooth of his had been martyred. So, I
broke all my teeth… It is only after that that I felt at peace” (Shykh
Fariduddin Attar, *Tazkirat-ul-Auliya*, trs. into Urdu by Maulana Zubair
Afzal Usmani, Delhi, n.d., 16, and quoted by Sita Ram Goel, *Islam
vis-a-vis Hindu Temples*, New Delhi, 1993, 59-60).

[⁸](#8a) William Muir, *Life of Mahomet*, 528.

[⁹](#9a) Margoliouth, 148.  Also Gibbon, II, 694.

[¹⁰](#10a) Margoliouth, 351-52; also 449-50 writing on the authority of
*Musnud*, iv, 422.

[¹¹](#11a) Quran, Lii.21ff., Lvi.11ff., Lxxviii.31ff. Cited in Muir,
74-75. Hughes,  449.

[¹²](#12a) Muir, 73-74n.; Hughes, 59. Also Gibbon, II, 678.

[¹³](#13a) Margoliouth, 149.

[¹⁴](#14a) Hughes, 313-14.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam through Hadis*, 57 and n.

[¹⁶](#16a) Burton, *Sindh Revisited*, I, 340.

[¹⁷](#17a) Bary, 81.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ain., I, 327. All these three references have been given in
Herklot, *Islam in India*, 85-86.

[¹⁹](#19a) Hughes, 464.

[²⁰](#20a) Margoliouth, 177.

[²¹](#21a) W. Haig in C.H.I., III, 3; *Chachnama* Kalichbeg, 82-84.

[²²](#22a) H. G. Rawlinson in C.H.I., IV, 424 and n.

[²³](#23a) E.D., II. 221.

[²⁴](#24a) Minhaj, 506, 526n.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibid., Reverty in 601n.

[²⁶](#26a) Afif, 36-40. Trs in E.D., III, 271-73.

[²⁷](#27a) *Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri*, I, 144.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., 82-83, 87.

[²⁹](#29a) Ibid., 160.

[³⁰](#30a) Hamilton, *Hedaya*, I, Discourse, XVIII; Schacht, *Cambridge
History of Islam*, II, 144.

[³¹](#31a) Hitti, *The Arabs*, 76.

[³²](#32a) Ahmad Yadgar, *Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana*, Persian Text, 17,
31-34; Farishtah I, 179; *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, I, 298. For many other
references see Lal, *Twilight*, 162-63.

[³³](#33a) Niamatullah, *Makhzan-i-Afghani*, 51 (6); Tuzuk, I. 20.

[³⁴](#34a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 176-77.

[³⁵](#35a) Muir, *Life of Mahomet*, 365.

[³⁶](#36a) Hughes, *Dictionary of Islam*, 59; Margoliouth, Mohammed,
407, 461.

[³⁷](#37a) For details see Lai, *Khaljis*, 234-36.

[³⁸](#38a) Ibid., 264-65.

[³⁹](#39a) Hajiuddabir, *Zafarul Valih*, 841-44; Farishtah, I, 125.

[⁴⁰](#40a) Barani, 410-11; Lal, *Khaljis*, 298-99.

[⁴¹](#41a) Lal, *Khaljis*, 102-110, esp. 103.

[⁴²](#42a) *Chachnama*, Kalichheg, 83, 155, 161, 173-74; E.D., I, 164,
170-71, 203; Al Biladuri, E.D., I, 123.  For massacres of Alauddin
Khalji, *Khazain-ul-Fatuh*, Habib trs, 49.

[⁴³](#43a) Al Biladuri, op.cit. 127.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Ibn Battuta, 123.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Ibn Battuta, 63; Hindi tras., in Rizvi, *Tughlaq Kalin
Bharat* part I, Aligarh 1956, 189.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Afif, 119-20, 180, 265.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Manucci, I, 202; II, 35; III, 179.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Saksena, B.P., *History of Shahjahan*, 89, 112-13, for die
Portuguese captives of Hughli and female prisoners of the Bundela ruling
family of Orcha.

[⁴⁹](#49a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 153-55; E.D., I, 181.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Yazdi, *Zafar Nama*, II, 130-32.  Lal, *Twilight*, 32.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Akbar Nama*, II, 472.

[⁵²](#52a) C.H.I., IV, 195.

[⁵³](#53a) Minhaj, 630;631 and n.4. *Futuh-us-Salatin*, a historical
work by Isami, composed in the 14th century, mentions casually that she
was a Hindu slave girl. Mahdi Husain’s acceptance of Isami’s version
lacks critical analysis. *Futuh*, trs. II, 247 and n.2. Also 249.

[⁵⁴](#54a) Minhaj, 638.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Nigam, *Nobility under the Sultanate of Delhi*, 28.

[⁵⁶](#56a) C.H.I., IV, 328.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Sarkar in Ibid., 226.

[⁵⁸](#58a) Khafi Khan, 432-33.

[⁵⁹](#59a) *Siyar-ul-Mutakhrin*, 33.

[⁶⁰](#60a) C.H.I., IV. 215.

[⁶¹](#61a) Andre Butenschon, *The Life of the Mughal Princess*, 39,
194-95.

[⁶²](#62a) A.N., III, 372.

[⁶³](#63a) *Ain*, I, 681 and n.

[⁶⁴](#64a) *Tuzuk*, I, 150.

[⁶⁵](#65a) A.N., II, 213-14.

[⁶⁶](#66a) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 30.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Orme’s *Fragments*, 438.

[⁶⁸](#68a) Barani, 314-15; Bernier, 426.

[⁶⁹](#69a) *Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 138.

[⁷⁰](#70a) Ibid., 137.

[⁷¹](#71a) *Bernier*, 258; Manucci, II, 341.

[⁷²](#72a) Manucci, II, 336-38.

[⁷³](#73a) *Ashraf-ul-Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, 138-39. P. Venkateshwar
Rao Jr., in his review of Akbar Ahmed’s, BBC BKs/Penguin, *From
Samarkand to Stornoway living Islam*, in the *Indian Express Sunday
Magazine*, June 27, 1993, observes: “He (Ahmed) hates Muslim wives whose
children have Hindu names.” But that is the legal position. A Musalman
is expected to detest the company of a kafir, in spite of the efforts
made for acquiring non-Muslim wives in medieval and modem times. But
Ahmed’s aim is, as he himself claims, to show “where Muslims are able to
live by the ideal and where they are not”.

[⁷⁴](#74a) Khafi Khan, II, 300, 371.

[⁷⁵](#75a) ibid., II, 228, 261 ff, 498 ff.

[⁷⁶](#76a) Pelsaert, 64-65.

[⁷⁷](#77a) *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Delhi, III, *Kitab-ul-’Ataq*, 1-89;
Deoband, XII, 23-98; esp. 15.

[⁷⁸](#78a) Gulbadan Begum, *Humayun Nama*, Persian Text, 27, English
trs., 112.

[⁷⁹](#79a) Hamiduddin Khan, Bahadur, *Ahkam-i-Alamgiri*, 36-38; Lal,
*Mughal Harem*, 158-60.

[⁸⁰](#80a) Muhammad Hadi, *Tatimma-i-Waqiat-i-Jahangiri* (or Epilogue to
Jahangir’s Memoirs), E.D., VI, 339.

[⁸¹](#81a) Manucci, II, 397-98.

[⁸²](#82a) *The Mughal Harerm*, 198.

[⁸³](#83a) Khafi Khan, *Muntakhab-ul-Lubab*, text, II, 921 ff. trs. in
E.D., VII, 515.

[⁸⁴](#84a) Mir Ghulam Husain Khan, *Siyar-ul-Mutakherin*, revised from
the translation of Hag Mustafa by Johns Briggs, 1832, and republished
Allahabad, 1924, 183.

[⁸⁵](#85a) Servants formed part of the establishment and so were
included in escheat. Ibid., 188.

[⁸⁶](#86a) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 198,199.

[⁸⁷](#87a) Barani, 396; Afif, 261-62

[⁸⁸](#88a) *Muraqqa-i-Dihli*, Persian text and trs. in Urdu by Nurul
Hasan Ansari, 129-34, 192-205 respectively.

[⁸⁹](#89a) Percy Brown, *Indian Architecture* (Islamic Period) third ed.
28-29; Carr Stephen, *Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi*,
196-97; *Archaeological Survey Report*, IV, 67ff. XX, 155-58. Also Lal,
*Twilight*, 230-31 for other references.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


