+++
title = "53 PART II HINDU CASE AGAINST PAKISTAN"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PART II

HINDU CASE AGAINST PAKISTAN

  

[TABLE]

CHAPTER IV

BREAK-UP OF UNITY

  
  
  
  

 Before the Hindus complain of the destruction of the unity of India,
let them make certain that the unity they are harping upon does exist.
What unity is there between Pakistan and Hindustan?

 Those Hindus, who maintain the affirmative, rely chiefly upon the
fact that the areas which the Muslims want to be separated from India
have always been a part of India. Historically this is, no doubt, true.
This area was a part of India when Chandragupta was the ruler; it
continued to be a part of India when Hsuan Tsang, the Chinese pilgrim,
visited India in the 7th century A. D. In his diary, Hsuan Tsang has
recorded that India was divided into five divisions or to use his
language, there were ‘five Indies':**[/1/](#n01)** (1) Northern India,
(2) Western India, (3) Central India, (4) Eastern India and (5) Southern
India; and that these five divisions contained 80 kingdoms. According to
Hsuan Tsang, Northern India comprised the Punjab proper, including
Kashmir and the adjoining hill States with the whole of Eastern
Afghanistan beyond the Indus, and the present Cis-Satlaj States to the
west of the Sarasvati river. Thus, in Northern India there were included
the districts of Kabul, Jallalabad, Peshawar, Ghazni and Bannu, which
were all subject to the ruler of Kapisa, who was a Hindu Kshatriya and
whose capital was most probably at Charikar, 27 miles from Kabul. In the
Punjab proper, the hilly districts Taxila, Singhapura, Urasa, Punch and
Rajaori, were subject to the Raja of Kashmir; while the whole of the
plains, including Multan and Shorkot, were dependent on the ruler of
Taki or Sangala, near Lahore. Such was the extent of the northern
boundary of India at the time when Hsuan Tsang came on his pilgrimage.
But as Prof. Toynbee points out :

> "We must be on our guard against 'historical sentiment,' that is
> against arguments taken from conditions which once existed or were
> supposed to exist, but which are no longer real at the present moment.
> They are most easily illustrated by extreme examples. Italian
> newspapers have described the annexation of Tripoli as recovering the
> soil of the Fatherland because it was once a province of the Roman
> Empire; and the entire region of Macedonia is claimed by Greek
> Chauvinists on the one hand, because it contains the site of Pella,
> the cradle of Alexander the Great in the fourth century B.C., and by
> Bulgarians on the other, because Ochrida, in the opposite corner, was
> the capital of the Bulgarian Tzardom in the tenth century A. D.,
> though the drift of time has buried the tradition of the latter almost
> as deep as the achievements of the 'Emathian Conqueror' on which the
> modem Greek nationalists insist so strongly."

 The same logic applies here. Here also arguments are taken from
conditions which once existed but which are no longer real and which
omit to take into consideration later facts which history has to record
during practically one thousand years—after the return of Hsuan Tsang.

 It is true that when Hsuan Tsang came, not only the Punjab but what
is now Afghanistan was part of India and further, the people of the
Punjab and Afghanistan were either Vedic or Buddhist by religion. But
what has happened since Hsuan Tsang left India?

 The most important thing that has happened is the invasion of India
by the Muslim hordes from the north-west. The first Muslim invasion of
India was by the Arabs who were led by Mahommad Bin Qasim. It took place
in 711 A. D. and resulted in the conquest of Sind. This first Muslim
invasion did not result in a permanent occupation of the country because
the Caliphate of Baghdad, by whose order and command the invasion had
taken place, was obliged by the middle of the 9th century A. D. to
withdraw**[/2/](#n02)** its direct control from this distant province of
Sind. Soon after this withdrawal, there began a series of terrible
invasions by Muhammad of Ghazni in 1001 A. D. Muhammad died in 1030 A.
D., but within the short span of 30 years, he invaded India 17 times. He
was followed by Mahommad Ghori who began his career as an invader in
1173. He was killed in 1206. For thirty years had Muhammad of Ghazni
ravaged India and for thirty years Mahommad Ghori harried the same
country in the same way. Then followed the incursions of the Moghul
hordes of Chenghiz Khan. They first came in 1221. They then only
wintered on the border of India but did not enter it. Twenty years
after, they marched on Lahore and sacked it. Of their inroads, the most
terrible was under Taimur in 1398. Then comes on the scene a new invader
in the person of Babar who invaded India in 1526. The invasions of India
did not stop with that of Babar. There occurred two more invasions. In
1738 Nadirshah's invading host swept over the Punjab like a flooded
river "furious as the ocean." He was followed by Ahmadshah Abdalli who
invaded India in 1761, smashed the forces of the Mahrattas at Panipat
and crushed for ever the attempt of the Hindus to gain the ground which
they had lost to their Muslim invaders.

 These Muslim invasions were not undertaken merely out of lust for
loot or conquest. There was another object behind them. The expedition
against Sind by Mahommad bin Qasim was of a punitive character and was
undertaken to punish Raja Dahir of Sind who had refused to make
restitution for the seizure of an Arab ship at Debul, one of the
sea-port towns of Sind. But, there is no doubt that striking a blow at
the idolatry and polytheism of Hindus and establishing Islam in India
was also one of the aims of this expedition. In one of his dispatches to
Hajjaj, Mahommad bin Qasim is quoted to have said :

> "The nephew of Raja Dahir, his warriors and principal officers have
> been dispatched, and the infidels converted to Islam or destroyed.
> Instead of idol-temples, mosques and other places of worship have been
> created, the Kutbah is read, the call to prayers is raised, so that
> devotions are performed at stated hours. The Takbir and praise to the
> Almighty God are offered every morning and evening."**[/3/](#n03)**

 After receiving the above dispatch, which had been forwarded with
the head of the Raja, Hajjaj sent the following reply to his general:

> "Except that you give protection to all, great and small alike, make
> no difference between enemy and friend. God says, 'Give no quarter to
> infidels but cut their throats.' Then know that this is the command of
> the great God. You shall not be too ready to grant protection,
> because it will prolong your work. After this give no quarter to any
> enemy except those who are of rank."**[/4/](#n04)**

 Muhammad of Ghazni also looked upon his numerous invasions of India
as the waging of a holy war. Al' Utbi, the historian of Muhammad,
describing his raids writes:

> "He demolished idol temples and established Islam. He captured. . .
> .cities, killed the polluted wretches, destroying the idolaters, and
> gratifying Muslims. He then returned home and promulgated accounts of
> the victories obtained for Islam. . . .and vowed that every year he
> would undertake a holy war against Hind."**[/5/](#n05)**

 Mahommed Ghori was actuated by the same holy zeal in his invasions
of India. Hasan Nizami, the historian, describes his work in the
following terms:

> "He purged by his sword the land of Hind from the filth of infidelity
> and vice, and freed the whole of that country from the thorn of
> God-plurality and the impurity of idol-worship, and by his royal
> vigour and intrepidity left not one temple standing."**[/6/](#n06)**

 Taimur has in his **Memoir** explained what led him to invade India.
He says:

> "My object in the invasions of Hindustan is to lead a campaign against
> the infidels, to convert them to the true faith according to the
> command of Muhammad (on whom and his family be the blessing and peace
> of God), to purify the land from the defilement of misbelief and
> polytheism, and overthrow the temples and idols, whereby we shall be
> *Ghazis* and *Mujahids*, companions and soldiers of the faith before
> God."**[/7/](#n07)**

 These invasions of India by Muslims were as much invasions of India
as they were wars among the Muslims themselves. This fact has remained
hidden because the invaders are all lumped together as Muslims without
distinction. But as a matter of fact, they were Tartars, Afghans and
Mongols. Muhammad of Ghazni was a Tartar, Mahommed of Ghori was an
Afghan, Taimur was a Mongol, Babar was a Tartar, while Nadirshah and
Ahmadshah Abdalli were Afghans. In invading India, the Afghan was out to
destroy the Tartar and the Mongol was out to destroy the Tartar as well
as the Afghan. They were not a loving family cemented by the feeling of
Islamic brotherhood. They were deadly rivals of one another and their
wars were often wars of mutual extermination. What is, however,
important to bear in mind is that with all their internecine conflicts
they were all united by one common objective and that was to destroy the
Hindu faith.

 The methods adopted by the Muslim invaders of India are not less
significant for the subsequent history of India than the object of their
invasions.

 Mahommad bin Qasim's first act of religious zeal was forcibly to
circumcise the Brahmins of the captured city of Debul; but on
discovering that they objected to this sort of conversion, he proceeded
to put all above the age of 17 to death, and to order all others, with
women and children, to be led into slavery. The temple of the Hindus was
looted, and the rich booty was divided equally among the soldiers, after
one-fifth, the legal portion for the government, had been set aside.

 Muhammad of Ghazni from the first adopted those plans that would
strike terror into the hearts of the Hindus. After the defeat of Raja
Jaipal inA.D. 1001, Muhammad ordered that Jaipal "be paraded about in
the streets so that his sons and chieftains might see him in that
condition of shame, bonds and disgrace; and that fear of Islam might fly
abroad through the country of the infidels."

> "The slaughtering of 'infidels' seemed to be one thing that gave
> Muhammad particular pleasure. In one attack on Chand Rai, in A. D.
> 1019, many infidels were slain or taken prisoners, and the Muslims
> paid no regard to booty until they had satiated themselves with the
> slaughter of the infidels and worshippers of the sun and fire. The
> historian naively adds that the elephants of the Hindu armies came to
> Muhammad of their own accord, leaving idols, preferring the service of
> the religion of Islam."**[/8/](#n08)**

 Not infrequently, the slaughter of the Hindus gave a great setback
to the indigenous culture of the Hindus, as in the conquest of Bihar by
Muhammad Bakhtyar Khilji. When he took Nuddea (Bihar) the
**Tabaquat-i-Nasiri** informs us that:

> "great plunder fell into the hands of the victors. Most of the
> inhabitants were Brahmins with shaven heads. They were put to death.
> Large number of books were found. . . .but none could explain their
> contents as all the men had been killed, the whole fort and city being
> a place of study."**[/9/](#n09)**

Summing up the evidence on the point, Dr. Titus concludes :

> "Of the destruction of temples and the desecration of idols we have an
> abundance of evidence. Mahommad bin Qasim carried out his plan of
> destruction systematically in Sind, we have seen, but he made an
> exception of the famous temple at Multan for purposes of revenue, as
> this temple was a place of resort for pilgrims, who made large gifts
> to the idol. Nevertheless, while he thus satisfied his avarice by
> letting the temple stand, he gave vent to his malignity by having a
> piece of cow's flesh tied around the neck of the idol.
>
> "**Minhaj-as-Siraj** further tells how Mahommad became widely known
> for having destroyed as many as a thousand temples, and of his great
> feat in destroying the temple of Somnath and carrying off its idol,
> which he asserts was broken into four parts. One part he deposited in
> the Jami Masjid of Ghazni, one he placed at the entrance of the royal
> palace, the third he sent to Mecca, and the fourth to
> Medina."**[/10/](#n10)**

It is said by Lane Poole that Muhammad of Ghazni "who had vowed that
every year should see him wage a holy war against the infidels of
Hindustan" could not rest from his idol-breaking campaign so long as the
temple of Somnath remained inviolate. It was for this specific purpose
that he, at the very close of his career, undertook his arduous march
across the desert from Multan to Anhalwara on the coast, fighting as he
went, until he saw at last the famous temple:

> "There a hundred thousand pilgrims were wont to assemble, a thousand
> Brahmins served the temple and guarded its treasures, and hundreds of
> dancers and singers played before its gates. Within stood the famous
> linga, a rude pillar stone adorned with gems and lighted by jewelled
> candelebra which were reflected in rich hangings, embroidered with
> precious stones like stars, that decked the shrine. . . .Its ramparts
> were swarmed with incredulous Brahmins, mocking the vain arrogance of
> foreign infidels whom the God of Somnath would assuredly consume. The
> foreigners, nothing daunted, scaled the walls; the God remained dumb
> to the urgent appeals of his servants; fifty thousand Hindus suffered
> for their faith and the sacred shrine was sacked to the joy of the
> true believers. The great stone was cast down and its fragments were
> carried off to grace the conqueror's palace. The temple gates were
> setup at Ghazni and a million pounds worth of treasure rewarded the
> iconoclast."**[/11/](#n11)**

 The work done by Muhammad of Ghazni became a pious tradition and was
faithfully followed by those who came after him. In the words of Dr.
Titus:**[/12/](#n12)**

> "Mahommad Ghori, one of the enthusiastic successors of Muhammad of
> Ghazni, in his conquest of Ajmir destroyed pillars and foundations of
> the idol-temples, and built in their stead mosques and colleges, and
> the precepts of Islam and the customs of the law were divulged and
> established. At Delhi, the city and its vicinity were freed from idols
> and idol worship, and in the sanctuaries of the images of the Gods
> mosques were raised by the worshippers of the one God.
>
> "Qutb-ud-Din Aybak also is said to have destroyed nearly a thousand
> temples, and then raised mosques on their foundations. The same author
> states that he built the Jami Masjid, Delhi, and adorned it with the
> stones and gold obtained from the temples which had been demolished by
> elephants, and covered it with inscriptions (from the Quran)
> containing the divine commands. We have further evidence of this
> harrowing process having been systematically employed from the
> inscription extant over the eastern gateway of this same mosque at
> Delhi, which relates that the materials of 27 idol temples were used
> in its construction.
>
> "Ala-ud-Din, in his zeal to build a second Minar to the Jami Masjid,
> to rival the one built by Qulb-ud-Din, is said by Amir Khusru not only
> to have dug stones out of the hills, but to have demolished temples of
> the infidels to furnish a supply. In his conquests of South India the
> destruction of temples was carried out by Ala-ud-Din as it had been in
> the north by his predecessors.
>
> "The Sultan Firoz Shah, in his **Futuhat**, graphically relates how he
> treated Hindus who had dared to build new temples. 'When they did this
> in the city (Delhi) and the environs, in opposition to the law of the
> Prophet, which declares that such are not to be tolerated, under
> Divine guidance I destroyed these edifices. I killed these leaders of
> infidelity and punished others with stripes, until this abuse was
> entirely abolished and where infidels and idolaters worshipped idols,
> Musalmans now by God's mercy perform their devotions to the true God."

 Even in the reign of Shah Jahan, we read of the destruction of the
temples that the Hindus had started to rebuild, and the account of this
direct attack on the piety of the Hindus is thus solemnly recorded in
the **Badshah-namah** :

> "It had been brought to the notice of His Majesty, says the historian,
> that during the late reign (of Akbar) many idol-temples had been begun
> but remained unfinished at Benares, the great stronghold of
> infidelity. The infidels were now desirous of completing them. His
> Majesty, the defender of the faith, gave orders that at Benares and
> throughout all his dominions in every place all temples that had been
> begun should be cast down. It was reported from the Province of
> Allahabad that 76 temples had been destroyed in the district of
> Benares."**[/13/](#n13)**

 It was left to Aurangzeb to make a final attempt to overthrow
idolatry. The author of **'Ma'athir-i-Alamgiri** dilates upon his
efforts to put down Hindu teaching, and his destruction of temples in
the following terms:

> "In April, A. D. 1669, Aurangzib learned that in the provinces of
> Thatta, Multan and Benares, but especially in the latter, foolish
> Brahmins were in the habit of expounding frivolous books in their
> schools, and that learners, Muslims as well as Hindus, went there from
> long distances. . . .The 'Director of the Faith' consequently issued
> orders to all the governors of provinces to destroy with a willing
> hand the schools and temples of the infidels; and they were enjoined
> to put an entire stop to the teaching and practising of idolatrous
> worship. . . .Later it was reported to his religious Majesty that the
> Government officers had destroyed the temple of Bishnath at
> Benares."**[/14/](#n14)**

As Dr. Titus observes**[/15/](#n15)** —

> "Such invaders as Muhammad and Timur seem to have been more concerned
> with iconoclasm, the collection of booty, the enslaving of captives,
> and the sending of infidels to hell with the 'proselytizing sword'
> than they were with the conversion of them even by force. But when
> rulers were permanently established the winning of converts became a
> matter of supreme urgency. It was a part of the state policy to
> establish Islam as the religion of the whole land.
>
> "Qutb-ud-Din, whose reputation for destroying temples was almost as
> great as that of Muhammad, in the latter part of the twelfth century
> and early years of the thirteenth, must have frequently resorted to
> force as an incentive to conversion. One instance may be noted: when
> he approached Koil (Aligarh) in A. D. 1194, 'those of the garrison who
> were wise and acute were converted to Islam, but the others were slain
> with the sword.'
>
> "Further examples of extreme measures employed to effect a change of
> faith are all too numerous. One pathetic case is mentioned in the time
> of the reign of Firoz Shah (A. D. 1351—1388). An old Brahmin of Delhi
> had been accused of worshipping idols in his house, and of even
> leading Muslim women to become infidels. He was sent for and his case
> placed before the judges, doctors, elders and lawyers. Their reply was
> that the provisions of the law were clear. The Brahmin must either
> become a Muslim or be burned. The true faith was declared to him and
> the right course pointed out, but he refused to accept it.
> Consequently he was burned by the order of the Sultan, and the
> commentator adds, 'Behold the Sultan's strict adherence to law and
> rectitude, how he would not deviate in the least from its decrees.'"

 Muhammad not only destroyed temples but made it a policy to make
slaves of the Hindus he conquered. In the words of Dr. Titus:

> "Not only was slaughter of the infidels and the destruction of their
> temples resorted to in earlier period of Islam's contact with India,
> but as we have seen, many of the vanquished were led into slavery. The
> dividing up of booty was one of the special attractions, to the
> leaders as well as to the common soldiers in these expeditions.
> Muhammad seems to have made the slaughter of infidels, the destruction
> of their temples, the capturing of slaves, and the plundering of the
> wealth of the people, particularly of the temples and the priests, the
> main object of his raids. On the occasion of his first raid he is said
> to have taken much booty ; and half a million Hindus, 'beautiful men
> and women,' were reduced to slavery and taken back to
> Ghazni."**[/16/](#n16)**

 When Muhammad later took Kanauj, in A. D. 1017, he took so much
booty and so many prisoners that 'the fingers of those who counted them
would have tired.' Describing how common Indian slaves had become in
Ghazni and Central Asia after the campaign of A. D. 1019, the historian
of the times says:**[/17/](#n17)**

> "The number of prisoners may be conceived from the fact that each was
> sold for from two to ten dirhams. These were afterwards taken to
> Ghazni, and merchants came from far distant cities to purchase them; .
> . . .and the fair and the dark, the rich and the poor were commingled
> in one common slavery.
>
> "In the year A.D. 1202, when Qulb-ud-Din captured Kalinjar, after the
> temples had been converted into mosques, and the very name of idolatry
> was annihilated, fifty thousand men came under the collar of slavery
> and the plain became black as pitch with Hindus."

 Slavery was the fate of those Hindus who were captured in the holy
war. But, when there was no war the systematic abasement of the Hindus
played no unimportant part in the methods adopted by the Muslim
invaders. In the days of Ala-ud-Din, at the beginning of the fourteenth
century, the Hindus had in certain parts given the Sultan much trouble.
So, he determined to impose such taxes on them that they would be
prevented from rising in rebellion.

> "The Hindu was to be left unable to keep a horse to ride on, to carry
> arms, to wear fine clothes, or to enjoy any of the luxuries of
> life."**[/18/](#n18)**

 Speaking of the levy of Jizyah Dr. Titus says:**[/19/](#n19)**

> "The payment of the Jizyah by the Hindus continued throughout the
> dominions of the sultans, emperors, and kings in various parts of
> India with more or less regularity, though often, the law was in force
> in theory only; since it depended entirely on the ability of the
> sovereign to enforce his demands. But, finally, it was abolished
> throughout the Moghul Empire in the ninth year of the enlightened
> Akbar's reign (A. D. 1665), after it had been accepted as a
> fundamental part of Muslim government policy in India for a period of
> more than eight centuries."

 Lane Poole says that

> "the Hindu was taxed to the extent of half the produce of his land,
> and had to pay duties on all his buffaloes, goats, and other
> milk-cattle. The taxes were to be levied equally on rich and poor, at
> so much per acre, so much per animal. Any collectors or officers
> taking bribes were summarily dismissed and heavily punished with
> sticks, pincers, the rack, imprisonment and chains. The new rules were
> strictly carried out, so that one revenue officer would string
> together 20 Hindu notables and enforce payment by blows. No gold or
> silver, not even the betelnut, so cheering and stimulative to
> pleasure, was to be seen in a Hindu house, and the wives of the
> impoverished native officials were reduced to taking service in Muslim
> families. Revenue officers came to be regarded as more deadly than the
> plague; and to be a government clerk was disgrace worse than death, in
> so much that no Hindu would marry his daughter to such a
> man."**[/20/](#n20)**

 These edicts, says the historian of the period,

> "were so strictly carried out that the chaukidars and khuts and
> muqaddims were not able to ride on horseback, to find weapon, to wear
> fine clothes, or to indulge in betel. . . .No Hindu could hold up his
> head. . . .Blows, confinement in the stocks, imprisonment and chains
> were all employed to enforce payment."

 All this was not the result of mere caprice or moral perversion. On
the other hand, what was done was in accordance with the ruling ideas of
the leaders of Islam in the broadest aspects. These ideas were well
expressed by the Kazi in reply to a question put by Sultan Ala-ud-Din
wanting to know the legal position of the Hindus under Muslim law. The
Kazi said :—

> "They are called payers of tribute, and when the revenue officer
> demands silver from them they should without question, and with all
> humility and respect, tender gold. If the officer throws dirt in their
> mouths, they must without reluctance open their mouths wide to receive
> it. . . .The due subordination of the Dhimmi is exhibited in this
> humble payment, and by this throwing of dirt into their mouths. The
> glorification of Islam is a duty, and contempt for religion is vain.
> God holds them in contempt, for he says, 'Keep them in subjection.' To
> keep the Hindus in abasement is especially a religious duty, because
> they are the most inveterate enemies of the Prophet, and because the
> Prophet has commanded us to slay them, plunder them, and make them
> captive, saying, 'Convert them to Islam or kill them, and make them
> slaves, and spoil their wealth and properly.' No doctor but the great
> doctor (Hanifah), to whose school we belong, has assented to the
> imposition of jizya on Hindus; doctors of other schools allow no other
> alternative but ' Death or Islam.'"**[/21/](#n21)**

 Such is the story of this period of 762 years which elapsed between
the advent of Muhammad of Ghazni and the return of Ahmadshah Abdalli.

 How far is it open to the Hindus to say that Northern India is part
of Aryavarta? How far is it open to the Hindus to say because once it
belonged to them, therefore, it must remain for ever an integral part of
India? Those who oppose separation and hold to the 'historic sentiment'
arising out of an ancient fact that Northern India including Afghanistan
was once part of India and that the people of that area were either
Buddhist or Hindus, must be asked whether the events of these 762 years
of incessant Muslim invasions, the object with which they were launched
and the methods adopted by these invaders to give effect to their
object, are to be treated as though they were matters of no account?

 Apart from other consequences which have flowed from them these
invasions have, in my opinion, so profoundly altered the culture and
character of the northern areas, which it is now proposed to be included
in a Pakistan, that there is not only no unity between that area and the
rest of India but that there is as a matter of fact a real antipathy
between the two.

 The first consequence of these invasions was the breaking up of the
unity of Northern India with the rest of India. After his conquest of
Northern India, Muhammad of Ghazni detached it from India and ruled it
from Ghazni. When Mahommed Ghori came in the field as a conqueror, he
again attached it to India and ruled it from Lahore and then from Delhi.
Hakim, the brother of Akbar, detached Kabul and Kandahar from Northern
India. Akbar again attached it to Northern India. They were again
detached by Nadirshah in 1738 and the whole of Northern India would have
been severed from India had it not been for the check provided by the
rise of the Sikhs. Northern India, therefore, has been like a wagon in a
train, which can be coupled or uncoupled according to the circumstances
of the moment. If analogy is wanted, the case of Alsace-Lorraine could
be cited. Alsace-Lorraine was originally part of Germany, like the rest
of Switzerland and the Low Countries. It continued to be so till 1680,
when it was taken by France and incorporated into French territory. It
belonged to France till 1871, when it was detached by Germany and made
part of her territory. In 1918, it was again detached from Germany and
made part of France. In 1940, it was detached from France and made part
of Germany.

 The methods adopted by the invaders have left behind them their
aftermath. One aftermath is the bitterness between the Hindus and the
Muslims which they have caused. This bitterness between the two is so
deep-seated that a century of political life has neither succeeded in
assuaging it, nor in making people forget it. As the invasions were
accompanied with. destruction of temples and forced conversions, with
spoliation of property, with slaughter,, enslavement and abasement of
men, women and children, what wonder if the memory of these invasions
has ever remained green, as a source of pride to the Muslims and as a
source of shame to the Hindus? But these things apart, this north-west
corner of India has been a theatre in which a stern drama has been
played. Muslim hordes, in wave after wave, have surged down into this
area and from thence scattered themselves in spray over the rest of
India. These reached the rest of India in thin currents. In time, they
also receded from their farthest limits; while they lasted, they left a
deep deposit of Islamic culture over the original Aryan culture in this
north-west corner of India which has given it a totally different
colour, both in religious and political outlook. The Muslim invaders, no
doubt, came to India singing a hymn of hate against the Hindus. But,
they did not merely sing their hymn of hate and go back burning a few
temples on the way. That would have been a blessing. They were not
content with so negative a result. They did a positive act, namely, to
plant the seed of Islam. The growth of this plant is remarkable. It is
not a summer sapling. It is as great and as strong as an oak. Its growth
is the thickest in Northern India. The successive invasions have
deposited their 'silt' more there than anywhere else, and have served as
watering exercises of devoted gardeners. Its growth is so thick in
Northern India that the remnants of Hindu and Buddhist culture are just
shrubs. Even the Sikh axe could not fell this oak. Sikhs, no doubt,
became the political masters of Northern India, but they did not gain
back Northern India to that spiritual and cultural unity by which it was
bound to the rest of India before Hsuan Tsang. The Sikhs coupled it back
to India. Still, it remains like Alsace-Lorraine politically detachable
and spiritually alien so far as the rest of India is concerned. It is
only an unimaginative person who could fail to take notice of these
facts or insist in the face of them that Pakistan means breaking up into
two what is one whole.

 What is the unity the Hindu sees between Pakistan and Hindustan? If
it is geographical unity, then that is no unity. Geographical unity is
unity intended by nature. In building up a nationality on geographical
unity, it must be remembered that it is a case where Nature proposes and
Man disposes. If it is unity in external things, such as ways and habits
of life, that is no unity. Such unity is the result of exposure to a
common environment. If it is administrative unity, that again is no
unity. The instance of Burma is in point. Arakan and Tenasserim were
annexed in 1826 by the treaty of Yendabu. Pegu and Martaban were annexed
in 1852. Upper Burma was annexed in 1886. The administrative unity
between India and Burma was forged in 1826. For over 110 years that
administrative unity continued to exist. In 1937, the knot that tied the
two together was cut asunder and nobody shed a tear over it. The unity
between India and Burma was not less fundamental. If unity is to be of
an abiding character, it must be founded on a sense of kinship, in the
feeling of being kindred. In short, it must be spiritual. Judged in the
light of these considerations, the unity between Pakistan and Hindustan
is a myth. Indeed, there is more spiritual unity between Hindustan and
Burma than there is between Pakistan and Hindustan. And if the Hindus
did not object to the severance of Burma from India, it is difficult to
understand how the Hindus can object to the severance of an area like
Pakistan, which, to repeat, is politically detachable from, socially
hostile and spiritually alien to, the rest of India.  
  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** Cunningham's **Ancient Geography of India** (Ed.
Majumdar), pp. 13-14. The writers of the Puranas divided India into nine
divisions.

**[/2/](#m02)** Sind was reoccupied by Mahommed Ghori.

**[/3/](#m03)** **Indian Islam** by Dr. Titus, p. 10.

**[/4/](#m04)** Quoted by Dr. Titus--Ibid., p. 10.

**[/5/](#m05)** Ibid., p. 11.

**[/6/](#m06)** Ibid., p. 11.

**[/7/](#m07)** Quoted by Lane Poole in **Medieval India**, p. 155.

**[/8/](#m08)** Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 22.

**[/9/](#m09)** Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 22.

**[/10/](#m10)** Ibid., pp. 22-23.

**[/11/](#m11)** Lane Poole, **Medieval India**, p. 26.

**[/12/](#m12)** Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, pp. 23-24.

**[/13/](#m13)** Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 24.

**[/14/](#m14)** Ibid., p. 22.

**[/15/](#m15)** Ibid., pp. 31-32.

**[/16/](#m16)** Quoted by Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 24.

**[/17/](#m17)** Ibid., p. 26.

**[/18/](#m18)** Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 29.

**[/19/](#m19)** Ibid., p. 30.

**[/20/](#m20)** Lane Poole, **Medieval India**, p. 104.

**[/21/](#m21)** Quoted by Dr. Titus, **Indian Islam**, p. 29.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
