+++
title = "58 CHAPTER VII HINDU ALTERNATIVE TO PAKISTAN"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER VII

HINDU ALTERNATIVE TO PAKISTAN  


\[IV\]  
\[the number is missing in the printed text\]  
\[The riot-torn history of Hindu-Muslim relations, 1920-1940\]

 Such is the history of Mr. Gandhi's efforts to bring about
Hindu-Moslem unity. What fruits did these efforts bear? To be able to
answer this question it is necessary to examine the relationship between
the two communities during 1920-40, the years during which Mr. Gandhi
laboured so hard to bring about Hindu-Moslem unity. The relationship is
well described in the **Annual Reports** on the affairs of India
submitted year by year to Parliament by the Government of India under
the old Government of India Act. It is on these reports**[/1/](#n01)**
that I have drawn for the facts recorded below.

 Beginning with the year 1920 there occurred in that year in Malabar
what is known as the Mopla Rebellion. It was the result of the agitation
carried out by two Muslim organizations, the Khuddam-i-Kaba (servants of
the Mecca Shrine) and the Central Khilafat Committee. Agitators actually
preached the doctrine that India under the British Government was
Dar-ul-Harab and that the Muslims must fight against it and if they
could not, they must carry out the alternative principle of Hijrat. The
Moplas were suddenly carried off their feet by this agitation. The
outbreak was essentially a rebellion against the British Government The
aim was to establish the kingdom of Islam by overthrowing the British
Government. Knives, swords and spears were secretly manufactured, bands
of desperadoes collected for an attack on British authority. On 20th
August a severe encounter took place between the Moplas and the British
forces at Pinmangdi Roads were blocked, telegraph lines cut, and the
railway destroyed in a number of places. As soon as the administration
had been paralysed, the Moplas declared that Swaraj had been
established. A certain Ali Mudaliar was proclaimed Raja, Khilafat flags
were flown, and Ernad and Wallurana were declared Khilafat Kingdoms. As
a rebellion against the British Government it was quite understandable.
But what baffled most was the treatment accorded by the Moplas to the
Hindus of Malabar. The Hindus were visited by a dire fate at the hands
of the Moplas. Massacres, forcible conversions, desecration of temples,
foul outrages upon women, such as ripping open pregnant women, pillage,
arson and destruction—in short, all the accompaniments of brutal and
unrestrained barbarism, were perpetrated freely by the Moplas upon the
Hindus until such time as troops could be hurried to the task of
restoring order through a difficult and extensive tract of the country.
This was not a Hindu-Moslem riot. This was just a Bartholomew. The
number of Hindus who were killed, wounded or converted, is not known.
But the number must have been enormous.

 In the year 1921-22 communal jealously did not subside. The Muharram
Celebrations had been attended by serious riots both in Bengal and in
the Punjab. In the latter province in particular, communal feeling at
Multan reached very serious heights, and although the casualty list was
comparatively small, a great deal of damage to property was done.

 Though the year 1922-23 was a peaceful year the relations between
the two communities were strained throughout 1923-24. But in no locality
did this tension produce such tragic consequences as in the city of
Kohat. The immediate cause of the trouble was the publication and
circulation of a pamphlet containing a virulently anti-Islamic poem.
Terrible riots broke out on the 9th and 10th of September 1924, the
total casualties being about 155 killed and wounded. House property to
the estimated value of Rs. 9 lakhs was destroyed, and a large quantity
of goods were looted. As a result of this reign of terror the whole
Hindu population evacuated the city of Kohat. After protracted
negotiations an agreement of reconciliation was concluded between the
two communities. Government giving an assurance that, subject to certain
reservations, the prosecution pending against persons concerned in
rioting should be dropped. With the object of enabling the sufferers to
restart their businesses and rebuild their houses, Government sanctioned
advances, free of interest in certain instances, amounting to Rs. 5
lakhs. But even after the settlement had been reached and evacuees had
returned to Kohat there was no peace, and throughout 1924-25 the tension
between the Hindu and Musalman masses in various parts of the country
increased to a lamentable extent. In the summer months, there was a
distressing number of riots. In July, severe fighting broke out between
Hindus and Musalmans in Delhi, which was accompanied by serious
casualties. In the same month, there was a bad outbreak at Nagpur.
August was even worse. There were riots at Lahore, at Lucknow, at
Moradabad, at Bhagalpur and Nagpur in British India; while a severe
affray took place at Gulbarga in the Nizam's Dominions.
September-October saw severe fighting at Lucknow, Shahajahanpur,
Kankinarah and at Allahabad. The most terrible outbreak of the year
being the one that took place at. Kohat which was accompanied by murder,
arson and loot.

 In 1925-26 the antagonism between the Hindus and the Muslims became
widespread. Very significant features of the Hindu-Muslim rioting, which
took place during this year were its wide distribution and its
occurrence, in some cases, in small villages. Calcutta, the United
Provinces, the Central Provinces and the Bombay Presidency were all
scenes of riots, some of which led to regrettable losses of life.
Certain minor and local Hindu festivals which occurred at the end of
August, gave rise to communal trouble in Calcutta, in Berar, in Gujarat
in the Bombay Presidency, and in the United Provinces. In some of these
places there were actual clashes between the two communities, but
elsewhere, notably at Kankinarah—one of the most thickly populated jute
mill centres of Calcutta—serious rioting was prevented by the activity
of the police. In Gujarat, Hindu-Muslim feeling was running high in
these days and was marked by at least one case of temple desecration.
The important Hindu festival of Ramlila, at the end of September, gave
rise to acute anxiety in many places, and at Aligarh, an important place
in the United Provinces, its celebration was marked by one of the worst
riots of the year. The riot assumed such dangerous proportions that the
police were compelled to fire in order to restore order, and five
persons were killed, either by the police or by riots. At Lucknow, the
same festival gave rise at one time to a threatening situation, but the
local authorities prevented actual rioting. October saw another serious
riot at Sholapur in the Bombay Presidency. There, the local Hindus were
taking a car with Hindu idols through the city, and when they came near
a mosque, a dispute arose between them and certain Muslims, which
developed into a riot.

 A deplorable rioting started in Calcutta in the beginning of April
as an affray outside a mosque between Muslims and some Arya Samajists
and continued to spread until 5th April, though there was only one
occasion on which the police or military were faced by a crowd which
showed determined resistance, namely, on the evening of the 5th April,
when fire had to be opened. There was also a great deal of incendiarism
and in the first three days of this incendiarism, the Fire Brigade had
to deal with 110 fires. An unprecedented feature of the riots was the
attacks on temples by Muslims and on mosques by Hindus which naturally
led to intense bitterness. There were 44 deaths and 584 injured. There
was a certain amount of looting and business was suspended, with great
economic loss to Calcutta. Shops began to reopen soon after the 5th, but
the period of tension was prolonged by the approach of a Hindu festival
on the 13th of April, and of the Id on the 14th. The Sikhs were to have
taken out a procession on the 13th, but Government were unable to give
them the necessary license. The apprehensions with regard to the 13th
and 14th of April, fortunately, did not materialise and outward peace
prevailed until 22nd April when it was abruptly broken as a result of a
petty quarrel in a street, which restarted the rioting. Fighting between
the mobs of the two communities, generally on a small scale, accompanied
by isolated assaults and murders continued for six days. During this
period there were no attacks on the temples and mosques and there was
little arson or looting. But there were more numerous occasions, on
which the hostile mobs did not immediately disperse on the appearance of
the police and on 12 occasions it was necessary to open fire. The total
number of casualties during this second phase of the rioting was 66
deaths and 391 injured. The dislocation of business was much more
serious during the first riots and the closing of Marwari business
houses was not without an effect on European business firms. Panic
caused many of the markets to be wholly or partially closed and for two
days the meat supply was practically stopped. So great was the panic
that the removal of refuse in the disturbed area was stopped.
Arrangements were, however, made to protect supplies, and the difficulty
with the Municipal scavengers was overcome, as soon as the Municipality
had applied to the police for protection. There was slight extension of
the area of rioting, but no disturbances occurred in the mill area
around Calcutta. Systematic raiding of the portions of the disturbed
area, the arrest of hooligans, the seizure of weapons and the
re-inforcement of the police by the posting of British soldiers to act
as special police officers had the desired effect, and the last three
days of April, in spite of the continuance of isolated assaults and
murders, witnessed a steady improvement in the situation. Isolated
murders were largely attributable to hooligans of both communities and
their persistence during the first as well as the second outbreak
induced a general belief that these hooligans were hired assassins.
Another equally persistent feature of the riots, namely, the
distribution of inflammatory printed leaflets by both sides, together
with the employment of hired roughs, strengthened the belief that money
had been spent to keep the riots going.

 The year 1926-27 was one continuous period of communal riots. Since
April 1926, every month witnessed affrays more or less serious between
partizans of the two communities and only two months passed without
actual rioting in the legal sense of the word. The examination of the
circumstances of these numerous riots and affrays shows that they
originated either in utterly petty and trivial disputes between
individuals, as, for example, between a Hindu shopkeeper and a Mahomedan
customer, or else, the immediate cause of trouble was the celebration of
some religious festival or the playing of music by Hindu processionists
in the neighbourhood of Mahomedan places of worship. One or two of the
riots, indeed, were due to nothing more than strained nerves and general
excitement. Of these, the most striking example occurred in Delhi on
24th June, when the bolting of a pony in a crowded street gave the
impression that a riot had started, upon which both sides immediately
attacked each other with brickbats and staves.

 Including the two outbursts of rioting in Calcutta during April and
May 1926, 40 riots took place during the twelve months ending with April
1st 1927, resulting in the death of 197 and injuries, more or less
severe, to 1,598 persons. These disorders were widespread, but Bengal,
the Punjab, and the United Provinces were the parts of India most
seriously affected. Bengal suffered most from rioting, but on many
occasions during the year, tension between Hindus and Mahomedans was
high in the Bombay Presidency and also in Sind. Calcutta remained uneasy
throughout the whole of the summer. On 1st June a petty dispute
developed into a riot in which forty persons were hurt. After this,
there was a lull in overt violence until July 15th, on which day fell an
important Hindu religious festival. During its celebration the passage
of a procession, with bands playing in the neighbourhood of certain
mosques, resulted in a conflict, in which 14 persons were killed and 116
injured. The next day saw the beginning of the important Mahomedan
festival of Muharram. Rioting broke out on that day and, after a lull,
was renewed on the 19th, 20th, 21st and 22nd. Isolated assaults and
cases of stabbing occurred on the 23rd, 24th and 25th. The total
ascertained casualties during this period of rioting were 28 deaths and
226 injured. There were further riots in Calcutta on the 15th September
and 16th October and on the latter day there was also rioting in the
adjoining city of Howrah, during which one or two persons were killed
and over 30 injured. The April and May riots had been greatly aggravated
by incendiarism, but, happily, this feature was almost entirely absent
from the later disorders and during the July riots, for example, the
Fire Brigade was called upon to deal with only four incendiary fires.

 Coming to the year 1927-28 the following facts stare us in the face.
Between the beginning of April and the end of September 1927, no fewer
than 25 riots were reported. Of these 10 occurred in the United
Provinces, six in the Bombay Presidency, 2 each in the Punjab, the
Central Provinces, Bengal, and Bihar and Orissa, and one in Delhi. The
majority of these riots occurred during the celebration of a religious
festival by one or other of the two communities, whilst some arose out
of the playing of music by Hindus in the neighbourhood of mosques or out
of the slaughter of cows by the Muslims. The total casualties resulting
from the above disorders were approximately 103 persons killed and 1,084
wounded.

 By far the most serious riot reported during the year was that which
took place in Lahore between the 4th and 7th of May 1927. Tension
between the two communities had been acute for some time before the
outbreak, and the trouble when it came was precipitated by a chance
collision between a Mahomedan and two Sikhs. The disorder spread with
lightning speed and the heavy casualty list—27 killed 272 injured—was
largely swollen by unorganised attacks on individuals. Police and troops
were rushed to the scene of rioting quickly and it was impossible for
clashes on a big scale to take place between hostile groups. Casual
assassinations and assaults were however, reported, for two or three
days longer before the streets and lanes of Lahore became safe for the
solitary passerby.

 After the Lahore riot in May, there was a lull for two months in
inter-communal rioting, if we except a minor incident, which happened
about the middle of June in Bihar and Orissa ; but July witnessed no
fewer than eight riots of which the most serious occurred in Multan in
the Punjab, on the occasion of the annual Muharram celebrations.
Thirteen killed and twenty-four wounded was the toll taken by this riot.
But August was to see worse rioting still. In that month, nine riots
occurred, two of them resulting in heavy loss of life. In a riot in
Bettiah, a town in Bihar and Orissa, arising out of a dispute over a
religious procession, eleven persons were killed and over a hundred
injured, whilst the passage of a procession in front of a mosque in
Bareilly in the United Provinces was the occasion of rioting in which
fourteen persons were killed and 165 were injured. Fortunately, this
proved to be the turning point in inter-communal trouble during the
year, and September witnessed only 4 riots. One of these, however, the
riot in Nagpur in the Central Provinces on September 4th was second only
to Lahore riot in seriousness and in the damage which it caused. The
spark, which started the fire, was the trouble in connection with a
Muslim procession, but the materials for the combustion had been
collected for some time. Nineteen persons were killed and 123 injured
were admitted to hospitals as a result of this riot, during the course
of which many members of the Muslim community abandoned their homes in
Nagpur.

 A feature of Hindu-Muslim relations during the year which was hardly
less serious than the riots was the number of murderous outrages
committed by members of one community against persons belonging to the
other. Some of the most serious of these outrages were perpetrated in
connection with the agitation relating to **Rangila Rasul** and **Risala
Vartman**, two publications containing most scurrilous attack on the
Prophet Muhammed, and as a result of them, a number of innocent persons
lost their lives, sometimes in circumstances of great barbarity. In
Lahore a series of outrages against individuals led to a state of great
excitement and insecurity during the summer of 1927.

 The excitement over the **Rangila Rasul[/2/](#n02)** case had by now
travelled far from its original centre and by July had begun to produce
unpleasant repercussions on and across the North-West Frontier. The
first signs of trouble in this region became apparent early in June, and
by the latter part of July the excitement had reached its height. On the
British side of the border, firm and tactful handling of the situation
by the local authorities averted, what would have been a serious breach
of the peace. Economic boycott of Hindus was freely advocated in the
British Frontier Districts, especially in Peshawar, but this movement
met with little success, and although the Hindus were maltreated in one
or two villages, the arrest of the culprits, together with appropriate
action under the Criminal Law, quickly restored order. Across the border
however, the indignation, aroused by these attacks on the Prophet, gave
rise to more serious consequences. The Frontier tribesmen are acutely
sensitive to the appeal of religion and when a well-known Mullah started
to preach against the Hindus among the Afridis and Shinwaris in the
neighbourhood of the Khyber Pass, his words fell on fruitful ground. He
called upon the Afridis and Shinwaris to expel all the Hindus living in
their midst unless they declared in writing that they dissociated
themselves from the doings of their co-religionists down country. The
first to expel their Hindu neighbours were two clans of the Khyber
Afridis, namely the Kuikhel and Zakkakhel, on the 22nd July. From these,
the excitement spread among their Shinwari neighbours, who gave their
Hindu neighbours notice to quit a few days later. However, after the
departure of some of the Hindus, the Shinwaris agreed to allow the
remainder to stay on. Some of the Hindus on leaving the Khyber were
roughly handled. In two cases, stones were thrown, though happily
without any damage resulting. In a third case, a Hindu was wounded and a
large amount of property carried off, but this was recovered by Afridi
Khassadars in full, and the culprits were fined for the offence.
Thereafter, arrangements were made for the picketing of the road for the
passage of any Hindu evacuating tribal territory. Under pressure from
the Political Agent an Afridi *jirga* decided towards the end of July to
suspend the Hindu boycott pending a decision in the **Risala Vartman**
case. In the following week, however, several Hindu families, who had
been living at Landi Kotal at the head of the Khyber Pass moved to
Peshawar refusing to accept assurances of the tribal chiefs but leaving
one person from each family behind to watch over their interests. All
told, between four hundred and fifty Hindus, men, women and children,
had come into Peshawar by the Middle of August, when the trouble was
definitely on the wane. Some of the Hindus were definitely expelled,
some were induced to leave their homes by threats, some left from fear,
some no doubt from sympathy with their neighbours. This expulsion and
voluntary exodus from tribal territory were without parallel. Hindus had
lived there for more generations than most of them could record as
valued and respected, and, indeed, as essential members of the tribal
system, for whose protection the tribesmen had been jealous, and whose
blood feuds they commonly made their own. In all, about 450 Hindus left
the Khyber during the excitement; of these, about 330 had returned to
their homes in tribal territory by the close of the year 1927. Most of
the remainder had decided to settle, at any rate for the present, amid
the more secure conditions of British India.

 The year 1928-29 was comparatively more peaceful than the year
1927-28. His Excellency Lord Irwin, by his speeches to the Central
Legislature and outside, had given a strong impetus to the attempts to
find some basis for agreement between the two communities, on those
questions of political importance, which were responsible for the
strained relations between them. Fortunately the issues arising out of
the inquiry by the Simon Commission which was appointed in 1929,
absorbed a large part of the energy and attention of the different
communities, with the result that less importance came to be attached to
local causes of conflict, and more importance to the broad question of
constitutional policy. Moreover, the legislation passed during the
autumn session of the Indian Legislature in 1927 penalising the
instigation of inter-communal hostility by the press, had some effect in
improving the inter-communal disturbances. The number of riots during
the twelve months ending with March 31st, 1929, was 22. Though the
number of riots was comparatively small, the casualties,—swelled heavily
by the Bombay riots,—were very serious, no fewer than 204 persons having
been killed and nearly a thousand injured. Of these, the fortnight's
rioting in Bombay accounts for 149 killed and 739 injured. Seven of
these 22 riots, or roughly one-third of them, occurred on the day of the
celebration of the annual Muslim festival of Bakr-i-Id at the end of
May. The celebration of this festival is always a dangerous time in
Hindu-Muslim relations. The Muslim regard it as a day of animal
sacrifice, and as the animal chosen is almost always a cow the slightest
tension between the two communities is apt to produce an explosion. Of
the Bakr-i-Id riots only two were serious and both of them took place in
the Punjab. The first took place in a village in the Ambala District in
which ten people were killed and nine injured. The other riot which took
place in Softa village in the Gurgaon District in the Southern Punjab,
attained considerable notoriety because of its sensational features. The
village of Softa is about 27 miles south of Delhi and is inhabited by
Muslims. This village is surrounded by villages occupied by Hindu
cultivators who, on hearing that the muslims of Softa intended to
sacrifice a cow on the 'Id Day,' objected to the sacrifice of the
particular cow selected on the ground that it had been accustomed to
graze in fields belonging to the Hindu cultivators. The dispute over the
matter assumed a threatening aspect and the Superintendent of Police of
the district accordingly went with a small force of police, about 25 men
in all, to try to keep peace. He took charge of the disputed cow and
locked it up, but his presence did not deter the Hindu cultivators of a
few neighbouring villages from collecting about a thousand people armed
with pitchforks, spears and staves, and going to Softa. The
Superintendent of Police and an Indian Revenue official, who were
present in the village, assured the crowd that the cow, in connection
with which the dispute had arisen would not be sacrificed, but this did
not satisfy the mob which threatened to burn the whole village if any
cow was sacrificed, and also demanded that the cow should be handed over
to them. The Superintendent of Police refused to agree to this demand,
whereupon the crowd became violent and began to throw stones at the
police and to try to get round the latter into the village. The
Superintendent of Police warned the crowd to disperse, but to no effect.
He, therefore, fired one shot from his revolver as a further warning.
Notwithstanding the crowd still continued to advance and the
Superintendent had to order his party of police to fire. Only one volley
was fired at first, but as this did not cause the retreat of the mob,
two more volleys had to be fired before the crowd slowly dispersed,
driving off some cattle belonging to the village.

 While the police were engaged in this affair a few Hindu cultivators
got into Softa at another place and tried to set fire to the village.
They were, however, driven away by the police after they had inflicted
injuries on three or four men. In all 14 persons were killed and 33 were
injured. The Punjab Government deputed a judicial officer to enquire
into this affair. His report, which was published on 6th July, justified
the action of the police in firing on the mob and recorded the opinion
that there was no reason to suppose that the firing was excessive or was
continued after the mob had desisted from its unlawful aggression. Had
the police not opened fire, the report proceeds, their own lives would
have been in immediate danger, as also the lives of the people of Softa.
Lastly, in the opinion of the officer writing the report, had Softa
village been sacked, there would certainly have broken up, within 24
hours, a terrible communal conflagration in the whole of the surrounding
country-side.

 The riots of Kharagpur, an important railway centre not far from
Calcutta, also resulted in serious loss of life. Two riots took place at
Kharagpur, the first on the occasion of the Muharram celebration at the
end of June and the second on the 1st September 1928, when the killing
of a cow served as a cause. In the first riot 15 were killed and 21
injured, while in the second riot, the casualties were 9 killed and 35
wounded. But none of these riots is to be compared with those that raged
in Bombay from the beginning to the middle of February, when, as we have
seen, 149 persons were killed and well over 700 injured.

 During the year 1929-30 communal riots, which had been so
conspicuous and deplorable a feature of public life during the preceding
years, were very much less frequent. Only 12 were of sufficient
importance to be reported to Government of India, and of these only the
disturbances in the City of Bombay were really serious. Starting on the
23rd of April they continued sporadically until the middle of May, and
were responsible for 35 deaths and about 200 other casualties. An event
which caused considerable tension in April was the murder at Lahore of
Rajpal, whose pamphlet **Rangila Rasul**, containing a scurrilous attack
on the Prophet of Islam, was responsible for much of the communal
trouble in previous years, and also for a variety of legal and political
complications. Fortunately, both communities showed commendable
restraint at the time of the murder, and again on the occasion of the
execution and funeral of the convicted man; and although feelings ran
high no serious trouble occurred.

 The year 1930-31 saw the eruption of the Civil Disobedience
Movement. It gave rise to riots and disturbances all over the country.
They were mostly of a political character and the parties involved in
them were the police and the Congress volunteers. But, as it always
happens in India, the political disturbances took a communal twist. This
was due to the fact that the Muslims refused to submit to the coercive
methods used by Congress volunteers to compel them to join in Civil
Disobedience. The result was that although the year began with political
riots it ended in numerous and quite serious communal riots. The worst
of these communal riots took place in and around Sukkur in Sind between
the 4th and 11th of August and affected over a hundred villages. The
outbreak in the Kishoreganj subdivision of Mymensingh District (Bengal)
on the 12th/15th of July was also on a large scale. In addition, there
were communal disturbances on the 3rd of August in Ballia (United
Provinces); on the 6th of September in Nagpur, and on the 6th/7th
September in Bombay; and a Hindu-Christian riot broke out near
Tiruchendur (Madras) on the 31st of October. On the 12th of February, in
Amritsar, an attempt was made to murder a Hindu cloth merchant who had
defied the picketers, and a similar outrage which was perpetrated the
day before in Benares had very serious consequences. On this occasion,
the victim was a Muslim trader, and the attack proved fatal; as a
result, since Hindu-Muslim relations throughout most of Northern India
were by this time very strained, a serious communal riot broke out and
continued for five days, causing great destruction of property and
numerous casualties. Among the other communal clashes during this period
were the riots at Nilphamari (Bengal) on the 25th of January and at
Rawalpindi on the 31st. Throughout Northern India communal relations
had markedly deteriorated during the first two months of 1931, and
already, in February, there had been serious communal rioting in
Benares, This state of affairs was due chiefly to the increasing
exasperation created among Muslims by the paralysis of trade and the
general atmosphere of unrest and confusion that resulted from Congress
activities. The increased importance which the Congress seemed to be
acquiring as a result of the negotiations with the Government aroused in
the Muslims serious apprehensions and had the effect of worsening the
tension between the two communities. During March, this tension, in the
United Provinces at any rate, became greatly increased. Between the 14th
and 16th there was serious rioting in the Mirzapur District, and on the
17th, trouble broke out in Agra and continued till the 20th. There was
also a communal riot in Dhanbad (Bengal) on the 28th, and in Amritsar
District on the 30th ; and in many other parts of the country, the
relations between members of the two communities had become extremely
strained.

 In Assam, the communal riot which occurred at Digboi in Lakhimpur
District, resulted in deaths of one Hindu and three Muslims. In Bengal,
a communal riot took place in the Asansol division during the Muharram
festival. In Bihar and Orissa there was a certain amount of communal
tension during the year, particularly in Saran. Altogether there were 16
cases of communal rioting and unlawful assembly. During the Bakr-i-Id
festival a clash occurred in the Bhabua sub-division of Shahabad. Some
300 Hindus collected in the mistaken belief that a cow had been
sacrificed. The local officers had succeeded in pacifying them when a
mob of about 200 Muhammedans armed with lathis, spears and swords,
attacked the Hindus, one of whom subsequently died. The prompt action of
the police and the appointment of a conciliation committee prevented the
spread of the trouble. The Muharram festival was marked by two small
riots in Monghyr, the Hindus being the aggressors on one occasion and
the Muslims on the other. In the Madras Presidency there were also
several riots of a communal nature during the year and the relations
between the communities were in places distinctly strained. The most
serious disturbance of the year occurred at Vellore on the 8th of June,
as a result of the passage of a Muslim procession with Tazias near a
Hindu temple; so violent was the conflict between members of the two
communities that the police were compelled to open fire in order to
restore order; and sporadic fighting continued in the town during the
next two or three days. In Salem town, owing to Hindu-Muslim tension a
dispute arose on the 13th of July, as to who had been the victor at a
largely attended Hindu-Muslim wrestling match at Shevapet. Another riot
occurred in October at Kitchipalaiyam near Salem town ; the trouble
arose from a few Muslims disturbing a street game played by some young
Hindus. Hindu-Muslim disturbances also arose in Polikal village, Kurnool
District, on the 15th of March, owing to a dispute about the route of a
Hindu procession, but the rioters were easily dispersed by a small force
of police. In the Punjab there were 907 cases of rioting during the year
as compared with 813 in 1929. Many of them were of a communal character,
and the tension between the two principal communities remained acute in
many parts of the Province. In the United Provinces, although communal
tension during 1930 was not nearly so acute as during the first 3 months
of 1931, and was for a while overshadowed by the excitement engendered
by the Civil Disobedience Movement, indications of it were fairly
numerous, and the causes of disagreement remained as potent as ever. In
Dehra Dun and Bulandshahr there were communal riots of the usual type,
and a very serious riot occurred in Ballia city as a result of a dispute
concerning the route taken by a Hindu procession, which necessitated
firing by the police. Riots also occurred in Muttra, Azamgarh, Mainpuri
and several other places.

 Passing on to the events of the year 1931-32, the progress of
constitutional discussions at the R. T. C. had a definite reaction in
that it bred a certain nervousness among the Muslim and other minority
communities as to their position under a constitution functioning on the
majority principle. The first session of the Round Table Conference
afforded the first "close-up" of the constitutional future. Until then
the ideal of Dominion Status had progressed little beyond a vague and
general conception, but the declaration of the Princes at the opening of
the Conference had brought responsibility at the Centre, in the form of
a federal government, within definite view. The Muslims, therefore, felt
that it was high time for them to take stock of their position. This
uneasiness was intensified by the Irwin-Gandhi settlement, which
accorded what appeared to be a privileged position to the Congress, and
Congress elation and pose of victory over the Government did not tend to
ease Muslim misgivings. Within three weeks of the "pact" occurred the
savage communal riots at Cawnpore, which significantly enough began with
the attempts of Congress adherents to force Mahomedan shopkeepers to
observe a hartal in memory of Bhagat Singh who was executed on 23rd
March. On 24th March began the plunder of Hindu shops. On the 25th there
was a blaze. Shops and temples were set fire to and burnt to cinders.
Disorder, arson, loot, murder, spread like wild fire. Five hundred
families abandoned their houses and took shelter in villages. Dr.
Ramchandra was one of the worst sufferers. All members of his family,
including his wife and aged parents, were killed and their bodies thrown
into gutters. In the same slaughter Mr. Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi lost
his life. The Cawnpore Riots Inquiry Committee in its report states that
the riot was of unprecedented violence and peculiar atrocity, which
spread with unexpected rapidity through the whole city and even beyond
it. Murders, arson and looting were widespread for three days, before
the rioting was definitely brought under control. Afterwards it subsided
gradually. The loss of life and property was great. The number of
verified deaths was 300; but the death roll is known to have been larger
and was probably between four and five hundred. A large number of
temples and mosques were desecrated or burnt or destroyed and a very
large number of houses were burnt and pillaged.

 This communal riot, which need never have occurred but for the
provocative conduct of the adherents of the Congress, was the worst
which India has experienced for many years. The trouble, moreover,
spread from the city to the neighbouring villages, where there were
sporadic communal disturbances for several days afterwards.

 The year 1932-33 was relatively free from communal agitations and
disturbances. This welcome improvement was doubtless in some measure due
to the suppression of lawlessness generally and the removal of
uncertainty in regard to the position of the Muslims under the new
constitution.

 But in 1933-34 throughout the country communal tension had been
increasing and disorders which occurred not only on the occasion of such
festivals as Holi, Id and Muharram, but also many resulting from
ordinary incidents of every-day life, indicated that there had been a
deterioration in communal relations since the year began. Communal riots
during Holi occurred at Benares and Cawnpore in the United Provinces, at
Lahore in the Punjab, and at Peshawar. Bakr-i-ld was marked by serious
rioting at Ayodhya, in the United Provinces over cow sacrifice, also at
Bhagalpore in Bihar and Orissa and at Cannanore in Madras. A serious
riot in the Ghazipur District of the United Provinces also resulted in
several deaths. During April and May there were Hindu-Muslim riots at
several places in Bihar and Orissa, in Bengal, in Sind and Delhi, some
of them provoked by very trifling incidents, as for instance, the
unintentional spitting by a Muslim shopkeeper of Delhi upon a Hindu
passer-by. The increase in communal disputes in British India was also
reflected in some of the States where similar incidents occurred.

 The position with regard to communal unrest during the months from
June to October was indicative of the normal, deep-seated antagonism
between the two major communities. June and July months, in which no
Hindu or Muhammedan festival of importance took place, were
comparatively free from riots, though the situation in certain areas of
Bihar necessitated the quartering of additional police. A long-drawn-out
dispute started in Agra. The Muslims of this city objected to the noise
of religious ceremonies in certain Hindu private houses which they said
disturbed worshippers at prayers in a neighbouring mosque. Before the
dispute was settled, riots occurred on the 20th July and again on the
2nd September, in the course of which 4 persons were killed and over 80
injured. In Madras a riot, on the 3rd September resulting in one death
and injuries to 13 persons was occasioned by a book published by Hindus
containing alleged reflections on the Prophet. During the same month
minor riots occurred in several places in the Punjab and the United
Provinces.

 In 1934-35 serious trouble arose in Lahore on the 29th June as a
result of a dispute between Muslims and Sikhs about a mosque situated
within the precincts of a Sikh temple known as the Shahidganj Gurudwara.
Trouble had been brewing for some time. Ill-feeling became intensified
when the Sikhs started to demolish the Mosque despite Muslim protests.
The building had been the subject of prolonged litigation, which has
confirmed the Sikh right of possession.

 On the night of the 29th June a crowd of 3 or 4 thousand Muslims
assembled in front of the Gurudwara. A struggle between this crowd and
the Sikhs inside the Gurudwara was only averted by the prompt action of
the local authorities. They subsequently obtained an undertaking from
the Sikhs to refrain from further demolition. But during the following
week, while strenuous efforts were being made to persuade the leaders to
reach an amicable settlement, the Sikhs under pressure of extremist
influence again set about demolishing the mosque. This placed the
authorities in a most difficult position. The Sikhs were acting within
their legal rights. Moreover the only effective method of stopping
demolition would have been to resort to firing. As the building was full
of Sikhs and was within the precincts of a Sikh place of worship, this
would not only have caused much bloodshed but, for religious reasons,
would have had serious reactions on the Sikh population throughout the
Province. On the other hand, inaction by Government was bound to cause
great indignation among the Muslims, for religious reasons: and it was
expected that this would show itself in sporadic attacks on the Sikhs
and perhaps on the forces of Government.

 It was hoped that discussions between leaders of the two communities
would effect some rapprochement, but mischief-makers inflamed the minds
of their co-religionists. Despite the arrest of the chief offenders, the
excitement increased. The Government's gesture in offering to restore to
the Muslims another mosque which they had purchased years ago proved
unavailing. The situation took a further turn for the worse on the 19th
July and during the following two days the situation was acutely
dangerous. The Central Police station was practically besieged by the
huge crowds, which assumed a most menacing attitude. Repeated attempts
to disperse them without the use of firearms failed and the troops had
to fire twice on the 20th July and eight times on the 21st. In all 23
rounds were fired and 12 persons killed. Casualties, mostly of a minor
nature, were numerous amongst the military and police.

 As a result of the firing, the crowds dispersed and did not
reassemble. Extra police were brought in from other Provinces and the
military garrisons were strengthened. Administrative control was
re-established rapidly, but the religious leaders continued to fan the
embers of the agitation. Civil litigation was renewed and certain Muslim
organisations framed some extravagant demands.

 The situation in Lahore continued to cause anxiety up to the close
of the year. On the 6th November, a Sikh was mortally wounded by a
Muslim. Three days later a huge Sikh-Hindu procession was taken out. The
organisers appeared anxious to avoid conflict but nonetheless one
serious clash occurred. This was followed by further rioting on the next
day. But for the good work of the police and the troops, in breaking up
the fights quickly, the casualties might have been very large.

 On the 19th March 1935 a serious incident occurred in Karachi after
the execution of Abdul Quayum, the Muslim who had murdered Nathuramal, a
Hindu, already referred to as the writer of a scurrilous pamphlet about
the Prophet. Abdul Quayum's body was taken by the District Magistrate,
accompanied by a police party, to be handed over to the deceased's
family for burial outside the city. A huge crowd, estimated to be about
25,000 strong, collected at the place of burial. Though the relatives of
Abdul Quayum wished to complete the burial at the cemetery, the most
violent members of the mob determined to take the body in procession
through the city. The local authorities decided to prevent the mob
entering, since this would have led to communal rioting. All attempts of
the police to stop the procession failed, so a platoon of the Royal
Sussex Regiment was brought in to keep peace. It was forced to open fire
at short range to stop the advance of the frenzied mob and to prevent
itself from being overwhelmed. Forty-seven rounds were fired by which 47
people were killed and 134 injured. The arrival of reinforcements
prevented further attempts to advance. The wounded were taken to the
Civil Hospital and the body of Abdul Quayum was then interred without
further trouble.

 On the 25th August 1935 there was a communal riot at Secunderabad.

 In the year 1936 there were four communal riots. On the 14th April
there occurred a most terrible riot at Firozabad in the Agra District. A
Muslim procession was proceeding along the main bazar and it is alleged
that bricks were thrown from the roofs of Hindu houses. This enraged the
Muslims in the procession who set fire to the house of a Hindu, Dr.
Jivaram, and the adjacent temple of Radha Krishna. The inmates of Dr.
Jivaram's house in addition to 11 Hindus including 3 children were burnt
to death. A second Hindu-Muslim riot broke out in Poona in the Bombay
Presidency on 24th April 1936. On the 27th April there occurred a
Hindu-Muslim riot in Jamalpur in the Monghyr District. The fourth
Hindu-Muslim riot of the year took place in Bombay on the 15th October
1936.

 The year 1937 was full of communal disturbances. On the 27th March
1937 there was a Hindu-Muslim riot at Panipat over the Holi procession
and 14 persons were killed. On the 1st May 1937 there occurred a
communal riot in Madras in which 50 persons were injured. The month of
May was full of communal riots which took place mostly in the C. P. and
the Punjab. One that took place in Shikarpur in Sind caused great panic.
On 18th June there was a Sikh-Muslim riot in Amritsar. It assumed such
proportions that British troops had to be called out to maintain order.

 The year 1938 was marked by two communal riots—one in Allahabad on
26th March and another in Bombay in April.

 There were 6 Hindu-Muslim riots in 1939. On the 21st January there
was a riot at Asansol in which one was killed and 18 injured. It was
followed by a riot in Cawnpore on the 11th February in which 42 were
killed, 200 injured and 800 arrested. On the 4th March there was a riot
at Benares followed by a riot at Cassipore near Calcutta on the 5th
March. On 19th June there was again a riot at Cawnpore over the
Rathajatra procession.

 A serious riot occurred on 20th November 1939 in Sukkur in Sind. The
riot was the culmination of the agitation by the Muslims to take
possession, even by force, of a building called Manzilgah which was in
the possession of Government as Government property and to the transfer
of which the Hindus had raised objections. Mr. E. Weston—now a judge of
the Bombay High Court—who was appointed to investigate into the
disturbances gives the following figures of the murdered and the
wounded:  


|                                                                            |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [CASUALTIES OF THE RIOTS IN SUKKUR, SIND, NOVEMBER 1939](tables/307a.html) |

 Of the many gruesome incidents recorded by him the following may be
quoted:

> "The most terrible of all the disturbances occurred on the night of
> the 20th at Gosarji village which is eight miles from Sukkur and
> sixteen from Shikarpur. According to an early statement sent by the
> District Magistrate to Government, admittedly incomplete, 27 Hindus
> were murdered there that night. According to the witnesses examined
> the number was 37.
>
> "Pamanmal, a contractor of Gosarji states that at the time of
> satyagraha the leading Hindus of Gosarji came in deputation to the
> leading zemindar of the locality Khan Sahib Amirbux who was then at
> Sukkur. He reassured them and said he was responsible for their
> safely. On the 20th Khan Sahib Amirbux was at Gosarji, and that
> morning Mukhi Mahrumal was murdered there. The Hindus went to Khan
> Sahib Amirbux for protection and were again reassured, but that night
> wholesale murder and looting took place. Of the 37 murdered, seven
> were women. Pamanmal states that the following morning he went to the
> Sub-Inspector of Bagerji, which is one mile from Gosarji, but he was
> abused and driven from the thana. He then went to Shikarpur and
> complained to the panchayat, but did not complain to any officer
> there. I may mention that the Sub-Inspector of Bagerji was afterwards
> prosecuted under section 211, Indian Penal Code, and has been
> convicted for failure to make arrests in connection with murders at
> Gosarji.
>
> "As Khan Sahib Amirbux, the zemindar, who was said to have given
> assurance of protection to the Hindus of Bagerji, was reported to be
> attending the Court, he was called and examined as a Court witness. He
> states that he lives half a mile from Gosarji village. The
> Sub-Inspector of Bagerji came to Gosarji on the 20th after the murder
> of Mehrumal, and he acted as a mashir. He says that the Hindus did not
> ask for help and there was no apprehension of trouble. On the night of
> the 20th he was not well, and he heard nothing of the murders. He
> admits that he had heard of the Manzilgah evacuation. Later in his
> evidence he admits that he told the villagers of Gosarji to be on the
> alert as there was trouble in Sukkur, and he says he had called the
> panchayat on the evening of the 19th. He went to Gosarji at sunrise on
> the 21st after the murders. He admits that he is regarded as the
> protector of Gosarji."

 Mr. Weston adds**[/3/](#n03)** :—

> "I find it impossible to believe the evidence of this witness. I have
> no doubt that he was fully aware that there was trouble in Gosarji on
> the night of 20th and preferred to remain in his house."

 Who can deny that this record of rioting presents a picture which is
grim in its results and sombre in its tone? But being chronological in
order, the record might fail to give an idea of the havoc these riots
have caused in any given Province and the paralysis it has brought about
in its social and economic life. To give an idea of the paralysis caused
by the recurrence of riots in a Province I have recast the record of
riots for the Province of Bombay. When recast the general picture
appears as follows:

 Leaving aside the Presidency and confining oneself to the City of
Bombay, there can be no doubt that the record of the city is the
blackest. The first Hindu-Muslim riot took place in 1893. This was
followed by a long period of communal peace which lasted up to 1929. But
the years that have followed have an appalling story to tell. From
February 1929 to April 1938—a period of nine years—there were no less
than 10 communal riots. In 1929 there were two communal riots. In the
first, 149 were killed and 739 were injured and it lasted for 36 days.
In the second riot 35 were killed, 109 were injured and it continued for
22 days. In 1930 there were two riots. Details as to loss of life and
its duration are not available. In 1932 there were again two riots. The
first was a small one. In the second 217 were killed, 2,713 were injured
and it went on for 49 days. In 1933 there was one riot, details about
which are not available. In 1936 there was one riot in which 94 were
killed, 632 were injured and it continued to rage for 65 days. In the
riot of 1937, 11 were killed, 85 were injured and it occupied 21 days.
The riot of 1938 lasted for 2 1/2 hours only but within that time 12
were killed and a little over 100 were injured. Taking the total period
of 9 years and 2 months from February 1929 to April 1938 the Hindus and
Muslims of the City of Bombay alone were engaged in a sanguinary warfare
for 210 days during which period 550 were killed and 4,500 were wounded.
This does not of course take into consideration the loss of property
which took place through arson and loot.

V  
\[Such barbaric mutual violence shows an utter lack of unity\]

 Such is the record of Hindu-Muslim relationship from 1920 to 1940.
Placed side by side with the frantic efforts made by Mr. Gandhi to bring
about Hindu-Muslim unity, the record makes most painful and
heart-rending reading. It would not be much exaggeration to say that it
is a record of twenty years of civil war between the Hindus and the
Muslims in India, interrupted by brief intervals of armed peace.

 In this civil war men were, of course, the principal victims. But
women did not altogether escape molestation. It is perhaps not
sufficiently known how much women have suffered in communal hostilities.
Data relating to the whole of India are not available. But some data
relating to Bengal exist.

 On the 6th September 1932 questions were asked in the old Bengal
Legislative Council regarding the abduction of women in the Province of
Bengal. In reply, the Government of the day stated that between 1922 to
1927, the total number of women abducted was 568. Of these, 101 were
unmarried and 467 were married. Asked to state the community to which
the abducted women belonged, it was disclosed that out of 101 unmarried
women 64 were Hindus, 29 Muslims, 4 Christians, and 4 non-descript; and
that out of 467 married women 331 were Hindus, 122 Muslims, 2 Christians
and 12 non-descript. These figures relate to cases which were reported
or if reported were not detected. Usually, about 10 p.c. of the cases
are reported or detected and 90 p.c. go undetected. Applying this
proportion to the facts disclosed by the Bengal Government, it may be
said that about 35,000 women were abducted in Bengal during the short
period of five years between 1922-27.

 The attitude towards women-folk is a good index of the friendly or
unfriendly attitude between the two communities. As such, the case which
happened on 27th June 1936 in the village of Govindpur in Bengal makes
very instructive reading. The following account of it is taken from the
opening speech**[/4/](#n04)** of the Crown counsel when the trial of 40
Mahomedan accused began on the 10th August 1936. According to the
prosecution:

> "There lived in Govindpur a Hindu by name Radha Vallabh. He had a son
> Harendra. There lived also in Govindpur a Muslim woman whose
> occupation was to sell milk. The local Musalmans of the village
> suspected that Harendra had illicit relationship with this Muslim milk
> woman. They resented that a Muslim woman should be in the keeping of a
> Hindu and they decided to wreak their vengeance on the family of Radha
> Vallabh for this insult. A meeting of the Musalmans of Govindpur was
> convened and Harendra was summoned to allend this meeting. Soon after
> Harendra went to the meeting, cries of Harendra were heard. It was
> found that Harendra was assaulted and was lying senseless in the field
> where the meeting was held. The Musalmans of Govindpur were not
> satisfied with this assault. They informed Radha Vallabh that unless
> he, his wife and his children embraced Islam the Musalmans did not
> feel satisfied for the wrong his son had done to them. Radha Vallabh
> was planning to send away to another place his wife and children. The
> Musalmans came to know this plan. Next day when Kusum, the wife of
> Radha Vallabh, was sweeping the courtyard of her house, some
> Mahomedans came, held down Radha Vallabh and some spirited away Kusum,
> After having taken her to some distance two Mahomedans by name Laker
> and Mahaxar raped her and removed her ornaments. After some time, she
> came to her senses and ran towards her home. Her assailants again
> pursued her. She succeeded in reaching her home and locking herself
> in. Her Muslim assailants broke open the door, caught hold of her and
> again carried her away on the road. It was suggested by her assailants
> that she should be again raped on the street. But with the help of
> another woman by name Rajani, Kusum escaped and took shelter in the
> house of Rajani. While she was in the house of Rajani the Musalmans of
> Govindpur paraded her husband Radha Vallabh in the streets in complete
> disgrace. Next day the Musalmans kept watch on the roads to and from
> Govindpur to the Police Station to prevent Radha Vallabh and Kusum
> from giving information of the outrage to the Police."

 These acts of barbarism against women, committed without remorse,
without shame and without condemnation by their fellow brethren show the
depth of the antagonism which divided the two communities. The tempers
on each side were the tempers of two warring nations. There was carnage,
pillage, sacrilege and outrage of every species, perpetrated by Hindus
against Musalmans and by Musalmans against Hindus—more perhaps by
Musalmans against Hindus than by Hindus against Musalmans. Cases of
arson have occurred in which Musalmans have set fire to the houses of
Hindus, in which whole families of Hindus, men, women and children were
roasted alive and consumed in the fire, to the great satisfaction of the
Muslim spectators. What is astonishing is that these cold and deliberate
acts of rank cruelty were not regarded as atrocities to be condemned but
were treated as legitimate acts of warfare for which no apology was
necessary. Enraged by these hostilities, the editor of the
**Hindustan**—a Congress paper—writing in 1926 used the following
language to express the painful truth of the utter failure of Mr.
Gandhi's efforts to bring about Hindu-Muslim unity. In words of utter
despair the editor said:**[/5/](#n05)**

> "There is an immense distance between the India of to-day and India a
> nation, between an uncouth reality which expresses itself in murder
> and arson and that fond fiction which is in the imagination of
> patriotic if self-deceiving men. To talk about Hindu-Muslim unity from
> a thousand platforms or to give it blazoning headlines is to
> perpetrate an illusion whose cloudly structure dissolves itself at the
> exchange of brick-bats and the desecration of tombs and temples. To
> sing a few pious hymns of peace and goodwill a la Naidu. . . .will not
> benefit the country. The President of the Congress has been
> improvising on the theme of Hindu- Muslim unity, so dear to her heart,
> with brilliant variations, which does credit to her genius but leaves
> the problem untouched. The millions in India can only respond when the
> unity song is not only on the tongues of the leaders but in the hearts
> of the millions of their countrymen."

Nothing I could say can so well show the futility of any hope of
Hindu-Muslim unity. Hindu-Muslim unity up to now was at least in sight
although it was like a mirage. Today it is out of sight and also out of
mind. Even Mr. Gandhi has given up what, he perhaps now realizes, is an
impossible task.

 But there are others who, notwithstanding the history of the past
twenty years, believe in the possibility of Hindu-Muslim unity. This
belief of theirs seems to rest on two grounds. Firstly, they believe in
the efficacy of a Central Government to mould diverse set of people into
one nation. Secondly, they feel that the satisfaction of Muslim demands
will be a sure means of achieving Hindu-Muslim unity.

 It is true that Government is a unifying force and that there are
many instances where diverse people have become unified into one
homogeneous people by reason of their being subjected to a single
Government. But the Hindus who are depending upon Government as a
unifying force seem to forget that there are obvious limits to
Government acting as a unifying force. The limits to Government working
as a unifying force are set by the possibilities of fusion among the
people. In a country where race, language and religion do not stand in
the way of fusion, Government is most effective as a unifying force. On
the other hand, in a country where race, language and religion put an
effective bar against fusion, Government can have no effect as a
unifying force. If the diverse people in France, England, Italy and
Germany became unified nations by reason of a common Government, it was
because neither race, language nor religion obstructed the unifying
process of Government. On the other hand, if the people in Austria,
Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Turkey failed to be unified, although under
a common Government, it was because race, language and religion were
strong enough to counter and nullify the unifying power of Government.
No one can deny that race, language and religion have been too dominant
in India to permit the people of India to be welded into a nation by the
unifying force of a common Government. It is an illusion to say that the
Central Government in India has moulded the Indian people into a nation.
What the Central Government has done, is to tie them together by one law
and to house them together in one place, as the owner of unruly animals
does, by tying them with one rope and keeping them in one stable. All
that the Central Government has done is to produce a kind of peace among
Indians. It has not made them one nation.

 It cannot be said that time has been too short for unification to
take place. If one hundred and fifty years of life under a Central
Government does not suffice, eternity will not suffice. For this failure
the genius of the Indians alone is responsible. There is among Indians
no passion for unity, no desire for fusion. There is no desire to have a
common dress. There is no desire to have a common language. There is no
will to give up what is local and particular for something which is
common and national. A Gujarati takes pride in being a Gujarati, a
Maharashtrian in being a Maharashtrian, a Punjabi in being a Punjabi, a
Madrasi in being a Madrasi and a Bengali in being a Bengali. Such is the
mentality of Hindus, who accuse the Musalman of want of national feeling
when he says "I am a Musalman first and Indian afterwards." Can any one
suggest that there exists anywhere in India even among the Hindus an
instinct or a passion that would put any semblance of emotion behind
their declaration "Civis Indianus sum," or the smallest consciousness of
a moral and social unity, which desires to give expression by
sacrificing whatever is particular and local in favour of what is common
and unifying? There is no such consciousness and no such desire. Without
such consciousness and no such desire, to depend upon Government to
bring about unification is to deceive oneself.

 Regarding the second, it was no doubt the opinion of the Simon
Commission:

> "That the communal riots were a manifestation of the anxieties and
> ambitions aroused in both the communities by the prospects of India's
> political future. So long as authority was firmly established in
> British hands and self-government was not thought of, Hindu-Muslim
> rivalry was confined within a narrower field. This was not merely
> because the presence of a neutral bureaucracy discouraged strife. A
> further reason was that there was little for members of one community
> to fear from the predominance of the other. The comparative absence of
> communal strife in the Indian States today may be similarly explained.
> Many, who are well acquainted with conditions in British India a
> generation ago, would testify that at that epoch so much good feeling
> had been engendered between the two sides that communal tension as a
> threat to civil peace was at a minimum. But the coming of the Reforms
> and the anticipation of what may follow them have given new point to
> Hindu-Muslim competition. The one community naturally lays claim to
> the rights of a majority and relics upon its qualifications of better
> education and greater wealth; the other is all the more determined on
> those accounts to secure effective protection for its members, and
> does not forget that it represents the previous conquerors of the
> country. It wishes to be assured of adequate representation and of a
> full share of official posts."

 Assuming that to be a true diagnosis, assuming that Muslim demands
are reasonable, assuming that the Hindus were prepared to grant them—and
these are all very big assumptions—it is a question whether a true union
between Hindus and Muslims can take place through political unity,
resulting from the satisfaction of Muslim political demands. Some people
seem to think that it is enough if there is a political unity between
Hindus and Muslims. I think this is the greatest delusion. Those who
take this view seem to be thinking only of how to bring the Muslims to
join the Hindus in their demands on the British for Dominion Status or
Independence, as the mood of the moment be. This, to say the least, is a
very shortsighted view. How to make the Muslims join the Hindus in the
latter's demands on the British is comparatively a very small question.
In what spirit will they work the constitution? Will they work it only
as aliens by an unwanted tie or will they work it as true kindreds, is
the more important question. For working it as true kindreds, what is
wanted is not merely political unity but a true union of heart and soul,
in other words, social unity. Political unity is worth nothing, if it is
not the expression of real union. It is as precarious as the unity
between persons who without being friends become allies of each other.
How very precarious it always is, is best illustrated by what has
happened between Germany and Russia. Personally, I do not think that a
permanent union can be made to depend upon the satisfaction of mere
material interests. Pacts may produce unity. But that unity can never
ripen into union. A pact as a basis for a union is worse than useless.
As its very nature indicates, a pact is separative in character. A pact
cannot produce the desire to accommodate, it cannot instil the spirit of
sacrifice, nor can it bind the parties to the main objective. Instead of
accommodating each other, parties to a pact strive to get as much as
possible out of each other. Instead of sacrificing for the common cause,
parties to the pact are constantly occupied in seeing that the sacrifice
made by one is not used for the good of the other. Instead of fighting
for the main objective, parties to the pact are for ever engaged in
seeing that in the struggle for reaching the goal, the balance of power
between the parties is not disturbed. Renan spoke the most profound
truth when he said:

> "Community of interests is assuredly a powerful bond between men. But
> nevertheless can interests suffice to make a nation? I do not believe
> it. Community of interests make commercial treaties. There is a
> sentimental side to nationality; it is at once body and soul; a
> Zollverein is not a fatherland."

 Equally striking is the view of James Bryce, another well-known
student of history. According to Bryce,

> "The permanence of an institution depends not merely on the material
> interests that support it, but on its conformity to the deep-rooted
> sentiment of the men for whom it has been made. When it draws to
> itself and provides a fitting expression for that sentiment, the
> sentiment becomes thereby not only more vocal but actually stronger,
> and in its turn imparts a fuller vitality to the institution."

 These observations of Bryce were made in connection with the
foundation of the German Empire by Bismarck who, according to Bryce,
succeeded in creating a durable empire because it was based on a
sentiment and that this sentiment was fostered

> ". . . .most of all by what we call the instinct or passion for
> nationality, the desire of a people already conscious of a moral and
> social unity, to see such unity expressed and realized under a single
> government, which shall give it a place and name among civilized
> states."

 What is it that produces this moral and social unity which gives
permanence, and what is it that drives people to see such unity
expressed and realized under a single government, which shall give it a
place and a name among civilized states?

 No one is more competent to answer this question than James Bryce.
It was just such a question he had to consider in discussing the
vitality of the Holy Roman Empire as contrasted with the Roman Empire.
If any Empire can be said to have succeeded in bringing about political
unity among its diverse subjects it was the Roman Empire. Paraphrasing
for the sake of brevity the language of Bryce :—The gradual extension of
Roman citizenship through the founding of colonies, first throughout
Italy and then in the provinces, the working of the equalized and
equalizing Roman Law, the even pressure of the government on all
subjects, the movements of population, caused by commerce and the slave
traffic, were steadily assimilating the various peoples. Emperors, who
were for the most part natives of the provinces, cared little to cherish
Italy or even after the days of the Antonines, to conciliate Rome. It
was their policy to keep open for every subject a career by whose
freedom they had themselves risen to greatness. Annihilating
distinctions of legal status among freemen, it completed the work, which
trade and literature and toleration to all beliefs but one were already
performing. No quarrel of race or religions disturbed that calm, for all
national distinctions were becoming merged in the idea of a common
Empire.

 This unity produced by the Roman Empire was only a political unity.
How long did this political unity last? In the words of Bryce:

> "Scarcely had these slowly working influences brought about this
> unity, when other influences began to threaten it. New foes assailed
> the frontiers; while the loosening of the structure within was shown
> by the long struggles for power which followed the death or deposition
> of each successive emperor. In the period of anarchy after the fall of
> Valerian, generals were raised by their armies in every part of the
> Empire, and ruled great provinces as monarchs apart, owning no
> allegiance to the possessor of the capital. The breaking-up of the
> western half of the Empire into separate kingdoms might have been
> anticipated by two hundred years, had there not arisen in Diocletian a
> prince active and skilful enough to bind up the fragments before they
> had lost all cohesion, meeting altered conditions by new remedies. The
> policy he adopted by dividing and localizing authority recognized the
> fact that the weakened heart could no longer make its pulsations fell
> to the body's extremities. He parcelled out the supreme power among
> four monarchs, ruling as joint emperors in four capitals, and then
> sought to give it a fictitious strength by surrounding it with an
> oriental pomp which his earlier predecessors would have scorned. . .
> .The prerogative of Rome was menaced by the rivalry of Nicomedia, and
> the nearer greatness of Milan."

 It is, therefore, evident that political unity was not enough to
give permanence and stability to the Roman Empire and as Bryce points
out that "the breaking-up of the western half (of the Roman Empire) into
separate kingdoms might have been anticipated by two hundred years, had
the barbarian tribes on the border been bolder, or had there not arisen
in Diocletian a prince active and skilful enough to bind up the
fragments before they had lost all cohesion, meeting altered conditions
by new remedies." But the fact is that the Roman Empire which was
tottering and breaking into bits and whose political unity was not
enough to bind it together did last for several hundred years as one
cohesive unit after it became the Holy Roman Empire. As Prof. Marvin
points out:**[/6/](#n06)**

> "The unity of the Roman Empire was mainly political and military. It
> lasted for between four and Five hundred years. The unity which
> supervened in the Catholic Church was religious and moral and endured
> for a thousand years."

 The question is, what made the Holy Roman Empire more stable than
the Roman Empire could ever hope to be? According to Bryce, it was a
common religion in the shape of Christianity and a common religious
organization in the shape of the Christian Church which supplied the
cement to the Holy Roman Empire, and which was wanting in the Roman
Empire. It was this cement which gave to the people of the Empire a
moral and social unity and made them see such unity expressed and
realized under a single government.

 Speaking of the unifying effect of Christianity as a common religion
Bryce says:

"It is on religion that the inmost and deepest life of a nation rests.
Because Divinity was divided, humanity had been divided, likewise; the
doctrine of the unity of God now enforced the unity of man, who had been
created in His image. The first lesson of Christianity was love, a love
that was to join in one body those whom suspicion and prejudice and
pride of race had hitherto kept apart. There was thus formed by the new
religion a community of the faithful, a Holy Empire, designed to gather
all men into its bosom, and standing opposed to the manifold polytheisms
of the older world, exactly as the universal sway of the Caesars was
contrasted with the innumerable kingdoms and city republics that had
gone before it. . . ."**[/7/](#n07)**

 If what Bryce has said regarding the instability of the Roman Empire
and the comparatively greater stability of its successor, the Holy Roman
Empire, has any lesson for India; and if the reasoning of Bryce that the
Roman Empire was unstable because it had nothing more than political
unity to rely on, and that the Holy Roman Empire was more stable,
because it rested on the secure foundation of moral and social unity,
produced by the possession of a common faith, is valid reasoning and
embodies human experience, then it is obvious that there can be no
possibility of a union between Hindus and Muslims. The cementing force
of a common religion is wanting. From a spiritual point of view, Hindus
and Musalmans are not merely two classes or two sects such as
Protestants and Catholics or Shaivas and Vaishnavas. They are two
distinct species. In this view, neither the Hindu nor .the Muslim can be
expected to recognize that humanity is an essential quality present in
them both, and that they are not many but one, and that the differences
between them are no more than accidents. For them Divinity is divided,
and with the division of Divinity their humanity is divided, and with
the division of humanity they must remain divided. There is nothing to
bring them in one bosom.

 Without social union, political unity is difficult to be achieved.
If achieved, it would be as precarious as a summer sapling, liable to be
uprooted by the gust of a hostile wind. With mere political unity, India
may be a State. But to be a State is not to be a nation, and a State
which is not a nation has small prospects of survival in the struggle
for existence. This is especially true where nationalism—the most
dynamic force of modern times—is seeking everywhere to free itself by
the destruction and disruption of all mixed states. The danger to a
mixed and composite state, therefore, lies not so much in external
aggression as in the internal resurgence of nationalities which are
fragmented, entrapped, suppressed and held against their will. Those who
oppose Pakistan should not only bear this danger in mind but should also
realize that this attempt on the part of suppressed nationalities to
disrupt a mixed state and to found a separate home for themselves,
instead of being condemned, finds ethical justification from the
principle of self-determination.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** The series is known as "India in 1920" & so on.

**[/2/](#m02)** **Rangila Rasul**was written in reply to **Sitaka
Chinala**—a pamphlet written by a Muslim alleging that Sita, wife of
Rama, the hero of **Ramayana**, was a prostitute.

**[/3/](#m03)** Report of the Court of Inquiry appointed under section 3
of the Sind Public Inquiries Act to inquire into the riots which
occurred at Sukkur in 1939, pp. 66-67.

**[/4/](#m04)** This is an English version of the report which appeared
in the **Savadhan**, a Marathi weekly of Nagpur, in its issue of 25th
August 1936.

**[/5/](#m05)** Quoted in "Through Indian Eyes" columns of the **Times
of India**, dated 16-8-26.

**[/6/](#m06)** **The Unity of Western Civilization** (4th Ed.), p. 27.

**[/7/](#m07)** The Christian Church did not play a passive part in the
process of unification of the Holy Roman Empire. It took a very active
part in bringing it about. "Seeing one institution after another falling
to pieces around her, seeing how countries and cities were being severed
from each other by the eruption of strange tribes and the increasing
difficulty of communication the Christain Church," says Bryce, "strove
to save religious fellowship by strengthening the ecclesiastical
organization, by drawing tighter every bond of outward union.
Necessities of faith were still more powerful. Truth, it was said, is
one, and as it must bind into one body all who hold it, so it is only by
continuing in that body that they can preserve it. There is one Flock
and one Shepherd."  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
