+++
title = "03 "

+++
****

3\. THE CHRISTIANS : A MINORITY IN MORAL MAJORITY

Many of us in the West – at least those born in the forties and early
fifties – grew-up hearing of the wonderful and ‘saintly’ work done by
the "White" missionaries in far away and dangerous (that is jungle and
snake-infested) countries, where lived "Savages", waiting to be
converted to the civilizing influence of Christianity. The reality which
I discovered in India was totally different: while there is no doubt
that Christian missionaries have done a remarkable work in the fields of
education and health, their prime purpose remains - even today - to
convert the ‘heathen’ Hindus to the True God – by any means. Christians
constitute only 3% of the population of India, but they weld an enormous
moral power, thanks in greater part to many of India’s intelligentsia
who are educated in Christian schools and taught to look at their own
culture in a derogatory manner. Nothing illustrates this better than the
way the Indian Press went berserk after the Staines murder, while
ignoring the crimes committed against the Hindus for centuries.

****

THE CHRISTIAN STORY : A WARPED INDIAN MEDIA

While there is no doubt that the ghastly murder of Graham Stewart
Staines, the Australian missionary and his two innocent sons, should be
universally condemned and that the culprits should be severely punished,
the massive outcry it has evoked in the Indian Press, raises several
important questions, which can only be answered by a Westerner, as any
Indian who would dare utter the below statements would immediately be
assimilated with the Sangh Parivar :

1.  Is the life of a White Man infinitely more important and dear to the
    Indian Media than the lives of a hundred Indians ? Or to put it
    differently : is the life of a Christian more sacred than the lives
    of many Hindus ?

It would seem so. Because we all remember not so long ago, whether in
Punjab or in Kashmir, how militants would stop buses and kill all the
Hindus - men, women and children. It even happened recently, when a few
of the last courageous Hindus to dare remain in Kashmir, were savagely
slaughtered in a village, as were the labourers in Himachal Pradesh.
Yet, very few voices were raised in the Indian Press condemning it - at
least there never was such an outrage as provoked by the murder of
Staines. When Hindus are killed in pogroms in Pakistan or Bangladesh
(please read Taslima Nasreen’s book "Lajja"), we never witness in the
Indian Media the like of the tear-jerking, posthumous "interview" of Mr
Staines in Star News. Does this really mean, as many of the early
colonialists and missionaries thought, that the life of a hundred Hindus
is not worth a tear ?

1.  This massive outcry on the "atrocities against the minorities"
    raises also doubts about the quality and integrity of Indian
    journalism. Take for instance the rape of the four nuns in Jhabua.
    Today the Indian Press (and the foreign correspondents - witness
    Tony Clifton’s piece in Newseek) are still reporting that it was a
    "religious" rape. Yet I went to Jhabua and met the four adorable
    nuns, who themselves admitted, along with their bishop George
    Anatil, that it had **nothing** to do with religion - it was the
    doing of a gang of Bhil tribals, known to perpetrate this kind of
    hateful acts on their own women. Yet today, the Indian Press, the
    Christian hierarchy and the politicians, continue to include the
    Jhabua rape in the list of the atrocities against the Christians.
    Take the Wayanad incident in Northern Kerala. It was reported that a
    priest and four women were beaten up and a Bible stolen by
    "fanatical" Hindus. A FIR was lodged, the communists took out
    processions all over Kerala to protest against the "atrocities" and
    the Press went gaga. Yet as an intrepid reporter from the Calicut
    office of the Indian Express found out, nobody was beaten up and the
    Bible was safe. Too late : the damage was done and it still is being
    made use of by the enemies of India. Finally, even if Dara Singh
    does belong to the Bajrang Dal, it is doubtful if the 100 others
    accused do. What is more probable, is that like in Wayanad, it is a
    case of converted tribals versus non-converted tribals, of pent-up
    jealousies, of old village feuds and land disputes. It is also an
    outcome of what - it should be said - are the aggressive methods of
    the Pentecost and seventh Adventists missionaries, known for their
    muscular ways of converting.

3\) And this raises the most important question : why does the Indian
press always reflect a westernised point of view ? Why does India’s
intellectual "elite", the majority of which happens to be Hindu, always
come down so hard on their own culture, their own religion, their own
brothers and sisters ? Is it because of an eternal feeling of
inferiority, which itself is a legacy of British colonisation ? Is it
because they considers Hindus to be inferior beings - remember the words
of Claudius Buccchanan, a chaplain attached to the East India Company :
"...Neither truth, nor honesty, honour, gratitude, nor charity, is to be
found in the breast of a Hindoo"! Is it because the Indian Press is
still deeply influenced by Marxist and communist thoughts planted by
Nehruvianism, like it is in Kerala, where the communists have
shamelessly and dangerously exploited the Christians issue for their own
selfish purpose ?

Whatever it is, the harm is done. Because even though it is not the
truth which has been reported from Jhabua, from Wayanad or from the
Keonjhar district in Orissa, it has been **passed-off as the truth** and
it has been **believed** to be so by the masses. And the result is that
it has split India a little more along religious and castes lines, as
the communist and those who want to see India divided, diminished,
humiliated, have always wished. How sad that such a beautiful country,
with such a wonderful tradition of tolerance, spirituality and
greatness, is slowly sinking into self-destruction… And the best is that
the Hindus - they who were colonised, beaten-up, converted by force or
guile, their temples destroyed, their women raped, are blamed - and not
those who raped, converted, destroyed, colonised…

And finally, Christianity has always striven on martyrdom, on being
persecuted. It was so in Rome, it was so in Africa, it is so in India.
Before the murder of Mr Staines, the Christian story was slowly dying;
the culprits of the Jhabua rape would have been condemned and the
Wayanad fraud exposed. In one stroke the burning of Graham Stewart
Staines has revived the controversy and insured that it does not die for
a long time.

****

THE RIGHT WAY TO WELCOME THE POPE

Numerous religious leaders have pointed out that it will be
counterproductive for Hindus to protest the Pope’s coming to India - and
that rather he should be welcomed in the traditional manner, as all
saints have always been greeted in India: with a ‘Purna Kumba’, a pot of
water, topped with a coconut, which symbolises the fullness of life. "We
welcome him in the fullness and the confidence of a civilisation which
is thousands of years old", says Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, the Revered
founder of the Bangalore-based Art of Living.

But at the same time, the Pope should help remove in the minds of
Christians the idea that Hinduism is polytheism, because Hindus have
always recognized the One from which all creation happened. Indeed,
Hindus accept everything : many of them are even ready to put an altar
for Jesus in every temple - but will the Church accommodate their
Upanishads and Vedas ? It is very doubtful !Maybe then should the Pope
publicly state that Hinduism is not satanic - as it is described in the
latest pamphlet released by the US-based Southern Baptist Church - and
acknowledge the fact that it has influenced many spiritual religions
over the millenniums.

It is also hoped that the Pope will ask catholic missionaries to put a
brake on conversions of tribals and low caste Hindus, because if you
honour and respect all other religions - as the Hindus do - the culture
of conversion is not needed. But unfortunately there is not yet been any
sanction in Christianity to similarly respect opposite religions. If
only the Pope could tell his missionaries just to do service in the
remote areas and leave the tribals to their indigenous practises, there
would not be any more problems ! It is also clear that the Christian
community of India has overreacted in the past sixteen months, because
Christianity has often alienated Indian Christians from the mainstream -
it even sometimes gave Christians an unfortunate feeling of superiority
over Hindus. They are afraid, or loath, for instance, to participate in
anything that has a Hindu connotation; or they are made to change their
names. And since they get alienated, a certain fear psychosis sets in.

The Pope might remind Indians that Christianity brought education to
them. But did you know for instance that there were125.000 medical
institutes in Madras before the Europeans came ? In fact, Indians never
lacked education - the latest archaeological and linguistic discoveries
point out that the Western world owes much of its sciences and
philosophy to ancient India - the Christians only brought British
education to India, which often caused more damage by westernising many
of India’s upper classes. But it is also true on the positive side, that
Christianity is often service-oriented to the people and to some extent
no caste system affects Christianity. Also, it takes more into prayer
people who were so caught-up in religion rituals. As for the Pope’s
probable announcement that he is speeding-up the process of beatifying
Mother Theresa, it’s all drama ! What is the point of conferring
sainthood on someone who is dead ! She did good things, she symbolised
Service, but sainthood is a concept of the past, often used to highlight
the "martyrdom" of a single enlightened (catholic) individual, pitted
against a whole "heathen", or "pagan" community or nation.

History books should in fact be rewritten to include the harsher
consequences of Christianity in India. The Anglican missionaries, for
instance, who arrived in India on the heels of the British, preyed on
the Adivasis, the tribal people, whom they promptly proceeded to name as
the "original" inhabitants of India, who were colonised by the « bad »
Brahmins, during the mythical Aryan invasion. "Was it not right, they
said, to free them from the grip of their masters, who had enslaved them
both socially and religiously"? Thus, they set the low castes against
the mainstream of Hindu society and sowed the seeds of an explosive
conflict, which was later exploited by power hungry Indian politicians.
And remember the words of Swami Vivekananda, who nearly a century ago
had cried in anguish at the Parliament of Religions in Chicago : "if we
Hindus dig out all the dirt from the bottom of the Pacific Ocean and
throw it in you faces, it will be but a speck compared to what the
missionaries have done to our religion and culture »".

Should then Hindus demand an apology from the Pope, or should they
‘tolerate’ his visit as they have tolerated the presence of Muslim and
Europeans invaders so many times before ? "There is no question of
‘tolerating’ the Pope, smiles mischievously Sri Sri Ravi Shankar :
tolerance has a negative connotation, as it implies that we tolerate
something we don’t like... In fact we like everybody"…

 

 

 

****

THE HINDU ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY

The Pope is arriving in India on the 5th of November. Does he know that
he may be stepping on a land from which Christianity originated ?
Indeed, over the centuries, numerous historians and Sages have pointed
out that not only Hinduism has had a predominant influence on
Christianity, but that many of the Christian rites could be directly
borrowed from Buddhist and Hindu India !

French historian Alain Danielou had noticed as early as 1950 "that a
great number of events which surround the birth of Christ - as it is
related in the Gospels - strangely remind us of buddhists and
krishnaites legends". Danielou quotes as examples the structure of the
Christian Church, which resembles that of the buddhist Chaitya; the
rigorous asceticism of certain early Christian sects, which reminds one
of the asceticism of Jain and Buddhist saints; the veneration of relics,
the usage of holy water, which is an Indian practice, or the word
"Amen", which comes from Hindu OM. Another historian, Belgium Konraad
Elst, also remarks "that many early Christian saints, such as Hippolytus
of Rome, possessed an intimate knowledge of Brahmanism". Elst even
quotes the famous Saint Augustin who wrote: « that we never cease to
look towards India, where many things are proposed to our admiration».
Unfortunately, remarks American Indianist David Frawley, "from the 2d
century onwards, Christians leaders decided to break away from the Hindu
influence and show that Christianity ONLY started with the birth of
Christ". Hence, many later saints began branding Brahmins as "heretics"
and Saint Gregory set a future trend by publicly destroying the "pagan"
idols of the Hindus.

Great Indian Sages, such as Sri Aurobindo, or Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, the
founder of the Art of Living, which is practised in more than 80
countries, have often remarked that the stories recounting how Jesus
came to India to be initiated, are probably true. Sri Sri Ravi Shankar
notes, for instance, that Jesus sometimes wore an orange robe, the Hindu
symbol of renunciation in the world, which was not a usual practice in
Judaism. "In the same way, he continues, the worshipping of the Virgin
Mary in Catholicism is probably borrowed from the Hindu cult of Devi".
Bells too, which cannot be found today in synagogues, the surviving form
of Judaism, are used in Church - and we all know their importance in
Buddhism and Hinduism for thousands of years. There are many other
similarities between Hinduism and Christianity : incense, sacred bread
(Prasadam), the different altars around churches (which recall the
manifold deities in their niches inside Hindu temples); reciting the
rosary (japamala), the Christian Trinity (the ancient Santana Dharma:
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh), Christian processions, the sign of the cross
(Anganyasa) etc…

In fact, Hinduism’s pervading influence seems to go much earlier than
Christianity. American mathematician, A. Seindenberg, has for example
shown that the Sulbasutras, the ancient Vedic science of mathematics,
constitute the source of mathematics in the Antic world, from Babylon to
Greece : « the arithmetic equations of the Sulbasutras he writes, were
used in the observation of the triangle by the Babylonians, as well as
in the edification of Egyptian pyramids, in particular the funeral altar
in form of pyramid known in the vedic world as smasana-cit (Seindenberg
1978: 329). In astronomy too, the "Indus" (from the valley of the Indus)
have left a universal legacy, determining for instance the dates of
solstices, as noted by 18th century French astronomer Jean-Sylvain
Bailly : « the movement of stars which was calculated by Hindus 4500
years ago, does not differ even by a minute from the tables which we are
using today". And he concludes: "the Hindu systems of astronomy are much
more ancient than those of the Egyptians - even the Jews derived from
the Hindus their knowledge ». There is also no doubt that the Greeks
heavily borrowed from the "Indus". Danielou notes that the Greek cult of
Dionysos, which later became Bacchus with the Romans, is a branch of
Shivaism : « Greeks spoke of India as the sacred territory of Dionysos
and even historians of Alexander the Great identified the Indian Shiva
with Dionysos and mention the dates and legends of the Puranas ». French
philosopher and Le Monde journalist Jean-Paul Droit, recently wrote in
his book "The Forgetfulness of India" that « the Greeks loved so much
Indian philosophy, that Demetrios Galianos had even translated the
Bhagavad Gita ».

Many western and Christian historians have tried to nullify this Indian
influence on Christian and ancient Greece, by saying that it is the
West, through the Aryan invasion, and later the onslaught of Alexander
the Great on India, which influenced Indian astronomy, mathematics,
architecture, philosophy - and not vice versa. But new archaeological
and linguistic discoveries such as the mapping of the ancient Saraswati
river by satellites, or the decipherment of the Indus script, have
proved not only that there never was an Aryan invasion and that there is
a continuity from ancient Vedic civilisation to the Saraswati culture,
but also that Indian History has been considerably post-dated by
British, or Birtish-related historians. The Vedas, for instance, which
constitute the soul of present day Hinduism, have not been composed in
500 BC, as dear Max Mueller arbitrarily decided, but may go back to 7000
years Before Christ… giving Hinduism plenty of time to influence
Christianity and older civilisations which preceded it. Thus, instead of
protesting the Pope’s visit, the VHP and other Hindu organisations
should rather point out to him the close links which exist between
Christianity and ancient India, which bind them into a secret
brotherhood.

****

CHRIST AND THE NORTH-EAST

Jesus Christ was a great avatar of Love in the history of humanity and
his message of compassion, charity, of caring for one and another, is
even more relevant today, in this fast and merciless civilization of
ours, than it was 20 centuries ago, when people were more simple and
living closer to Nature. Indeed, there are Christians who today try
quietly and unobtrusively to put into practise Christ’s precepts - and
you can find missionaries in India, such as Father Ceyrac, a Jesuit, who
has lived for more than 60 years in Chennai, tending to the poorest
sections of this society, while respecting their culture (Father Ceyrac,
who speaks fluently Tamil, often quotes from the Upanishads).

Unfortunately, there has crept in the purity of the early Christianity
an exclusiveness, a feeling of sole propriety over the Copyright of God.
This exclusiveness, this feeling amongst Christians, that "we are the
only true religion, all other gods are false gods", has had the most
catastrophic and bloody consequences: millions have been killed in the
name of Christ, entire civilizations, such as the Atzecs and Incas, have
been wiped-out, in order "to bring them the word of Jesus" and
Christians have even savagely murdered each other, whether in France or
England. One would hope that this intolerance, this fanatical and
militant drive to convert, forcibly or otherwise, pagans to the "true"
God has ceased in this new millenium of "enlightenment". Unfortunately
it is not so. For nearly three centuries, India has been the target of a
massive conversion drive. It is even more so today, as Christianity is
dwindling in the West – there are less and less people going to Church
and very few youth willing to become priests and nuns. The Church is
thus looking for new converts in the Third World, particularly in India,
where people have such an innate aspiration to spirituality. Indeed, the
Pope has earmarked this new millenium as "the Evangelization of Asia".
And it is in the North-East that this evangelization is meeting with the
most success, because it is peopled with simple, poor and uneducated
tribals, who make an easy target.

In Tripura, for instance, there were no Christians at independence, the
maharaja of the state was a Hindu and there were innumerable temples all
over the State. But from 1950, Christian missionaries (with Nehru’s
blessings) went into the deep forests of Tripura and started converting
the Kukis. Today, according to official figures, there are 120.000
Christians in Tripura, a 90% increase since 1991. The figures are even
more striking in Arunachal Pradesh, where there were only 1710
Christians in 1961, but 115000 today, as well as 700 churches! What to
say of Mizoram and Nagaland, where the entire local population is
Christian! The amount of money being by poured by Christians into the
North-East is staggering: The Saint Paul’s school of Tripura, for
instance, gets an 80 lakhs endowment per semester. Which Hindu school
can match this ? No country in the world would allow this. France, for
instance, has a full-blown Minister who is in charge of hunting down
"sects". And by sects, it is meant anything which does not belong to the
great Christian family, particularly if it has Hindu "pagan" overtones…

Isn’t it also strange that many of the North-East separatist movements,
such as the Mizo or the Bodos, are not only Christian dominated, but
also sometimes function with the covert backing of the missionaries? The
Don Bosco schools, for example, which are everywhere in the North-East,
are known by the Tripura Intelligence Bureau to sometimes harbor
extremists at night. But the Tripura Marxist Government chooses to close
its eyes, because in India, Communists are often walking – for their own
selfish purpose - hand in hand with Christians. Does the common man in
India know that the nexus between the separatists and the Church is so
strong in Tripura and Assam that temples are being demolished, that
people are scared to practise poujas, except in strongholds such as
Agartala, that Hindu social workers do not dare go in the interior ? On
the other hand, every other day a new church springs-up in the
North-East, every week a new Christian school is opened without facing
the threat of any extremist attack. Is it the way of treating a country,
which from early times, gave hospitality to Christians – indeed, the
first Christian community in the world, that of the Christian Syrians,
was established in Kerala in the first century AD?

It’s not only that conversion is an unethical custom, but also that it
threatens a whole way of life, erasing centuries of tradition, customs,
wisdom, teaching people to despise their own religion and look westwards
to a culture which is alien to them, with disastrous results. Look how
the biggest drug problems in India are found in the North East, or how
Third World countries which have been totally christianized have lost
all moorings and bearing and are drifting away without nationalism and
self-pride. It is time that Indians awoke to the threat of Christian
conversions here. The argument (mostly put forward by "secular"
thinkers) that Christians are only 3% in India and therefore cannot be a
threat, is totally fallacious: the influence that Christians exercise in
this country through their schools, hospitals and the enormous amount of
money being poured in by western countries for the purpose of converting
Hindus, is totally disproportionate.

The message of Christ is one of Love, of respecting other’s cultures and
creed - not of utilizing devious and unethical means for converting
people. It is false that Jesus is the only true God. The Divine has
manifested Himself throughout the ages under different names and
identities, whether it is Christ, Buddha, Krishna or Mohamed. Let this
be the motto of the 21st century. Then only will true spirituality
emerge, beyond all religions and intolerances.

 

****

THE "PERSECUTION" OF CHRISTIANS IN INDIA

When Prime Minister Vajpayee was in the US in September, the National
Association of Asian Christians in the US (whom nobody had heard about
before), paid 50.000 $ to the New York Times to publish "an Open Letter
to the Hon’ Atal Behari Vajpayee, Prime Minister of India". While
"warmly welcoming the PM", the Naaic expressed deep concern about the
"persecution" of Christians in India by "extremist" (meaning Hindu)
groups, mentioning as examples "the priest, missionaries and church
workers who have been murdered", the nuns "raped", and the potential
enacting of conversion laws, which would "make "genuine" conversions
illegal. The letter concluded by saying "that Christians in India today
live in fear". The whole affair was an embarrassment (as it was intended
to be) to Mr Vajpayee and the accompanying Indian delegation, which had
come to prod American businessmen to invest in India, a peaceful,
pro-Western and democratic country.

I am born a Christian and I have had a strong Catholic education. I do
believe that Christ was an incarnation of Pure Love and that His
Presence still radiates in the world. But I have also lived for more
than 30 years in India, I am married to an Indian, I have traveled the
length and breath of this country and I have evolved a love and an
understanding of India, which few other foreign correspondents have,
because they are never posted long enough to start getting a real
feeling of this vast and often baffling country (nobody can claim to
fully understand India). And this is what I have to say about the
"persecution" of Christians in India.

Firstly, it is necessary to bring about a little bit of a historical
flashback, which very few foreign correspondents (and unfortunately also
Indian journalists) care to do, which would make for a more balanced
view of the problem… If ever there was persecution, it was of the Hindus
at the hands of Christians, who were actually welcomed in this country,
as they have been welcomed in no other place in this Planet. Indeed, the
first Christian community of the world, that of the Syrian Christians,
was established in Kerala in the first century; they were able to live
in peace and practice their religion freely, even imbibing some of the
local Hindu customs, until the Jesuits came in the 16^(th) century and
told them it was "heathen" to have anything to do with the Hindus,
thereby breaking the Syrian Church in two. When Vasco de Gama, landed in
Kerala in 1498, he was generously received by Zamorin, the Hindu king of
Calicut, who granted him the right to establish warehouses for commerce.
But once again, Hindu tolerance was exploited and the Portuguese wanted
more and more: in 1510, Alfonso de Albuquerque seized Goa, where he
started a reign of terror, burning "heretics", crucifying Brahmins,
using false theories to forcibly convert the lower castes, razing
temples to build churches upon them and encouraging his soldiers to take
Indian mistresses. Indeed, the Portuguese perpetrated here some of the
worst atrocities ever committed in Asia by Christianity upon another
religion. Ultimately, the Portuguese had to be kicked out of India, when
all other colonisers had already left.

Secondly, Christianity has always striven on the myth of persecution,
which in turn bred "martyrs" and saints, indispensable to the
propagation of Christianity. But it is little known, for instance, that
the first "saints" of Christianity, "martyred" in Rome, a highly refined
civilization, which had evolved a remarkable system of Gods and
Goddesses, some of whom were derived from Hindu mythology via the
Greeks, were actually killed (a normal practice in those days), while
bullying peaceful Romans to embrace the "true" religion, in the same way
that later Christian missionaries will browbeat "heathen" Hindus,
adoring many Gods, into believing that Jesus was the only "true" God.

Now to come to the recent cases of persecution of Christians in India at
the hands of Hindu groups. Ttake the burning of churches in Andhra
Pradesh a few months ago, for instance, which was supposed to have been
committed by the "fanatic" RSS. It was proved later that it was actually
the handiwork of Indian Muslims, at the behest of the ISI to foment
hatred between Christians and Hindus. Yet the Indian Press which went
wild at the time of the burnings, mostly kept quiet when the true nature
of the perpetrators was revealed. Now that Dara Singh has been caught,
it has been shown that even if he does belong to the Bajrang Dal, it is
doubtful if the 100 others accused do. What is more probable, is that
like in many other "backward" places, it is a case of converted tribals
versus non-converted tribals, of pent-up jealousies, of old village
feuds and land disputes. It is also an outcome of what - it should be
said - are the aggressive methods of the Pentecost and seventh
Adventists missionaries, known for their muscular ways of converting.

Thirdly, conversions in India by Christian missionaries of low caste
Hindus and tribals are sometimes nothing short of fraudulent and
shameful. American missionaries are investing huge amounts of money in
India, which come from donation drives in the United States where
gullible Americans think the dollars they are giving go towards
uplifting "poor and uneducated Indians". It is common in Kerala, for
instance, particularly in the poor coastal districts, to have "miracle
boxes" put in local churches: the gullible villager writes out a paper
mentioning his wish: a fishing boat, a loan for a pukka house, fees for
the son’s schooling… And lo, a few weeks later, the miracle happens !
And of course the whole family converts, making others in the village
follow suit…

American missionaries (and their Government) would like us to believe
that democracy includes the freedom to convert by *any* means. But
France for example, a traditionally Christian country, has a Minister
who is in charge of hunting down "sects". And by sects, it is meant
anything that does not fall within the recognised family of Christianity
– even the Church of Scientology, favoured by some Hollywood stars such
as Tom Cruise or John Travolta, is ruthlessly hounded. And look at what
the Americans did to the Osho movement in Arizona, or how innocent
children and women were burnt down by the FBI (with the assistance of
the US army) in Waco Texas, because they belonged to a dangerous sect…

Did you know that the Christianity is dying in the West ? Not only
church attendance is falling dramatically because spirituality has
deserted it, but less and less youth find the vocation to become priests
or nuns. And as a result, say in the rural parts of France, you will
find only one priest for six or seven villages, whereas till the late
seventies the smallest hamlet had its own parish priest. And where is
Christianity finding new priests today ? In the Third World, of course !
And India, because of the innate impulsion of its people towards God, is
a very fertile recruiting ground for the Church, particularly in Kerala
and Tamil Nadu. Hence the huge attention that India is getting from the
United States, Australia, or England and the massive conversion drive
going on today.

It is sad that Indians, once converted, specially the priests and nuns,
tend to turn against their own country and help in the conversion drive.
There are very few "White" missionaries left in India and most of the
conversions are done today by Indian priests. Last month, during the
Bishop’s conference in Bangalore, it was restated by bishops and priests
from all over India, that conversion is the FIRST priority of the Church
here. But are the priests and Bishops aware that they would never find
in any western country the same freedom to convert that they take for
granted in India ? Do they know that in China they would be expelled, if
not put into jail ? Do they realize that they have been honoured guests
in this country for nearly two thousand years and that they are
betraying those that gave them peace and freedom ?

Hinduism, the religion of tolerance, the coming spirituality of this new
millennium, has survived the unspeakable barbarism of wave after wave of
Muslim invasions, the insidious onslaught of Western colonialism which
has killed the spirit of so many Third World countries and the
soul-stifling assault of Nehruvianism. But will it survive the present
Christian offensive ? Many Hindu religious leaders feel that
Christianity is a real threat today, as in numerous ways it is similar
to Hinduism, from which Christ borrowed so many concepts (see Sri Siri
Ravi Shankar’s book: " Hinduism and Christianity").. It is thus
necessary that Indian themselves become more aware of the danger their
culture and unique civilisation is facing at the hands of missionaries
sponsored by foreign money. It is also necessary that they stop
listening to the Marxist- influenced English newspapers’ defense of the
right of Christian missionaries to convert innocent Hindus. Conversion
belongs to the times of colonialism. We have entered in the era of
Unity, of coming together, of tolerance and accepting each other as we
are – not of converting in the name of one elusive "true" God.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
