+++
title = "10 9. Ayodhya and the Supreme Court"

+++
**9. Ayodhya and the Supreme Court**

What follows is a reworked version of my paper “The Ayodhya demolition:
an evaluation”, contributed to the collective volume: *The Ayodhya
Reference.  Supreme -Court Judgment and Commentaries* (Voice of India,
Delhi 1995), which also included papers by Swapan Dasgupta, M. Rama
Jois, Arun Jaitley and S.P. Gupta.  The book was occasioned by the
Supreme Court’s decision not to help Narasimha Rao’s Government out of
the Ayodhya dilemma by offering an opinion on the historical evidence.

**9.1. The one-point reference**

The North-Indian town of Ayodhya became world famous in 1989-92 when
Hindus and Muslims clashed over a mosque structure used by the Hindus as
a temple but claimed by the Muslims as the Babri Masjid.  It made
headlines worldwide on at least three occasions.  The first one was when
Hindus laid the foundation stone of the prospective temple on 9 November
1989, incidentally the same day when the Berlin Wall was brought down. 
The second time was when the Hindu activists outwitted the troops
deployed by Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Mulayam Singh Yadav and entered
Ayodhya in large numbers, only to be shot down (with several dozen being
killed) within sight of the Babri Masjid.  The third and most
sensational occasion was when vanguard irregulars of Hindu society
destroyed the controversial structure on 6 December 1992 and replaced it
with a small makeshift temple in expectation of a proper (scripturally
designed) temple building.

Hindus believe that the site of the building is Rama’s birthplace, and
maintain that a Hindu temple adorned the site until, in 1528 at the
latest, Muslims forcibly replaced it with a mosque.  Muslim leaders have
recently taken to denying this, though their fellow Muslims of earlier
generations had proudly confirmed it.

Contrary to what the international press has written, the dispute over
the Rama-Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid site in Ayodhya is not a hopeless
tangle of contending fanaticisms in which the historical truth is
forever unknowable.  A lot of scholarly research has been done, and the
Government of India has provided the contending parties with an official
forum in which experts could go through the evidence produced for both
sides.  This scholarly debate took place around the turn of 1991, and
once more in autumn 1992.  Though both rounds of debate were
unilaterally broken off by one of the parties, viz. the anti-temple
party, it brought to light enough evidence to support an unambiguous
verdict.

Apart from this semi-official debate, there was a longdrawn-out polemic
in the general publishing market, in a dozen books and hundreds of
newspaper articles and columns.  The polemic started in earnest in 1989
and has effectively ended with the October 1994 decision of the Supreme
Court to reject the Government’s “one-point reference”, viz. the request
for a judicial verdict on the single historical question whether a
temple had existed at the site until it was replaced with a mosque. 
Narasimha Rao’s government had made this request on the tacit
understanding that a positive verdict would justify an acceptance of the
Hindu claim on the disputed site, while a negative verdict would justify
a “solution” in accordance with the Muslims’ wishes.

The one-point reference was supported by those who wanted the dispute to
end, whatever the details of the eventual solution.  Otherwise, it was
widely objected to.  Observers of India’s ramshackle institutions feared
that the judiciary might not be immune to political manipulation.  Some
historians argued that judges are not competent on hi story and
archaeology.  Modernist supporters of the Babri Masjid cause objected
that medieval state of affairs, no matter how well-proven, should not be
allowed to determine today’s policies.  Its Islamist supporters asserted
that any and every mosque deserves protection, regardless of whether it
had a history of forcibly replacing a temple.  Supporters of the
Rama-Janmabhoomi cause objected to the idea that a firm Hindu tradition
would be made the object of a,contingent judgment by fallible human
judges appointed by a hostile state.

So, there was a sigh of relief in many quarters when in October 1994,
after more than a year of deliberations, the Supreme Court formally
rejected this one-point reference regarding the history of Ayodhya’s
disputed site.  With that, the historical question, which would have
come into full focus if the Supreme Court had accepted to consider it,
seemingly lost its political relevance and disappeared from public
debate.

For at least three reasons, this was a correct decision.  In fact, it
was correct for more and better reasons than the judges themselves
realised.

The formal reason is the matter of competence: historical questions
should be decided by impartial scholars, not by judges.  In practice,
judges often have to base their verdicts at least partly on opinions
about matters beyond their strict competence, after calling certified
“expert witnesses” to the court.  But in this case, such an opinion
would not merely be an ancillary consideration in a properly judicial
verdict based on the judges’ expertise in legal matters; it would be the
whole of the verdict.  Though they could legally have chosen to offer
the opinion, they were equally within their rights when they opted to
refuse.  This point is quite straightforward, has been argued
sufficiently and needs no further elaboration.

The other two reasons, by contrast, have hardly been mentioned, let
alone elaborated: the historical question is in its pertinent aspects
sufficiently clear; and history is not the cause of the dispute anyway. 
We will look into them in the next sections, before attempting a more
general evaluation of the Ayodhya debate.

**9.2. Why an Ayodhya debate at all?**

The material reason why the judges were right not to entertain the
historical question regarding Ayodhya, is that in this question, apart
from details, there was nothing left to decide anyway.  Until 1989,
there was a complete consensus in all sources (Hindu, Muslim and
European) which spoke out on the matter, viz. that the Babri Masjid had
been built in forcible replacement of a Hindu temple.  The 1989 edition
of the *Encyclopedia Brittannica* (entry Ayodhya) puts it squarely:
“There are few surviving monuments of any antiquity.  Rama’s birthplace
is marked by a mosque, erected by the Moghul emperor Babur in 1528 on
the site of an earlier temple.”

Apart from local tradition, architectural indications, supporting
documents and archaeological evidence, this consensus had logic on its
side: thousands of mosques inside and outside India do stand on
demolished non-Muslim places of worship, while in every area of North
India where Muslim power has reached during the Sultanate and Moghul
periods, every prominent temple has been demolished.  Therefore, all
that the consensus claimed, was that the general rule, verified in
thousands of places in India and thousands more in other countries,
applied in this particular case (the central hill of the temple town of
Ayodhya) as well.  To affirm that the general rule also applies in a
given particular case, is the most modest claim one can possibly make. 
He who makes the opposite claim, viz. that the given particular case
forms an exception to the rule, must logically accept the burden of
proof.

In normal scholarly practice, the debate on the object of such a
consensus is only reopened when new evidence surfaces.  Scholars have
more promising questions to figure out, so they don’t waste time on
settled affairs.  The “eminent historians” from Jawaharlal Nehru
University JNU), Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) *et al.*, who insisted
on revising the consensus have not shown such evidence, no new fact nor
credible new interpretation of known facts.  Instead, they have
constructed purely speculative hypotheses (like the British conspiracy
to float demolition stories in order to “divide and rule”) which are in
conflict with all available knowledge and remain in need of supporting
evidence themselves.

In the entire corpus of Ayodhya arguments, including the minutes of the
Govemment-sponsored debates of DecemberJanuary 1990-1991 and
October-November 1992 between scholars mandated by the Babri Masjid
Action Committee (BMAC) and the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), I have not
come across any piece of evidence which would warrant the reopening of
the question in any normal scholarly context.  On the contrary, what new
evidence has surfaced, has only confirmed the old consensus: new
documentary and esp. archaeological evidence confirms that a Hindu
temple stood at the Babri Masjid site.  The Supreme Court judges could
not have added anything to this unambiguous *status quaestionis*.

Of course, some as yet undecided historical details may remain of
interest to scholars.  Thus, it is unlikely that the demolition which
was followed by the construction of the Babri mosque, was the first
temple demolition on the Rama Janmabhoomi site.  The temple from which 
historians claim to have recovered an inscription in the Babri debris on
6 December 1992 was built around 1100 A.D., i.e. well after Mahmud
Ghaznavi’s raids.  It is most likely that during the Ghorid and
Sultanate periods (1192-1526), the RamaJanmabhoomi site suffered a fate
similar to the Somnath site in Prabhas Patan, Gujarat: temple demolition
followed by reconstruction followed by yet another demolition, mosque
built by Muslim invaders but reclaimed by the Hindus and temporarily
used as a makeshift temple, etc.  The RamaJanmabhoomi site had probably
been desecrated a number of times before Babar and A& Baqi set foot in
Ayodhya.

In various intemet discussion lists and other forums, this observation
of mine has been quoted by anti-temple polemicists to counter the
unreflected claim of some Hindutva publications that the original
ancient temple itself is the one which Babar’s men destroyed.  It is
true that unlike the hardliners in both contending parties, who are so
terribly sure of their theories, I readily admit that in the said
period, much remains obscure about the exact chain of events between the
original Hindu temple and the Babri mosque.  Thus, architectural
indications have been pointed out for a preMoghul construction of the
mosque, implying that it was not built by Babar but more likely by the
Sharqi sultans of jaunpur in the early 15th century.^([1](#1))

The “entirely disproportionate” size of the domes in relation to the
walls and the “patchwork”^([2](#2)) nature of the building indicates an
eventful history, probably including partial demolition, re-employment
for different purposes and reconstruction.  This scenario has plenty of
room for periods of Hindu use of the site, either thanks to temporary
unilateral acquisition of the site, or by consent of the Muslim
authorities when they needed Hindu support against Muslim rivals.  This
was the case in the final years of the Sultanate, and - more definitely
attested - in the post-Aurangzeb period of the Moghul empire, when the
Muslims acquiesced in a Hindu presence at the site, materialized in the
Ram *chahootra* (platform) just metres outside the Babri
mosque.^([3](#3))

I therefore concur with archaeologist R. Nath’s observation: the Hindu
temple at the contentious site “was devastated either by the armies of
Mahmud of Ghaznin or the Delhi Sultans who captured the place and
established here their provincial seat.  It is quite probable, and
possible too, that a mosque was first raised during the Sultanate
period (1001-1030; 1192-1526) on the site of the most important temple
associated with the life of Rama, and Mir Baqi just *restored* that
mosque during his occupation of Ayodhya.”^([4](#4)) Sushil Srivastava
likewise opines: “Mir Baqi might have had the mosque renovated and then
re-dedicated it to Babur.”^([5](#5))

But interesting as these vicissitudes of Islamic iconoclasm in Ayodhya
may be, they are immaterial to the fundamental issue: the very fact of
Islamic iconoclasm as the cause of the destruction of a Hindu temple on
one of the foremost sacred sites of India’s native religion.  In a Hindu
city, a mosque could not have appeared where a Hindu temple stood
without the forcible replacement of that temple, no matter what the
exact year was in which the replacement happened.  The basic and
pertinent fact of history is that first there was a Hindu temple at the
site (at least until the Ghorid invasion of 1192) and later a mosque was
built in forcible replacement of the temple (at least from 1528
onwards).

The outline of the relevant historical events is quite wellknown, but
then the controversy is not about history.  This is not merely the now
dominant position among India’s secularists who, knowing fully well that
they can’t win the debate on history, try to shift their ground towards
redefining the conflict as a strictly judicial property dispute.  It is
also the view of the Muslim and Hindu claimants.

According to anti-temple author Sushil Srivastava, the local Muslims
“believe that Emperor Babur came to Ayodhya in 1528 and destroyed the
famous Ram Janmabhoomi temple, to propitiate Pir Fazal Abbas Musa
Aashikan”, an allegedly fanatical Muslim saint.^([6](#6)) Muslim
claimants have only started challenging the established consensus about
the iconoclastic origin of the Babri Masjid when secularist
intellectuals taught them the tactical usefulness of that negationist
position. Originally they accepted the true history, but differed with
other people only in their theologico-juridical conclusions.  To them, a
mosque is not less legitimate because it was built in forcible
replacement of an idol temple, rather the contrary.  They claimed the
Babri Masjid because at one point it was a mosque, and regardless of
that mosque’s prehistory, they insist on the principle: “once a mosque,
always a mosque”.

The Hindus who refuse to cede the Rama-Janmabhoomi site to the Muslim
and secularist claimants, do so because this is a Hindu sacred site, -
not because it was one in Valmiki’s, Vikramaditya’s or Babar’s day, but
simply because it is one *right now*.  And the problem, the cause of the
post-1949 episode of the Ayodhya conflict, is not the fact that some
*mujahid* denied them the right to their own sacred site sometime in the
Middle Ages, but that Muslim and secularist politicians are denying them
that right today.

That Muslims have destroyed thousands of temples would not be an issue
today if the Muslims had taken the same conciliatory attitude which the
Pope takes vis-A-vis the Native Americans (during his 1992 visit to the
site where Columbus landed in 1492, the Pope expressed his heartfelt
regrets for the suffering which Christendom inflicted on them), which
the Japanese now take vis-A-vis the Koreans, the Germans vis-A-vis the
Jews, etc.  Or they may dispense with the fashionable breast-beating and
televised apologies, as long as they don’t repeat their medieval
behaviour in our own time.  The problem is not what Muslims did in the
past, but what they do today: Hindus are trying to exercise a right
which religious communities everywhere obviously have, viz. to worship
at their own sacred site; and Muslims are trying to deny them this
self-evident right - *not in the middle Ages, but today*.

**9.3. The role of foreign scholars**

There never was a Rama-Janmabhoomi problem, only a Babri Masjid
problem.  That Hindus want to build a temple at their own sacred site is
the most normal and natural thing in the world.  By contrast, it is a
most astonishing circumstance that some Muslims lay claim to this Hindu
sacred site and try to occupy it.  But this arrogant and self-righteous
Muslim behaviour is only the effect of indoctrination in Islamic
theology.  The most abnormal and unnatural thing is the complete support
which this Islamic communal aggression has received from world opinion.

Foreign scholars might have played the role which the Supreme Court
judges rejected: that of independent arbitrators.  But as it turned out,
the established Western academics, to the extent that they cared to look
into the Ayodhya debate at all, have only looked through the glasses
which the India’s Marxist-Muslim combine has put on their noses.

Writing on the Ayodhya controversy, the American India watcher Susan
Bayly describes how Hindu activists “claim that the ‘scientifically’
verifiable facts of history justify their cause”.  Against this
tendency, she sees “a pressing need for more academics to join those in
India who have been brave enough to contest these views”.^([7](#7)) The
claims made here explicitly or implicitly are the following five:

1\) Hindu activists claim that facts of history justify their cause,
viz. the official recognition of the Hindu status (effective since
December 22, 1949) of the disputed RamaJanmabhoomi Babri Masjid site at
Ayodhya, and its materialization in a scripturally appropriate Rama
temple at the site.

2\) These facts of history are scientifically verifiable, at least
according to the said Hindu activists, though Bayly’s quote marks
insinuate that the Hindus use the term “scientific” improperly.

3\) Some Indians, academics and others, are contesting these views, viz.
the view that the Hindu claim is justified by history, and the view that
this reference to history is scientifically verifiable.

4\) For these Indians, it requires bravery to contest the Hindu activist
claims.

5\) Western academics should urgently join these “brave” Indians in
their rejection of the Hindu activist position.

The first claim is incorrect, for the Hindu claim to the disputed site
in Ayodhya was not originally based on history, but on the actual
present-day status of the site as a Hindu sacred site.  The need for
historical justification only arose in 1989, four decades after Hindus
had staked their claim, when the opponents of the temple started
challenging the existing consensus regarding the history of the site,
viz. that a medieval Hindu temple had been razed by Muslims to make way
for a mosque.

The second claim is obviously uncontroversial: once the pro-temple party
accepted the challenge of collecting historical evidence, they were
confident that their corpus of evidence would stand up to scientific
scrutiny.  To an extent, this scrutiny has also taken place, and it has
not shaken the temple party’s confidence.

The third claim is only correct in the weaker sense, viz. that Indian
academics are politically contesting (opposing, protesting against) the
Hindu position; not in the stronger sense, viz. that they are
scientifically contesting (confronting, attempting to refute) it.  With
the very partial exception of the foursome of historians who represented
the Babari Masjid Action Committee during the Government-sponsored
scholars’ debate, Indian academics have most definitely not confronted
the case made by the pro-temple scholars.

On the contrary, they have fully used their power in the media, academic
and publishing sectors to muzzle the protemple voices and keep the
pro-temple evidence out of public view, rather than face it and possibly
refute it.  When confronted with inconvenient new evidence dug up by
their opponents, the knee-jerk reaction of the secularist scholars and
media was to allege “concoctions”, “fabrications” and “Goebbelsian lies”
at the top of their voices, and foreign scholars have sheepishly
followed their lead.

The fourth claim is simply untrue: it did not require bravery to oppose
the pro-temple party from academic platforms, certainly much less than
to defend the pro-temple position.  There is no physical risk involved
in publishing a paper denouncing the Hindu claims on
Ayodhya.^([8](#8)) To be sure, every now and then a secularist scholar
claims to have received death threats from people venting their impotent
anger, and the newspapers devote plenty of attention to these non-events
all while downplaying the real killing of Hindus in Kashmir or the
Northeast.^([9](#9)) But being no stranger to hate mail and death
threats myself, I know that someone who cares to send you advance
warning is not very serious about murdering you.  So, at the time of
writing, Romila Thapar, R.S. Sharma, S. Gopal and all those other
would-be martyrs for free speech are alive and well (like myself, thank
you).

The physical danger in writing against the temple is imaginary; by
contrast, it is dangerous to uphold rather than oppose Hindu activist
positions.  It is a fact that throughout the 1990s, many office-bearers
of the RSS, the BJP and their Tamil affiliate Hindu Munnani have been
murdered; but that was more because of the demolition and other
political matters than because of any statements on the historical
background of the Hindu claims on Ayodhya.  At one point, the
publishinghouse *Voice of India*, which has published the Vishva Hindu
Parishad’s statement and several other writings on the Ayodhya evidence,
has had to seek police protection for a few days, but the threats had to
do with “insults to the Prophet” and not with the Ayodhya evidence.  The
riotous and triggerhappy types are not the ones who attach great
importance to feats of scholarship.

In terms of status and career, a non-conformistic stance in favour of
the temple cannot be maintained without sacrifice.  By contrast, joining
the anti-temple party has always been a smart career move.  Far from
requiring bravery, posturing as a “committed secularist” up in arms
against “obscurantist and communalist history manipulation” will only
earn you praise (as Dr. Bayly’s own appreciation of this “bravery”
illustrates).  India’s secularist academics and journalists form a
society of mutual praise, and the cheapest way of getting applause in
elite India is to attack the Hindu movement.

Dr. Bayly’s fifth claim, about the urgent need for Western support, is
equally untenable.  There is no need at all for Western scholars to
*come out* in support of their Indian colleagues who oppose the
pro-temple position.  The reason is that they are already in the same
camp: not a single Western academic has come out in support of the Hindu
(i.e. the pre-1989 consensus) position.  Foreign academicians in
overwhelming majority borrow the views of the secularist establishment
in the Indian universities, so there is no need for them to “join” their
Indian colleagues.

Now, which is bravest: to take the position promulgated by the
government, the parliamentary majority, the media and the capitalist
media barons, most political parties, the academic establishment and the
international Indological and India-watching community; or to stand
alone against this power bloc?^([10](#10))

In the footsteps of the Indian academics, their Western colleagues
writing on Ayodhya pretend to discuss a conflict but do not care to find
out the position of one of the parties.  Somehow they manage to collect
a lot of data and write lengthy papers without noticing that one half of
the controversy’s contents is missing, and that they are merely
rewording the position of one of the two warring parties; though I am
sure that they would never accept a student’s thesis on any given
controversy which reported only one side’s version.  Future books on the
affair will include a chapter on “the Ayodhya scandal”: the unscrupled
use of academic and media power positions by India’s secularists to
suppress relevant evidence, and the gullibility of foreign scholars
relying on hearsay from Indian colleagues whose bonafides is open to
question.

Many outsiders still believe that the VHP case is based on “myth” and
“concoction”, as the BMAC and its Marxist supporters have kept on
alleging.^([11](#11)) At the very best, many people, including sincere
but uninformed scholars, assume a priory that “the truth must lie
somewhere in between”, and that both sides are just equally unreliable
hot-heads.  Foreign press correspondents have simply parroted the views
of the Marxist historians of JNU and AMU in support of the Babri Masjid
cause, as well as their silence about the scholars’ debate.  Thus, in
his review of the eminent historians’ book *Anatomy of a Confrontation*,
former *Time* correspondent Edward Desmond adopts the Marxist
historians’ contentions lock, stock and barrel.^([12](#12))

As a writer of lengthy pieces on Kashmir in which the 1990 ethnic
cleansing of the Hindus goes unmentioned, Desmond does not surprise us
by concealing the government sponsored debate with its embarrassing
outcome nor by deliberately denying the existence of evidence put at his
disposal by Voice of India: in his lengthy article on the affair, he
curtly dismisses all the pro-temple evidence as “bogus” without
presenting any part of it, a position he would never be able to defend
in a public debate.  His strength is, of course, that he does not have
to fear any public debate: the other side simply cannot get its message
across through the media, so the public assumes that this is a subject
on which the debate is closed.

Even the French sociologist G6rard Heuzie, who has written some fresh
and independent observations on the Hindutva movement, has not been able
to get around the secularist monopoly on the information flow on
Ayodhya.  He has analysed the anti-democratic musings which were audible
in the discourse of secularism “when several thousands of karsevaks
brutally demolished the Babri Masjid, refusing to listen to RSS cadres,
who were acting as the last ramparts of the paternalist
perspectives.  Numerous comments showed clearly that for the academic
and establishment commentators, the most insupportable thing was that
uneducated youngsters, without any letters of introduction or written
authorisations, had intervened to change the course of
things.”^([13](#13)) Heuzé points out that “the way in which the RSS was
overwhelmed by a thousand determined youngsters on 6 December 1992 is
telling.  The sect is worthless in street combat... its manifestations
remind us more of the boy scouts than of mass politics.”^([14](#14))

And yet, watch how even a lucid man like Heuze gets trapped.  For all
his independence, even he proves to be the prisoner of the secularists’
control of the information flow.  Mentioning the historical claims
regarding Ayodhya, he declares that Hindus believe only “since the 19th
century” in the forcible replacement of a Rama temple by the Babri
Masjid, that “there seems never to have been a temple underneath the
mosque”, and that the Hindu pillars used in the mosque “were clearly
brought from elsewhere”.^([15](#15)) These claims are not true, and have
not emerged from the debate as even plausible.

There is no firm information about the pillars’ provenance, though the
rule is that a mosque systematically incorporated rubble from the very
temple which it was replacing.  There is ample archaeological evidence
that the whole Ramkot hill was covered with a temple complex, as is only
to be expected at the geographical place of honour in a temple
city.  Apart from older but vaguer indications, there are three firm
pieces of evidence from the 18th century, apart from the unnamed
pre-19th century sources cited as such by the local 19th-century Muslim
authors.^([16](#16)) Moreover, he should have been able to draw the
right conclusions from the general context of Islamic iconoclasm, from
the fact that the VHP scholars had discovered no less than four attempts
by BMAC people to tamper with the evidence, and from the mediacentred
and swearword-oriented performance of the proBabri academics as opposed
to the evidence-centred performance of their rather fewer academic
opponents.

The point is that, judging from his text and bibliography, Heuze does
not know the official VHP argumentation presented during the
Government-sponsored debate, nor has he heard of the independent studies
supporting the temple thesis.  The same ignorance about the solid Hindu
argumentation is in evidence in the publications on India’s religious
conflict by Susan Bayly (US), Peter van der Veer (Holland), Christophe
Jaffrelot (France) and others.^([17](#17)) They have relied on India’s
secularist accounts of the *status quaestionis* of Ayodhya research, and
these have quite purposely kept the more serious and convincing
formulations of the Hindu position out of the reader’s view.

Thus, Ali Asghar Engineer writes on the cover of his *Babri Masjid Ram
Janmabhoomi Controversy*.  “Future generations will have a right to know
what the controversy was about”^([18](#18)), but then takes care to
include only a few token statements for the Hindu side which are either
on peripheral aspects of the debate or belong to the clumsier variety of
Hindutva polemic; he repeats the same exercise in his sequel *Politics
of Confrontation*.^([19](#19)) To comment on such manipulation, I need
only repeat Engineer’s own words on the same cover: “It is not- only
violence which has to be condemned but also distortion of history and
intellectual dishonesty.”

The Dutch Indologist Peter Van der Veer profusely quotes from the
contributors to S. Gopal’s and A.A. Engineer’s books.  Even the
bibliography (of a book published in 1994) does not mention a single
book presenting any aspect of the protemple argument (all of which were
available before 1993).  However, in his own earlier research on the
traditions concerning Ayodhya, he had endorsed the old consensus view. 
This earned him a lot of criticism, e.g.: “Disconcertingly, Van der Veer
does not query Babur’s destruction of the temple.”^([20](#20))

Even in his book *Religious Nationalism*, Van der Veer does not follow
the secularists all the way.  He actually quotes pro-temple
archaeologist Dr. S.P. Gupta, albeit only in a footnote; and not some
clumsy statement but an actual piece of refutation of Babri historian
Prof. R.S. Sharma’s claims: “Mr. Sharma has not given a single piece of
archaeological or historical evidence in support of what he says.  The
archaeological and other evidence from art history indicate that there
was a Brahminical temple at the place where the mosque stands
today.  The iconographical features like vanamala and karandmukut show
that it was probably a Vaishnava temple.”^([21](#21)) Prof. A.R. Khan,
who opposed the VHP plans for Ayodhya yet upheld true history by
confirming the preexistence of a temple at the site, is also mentioned
in footnote by Van der Veer but his arguments are not given.^([22](#22))

However, it is clear that after being taken to task for providing
ammunition to the pro-temple argumentation, the Dutch scholar developed
cold feet, hence his climb down: “In research carried out in the 1970s
both Bakker and I relied heavily on the local tradition that Babar’s
general had destroyed a temple built on Rama’s birthplace.  This
tradition is supposedly corroborated by the fact that in the mosque are
pillars of a temple (which Bakker ascribes to the eleventh century). 
The same kind of pillars are also used in the grave of a Muslim pir who
is in the local tradition considered to have been instrumental in the
demolition of the temple.( ... ) While Bakker and I could naively accept
local tradition, this cannot be done any longer.  For example, one could
argue that the fact that there are temple pillars in the mosque does not
tell you much.  They could have been taken from anywhere and not from a
demolished Rama temple.”^([23](#23))

So this is the evidence given, the *whole* reason for abandoning a
well-researched view of history: “One could argue...” It is in the
nature of historical evidence (as opposed to evidence in physics) that
it can always be “argued”, that is, explained away if inconvenient. 
Fossiles disprove the Biblical Creation Theory? No, for *one could
argue* (and some Evangelical fundamentalists do argue) that God created
the world with fossiles and all, if only to put the faith of
palaeontologists to the test- Of even the hardest evidence *one could
argue* that it may have been planted, doctored, misplaced, and that it
should therefore be rejected by historians.

Fact is that Bakker and Van der Veer, during their original and
extensive research, have not come across any fact which casts doubt on
the temple demolition scenario.  Fact is also that Van der Veer (and
likewise Bakker) can still not cite a single *finding* which casts such
doubt now.  All he has to show as justification for his climb down is
that “one could argue” that the probable things did not happen, and
that, though there is no evidence for it, something improbable *might*
have happened.

His critic Antony Copley goes all the way in parroting his Indian
contact persons: “Myth rather than history has fuelled Hindu
fundamentalist protest over Ayodhya.( ... ) Archaeologists question
there being any urban site at Ayodhya at the alleged date of Rama’s
birth, and find no evidence of any temple on the site of the Babri
Masjid mosque.”^([24](#24)) One wonders to what archaeological finding
he may be referring, for the two latest diggings, by B. B. Lal in the
late 1970s and by Y.D. Sharma in 1992, *have* yielded remains of a
temple.

To zoom in on a telling detail, Copley makes two claims which are
readily refuted by Father Tieffenthaler’s 1767 evidence, which had
figured prominently during the Ayodhya debate, but which has not come to
Copley’s notice because the Indian historians on whom he relies have
done their utmost to keep this evidence out of view.  He claims that in
the last decades of Nawabi rule (in Oudh), Muslims claimed that Hanuman
Garhi was built on a mosque, and "to appease Muslim feeling \[the Nawahl
gave permission for a new mosque to be built near the Hanuman temple. 
This inspired the Hindu counter-claim that the Babri Masjid mosque was
built on the site of a former temple, the Ram Janmabhoomi.” Further,
Copley alleges that the *chabootra* had been “illegally constructed near
the mosque in 1857”.^([25](#25)) Both claims are explicitly refuted by
Tieffenthaler’s testimony: he saw the *chabootra* in 1767, and he
reports the Hindu claim that the Masjid had forcibly replaced a Rama
temple.

Of course, Copley supports the secularist thesis that it was all a
British concoction: “But the British, convinced that the Muslims lay
behind the rebellion of 1857, (... ) saw fit to feed this mythology. 
Much is made by secular-minded historians of both this official
literature and Miss Beveridge’s introduction to her translation of
Babar’s memoirs, where she accused Babar of just this act of
vandalism.  That there was a temple to mark Rama’s birthplace and that
the entire Ayodhya complex could be seen as commemorative of his birth
suggests the irrationality of this claim.”^([26](#26))

But there is plenty of pre-British testimony, which is why even after
his climbdown, Peter van der Veer maintains: “The suggestion that the
local tradition is entirely invented by the British thus seems
disingenuous.”^([27](#27)) The facile claim of a British concoction also
flies in the face of the known fact that the British, while fostering
disunity among the Indians at the political level, made great efforts to
prevent communal clashes in the streets.  Further, if the British had
wanted to use temple demolition stories for fomenting communal friction,
they could have pointed to numerous indubitable instances rather than
having to invent one.

A scrutiny of the available historical material clearly shows that the
truth does not lie halfway between the recent politicized hypothesis and
the centuries-old consensus, and that the former is not half right, nor
the latter half wrong.  By all standards of historical method, the case
for the thesis that the Babri Masjid has replaced a pre-existent Hindu
temple is strong, if not overwhelming.  It should be accepted unless and
until evidence to the contrary is produced - and that is precisely what
the BMAC experts have failed to do when the Government of India provided
them with an official forum for doing so.

That the international media without exception and even most academics
have chosen the side of the Muslim aggressor and condemned the Hindus
who were merely minding their own business at their own sacred site, is
the eighth wonder of the world; but it becomes perfectly understandable
when we realise that they merely act upon the “information” given them
by India’s secularists.  Like their source, they have blacked out the
Hindu version on Ayodhya and completely identified with the Muslim
version.  Future scholars of political and communications science will
study the reporting on the Ayodhya affair as an absolute classic of
successful disinformation.

**9.4. Misrepresenting the Ayodhya issue**

Neither the real probability that Rama was effectively born right there,
nor the solid evidence that a temple was destroyed to make way for a
mosque, are what should decide this controversy.  After all, the call
for historical proof was only launched by India’s secularists spoiling
for a fight, as a dispersionary tactic.  To be sure, I don’t want to
follow the Babri Masjid Action Committee historians in replacing factual
argument with rhetoric consisting of the attributing of ulterior motives
to opponents.  The weakness of their argumentative position has to be
demonstrated in its own right, as has already been done.^([28](#28))
They themselves have not contributed any evidence to the search for the
historical true story, they were actually demanding from the Hindu side
what they themselves never provided, - indeed, never intended to
provide.  In the process, their ulterior motives have come to light in
sufficient measure to warrant some comment.

The aim of the pro-Babri Masjid historians was never to settle any
historical questions.  If it had been, then they would not have opposed
the VHP’s request to organize systematic excavations at the site; nor
would they have concealed the pro-temple evidence in their
publications.  Their aim was merely to distract public attention from
the obvious and extremely simple solution of this controversy.  The fact
that this solution would be in favour of the Hindu claims was apparently
unbearable to them because of their seething hatred of their ancestral
religion.

The solution to the Ayodhya tangle lies in the universal ethical
principle known as the Golden Rule: do unto others as you would be done
to by them.  Since Muslims would not like their own sacred sites to be
occupied by members of another religion, they should not claim anyone
else’s sacred site for themselves.

This means in practice that they should give up every attempt to wrest
the site from its rightful owner, Hindu society.  This includes street
agitation, political lobbying inside and outside Parliament, and also
the judicial proceedings.  The attempt to occupy another religion’s
sacred site is morally wrong, and it is not made one per cent less wrong
by circumstances which seem to bring the achievement of the
reprehensible goal within reach.  It is not made less reprehensible by
political equations which have allowed Islamic activists to score some
points (e.g. the Places of Worship Act which freezes the status of
places of worship as on 15 August 1947).  Nor by the media bias which
confers guilt on the Hindus for the riots which Muslims have started in
pursuance of their political goals (such as the Muslim attacks on Hindu
lives and property all over India, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Great
Britain after 6 December 1992), and thereby gives Muslim rioters ample
reward for their aggression.

The incredibly arrogant Muslim attempt to take over a Hindu sacred site
is not even justified by the legal sanction to the injustices of history
which has been created by the British and Nehruvian juridical
statusquo-ism regarding the accomplished facts of Islamic iconoclasm,
and which may have given the Muslims a judicial leg to stand upon. 
Pressing the Islamic claim on a Hindu sacred site is morally outrageous,
whether in the streets, in parliament or in court; whether using Molotov
cocktails, petrodollar bribes, or juridical residues of jihadic
accomplished facts.  The only just, honourable and workable solution is
that Muslims simply withdraw their outrageous claim, preferably with
apologies for the damage in lives and political stability which their
Babri Masjid agitation has already caused.

Some Muslims have understood the unreasonableness of the Islamic claim
to Rama-Janmabhoomi.  When Chandra Shekhar was Prime Minister, in
December 1990, even his friend Syed Shahabuddin wrote that for once,
Muslims would be ready to “gift away” the Babri Masjid site: “The law
protects the Babri Masjid even if it was constructed on the site of a
temple after demolishing it, but in the interest of communal amity, as a
one-time exception, the Muslim community is willing to make the offer,
as a moral gesture, in accordance with the Shariat.”^([29](#29)) The
Dutch scholar Paul Teunissen, in a review of my own book *Ram
Janmabhoomi vs. Babri Masjid*, takes me to task for putting Islamic
fanatics and secularists in the same bag, and declares that Syed
Shahabuddin cannot possibly be a fanatic, considering that “he has
promised to demolish the Babri Masjid with his own hands if proof is
furnished that it was built on a temple”.^([30](#30))

After the demolition, several more Muslim leaders have come forward with
proposals to abandon the claim to Ayodhya, notably Maulana Wahiduddin
Khan and Asghar Ali Engineer.  This raises the issue of a possible
settlement with the Muslims, and the terms in which such a settlement
should be formulated.  But note that no secularist opinion leader in
India nor any Western observer has highlighted these offers, let alone
given them his explicit support.  Their preference is with the most
obscurantist and militant tendency in the Muslim community.

The basis for a settlement must be a correct appreciation of the Ayodhya
situation.  The site belongs to the Hindus, and the fact of its
historical Muslim occupation, now already a distant memory, has not
altered that.  The ancient Hindu status of the site, strengthened
moreover by its restored Hindu status since 1949, implies that Muslims
are in no position to “gift away” what isn’t theirs in the first place. 
Muslim postures of “generosity” and “sacrifice for the common good”
still carry an implied claim that for now at least, the site is theirs;
it isn’t.  Similarly, the assertion that by exercising their right to
their own sacred site, Hindus are “exacting revenge” or “demanding
compensation” for Islamic misdeeds of the past, still implies that the
site is now the Muslims’ property, and that Hindus want to take it back
or receive it back.

“Revenge” would mean that Hindus kill as many Muslims as the number of
Hindus killed by Muslims (in absolute figures, or perhaps in relative
proportion, taking into account today’s higher population levels?),
which would require a good number of Hiroshima-size nuclear bombs; also,
thousands of functioning mosques, including those at the sacred sites of
Islam in Central Asia, would have to be destroyed.  It is no Hindu’s
case that Muslims should be subjected to this kind of treatment, and
Ayodhya simply has nothing to do with it.^([31](#31))

“Restoration” is out of the question too: the contemporary Indian
Muslims do not have the power to restore the millions of Hindu victims
back to life, nor to bring back the millions deported as slaves, nor to
resurrect the numerous treasures of civilisation which their ancestors
destroyed.  They may of course try to win back for Hinduism the lost
territories now known as Afghanistan, the Maldives, Pakistan, Bangladesh
and parts of Southeast Asia; and they are welcome to form a special
regiment and take Pak-Occupied Kashmir back into India, - that would be
a very incomplete but nonetheless meritorious “restoration”.

“Compensation” is what the Hindu upper castes are asked to do towards
the Hindu lower castes, in the form of job reservations.  In their
supreme arrogance, some Muslim leaders are now demanding that Muslims be
included in the category of “backwards” to whom the “forward” castes are
expected to give favourable treatment in compensation of past
injustices; at the same time, they angrily reject any suggestion that
they (like upper-caste Hindus) could be held accountable for the
“so-called misdeeds” of their ancestors.  If compensation is needed in
Hindu-Muslim relations, a start should be made with job reservations for
the oppressed and dwindling Hindu minorities in Pakistan and Bangladesh:
let the bullies make amends to their victims.  In the case of the
destroyed temples, compensation would mean that the estimated
contemporary value of all the buildings and art treasures victimised by
Islamic iconoclasm is paid back to Hindu trusts, in the form of a
mega-billion sum of petrodollars earmarked for public works in the
sphere of Hindu civilisation.  The signs are that such “compensation” is
not on the cards.  No Hindu organisation connected with the
Rama-Janmabhoomi controversy has formulated its wishes in those terms.

Let us not get sidetracked by the numerous semantic manipulations with
which India’s secularists are trying to blur this issue.  Muslims are
not the objects of “revenge”, they are not asked to “compensate”
anything, not even to “restore” anything.  All they should do, is to
abandon their claim to what is not theirs: a Hindu sacred site.  To put
it even more briefly, all they should do is *nothing*, except to get on
with their lives.  To Wahiduddin Khan and others who attach strings to
their offer of leaving the disputed site to the Hindus, it should be
clear that Muslims are not in a position to expect any kind of reward
for this long-overdue step.  There is, however, one reward which they
would certainly be getting: a positive feeling among Hindus, who have
never overlooked the fact that Muslims are human beings like the rest of
us.

Meanwhile, the prospect of Muslims “gifting away” the Rama-Janmabhoomi
site remains academical.  The Government of India could of course have
chosen to promote these conciliatory Muslim leaders (who are still
militant enough)^([32](#32)) as acknowledged representatives of their
community.  But it preferred to cultivate fanatics like the recently
deceded Ali Mian, director of a theological academy which doubles as a
sanctuary for Pakistani spies, on the assumption that they have more of
a following among the mass of Muslim voters.  At the time of writing,
the focus of the ongoing war of Islam against India has shifted to other
arenas (Kashmir, reservations for Muslims, Urdu), but there is as yet no
reason to believe that the Ayodhya normalisation process will be
completed in a peaceful manner anytime soon.^([33](#33)) Let it be clear
that that is not the Hindus’ fault: they should not bear any cross on
their chests for minding their own business at their own sacred site.

**9.5. Rama’s birthplace: a matter of faith?**

The terms of the Ayodhya debate have often been blurred, sometimes
deliberately and mischievously, sometimes out of intellectual
incompetence or sloppiness.  Both types converge in the affirmation that
the Hindu claim to Ayodhya is a matter of “faith”.  Anti-temple
polemicists have blurred the matter further by pretending that the
pro-temple spokesmen who clumsily described the question of Rama’s
birthplace as a matter of faith, had also tried to reduce the plainly
historical and archaeological question of medieval temple demolition to
a matter of faith, which they have not.  Let us now at any rate focus on
the belief concerning Rama’s birth.

Some RSS leaders have repeatedly claimed that the Rama-Janmabhoomi site
should be left to the Hindus out of respect for the “faith” of the Hindu
masses in the tradition that Rama was born at that very site.  Even the
noted historian Prof. K.S. Lal has gleefully been quoted by JNU
historian Prof. K.N. Panikkar as declaring: “In religion, it is a matter
of faith and not of proof... So by faith alone Christians embrace Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God, by faith and faith alone Muslims believe
Muhammad to be the Prophet of Allah, and by faith and faith alone Hindus
believe Ram-Janmabhoomi in Ayodhya to be the birthplace of Lord
Rama.”^([34](#34)) This presentation of the Hindu claim to Ayodhya as
being a matter of “faith” is inaccurate and unnecessarily weakens the
Hindu position.

For one thing, the status of the enumerated items of faith is
different.  Christianity stands or falls with the belief that Jesus was
God’s Only-Begotten Son.  Islam stands or falls with the belief that
Mohammed is Allah’s Prophet.  But Hinduism (and within Hinduism even the
particular tradition of Rama worship) does not in any way depend on the
belief that Rama was born at that or another site, just as Christianity
and Islam are not really dependent on their respective claims to
specific pilgrimage sites.^([35](#35))

However, it just so happens that the Mohammed whom we talk about when
formulating the dogmas of Islam, according to those very texts in which
his career is described and given a Prophetic interpretation, was a man
from Mecca in Arabia, brought up in the respect for the Pagan Arab
sanctuary there, the Kaaba; there is no other Prophet Mohammed than the
Mohammed from Mecca.^([36](#36)) Similarly, it so happens that Rama,
according to the texts describing his career and glorifying him, was a
member of the Ikshvaku dynasty ruling in Ayodhya; there is no other Rama
than the Rama from Ayodhya.  The agreement among all those concerned
that Mohammed was born in Mecca and Rama in Ayodhya may have certain
ritual consequences, but is by no means the defining dogma of the
respective religions embodied in Mohammed and Rama.

The second fundamental objection to the formulation of the Hindu
position regarding Ayodhya in terms of “faith”, is that the term “faith”
is not respectable among post-Enlightenment intellectuals, much less
among India’s secularists.  It has a connotation of irrational
attachment to unproven and even absurd claims.  Thus, “by faith alone
Christians embrace Jesus Christ to be the Son of God”: that is an
accurate description of an irrational behaviour.  The notion that a
human being, a creature, can be the Creator’s only-begotten son, is
quite absurd.  To believe it, is irrational, is an injustice to man’s
status as a creature equipped with the faculty of Reason.  The defiantly
anti-rational position of the Christian faith was summed up by the
Church Father Tertullian: *Credo quia absurdum*, “I believe it because
it is absurd”.

Similarly, “by faith and faith alone Muslims believe Muhammad to be the
Prophet of Allah”: that is an accurate description of an irrational
belief, seen for what it was by Mohammed’s Pagan contemporaries.  They
dismissed his “revelations” as hallucinations, poetic inventions or fits
of demonic possession.  It is simply not true that Mohammed heard the
voice of the archangel Gabriel, nor that the text he “received” was a
special message from God.  Everything in the Quran can perfectly be
explained from the psychology and the cultural and social circumstances
of the Meccan trader Mohammed.^([37](#37)) No fact in and about the
Quran makes it intellectually necessary for a rational reader to think
up the intervention of an outside and superhuman being, be it Gabriel or
Allah.  It is only by faith that one can accept the irrational claim
which is the basic tenet of Islam, viz. that Mohammed received a special
message from the Almighty.

By contrast, it is simply not true that “by faith and faith alone Hindus
believe Rama-Janmabhumi in Ayodhya to be the birthplace of Rama”.  In
common with the Muslim reverence for the Kaaba, the Hindu reverence for
the Rama-Janmabhoomi site is a *ritual convention*, a category which may
or may not have a basis in history.  In the case of the Kaaba, the
convention is demonstrably based on a deliberately concocted myth.  The
case of Ayodhya is altogether different.

Is it by faith alone that we believe Napoleon lost the Battle of
Waterloo?  Of course, we have no eye-witnesses, and even if we had, we
could not be sure that they weren’t lying to us.  It is, in a sense, an
act of faith (underlying all reliance on man-made historical evidence)
to assume that the wealth of documentary material mentioning Napoleon
and directly or indirectly confirming the traditional belief that he was
defeated at Waterloo, is trustworthy.  However, the scholarly discipline
of historical method has developed ways of discerning trustworthy from
untrustworthy sources, so that it can raise the mere possibility that
the traditional claims of Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo are true, to a
degree of probability bordering on certainty.  This is not the absolute
certainty of faith, but a rational form of knowledge which always
remains open to correction, and which is merely the best and most
practical instrument with which we can face the historical dimension of
reality.

We have fewer sources about Rama than about Napoleon, but essentially
the situation is the same: while we have no direct evidence in the form
of eye-witnesses, we do have documentary sources giving particular
information about his career.  The tradition that Rama was born in
Ayodhya, even on that very site, may well be historical. it is supported
by a fairly consistent Epic and Puranic tradition, a type of source
spurned by 19th-century Orientalists, and still ridiculed by westernized
Indian scholars who are not up-to-date with developments abroad, where
it has been rehabilitated.  The core of the Greek story of Troy, the
Biblical histories of the Israelite kings and the Chinese records of the
Shang dynasty were once dismissed by scholars as “obviously
unhistorical”, but are now accepted as remarkably accurate or at least
as having a core of historical truth.  It is only in India that people
are still ignoring their own ancient historical tradition, and keep on
treating some haughtily prejudiced 19th-century speculations as Gospel
truth.

By Puranic chronology, Rama lived in a pre-Harappan age which has left
few durable buildings, so chances are slim that anything about him could
ever be archaeologically verified or falsified.  Unlike the fictional
traditions conferring sanctity on the Muslim and Christian pilgrimage
sites in Mecca, Jerusalem and Bethlehem, the historicity of the Ayodhya
tradition remains an undisproven possibility.  The geographical
prominence of the site, coupled with the consistent Epic and Puranic
tradition that the Suryavamsa (solar) dynasty (including Rama) ruled in
Ayodhya, add to the probability of the conventional assumption that that
very site once carried Rama’s castle.

JNU historian Romila Thapar, a leading militant of the Babri Masjid
cause, has claimed in an interview with *Le Monde* that “the real
question” is not whether a mosque had forcibly replaced a temple, but
whether Rama had lived at that site in the first place.^([38](#38)) We
notice the strategic retreat from a question on which hard proof is
readily available, and where she knows her side has lost the battle, to
a question buried in the deep past which is probably beyond
verification.  Her position that the historicity of the tradition
underlying the sacred status of the site is what ought to be proven, is
an insulting application of double standards: it subjects Hindus to a
test which is out of the question with Islam and Christianity, and which
these two religions are totally unable to pass.

The fact that a community considers a site sacred in the present is
sufficient reason for respecting it as such, regardless of history.  The
Israeli government is protecting Christian access to the places where
Christians claim that Jesus was born, crucified and buried.  This
correct policy is not altered just because modem research has shown
these claims to be unfounded.^([39](#39)) Two of these sites originally
had Pagan temples on them, which the Church destroyed.  The Church’s
claim on the supposed site of Jesus’ crucifixion was based on a dream in
which Jesus himself revealed the location to the Emperor Constantine’s
Christian mother.  One imagines the scornful secularist reaction if the
Vishva Hindu Parishad had based its Ayodhya claims on a dream; yet, the
numerous Christians in India’s secularist coalition have not made any
plans to relinquish the Church’s dream-based claims on the pilgrimage
sites in Palestine.

Similarly, the Islamic claims on the Kaaba in Mecca and on the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem are completely unhistorical and are based on
transparent *ad hoc* myths.  In this case, we know the circumstances of
the myths’ deliberate creation with even more exactitude, from the
Islamic sources themselves.  Prophet Mohammed abandoned his fad of
imitating Jewish tradition, including the choice of Jerusalem as the
direction of prayer, when the Jews proved to be unimpressed with his
claims to prophethood.  Therefore he stole Abraham, the presumed founder
of the monotheistic tradition which he had adopted, from the Jews, and
declared that the Arabs were Abraham’s true heirs through Ishmael.  The
logic of this mythical construction forced him to claim that the Arab
national sanctuary at Mecca had been built by Abraham.  The fact that it
had been in use as a temple of Hubal and other Arab Gods and Goddesses
since time immemorial, was explained away by the totally unhistorical
speculation that the idolaters had at one time usurped the temple which
originally belonged to Abraham and his religion.

In reality, no pre-Islamic Arab text or inscription mentions Abraham,
his religion, or his son Ishmael.  Conversely, the Bible, the only
authentic source on Abraham, never makes him go anywhere near Mecca, nor
does it make him build the Kaaba.  These two inconvenient facts are
explained away by means of a conspiracy theory: the Jews censored their
own Scripture and destroyed the existing references to the future
prophet Mohammed, and the Pagan Arabs must have done likewise with their
inscriptions and oral tradition.  The truth of the matter is that
Mohammed stole the Kaaba from its rightful owners, who had never
practised any Abrahamic or Islamic worship there.  Yet, because the
Islamic use of the Kaaba is now a long-standing ritual convention, it is
respected as such without any question.

The Islamic claim to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem is even more
transparently fraudulent.  Prophet Mohammed is supposed to have used it
as a landing platform on his night journey through heaven on a winged
horse.  Any secularist willing to uphold this claim as historical?  Or
otherwise ready to show the courage of his conviction and demand that
the Muslims relinquish their claim to the Temple Mount so as to be
morally in a position to demand a similar abandonment of , “mythical”
claims from the Hindus?  Most Jews believe that it is up to the Messiah
to rebuild King Solomon’s temple on its original site, so they are in no
hurry to make the Muslims hand it back.  That saves the Israeli
government a dilemma: for apart from respecting Jewish sensibilities, it
is also committed to the principle that sacred sites, including Islamic
ones, are to be respected irrespective of the validity of the claims
underlying that status of sacredness.^([40](#40))

No secularist is brandishing the mythical nature of these Islamic claims
in support of a demand to hand the Temple Mount back to the Jews, nor to
seize it and declare it a secular “national monument”.  In the case of
Christians and Muslims, no one demands that they prove the historicity
of the stories underlying the sacred status of their places of
pilgrimage.  Demanding the same of Hindus is an insulting display of
double standards, a candid statement that one intends to treat Hindus as
dirt.

But for the sake of argument, let us assume that “the real question”
concerns Rama’s historical birthplace.  There are two competing answers
to that question.  One is the traditional answer, based on a corpus of
traditional literature.  The other is Romila Thapar’s not very precise
answer, which is essentially ready to let Rama come into this world at
any site except at the traditional one.  That traditional location may
be hard to prove, but there is even less proof for any alternative
location.  The traditional location has at least documentary evidence in
its favour, viz. the tradition itself.  Romila Thapar’s alternative, by
contrast, is only backed by her own eagerness to put Hindus in the
wrong.

To be sure, it remains possible that the tradition is mistaken, but the
point for an objective scholar is that Romila Thapar has not given one
iota of evidence for that scenario.  In her overview of the development
of different Ramayana versions, she mentions a lot of differences
(relationship between Rama and Sita, Janaka and Sita, status of Ravana,
of Hanuman) but no two different birthsites.^([41](#41))

It was left to the Babri Masjid Action Committee office-bearers to
claim, on the basis of a collection of articles by various modern crank
writers, that they had “proof” of Rama’s birth at no less than seven
different places (from Andhra Pradesh and Varanasi via Nepal and
Afghanistan all the way to Egypt), apart from having cited “proof” that
Rama had never existed at all.^([42](#42)) To stay within their logic, I
suggest that someone who has taken birth at seven different places was
certainly able to take birth at yet one more place, viz. that hilltop in
Ayodhya.

At any rate, the BMAC’s frontal display of contempt for logic and
rational method has not pitted any secularist against the BMAC
position.  For them no allegations of replacing historical knowledge
with myth or “faith”; which adds further illustration to our view that
the whole rhetoric of *historicity vs. faith* was never anything else
than a dispersionary tactic to put the Hindus on the defensive.  Albeit
one in which some Hindu spokesmen were unwitting accomplices by their
own mindless adoption of the term “faith”.

**9.6. A Babri Masjid, not a Rama-Janmabhoomi problem**

Though the Supreme Court judgment was correct in its effective decision,
the commentatorial parts of the verdict come in for some serious
criticism.  This is especially true of its allotment of guilt.  The bias
showing from these passages should warn against the optimism with which
some Hindu commentators have welcomed the verdict.

I suppose I am not the first to notice the glaring contradiction between
the following two statements made by the eminent judges in two
successive paragraphs.  In Para 56, Hindu society is explicitly
dissociated from the “guilt” of the demolition on 6 December 1992: “…The
miscreants who demolished the mosque had no religion, caste or creed
except the character of a criminal and the mere incident of birth of
such a person in any particular community cannot attach the stigma of
his crime to the community in which he was born.”^([43](#43))

This clear position is reversed in the very next Paragraph, n^(o) 57:
“...However, confining exercise of the right of worship of the Hindu
community to its reduced form within the disputed area as on 7th January
1993, lesser than that exercised till the demolition on 6th December
1992, by the freeze enacted in Section 7(2) appears to be reasonable and
just in view of the fact that the miscreants who demolished the mosque
are suspected to be persons professing to practice the Hindu
religion.  The Hindu community must, therefore, bear the cross on its
chest, for the misdeed of the miscreants reasonably suspected to belong
to their religious fold.”^([44](#44))

Remark first of all the Christian imagery in the last sentence: “The
Hindu community must bear the cross on its chest.” This illustrates what
we had suspected all along: the English-speaking elite in India has
preserved the mind-set of the Christian-British colonial rulers.  The
ruling class has borrowed its religious imagery from Western
Christianity, just as it has borrowed its secularism from the
anti-religious reaction in the late-Christian West.  Mentally, India is
to an extent still under *Brown Sahib* colonial domination, and the
legal apparatus which denies Hindus the right to their sacred site can,
in circumstances critical to the establishment’s legitimacy, still be
used as an instrument of colonial oppression.

Within this anti-native, anti-Hindu colonial system, it is the latter
(n0 57) of the two mutually contradictory statements which represents
the true spirit: Hindu society is guilty of trying to manage its own
affairs at its own sacred site, so it deserves to be punished with
administrative restrictions on its access to the Rama-Janmabhoomi, and
perhaps with further judicial restrictions later.  The judges simply
confirm what is explicitly laid down in article 30 of the Constitution:
minorities enjoy privileges which are denied to Hindus, including the
non-interference by the government in the affairs of their places of
worship.  Hindus have no right to complain when the government takes
over Hindu temples, nor when it works hand-in-glove with Islamic
activists trying to take over a Hindu sacred site.  They should be
satisfied with the status of second-class citizens, to which they have
been so well accustomed by centuries of colonial rule, Islamic as well
as Christian.

The former of the two statements (n0 56), by contrast, is quite
dishonest.  It is just a typical exercise in the mendacious secularspeak
of the Nehruvian elite: claiming that the religions are not themselves
responsible for communal strife, that it is the handiwork of evil
political opportunists and “miscreants”.  In reality, Islam is directly
responsible for the communal conflict as a whole; and a group of
committed Hindus are responsible for the demolition of the Babri
Masjid.  It is simply not true that the demolishers of the Babri Masjid
“had no religion, caste or creed except the character of a criminal”.

Though not all Hindus agreed on this type of strategy for achieving the
reconstruction of a proper temple at the site, it is undeniable that the
demolishers acted out of a commitment to Hindu concerns.  They certainly
belonged to a Hindu caste (say, Maratha) or a Hindu sect (say, Naga
sadhu) and professed the Hindu religion.  Of course the “stigma” of
their intervention does not attach to the whole of Hindu society, but
nevertheless every Hindu is entitled to feel some pride that “our boys”
have stood up for Hindu dignity on 6 December 1992.  They did what many
BJP supporters in their heart of hearts had wanted to do but were too
afraid or too politically domesticated to put into practice.

It is sad that such a symbolic event like the demolition of the
misplaced Babri Masjid architecture had to be performed surreptitiously
by an unruly crowd of mostly unemployed youngsters.  But then, perhaps
it was just their task in these circumstances.  Under India’s secularist
regime, Hindu society is an underground society, and sometimes it is
inevitable that moral imperatives in the service of Hindu society can
only be realised by such surreptitious surprise action.

Considering the foolish haughtiness with which the Allahabad High Court
had just decided, days before the gathering scheduled for 6 December, to
postpone once more their verdict on the acquisition of some of the
Ayodhya land by the UP government (intended as part of a strategy
towards a peaceful solution), after a full 42 years of endless
litigation, it is not fair to accuse the over-enthusiastic Rama devotees
of disrespect towards the judicial process and the democratic order
which it is supposed to uphold.  Rather, they have shown disrespect
towards the misuse of the courts for political games, and they have
rightly revolted against the judges’ contempt for Hindu society, which
was evident from their unwillingness to settle the dispute brought
before them, concerning no less a site than the Rama-Janmabhoomi.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> ^([1](#1a))Sushil Srivastava: *The Disputed Mosque.  A Historical
> Inquiry*, Vistaar Publ., Delhi 1991, p.90. As for the calligraphy of
> the inscription attributing the building of the mosque to Babar’s
> lieutenant Mir Baqi, Srivastava argues (p.89) that it is in a style
> typical of the 19th century, so that the inscription constitutes but a
> very weak proof for dating the mosque to Babar’s reign.
>
> ^([2](#2a))R. Nath: *The Babri Masjid of Ayodhya*, Historical Research
> Documentation Programme, Jaipur 1991, p.11.
>
> ^([3](#3a))About the Babri Masjid in the decades before the
> Hindu-Muslim clashes in the 1850s, the region’s first British district
> commissioner, Patrick Camegy, wrote: “It is said that up to that time
> the Hindus and Mohamedans alike used to worship in the mosque-temple.”
> Quoted by Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 153.
>
> ^([4](#4a))R. Nath: *The Babar Masjid of Ayodhya*, p.38. With
> “1001-1030”, the period of Mahmud Ghaznavi’s raids is meant.
>
> ^([5](#5a))Sushil Srivastava: *The Disputed Mosque*, p.88.
>
> ^([6](#6a))Sushil Srivastava: *The Disputed Mosque*, p.78.
>
> ^([7](#7a))Susan Bayly: “History and the fundamentalists: India after
> the Ayodhya crisis”, *Bulletin of the Academy of Arts and Sciences*,
> April 1993.
>
> ^([8](#8a))We are not considering here the cases of outright
> provocation, like the *Safdar Hashmi Memorial Trust* (Sahmat) Ramayana
> exhibit, or the disgusting performance of some journalists at the
> Ayodhya site prior to the demolition, when they were offering cookies
> to the Kar Sevaks, as if to monkeys in a zoo, in order to verify the
> rumour that these were just hungry street kids lured to the Kar Seva
> in exchange for food.  Since these have nothing to do with the
> historical debate on Ayodhya, we understand that they are not included
> in Susan Bayly’s paean to “bravery” of anti-temple Indiarls.  Against
> the said provocations, some Hindu activists have lost their temper,
> but even then, nobody was killed.
>
> ^([9](#9a))E.g. Soma Wadhwa: “Historians rained with hate mail”,
> *Sunday Observer*, 17-1-1993.
>
> ^([10](#10a))In 1998, a BJP-led alliance gained a working majority in
> the Lok Sabha, but many coalition parties refuse to have anything to
> do with “communal” issues, and even in the BJP the interest in and
> commitment to the Ayodhya temple is unimpressive.
>
> ^([11](#11a))This stand is still taken by most contributors to
> Sarvepalli Gopal ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation, the Babri
> Masjid/Ram Janmabhoomi Issue* (Penguin, Delhi 1991), which probably
> contains the final Marxist position in this debate.  The book (and the
> sycophantic reviews it has received) avoids mentioning the pre-British
> testimonies and carefully ignores the scholars’ debate as well as
> other scholarly expositions of the Hindu case.
>
> ^([12](#12a))Edward Desmond reviewing S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy of a
> Confrontation*, in *New York Review* of Books, 14-5-1992.
>
> ^([13](#13a))Gérard Heuzé: *Où va l’Inde moderne?* L’Harmattan, Paris
> 1993, p.59. 
>
> ^([14](#14a))Gérard Heuzé: *Où va l’Inde moderne?*, p. 12 2.
>
> ^([15](#15a))Gérard Heuzé: *Où va l’Inde modems?*, p.7-8.
>
> ^([16](#16a))Vide Harsh Narain: *Ayodhya Temple-Mosque Dispute*, esp.
> p.18 and p.91 for the Jaipur maharaja’s Janmasthan map (1717), p.10-11
> for Father Tieffenthaler’s testimony (1767), p.23-26 for the Persian
> *“Bahadurshahi Book of Forty Sermons”* (around 1710).
>
> ^([17](#17a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism.  Hindus and
> Muslims in India*, University of California Press, Berkeley 1994;
> Christophe Jaffrelot: *Les Nationalistes Hindous*, Fondation Nationale
> des Sciences Politiques, Paris 1993; Susan Bayly: “History and the
> Fundamentalists: India after the Ayodhya Crisis”, *Bulletin of the
> Academy of arts and Sciences*, April 1993.
>
> ^([18](#18a))Published by Ajanta Publ., Delhi 1990.
>
> ^([19](#19a))Published by Ajanta Publ., Delhi 1990 c.q. 1992.
>
> ^([20](#20a))Antony Copley: “Secularism Reconsidered”, *Contemporary
> South Asia* 1993, 2 (1), p.47-65, spec. p.64 n.38.
>
> ^([21](#21a))Quoted by Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*,
> p.219, n.55.
>
> ^([22](#22a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p.218 n.51.
> A.R. Khan’s rebuttal to the JNU historians, “In the name of
> ‘history’”, along with the ensuing polemic, has been included in S. R.
> Goel, ed.: *Hindu Temples*, vol. 1, 2nd ed., p.243-263.
>
> ^([23](#23a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p.161,
> referring to Hans Bakker: *Ayodhya*, Groningen 1987, and to Peter Van
> der Veer: “‘God must be liberated!’ A Hindu liberation movement in
> Ayodhya”, *Modern Asia Studies*, 1987.
>
> ^([24](#24a))Antony Copley: “Secularism Reconsidered”, *Contemporary
> South Asia* 1993, 2 (1), p. 57.
>
> ^([25](#25a))Antony Copley: “Secularism Reconsidered”, *Contemporary
> South Asia* 1993, 2 (1), p. 58.
>
> ^([26](#26a))Antony Copley: “Secularism Reconsidered”, *Contemporary
> South Asia* 1993, 2 (1), p.58.
>
> ^([27](#27a))Peter Van der Veer: *Religious Nationalism*, p. 160.
>
> ^([28](#28a))Important contributions to the debate from the Hindu side
> include the official argumentation by the Vishva Hindu Parishad,
> published as *History vs. Casuistry* by Voice of India 1991; *The
> Ayodhya Temple-Mosque Dispute, Focus on Muslim Sources* by Prof. Harsh
> Narain, Penman Publ., Delhi 1993; and, in a broader perspective,
> *Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them* (2 vols.), by Sitaram Goel et
> al., Voice of India, 1990-1993.
>
> ^([29](#29a))Syed Shahabuddin’s letter in *Indian Express*,
> 13-12-1990.
>
> ^([30](#30a))Paul Teunissen in the Dutch bimonthly *India Nu*, January
> 1993.  Note that he accepts my argumentation that the temple existed,
> so that “Shahabuddin will have to get serious about his demolition
> promise”.
>
> ^([31](#31a))This point has been developed in the VHP’s official
> rebuttal to the BMAC’s evidence bundle: *History vs.  Casuistry*, p.57
> and p.67. Of course, that document is absent from the bibliographies
> of practically all secularist publications on Ayodhya in India and
> abroad eventhough it represents the official position of the
> secularists’ own chosen enemy, the position which their publications
> purport to be rebutting.
>
> ^([32](#32a))Wahiduddin Khan is an ideologue of the *Tabligh* movement
> (propagation of pure Islamic ways and abolition of remnants of Hindu
> culture among Muslims); A.A. Engineer routinely publishes
> prefabricated “reports” on communal riots in which the Muslim hand is
> systematically concealed, comparable to the pre-Partition Pirpur
> Report.  Their commitment is to Islam, and their conciliatory stand on
> Ayodhya is only motivated by the calculation that at this point,
> Islamic interests are served better with a non-confrontational
> strategy.
>
> ^([33](#33a))Though written in 1995, these words do not need serious
> amending even in January 2002.
>
> ^([34](#34a))Quoted in K.N. Panikkar: “A Historical Overview”, in S.
> Gopal ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.37 of the Penguin reprint
> 1993, from K.S. Lal: “Ramjanmabhumi - Some Issues”, in *Organiser*,
> October 1989.  Remark that all the historical arguments developed by
> Prof. Lal, like all those of other competent scholars, have been
> carefully kept out of view in S. Gopal’s book (which for most
> foreigners is the *only* source about the Ayodhya affair), while this
> one clumsy phrase has been seized upon to demonstrate the
> “unhistorical” and “irrational” basis o the Hindu position.
>
> ^([35](#35a))To be sure, during the Ayodhya crisis, journalists
> managed to find an illiterate Rama devotee who, quoted from memory,
> declared: “We cannot attain *moksha* (liberation) unless we can
> worship Rama at his very birthplace.” In a political sense, one could
> argue that Hindu society is not really free as long as it has to
> suffer the occupation of its sacred sites by Islam; with that view, I
> agree.  But the interviewee was apparently talking about spiritual
> liberation, which of course has nothing to do with the location of the
> place of Rama’s birth.
>
> ^([36](#36a))I cannot mention Jesus at this point, because his
> birthplace is in doubt.  The claim for Bethlehem was made only in an
> attempt to convince potential Jewish converts that Biblical
> predictions about the birth of the Messiah in Bethlehem had come true
> in Jesus.
>
> ^([37](#37a))A brilliant and thoroughly scientific analysis of
> Mohammed’s psychology, strictly based on the authentic Islamic
> sources, has been developed by the Flemish psychologist Dr. Herman H.
> Somers in his Dutch-language book *Een Andere Mohammed*, Hadewijch,
> Antwerp 1992.  His conclusions are, of course, not compatible with the
> fond beliefs of Islam.  Since for some reason no English translation
> has been forthcoming, I am preparing an English summary myself.
>
> ^([38](#38a))Romila Thapar’s interview to *Le Monde* was reproduced in
> the September 1993 issue of *India*, bimonthly of Shanti Darshan
> Belgo-Indian Association.
>
> ^([39](#39a))That the claims to these sites were deliberately made up
> on non-historical grounds by the triumphant Church in the 4th century,
> is the thoroughly researched thesis of the New Zealand historian Joan
> Taylor: *Christians and the Holy Places*, Oxford University Press
> 1993.
>
> ^([40](#40a))This peculiar Messiah-centred Jewish attitude to the
> Temple Mount is only one of the fundamental differences between the
> Jerusalem and the Ayodhya situation.  It is only a symptom of laziness
> if not worse to describe the Temple Mount controversy as a “Jewish
> Ayodhya”.
>
> ^([41](#41a))Romila Thapar: “A historical perspective on the story of
> Rama”, in S. Gopal, ed.: *Anatomy of a Confrontation*, p.141-163.
>
> ^([42](#42a))This claim was made in writing during the very first
> round of the Government-sponsored scholars’ debate.  Embarrassed about
> their poor performance (which has gone strictly unreported in the
> media as well as in all academic publications), the BMAC negotiators
> have never published their argumentation; I could inspect a copy at
> the Deendayal Research Institute, Delhi.  The specific pieces of
> “proof” are commented on in the VHP rebuttal: *History vs. Casuistry*,
> p.38-41.
>
> ^([43](#43a))“The Supreme Court Judgment”, in Swapan Dasgupta et al.:
> *The Ayodhya Reference*, p.43.
>
> ^([44](#44a))“The Supreme Court Judgment”, in Swapan Dasgupta et al.:
> *The Ayodhya Reference*, p-44.  
>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
