+++
title = "11 10. Mohammed Habib's history-rewriting"

+++
**10. Mohammed Habib’s history-rewriting**

It is but rarely that a secularist or a Muslim actually takes issue with
what I have written.  Mostly they resort to swearwords and the use of
institutional power to deny me access to important forums.  So, when
someone does take the trouble of reading a book of mine and even writing
a rebuttal, I will gladly oblige and take my turn to comment on the
comment.

**10.1. Mohammed Habib’s revolutionary project**

“The writings of the Dutch historian Koenraad Elst have recently become
popular among the Hindutvavadis of India.  He claims that official (or
officially sanctioned) history in India is subject to ‘negationism’ -
the denial or playing down of Muslim crimes in the past, as well as of a
history of Hindu-Muslim conflict.” Thus writes Amber Habib in an article
titled “Elst on Habib”, published on his private website.1

My attention was drawn to it by a friend in 1999, but it may be a few
years older, being a reaction to my 1993 book *Negationism in India:
Concealing the Record of Islam*.  According to his homepage, Amber Habib
turns out to be a Communist, son of Prof. Irfan Habib, grandson of Prof.
Mohammed Habib, as well as grandnephew of Badruddin Tyabji, a leading
Congress Muslim.  The young mathematician living in Model Town, Delhi,
has married a young lady with a Hindu name and Hindu looks, and after
that he has started neglecting his website.  Well, happiness is a
sleeping website.^([1](#1))

He seems to be a jolly good fellow, but having grown up with a reverence
for Nehru and Lenin, his view of the Hindu-Muslim conflict is rather
unfair.  That is to say, by sounding balanced when commenting on a
highly asymmetrical conflict, it does injustice to one of the parties. 
He sums up his view in this verse from Kabir: “Hindu says Ram is the
beloved, the Turk \[Muslim\] says Rahim.  Then they kill each other.  No
one knows the secret.” Kabir belonged to a breed of Hindu converts to
Islam who had retained their Hindu spiritual consciousness but poisoned
it by imbibing categories of Islamic monotheism.  He was the founder of
the *Santa-mata* which had Hindu Bhakti of the Purans as its
stock-in-trade but which paraded a monotheistic facade and poured
contempt on the Hindu Pandit and the Muslim Mullah without knowing even
the ABCD of Islam.  That explains his great popularity in Nehruvian
circles who know their Islam quite superficially but have developed
contempt for Hinduism about which they know even less.  Anyway, picking
up a quarrel in the middle is pretty safe and mentally undemanding.  But
Kabir’s symmetry is false.  No Hindu ever killed a Muslim simply for not
worshipping Rama, but numerous Hindus were killed by Muslims purely for
not worshipping Rahim.

Let us come to the point.  Amber Habib has better things to do than to
argue with me: “Due to the volume of charges thrown around by him, I
cannot enter into a lengthy discussion of his views.” This is convenient
for the author, but I readily agree that life is too short and too
precious to spend it on polemics.  Habib jr. is willing to make one
exception, though: “However, I feel his discussion of Prof. Mohammad
Habib’s writings provides a useful example, by which his worth can be
judged.  The quotes below are from his book *Negationism in India:
Concealing the Record of Islam*.  The readers who care, may make some
judgments for themselves by reading excerpts from Prof. Habib’s
writings.”

Here we go: “Elst begins with: ‘Around 1920 Aligarh historian Mohammed
Habib launched a grand project to rewrite the history of the Indian
religious conflict.  The main points of his version of history are the
following.’ Prof. Habib’s specialization was the history of the Delhi
Sultanate.  Therefore he did write about what Elst sees only as ‘Indian
religious conflict’.  But this was not part of a larger ‘grand
project’.”

By “grand project”, I did not mean a grand research project, only a
grand project of launching a new interpretation of the behaviour of
Muslim conquerors in India.  Given its far-reaching implications and its
role as a model emulated by the dominant school of Indian historians, I
believe that it is fair to call Prof. Habib’s project “grand”.

Amber Habib continues: “From the prefaces to his essay on Mahmud of
Ghazni, it is also clear that Prof. Habib meant mainly to criticise the
image of Mahmud as a religious hero among certain Muslims, and not to
defend him in any way: ‘There has recently grown up a tendency among
some Musalmans of India to adore Mahmud as a saint, and to such
\[people\], a scientific evaluation of his work and his policy will
appear very painful.  There is only one thing I need say in my defence. 
Islam as a creed stands by the principles of the Quran and the ‘Life’ of
the Apostle.  If Sultan Mahmud and his followers strayed from the
‘straight path’ - so much the worse for them.  We want no idols.’”

But that was exactly my point.  The consensus view, shared by Muslims
(not only recently), Hindus and Westerners, was that Mahmud acted as a
Muslim, implementing the code of the *mujahid* as laid down by the
Prophet.  Habib’s new view was diametrically opposed to the
centuries-old consensus: he claimed that Mahmud’s behaviour “strayed
from” the properly Islamic path.  That he innovated by describing
Mahmud’s behaviour as un-Islamic is what I wrote, and Amber Habib has
now confirmed it.

Habib jr. correctly relates: “His first critics, therefore, were the
self-same Muslims.” And he quotes from Habib sr.’s foreword of a reprint
of his essay: “The book was hailed by a storm of criticism in the Urdu
press.  But as this criticism - vindictive, bitter, hostile - was based
on a complete’ ignorance of the originals, I took no notice of it. I
reprint the book as it was written.”

So, here we have it from the horse’s mouth: the Muslims applauded
Mahmud’s behaviour and they considered it impeccably Islamic. I only
disagree with the professor’s claim that their conviction was due to
ignorance.

**10.2. Absolving Islam**

Amber Habib then quotes me: “Firstly, it was not all that serious.  One
cannot fail to notice that the Islamic chroniclers (including some
rulers who wrote their own chronicles, like Teimur and Babar) have
described the slaughter of Hindus, the abduction of their women and
children, and the destruction of their places of worship most
gleefully.  But, according to Habib, these were merely exaggerations by
court poets out to please their patrons.  One wonders what it says about
Islamic rulers that they felt flattered by the bloody details which the
Muslims chroniclers of Hindu persecutions have left us.  At any rate,
Habib has never managed to underpin this convenient hypothesis with a
single fact.”

This is followed by the rebuttal: “Prof. Habib made no such claim. 
Again, it is best to quote him directly: ‘No honest historian should
seek to hide, and no Musalman acquainted with his faith will try to
justify, the wanton destruction of temples that followed in the wake of
the Ghaznavid army.  Contemporary as well as later historians do not
attempt to veil the nefarious acts but relate them with pride.’ He does
say that much of what was written about Mahmud, was written hundreds of
years after the fact, by a group seeking to legitimize itself by first
canonizing Mahmud and then using him as a prior example setter.”

Here, Amber Habib may have a point.  The quotation given should not be
used to represent the whole of the eminent historian’s writing on Mahmud
and the Sultanate, but judged all by itself, it does indeed acknowledge
as factual the atrocities committed by Mahmud.  In that respect at
least, he did better than some of the later secularists, with whose more
crassly negationist claims I seem to have confused Habib’s position.  As
for those who glorified Mahmud centuries after the fact, they based
their stories on contemporary accounts, of which Habib sr. himself
admitted that they accurately described Mahmud’s atrocities and
destruction.

Next, my turn again to be quoted: “Secondly, that percentage of
atrocities on Hindus which Habib was prepared to admit as historical, is
not to be attributed to the impact of Islam, but to other factors. 
Sometimes Islam was used as a justification post factum, but this was
deceptive.  In reality economic motives were at work.  The Hindus
amassed all their wealth in temples and therefore Muslim armies
plundered these temples.”

That Habib sr. made this claim concerning Mahmud, is already clear from
the quotations given above.  His whole point was to absolve Islam and
attribute the crimes Mahmud committed to other factors such as, here,
the desire for booty.  Habib jr. comments: “Prof. Habib says this for
the example of Mahmud of Ghazni.  If he has made a more general claim to
this effect, I have not been able to find it in his *Collected Works*. 
Which brings up the matter of Elst’s method - one should note the lack
of direct quotation or reference.”

It is funny how often I, as a writer of heavy books overburdened with
quotations and footnotes, have been attacked for not providing footnotes
in my book Negationism in India, which had been started as a mere review
article (of Sita Ram Goel’s book *Hindu Temples: What Happened to Them*)
and was retained in that format even after growing to the size of a book
in its own right.  I referred to Habib’s writings purely from memory,
having read some of them in India months or years before penning that
review.

Professor Habib, described here as a specialist on the Delhi Sultanate,
had to deal with many more Muslim fanatics and iconoclasts, the Delhi
Sultanate being one of the most violent regimes in history.  Invariably,
sultans oppressing Hinduism invoked the tenets of Islam as
justification.  If we are to believe Amber Habib, it was only in the
case of Mahmud Ghaznavi that the august professor disconnected behaviour
from religion.  So in all the other cases, say Malik Kafur, Alauddin
Khilji or Sikander Lodi, Habib admitted their Islamic motivation?  Habib
can be quoted as confirming the Islamic injunction to idol-breaking as
demonstrated by many Muslim rulers in India?

That is still not what I recall, but, not having Habib’s *Collected
Works* handy even now, I am willing to take Habib jr.’s word for it. 
Let us assume that I wrongly extrapolated Habib sr.’s view of Mahmud
Ghaznavi to Muslim rulers in general.  Note, however, that this
extrapolation would be accurate for most of Habib’s followers among
today’s AMU and JNU faculty, and even foreign scholars like Richard
Eaton, who do make these exonerating claims about Islam in the case of
Muslim conquerors in general.

**10.3. The ethnic factor**

The next quotation from my own text is this: “Thirdly, according to
Habib there was also a racial factor: these Muslims were mostly Turks,
savage riders from the steppes who would need several centuries before
getting civilized by the wholesome influence of Islam.  Their inborn
barbarity cannot be attributed to the doctrines of Islam.”

I readily admit that my choice of the word “racial” was cheap and
demagogic.  Nowadays, racism passes for the ultimate mortal sin and I
could not withstand the temptation to insinuate an allegation of racism
against my opponents.  Given the looseness with which the term “racism”
is used nowadays, the massacres of Hindus by Muslims and the
concentrated hatred of secularists for the Hindus could easily qualify
as “racist”.  But coming back to reality, the fact remains that Habib
and many others have described the pre-Islamic and freshly-islamized
Turks as barbaric, and used that classification to explain some of their
behaviour without implicating Islam.

Amber Habib sets the record straight: “Prof. Habib did talk about
relatively ‘uncivilized’ Turks, but this was in the context of their
conflicts with the Persians.  In his descriptions, these are not the
Turks who made it to India - and further the first Muslim invaders of
India were not Turks in any case.  Phrases such as ‘inborn barbarity’
seem quite foreign to Prof. Habib’s world-view and writing style and are
more likely a projection by Elst of his own weird classifications of
peoples.  Prof. Habib’s argument is quite the opposite of what is
presented here.  He did not describe barbarians who were not yet soothed
by Islam - but a sophisticated ruling class that perverted the ideals of
Islam to its own ends.”

Before replying, allow me to quote one more round of Amber Habib’s
argument.  I am quoted as writing: “Mohammed Habib’s exercise in
history-rewriting cannot stand the test of historical criticism on any
score.  We can demonstrate this with the example of Sultan Mahmud
Ghaznavi (997-1030), already mentioned, who carried out a number of
devastating raids in Sindh, Gujarat and Panjab.  This Ghaznavi was a
Turk, certainly, but in many respects he was not a barbarian: he
patronized arts and literature (including the great Persian poet
Firdausi, who would end up in trouble because his patron suspected him
of apostasy, and the Persian but Arabic-writing historian Albiruni) and
was a fine calligraphist himself.  The undeniable barbarity of his
antiHindu campaigns cannot be attributed to his ethnic stock.”

Habib jr. comments: “Prof. Habib does not attribute Mahmud’s behaviour
to his being a Turk ‘barbarian’, but (to the extent that background can
be blamed) to the spirit of the ‘Persian Renaissance’ and the subsequent
submission of the Islamic ideal to the whims and desires of the rulers. 
To say Mahmud patronised Alberuni is a bit of a stretch - for Alberuni
was a captive from one of Mahmud’s western campaigns and, while he
travelled in Mahmud’s train, he enjoyed no special privileges. (his
bitterness towards Mahmud is quite explicit in his Kitab-al-Hind.)”

Thank you, Amber, for this detail about Alberuni’s life story.  It is
most interesting to learn that one of the greatest scholars of the
Muslim Golden Age, an admirer of India moreover, was not honoured in
proportion to his exceptional merits, but was actually a captive and
treated as one.  But to return to the main point: as I already admitted,
it is possible that at some points I have conflated Habib’s views with
those of other secularists.  It is very common in those circles to
explain away the misdeeds of Muslims with ethnic factors of barbarity,
e.g. numerous modem publications on the Prophet justify his use of
violent means in imposing Islam as a regrettable but inevitable effect
of the prevalent barbarity of the Arabs.  The allegation of ethnic
barbarity against Arabs or Turks is not my “own weird classification of
peoples” but standard fare in pro-Islamic apologetics.  My point is that
this ethnic-cultural explanation of Islamic behaviour is wrong, for the
Arabs were not at all barbaric.  They had many tempering conventions
concerning warfare, and Prophet Mohammed’s novel contribution was
precisely to break these and wage a total war.

Mohammed Habib and Amber Habib have certainly not convinced me that
Mahmud’s crimes are in any way due to the Persian Renaissance.  Firdausi
was the prime exponent of this trend, and he was never guilty of such
crimes.  And it was precisely because he took the Persian heritage too
seriously that he got in trouble with the Islamic establishment
including Mahmud.

But even if we accept the Habib theory, and if we agree that Habib’s
line in exonerating Islam of Mahmud’s crimes is unrelated to
considerations of ethnic barbarity, we still maintain that his line was
wrong.  The explanation of Mahmud’s behaviour as un-Islamic, whether
from savageness or from decadent oversophistication, is wrong in any
case. The “sophisticated ruling class” in Mahmud’s kingdom has not
“perverted the ideals of Islam to its own ends”.  Those who cultivated
the Persian heritage did not destroy Hindu temples, while those who did
persecute Hindus and destroy their cultural treasures have not done more
than to faithfully apply the Islamic ideals.  They emulated the
precedents set by the Prophet of Islam himself.

**10.4. Conversion by force, or was it by fraud?**

Amber Habib has no quarrel with my following paraphrase of Mohammed
Habib’s position: “Finally, the violence of the Islamic warriors was of
minor importance in the establishment of Islam in India.  What happened
was not so much a conquest, but a shift in public opinion: when the
urban working-class heard of Islam and realized it now had a choice
between Hindu law (smriti) and Muslim law (shariat) it chose the
latter.” There, I was merely paraphrasing a very famous phrase of Prof.
Habib’s, one not pertaining to Mahmud Ghaznavi but to Mohammed Ghori and
his lieutenants.^([2](#2))

Amber comments: “Prof. Habib did believe that the sword failed to win
any significant number of converts to Islam.  In his view, the
sword-wielders were only out for gain in this world and were not
interested in conversions.  Nor does he believe they would have
succeeded had they tried.  He gives credit instead to the Sufis and such
preachers who spread a more egalitarian version of Islam through the
country.”

In Prophet Mohammed’s biography by Ibn Ishaq, we find that practically
all Arab conversions to Islam were the fruit of the sword.  When Pagan
tribes saw that their chances to hold out against Mohammed’s military
onslaught had become very small, most agreed to acquiesce in the lesser
evil, viz. to give up their culture rather than their lives.  Others had
joined Mohammed earlier for another sword-related reason: as fellow
fighters in Mohammed’s Jihad, they would be entitled to a share in the
war booty.  Yet others, typically unthinking youngsters including the
daughter of the leading family of Mecca, were eager to join what seemed
to them to be the wave of the future, the army that went from victory to
victory.  It was only a very small minority that joined Mohammed because
of a heartfelt belief that his claim of hearing Allah’s own voice was
genuine.

In India and other countries, the percentages of the different
categories of converts may have been divided differently, but the
military superiority of Islam was practically always the overriding
factor, directly or indirectly.  Many were literally converted at
swordpoint, but the largest number of converts were probably those,
mostly in the urban artisanal castes, who wanted to escape the jizya tax
and the numerous other disabilities imposed on non-Muslims, - a legal
discrimination which supposed the existence of an Islamic regime, and
this regime was invariably established by force.  But I will concede
that in some cases, gullible people were taken in by Muslim preachers or
sufis who managed to link Islam with certain virtues or mystical
experiences in the minds of their audiences.  Even today, absolutely any
self-styled prophet or cult leader manages to get a following, so why
not in the Middle Ages?

But that does not mean that an opinion poll was held in which the
Indians were given a reasoned choice between the *Smriti* and the
*Shariat* (Hindu c.q. Muslim law) and then decided on the basis of their
preference between these two.  In any event, the law governing their
day-to-day lives didn’t change much upon conversion, for most recent
converts retained their Hindu customs (which in turn were generally not
determined by the abstract *Smriti* but by caste tradition) for
generations.  To most converts, their first bite into beef, the classic
test of abandonment of Hinduism, tasted very bitter, but they judged it
was worth the nausea because it would increase their chances in life
under an Islamic regime.  The key fact here was not any “egalitarian”
pretence of Islam, but precisely the inequality which it imposed between
Muslims and Hindus of comparable social standing.

**10.5. Ghaznavi vs. other Muslim conquerors**

About Mahmud Ghaznavi, I am quoted as writing: “There is no record of
his being welcomed by urban artisans as a liberator from the oppressive
Hindu social system.  On the contrary, his companion Albiruni testifies
how all the Hindus had an inveterate aversion for all Muslims.”

Amber Habib comments: “No such claim is made for Mahmud by Prof. Habib. 
Let us quote him again: ‘It was inevitable that the Hindus should
consider Islam a deviation from the truth when its followers deviated so
deplorably from the path of rectitude and justice.  A people is not
conciliated by being robbed of all that it holds most dear, nor will it
love a faith that comes to it in the guise of plundering armies and
leaves devastated fields and ruined cities as monuments of its
victorious method for reforming the morals of a prosperous but erratic
world ... the policy of Mahmud secured the rejection of Islam without a
hearing.”

Amber Habib’s whole argument hinges on a supposed contrast in behaviour
between Mahmud and the other sultans.  But that contrast is in most
cases false.  The real conqueror of India for Islam, Mohammed
Shihabuddin Ghori, has left a trail of destruction behind him of
entirely similar proportions.  The same thing is true, on a
geographically smaller but otherwise similar scale, for other Muslim
conquerors, including Timur, Babar, Ahmad Shah Abdali and down to the
Pakistani irregulars who conquered parts of Kashmir in 1947.  If Mahmud
could not win the hearts of the Indians, then neither could his
successors.  They all set the Hindus firmly against Islam, precisely
because they did ensure that Islam got a proper hearing.  They showed
Islam in the true colours of Prophet Mohammed.  But for their military
superiority, they would have welcomed extremely few Hindu converts into
the Muslim fold.

But what about Mahmud’s chief predecessor, Mohammed bin Qasim?  I am
quoted thus: “His \[Mahmud’s\] massacres and acts of destruction were
merely a replay of what the Arab Mohammed bin Qasim had wrought in Sindh
in 712-15.  He didn’t care for material gain: he left rich mosques
untouched, but poor Hindu temples met the same fate at his hands as the
richer temples.  He turned down a Hindu offer to give back a famous idol
in exchange for a huge ransom: ‘I prefer to appear on judgement Day as
an idol-breaker rather than an idol-seller.’ The one explanation that
covers all the relevant facts, is that he was driven to his barbarous
acts by his ideological allegiance to Islam.”

Amber Habib comments: “Prof. Habib points to many significant
differences between Mohammed Qasim and Mahmud.  The former was
interested in setting up a fair government and in obtaining the consent
and approval of the local population.  He dealt harshly with opposing
soldiers but left the civil population alone.  It is not clear why Elst
refers to mosques being left untouched.  Mosques contain no riches - so
this would be entirely in consonance with Prof. Habib’s view of Mahmud
as a grand looter.  Further, there could not have been many mosques at
this time in India, let alone ‘rich’ ones.  Perhaps he is referring to
Mahmud’s western campaigns.  Prof. Habib’s thesis is that Mahmud’s
desire was to expand his empire to the west, and the raids in the east
were to provide finance as well as the mantle of a religious warrior. 
It is quite consistent with this that he would be more destructive in
the east than the west.  The story of the ransom is likely a latter day
fabrication by those seeking to enhance Mahmud’s status as a religious
hero - it makes little sense for Mahmud to be bargaining with those he
has just utterly defeated.  Further, there are accounts of other
occasions when Mahmud left a town alone on receiving a ransom.”

It is true, as I discovered later on, that the story about Mahmud
refusing the ransom is a. later fable retailed by the sufi poet Attar. I
mentioned it at that time as I found it in almost all books on Mahmud
and very popular among Muslim in praise of Mahmud as an idol-breaker. 
But even if it was true, the secularists would have ignored it or called
it another bit of court poetry.  Whenever the secularists find
historical testimonies inconvenient, they fatally hear words like “myth”
or “fabrication” crossing their lips.  In this case it happens to be
true that a later poet dramatized Mahmud’s well-known religious zeal
into this story of his refusing the ransom and preferring to break the
idol.  But it is only an extra to a sizable body of evidence, and
declaring it a fabrication won’t alter our solid knowledge about
Mahmud’s Islamic zeal.

It is possible but by no means certain that Mahmud only came to India to
plunder, not to conquer.  This thesis is put forward by historians who
want to avoid the impression that Mahmud was, in a way, defeated by
Hindu strength and hence unable to incorporate India into his kingdom. 
Habib, though critical of Mahmud because of his poor public relations
job for Islam, seems to have been among those eager to uphold Mahmud’s
military reputation.  The effort seems to be in conflict with elementary
logic.  Since Mahmud saw India as a source of wealth useful in financing
his western campaigns, it would have been more logical to conquer India
and enjoy a regular supply of its wealth. In fact, he *did* annex those
parts of India where Hindu resistance could be overcome, that is,
Gandhar (northern Afghanistan and Panjab upto Sindh), and western Punjab
upto Lahore from which parts he was able to drive away the Hindu
Shahiyas after a series of tough battles.  In the rest of India he
encountered unyielding resistance and we can surmise that though (like
Mohammed Ghori) he intended to conquer India, he settled for mere
material plunder and religious destruction simply because he wasn’t
strong enough for a durable conquest.

But for now, let us go with the convenient secularist theory that he
merely came to India with a limited agenda of plundering.  In that case,
pray, why did he have to break stone idols?  These cannot be melted and
turned into gold coins or iron swords.  Why did he have to desecrate
temples in all kinds of ways apart from merely taking out their golden
objects?  Clearly, his concern was not merely financial, it was also
religious.

I am quoted thus: “The contention that Hindus stored their riches in
temples is completely plucked out of thin air (though some of the richer
temples contained golden statues, which were temple property): it is one
among many ad hoc hypotheses which make Habib’s theory a
methodologically indefensible construction.  In fact, Habib is
proclaiming a grand conspiracy theory: all the hundreds of Islamic
authors who declared unanimously that what they reported was a war of
Islam against Infidelity, would all have co-ordinated one single fake
scenario to deceive us.”

And Amber Habib comments: “Even in present times, temples are recipients
of considerable donations.  Certainly, the writers of the time describe
the temples as sources of immense wealth.  Prof. Habib gives the
following quote about Mahmud’s sacking of Somnath: ‘Not a hundredth part
of the gold and precious stones he obtained from Somnath were to be
found in the treasury of any king of Hindustan.’”

Habib jr. does not answer my main point, viz. that Muslim conquerors
including Mahmud destroyed many Hindu religious statues and buildings
regardless of financial value.  Numerous Muslim sources testify to the
religious motive.  Alright, some religious objects in temples were
made-of precious material, but they were not the only ones targeted by
Muslim iconoclasts; stone and terra cotta sculptures were also
destroyed.

Finally, the distinction which Mohammed Habib and Amber Habib keep on
making between plundering and Jihad, between material gain and religious
zeal, is a false one in the case of Islam.  For a Muslim, emulating the
Prophet Mohammed it is the religious act par excellence.  The Prophet
himself organized numerous raids on caravans and Jewish as well Arab
settlements, 82 according to an oft-quoted count.  Looting the wealth of
the merchants, taking the passengers as hostages and raping the women
among them: all this was performed by the Prophet and his most trusted
companions.  Mahmud Ghaznavi accomplished a very pious mission when he
repeated all these prophetic precedents.

**10.6. Not the Muslims are guilty, but Islam**

My conclusion about this topic is quoted thus: “Habib tried to absolve
the ideology (Islam) of the undeniable facts of persecution and massacre
of the Pagans by blaming individuals (the Muslims).  The sources however
point to the opposite state of affairs: Muslim fanatics were merely
faithful executors of Quranic injunctions.  Not the Muslims are guilty,
but Islam.”

But Amber Habib disagrees: “On the contrary, Prof. Habib drew a careful
distinction between the original Islamic ideal, and the corrupted
version adopted by the Muslim invaders and ruling classes in India.  He
spared no effort in taking the latter to task, while espousing the
former as a worthy ideal.”

Well, that is exactly my point.  Mohammed Habib tried to convince his
readers that a consistent behaviour pattern of Muslim conquerors was
un-Islamic eventhough it was nothing but an application of the precedent
set by Prophet Mohammed himself.  On that understanding of his position,
at least, we seem to be in agreement.  We only differ in evaluating the
eminent historian’s opinion: Amber thinks he was right, I have argued
that he was mistaken.

About my essential conclusion, Amber Habib writes: “Elst’s distinction:
‘Not the Muslims are guilty, but Islam’, is a perplexing one.  What does
this mean in practice?  Is the religion of Islam to be tried and
convicted but its followers left in peace?  It is clear this cannot be. 
His distinction therefore is mere sophistry.”

The word “therefore”, which implies that a reasoning is being concluded,
is a little too much honour for the lone sentence: “It is clear this
cannot be.” Someone who is on his own admission “perplexed” by a
statement, should not go on to claim that its meaning and implications
are “clear” to him.  It seems to me that he hasn’t understood my
position that “not the Muslims are guilty, but Islam”.

My position is exactly the one which in Amber Habib’s opinion “cannot
be”.  Yes, I think that “the religion of Islam is to be tried and
convicted but its followers left in peace”. Just as geocentrism should
be tried and thrown out but its believers should be left in peace. 
Galilei didn’t think his opponents should be burned at the stake or
otherwise troubled.  All they needed was some exposure to free thinking
about their cherished but untenable belief.

Amber Habib concludes: “To summarise, it is clear that Elst’s case
against Prof. Habib rests mainly on a wholesale fabrication of his views
and arguments - these are distorted till they become less feasible, and
then attacked using rather questionable ‘facts’.  Why does Elst need to
take recourse to such tactics? it would suggest an attempt to hide the
weaknesses and gaps in his own arguments, by shifting attention to the
ones he has constructed in his opponent’s.”

I will not try to snatch the last word from my worthy opponent.  By now,
the reader is sufficiently informed to judge the matter for himself.

It is usual for Muslim apologists of Islam to proclaim that Islam was
and is being misrepresented by the mujahids of the past and the present
and that true Islam stands for peace and tolerance.  But they never tell
us where to find the “true” Islam they are talking about.  Let them
proclaim once for all that true Islam has nothing to do with the Quran
and the Sunnah of Prophet Mohammed.  Surely they cannot claim a monopoly
over studying and interpreting Islamic scriptures.  The world has not
yet become an Islamic theocracy; kafirs are still and most likely to
continue to be in majority and they have freedom to find out what lot
those scriptures prescribe for them.  
 

**Footnotes:**

> [¹](#1a)Vide www.geocities.com/a\_habib/Dada/elst.html. Not that it is
> important, but I am Flemish, i.e. Dutch-speaking Belgian.
>
> [²](#2a)Quoted e.g. by Prabha Dixit: “Prof. Mohammed Habib’s
> historical fallacies”, in Devahuti, ed.: *Bias in Indian
> Historiography*, D.K. Publ., Delhi 1980, p.202, from K.A. Nizami, ed.:
> *Politics and Society in the Early Medieval Period* (Collected Works
> of Professor Mohammed Habib), Delhi 1974, vol. 1, p.72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
