+++
title = "60 "

+++
<div align="right">

*Indian Express*  
New Delhi, 15 August 1994  
**1. Legacy of hate**  
Hindus and Muslims must endeavour  
to undo partition  
By K. R. Malkani

</div>

The Hindu-Muslim problem is a fact of Indian life. This problem is a
legacy of the past, particularly that of the recent past, when the
British gave it a new and dangerous twist, resulting in the partition of
India. And it is a problem that sours relations, distorts the whole
Indian polity and acts as a drag on the country. The task of Indian
statesmanship is to resolve this problem amicably in the light of
historic experience and the Indian genius of harmonisation.

Gandhiji used to compare the Hindu-Muslim conflict to
Saivite-Vaishnavite rivalries of bygone ages. He was probably
oversimplifying matters. Saivites and Vaishnavites - and Buddhists and
Jains - shared the same idiom, the same milieu and the same culture.
Islam represents not only a new religion, a new kind of religion, but
also a religion couched in a Turko-Persio-Arabian idiom. Fortunately,
the Prophet of Islam has a very positive view of India. He once said to
his wife Hind, “May Allah bless the country after which you are named.”
That is something to build on.

Also the Hindu-Muslim interaction over the centuries gives hope for a
harmonious solution in the fullness of time. But for the British
interregnum, with its “Divide and Rule” games, Hindus and Muslims would,
by now, have worked out an abiding and mutually satisfactory system of
peaceful coexistence, just as Catholics and Protestants have done in
Europe is spite of long and bloody religious wars. Let us not forget
that Hindus and Muslims jointly fought the British in 1857.

Nor was this a one-time exception. The Hindu-Muslim interaction has
produced gems like Kabir and Khusrau, Akbar and Dara Shikoh, Jaisi and
Rahiman. Mughal rule was basically a Mughal-Rajput coalition. And
Safdarjang was busy putting together a Mughal-Maratha coalition when the
tragedy of 1761 struck the country.^([1](#1)) After Ghazni and Ghori
invasions, there were no wholly Muslim or wholly Hindu armies in India.

As per ancient Indian royal practice, the Mughal monarchs drank only
Gangajal. They celebrated Basant and Holi, Dussehra and Divali. Jahangir
used to have Shraadh ceremony for his late father Akbar. While the
polity was basically in Muslim hands, the economy was in Hindu hands.
Muslim kings and nawabs invariably had Hindu accountants. And Aurangzeb
trusted only Rajputs to guard his *harem*. Apart from the loot by
Ghazni, Nadirshah and Abdali, there was no drain on wealth from India
Even after centuries of Muslim rule, the “Wealth of Ind” was known the
world over. Notwithstanding Islamic injunctions, the Indian Muslims gave
themselves ‘Pirs’ - on the model of ‘Gurus’. The Rath evolved into the
‘Tazia’. And even the Lord of the Seven Hills of Tirupati was given a
Turkish wife, “Thuluka Nachiyar”. Sir Syed Ahmed, founder of the Aligarh
movement, initially regarded himself a ‘Hindu’. Even the East India
Company referred to Indian Muslims as “Hindu Musalmans”.  The word
‘Indian’ was rightly translated as ‘Hindu’. That should happen again.

The Hindu-Muslim problem as we know it today is basically a gift of the
British after 1857 - and particularly after 1921. It was they who took
steps to divide Hindu and Muslim, Hindu and Sikh, “upper” castes and
“lower” castes, “Aryan” North and “Dravidian” South - and who succeeded
the most in dividing Hindus and Muslims. We have to see through this
game and work steadily for effecting Hindu-Muslim reconciliation on the
unexceptionable principle of “Justice for All and Appeasement of None”.

Among the Indian parties, Bharatiya Janata Party alone can undertake
this task. It is just like in the US where only the Republicans,
traditionally known for their strong anti-communism, could win and call
off the Cold War with Russia; the US Democrats could never have done it
because they were generally viewed by Americans as ‘Pinkos’ and
‘appeasers’. Likewise, because BJP is perceived as the guardian angel of
national interests, its principled policy of ‘Justice for All’ will not
be misunderstood as sell-out of Hindu interests. And at the same time it
will command greater acceptance among Muslims who view the Congress as
hypocritical and BJP as frank but honest.

Sri Aurobindo’s articulation of the problem and its solution appears
singularly apt: “Hindu-Mohamedan unity cannot be effected by political
adjustment or Congress Batteries. It must be sought deeper down, in the
heart and in the mind, for where the causes of disunion are, there the
remedies must be sought…… We must strive to remove the causes of
misunderstanding by a better mutual knowledge and sympathy; we must
extend the unflattering love of the patriot to our Mussalman brother,
remembering that to him too our Mother has given a permanent place in
her bosom; but we must cease to approach him falsely or flatter him out
of a selfish weakness and cowardice… What is wanted is some new
religious movement among the Mohammedans which would remodel their
religion and change the stamp of their temperament.” *Karmayogin*, Vol.
2, P. 24).

Specifically we can consider the following steps:

1. Rewrite Indian history - not to whitewash negative aspects, but to
incorporate the positive ones, deliberately left out by British
historians;^([2](#2))

2\. Accept Indian Muslims as ‘Muslim Indians’ or ‘Mohammedi Hindus’ and
see them with a friendly eye - *‘mittrasya chakshusha, pashyema’* - as
our brothers, while the latter regard Bharatvarsh as sacred Matribhoomi
and look upon partition as a sin;

3\. Unhesitatingly expose any wrongdoing or wrong expression by erring
Muslims, but not suspect or condemn the community wholesale;

4\. We don’t have to be allergic to Muslim States. We have age-old
cultural links with Iran, Afghanistan and Central Asia and these links
need reviving and strengthening. And we can have cooperative relations
with Egypt, Algeria etc. in our war on fundamentalist terrorism;

5\. Every Indian should eschew any pejorative terms or slogans about the
other community;

6\. Until now Muslim leadership has been misappropriated by the likes of
Shahabuddin and Imam Bukhari. Their intemperate statements provoke
equally intemperate Hindu response. Muslim intelligentsia should come
forward to respond coolly to Hindu-Muslim situations, as and when they
arise. Their moderation will also moderate the Hindu response.

Through these and other measures we should decelerate the level of
conflict and prepare for national harmony in the Hindustan Peninsula.
Once we move in this general direction of Hindu-Muslim reconciliation,
the whole rationale of partition will melt away. Pakistan may continue
as a single State - or it may decentralise into half a dozen States -
but the whole area then would be separate but friendly. Our political
goal should be a confederation or Common Market of the Hindustan
Peninsula, with proper autonomy for the States or provinces, and
security of life, limb and honour for all people from the Khyber Pass to
Kanyakumari.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Shri K. R. Malkani, ex-editor of the RSS weekly *Organiser*, refuses
resolutely to read Islamic Dogmatics, howsoever authentic. His appetite
for Islamic Apologetics, however, is insatiable. He can swallow any
number of spurious Traditions (*hadis*) without batting an eye. And he
has a genius for producing sweet stories about Islam and Muslim out of
his hat. The stories that follow in this article provide some specimens
of wishful thinking on a spree.

[¹](#1a) Safdar Jang died in October 1754, seven years before “the
tragedy of 1761” by which Malkani means the Third Battle of Panipat in
which Ahmad Shah Abdali defeated the Marathas with active assistance of
an army from the Nabobdom of Oudh. In any case, even during Safdar
Jang’s time, the Marathas were his hired mercenaries rather than his
allies.

[²](#2a) Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and the Muslim-Marxist historians from
Aligarh and JNU have already done the job and whitewashed Muslim rule in
India beyond recognition. In fact, Malkani has swallowed that
whitewashed version – hook, line and sinker. Unfortunately for him, the
British historians were too honest to accomplish that feat. It is a
shame that he should be selling to Hindus the aspersions which Muslim
and Marxist manipulators of human minds or crooks like ‘Pandit’
Sunderlal have cast on honest scholarship.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


