+++
title = "68 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Times of India*  
New Delhi, 22 April 1995  
**9. Vajpayee for diluting stand**  
**on ‘Hindutva’**

</div>

BOMBAY, APRIL 21 - Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Atal Behari
Vajpayee has urged toning down of the Hindutva stand of the BJP to avoid
alienating Muslims.

Muslims had supported the party in large numbers in the recent assembly
elections. He is understood to have told a closed door national level
conclave of the party at Virar in Thane district.

The party must tread a “middle path” to inspire confidence among the
minorities, he said. In this context, he proposed that issues of Krishna
Janmabhoomi at Mathura and the Vishwanath temple at Benaras should be
dropped from the party’s agenda.

Mr. Vajpayee said the minorities felt alienated from Congress and looked
up to BJP as a national alternative.

The conclave urged BJP governments in Gujarat, Rajasthan and Delhi to
expedite implementation of public welfare programmes and called on party
units in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh to
broaden their base at the grassroots level and strengthen their
organisational set up.

A special discussion was held to formulate an electoral strategy in
Uttar Pradesh.

Senior party leader Sikandar Bakht and chief of party’s minority cell
Arif Beg have been entrusted with the work of popularising party
programmes.

<div align="right">

(Agencies)

</div>

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


