+++
title = "71 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Hindustan Times*  
New Delhi, 4 June 1995  
**12. Advani allays minorities fears**  
HT Correspondent

</div>

NEW DELHI, June 3 - In his first wide-ranging television interview on
the attitude and policies of the BJP if it were to form a government
after the next elections, Mr. L.K. Advani has said that it will be his
responsibility to allay the fears of the minorities. Predicting better
relations with Pakistan, the BJP President also promised a tougher
Kashmir policy “without kid gloves”. Mr. Advani promised to abrogate
Article 370 “as swiftly as rapidly as possible” and said his government
would revoke any political concession made to Kashmir along the lines of
Prime Minister Rao’s recent statement in the Lok Sabha. But the BJP
president went out of his way to remove doubts created by his senior
party members regarding the BJP’s attitude to foreign investment.

In an interview to Eyewitness, a Doordarshan current affairs programme,
to be broadcast on Sunday June 4 at 10.00 p.m. on the Metro Channel, Mr.
Advani was asked whether a future BJP government would seek to allay the
fears of the minorities. He replied:

“Certainly it is my responsibility and it is the responsibility of the
party and more specifically of the heads of government where we are
ruling today. All BJP governments have issued instructions to their
administration etc. to ensure that every citizen living in that State is
treated equal with justice”.

Asked if he would be prepared to extend his statement that the mosques
in Varanasi and Mathura were not on the BJP’s agenda into a guarantee
that the BJP would respect their present status for all time to come,
Mr. Advani declined to do so.

“You are suggesting something which I have to discuss with my party
colleagues. You are suggesting something which I cannot do. I need not
do it. I don’t want to say anything about the party and what it might do
tomorrow and what it might not do. Every party has a right to review all
situations”.

Again, when asked if he would be prepared to put some distance between
the BJP party and associations like the VHP and Bajrang Dal as a way of
gaining the confidence of the minorities, Mr. Advani strenuously
declined: “Certainly not. I see not reason to do that. Absolutely no
reason”.

Finally, when told that in the eyes of the minorities his party’s
attitude to illegal Muslim immigrants suggested not so much a concern
with illegal immigrants as with the fact that they are Muslim, Mr.
Advani said: “I am against illegal immigrants but I also realise that
India in the circumstances in which it accepted partition has a
responsibility towards Hindus who were left behind in Pakistan and who
subsequently are a part of Bangladesh. Illegal immigration is wrong but
I do draw a distinction between illegal immigration and people who are
forced to flee a country as refugees because of partition. Muslims are
not refugees. They may be coming here for economic reasons which no
country in the world allows, not even America which is very prosperous”.

When pointed out that his qualifications had effectively undermined his
initial assurance to the minorities and that now it would seem that
under the surface he was a lot less re-assuring Mr. Advani accepted the
charge and said:

“This is because the kind of reassurance you want would be possible only
if you would expect me to disown whatever I have been saying or whatever
really makes me distinct from the other parties and at least for the
BJP, for the sake of minority votes which would come about after the
kind of reassurance you think I should give, it is not going to
compromise with its basic stands”.

So when asked if this meant he really was the ‘Rakshas’ some people took
him to be, Mr. Advani replied: “If you believe that the BJP is Rakshas,
then L.K. Advani has contributed most to making BJP what it is”.

Mr. Advani made clear that its policy would be “tough and consistent and
without ambivalence”, on Kashmir.

“My attitude is that today in Jammu and Kashmir if we are waging a proxy
war let us wage a proxy war. It cannot be fought with kid gloves. If
there are militants who are acting as foreign mercenaries on behalf of
Pakistan you cannot be dealing with them and talking of making
concessions to them and having a political settlement with them. I don’t
understand this.

“Just as in Punjab militancy came to an end not by holding elections but
by giving some measure of freedom to the security forces headed by
K.P.S. Gill and then holding elections, I envisage that there should be
no compromise with militancy and terrorism. Our policy will be not
merely tougher but also more consistent. You cannot be ambivalent on
these issues”.  
 

**Footnotes:**

“Minority fears” in India are imaginary and a concoction of the
secularist cult. What needs allaying is the majority fear that it will
no longer be tormented by Islamic gangsterism.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


