+++
title = "01 1. Anything but a \"Hindu\" party"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**1. Anything but a "Hindu" party**

        

The strange thing about the BJP is that its voters consider it a Hindu
party, its enemies denounce it as a Hindu party, but the party will call
itself anything except a Hindu party.

 

         Unlike most critics of the BJP, who tend to make their point by
quoting sources openly hostile to the party, we should prove our case by
going to its own formulations of its ideology.  To summarize the
ideological positions of the BJP and its former avatar, the BJS
(Bharatiya Jana Sangh), from authentic sources, we will reproduce the
brief professions of ideological commitment given in the Constitutions
of the BJS (1973) and of the BJP (1992).  The summary given in the BJS
Constitution under the heading "Aims and Objectives in Brief", a
programme to which all BJS party members pledged their loyalty, are as
follows (we give it in its entirety, but change the order so as to group
the different points under headings of our own making):

 

***1) Cultural nationalism:*** "Political, social and economic
reconstruction of the country on the basis of Bharatiya Sanskriti *\[=
culture\]* and Maryada *\[= "limit", ethics\]*.  Protection and
promotion of the cow.  Use of Hindi and other Pradesh *\[= provincial\]*
languages as official languages in their regions.  Changes in the
judicial system to suit the genius of India and fit in with present-day
conditions."

***2) Political nationalism:*** "The establishment of a unitary
government and decentralisation of political and economic power. 
Establishment of Akhand Bharat *\[= undivided India including the
Pakistani and Bangladeshi territories\]*.  Complete integration of
Kashmir.  Liberation of territory occupied by China and Pakistan.  A
foreign policy based upon enlightened self-interests of the country. 
Modern-most military armaments."

***3) Social concerns:*** "Protection of the fundamental rights of the
individual and the promotion of interests of the Society.  Guarantee of
the fundamental right to work and livelihood.  Upholding establishment
and protection of the tiller's right to ownership of land.  Ceiling on
agricultural land and redistribution of land.  Eradication of
untouchability.  Elimination of corruption.  Free education up to middle
class.  Facilities for medical care and social security."

***4) Economic programme:*** "Encouragement to small mechanised and
rural industries.  Nationalisation of basic industries.  Curbing
monopolistic tendencies in the economic sphere.  Determination of
minimum and maximum expendable income.  Worker's participation in the
profit and management of the industries.  Stabilisation of
prices.‚Äù[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

Under headings 1 and 2 we certainly find a nationalist programme,
considerably more radical than anything stated by the later BJP.  Under
headings 3 and 4, we do not find the "rightist" policies which the
leftists always attribute to the Hindutva forces, but a typical
social-democratic programme.  But either way, what we do not find, is an
explicitly Hindu orientation underlying this programme.  One may argue
that in its practical application, Hindu social philosophy boils down to
an "integral humanism" of which this programme is the logical
explicitation; but even then, there should be no reason to be so modest
(not to say secretive) about the Hindu source of this orientation.  

 

         The BJP defines its ideology as follows:

 

"***Article II: Objective***.  The party is pledged to build up India as
a strong and prosperous nation, which is modern, progressive and
enlightened in outlook and which proudly draws inspiration from India's
ancient culture and values and thus is able to emerge as great world
power playing an effective role in the comity of Nations for the
establishment of world peace and a just international order. 

"The party aims at establishing a democratic state which guarantees to
all citizens irrespective of caste, creed or sex, political, social and
economic justice, equality of opportunity and liberty of faith and
expression.

"The party shall bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established and to the principles of socialism,
secularism and democracy and would uphold the sovereignty, unity and
integrity of India.

"***Article III: Basic Philosophy***.  Integral Humanism shall be the
basic philosophy of the Party.

"***Article IV: Commitments***.  The Party shall be committed to
nationalism and national integration, democracy, Gandhian Socialism,
Positive Secularism, that is 'Sarva Dharma Samabhav', and value-based
politics.  The party stands for decentralisation of economic and
political power."[\[2\]](#_edn2)

        

Upon joining the party, every BJP member makes the following pledge:

 

"I believe in Integral Humanism which is the basic philosophy of
Bharatiya Janata Party.

"I am committed to Nationalism and National Integration, Democracy,
Gandhian Socialism, Positive Secularism (Sarva Dharma Samabhava) and
value-based politics.

"I subscribe to the concept of a Secular State and Nation not based on
religion.

"I firmly believe that this task can be achieved by peaceful means
alone.

"I do not observe or recognize untouchability in any shape or form.

"I am not a member of any other political party.

"I undertake to abide by the Constitution, Rules and Discipline of the
Party."[\[3\]](#_edn3)

 

         I have taken the trouble of quoting the BJP's explicit
statement of its political objectives and methods in full, because these
official self-declarations and the received wisdom about the BJP are
miles apart.  These statements can be used as counter-evidence by those
who are concerned about the slanderous descriptions of the BJP as "Hindu
fundamentalists" standing for "preservation of caste oppression", for a
"theocratic state", for "communal violence", if not for "fascism". 
However, while comforting for those who try to prove that the BJP is a
nice secularist party, the cited official statements of the BJP
party-line are somewhat worrying from a Hindu viewpoint.  Indeed, the
word "Hindu" does not figure in them at any point.

 

         Moreover, like in the Indian Constitution, there is nothing
typically Hindu about these BJS/BJP programmes.  The BJS text still
contained some Sanskrit words which could have been replaced with
English terms without loss of meaning, but the operative term is
*Bharatiya*, "Indian"; the BJP can do without the Sanskrit altogether
(except for one problematic expression, cfr. infra).  These manifestoes
are entirely in the tradition of Western liberal-democratic nationalism,
and most of the expressions used can be found in texts of the American
and French Revolutions or the speeches of 19th-century liberal
nationalists like Lajos Kossuth or Giuseppe Mazzini.  Not that this is
objectionable in itself, but from a party claiming "Bharatiya culture"
as its inspiration, this wholesale borrowing from the West is not very
promising. 

 

         The term *integral humanism*, the BJP's official ideology, was
introduced in Sangh ideology by Deendayal Upadhyaya, as a social
doctrine based on Hindu instead of Western thought.  It was given a
universalist rather than a "national" name, which in principle I
consider a good thing; "Western" ideologies like liberalism and
socialism have not been labelled after their country of origin either. 
At the same time, a nagging suspicion remains that the term was chosen
and promoted as yet another attempt to acquire a "secular" identity.

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  Reproduced in *Bharatiya Jana Sangh Party Documents
1951-1972*, vol.1, p.222.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^( \[2\])  *Constitution and Rules (as amended by the
National Council at Gandhinagar, Gujarat, on 2nd May 1992) of the
Bharatiya Janata Party*, p.3-4.  *"Sarva-Dharma-Samabhava"* is a
Gandhian slogan meaning "equal respect for all religions".

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^( \[3\])  *Constitution and Rules*, p.19.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section2.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/introduction.html)**

</div>

</div>
