+++
title = "02 2. \"Equal respect for all religions\""

+++
<div class="Section1">

**2. "Equal respect for all religions"**

 

         The only explicitly Indian contribution in the cited BJS/BJP
self-declarations is of doubtful value: "positive secularism" defined as
*"sarva-dharma-samabhava"*, "equal respect for all religions".  We let
the difference with the original European concept of secularism (equal
*indifference* towards all religions, equal *independence* from all
religions) pass, and focus on the problematic meaning of the slogan
defining this "positive secularism".  Two meanings are attested: the
political meaning apparently given to it in the cited BJP texts, viz.
that the state must be equidistant from Hinduism, Islam, Christianity
and any other religion; and the religious meaning given to it by Mahatma
Gandhi and his followers, viz. that a religious person should have equal
respect for Hinduism, Islam etc., because all these religions are
equally good and satisfying. 

 

         The Gandhians and the travelling neo-Hindu sadhus have spread
the notion that Hinduism itself holds all religions in equal esteem,
even that it considers all religions to be equally true.  This claim is
repeated with enthusiasm in anti-Hindutva polemic by secularists who try
to delegitimize Hindu self-defence in the name of some suicidal
masochism advertised as "genuine Hinduism".  However, the truth is that
this Gandhian slogan is a typical product of the political tangles of
the colonial age and of syncretistic Theosophy-influenced neo-Hinduism;
it is not an ancient Hindu dictum capturing the true spirit of
Hinduism.  Possibly Gandhi meant the slogan to be a trick to domesticate
Christianity and Islam into the age-old system of Hindu pluralism: if
Hindus treat Islam and Christianity as "equal" to their own cherished
traditions, Muslims and Christians will reciprocate this rhetoric and
give up their open intention to replace Hinduism with their own
beliefs.  The results of Gandhi's policies, viz. Partition and an
intensification of Christian missionary subversion, already indicates
how wrong-headed the well-intended slogan really is.

 

         Of course, Hindu tradition has always been wholeheartedly
pluralistic.  It cherishes a principle of modesty in judgment, aware of
the limitations of each human viewpoint.  It respects the urge to seek
the truth which alights in every soul.  It recognizes its own attitude
when it sees a reverence for the sacred at work in other societies.  It
has compassion for the limitations of the human intellect, which in most
people never outgrows the conditioning of education and culture (how
many people who deride a given doctrine or practice would have arrived
at the same judgment if they had been born in a community upholding this
doctrine or practice?).  For this reason, Hinduism practises tolerance
vis-Ã -vis all religious doctrines and practices, even obviously wrong
ones, as long as they don't interfere with those of others.  History
shows that Hinduism practises equal tolerance towards all sects of Hindu
provenance, and towards Zoroastrianism, Judaism and pre-colonial
Syrian-Christianity which, at least in India, have always abided by the
rules of Hindu pluralism: live and let live.  This tolerance becomes
questionable and indicative of a lack of *viveka*/discrimination when
one is dealing with religions which refuse to abide by the rules.

 

         Hinduism applauds diversity and consequently accepts that
people of different temperaments, circumstances and levels of
understanding develop different viewpoints and different forms to
express even the same viewpoint.  In that sense, it has always payed
equal respect to *shramana*s and *brahmana*s, to *jnana* and *bhakti*,
etc.  It showed *samabhava* to all traditions which counted as
*dharma*.  This respect was never due to *adharma* practices and
doctrines such as Christianity and Islam, the religions for whose
benefit the slogan is used mostly.  

 

         The fundamental mistake of Indian secularism is that Hinduism
is put in the same category as Islam and Christianity.  The definition
of "religion" which is implied when we call Islam and Christianity
religions, may well not apply to Hinduism, and vice versa.  Islam and
Christianity are defined, by believers as well as by informed outsiders,
as *belief systems*; Hinduism is not so defined (except by incompetent
outsiders and some of their neo-Hindu imitators who try to cast Hinduism
into the mould of Christianity).  Islam's and Christianity's intrinsic
irrationality and hostility to independent critical thought warranted
secularism as a kind of containment policy.  By contrast, Hinduism
recognizes freedom of thought and does not need to be contained by
secularism.  The contents of this last sentence, meaning the radical
difference in kind of Hinduism and its enemies, can be found in many
Hindutva publications (e.g., lamely, "Hinduism is not a religion but a
way of life", or apologetically, "Hindus cannot be fundamentalists"),
and yet the same Hindutva spokesmen parrot a Gandhian slogan which
treats both Hinduism and its enemies as equal members of the set of
"religions" or "dharmas".  

 

         Historically, Hindus have quickly recognized Islam and
missionary Christianity as *mleccha*, barbaric predatory religions, not
as instances of *dharma* to which any (not to speak of "equal") respect
is due.  Until Swami Dayananda Saraswati, they didn't even consider
these religions as worthy of a detailed critique.  Once this critique
was finally made, it was quickly proven that Christianity and Islam are
not "equally true" with Hinduism, whether with the help of modern
rationalist scholarship or from the viewpoint of Hindu spirituality
(cfr. infra).

 

         Far from paying equal respect to just any movement whether
dharmic or not, Hinduism does not even require equal respect for each of
its genuine dharmas.  Toleration does not imply equal respect for the
insights and values taught by the sects concerned; it is an application
of the true *ahimsa* spirit, viz. accepting the right of existing
entities including ethnic identities and religious traditions to
continue their existence.  But this doesn't mean that Hinduism considers
all doctrines and practices as of equal value.  Hinduism as a whole
gives a place in the sun to all, but it does not want any individual to
set aside his criticisms of certain viewpoints or his personal
preferences for some and aversion for other religious practices.  It
never was anti-logical nor anti-realistic; therefore, it never required
people to muzzle both their rational faculty and their temperamental
inclinations.  These criticisms and preferences are perfectly normal,
and there is no need to suppress them with an enforced "equal respect". 
Even within the Hindu fold, there is no question of equality between
different traditions and viewpoints. 

         One Hindu philosopher may disagree with another, i.e. consider
his own view right and the other's wrong; indeed, debates between
different schools of Hindu thought have mostly taken the logically
necessary form of demonstrating the truth of one and the consequent
untruth of the opposing viewpoint.  Calling one view true and another
untrue is not what I would call equal respect, eventhough there may be
equal respect for the human beings defending the respective views.  Like
a good moderator in a public debate, Hinduism allows both sides their
say, but it is not required to believe that both are equally right. 
Similarly, though Hindu society has both a class of married priests and
a class of celibate renunciates, there have always been people upholding
the one institution and arguing against the other, e.g. that full-time
monkhood is a parasitic way of life, or conversely, that the great
spiritual achievement happens to require full-time dedication and
thereby excludes social and family duties.  Hindu tradition as such
refuses to be pinned down to one side of the argument, but every Hindu
is entitled to choose sides and prefer one dharma over another.

 

         Apart from this subjective inequality of dharmas which Hinduism
allows its adherents, there are universal judgments on which the whole
society has developed a broad consensus, and which label one practice as
right and another as wrong, or at least as inferior.  Thus, a
contemporary ritualist who sacrifices flowers and fruits condemns the
animal sacrifice practised by his forebears, and still by some shaktic
sects, as primitive and unnecessarily cruel.  There was a time when
Vedic seers practised animal sacrifice, and though Hindus still hold the
Vedic seers in great esteem, the Hindu mainstream has outgrown this
bloody practice: there is no equal respect for the old, primitive
practice and for the new, more enlightened practice (as is illustrated
by the clumsy attempts to prove that the descriptions of Vedic seers
sacrificing goats or eating beef, or of the Buddha eating pork, are mere
metaphors).  The Vedic seers were Hindus alright, the shaktic priests
and sorcerers are Hindus alright, their rituals are part of Sanatana
Dharma alright, yet their slaughterhouse dharma is not considered worthy
of equal respect with more refined innovations in ritual. 

 

         Similarly, even most meat-eating Hindus agree that
vegetarianism is superior, deserving of greater respect.  Another
pan-Hindu consensus pertinent to the present discussion is the rejection
of the narrow-minded exclusivist sects which refuse to abide by the
rules of pluralism.  Before the Hindu mind got confused with
*sarva-dharma-samabhava*, this meant a spontaneous abhorrence of the
destructive fanaticism of Christianity and Islam.

 

         Within broad limits, the Hindu tradition as a whole does not
pronounce on the existing differences, leaving it to the Hindu people to
make a choice between its own variety of options.  Given each individual
man's limitations, it is wise not to identify with one man's beliefs and
preferences (as Islam does) and give room to different and even opposing
positions.  All the same, Sanatana Dharma leaves its adherents entirely
free to prefer one option over another, and even to criticize and reject
certain options.  So, even within the spectrum of Hindu schools and
sects, there is no question of *sarva-dharma-samabhava*, merely of
peaceful co-existence.  The few cases of violent rioting between Shaiva
and Vaishnava monks (gleefully played up and magnified in malafide
pieces on "the myth of Hindu tolerance") may be considered as trespasses
against the spirit of Hinduism, but debates and denunciations of certain
views and practices remain entirely within the rules of Hindu pluralism.
    

 

         Moreover, the same rational objection against
*sarva-dharma-samabhava* which applies to intra-Hindu debates, applies
to the relation between Islam or Christianity and Hinduism, or even to
that between Islam and Christianity.  According to Christianity, Jesus
was the divine Saviour and Mohammed was nobody; according to Islam,
Jesus was just a human prophet and Mohammed was the final prophet. 
These doctrines are mutually exclusive and cannot both be right.  They
can be equally wrong (actually, they are) and hence deserving of equal
skepticism, but it is impossible for both to be right and deserving of
equal respect.

 

         The slogan *sarva-dharma-samabhava* (not to mention the plain
buffoonery of the "equal *truth* of all religions" propagated by Bhagwan
Das and the latter-day Ramakrishna Mission) is a cheap but all too
transparent way of solving doctrinal contradictions, viz. by
dogmatically decreeing that they are non-existent or at least
irrelevant.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  It is incredibly pretentious, firstly by
falsely implying that one knows all religions (how can you pronounce on
things which you don't know?), and secondly by overruling the laws of
logic, viz. by positing the equivalence of mutually contradictory
doctrines.  In practice, it also implies a refusal to hear the
representatives of the religions concerned, esp. when they explain why
rival doctrines (including the whole spectrum of Hinduism) are
unacceptable to them.  Finally, while the slogan is rather harmless when
applied to rival schools of Hinduism, it becomes very dangerous when (as
mostly) it is applied to viper religions with an explicit programme of
annihilating Hinduism.  Hindu activists should think again about this
slogan, then drop it. 

 

         Instead, however, they have decided to make things worse: the
RSS-affiliated trade-union, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, has taken the
initiative of founding a *Sarva Panth Samadar Manch* (Equal Respect for
All Sects Front), on 16 April 1994.  The function where this new
platform was created, was presided over by Maulana Wahiduddin Khan, who
counts as the Sangh's model Muslim (cfr. infra).  The problem is not
that contact is made with Muslims.  Muslims are as good human beings as
Hindus on average, and every effort should be made to break through the
intrinsic separatism of Islam, which teaches its followers that there
are two separate mankinds: the Muslims to whom both bliss in heaven and
rulership on earth have been promised, and the unbelievers, doomed to
subservience in this world and eternal hellfire in the next.  Indeed,
one of the wellsprings of the RSS desire to reach out to the Muslims was
the experience of cordial co-operation with Jamaat-i Islami activists
during the Emergency, as BMS founder-president Dattopant Thengadi told
me.  Soon after coming out of jail in 1977, K. R. Malkani told Sita Ram
Goel that he had an opportunity to learn true Islam from the
Jamaat-i-Islami co-prisoners. When Goel asked him as to how he could
judge the statements of these spokesmen for Islam when he himself had
not studied the subject, Malkani dismissed the doubt raised with a
disdainful smile.

 

         The problem is that these outreach operations invariably imply
flattery of Islam.  The day a unit of any Sangh Parivar organization
includes even a single Muslim, its capacity to talk freely about Islam
disappears.  Instead of freeing the Muslims from their medieval
doctrinal conditioning called Islam, this approach only serves to
confirm them in their thralldom to Mohammed and his belief system. 
Bringing the alienated Muslims into the national mainstream without
loosening their ties to Mohammed was Mahatma Gandhi's full-time
occupation, yet he failed dismally.  There is no sign at all that the
RSS has a better and more clever approach which could spare it the same
humiliating defeat at the hands of unregenerate Islamic separatism.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  A must reading about this is Harsh
Narain: *Myth of Composite Culture and Equality of Religions*, Voice of
India 1991.

 

**   [NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section3.html)**

**[   BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section1.html)**

</div>

</div>
