+++
title = "04 4. The BJP flag"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**4. The BJP flag**

 

         A "Hindu" or non-Hindu party name would matter little if the
policies behind it would be the right ones, but as we shall demonstrate,
the avoidance of a Hindu self‑designation goes hand in hand with the
avoidance of certain pressing Hindu concerns in the party's policies. 
While we are discussing the party's self‑presentation, we may add to our
doubts about the chosen name, the question of the party's flag.  Many
party workers are embarrassed with the green-saffron flag, and I want to
give a voice to their misgivings.

 

         When the BJP was founded, a new flag was devised: "two vertical
colours, saffron and green, in the ratio of 2:1, with the election
symbol of the Party \[lotus flower\] in blue colour in the middle of the
saffron portion equal to half its size.  The green portion will be near
the mast."[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Why the green part?  When questioned, more
than one BJP spokesman will try to conceal the simple truth, e.g. by
arguing that this was the flag of the unified Janata Party of 1977-79,
of which the new BJP had claimed the heritage.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  In
reality, the Janata Party had its colours in vertical instead of
horizontal juxtaposition, and no lotus flower, so the BJP flag was
definitely a newly designed flag.

 

         The Hindu Mahasabha flag was and is saffron, adorned with
several Hindu symbols.  Shivaji's flag was plain saffron and is still
used by the Shiv Sena as well as by the RSS.  The old Jan Sangh flag was
saffron, adorned only with a lamp.  Whatever else may be said of these
organizations, they have pledged allegiance to Hinduism at least at the
level of visual symbolism.  Of course, this colour does not necessarily
imply a bold commitment to Hinduism: when challenged by secularists
about this shameless expression of Hindu inspiration, Hindutva spokesmen
so inclined can always wriggle out by saying that the saffron flag is
just a conventional symbol, a historical remnant, in fact the original
pre-Independence Congress choice as the secular national flag, or some
such disclaimer.  Yet, upon being constituted as a new party in 1980,
the BJP chose to betray even that merely symbolic link with Hinduism.

 

         The BJP's flag, like the Congress and Republic flags, is
one‑third green.  The green was added as the symbol of Islam as a
permanent declaration that the new party was Muslim‑friendly.  This is a
more extreme case of Muslim appeasement than the inclusion of green in
the national flag. 

 

         Firstly, as a classical tricolour scheme, the Indian flag,
unlike the BJP flag, may be read as just another instance of the
traditional Indo‑European scheme of three qualities (*triguna*) found in
most tricolour flags: white as representing the serene (*sattvika*)
quality, saffron or red for the energetic (*râjasika*) quality, and a
dark colour for the material (*tâmasika*) quality.  The dark colour can
vary between different Indo‑European cultures, and may be black, brown,
blue or even green; in which case, green has a natural non‑communal
symbol value in a Vedic cosmological scheme.  This way, the
Congress/Republic flag at least satisfies certain patterns of universal
symbolism; by contrast, the imposition of a green part on the BJP flag
admits of no interpretation except as a kow-tow to Islam.

 

         In a future post‑communal era, the said *triguna* symbolism may
become the official explanation of the Republic flag's colour division,
but its historical genesis was of course communal: during the
*Hindu-Muslim bhai-bhai* era of Congress collaboration with the
(intrinsically anti-national) Khilafat agitation, Muslim militants and
their Hindu sympathizers inside the Congress insisted on including
green, conventionally the emblematic colour of the desert religion,
Islam.  The Congress Flag Committee (1931) proposed the plain saffron
flag (with blue charkha) as a historically rooted, truly national flag
for independent India.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  Disregarding the Committee's
advice, the Congress leadership opted once more for the tricolour scheme
which was commonly understood to signify a pledge of allegiance to both
Hinduism and Islam.  But then, secondly, the Indian National Congress
had at least the excuse of being pressed by Muslim communalist party
members into adopting this communal colour scheme.  The BJP has no such
excuse: the number of Muslims present when the flag was designed, was
negligeable, and these BJP Muslims (always paraded as truly "nationalist
Muslims") are not known to have pressed any demands on this. 

 

         Moreover, thirdly, the Congress had to devise a national flag
somehow representative of a nation which it conceived as "composite" and
"multi‑religious", not the symbol of a party representing a single
ideology.  By contrast, the BJP merely had to choose a party flag,
representative only of its own political identity.  Entirely by its own
choice, the BJP leadership chose to burden a party which thrives on
Hindu votes, with a symbol of subservience to the religion which killed
millions of Hindus, including hundreds of thousands within our own
lifetime.  Many ordinary BJP and Sangh Parivar workers have expressed
their dismay about this imposition, and identify A.B. Vajpayee as the
crucial influence in giving the party flag a Muslim colour; though I
would add that after all, the majority of the party leadership must have
voted to accept their choice.  The problem lies not with a few
individuals; in different degrees, it affects the BJP if not the Sangh
cadre as a whole.

 

         Like the flag, many policies of the BJP are one-third Islamic. 
When Prime Minister V.P. Singh earmarked 5 million Rupees for the
beautification of the Jama Masjid in Delhi, run by Singh's ally Imam
Bukhari, *Organiser* protested loudly against this "blatant" case of
"Muslim appeasement".  But when Bhairon Singh Shekhawat became BJP Chief
Minister in Rajasthan (admittedly in coalition with the more pro-Muslim
Janata Dal), one of the first things he did was to grant 67 million
Rupees for the beautification of the Ajmer mausoleum of Muinuddin
Chishti, a Sufi saint who preached against "idolatry" and who was buried
on the site of a demolished Hindu temple.  Doubtlessly, the BJP did this
to prove its "secularism", though it is not clear what could be secular
about the monument of a Sufi fanatic, built with materials of destroyed
Hindu temples.  Orthodox biographies of Muinuddin say in so many words
that he invited Mohammed Ghori for destroying the Chauhan Kingdom and
establishing Islam, and that he accepted as a gift from Allah the
daughter of a Hindu Prince who had been captured by Muslim raiders and
presented to him. Reports of the Archaeological Survey of India have
found pieces of many Hindu idols embedded in buildings all over the
sprawling *dargah*.

 

The promised crackdown on illegal immigrants from Bangladesh (not really
communal, merely the implementation of existing laws, but somehow
vilified as communal) never materialized in any of the BJP-ruled
states.  The only state where an attempt was made, though without any
substantial results, is Maharashtra, where it is left to the Shiv Sena
to claim the credit for this slightly tougher policy.  The BJP has a
"Minority Cell", and its members are expected to be exemplary Muslims,
dutifully interrupting committee meetings for *namaz*. 

 

         Whether one applauds or deplores it, the actual facts are that
the BJP, like the pre-Independence Congress, goes out of its way to put
some token Muslims or Muslim symbols on display.  Whatever the BJP may
say about "Muslim appeasement" by Congress, its own record in this
regard shows that it is equally subservient to the chimera of
Muslim-certified secularism.     

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  *BJP Constitution and Rules* (1987
ed.), p.4.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  This was the explanation given in
1990 by the RSS *Baudhik Pramukh* (overseer for intellectual
development) for Maharashtra to historian Shrikant Talageri (personal
communication, December 1995).

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  The story is told by K.R. Malkani:
*The Politics of Ayodhya and Hindu-Muslim Relations* (Har-Anand Publ.,
Delhi 1993), p.175-179.

 

     **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section5.html)**

     **[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section3.html)******

</div>

</div>
