+++
title = "19 19. How not to deal with Islam"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**19. How not to deal with Islam**

 

         When dealing with Islam, it is crucially important to keep in
mind the distinction between Islam as a doctrine and the Muslims, a
group of people who were born or tricked into an Islamic environment. 
There is nothing intrinsically Islamic about human beings, not even when
they are named Mohammed or Aisha.

 

         In Europe, the secularist Left accuses the mushrooming
national‑populist and xenophobic parties of a "biologization of cultural
differences".  When the said parties plead that they have put "racism"
behind them, that they have nothing against coloured people or
foreigners per se, and that they only fear for social disharmony as a
consequence of the co‑existence of European and immigrant *cultures*,
their opponents rightly argue that this implies a belief in the
permanent character of people's cultural identity.  By assuming that
immigrant foreigners are bound to remain culturally foreign, the
xenophobes treat cultural identity as if it were a racial
characteristic: a permanent and hereditary trait.  In reality, of
course, cultural identities change, e.g. most second‑generation Hindu
immigrants have moved rather closely towards the mainstream culture of
their adopted countries.  Cultural identity including religion is not a
permanent or hereditary trait.

 

         Yet, in India, the secularist Left, always ready to take stands
directly opposed to what counts internationally as secular, insists that
the Muslim cultural identity is a permanent fact of life with which
Hindus will have to co‑exist in perpetuity.  Just as whites are bound to
remain white and blacks are certain to remain black, Muslims are bound
to remain Muslim, and Hindus just have to learn to live with them.  (The
implication that Hindus should remain Hindu, however, does not apply:
any criticism of conversion of Hindus to Islam or Christianity is either
condemned or ridiculed.) 

 

         This secularist "biologization of Islam" is also assumed, quite
mindlessly, by most supposedly Hindu organizations.  Their schemes for
solving the communal problem are entirely within the framework of
Hindu-Muslim co-existence: first there are the Hindu and the Muslim
community, and next we have to find a way to make them co-exist.  The
harder they try to be secular, the more they reduce the Islam problem to
one of co-existence with a community which is somehow different, though
the nature of that difference is emphatically not up for analysis.  Not
one bad word will they say about Islam, even though it is Islam and
nothing else which separates the Indian Muslims from their fellow
Indians, and even though the problem of how to integrate the Muslims
into the Hindutva identity constantly occupies their minds.

 

         This approach is politically counterproductive, as we shall
argue, and it is unhistorical in its acceptance of Islam on a par with
Hinduism.  Firstly, Hinduism is a civilization in its own right,
developed as mankind's answer to certain questions and problems, both
practical and profound, but Islam is merely a reactive phenomenon,
generally destructive of (and at best parasitic on) ancient and genuine
civilizations.  Secondly, in India's religious landscape, the Indian
Muslim community is but a fairly recent addition cut out of the flesh of
Hindu society. 

 

         Moreover, this approach of shielding Islam from critical
enquiry is unfair to Islam by emphatically ignoring Islam's own
self-definition as a religion based on a truth claim, viz. that "there
is no god but Allah and Mohammed is Allah's prophet", a truth claim
which can and must be evaluated as either true or false. 

 

         Finally, this non-doctrinal approach to the Muslim community
creates the impression (gleefully picked up by the legions of
communalism-watchers out to blacken Hindu society and its defenders) of
a purely xenophobic motivation, similar to that of anti-foreigner
parties in the West.  Xenophobic parties in the West are faced with the
problem that the country which they claim for their own nation is
"invaded" by an outsider population which they cannot or will not
assimilate.  The cadres of these parties are often ideologues of ethnic
or racial purity who do not *want* to assimilate Blacks or
North-Africans or Turks, just as their grandfathers once rejected the
assimilation of Jews.  The recent electoral growth of these parties is,
by contrast, mainly due to working-class people who have assimilated
immigrant labour (Italians, Poles) before, but who now find that certain
new immigrant groups (particularly Muslims) in their neighbourhoods
cultivate their separateness.  They fear that, against their own wish,
they *can* not assimilate these separatist newcomers, and that their
children will be faced with a civil war.  Either way, the starting-point
of these xenophobic parties is the separateness or non-assimilation of
foreigner populations, and their "only solution" is to send these
immigrants (and their children and grandchildren) back to their
countries of origin.

 

         In India, most Muslims are not immigrants even in the tenth
generation, but otherwise the mistake made by their opponents is the
same as in Europe: accepting the Muslimness of these Muslims as an
unshakable basic fact which any policy must take into account. 

 

         The best example of this alleged similarity is the common
complaint about the Islamic birth rate.  On the Hindutva fringe, there
are pamphlets which falsely cite the World Health Organization as having
established that within twenty years or so, Muslims will be the majority
in India.  More serious publications, including *Organiser* and *BJP
Today*, report a slower but nonetheless impressive increase in the
Muslim percentage of India's population, recorded in every decadal
census since 1881, and projected to continue at an even faster rate in
the coming decades.  In essence, this picture is correct: the percentage
of Muslims shows a persistent increase at the expense of the Hindu
percentage, with the rate of increase itself increasing.  Given the
higher Hindu participation in the birth control effort of the 1960s and
70s, we must now be witnessing a cumulative effect, of a proportionately
smaller number of Hindu mothers (born in that period) having in their
turn each a smaller number of children than the proportionately larger
number of Muslim mothers, on average.  On top of the higher birth rate
of Muslims within the Indian Union, there is the dramatic influx of
millions upon millions of Bangladeshis and also some Pakistanis. 

 

         The fact that in 1991 the Indian government has chosen to
replace a real census count of religious adherence with an estimate is
itself an indication that the Muslim percentage is now rising at an
alarming rate.  In fact, the estimate was demonstrably rigged.  It shows
a slight decrease in the rate at which the Muslim percentage increases:
up by 0.52% between 1971 (11.21%) and 1981 (11.73%), up by 0.47% between
1981 and 1991 (12.20).  However, all data about the Hindu-Muslim
differential in birth control and birth figures imply that the rate of
Muslim increase is itself increasing, even without counting the
estimated ten million Bangladeshi Muslims who entered India between 1981
and 1991.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  On top of the native increase, we must add the
figure of the said immigrants, which by itself amounts to more than 1%
of India's population, twice as high as the total growth of the Muslim
percentage as claimed by the Government.  For once, I agree with Imam
Bukhari, who has been saying for long that the Indian government
systematically understates the number of Muslims in India.  The total
increase between 1981 and 1991 must be at least 1.5%.  Assuming that the
1981 figure is correct, the 1991 figure is definitely higher than 13%,
or at least 1% higher than the government claims.   

 

         So far, so good: the Sangh is right about the substantial
increase in the Muslim percentage of the Indian population.  A realistic
projection into the future of present demographic (including migratory)
trends does predict a Muslim majority in the Subcontinent by the
mid-21st century, and a Muslim majority in the Indian Union by the turn
of the 22nd century (in some regions much earlier).  Though generally
correct, this type of calculation is subject to an unkind comparison:
the same type of projection occupies the minds of white racists in the
USA.  They expect that whites will cease to be the majority there by the
mid-21st century, and they too are worried and unable to stem the tide. 
But there are two important differences. 

 

         The first one is that the non-whites in the USA do not or need
not form a genuine problem for US whites, because people of different
ethnic backgrounds can and do share in the same American Dream, can and
do participate in a common American society.  By contrast, Islam in
India is intrinsically separatist and aiming for hegemony and ultimately
for the destruction of Hinduism through conversion or otherwise.  There
is nothing intrinsically anti-white about blacks, but there is
definitely something intrinsically anti-Hindu about Islam.  For this
reason, the concern of whites about the growth of non-white groups in
the USA is reprehensible, but the concern of Hindus about the growth of
Islam is entirely justified.

 

         The second difference is that people's membership of certain
racial groups, black or white or other, is unchangeable; while the
potentially alarming adherence of people to Islam is entirely
changeable.  And it is at this last point that the BJP-cum-secularist
acceptance of the Islamic identity of the Indian Muslims distorts the
picture.

 

         Like American white racists, BJP secularists are, in their
heart of hearts, worried about the demographic increase of the
minorities, but they don't want to admit it in so many words.  Thus, in
its 1996 Election Manifesto, the BJP warns that because of Bangladeshi
infiltration, "various demographic entities are bound to come in
conflict" due to "an alarming growth of a section of the population";
already, "a section of the population has grown by almost 100 per cent"
in certain northeastern areas.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  The BJP dooms itself to
impotence by refusing to define the problem in its proper terms.  Not
wanting to sound anti-Muslim, the BJP avoids facing the "communal"
angle, with the result that the Communist government in West Bengal
cracks down on Hindu refugees and forces them back into Bangladesh, just
to show the BJP what the asked-for crackdown on religiously undefined
"Bangladeshi infiltrators" would mean in practice.  Worse, even to the
extent that the BJP does identify the problem as "illegal Bangladeshi
*Muslims*", it dooms itself to an unimaginative (and by now probably
unrealistic) solution, viz. to physically push these people back across
the border.[\[3\]](#_edn3)

 

         This grudgingly admitted concern about the increasing Muslim
presence, combined with the feeling of impotence to stop this ominous
increase, leads to certain undesirable ideas, which you do not find in
BJP or RSS publications, but which do come out in more extreme pamphlets
of fringe groups and in unrecorded conversations.  One such idea is that
birth control should be made compulsory, e.g. by enforcing vasectomy on
every father of two children.  Another idea in this category is that
Hindus should reintroduce polygamy (as I read in a pamphlet by British
NRIs).  A third, propagated by the Puri Shankaracharya among others, is
that Hindus should return to having as many children per woman as
possible (quite like the natalist propaganda of xenophobic parties in
Europe).  A fourth is that all Indian Muslims should go to Pakistan,
which was, after all, created for them (*"Mussalman ke do hi sthan:
Pakistan ya qabrastan"*).  In 1947 this was, coupled with an ordered
evacuation of Hindus from Pakistan, an eminently sensible proposal which
could have saved millions of lives (including those yet to be lost in
future clashes resulting from Hindu-Muslim "co-existence" in
India).[\[4\]](#_edn4)  Today, however, it could only be done by means
of extreme violence, comparable in intensity to (but a hundred times
larger than) the full-scale civil war which preceded the expulsion of
the French inhabitants of Algeria in 1962. 

 

         Hindutva men of the drinking kind utter such ideas in the late
hours, when they are ashamed about their party's non-performance on the
communal front and feel the need to strike a more martial profile. 
These are indeed drunkards' ideas.  Within their scheme of things, the
choice is one of simply letting the Muslims take over India as soon as
they become numerous enough (which is well before they reach the 50%
mark, e.g. Jinnah was offered the government by Gandhi when the Muslims
were hardly 24% in undivided India); or implementing one of the said
scenarios of demographic competition or ethnic cleansing.  I cannot
blame anti-Hindu authors for highlighting such ideas as all too similar
to certain forms of xenophobia and racism elsewhere.

 

         Thoughtful Hindus, by contrast, have no such problem.  They
don't rely on numbers but on consciousness, the secret weapon which will
blow Islam away.  Let the Indian Muslims "breed like rats": it is thanks
to them that India will overtake China as the most populous country in
the world (a doubtful honour in this age, but these millions may be
needed one day).  All that is needed to avert the catastrophe of a
Muslim take-over, is that these numerous children of Muslim parents are
properly educated.

 

         It is a well-known fact that most South-Asian Muslims are the
descendents of converts from Hinduism.  As for the Turkish, Persian or
Arabic components of the Muslim community, they too are the descendents
of converts, be it from Buddhism or Zoroastrianism or some other Kafir
religion.  There is nothing intrinsically Muslim even about Arabs, who
were the first victims of Islam.  Islamic scripture itself is quite
unambiguous about the terror which Mohammed and his companions used to
pressurize the Arabs into joining them; and about the national Arab
revolt against Islam after Mohammed's death, a war of liberation which
they only lost because they did not resort to the same ruthless style of
warfare which Mohammed had introduced.  The people known as Muslims have
walked into Islam, and they are bound to walk out again as well. 
Powerful as the conditioning of Islamic indoctrination may be, it
remains a superficial imposition susceptible to the law of
impermanence.  That is why any solution which starts by assuming the
Muslimness of the Muslims, is mistaken.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  The clearest eye-opener is the
birth-rate in the relatively affluent Muslim-majority district of
Malappuram in highly-literate Kerala (see Baljit Rai: *Is India Going
Islamic?*, p.103-106); at 75.22%, the female literacy rate in Malappuram
is twice as high as for most Hindu communities in the Hindi belt.  In
the decade 1981-91 its population grew by 28.74%, well above the
national average of 23.50% and more than twice the Kerala average of
13.98%.  This disproves the usual excuse that the birth-rate
automatically follows the poverty rate and the illiteracy rate.  Most
Hindu Scheduled Caste people whom I know have settled for smaller
families, but by and large, Muslims have not changed their appetite for
large families.  Ever since the propagation of birth control among the
Hindu masses, rich and literate Muslims have more children than poor and
illiterate Hindus.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  *BJP Election Manifesto 1996: For a
Strong and Prosperous India*, p.39.  This is practically a parody of
secularist riot reporting (where "Muslims burned a temple down" becomes
"members of a particular community damaged a religious building").

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(             \[3\])  It is a different matter that the
BJP state government in Delhi, voted to power in 1993 on a platform
prominently including a crackdown on Bangladeshi infiltrators, has
totally gone back on this promise.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(             \[4\])  The chance to organize a peaceful
and ordered exchange of population (not the optimum solution but
certainly the lesser evil after Partition had been conceded), though
proposed as early as 1940 by Dr. Ambedkar, was spurned by Gandhi and
Nehru, who preferred to see the millions bleed rather than give up their
dogma of a "composite culture".  The 20th century AD has been full of
enlightened leaders sacrificing millions of real human beings on the
altar of ideological chimaeras.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section20.html)**

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section18.html)**

</div>

</div>
