+++
title = "24 "

+++
<div class="Section1">

# Appendix: A Reply to Kanchan Gupta

 

         On 14 and 15 January 1997, the *Observer of Business and
Politics* published a reply by Kanchan Gupta to my own two-part article,
"BJP retreat on Ayodhya", on which the present booklet is based.  I do
not know what Kanchan Gupta's exact relation with the BJP is; I have met
him several times at the BJP office and assume that he is a BJP
supporter though not from an RSS background.  It deserves mention and
praise that the article is polite and to the point, two qualities which
are the exception rather than the rule in communalism-related debates in
India.

 

         After summarizing my critique, he starts by telling the readers
that "Mr. Elst's critique stems from a certain sympathy, if not concern,
for the BJP".  This is and remains true: I still believe that a BJP
Government would be a relatively good thing for India, and it makes me
sad to see that a lot of potential in the broader Hindu revivalist
movement is wasted because of the ideological confusion in the party
which was meant to be its political spearhead.

 

         Coming to my view on the BJP's hesitant and shifting stand on
the Ayodhya issue, Mr. Gupta suggests that it is "simplistic" and "based
on rather superficial knowledge of actual events and facts".  So, for my
benefit as well as that of the reader, he recapitulates the history of
the Ayodhya affair.  He argues that from 1528 (construction of Babri
Masjid) until after the opening of the building for general worship of
the idols in 1986, "the movement to regain Ram Janmabhoomi from illegal
Muslim occupation was nothing more than articulation of Hindu religious
aspiration and assertion of pious faith over blind zealotry".  It became
politicized after the 1986 court verdict due to Muslim and secularist
agitations against the full restoration of the Ram Janmabhoomi temple:
"It was then that the BJP stepped in and strengthened the movement by
converting it into a mass agitation aimed at reasserting the very ethos
of Indian nationalism -- hence the appeal to Indians to choose between
Babar the invader and Ram the national hero, to choose between a
monument to India's subjugation and a temple in honour of Indian
nationhood."

 

         I understand from this that Kanchan Gupta fully supports the
rhetorical shift from a religious Hindu-Muslim conflict to a conflict
between nationalism and anti-national forces.  Let me point out that
many Christian monuments, some of which have become "national" monuments
as well, stand on the destroyed pre-Christian places of worship of the
nations concerned.  Had Islam prevailed in India, the Babri Masjid would
stand as a national monument celebrating the Indian nation's liberation
from idolatry.  Whether the Babri Masjid was national or anti-national
entirely depends on fate's choice between two religions: it is only as
long as Hinduism prevails that the Babri Masjid counts as an
anti-national monument.  Whichever way you turn it, the basic conflict
remains one between Hinduism and Islam, and twisting it to make it look
like something else serves no good purpose.

 

         Kanchan Gupta has a valid point when he describes how the
Muslim leadership had been emboldened by its victory in the Shah Bano
dispute, where it had made the Government change the law to overrule a
Supreme Court verdict disagreeable to the Islamic orthodoxy.  It tried
to repeat this feat in the Ayodhya affair: force the Government to
overrule the 1986 Court verdict opening the disputed building for Hindu
worship.  "Perhaps they would have succeeded had not the BJP stepped in
and put Ayodhya first on its own and the nation's agenda.  Suffice it to
say, contrary to what Mr. Elst claims, this was no reluctant decision,
but a choice exercised voluntarily because the party was (and remains)
alert to Hindu concerns."

 

         A somewhat academic point is whether it is indeed best to have
one party as champion of a given cause, rather than to stay aloof from
all parties while pressurizing all of them and forcing them to compete
for your constituency's support.  In this case, it seems to me that at
least the Congress Party would have been much more sympathetic to the
Hindu position on Ayodhya, and much less tied to the Communist-dominated
anti-Hindu front, if the Ayodhya demand had not gotten so identified
with the BJP.  The then Congress leader, Rajiv Gandhi (unlike the
"secular fundamentalists" who claim his legacy, like M.J. Akbar and Mani
Shankar Aiyar), was a modern and practical man, and he was definitely
ready to allow the construction of the Ram Janmabhoomi temple in return
for some sop to the Muslim leadership, just to get it over with and move
on to more tangible issues.  I don't know if the identification of the
Ayodhya demand with the BJP could have been avoided (through the RSS,
the VHP and its Ayodhya campaign were already linked with the BJP
anyway), but serious strategists should analyze all the factors of
success and failure including the alternatives which we can discern with
the benefit of hindsight.

 

         Now the main point: the BJP was "alert to Hindu concerns" and
hence not reluctant to embrace the Ayodhya demand.  To corroborate this,
Kanchan Gupta quotes from two BJP statements made in 1989, which are in
themselves quite unobjectionable (though they contain the term "Hindu
sentiments" too many times).  He summarizes them as focussing on
"cultural nationalism, or Hindutva" and on the fact that "India may be
more than Hinduism but it cannot be less".  And to top it all, L.K.
Advani's excellent statement is quoted: "We represent the commitment
that this is our ancient nation, not a nation born in 1947, but a nation
which has a hoary past and whose culture is essentially Hindu."  Yes,
the BJP of 1989 was a great party.  There is no doubt that its activists
wholeheartedly supported the Ayodhya demand, but it remains uncertain
whether the leadership's temporary enthusiasm sprang from something
better than opportunism.  Of course, the leadership is a fairly large
group with different tendencies with different degrees of commitment on
Ayodhya and other Hindu issues.

 

         Kanchan Gupta maintains that the BJP is still committed to the
construction of the temple.  About the demolition, it was "regrettable
that the famed discipline of the Sangh Parivar failed to withstand the
furor of Hindu disquiet", but there was no regret over "the collapse of
the domes".  I have no quarrel with that.  I can also understand that
the BJP has tried to re-widen its focus and profile after the Ayodhya
drama, and it is even possible that the issue will be solved in a just
way without further political interference.  Indeed, after half a
century of deliberations, and in spite of perennial political pressures
on the judges, the Allahabad High Court might still do justice to the
Hindus.  After all, the Hindus have a cast-iron case, and the judges do
seem sensitive to the historical and juridical facts of the matter (as I
was told by Dr. B.R. Grover and Dr. S.P. Gupta, whose expert testimonies
on the old revenue records and on the archaeological evidence have been
heard by the said Court).

 

         As a matter of principle, one should not make too much of the
Ayodhya controversy.  The Hindu position is the right one and the issue
is important as a symbol,-- but not more than that.  If the party feels
it can achieve more important things for Hindu society by keeping
Ayodhya in the background for a while, that could be the right
decision.  But what is the BJP's record in the post-Demolition years?

 

         Mr. Gupta moves on to the evaluation of the 13-day (14-day in
his count) BJP Government, the hottest fortnight of 1996.  He argues
that at least at the level of rhetoric, this was undeniably the most
nationalistic and the most unapologetically Hindu Government since 1947:
announcing a ban on cow-slaughter, the "liberal" Vajpayee declaring that
India is secular not in spite of but because of its Hindu majority,
and... well, that's it, these two points.  Gupta claims that this bold
articulation of cultural nationalism "made the opponents of this
philosophy look silly", and that it was the very opposite of "crawling
in the dust", which was my description of the BJP leadership's typical
attitude vis-Ã -vis the secularists.

 

         I am not aware of any occasion during that fortnight when the
secularists looked silly to an objective observer.  They looked mean and
wrong-headed, because that is what they are, but their success in
closing ranks againt the BJP Government and in dictating the terms of
public discourse including Vajpayee's speech (which extolled
"secularism", very much their term) can hardly be described as silly. 
      The expression "looking silly" reminds me rather of that occasion
a few years ago when a member of the national BJP leadership proposed
the "Mahatma Gandhi formula" for a compromise on Ayodhya, compromise
which amounted to a return of the Muslim-occupied Hindu sites to the
Hindus.  The reference he made to a particular issue of one of Gandhi's
weeklies had not been verified, the said issue turned out not to exist
(publication of the paper had been stopped years before the date given),
and Gandhi had never proposed such a formula.  The BJP had made Ayodhya
its number one campaign issue, yet it had not bothered to verify a wild
claim which any secularist journalist could debunk at short notice.  On
a silver platter, the party handed its enemies the chance to dispense
with their usual lies and to speak the truth while exposing a Hindutva
leader's attempted deceit.  Of course, their claim that this incident
showed the unscrupled Goebbelsian mentality of the BJP was self-serving
hyperbole; what it did show instead was the silly thoughtlessness of the
Hindutva leaders, innocents abroad in the real world of politics.

 

         Kanchan Gupta then explains that the BJP Government had not
really retreated from its commitment to abrogate Article 370 concerning
Kashmir: since it did not have the two-thirds majority needed to amend
the Constitution, it was simply unable to fulfil this promise, and
admitting this was but a matter of honesty and realism.  Of course, I am
aware that a BJP majority Government would be unable to realize the
distinctive points of its programme (except by persuading others to join
it on specific points), and it would already have been a great success
if the party had merely stayed in power, just to break the taboo on the
very idea of a BJP Government.  But *Panun Kashmir*, the Kashmiri
refugee organization, well-placed to evaluate the exact impact of
Vajpayee's statements on the Kashmir situation, thought it necessary to
rebuke the BJP for its "betrayal" of the cause of Kashmir's full
integration in India.  It announced that apparently no political party
except the Shiv Sena could be trusted to uphold the rights of the
Kashmiri Hindus.  I confess that my information on Vajpayee's plans for
Kashmir was incomplete; but Gupta need not bother about convincing an
outsider like myself, I will automatically believe him when he has
convinced the Kashmiri refugees. 

 

         Gupta admits that "it remains a fact that the BJP cannot look
forward to majority Muslim support", that "it cannot but depend on the
Hindu vote for electoral success", and that "to disown this fact would
amount to disowning the party's *raison d'Ãªtre*", but defends Advani's
vote of thanks to the Muslim voters, made during the party's national
executive meeting in Goa.  I had quoted the grumbling of some BJP
workers against Advani's thanking the Muslim voters but never the Hindu
voters as such, though he owes his political career to the latter. 
Gupta replies: "The very fact that Mr. Advani 'thanked' Muslims for
voting BJP -- never mind that probably one in a thousand Muslim voters
stamped the party symbol on the ballot paper -- was indicative of the
paradigm shift in Moslim opinion post December 6, 1992.  The
belligerence that marked the boycott of Republic Day celebrations in
1988 had first given way to disbelief as the disputed structure came
crashing down and then to acceptance of majoritarian sentiments at the
time of polls.  That a Muslim delegation called on the BJP-Shiv Sena
Government and sought to work in tandem with the Hindu right signifies a
political victory unparalleled in India's post-Mughal history." 

 

         Really, I don't object to Advani thanking the Muslim voters,
for his making this communal distinction in the electorate merely
reflects reality.  If Muslims vote for the BJP rather than for
anti-national parties, it does amount to a substantial step in the right
direction, away from Islamic separatism.  But to say that the visit of a
Muslim lobby group to the BJP/SS government in Mumbai is a "political
victory unparalleled in India's post-Mughal history" is a wild
exaggeration.  I am sure that the Muslim delegation to the BJP/SS
government was quite explicit about its intention to safeguard *Muslim*
interests, not national let alone Hindu interests.  Rather than being a
spectacular innovation, Muslim kowtows before the existing powers for
the sake of safeguarding the Muslim interests is an old tradition; it
was tried out with roaring success by the Muslim League for 41 years
from the time of its foundation down to the time of Partition.

 

         Gupta's reference to the apparent loss of belligerence among
the Muslims since 1993, when the post-Demolition riots died down, calls
for an explanation.  About the facts themselves there can be no doubt,
or in Asghar Ali Engineer's words: "Before the Babri demolition it was
said a riot a day takes place in India.  But since 1993 this position
has drastically changed. (...) Organising riots does not seem to be a
paying proposition at least for the present."[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Gupta
seems to be claiming the credit on behalf of his party, but most
Hindutva activists I know are united in giving the credit to the Kar
Sevaks: it was their simplistic and illiterate action which made clear
to the Muslim riot-mongers that there is a limit to Hindu patience.  

 

         Let us finally address the truly worrying part of Kanchan
Gupta's article, about "this last thing of recommending that the BJP
should adopt a new two-point agenda of freeing Hindu temples from
Government control and amending Article 30 in order to allow Hindu
institutions the same benefits as those controlled by minorities".  I am
indeed in favour of a refocussing of the communal dispute to points of
legal and constitutional discrimination against the Hindus, such as the
Minorities' Commission and the special status of Kashmir, Mizoram and
Nagaland.  A top priority should be the abolition of the discrimination
sanctioned by Article 30, which allows "minorities" to set up and
administer their own educational institutions, in their own communal
interest but with Government subsidies.

 

         Gupta duly notes that the BJP "has articulated its views on
Article 30 in its Manifesto: 'Ensure equality for all and discrimination
against none on grounds of religion in matters of education by amending
Article 30.'"  This could be done by adjusting the Hindu rights upwards
or the minorities' rights downwards.  My impression so far was that the
BJP had in mind the extension to the Hindus of the privileges conceded
to the minorities; that is at least what BJP experts like Justice Rama
Jois had told me.  It is remarkable that the BJP Manifesto is ambiguous
about this; this may well be due to the influence of people like Kanchan
Gupta.  For indeed, and to my surprise, Mr. Gupta's position is this:
"The solution, from a particular perspective, lies in adopting a radical
approach to the problem, scrapping Article 30 in its entirety, not
merely amending it to include in its scope Hindu institutions, for the
latter approach could only enlarge the realm of malpractices as are
evident in minority-managed institutions."

 

         I had already noted in my own article that a downward
equalization, stripping the minorities of their privileges, would cause
a revolt among the minorities with international support, a crisis which
the present BJP is incapable of handling.  It seems that my warning has
not impressed him; I must have underestimated the BJP's mettle.  Well, I
wish the BJP a whole lot of good luck if it wants to cut into the
Christian and Muslim positions; it will have to face the pandemonium of
their muscle-money-media power.

 

         But the breath-taking surprise in Gupta's position lies
elsewhere.  Here is a BJP spokesman who considers Hindus incapable of
honestly administering their own colleges: if Hindus are given the same
rights as Muslims and Christians, this will only lead to more
"malpractices".  For similar reasons, my own "suggestion that the BJP
should campaign for the state's retreat from the management of Hindu
temples" is rejected as being "not an acceptable proposition".  On the
contrary, "the BJP should be in the forefront of the demand for state
intervention to facilitate social and religious reform".

 

         Follows a list of laws exclusively affecting the Hindus, which
are described as beneficial, to the extent that today, "Hindu women are
far better off than Muslim or Christian women" and "Hindu society \[is\]
able to compete successfully in a modern world": Sati Regulation of
1829, Hindu Widow Remarriage Act of 1856, Age of Consent Bill,
Travancore Royal Declaration on all-caste temple entry (in this list the
only law imposed by a Hindu state), and the four Acts of Parliament of
1955-56 constituting the Hindu Code.  With reference to a court case in
which Brahmins had unsuccessfully challenged the appointment of an
Ezhava as temple priest, Gupta notes: "Had there not been a Travancore
Devaswom Board, an Ezhava would never have made it to Priesthood and the
Travancore Royal Declaration of the 1930s on temple entry would have
remained a forgotten edict."  Therefore, the BJP should continue the
line taken by the Hindu Religious Endowments Commission (1960, led by
Sir C.P. Ramaswamy Aiyer), which opted for "the speedy enactment of
legislation for Government supervision of temples in States where there
was no such law"; minor improvements may be made on the model of the law
governing the Vaishnodevi shrine in Jammu. 

 

         For Gupta, if anything, the BJP should work for the
implementation of the second, never-implemented recommendation of the
same commission: to *extend* this form of state control to the places of
worship of the minorities.  Once more, Kanchan Gupta wants to solve the
existing inequality by stripping the minorities of their privileges
rather than by extending these to the Hindu majority.  I repeat my
warning that this would probably cause a communal upheaval which a BJP
Government could not handle.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  But the most remarkable
point about Gupta's plea for more state intervention in education and
temple management is not its recklessness, but its stark disavowal of
everything the RSS Parivar stands for. 

 

         One of the beautiful things about the Sangh Parivar is its
active belief in civil self-organization rather than state
intervention.  The BJS opposed the Hindu Code Bill, not because it
opposed reform (as Swami Karpatri's *Ram Rajya Parishad* did), but
because it rejected interference by a secular state in internal Hindu
affairs.  The 1951 BJS Manifesto was unambiguous: "Hindu Code Bill.  The
party holds that social reform should not come as imposition from
above.  It should work from within the society.  Any far-reaching
changes as envisaged in the Hindu Code Bill, therefore, should not be
made unless there is a strong popular demand for them and a clear
verdict is obtained from the electorate."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  And now Gupta
tells us that Hindu society by itself is incapable of reform, that the
RSS project has failed, that it could never have succeeded anyway, and
that only coercion by the Nehruvian state could implement the reforms
which the RSS pretends to work for.  Maybe Gupta is right, but in that
case the Sangh Parivar ought to organize a large-scale internal debate
about the principles involved.

 

         Finally, Gupta restates the BJP's general commitments: "The
party cannot afford to lose its cutting edge, its ideological commitment
to uncompromising nationalism, be it cultural or economic -- Hindutva
and Swadeshi have to remain the BJP's twin oars with the helmsman (at
present Mr. Advani) setting the course towards the re-emergence of India
as a modern, re-invigorated nation that can claim justifiable pride in
its self-identity and self-reliance.  This would mean a continuing
campaign on issues like Article 370, Ayodhya, uniform civil code,
illegal immigration, social harmony, national security, self-reliance,
social reform and cultural re-awakening. (...) Above all, the BJP must
prepare for power so that it is able to ensure India's transition from
suppressed nationhood to a proud nation aware of its true identity with
absolute ease; so that it is able to deliver on its promise of 'good
governance', which is not a 'colourless slogan', as Mr. Elst argues, but
as the party manifesto says, the sum total of 'the four concepts of
*Suraksha, Shuchita, Swadeshi* and *Samrasata*'."[\[4\]](#_edn4)

 

         In most democratic countries, "good governance" would certainly
be a colourless slogan, but Mr. Gupta has a point: in India most parties
do not dare to make this totally empty promise because their actual
record would make it sound laughable.  It reflects well on the BJP that
it still dares to mention the very term "good governance", eventhough
its record is not spotless either.  Nevertheless, there is no doubt that
the BJP has eagerly adopted these innocuous secular slogans because the
label of "Hindu fundamentalists" etc. became too heavy to bear.  While
good governance is certainly a commendable campaign promise, its
eloquence lies not only in its own contents but also in what it wants to
deflect attention away from.

 

         And that brings us to a final point in Kanchan Gupta's reply:
"These are not issues that ensure good 'public relations', something
which seems to figure high on Mr. Elst's list of priorities, but these
are issues which set apart the BJP from other political parties, giving
it an identity which others secretly aspire for but are scared to admit
in public."  Reference is to my own criticism of the BJP's awfully poor
public relations during its Ayodhya campaign.  My point was and is
precisely that, contrary to Kanchan Gupta's bold claims, the BJP is not
bravely insensitive to the abuse it receives from opinion-makers
including the secularist etsablishment and its parrots, the
international media.  On the contrary, the BJP's political line is
determined to a considerable extent by what its enemies say about it. 
            When it comes to those points which give the BJP its
distinct identity in India's party landscape, the BJP is not a proud and
defiant champion of a radical alternative to the rotten establishment,
but a sycophantic beggar trying to curry favour with the same
establishment.  When articulating its "cultural nationalism", the BJP
systematically tries to define this as essentially the same thing as the
prevalent secularism minus a few excesses.  Even when pretending to
formulate an alternative, the BJP is still paying implicit tribute to
the Nehruvian system.  Even when pretending to undo some of the damage
to Hindu temples wrought by Islam, the BJP whitewashes and praises
Islam.[\[5\]](#_edn5)  That the BJP stoops to this "crawling in the dust
before its enemies" (I stand by that description, Mr. Gupta) is largely
the effect of its fright before a bullying crowd of opinion-makers.  The
BJP consists of very ordinary people (which is alright, certainly
preferable to the spoilt children who make up the secularist
establishment) and they don't like being in the dock for decades on
end.  It for this reason, the BJP's demonstrable concern about public
opinion, that the BJP in its turn has no serious option but to influence
public opinion in its own favour.

 

         Public opinion consists of two sections.  On the one hand you
have the Marxist and "secular fundamentalist" shepherd-dogs whose
bullying rhetoric frightens many people into compliance with their
anti-Hindu line.  On the other, you have the docile herd of fearful
conformists and ignorant outsiders.  The weight which the former section
carries largely depends on the extent to which the latter follows its
dictates.  In this situation, any serious movement would work overtime
to detach the herd from the bullies, the camp-followers from the hard
core, for this would substantially alter the ideological power equation
determining the political possibilities before the BJP.  Call it "public
relations" or anything you want, but it is imperative that Hindu
activists effectively counter the disinformation which cuts them off
from a part of their natural Hindu constituency and of their natural
allies in the outside world.  

 

         To sum up, I still think that a BJP Government at the centre
may be a healthy development for India, and I still believe that the RSS
can be an important instrument for the self-renewal of Hindu society. 
However, they need first of all to think of themselves as just that --
*instruments* in the service of Hindu civilization.  They need to
evaluate seriously what ends their policies have actually been serving,
and to improve their performance.  The next word should come from them,
and it should not be just a defensive brief like Kanchan Gupta's
newspaper article, but a comprehensive evaluation of their achievements
in terms of their goals.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  A.A. Engineer: "Communalism and
Communal Violence, 1996", *Economic and Political Weekly*, 15 Feb. 1997,
p.323-326.  Of course, Engineer forgets to note the murders of Hindutva
activists in his rather reassuring survey of communal violence in 1996.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  On the other hand, I am aware that
history provides many examples of people who surprised everyone with
their unexpected courage and skill when provoked by a crisis.  Quite
possibly, some individuals in a future BJP Government would do likewise
and thereby shake the Hindutva movement out of its slumber and
confusion. 

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  *BJS Party Documents 1951-1972*,
vol.1, p.57-58.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref4)^(           \[4\])  *Suraksha* = security, *Shuchita* =
impeccability, *Swadeshi* = economic self-reliance, *Samrasata* =
solidarity.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref5)^(           \[5\])  E.g., in his post-Demolition speech in
the Lok Sabha, A.B. Vajpayee declared that he did "not recognize
Aurangzeb as a representative of Islam", meaning that Islam is alright
but extraneous forces put Aurangzeb on an un-Islamic course of
persecution and temple destruction.  The RSS publishing-house Suruchi
Prakashan has published his speech in a booklet titled, with unintended
irony, *Hindus Betrayed*.

 

    **[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section23.html)**

**    [HOME](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/index.html)**

</div>

</div>
