+++
title = "01 FOREWORD"

+++
## FOREWORD

This book is a much-expanded version of an article titled *Het
Islam-negationisme*, published in the September 1992 issue of the
Flemish Catholic monthly *Nucleus*, combined with a review of Sitaram
Goel's book *"Hindu Temples, What happened to them, vol. 2: The Islamic
Evidence"*. The review was written for *Infoerient*, the Dutch language
periodical of the Asian and Islamic Studies department of my Alma Mater,
the Catholic University of Leuven, under the title *Een Heiden tegen het
Negationisme* ( *A Pagan's Stand against Negationism*). However, after
some dilly-dallying and moving it around like a hot potato in the mouth,
it was decided that publishing this review was too dangerous: the good
relations with the embassies of Islamic countries might be harmed, aqnd
the dominant trend in what is called public opinion might object to this
highlighting of a frank critique of Islam.

This censorship is at once a good illustration of how the effective
prohibition of Islam crticism has fast become a worldwide phenomenon.
When I discovered the Islam problem during my first stay in India in
19988, and the concomitant pressure against Islam criticism, it had
still seemed a Third World problem, far removed from post-Enlightenment
Europe. Today, after the Rushdie affair, the threatened or effective
murder of Islam critics (like the Egyptian Farag Foda), and the threats
and administrative sanctions against Islam critics in Europe by
non-Muslim authorities (like the sacking of the French civil servant
Jean-Claude Barreau), the taboo on a frank discussion of Islam has the
whole world in its grip. A study of Islam negationism, i.e., the denial
of its historic crimes against humanity, has become even more necessary.

This book develops a theme I have touched upon in my earlier books on
India's *communal* problem, *Ram Janambhoomi vs. Babri Masjid* and
*Ayodhya and After*, viz. the practice of systematic distortion out of
political motives, especially the destruction wrought by Islam in its
*jihad* against Hinduism.

In my study of the Ayodhya controversy, I noticed that the frequent
attempts to conceal or deny inconvenient evidence were an integral part
of a larger effort to rewrite India's history and to whitewash Islam. It
struck me that this effort to deny the unpleasant facts of Islam's
destructive role in Indian history is similar to the attempts by some
European writers to deny the Nazi holocaust. Its goal and methods are
similar, even though its social position is very different: in Europe,
Holocaust negationists are a fringe group shunned by respectable people,
but in India, *jihad* negationists are in control of the academic
establishment and of the press.

I want to dedicate this book to Boutros Ghali, the new secretary-general
of the United Nations Organization. As a Coptic Christian in Egypt, he
has risen to unusually high posts in the administration of his country,
probably higher than young Copts can today reasonably look forward to.
Though he was sidelined in the end by being *promoted* to the symbolic
post of deputy prime minister, he gave hope and pride to the
fellow-members of his community by climbing as high as possible for a
non-Muslim in a nominally secular state. Of course, in his difficult
position he cannot speak out against the Islamic oppression which his
own community has suffered; but in his own way, he has contributed to
alleviating the hold of Islam on his part of the world. He played a key
role in the Camp David peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, for which
Egypt was thrown out of the Arab League and president Sadat was killed
by Islamic fanatics. The Camp David treaty proved that a nation can put
its national interests and its desire for peaceful co-existence above
its commitment to pan-Islamic brotherhood with its programme of hatred
and destruction. It has reminded us how in the end, reason is bound to
defeat Islam.

Delhi, Innocents' Day (28 December) 1992

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
