+++
title = "06 CHAPTER FOUR - REPLY TO SOME QUESTIONS AND CRITICISMS"

+++
## CHAPTER FOUR - REPLY TO SOME QUESTIONS AND CRITICISMS

After the publication of first edition of this book, and of articles
containing some of its ideas, I have received some comments to which I
will reply here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4.1 BOTH SIDES OF THE STORY

*"You have been too much influenced by these Hindus among whom you lived
in Benares and Delhi. You haven't heard the other side of the story."*

*"The other side of the story"* is not at all unknown to me: it has been
the object of my rather lengthy criticism all through this essay. It is
the people who have been taken in by the rosy picture of Islam, who know
only one side of the story. When they get to hear this side as well, it
turns out that they just don't want to hear it. After all, the prospect
of having to deal with an increasingly numerous and increasingly
aggressive community under the spell of Islam is a bit frightening. We
would all prefer to live in a world without the threat of Islamic
fanaticism, but we should not delude ourselves that we are already
living in such a tolerant and danger-free world.

Have I started seeing this side of the story because I was
*"influenced"*? As a matter of fact, I have spent my first season in
India in Benaras, the centre of Hindu orthodoxy, withoug hearing the
*"Hindu fundamentalist*" viewpoint at all. Many people who would later
be very forthcoming with inside information and with strong opinions,
were at first careful not to annoy this foreigner with viewpoints which
they thought he would not understand. It is only when I had discovered
the Hindu viewpoint for myself, and edpressed my general sympathy with
it, that my spokesmen at Benaras Hindu University would lay their cards
on the table. The *"secularist"* viewpoint is (was) so dominant that
cultured people did not want Westerners to associate them with the Hindu
cause.

It is a somewhat misdirected criticism, to argue that somneone says
something because he has been influenced by someone else. Imputing
motives or *"influences"* are an ad hominen argument which can never
replace an ad rem criticism; it is always done precisely to compensate
for the absence of such proper criticism. I refer to Arun Shourie's book
*"Individuals, Institutions, Processes"*, for a discussion of the bad
habit of giving people a label (*"that Naxalite"*, *"that RSS man"*, to
name a few which he himself has carried) and then acting as if their
views have been refuted by the label. This labelling is mental laziness.
Ideas should be judged by merit, not by caste provenance.

A similar attempt to dismiss my conclusions without dealing with them,
can be found in Sarvapalli Gopal's introduction to his book about the
Ayodhy issue, *"Anatomy of a Confrontation"*. His entire book does not
contain any reply to the main arguments give in my book *"Ram
Janmabhoomi vs. Babri Masjid"*, arguments which have also been brought
up by Indian participants in various instances of the Ayodhya debate.
Instead, Prof. Gopal thinks he can clinch the issue by calling me *"a
Catholic practitioner of polemics"* who *"fights the Crusades all over
again on Indian soil"*. For Communists, swearwords are ten a penny, so I
grant the august practitioner of swearology this comparatively mild
exercise in his worn-out old game.

More interesting is his comment, apparently meant to justify his
ignoring my arguments, that *"it is difficult to take serious an athor
who draws his historical ecidence from newspaper reports and speaks of
the centuries when there were Muslim rulers in India as a **bloodsoaked
catastrophe**"*. For a scientist, the place where findings are
published, or the name of the author, or any other social circumstances
of their publication, are of absolutely no consequence to the
correctness of their contents. Only for party-line historians like those
of JNU,, who count more on power positions than on facts to convince
people, the argument of authority is all-important. So, if in my book I
have chosen to analyze at length (and partly repeat) the arguments given
in the course of a debate conducted on the opinion page of the Indian
Express, this does not in any way diminish the value of these arguments.
I cannot help it that a number of the documents, facts and insights
presented by people like Prof. A.R. Khan, Prof. Harsh Narain and Mr.
A.K. Chatterjee, have been ignored in nicely published books by
prestigious authors like the JNU historians, Prof. R.S. Sharma and Mr.
A.A. Engineer. So I prefer genuine facts published to cheap paper to the
distortions on the shiny paper of Prof. Gopal's own book.

Is it hard to take seriously someone who considers the *"Muslim period"*
a blood-soaked catastrophe? That depends solely on whether the Muslim
period was indeed a blood-soaked catastrophe. European negationists
applaud Hitler's reign and deny its horrors. Indian negationists
eulogize Islamic rule and deny its millionfold murders and the
catastrophe it wrought in Indian cultural, political and religious life.
In both cases, the authentic records tell a different story. That is no
doubt why the negationists refuse to *"take seriously"* the numerous
authentic records of the massive destruction wrought by Islam.

And while we are dealing with the negationist reaction to my first book
about the Islam problem in India, there was also a review in The
Telegraph by Manini Chatterjee. She thought that my *"very bad book"*
was marred by miserably tentative terminology, like *"maybe"* and
*"possibly"*. In the case of party-line history-writing, that would
indeed be a grave shortcoming. Once the party has decided on what
history should look like, a historian is no longer supposed to confront
conflicting testimonies, to calculate probablities, to make allowance
for the uncertainties inherent in most historical research. That is why
the Marxist participants in the Ayodhya debate have always been so
cocksure in their statements: for them there can be no doubt whatsoever,
and no amount of inconvenient testimony is going to shake them out of
the absolute certainly of their foregone conslusions.

Incidentally, Mrs. Chatterjee finds my writing *"suspiciously similar"*
in style and contents to that to the essayists in the first volume of
*"Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them"*. Never mind, the is not the
first one who suspects that I don't exist and that Koenraad Elst is only
a pen-name for some *"Hindu communalist"* writer. Let me take this
opportunity to confirm that I exist. Mrs. Chatterjee should know that it
is indeed quite possible for a non-Hindu to independently arrive at the
same conclusions as accomplished Hindu intellectuals like Harsh Narain,
Ram Swarup, Sitaram Goel, Jay Dubashi and Arun Shourie. If the
information flow from India to the outside world was not so completely
in negationist hands, many more Western scholars would have come out
with similar views.

This is not the place for repeating the Ayodhya debate, so for the full
presentation of evidence for the Ayodhya temple, submitted by the VHP
scholars by me have been incorporated), I refer to the Voice of India
publication *"History vs. Casuistry"*. The *"evidence"* submitted by the
BMAC will be harder to come by, as it was not exactly fit for
publication.

A last word about this *"influence"* allegation, which was also levelled
against me by a collegue when I didn't display any knee-jerk reaction of
indignation after the demolition of the Babri Masjid. My position, that
a Hindu sacred place should simply be left to the Hindus, will be shared
any unbiased person: it is a natural insight not needing any
*"influencing"*, to approve a community's right to its own traditional
sacred places. That is merely the simple view, which a child can
understand. The opposite is true of the *"secularist"* view, viz. that
the Hindus had no right to transform the architecture at their own
sacred place, and that the Muslims do have rights over the Ram
Janmabhoomi which they would never concede (nor be asked to concede) to
anyone in the case of, say, Mecca. That view is based on double
standards which are only acceptable to people who have undergone some
*"re-education"*, some ideological conditioning or *"influencing"*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4.2 MUSLIMS VS. ISLAM

*"But I know some Muslims, and they are not fanatical at all."*

And: *"But I've been to Turkey, and people there are very friendly and
hospitable, and they have nothing to do with fundamentalism. You confuse
the mass of Muslims with the small minority of fanatics."* And: *"But in
indonesia, Islam is very different. You confuse the war-hungry mentality
of West Asia with the essence of Islam, which is very open."*

Me too, I know some Muslims who are not fanatical at all. And I have had
quite a good time in Muslim countries, starting with Pakistan. But this
has not convinced me that Islam is a benevolent and tolerant religion.

We need not travel to Islamic countries to see how decent people whose
membership of the Muslim community offends no one, can suddenly turn
fanatical when Islam is at stake. All these Islamic demonstrators in our
streets, who demanded Rushdie's death, and who told interviewers in so
many words: *"He must die, we will kill this Satan"*, were mostly very
nice people when you talk to them in their coffee-houses. When the
Japanese Rushdie translator was killed (summer 1991), spokesmen of the
Japanese Muslim community said: *"Whoever has killed him, whether Muslim
or non-Muslim, at any rate it was his deserved punishment ordained by
Allah."* (Japanese public opinion has reacted very sharply against this
statement of moral, if not actual, complicity in the murder) Yet, I had
never heard of Japanese Muslims behaving in a less civic manner than
their compatriots. Very nice people can turn vicious once a strong
belief is at stake, especially the self-righteous belief fostered by
Islam.

It is obviously true that many people in Muslim countries have good
qualities. In countries yet unspoiled by consumerism, it is normal for
people to be friendly and hospitable, they don't need Islam for that.
For nomadic peoples, like the Turks until a few centuries ago,
hospitality was a vital necessity, and this tradition has remained even
after conversion to Islam. In fact, as nomadic traditions were strongly
present in Mohammed's own cultural surroundings, hospitality is indeed
highly valued in Islam: not because Allah decreed it, but because
Mohammed had never known otherwise. Friendliness and hospitality owe
nothing to Islam, but are human values cherished by most cultures.

This merely proves the obvious: that human beings continue to be human
even after conversion to Islam. People continue to cherish certain
values regardless of the doctrines taught by the religion in which they
find themselves. On top of that, the Islamic doctrine itself has adopted
certain positive pre-Islamic values, and continues to instil them in its
young generations. This is not a comparative merit vis-a-vis other
religious and ethical systems, but it may be valuable in comparison with
the moral disorientation which befalls ever more youngsters in the big
cities. That is why American policy-makers have some appreciation for
the role of islam in inner-city Black communities. In the modern world,
the alternative for the parental religion is mostly not another
religion, but nihilism and morel anarchy. Any religion will do to give a
new sense of direction to lost souls, provided its elementary moral code
is emphasized, rather than its sterile and divisive points of theology.

On the negative side too, Islam is not foreign to human nature. The
negative values which Islam explicitly promote: (self-righteousness,
narrow-mindedness, greed for booty, disrespect for others people's
artistic and religious treasures), are all defects which may emerge in
any human being. Muslims may believe that Islam was brought from heaven,
but I am convinced that it was produced by a human being, and that all
its positive and negative qualities are expressions of human nature. The
point is that Islam gives certain negative tendencies systematic support
whenever they are practised in relation to non-muslim people,
institutions or values. The evil present in general human nature is
sharpened and legitimized by Islam, and directed against the unbelievers
in Mohammed's claims at prophethood. This legitimation of evil
tendencies is an original contribution of Islam (even if it drew some
inspiration from the Biblical Yahweh). It cannot be ascribed to
Mohammed's pre-Islamic cultural milieu.

Most religions, regardless of their metaphysical and ritual differences,
agree on a number of ethical values: self-control, harmony with our
fellow-men, truthfulness, etc. Islam has adopted some elements of this
universal heritage. Ordinary Muslims will point to these universal
virtues when defending the claim that Islam stands for important ethical
values. But Islam has also elevated to the rank of religious duty a
number of attitudes and behaviour patterns which are the very opposite
of this world-wide ehtical consensus.

Whatever our judgement of the the Islamic doctrine, it should be clearly
distinguished from our attitude towards Muslim people. I guess most
Muslims will not be too happy when you say: *"I have nothing against
you, I only object to your religion."* Yet, even if it is
psychologically rather delicate to take this position, it is nonetheles
the correct position. People cannot help it that they have been born
into the community that pledges allegiance to Islam. They cannot help it
that they have been made to develop an emotional attachment to that
arch-fanatical book the Quran, and to its author Mohammed. Moreover,
many of them have followed their more humane feelings, and retained from
their religious indocrtrination only some universal ethical rules and
some common life wisdom, quietly putting the more fanatical parts of
Islamic teaching aside. Their effective religion is strictly not Islam,
but a selection of the saner and more humane elements which Mohammed's
followers had preserved or adopted from universal religion.

But whatever the human qualities of the people in Turkey, it is
undeniable that a substantial number of these common Muslims (both
Turkish and Kurdish) has taken part in terroizing the Christians (in
Kurdistan also Yezidi) minorities. Even when the secular state founded
by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk accorded protection to the Christians (and
restored some historical churches to them), the common people kept on
harassing the minorities.

Before World War I, Christians formed a substantial percentage of the
population of what is now called Turkey (if my information is correct,
they even formed the majority in the capital city Istambul). In 1915-18,
the Armenians were massacred. In 1922, when Greece had tried to liberate
the territories with Greek populations on Turkey's West Coast, all the
Greeks were killed or driven out. Since then, the pressure on not only
the remaining Armenians and Greek-Orthodox, but alo on the Chaldaean and
Assyrian Christians in the South-East, has continued. Ethnic clashes
between Muslim Kurds and Muslims Turks have often ended in a massacre of
the religious minorities. By now, the Christians form less than 1% of
Turkey's population. Many thousands have fled to European countries, and
those remaining in Turkey have moved to the relative safety of the
metropolis Istambul. When questioned, they are often too ashamed or too
afraid to tell their story. But ultimately, the truth comes out, and the
conclusion is: *"We had no choice but to go away."*

An intriguing aspect of the Islamic terror against the Christians in
Turkey is that it has not stopped with the state's secularization. In
the khilafat period, Islam was safely in power, and from that position
it could show generosity and ensure the *"protection"* which the Islamic
state owes its zimmi minorities (except when the caliph himself declared
a jihad against a specified people). But this generosity and protection
should not be exaggerated: at least in the Balkan part of the Ottaman
empire, Christians lived in constant fear. They were the target of
never- ending terror, in the form of abductions of girls and boys and
all kinds of harassment. It is such harassment at the local and popular
level which has continued in the last decades and reached the farthest
corners of the country. This process has also been helped by the fact
that increased population pressure and better roads and transport have
ended the virtual isolation in which many Christian communities in the
mountains used to live. Once the contact with the Muslims became more
intense, trouble followed. Protective measures by the secular government
failed to control the hostility at the popular level.

It is always easy to blame the state and the men in uniform. But Islamic
terror essentially does not emanate from uniforms and state power, but
from a belief system which even the ordinary people have been fed. That
is why a lot of Islamic terror never gets recorded by human-rights
organizations like Amnesty International. A Christian Pakastani friend
complained to me that Amnesty had not spoken out against the religious
persecutions in his homeland, even when these are a grim and undeniable
reality. The fact is that much of this persecution and discrimination is
not ordered by the state (the type of culprit with which Amnesty is
familiar), but is a spontaneous attituide among sections of the Muslim
population, egged on by nothing except the omnipresent Islamic doctrine.

As for Indonesia, let us note first of all that it is a non-secular and
non-Islamic state. It requires its citizens to be *"monotheists"*, but
they can choose for themselves whether they worship Allah, Jesus,
Ganesha or Buddha, regardless of the very different status which these
divine characters have for their respective followers. Many Muslims are
unhappy that the majority religion is prevented from making its mark on
the polity ( a frustration which many Hindus in India will understand,
in spite of the sharp difference which would exist between a pluralist
Hindu Rashtra and an oppressive Islamic state). True to type, some
Muslims advocate the separation and islamization of their heartland, the
island Aceh, while others are working for the islamization of the entire
country.

The fact that Islam sits lightly on most Muslims in Indonesia, has not
prevented a hard core to display the patented behaviour pattern of
Islam. In Irian Jaya (West New Guinea), the Papua tribals are overrun by
immigrant Muslims from Java. Many of them have already been converted by
force or social pressure. In ex-Portuguese East Timor, which Indonesia
has annexed against the United Nations' will, massacres of Christians or
Animist natives by Muslim immigrants and soldiers have happened on a
large scale. In Bali, the Hindus are not exactly persecuted, but Muslim
immigrants from Java have acquired the positions of power. By the
standards which Indian Muslims use to measure *"discrimination against
the minorities"*, the Hindus of Bali could claim that they are
discriminated against. Nevertheless, the situation in most of Indonesia
still seems to be much better than in Bangladesh (let alone Pakistan),
and the communities live together rather peacefully. But it has taken
tough rulers to uphold this relatively stable pluralism.

The impact of Islamic doctrine on Muslim populations is not uniform in
intensity. Many Muslims ignore the Quranic injunctions to hostility.
Some non-Muslims don't need the Quran for developing self-righteousness
and intolerance. But this doesn't prove that Islam doesn't make a
difference. Some people get drunk and yet drive their cars safely,
others don't drink but are nonetheless a danger on the road; neither of
these special cases can disprove the general correlation between drunken
driving and traffic accidents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4.3 IMMIGRANTS AND MUSLIMS

*"But your criticism of Islam will contribute to the increasing
animosity in Europe against Muslim immigrants. You play into the hand of
xenophobic and racist politicians."*

Of course I have nothing to do with racism and xenophobia, and I have my
life-story to prove it. Given the democratic slump in Europe, I am
convinced that a measured and carefully monitored immigration is
necessary. My hometown is host to people from every country, and I have
a lot of foreign friends, mostly Indian and Chinese. So, I am not at all
against immigrants, and I have personally helped some to integrate or to
get naturalized as citizens of my country. But my criticism of Islam
stands: Islam is intrinsically separatist and hostile to neighbour
communities.

The position of the *"xenophobic and racist politicians"* in Europe is
just the opposite. They are against immigration, but most of them
profess to have nothing against Islam. They say that Islam is quite all
right, as long as it remains in Islamic countries. They want Muslims out
of Europe, not because they think islam is bad in itself, but because
they consider it so foreign to our culture and value system that Muslim
people cannot ever be integrated in our society.

Moreover, the really racist elements among them are mostly also
anti-Jewish and consequently in sympathy with the Arabs. The leader of
the French anti-immigrant party Front National, Jean-Marie Le Pen, had
pleaded against French participation in the war against Saddam Hussain,
and has on the whole been cultivating good relations with the Arab
world. He thinks this is necessary in order to make a civilized deal
with the source countries of most French immigrants, to make them take
these immigrants back. Finally, hard rightist had always felt more at
home with straightforward, regimented Islam than for instance with the
*"haggling Jewish money-lenders"* or the anarchic, unfathomable
polytheists in the colonies: in sub-Saharan Africa, the colonial powers
used to actively support the spread of Islam.

Other *"xenophobic and racist politicians"* do speak out against Islam,
but they don't go to the root of the problem. They like to point at some
barbaric points of islam (public lashings, amputation, purdah) merely to
impress on the public that the Muslim are a barbaric lot with whom it is
best not to co-exist. They have a very static view of Islam, by assuming
that it is somehow the unalterable *"native culture"* of the Turkish and
North-African populations. In reality, those populations have been lured
or forced into Islam, and they may also grow out of it. It is well worth
repeating that a distinction must be made between Muslims and Islam,
between the doctrine and the people who have been fed the doctrine. Some
people in the anti-immigrant lobby have attacked *"the Muslims"*, but
not one among them has attacked Islam as a doctrine.

If we put a criticism of Islam in the context of the modern world's need
to develop ways of co-existence between different communities, and
specifically the situation of Muslim immigrants in Europe, let us
distinguish first between a few commonly used terms and concepts.

Racism means the belief that there is a qualitative inequality between
human beings on the basis of their respective race. This was present in
a relatively mild form in the paternalistic theory of the *"white man's
burden"*, the duty of superior whites to be responsible guardians of the
inferior races, who are *"half devil and half child"* (both expressions
are Rudyard Kipling's). Racism was present in a much more strident form
in Nazism, which taught that there were master races, inferior races,
and also doomed races which had to be exterminated. This hard racism was
a materialistic theory, which tried to reduce the perceived moral and
cultural differences between people to biological factors. Thus, the
Jews were not defined as a religious community, but as a *"race"*, and
even converting to another religion could not alter your genetic
Jewishness. Such race theories are quite marginal in the present
European political context. Most political parties which are called
*"racist"* by their opponents do not subscribe to a theory of racial
inequality (eventhough citizens who privately cherish such racist
convictions usually vote for them).

The present wave of anti-immigrant feelings in Europe should more
properly be called xenophobia. Xenophobia is not racism, as it is not
based on biological but on cultural differences. It is often understood
as *"hatred against outsiders"*, and in that case Islam itself is an
intense case of xenophobia. But in the European context, it is the
literal meaning that applies: *"fear of outsiders"*. The psychology that
is catching on in ever wider circles in Europe today, is that the
immigrants are a threat to our safety and prosperity, not because of
their skin colour but because of their cultural non-assimilation.
Anti-immigrant campaigners contend that cultural assimilation become
difficult once the immigrants are numerous enough to form islands of
foreign culture in our society. Such islands would then constitute a
threat to our social fabric. In the case of Muslims, it is suspected
that they not only have little motivation to assimilate (as a
consequence of their large quantity), but harbour a positive intention
not to assimilate.

Muslims are not a race, and much less is Islam a race. A criticism of
Islam has nothing to do with anti-Arab racism. Many Arabs are not
Muslims. The Christians Arabs are heavily persecuted (as Mgr. Teissier,
bishop of Algiers, recently came to testify in Leuven, something which
he significantly refrains from doing in writing), and whenever they see
no other option than to flee the Muslim world, I think Europe has the
duty to welcome these non-Muslim Arabs without reservation (just like
India should welcome all Hindu refugees, just like Germany accepts all
East-Europen Germans, and just like Israel has welcomed the Jews of
Ethoipia and Russia). On the other hand, many fanatical Muslims are not
Arabs or Turks or Persians, but Europeans. European converts to Islam
like to tell interviewers that *"Islam is all about peace and
brotherhood"*. What this means in practice became clear when one of the
most famous converts, singer Cat Stevens alias Yusuf Islam, was asked
for his opinion about the Rushdie affair. He said: *"If I see Rushdie,
I'll kill him."* Fanaticism is not a racial characteristic, but an
ideological position fostered by imbibing the Quran.

If criticism of Islam is racism, then what about criticism of
Christianity? I don't believe anyone is ready to call Voltaire and other
European freethinkers racists. Voltaire criticized Christian doctrine
and the power of the Catholic Church, but no one has accused him of
racism against the Christian community. It so happens that the same
Voltarie was equally critical of Islam, which he considered the
fanatical religion par excellence. In *"Mahomet ou le fanatisme"*, a
theatre play written in defence of the value of religious tolerance, he
uses Mohammed as model case of relgious fanaticism. Again, no one has
accused entertained the idea, he would have had to acknowledge that
Voltaire's explicit admiration for other exotic cultures, like India and
especially China, made him immune against any suspicions of *"racism"*
or xenophobia.

The truth is that the cry of *"racism"* has become a favourite way of
orphaned Communists to recapture the initiative and continue their old
game of putting people against the wall, for volleys of swearology if
not bullets. Thus, in my country there is an *"anti-racist forum"*
called Charta \`91, in which we find back most Flemist Marxists. The
name is obviously modelled on Charta \`77, the dissident forum in
Czechoslovakia against the Communist regime (which forum included the
playwright and later president Vaclav Havel). The Charta \`91 people
have the effrontery to try and capitalize on the moral prestige of
Charta \`77, while many of them were personally supporters of the very
regime that used to sent Charta \`77 people to jail. They are the very
people who used to cast aspersions on the dissidents, who ridiculed
anti-Communist voices in the West, and who led movements of which we now
officially know that they were sponsored by Moscow (I remember shrugging
off my father's remarks about Moscow's involvement in the
pro-disarmament demonstration I ws going to; but he was right). For
these exposed Gulag collaborators, anti-racism is the only way to remain
on the offensive and to pre-empt a critical look into their own record.

As a practised non-racist, I feel free to ignore the insistent
self-advertisement of organized *"anti-racism"*. The racist attacks on
foreigners in Europe are a most serious problem, but there is no need
for *"allying with Stalin to fight Hitler"* now: we have to get both out
of the way.

Secondly, *"anti-racism"* and *"multiculturalism"* (cfr. the Indian
creed of *"composite culture"*) are an easy cover for Islamic
propagandists and their fellow-travellers to pre- empt all criticism of
Islam. They take heart from some accomplished facts of confusion between
racial and relgious issues, such as the following. Recently, a British
employer wanted to hire workers but made it clear that he would not
employ Muslims, with reference to the plight of Salman Rushdie, whose
condemnation to a life underground has been supported by most vocal
Muslims in Britain. A pro-Muslim organization filed a plaint charging
him with racial discrimination. The judge ruled that excluding Muslims
is not a direct act of racism, as Muslims are not a race; but that it
was nonetheless an indirect act of racism, as most Muslims are
effectively non-European. He thought that a complete acquittal in this
case would clear the way for attempts at racial discrimination under the
cover of excluding the non-racial category of Muslims, so he imposed a
token penalty.

In many European countries racism is an offence punishable by law, so I
expect that the allegation of racism will be tried in the near future as
a way of prohibiting criticism of Islam. At the level of public debate,
there is already strong pressure tending towads an informal prohibition
of Islam criticism. But it won't work.

Europe has built up a strong tradition of free speech and freedom of
publication, and Islamic attempts to tamper with that freedom will only
sharpen the awareness that no concessions can be made to these new forms
of fanaticism and censorship. Moreover, the general public and many
political commentators and politicians are vaguely aware of the
intrinsic fanaticism of Islam. In the news, the word Islam is more often
than not mentioned in a context of terrorism, so the pious claims that
islam is tolerant and peaceful at heart are regarded with healthy
skepticism.

What really gives Islam an incurably bad name, is its treatment of
women. No amount of apologetics can convince modern people that it is
right to spend a raped woman to jail if she cannot bring the four male
witnesses which the shariat requires, and to sentence her, after a long
time in custody, to public flogging for committing adultery or for
falsely accusing a good Muslim of rape. The said sentence only comes as
a matter of clemency, and sometimes the strict penalty is given: stoning
to death. Such things happen in Pakistan (where 60% of the women brought
to trial for sex offences are cases of *"unproven"* plaints of rape,
according to a Pakistani lawyer quoted in The Economist) and other
Islamic states, and the world knows it. We have seen on television how
women in Algeria demonstrated against the attempts to transform the
country into an islamic republic, and how they were attacked by
fundamentalist counter- demonstrators. No one is fooled if some Islamic
apologist explains how Islam has meant a liberation of women. The
women's movement will contribuite a lot to Islam's undoing.

Most non-specialist observers are broadly aware of the retrograde and
barbaric charcter of Islam. Nonetheless, governments waver when they are
confronted with Islamic threats and blackmail. Margaret Thatcher has
stood by Salman Rushdie, in spite of the latter's invective against her
(both before and after the fatwa). But John Major prohibited a
manifestation to *"celebrate"* Salman Rushdie's 1,000th day in hiding,
in order not to disturb the negotiations over hostages in Lebanon. The
organizers of the Books Fair in Frunkfurt had invited the Iranian state
publishing-house to participate, just when the Japanese Rushdie
translator had been murdered, and it was only after strong protest from
the German Writers Association that the invitation was withdrawn.

The French government accepted a compromise on the issue of girls
wearing a chador in school, which Muslims claimed as a victory
(according to Kalim Siddiqui, speaking at the 6th European Muslim
Conference in Genk, April 1992, a veiled woman *"carries the flag of
Islam: she makes a statement that European civilization is unacceptable
to us, that it is a disease, a pestilence on mankind"*). In November
1991, it sacked Jean-Claude Barreau, a top civil servant who had writen
that Islam has been a destructive and regressive religion. Muslims
protested that his book contained *"simplistic opinions"* about Islam,
and obtained that the government destanced itself from his views by
sacking him. It is unthinkable that a French government would sack a
civil servant for writing against Christianity, but Islam has already
wrested the privilege of immunity from criticism. Incidentally, the
French government's behaviour disproves the Indian belief that Muslim
appeasement is a consequence of the desire to win over the *"Muslim vote
bank"*: few Muslims in France were voters, and the socialist
government's hand was not forced by vote politics, but by a mentality.

In an interview with the leading French newspaper Le Figaro, Jean-Claude
Barreau explains: *"This shows to what extent that which I had felt in
advance was true: Islam is a taboo which you cannot defy unpunishedly.
Today, there is something very disturbing for the foundations of our
Republic, viz. for secularism... It is possible for a top civil servant
to doubt Christ's divinity without creating a ripple, but it is
impossible for him to speak of Prophet Mohammed... \[I have been hit
by\] not a law, but a collective and almost unanymously observed taboo.
This taboo is not typical for the Left... I have found out that there is
of course a Leftist pro-Islamism linked with the post-colonial complex,
but also a Rightist pro-Islamism... There has been strong pressure from
Islamic embassies. That this pressure exists, shows to what extent
certain Islamic circles are incapable of listening to criticism. But
there are dissidents in the Islamic world whom we are not at all helping
with our attitude."*

To the question whether democracy was lacking in aggressiveness, he
replied: *"Rather, it lacks courage... My book, it is nothing but the
right of intellectual intervention. But because it concerns Islam, it is
deemed insupportable. There are double standards at work."* He compares
with similar topics: *"This book is not more scandalous than those which
I have published about Christianity, about Israel, or about the art of
government. I reaslized I was touching on a taboo, but I didn't know it
was that strong."*

Muslims are already a considerable pressure group, but what really
weakens the position of European governments before Islamic arrogance is
the pro-Islamic rhetoric of a small but noisy section of media people
and leftist political circles. Some of these fellow-travellers of Islam
are well-intending but inconsistent softies: they have not renounced
their young days' habit of mocking Christian obscurantist customs and
irrational beliefs, and yet they are defending (or asking us to
*"understand"*) similar things in Islam. Some are husbands of Muslim
women whose parents, following Muslim law, insisted on their
son-in-law's conversion: like the ancestors of many Muslim fanatics,
they think this conversion is a superficial thing without any
consequences, but already they feel compelled to defend Islamic causes.
Others are Marxists who have shifted their focus from anti-Fascist
through anti-racist and pro- immigrant, to pro-Muslim.

The influence of these fellow-travellers will probably be blown away
soon. Their grip on the public arena is weak compared to that of india's
secularists, and is totally dependent on the public's modest sense of
incompetence regarding Islam and on its concomitant care not to make
rash and unfair judgements. As soon as the facts concerning Islam become
more well-known, not as a general feeling but as an authoritative
opinion equipped with details of Islamic scripture and history, the game
of islam's public relations offensive will be over. But until then, this
vocal section makes it difficual to speak out freely about the nature of
Islam, and it puts psychological pressure on governments and police
forces, which prevents an effective policy against Islamic arrogance.
Today, there are not many intellectuals in Europe who say the truth
about Islamic fanaticism, partly out of ignorance, partly for fear of
negative press coverage. Those who do, like John Laffin (The Dagger of
Islam), are given little publicity, or denounced as prejudiced
alarmists.

In 1990, a Pakistani living in Holland published a book, De Ondergang
van Nederland (*"The Downfall of the Netherlands"*), about the mistaken
Muslim policy of his host country. he stated that Holland was spending
its laudable tolerance on the wrong people: it gives all the facilities
to a growing Islamic establishment in its immigrant communities. After
demonstrating the intolerant behaviour of Muslims worldwide, he predicts
that *"the naive and mindless Dutch"* are feeding a poisonous baby which
in a few decades will devour them and replace their tolerant and
pluralist society with an Islamic republic. Unfortunately, he too treats
*"the Muslims"* as a static entity, and he idealizes the Europeans
instead of seeing that our level of tolerance is the result of a
historical process which the Muslims can and should also go through
(discarding their Muslim-ness on the way, like Europe largely discarded
Christianity). Because he took his own assessment of Islam seriously,
and with the Rushdie affair still very much in the air, he did not want
to make his name known, so he wrote under the pseudonym Mohammed Rasool.

The reaction of the press was most interesting. The leftist press had
nothing but scorn for his message, and concentrated on the more
sensational effort of finding out the writer's identity. At first they
were very sure that it had to be some fascist racist Dutchman trying to
sound more convincing by adopting an exotic pseudonym. But Mohammed
Rasool gave interviews, wearing a mask that showed enough of his face to
prove that he was not a native European. Interviewers tried to snatch
his foreigners' passport to find out his name, but he was faster.
Finally, after a lot of detective work, they did find out his real name,
and made it public. If ever Mohammed Rasool gets killed, these mindless
leftist are to blame.

To be sure, he has not been killed yet. He has not criticized the
Prophet himself, and the fair name of Mohammed is what Muslims are most
particular about. Criticizing the Muslim community or the doctrine of
Islam is less dramatic (Rushdie had not criticized Islam, but had mocked
the Prophet). As the Persian proverb says: you can make jokes about God,
but be careful with Mohammed. Secondly, the Muslim communities in
continental Europe keep a low profile, in conformity with their Saudi
sponsors' policy of penetrating Europe gently (as opposed to the Iranian
approach). Finally, this Mohammed Rasool was an unknown fellow in a
small language-area, not a prize-winning English writer. So there was no
fatwa to kill this Dutch- Pakistani warner against the Islamic threat.

But does that prove the opinion expressed by the more sympathetic
right-wing commentators, that Rasool may have a point but that he has
exaggerated the danger of Islam in Holland? At the moment, Holland has
one of the lowest percentages of Muslims in the European Community, and
they are not making much trouble (except that they took to the streets
to demand Rushdie's death). But that may change fast: their birth rate
is very high, and a continued inpouring from North Africa is just about
inevitable. As their numbers go up, the Muslims' attitude may change
too. A keen awareness of power equations may be at work: when they are
small and weak, they are wise enough not to be too troublesome, but when
they become strong, their demands go on increasing; that at any rate is
the Indian experience. Policy-makers should consider more than only the
most optimistic prognosis.

It is mathematically certain that Islam will ultimately disappear. An
artificial belief system imposed by force can only survive by means of a
continued indoctrination. Relax that, and Islam will wither away fast.
With the modern media and the unprecedented pace of progress, cultural
circumstances can emerge (not by a conspiracy, but by the laws of the
market and similar natural developments) that will make Islam look like
a strange antiquity even to those brought up as Muslims. So, Islam will
certainly go. But the question is what it can still do in the meantime.

In the Soviet Union, several jihads are on the cards. Kazakhstan may
soon become an Islamic republic, and it has an advanced nuclear arsenal.
The president (chosen in an election from which Russians were excluded)
of the Muslim Chechen-Ingoosh republic has declared that in order to
obtain independence, his people will use terrorist attacks against
Russian targets including nuclear facilities. He has been arming several
Muslim separatisms in the northern Caucasus and effectively supporting
the separatist violence in Abkhasia. Iran, Iraq and Pakistan are
building their nuclear strike capability. More than ever, Pakistan will
be the frontline of an impressive block of Islamic states with nuclear
teeth. India will no doubt be the prime target, Russia will definitely
suffer, but Europe too may be put in trouble by an Islamic upsurge from
the inside. We simply cannot perdict what effect an expected
international conflict in the name of Islam will have on a European
Muslim community that will have become much more numerous and well-
organized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
