---
title: Composure
---


## Calming turbulence
Prepare content in advance if necessary.

### Importance

This is especially important while meeting strangers.

Most people do not want to be burdened by an unsettled, harried
individual - they are wary of getting tangled in unsavoury business.

### General technique

Concentrate on the high order bits: the important matter. Solemnly
recognize that exchange of information/ expectations is the most
important point of the meeting and determinedly focus the intellect on
it.

### Suppressing inopportune reactions

It may sometimes be inopportune to feel or display laughter or anger or
nervousness.

Use breath control. (PraaNaayaama)


## Dress strategy

Dressing in clothing in light/bright colors will make you stand out more
in a crowd and look more approachable.

Wear something comfortable, but which will project the impression of one
serious in his work.

## Timing

When you are overtly trying to sell something, for example your
qualifications, do it only when you are adequately prepared, otherwise,
you may create an unfavorable impression leading to the failure of the
mission.

Do not interrupt a person who is known to dislike interruptions.

## Content

In conversation, it is better to talk about others’ work and learn, than
to talk about oneself.

Ask questions that require more than a simple "yes" or "no" answer to
subtly encourage a shy or introverted person to keep talking.

Conduct interviews. Make them talk about themselves and their work.

Be prepared - try not to ask questions which could have been answered by
other means. Special questions: How did you get your job? How did you
decide you wanted to pursue this specific career? Did you have a mentor
who helped you? Did you have role models? What satisfactions do you get
from your position? Did the organizational culture turn out to be what
you expected? How were the most recently employed people hired? How
would you suggest someone with my background to look for a job?
Professors: Do you have any suggestions which may help my research or
graduate studies?

Prepare answers for questions.

Compliment them - Everyone has an ego. But, don’t overdo it.

If they’re close, inquire about their family.

## Exchange stories

Eg, in case of friends: Ask for a personal story of childhood or home,
and give one in return.
