+++
title = "106 Apostasy"

+++


\*[Selections from the Munir Report (1954)](index.html)\*

  

8\) Apostasy

 a.) Apostasy in an Islamic State is punishable with death. On
this the *ulama* are practically unanimous (*vide* the evidence of
Maulana Abul Hasanat Sayyad Muhammad Ahmad Qadri, President,
Jami'at-ul-Ulama-i-Pakistan, Punjab; Maulana Ahmad Ali, Sadr
Jami'at-ul-Ulama-i-lslam, West Pakistan; Maulana Abul Ala Maudoodi,
founder and ex-Amir-i-Jama'at-i-Islami, Pakistan; Mufti Muhammad Idris,
Jami'Ashrafia, Lahore, and Member, Jami'at-ul. Ulama-i-Pakistan; Maulana
Daud Ghaznavi, President, Jami'at-i-Ahl-i-Hadith, Maghribi Pakistan;
Maulana Abdul Haleem Qasimi, Jami'at-ul-Ulama-i-Islam, Punjab; and Mr.
Ibrahim All Chishti).

According to this doctrine, Chaudhri Zafrullah Khan, if he has not
inherited his present religious beliefs but has voluntarily elected to
be an Ahmadi, must be put. to death. And the same fate should befall
Deobandis and Wahabis, including Maulana Muhammad Shafi Deobandi,
Member, Board of Talimat-i- Islami attached to the Constotuent Assembly
of Pakistan, and Maulana Daud Ghaznavi, if Maulana Abul Hasanat Sayyad
Muhammad Ahmad Qadri, or Mirza Raza Ahmarl Khan Barelvi, or any one of
the numerous *ulama* who are shown perched on every leaf of a beautifnl
tree in the *fatwa*, Exhibit D. E. 14, were the head of such Islamic
State.

And if Maulana Muhammad Shafi Deobandi were the head of the State, he
would exclude those who have pronounced Deobandis as *kafirs* from the
pale of Islam and inflict on them the death penalty if they come within
the definition of *murtadd*, namely, if they have changed and not
inherited their religious views.

 b.) The genuineness of the fatwa, Exhibit D. E. 13, by the
Deobandis, which says that Asna Ashari Shias are *kafirs* and
*murtadds*, was questioned in the course of enquiry, but Maulana
Muhammad Shafi made an inquiry on the subject from Deoband, and received
from the records of that institution the copy of a *fatwa* signed by all
the teachers of the Darul Uloom, including Maulana Muhammad Shafi
himself, which is to the effect that those who do not believe in the
*sahabiyat* of Hazrat Siddiq Akbar, and who are *qazif* of Hazrat Aisha
Siddiqa, and have been guilty of *tehrif* of the Qur'an, are *kafirs*.

This opinion is also supported by Mr. Ibrahim All Chishti, who has
studied and knows his subject. He thinks the Shias are *kafirs* because
they believe that Hazrat Ali shared the prophethood with our Holy
Prophet. He refused to answer the question whether a person who being a
Sunni changes his view and agrees with the Shia view would be guilty of
*irtidad* so as to deserve the death penalty. According to the Shias,
all Sunnis are *kafirs*, and Ahl-i-Qur'an, namely, persons who consider
*hadith* to be unreliable and therefore not binding, are unanimously
*kafirs*, and so are all independent thinkers.

The net result of all this is that niether Shias nor Sunnis nor
Deobandis nor Ahl-i-Hadith nor Barelvis are Muslims, and any change from
one view to the other must be accompanied in an Islamic State with the
penalty of death, if the Government of the State is in the hands of the
party which considers the other party to be *kafirs*. And it does not
require much imagination to judge of the consequences of this doctrine,
when it is remembered that no two *ulama* have agreed before us as to
the definition of a Muslim.

If the constituents of each of the definitions given by the *ulama* are
given effect to, and subjected to the rule of 'combination and
permutation', and the form of charge in the Inquisition's sentence on
Galileo is adopted *mutatis mutandis* as a model, the grounds on which a
person may be indicted for apostasy will be too numerous to count.

 c.) In an earlier part of this report we have referred to the
proscription of the 'Ash-shahab', a pamphlet written by Maulana Shabbir
Ahmad Usmani, who later became Sheikh-ul-Islam-i-Pakistan. In that
pamphlet the Maulana had attempted to show from the Qur'an, the *sunna*,
the *ijma'*, and *qayas* that in Islam the punishment for apostasy
(*irtidad*) *simpliciter* is death. After propounding the theologioal
doctrine, the Maulana had made in that document a statement of fact:
that in the time of the Caliph Siddiq-i-Akbar and the subsequent Caliphs
vast areas of Arabia became repeatedly red with the blood of apostates.

We are not called upon to express any opinion as to the correctness or
otherwise of this doctrine, but knowing that the suggestion to the
Punjab Government to proscribe this pamphlet had come from the Minister
for the Interior, we have attempted to inquire of ourselves the reasons
for Government's taking a step which *ex hypothesi* amounted to
condemning a doctrine which the Maulana had professed to derive from the
Qur'an and the *sunna*.

The death penalty for *irtidad* has implications of a far-reaching
character, and stamps Islam as a religion of fanatics, which punishes
all independent thinking. The Qur'an again and again lays emphasis on
reason and thought, advises toleration, and preaches against compulsion
in religious matters; but the dootrine of *irtidad* as enunciated in
this pamphlet strikes at the very root of independent thinking when it
propounds the view that anyone who, being born a Muslim or having
embraced Islam, attempts to think on the subject of religion with a
view, if he comes to that conclusion, to choose for himself any religion
he likes, has the caipital penalty in store for him.

With this implication Islam becomes an embodiment of complete
intellectual paralysis. And the statement in the pamphlet that vast
areas of Arabia were repeatedly bespattered with human blood, if true,
could only lend itself to this inference: that even when Islam was at
the height of its splendour and held absolute sway in Arabia, there were
in that country a large number of people who turned away from that
religion and preferred to die than to remain in that system.

It must have been some such reaction of this pamphlet on the mind of the
Minister for the Interior which prompted him to advise the Punjab
Government to proscribe the pamphlet. Further, the Minister who was
himself well-versed in religious matters, must have thought that the
conclusion drawn by the author of the pamphlet, which was principally
based on the precedent mentioned in paras. 26, 27, and 28 of the Old
Testament, and which is only partially referred to in the Qur an in the
54th verse of the Second Sura, could not be applicable to apostasy from
Islam, and that therefore the author's opinion was in fact incorrect,
there being no express text in the Qur'an for the death penalty for
apostasy.

On the contrary each of the two ideas, one underlying the six brief
verses of Surat-ul-Kafiroon and the other the *La lkrah* verse of the
second Sura, has merely to be understood, to reject as erroneous the
view propounded in the 'Ash-Shahab'. Each of the verses in
Surat-ul-Kafiroon, which contains thirty words and no verse of which
exceeds six words, brings out a fundamental trait in man engrained in
him since his creation; while the *La lkrah* verse, the relevant portion
of which contains only nine words, states the rule of responsibility of
the mind with a precision that cannot be surpassed.

Both of these texts, which are an early part of the Revelation, are,
individually and collectively, the foundation of that principle which
human society, after centuries of conflict, hatred, and bloodshed, has
adopted in defining one of the most important fundamental rights of man.
But our doctors would never dissociate chauvinism from Islam.

  
9) Propagation of other religions

 a.) Closely allied to the punishment for apostasy is the right
of non-Muslims publicly to preach their religion. The principle which
punishes an apostate with death must be applicable to public preaching
of *kufr*, and it is admitted by Maulana Abul Hasanat, Ghazi
Siraj-ud-Din Munir, and Master Taj-ud-Din Ansari, though the last
subordinates his opinion to the opinion of the *ulama*, that any faith
other than Islam will not be permitted publicly to be preached in the
State. And Maulana Abul Ala Maudoodi, as will appear from his pamphlet
'Punishment in Islam for an apostate', has the same views on the
subject.

Ghazi Siraj-ud-Din Munir, when questioned on this point, replied: --

> "Q.-- What will you do with them (Ahmadis) if you were the head of the
> Pakistan State?  
> A.-- I would tolerate them as human beings but will not allow them the
> right to preach their religion."

  
 b.) The prohibition against public preaching of any non-Muslim
religion must logically follow from the proposition that apostasy will
be punished with death, and that any attack on, or danger to, Islam will
be treated as treason  
and punished in the same way as apostasy.  


On to: \*[10) Jihad](1010jihad.html)\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[Munir Report index](index.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
