+++
title = "Appendices"

+++
*This page intentionally left blank *

## Own-Children Method
A PPE N D I X  O N E

The Own-Children Method and 

Its Mortality Assumptions

T H E O P E R AT I O N O F T H E O W N - C H I L D R E N M E T H O D

Many of the demographic claims in this book derive from a dataset generated by applying the Own-Children Method of Fertility Estimation \(OCM\) to a sample of about 3,300 population registers. In the words of a classic introduction to the OCM, it is “a reverse-survival technique for estimating age-specifi c fertility rates for the years previous to a census or household survey.”1 Th

e OCM matches children with their mothers, then reverse-survives both groups for typically ten to fi ft een years prior to the survey and computes age-specifi c fertility rates for each year in that time span \(the “estimation period”\). 

Th

e basic rationale of the OCM is that the present structure of each household \(that is, the age distribution of its members and their kinship ties\) is the result of past fertility, mortality, and migration. When the present population structure is known and past mortality and migration can be estimated with confi dence, it is therefore possible to reconstruct past fertility. In practice, the OCM is mostly applied to populations in which migration can be assumed to be insignifi cant. 

Th

e OCM requires two types of data: fi rst, a snapshot of a population that specifi es individual ages and kinship relations within the household; and second, information on the age-specifi c mortality risks of that population in the years leading up to the snapshot. To permit accurate estimates, the data in addition has to meet the following criteria: 1. Individual ages are recorded with precision. 

2. 

Th

e record specifi es the relationships within the household in a way that permits the matching of children with their mothers. 

3. Mothers and children typically reside in the same household, so that a high proportion of children can be assigned to their mothers. 

4. 

Th

ere is no systematic underrecording of children or adults. 

5. 

Age-specifi c mortality rates can be estimated with confi dence for each year in the estimation period. 

245

 

 

246 APPENDIX 1

6. Either there is little migration during the estimation period or the migrants and nonmigrants have similar age-specifi c fertility rates. 

Tokugawa Japan has left us a wealth of materials that generally fulfi ll these conditions, with some qualifi cations that Appendix 2 discusses. 

In the specifi c case of the Ten Provinces dataset, I implemented the OCM in the following steps:

1. I assigned children to their mothers. 

2. Where children could not be assigned to their mothers, I assumed that those unknown mothers had the same age distribution as known mothers of children of the same age. 

3. I determined the mortality level for each village and each year of the estimation period, and then chose an appropriate set of age-specifi c mortality rates. 

4. I adjusted these age-specifi c mortality rates for the diff erent lengths of normal and leap years \( *urūdoshi*\) with a thirteenth intercalary month.2 I then reverse-survived the population to the last day of the previous calendar year so as to take account of the diff erent months in which each register was compiled. Finally, I reverse-survived the population an additional fi ft een years into the past. Each individual thus acquired a mortality adjustment factor that represented both the individual and a fractional shadow population of recently dead individuals with the same characteristics. For example, an individual who had an 80 percent chance of survival between the year of the estimation and the year of the observation would have a mortality adjustment factor of 1/0.8, i.e. 1.25, in the year of the estimation. 

5. For most population registers, the estimation period had to be shortened to eliminate overlaps between subsequent registers from the same village, and also to avoid the following two sources of inaccuracy. 



A. When girls and boys begin to leave their native households, they can no longer be assigned to their mothers. I set the limits of the reverse-survival either at fi ft een years or at a lower number equal to the age at which 10 percent of children in a given district and decade had married or left their native household to work for another.3 Since intervals between registers were oft en much shorter, in practice only 24 percent of person-years in the Ten Provinces dataset lie more than ten years in the reconstructed past. 

B. 



Th

e delayed recording of infants in Edo-period population registers means that the OCM would underestimate fertility rates for the fi rst year, or in some cases the fi rst several years, before the observation. Where several registers from the same village or registers from neighboring village under the same recording regime were available, I used them to deduce the implicit rules that governed when a child would fi rst be registered. In the rare cases where this was not possible, I deduced the rules internally from each population register; specifi cally, I omitted the most recent years of the reconstruction up to the year in which the total fertility rate \(TFR\) last exceeded a quarter of the average for the entire estimation period. 

6. I now tabulated the number of children born in each year by the age of their mother, and multiplied that number by their mortality adjustment factor. I also tabulated the number of women by their ages, and multiplied that number with the appropriate mortality adjustment factor for each age. 

 

 

The Own-Children Method 247

7. To avoid the distortions that the sometimes small sample sizes of one-year age-groups would have introduced, I grouped women into fi ve-year age groups, and categorized children by the fi ve-year age groups of their mothers. 

8. I calculated age-specifi c fertility rates by dividing the adjusted number of children born to mothers of a given age group by the adjusted number of women in that age group. 

Th

e TFR is the sum of these fractions. Th

is fi gure, too, was adjusted for the diff erent 

length of twelve-month and thirteen-month years. 

T H E D E T E R M I NA N T S O F M O RTA L I T Y

Most previous applications of the OCM derive their mortality assumptions from model life tables and assume that the level of mortality is constant across the years they cover. 

Th

ere are even programs that automate this process, such as EASWESPOP \(East-West Center\) and APPLAUSI \(Marco Breschi and Gustavo De Santis\). Th is book diff ers from most 

applications of the OCM in that it reconstructs fertility for hundreds of overlapping periods and across regions with large variations in the timing and severity of mortality crises. Th

roughout the Edo period, regional diff erentials in mortality were large.4 Between the 1690s and 1780s, the district of Tsugaru suff ered no fewer than six famines in which the annual number of deaths exceeded three times those of a normal year. Only a little farther to the south, but sheltered from the cold summer rains that caused the crop failures of Hirosaki, the district of Mogami only suff ered one mortality crisis of comparable magnitude over the same century.5 To do justice to this history, the application of the OCM to the Ten Provinces dataset has therefore required a more determined eff ort to arrive at the most realistic mortality assumptions possible. 

An individual’s risk of dying in a given year depends on a complex array of factors, most of which elude easy reconstruction. Even factors that are relatively straightforward to measure and seem intuitively connected to mortality do not necessarily have strong and consistent eff ects. For example, although household landholdings, the role within the household, and sibling confi guration all played a role in determining individual probabilities of dying in Tokugawa Japan, these eff ects were generally small and occasionally counterintuitive.6

In contrast, the preceding and the following birth interval are major determinants of infant and child mortality risks in so many populations that there is little reason to doubt that birth interval eff ects were strong in Tokugawa Japan as well.7 Aft er developing a version of the OCM that takes into account birth intervals, however, I discovered that short *recorded* birth intervals were so rare in the Ten Provinces dataset that the eff ect of this refi nement on estimated fertility rates was almost invisible. In the spirit of keeping the methodology as transparent and free of complications as possible, the results cited in this book derive from the simpler version of the OCM that does not diff erentiate between birth intervals. 

Th

e mortality assumptions used in this project take into account just four factors: age, sex, year, and region. Th

e eff ects of age and sex on mortality are expressed in a series of life tables, with one life table for each level of mortality. Th e mortality level, in turn—a measure 

of the absence or severity of mortality crises in any given year—is derived from the year and region of each individual observation. 

 

 

248 APPENDIX 1

M O RTA L I T Y L E V E L S B Y Y E A R A N D R E G I O N

Th

e regions for which I established diff erent mortality levels had to be large enough to contain a suffi

cient sample size of deaths, but small enough to be relevant to the experience of each village. I delineated these regions based on district boundaries, geography \(mountain basins, watersheds, and type of terrain: mountains, hills, and plains\), and, in an eff ort to take into account the diff erent timing of inoculation eff orts and the varying eff ectiveness of famine relief policy, the borders of domains. 

For each year and region, I defi ned a mortality level based on three diff erent types of sources: \(1\) population registers with continuous records \(21,791 deaths in 29 villages\); \(2\) other documents from the population registration system that record vital events, such as *zōgenchō* \(“ledgers of increase and decrease”; 2,547 deaths in 20 villages\); and \(3\) necrologies \( *kakochō*\) that Buddhist temples maintained to schedule the rites for their deceased parishioners \(446,350 deaths in 199 temple parishes\).8

Each of these sources has its own strengths and weaknesses. Continuous population registers state the population at risk as well as the number of deaths, but are only available in limited numbers. Th

e strength of the kakochō * * is their sample size and territorial coverage. 

Furthermore, kakochō * * survive for an uninterrupted century or more at a large proportion of temples, and reach further back in time than the continuous population registers available for his study. Kakochō * * therefore do not raise the same order of doubts about their representative nature as the much rarer villages with a century or more of perfectly preserved population registers. Nonetheless, kakochō have one serious drawback for our purposes: they state only deaths rather than the population at risk, which must therefore be estimated by other means.9

Since enrollment as a parishioner of a temple was usually hereditary and terminated only by marriage, permanent migration, or death, the median number of deaths over a long time period is a good basis for estimating the population at risk. I use the median number of deaths over fi ft een years rather than the average, since the median minimizes the eff ect of exceptional mortality crises on the estimate of how many deaths occurred in a “normal” mortality year. As a result, regions with a higher frequency of mortality crisis are—realistically—

estimated to have higher average death rates. With both population registers and necrologies, I adjusted annual mortality fi gures for the diff erent lengths of normal and leap years. 

For years and regions in which no such sources were available in suffi cient numbers, 

I estimated the mortality level by averaging the fi gures from neighboring regions with similar ecological and policy characteristics. Since many kakochō did not comprehensively record deaths of parishioners before 1690, the mid–seventeenth century poses peculiar challenges.10 For the decades before 1690, I used kakochō * * to construct a fi rst estimate of baseline rates, but then amended these based on qualitative records of crop failures, fl oods, famines, and epidemics.11

L I F E TA B L E S

Applications of the OCM typically use one of the “standard life tables” developed by Ansley Coale and Paul Demeny based on modern European census data. To ensure maximum accuracy in the estimation of Eastern Japan’s fertility levels, I constructed life tables based  

 

The Own-Children Method 249

on the deaths recorded in population registers in Eastern Japan. Earlier village studies have published a good deal of such data, and I added to them age-specifi c deaths recorded in some of the population registers of the Ten Provinces dataset. 

It is ironic that this project, which historicizes fertility, has to assume certain continuities in mortality patterns. It is quite possible that the age-specifi c pattern of mortality for any given mortality level was diff erent in 1700 than in 1800. Like fertility, mortality is infl uenced by the social, cultural, and medical context of its population at risk. Who gets to eat fi rst when there is too little food? What is the quality of obstetrics compared to the care of smallpox patients or the cures of diarrhea?12

In addition, the same elevated level of mortality may be distributed diff erently across diff erent age groups in a famine year than during an equally deadly measles outbreak. 

Unfortunately, it has not been possible to diff erentiate between mortality crises by their underlying cause. While we have some knowledge about the space-time coordinates of epidemic disease in Japan, the spatial coordinates are oft en based on a great deal of interpolation; for example, if a measles epidemic raged at the same time in Hida, in Central Japan, and in Sendai, in the Northeast, it is commonly inferred that all of Eastern Honshu was aff ected. More detailed studies have revealed a great deal of complexity. In 1860s Sendai domain, for example, villages with dozens of cholera victims are only miles from villages seemingly untouched.13 Smallpox seems to have circulated continuously through Tokugawa Japan, but in spatial patterns whose detailed understanding requires much more analysis.14 

Even in years of known epidemics, not all excess deaths in a particular location need to have been the direct result of that prominently noted disease. In sum, although there is some excellent research on mortality conditions in the Edo period, it does not yet combine temporal and spatial specifi city with a breadth of coverage that can create precise knowledge about distinct age-specifi c patterns of mortality in diff erent periods and regions. 

Many village studies include mortality analyses by period, but it is unclear whether the diff erent age-specifi c patterns observed in 1750–1800 and in 1800–1850, say, are the result of a diff erent incidence of diff erent types of mortality crises or a change in the underlying age pattern of mortality. Th

is is true for Hayami Akira’s well-known fi nding that child mortality in his study village of Yokouchi in Shinano declined from the late seventeenth to the late eighteenth century.15 In the meantime, a consistent picture about the trend in mortality patterns and levels in the Edo period has yet to emerge. Hayami confi rmed a declining trend in child mortality in Kando Shinden in Owari between the early eighteenth and mid–nineteenth centuries, but failed to do so in Nishijō in Mino between 1773 and 1864.16 In Eastern Japan, Takahashi Miyuki discovered rising rates of infant mortality in Kōriyama Kamimachi, which may however simply have been the result of more inclusive recordkeeping.17

Faced with the incomplete state of our knowledge, I have designated three diff erent levels of mortality and developed a life table for each. I deduced age-specifi c probabilities of dying from twenty-eight villages and towns in Eastern Japan, grouping their years into three mortality levels: high crisis mortality \(crude death rates \[CDRs\] between 60 and 100 per thousand, with an average of 95\), moderate crisis mortality \(with an average CDR of 43, ranging from 40 and 60 per thousand for villages with more than 200 inhabitants, and, to avoid misreading random fl uctuation as mortality crises, between 50 and 60 per thousand for villages with less 200 inhabitants\), and normal mortality \(averaging 23 per thousand\).18

 

 

250 APPENDIX 1

According to these life tables, when CDRs rise over 40 per thousand, probabilities of dying initially increase by a greater factor for infants and old people than for women of reproductive age. When the CDR exceeds 60, by contrast, probabilities of dying rise more rapidly for adults, especially those in their forties and fi ft ies.19 Space constraints prevent me from printing the life table here, but the following fi gures may give a sense of the diff erences between the diff erent levels of mortality.20 According to the life table for normal years, boys spared from infanticide had a life expectancy of 39 years. For similarly fortunate girls, life expectancy at birth was 37 years. In the life tables for years of moderate crisis mortality, the number plummets to 18 years for both sexes; and for years of high crisis mortality, it is reduced to just 9 and 15, respectively. Life expectancy at the beginning of an individual’s fi ft eenth calendar year \(fi ft een *sai*\) are as follows: an additional 45 and 42 years at normal mortality \(that is, an average age at death of 60 and 57, respectively, by the Japanese count\), 34 and 35 years at continuous moderate crisis mortality, and 22 and 23 years at \(mercifully hypothetical\) continuous high crisis mortality. According to my life tables, in short, moderate crisis mortality was concentrated among the very young, while high crisis mortality aff ected all age groups. 

Th

is is consistent with what we know about the nature of diff erent mortality crises in Edo-period Eastern Japan. Most smaller mortality spikes occurred in years of recorded outbreaks of infectious disease, with measles the most devastating and smallpox the most frequent. Both measles and smallpox confer immunity on their survivors. Smallpox in particular occurred frequently enough to aff ect mainly children, so that infants and toddlers accounted for most of the excess deaths in such years.21 Th e worst mortality crises \(with 

CDRs above 60 per thousand\), however, also and necessarily involved heightened levels of adult mortality. Infants typically make up less than 3 percent of a population, so that even if all infants die in a year while other age groups experience normal mortality levels, the CDR 

would not rise far above 50 per thousand. Th

e worst mortality crises in the Edo period were 

caused by successive crop failures that left even adults without sustenance and with few defenses against disease outbreaks. 

Once an individual record reaches a year in which the CDR exceeds 60, I terminated the reverse-survival at the beginning of that year. While the underlying sample size for such rates is reasonably large, it is likely that diff erent mortality crises of this magnitude, which include famines and cholera outbreaks, had diff erent age-patterns. For the sake of maximizing the accuracy of the fertility reconstruction of the years immediately preceding major mortality crises, I have not continued the back-projection across such blighted years, instead making, for example, 1784 the earliest year reconstructed from a register compiled in 1787, which ordinarily could have been back-projected all the way to about 1775. 

Since population registers were compiled in diff erent calendar months, it has been necessary to initially back-project the population month by month. For adults, this presented few diffi

culties. Small diff erences in age make only a minute diff erence to adult probabilities of dying over a given month. During the fi rst three years of life, however, every month in age greatly changes the monthly probabilities of dying. 

Across cultures that breastfeed their children, the age structure of infant deaths aft er the fi rst month of life falls into a narrow range. In breastfeeding populations such as Tokugawa Japan, the following patterns of infant and child mortality are generally observed.22 Th e cumulative number of deaths is a logarithmic function of the age in days.23 At infant mortality rates of above 150 per thousand, 30 percent of deaths within the fi rst year of life occur within  

 

The Own-Children Method 251

7

6

Male life expectancy at birth \(e0\):

28 years at normal mortality

9 years at moderate crisis mortality

5

39 years / 

18 years

n

4

omaw

n per 

49 years / 

29 years

3

childre

2

1

0

1650

1700

1750

1800

1850

TF

TF R 

R b based 

ased o on the 

n th

be

e bes st

t est

esti im

ma a

t t

e e

f f

o o

r r qx

qx, t, the pro

he prob bability

ability ofof dy

dyi ing at

ng at each 

each age. 

age. 

TF

TF R 

R b b

a a

s sed on

ed on tw

tw o 

o t t

h h

ir irds

d of o

t f the b

he bes e

t st 

es es

ti ti

m m

at a

e tfe

o f

r o

qr 

x. qx. 

TF

TF R 

R b b

a a

s sed on

ed on 1. 

1. 5 t

5 th im

e es 

bes th

t e be

esti s

m t

a es

te ftiom

r a

q tx.e for qx. 

figure a1. Th

e sensitivity of the Own-Children Method to diff erent mortality assumptions, 1650–1872 \(explained on p. 252\). \(sources: Tōgoku dataset and mortality assumptions in this appendix.\)

the fi rst month, and 50 percent within the fi rst three months;24 71 percent of deaths in the fi rst two years of life occur in the fi rst year; and 67 percent of deaths between the second and third years occur in the second year. Based on these regularities, I reconstructed the month-by-month mortality pattern for infants and children in a way that corrects for the underregistration of unintended infant deaths. 

 

 

252 APPENDIX 1

Two studies of infant mortality based on Edo-period population registers diff er from these regularities for the fi rst year of life, but show the expected ratio of deaths in the second year to deaths in the third year.25 Th

is supports the general impression that even 

where population registration was supposedly continuous, births and infant deaths were underreported during the fi rst months of life. 

Pregnancy surveillance systems were apparently much more successful at recording births comprehensively. In documents from the surveillance system of Ichinoseki domain, analyzed by Takagi Masao and Mukaida Noriko, 41 percent of infant deaths occurred during the fi rst month of life.26 Kitō Hiroshi’s study of infant mortality based on similar records from Mito found that 34 percent of infant deaths occurred in the fi rst month, and 75 percent in the fi rst three months.27 Due to the small sample size of both the Ichinoseki and Mito data, their divergence from the expected distribution of deaths is not statistically signifi -

cant. Th

at under both systems more newborn infants died than the regularities from other populations would lead us to expect, however, may be the result of infanticides masked as natural deaths.28

T H E L OW S E N S I T I V I T Y O F T H E OW N - C H I L D R E N 

M E T H O D T O M O RTA L I T Y A S SU M P T I O N S

Th

e OCM is not particularly sensitive to its mortality assumptions.29 Marco Breschi and Gustavo De Santis have demonstrated that when Coale-Demeny or Brass model life tables are used, the eff ect of mistaken assumptions about infant mortality or life expectancy on estimated fertility is smaller in percentage terms than the mistake in the assumption.30 In Japan, Satomi Kurosu’s work on a village near Edo has confi rmed that OCM results have a low sensitivity to changes in mortality assumptions.31 Figure A1 shows the eff ects of widely divergent mortality assumptions on the OCM results for the Tōgoku dataset. Male life expectancies at birth \(assuming a life without mortality crises\) were 39 years at the best estimate, 49 years at two-thirds the best estimate, and only 28 years at one and a half times the best estimate. For moderate crisis years, the life expectancies were 18 years, 29 years, and 9 years, respectively. Th

ese curves can therefore accommodate very large errors in the mortality assumptions. 

 

 

## Sampling Biases
A PPE N D I X  T WO

Sampling Biases, Sources of Error, 

and the Characteristics of the 

Ten Provinces Dataset

T H E C O N T E N T A N D C HA R AC T E R I S T I C S O F T H E P O P U L AT I O N R E G I S T E R S

Th

e scale and duration of Tokugawa Japan’s population registration system are exceptional.1 In very few other parts of the world were census-type documents compiled according to rules that changed as little over more than two centuries. Nevertheless, compilation principles were not uniform over time and varied between diff erent jurisdictions. In order to understand what exactly the demographic data of this study represent, it is useful to consider how these diff erences aff ected the measures computed from them. 

*Status Groups*

Th

e population of the Ten Provinces dataset consists overwhelmingly of commoners. Warriors were generally excluded from the population registers of villages and commoner town wards.2 In many areas, outcastes had their own population registers, and certain trades might be excluded as well.3 Even where registers list outcastes, some publication projects of primary sources have omitted them to protect the privacy of their descendants.4 However, the number of outcastes in Eastern Japan was very small compared to other regions, accounting for less than 1 percent of the population in 1870.5

*Kinship Terms*

A variety of kinship terms appears in the registers. A second son might be recorded as *segare* in one village, but as *danshi, jinan, ko, kodomo, * or *musuko* in another. In addition, the perspective of the kinship terms varies. Some registers record kinship relative to the household head; others use the individual heads of nuclear families within the household as their reference point; still others take the perspective of the oldest child in every generation. A boy who appears as a grandson according to the fi rst approach would be recorded as a son of a son of the household head in the second, and might be a younger brother in the third. Similarly, a woman whom the fi rst formula calls *yome *\(daughter-in-law\) turns into a “wife” where the second is used.6

253

 

 

254 APPENDIX 2

For the purposes of calculating fertility rates and sex ratios at birth, this variability poses minimal problems, since children can usually be assigned to their mothers without diffi culty. Th

ere are two types of circumstances in which parentage is not clearly stated. A few registers list children in order of age even in households with several married couples of the same generation, so that parentage is not always easy to establish with certainty. In rare cases, the registers omit the kinship terms for some individuals; usually, it is possible to infer these based on ages and names. I have only done so conservatively, and excluded registers from my sample whenever this omission aff ected more than a few individuals. 

A greater problem for assigning parentage with complete confi dence is that divorce and remarriage were frequent in Edo-period Eastern Japan, and many registers do not distinguish between stepmothers and mothers. As long as the average age diff erence between husband and wife is no diff erent for second and third marriages than for fi rst unions, this presents no problem in large samples other than obscuring the traces of some of the practices discussed in Chapter 6. Unfortunately, it appears that the age diff erence between husband and wife tended to widen with remarriage. As a result, my estimated age-specifi c fertility curves are shift ed toward younger ages, if only by a small fraction. 

Th

is study assumes that non-own children follow the same age distribution as own children. Since a death of a parent was oft en the reason for non-own status, and since probabilities of dying rise at older adult ages, this is not quite accurate, but the resulting error is again minor. 

*Continuous versus Annual Recording*

Rules for the recording of events between the compilation of two registers were not uniform. In Nihonmatsu, registers were written up anew every year, but in the interval, they were continuously updated with events such as births, deaths, marriages, and adoptions. 

In Mito, a single register was sometimes used for as long as twenty-eight years, with events recorded continuously.7 More common, however, were registers that were not updated but compiled anew once every year, usually in the spring. For the conventional method of deriving demographic data from population registers—by counting and tabulating people and events—this variation presents a signifi cant problem. Ceteris paribus, the greater the frequency of recording, the fewer infants with very short lives fall through the cracks, and thus the higher both recorded fertility and recorded infant mortality. Th e Own-Children 

Method \(OCM\) skirts this problem, since it uses a record of age structure and kinship to reconstruct probabilities of events further in the past. Once the reverse survival has reached one year into the past, the frequency of recording within that single year loses its infl uence on the demographic estimates. In this study, the OCM has therefore been applied even to villages for which continuous data exists. 

*Minimum Age at First Recording*

Conventional studies of population registers have been plagued by the delayed recording of births. While certain domains required the recording of children only over the age of fi ve \(Kaga\), seven \(Satsuma\), or eight \(Wakayama\), in the areas covered by this study, infants were generally recorded the fi rst time a register was compiled during their extrauterine lives.8 In most cases, this means that children initially appeared in the registers during their fi rst spring. In a number of villages, the age at fi rst recording was not uniform, so  

 

the Ten Provinces Dataset 255

that some children appeared on the list in their fi rst spring and others only in their third.9 

Where recording was continuous, children might be entered even earlier. However, even in continuing recording regimes that stated the month of the birth, that note may have been made retrospectively, so there may still have been a long interval between birth and recording.10

Over time, there seems to have been a trend toward a more prompt recording of newborns in Eastern Japan, particularly aft er the introduction of pregnancy surveillance. For example, in Kōriyama, the commercial center of the middling Northeastern domain of Nihonmatsu, infant deaths begin to appear in plausible numbers only aft er 1805 amid a heightened concern for infant life and demographic recovery.11 For a project that takes fertility as an indicator for ideational change, this trend is particularly problematic, since the changing ideas about the humanity and political meaning of infants directly aff ected their recording. Luckily, the OCM is particularly suited to overcoming this problem, since it can be exclusively applied to children who at the point of observation had reached an age at which all children appeared in the registers. 

*Accuracy of Ages*

If the ages of children are misreported, the validity of OCM fertility estimates is gravely undermined.12 Age misreporting is common in societies in which a person’s precise age is of little concern and age heaping near round numbers is frequent. Fortunately, age misreporting appears to be rare in the population registers used in this book. Th e people of Edo 

Japan invested their exact age and birth zodiac with great signifi cance, but even if they had been indiff erent to this number, the population registers were designed to keep track of an individual from his fi rst or second year all the way to his last. Th e system itself therefore 

ensured that ages were generally accurate.13 Th

is has long been demonstrated by scholars 

who have analyzed long runs of consecutive registers, who have found that ages are generally consistent between diff erent documents. 

One problem peculiar to this project, however, is that some ages are missing due to worm-eaten registers or negligent recording. In cases in which the context suggests that the missing age signifi ed the permanent absence of a person, I omitted the individual from the dataset. For ages missing for other reasons, such as physical damage to the page, I inferred the ages from subsequent or earlier registers of the same village. Where this was impossible, I estimated an age based on that of a marriage partner or siblings. Overall, only 0.08 percent of the observations have ages reconstructed in this fashion.14

*Defi nitions of Marriage*

Th

ere was no unifi ed defi nition of marriage in the Edo period. Although the arrival of a bride or a groom was oft en celebrated—sometimes to the dismay of administrators who saw this as reckless extravagance—there was no obligatory ritual to unambiguously mark the inception of marriage. Th

e Shinto wedding rite was only invented for Crown Prince Yoshihito’s marriage ceremony in 1900.15 Before 1900, a bride and her in-laws would consider her fi rst months or even years in the new household as a trial period, and little stigma attached to concluding that the young woman and the household were not a good match.16 

While in most areas daughters-in-law were recorded even during such trial periods, some registers, for example those of Mito, noted the arrival of brides only once the woman had  

 

256 APPENDIX 2

permanently settled into the household. As a result, grandchildren sometimes appear on the record before their mother does.17

Th

e fi rst recording of a young woman as a daughter-in-law constituted a transfer of her registration from her native home to her new household. Delayed recording as a wife in one household would therefore have extended her offi

cial presence as a daughter in another. 

Th

e eff ect on fertility calculations should therefore largely balance out in large populations. 

Th

e only eff ect would be a slight shift of the age schedule of fertility toward older ages, since the fi rst child of a daughter-in-law has a higher probability of being a “non-own” child, that is, a child whose mother’s age is not known from the register. As with the delayed reporting of births, the OCM minimizes this problem, since it includes births several years before the creation of the record, by which time the child’s mother had her registration transferred to the new household. 

*Physical Presence and Migration*

Th

e knottiest problem posed by the variation of compilation regimes is the treatment of physical presence. Hayami Akira distinguishes between de jure and de facto * * compilation, depending on whether people temporarily absent were noted as employed in another village or town or simply recorded as legal residents of their home village alongside their physically present kin.18 Hayami’s binary taxonomy is derived from a distinction in the layout of registers. De jure registers list all legal residents of a village, regardless of their geographic location at the time of recording. De facto registers either list current residents only or have a separate record of legal residents temporarily absent, listing them either aft er each household or at the end of the register. In the Ten Provinces, four distinct principles seem to have governed which community members would be mentioned in the register: de jure; de jure but listing in a separate section village members whose registration had been transferred elsewhere, such as daughters, sisters, or aunts who left the household upon marriage; de facto; and de facto with a list of absent villagers appended.19 Th e operation of the 

third of these principles \(de facto without a list of absentees\) is evident when a comparison of consecutive registers from the same village uncovers for example a husband who was not mentioned in one year owing to physical absence, other than by conferring the title of 

“wife” onto his consort, and reappears in the next. 

Th

ere was a similar variation in recording practices for maids and servants who worked in one village while maintaining their primary registration elsewhere. Some registers are meticulous in stating the terms of the contract as well as the village and household of origin of each servant. Others list them with no additional information. So many villages have no record of any servants or maids as to suggest that they were omitted from registers on principle, although it is also possible that these villages really employed no hired help with formal contracts. 

Th

e treatment of labor migrants poses several challenges. Th e fi rst of these is the danger 

of counting the same individual—oft en a woman in her childbearing years—twice. Th is 

would infl ate the denominators in the calculation of fertility rates, therefore leading to misleadingly low values. Th

e dual recording of servants occurs within single villages, where they were sometimes listed with both their native family and the family of their employer. 

For example, in the 1680 register of Murai in Kōzuke, Ushisuke, a fourteen-year-old boy, appears both as the son of his father, the landless tenant of Jin’emon, and as a servant in  

 

the Ten Provinces Dataset 257

Jin’emon’s own household, where he worked as an indentured servant. Twenty-nine other servants are recorded twice in this village of fi ft y households. For the same reason, the 1695 

register for Tomioka in Kōzuke has a double record for fully 128 of its 259 people.20 Given the size and density of the Ten Provinces dataset, a number of individuals who worked outside their native village also appear twice in the dataset. 

I have addressed this problem by counting maids and servants wherever they maintained their primary registration. Th

is means that I typically count them as members of 

their native households and, for the purposes of fertility calculations, omit them from the households that employed them. For large parts of the dataset, this system works smoothly. 

In most parts of Eastern Japan, servants who had their registration transferred to their employer are recorded with terms that denote a permanent relationship of dependence, such as *fudai, * so that they can clearly be distinguished from servants who still maintained their primary registration with their native household. Vexingly, however, some recording regimes do not distinguish the two types of servants. In Sendai, most registers use the term *genin *\(servant\) or *gejo *\(maid\) to cover both categories. Some genin * * in Sendai’s registers were small children or wizened old men, suggesting that they were really fudai.21 Other genin, however, are also recorded in their native households in the same village, with a note explaining their indenture contract.22 While it is possible to clarify the status of such servants in individual cases, in many others the ambiguity remains. I have therefore created the category of “servants with ambiguous status” and calculated the fertility measures with and without them. While the fi gures reported in this book include ambiguous servants, their numbers are such a small part of the dataset that their inclusion or omission makes almost no diff erence to the fertility estimates even for the districts of Sendai domain, let alone those in Eastern Japan overall. 

Servants of any kind were relatively few in Eastern Japan overall, especially aft er the seventeenth century, and maids were even rarer. Even in the 11 percent of sample villages that recorded at least one person as working outside the village, fewer than 3 percent of women of childbearing age were registered as absent. While servants and their treatment in the OCM cost me many sleepless nights, therefore, their infl uence on overall fertility rates would have been slight even without the precautions explained above. 

*Land*

All *ninzū aratamechō *\(the headcount registers of Sendai and Ichinoseki\), most *ninbetsu* *aratamechō *\(“registers counting person by person” in domains such as Mito and Nihonmatsu\), and many *shūmon aratamechō *\(registers of religious scrutiny\) * * record the landholdings of the household, sometimes diff erentiated by location, type of soil, and leasing status. Th e kinds of 

land included varied regionally, as did the extent of underreporting in the categories of land formally reportable. Landholdings in neighboring villages were listed under some recording regimes, such as Sendai’s, but not under others, for example shogunal lands. Although the population registers were not primarily tax documents, they would not usually record “hidden” fi elds \( *onden*\), which were kept secret from the authorities. Th e extent of this shadow 

agriculture was diff erent in diff erent localities. Since recorded landholdings were a measure of how the tax burden of a village was divided among its members, they were in a sense assets and liabilities at the same time. Th

is was particularly serious when individuals or entire villages found that they had more land than they could actually till. 

 

 

258 APPENDIX 2

Another complication in translating recorded property into economic entitlements is that landholding was measured in the potential grain output of fi elds. Th is approach tended 

to slight cash crops that grew on dry fi elds and ignored nonagricultural activities altogether. 

A household recorded as landless could in individual cases be a wealthy pawnbroker or sericulturalist, a soy sauce brewer or logging entrepreneur. In his appraisal of the economic situation of the Kantō in the early nineteenth century, David Howell cites an 1847 report of a village in Kazusa, where 128 out of 325 households were engaged in commercial activities in addition to agriculture. Between them, the 128 households ran eight saloons, two saké wholesalers, four bathhouses, three barbershops, two inns, twenty-eight grain dealerships, twenty-two dry-goods shops, six confectionery stores, and two apothecaries.23 Similar examples abound in offi

cial “surveys of trade and livelihoods.” 

Despite these diffi

culties, landholdings did correlate with the wealth of villagers in a very general sense. Holdings of hidden fi elds would generally correlate with the size of fi elds offi

cially tilled. Even for wealthy brewers and merchants, investment in fi elds was still an attractive way of holding assets; the man recorded as a *mizunomi *\(“water-drinker,” or landless peasant\), who only quaff ed his water fl avored with the choicest teas fi nanced from the proceeds of his trading empire, remained a rarity in his status group.24 As a result, it is still meaningful to calculate diff erential fertility rates according to recorded landholding, as long as this is done with an awareness that real estate is a very imperfect measure of prosperity. 

While the Own-Children Method is adept at overcoming many of the most serious problems posed by the nature and variation of population registers, it is at a disadvantage in determining economic status. Landholdings changed over time, but while past births and deaths can be estimated from an array of fi nely tuned data inputs, present landholdings must simply be extrapolated into the past. Over a sizeable population, this eff ect should largely balance out, but in a small way it further attenuates the link between household landholdings and economic status. 

S A M P L I N G B IA S E S

Th

ree areas of bias make the Ten Provinces Dataset less than perfectly representative of the commoner society of eastern and northern Honshu: compilation, preservation, and public access. Villages whose registers were compiled with great frequency are overrepresented in the sample, while villages whose headmen set down no population registers remain invisible. Th

is obvious fact would not be problematic if the reasons why some villages compiled registers more frequently than others were uncorrelated with the factors that infl uence the phenomena I investigate in this book—such as fertility levels, household structures, and attitudes to population growth. Unfortunately, a heightened demographic consciousness, with its obvious connections to fertility levels, may have played a role in prompting some domains to demand meticulous compilation. 

Well over one million registers were compiled in the Ten Provinces during the Tokugawa period. Th

e continued predominance of private ownership makes it diffi cult to estimate 

how many of these survive, but there is no doubt that they are like drift wood from a forest on a distant shore. Factors that favored preservation were not equally present in all villages, and may again have correlated with some of the phenomena this study investigates. While  

 

the Ten Provinces Dataset 259

table a1 Population register data used in this book, by source Observations 

Person-years reconstructed



\(includes servants on 

\(excludes servants on



temporary contracts\) 

temporary contracts\)

Type of document 

No. 

% 

No. 

%

Archival documents 

144,674 

18.5 

870,968 

15.7

Published documents 

528,339 

67.7 

4,443,138 

80.2

Hayami Akira’s Basic Data Sheets 

59,263 

7.6 

174,996 

3.2

Kawaguchi Hiroshi’s Danjuro 3.0 database 

48,246 

6.2 

51,588 

0.9

total 

780,522 

100.0 

5,540,690 

100.0

some domains, such as Sendai, required headmen to preserve registers in perpetuity, others, such as Morioka, permitted them to be pulped to make recycled paper.25 Much, too, depended on the attitude of headmen. Even in the pages of this book, we have encountered some village notables who leafed through old registers in their possession and discovered that their village had shrunk greatly over the generations; where headmen approached administrative documents with a historical consciousness or a concern with demographic trends, they would be less likely to discard population registers aft er a few years, to use them as scrap paper, or to turn them into fi lling material for paper screens.26 Since the possession of population registers and other administrative documents was a sign of headman status, family pride has worked in favor of preservation.27 However, a single fi re or fl ood could bring to nothing the curatorial eff ort of many generations; villages with relatively few such disasters are therefore probably overrepresented in the sample, especially in comparison with villages that became parts of urban areas, only to be targeted by U.S. fi rebombing during the Pacifi c War. 

Th

ese two types of bias, arising from diff erent rates of compilation and preservation, are less serious with the multivillage approach taken by this book than with conventional longitudinal village studies. Single-village studies have generally only used the registers of villages that are available for long series of years, which owe their survival to generations of devoted recordkeeping and good fortune. However, a third bias, public access, is at least as serious with this multivillage study as with the conventional approach. 

Published documents account for two-thirds of my observations and four-fi ft hs of the 5.5 million person-years reconstructed in this study \(Table A1\). Publication of sources, however, has depended on local history projects and their budgets, which in turn correlate with present-day population densities. If population density is a factor, publication bias should tend to partially off set the component of preservation bias introduced by diff erential rates of loss to fi re, since more remote locations were less likely to burn in peacetime or in war. 

A further complicating factor is editorial policy. While some towns and villages have published every last population register surviving in their jurisdiction, a more typical approach has been to publish a sampling selected based on age \(the older the more impressive\), typicality, and the willingness of owners to have their documents transcribed and published. Some villages and towns have published very few or no documents of any sort, and others have decided that population registers were not fi t for publication. Editorial  

 

260 APPENDIX 2

policy refl ects the prominence of demographic concerns in the narrative of the Edo period; since stable and growing populations make for less interesting copy, this bias favors areas with steeper population declines. However, editorial policy has oft en been infl uenced by renowned local historians who worked on most projects for a large part of an entire prefecture, such as Seya Yoshihiko for the former parts of the Mito domain. Consequently, editorial policy should have been largely constant within a single small region of this study design and thus represent no important distortion, at least as far as the fertility rates by district \(listed in Appendix 4\) are concerned. In addition, the experience of population decline in the eighteenth century is, of course, a part of the history of most areas within Eastern Japan. 

 

 

## Villages
A PPE N D I X  T H RE E

The Villages in the Ten Provinces Dataset

Th

e villages are listed by province and district, with provinces arranged from north to south and districts and villages in alphabetical order. Th

e dates behind the village names indicate 

the range of years reconstructed through the Own-Children Method. Periods for which only a fragment of a register was available are marked with an asterisk. Village names follow Heibonsha Chihō Shiryō Sentā, eds., *Nihon rekishi chimei taikei. *

M U T SU \( T SU G A RU L A N D S \)

*Tsugaru*

Arayamachi 1853–1867; Asamushi 1848–1867; Hyakkoku 1845–1859; Kamata 1798–1812; Kamenokō \*1823–1837; Kanaya 1848–1863; Karatake 1825–1839, 1857–1871; Kichinai 1789–

1803; Mizuki 1835–1855; Nakasado 1853–1867; Nii 1798–1812; Osada 1853–1867; Tanaka 1853–

1867; Watoku 1848–1862; Yoshinoda 1858–1872. 

M U T SU \( NA N B U L A N D S \)

*Hei*

Hakozaki 1845–1859; Hashino 1847–1868; Kasshi 1837–1847, 1857–1871; Otobe 1837–1843; Shimoiwaizumi 1850–1863; Suemae 1856–1870; Toyomane 1729–1754, 1756–1771. 

*Kita*

Kirida 1788–1802; Shimokirida 1847–1861. 

*Kunohe*

Ōkawame 1728–1742. 

261

 

 

262 APPENDIX 3

*Ninohe*

Ishikiriba 1839–1848; Kintaichi 1854–1868; Kozuya 1788–1802; Nagakubo 1805–1819; Shimo-tomai 1841–1855. 

*Sannohe*

Aozukuri 1730–1737; Hatoda 1730–1743; Herai 1768–1782; Ichinosawa 1730–1744; Izumi-shimizu 1730–1744; Kanayamasawa 1731–1745; Nakaichi 1802–1816, 1823–1836; Nakano 1730–1743; Niida 1813–1827; Ōmori 1730–1742; Seki 1848–1855; Shimoda 1784, 1786–1806, 1809–1833, 1843–1857; Takko 1784–1803, 1809–1823; Umenai 1762–1782, 1784–1797. 

*Shiwa*

Sahinai 1812–1825. 

M U T SU \( S E N DA I A N D I C H I N O S E K I D O M A I N S \) *Esashi*

Asai 1742–1756; Kamikuchinai 1816–1831; Kodashirogawa 1702–1716; Koike 1829–1844; Kurasawa 1856–1870; Kuroishi 1744–1758; Mizuoshi 1829–1844; Mochida 1667–1681, 1784–

1795; Tsugimaru \*1660–1674; Tsunokake \*1660–1674; Yokoze \*1852–1866. 

*Igu*

Hanashima 1753–1767; Kimigaya 1809–1823; Takakura 1715–1729. 

*Isawa*

Kamikomorogawa Kitamata 1756–1770, 1836–1850, 1853–1867; Kamikomorogawa Minamimata 1721–1735, 1803–1817, 1836–1863; Shimokomorogawa 1821–1835, 1842–1865; Shimowakayanagi \*1843–1862. 

*Iwai*

Aikawa 1784–1786; Ebishima 1662–1676; Hamayokozawa 1695–1709; Higashinagai 1852–1866; Hikata 1701–1715; Itsukushi 1819–1834; Kamikurosawa 1808–1822; Kamiokutama 1735–1757, 1842–1865; Kazawa 1724–1738; Kanda 1855–1869; Kinomi 1784–1799; Kozenji 1796–1810; Kumatakura 1744–1758, 1837; Minamikonashi 1690–1712, 1841–1864; Nakagawa \*1842–1856; Nakaokutama 1694–1708, 1856–1870; Nigurinuma 1670–1684, 1691–1705, 1708–1722, 1766–1780, 1811–1825; Ninoseki 1817–1869; Nishinagai 1811–1825; Ōhara Hongō 1836–1850; Ōhara Shinzan 1836–1850; Ojima 1684–1698, 1714–1728, 1744–

1758, 1837–1860; Ōkago 1784–1791; Osabe 1642–1656, 1660–1674; Otokozawa 1830–1844; Shibutami 1702–1716, \*1857–1871; Shimizu 1837; Shimoorikabe \*1660–1674, 1852–1866; Shimoyuda 1667–1681; Sokei \*1670–1684, 1692–1706, 1722–1746, \*1855–1869; Surisawa 1828–1842; Suzubaba 1756–1770, 1784–1798; Tatsukodai 1849–1863; Tomizawa 1701–1715; Torinomi 1850–1864; Tōge 1738–1752; Tsuyagawa 1830–1844; Usuginu 1733–1747; Wakutsu 1852–1866; Yō 1711–1725. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 263

*Katta*

Magatake 1784, 1842–1856; Nametsu 1843–1857; Seki 1841–1855; Shiozawa 1806–1820; Yunohara 1835–1849. 

*Kesen*

Bettō Yashiki 1837; Hamada 1816–1830, 1852–1866; Imaizumi 1852–1866; Osabe 1714–1728, 1852–1866; Setamai 1678–1692; Takata 1843–1857; Takekoma 1718–1730; Yokosawa 1764–

1778; Yokota 1687–1701. 

*Kurokawa*

Okuda 1758–1772, 1827–1841; Ōhira 1756–1770, 1821–1835; Ōuri 1757–1771; Ōya Narita 1788–

1802; Ōya Tsuchihashi 1788–1802; Ōya Uzurasaki 1788–1802; Ōya Yamasaki 1800–1814, 1830–1844. 

*Miyagi*

Ichikawa 1658–1687, 1731–1745, 1789–1828; Kasagami 1820–1836; Kitakoizumi 1862–1863; Ōshiro 1820–1836; Takagi Hongō 1839–1853. 

*Monō*

Hashiura 1840–1855; Kandori 1847–1867; Nagatsura Hama 1837; Onosakihama 1837; Ōta Hongō 1817–1831. 

*Motoyoshi*

Akanuma 1660–1674; Hajikami 1842–1856; Karakuwa 1770–1784; Matsuzaki 1793–1807. 

*Oshika*

Mizunuma \*1718–1724; Negishi 1818–1833. 

*Shibata*

Ashitate 1768–1782, 1784–1817; Fukuda \*1796–1810; Kawauchi 1846–1860; Ono 1812–1826; Shimonomyō \*1846–1860; Tomizawa 1849–1865. 

*Shida*

Fukanuma 1791–1805; Kuwabari 1791–1805; Ōgaki 1822–1837; Shimonomori 1784–1787. 

*Tamatsukuri*

Shimomayama 1710–1724, 1847–1864. 

*Tōda*

Fukugafukuro 1834–1848; Neriushi 1834–1848; Tajiri 1854–1868. 

*Tome*

Kiushi 1837–1846; Oinokawara \*1709–1723, \*1737–1751, \*1757–1771; Sagatachi 1822–1836; Sanhasama Ishikoshi 1718–1732; Sanuma Kitakata Hitoichi 1720–1771; Sanuma Kitakata  

 

264 APPENDIX 3

Kitaura 1813–1827; Sanuma Shinden 1658–1672, 1741–1755, 1854–1868; Sanuma Shinden Ōmachi 1854–1868. 

M U T SU \( A I Z U D O M A I N A N D M I NA M I YA M A O K U R A I R I RYŌ \) *Aizu*

Aoyagi 1674–1688; Furumachi 1752–1766; Furumachi Kiji 1825–1839; Hagiwara 1743–1757; Hinoemata 1855–1869; Honmarumarununo 1769–1788, 1821–1835; Ishibushi 1703–1811; Izumida 1799–1813; Kanaizawa 1629–1643; Kanōzu 1676–1690, 1693–1707; Kariai 1795–1818; Kawaginu 1821–1835; Koike 1740–1754, 1830–1844; Komatsukawa 1649–1663, 1673–1694, 1708–1722, 1735–1749, 1770–1867; Koshio 1718–1732; Kumagura 1690–1716; Nagurasawa 1773–

1801, 1809–1843, 1847–1866; Nakazuma 1666–1680, 1706–1720, 1774–1788, 1821–1835; Narioka 1698–1712, 1716–1730, 1747–1761, 1764–1789, 1796–1818, 1830–1844; Ōkubo 1673–1694, 1708–

1722, 1735–1749, 1770–1784, 1820–1838; Ōkura 1658–1672; Ōmachi 1775–1789; Ōmomo 1770–

1784; Sawairi 1673–1694, 1708–1722, 1735–1749, 1770–1784, 1820–1834, 1853–1867; Sekimoto 1697–1711, 1714–1728; Shiraiwa 1767–1781, 1843–1858; Tadaishi 1751–1765; Tagokura 1674–1714; Tajima 1820–1834; Takizawa 1801–1815; Tera 1673–1694, 1708–1722, 1770–1784, 1820–1834; Terayama 1673–1694, 1708–1722, 1735–1749, 1770–1784, 1820–1838, 1853–1867; Tōnosu 1699–1713, 1768–1858; Tōnyū 1673–1687, 1700–1726; Yagoshima 1658–1672; Yuiri and Mizubiki 1833–1847. 

*Kawanuma*

Hattano 1642–1656; Kaminojiri 1850–1865; Katsugata 1847–1862. 

*Ōnuma*

Kamisugihara, 1852–1866; Koyama 1852–1866; Kuimaru 1771–1785; Kuwanohara 1676–1867; Mitsukuri 1826–1840; Ninnō 1852–1866; Ōashi 1825–1839; Ōkanbara 1694–1708, 1728–1868; Shinyashiki Shinden 1845–1859; Suganuma 1852–1866; Tarudo 1645–1659, 1661–1675, 1738–1752. 

*Yama*

Fukazawa 1851–1866; Futō 1832–1846; Genbashi 1855–1870; Gokunyū 1686–1700; Gōtō 1845–

1859; Ichinosawa 1848–1863; Ichinoto 1819–1833, 1853–1867; Irikura 1812–1826, 1843–1862; Kamisairen 1817–1858; Kawarada 1778–1792; Kawayoshi Shinden 1841–1855; Kunugiyama 1780–1794, 1804–1818; Meguriyaji 1843–1857; Nagao 1829–1844; Nakazori 1848–1863; Ochiai 1638–1652, 1773–1787, 1837–1852; Odazuki 1853–1867; Ōta 1743–1758, 1818–1833; Ōtera 1853–1869; Shimoakaeda 1854–1868; Shiotsubo 1650–1664; Suriage 1851–1865; Terauchi 1805–1819, 1853–

1868; Uenoyama 1840–1854; Wasetani 1846–1861; Yaheishirō 1671–1685; Yoshida 1757–1771. 

M U T SU \( NA K A D Ō R I \)

*Adachi*

Arai 1841–1856; Inazawa 1787–1802; Kamidaie 1837–1838; Kamiōta 1850–1865; Kitaozawa 1701–1717; Kunugiyama 1837–1849; Matsuzawa 1674–1689; Nagaya 1849–1864; Nawashiroda 1658–1672; Shiraiwa 1817–1833; Sotokohata 1790–1804; Sotokohata Nunozawa 1792–1807; Tamanoi 1848–1863; Tazawa 1852–1867; Uchikohata 1655–1670, 1845–1860; Ura Shiozawa 1752–1767; Wada 1728–1743. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 265

*Asaka*

Hidenoyama 1682–1782, 1784–1871; Kōriyama Kamimachi 1699–1714; Sasahara 1698–1782, 1784–1871. 

*Date*

Awano 1815–1830; Fujita 1843–1858; Fushiguro 1847–1862; Higashiōkubo 1847–1861; Ichiyanagi 1842–1857; Iizaka 1734–1748; Isazawa 1768–1782, 1837–1846; Ishimoda 1784–1785; Izumisawa 1842–1856; Kageda 1784–1788; Kaida 1817–1831; Kitahanda 1851–1865; Kitahanda \(renters\) 1850–1861; Kitahanda Kamigumi 1850–1865; Kitahanda Shimogumi 1788–1803, 1850–1865; Kogami 1837–1843; Kōmyōji 1837–1841; Kōri Motomachi 1854–1869; Kunugiyama 1784–1791, 1852–1866; Moniwa Kamigumi 1852–1866; Moniwa Shimogumi 1852–1868; Mukōgawara 1784–1791; Ozaka 1784–1785, 1849–1863; Shimohashirada 1759–1773, 1784–

1797; Shinden Kotsunagi 1823–1837; Shirane 1837–1841; Tokorozawa 1838–1853. 

*Higashishirakawa*

Akasaka** **Higashino 1820–1848; Fukuoka 1769–1783; Kitano 1848–1862; Kōyagachi 1848–

1863; Nagare 1797–1811; Okada 1792–1806; Sōnotaira 1774–1788; Terayama 1829–1843; Tomioka 1839–1853; Urushikusa 1810–1824; Yamanoi 1843–1857; Yatsuki 1741–1755. 

*Ishikawa*

Asakawa 1850–1867; Hatada 1759–1776; Magaki 1846–1860; Morijuku 1838–1852; Naka-gura 1830–1844, 1852–1867; Nakano 1851–1865; Nishiyama 1847–1861; Ōkusa 1796–1810; Satoshiraishi 1802–1816; Takada 1852–1868; Yamagata 1791–1817; Yoshi 1839–1853; Yotsuji Shinden 1826–1846; Yugōto 1835–1849. 

*Iwase*

Horigome 1851–1865; Kamiebana 1762–1776; Masumi 1742–1756; Nakashinjō 1787–1806; Narita 1770–1784; Shimogoya 1850–1864; Shimokonaka \*1674–1688; Takahayashi 1743–1757, 1771–1785; Takakuda 1678–1692. 

*Nishishirakawa*

Kazaemon Shinden 1833–1847; Kozume 1850–1864; Manago Shinden 1846–1860; Segano 1758–1772; Takagi 1833–1847; Wakaguri Shinden, 1833–1847. 

*Shinobu*

Fukushima Bakuromachi 1837–1850; Fukushima Nakamachi 1717–1731; Fushiogami 1839–

1866; Hirata 1767–1781; Koshihama 1855–1869; Minamiyanome 1849–1869; Sahara 1837–

1838; Shimoiizaka 1856–1870; Shimonodera 1687–1701; Takanashi 1838–1851; Tatsugoyama 1856–1870; Tsuchiyu 1701–1715; Watari 1839–1854. 

*Tamura*

Akanuma 1776–1790; Hirose 1758–1773; Kamiōgoe 1837–1861; Kamiyukiai 1743–1779, 1784–1863; Kanmata 1846–1860; Kawagoishi 1726–1740; Kitakoizumi 1746–1760; Kitatawarai 1816–1830; Kuride 1839–1854; Miharu \(outcastes\) 1843–1857; Miharu Aramachi  

 

266 APPENDIX 3

1843–1857; Miharu Hachimanmachi 1843–1857; Miharu Kitamachi 1843–1857; Miharu Nakamachi 1843–1857; Miharu Ōmachi 1843–1857; Miharu Shinmachi 1843–1857; Ono Yamagami 1775–1789; Shōbuya 1843–1858; Sugaya 1836–1852; Wasegawa 1750–1764; Yuzawa 1831–1845. 

M U T SU \( HA M A D Ō R I \)

*Iwaki*

Ōmori 1855–1867; Ōmuro, 1855–1866. 

*Iwasaki*

Iida, 1855–1856; Nakahirakubo, 1855–1856; Oyazaku, 1855–1867. 

*Kikuta*

Taira Jūgochōme 1854–1868. 

*Namekata*

Fukōno 1855–1869; Hiso 1856–1870; Shidazawa 1853–1867. 

*Shineha*

Kaminogawa 1857–1871; Ochiai 1857–1871; Shimonogawa 1857–1871. 

D E WA

*Akumi*

Jōzenji 1837–1851. 

*Mogami*

Akamatsu 1849–1863; Sakaida 1756–1764, 1800–1827, 1839–1853; Shimizu 1842–1869. 

*Murayama*

Batsukira 1759–1771; Hataya 1825–1839; Hirashio 1714–1728; Ide, 1677–1691; Ishikawa 1834–

1865; Iwanezawa 1852–1870; Jinengo 1855–1869; Komagome 1743–1757, 1853–1867; Koseki 1726–1796; Matsubashi Kamigumi 1854–1869; Naganuma 1794–1821; Ōishida 1677–1691, 1840–1854; Ōishida Yotsukamachi 1829–1843; Ōmachi 1788–1806, 1833–1847, 1856–1871; Ōnuma Hitoyama 1805–1819, 1821–1868; Shibahashi 1719–1733, 1746–1760, 1822–1847; Shimo ashizawa 1770–1784; Shinmachi 1682–1696; Shiraiwa Hondōji 1777–1791, 1829–1858; Sugiyama 1827–1844; Taruishi 1819–1835, 1838–1854; Tazawa 1838–1852; Tendō Kōjimachi 1819–1833; Terauchi Yashiki 1709–1723; Tomeba 1820–1852, 1854–1869; Yakuwa 1702–1870; Yamagata Kobashimachi 1834–1867; Yokoyama 1853–1868; Yoshikawa 1743–1827, 1830–1869; Yūno 1803–1817, 1850–1864. 

*Okitama*

Kami Shinden 1791–1818; Kashiwagime 1847–1861; Ōtsuka 1720–1734; Soegawa 1692–1706. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 267

*Tagawa*

Fukagawa 1757–1771; Kakuta Futakuchi 1719–1733, 1776–1790, 1826–1840, 1850–1864; Oshikiri 1849–1863. 

*Yuri*

Abura Kōjidōri 1841–1865; Kamiyokomachi Ryōdōri 1841–1865, Kosagawa 1813–1827; Mukaeno 1848–1866; Nagaoka 1751–1765; Nakahitane 1847–1861; Urushihata 1840–1869. 

S A D O

*Hamochi*

Fukaura 1806–1819. 

*Kamo*

Ikaura 1731–1745; Iwayaguchi 1852–1867; Tamagawa 1790–1805; Umakubi 1788–1802. 

*Sawata*

Sawane 1822–1835; Yahata Shinmachi 1819–1832. 

E C H I G O

*Iwafune*

Akadani 1853–1867; Ebie 1785–1799; Fujisawa 1814–1828; Hanadate 1818–1832; Iioka 1808–

1823; Kamisukebuchi 1846–1860; Kinokuni Shinden 1799–1813; Kitta 1852–1865; Koiwauchi 1832–1846; Momogawa 1840–1854; Nagamasa Shinden 1799–1813; Nawari Shin 1821–1835; Ōdaira 1820–1833; Omi 1852–1865; Osonogō 1818–1831; Sakamachi 1814–1828; Shimoseki 1787–1802; Shinbo 1816–1830; 1838–1853; Tanaka 1823–1837; Toriya 1852–1866; Zōdajima 1810–1824. 

*Kanbara*

Ajikata \*1817–1837, \*1856–1870; Aota 1726–1738; Ebisudana 1650–1664; Eguchi 1853–1866; Fujiyama \*1679–1693; Fumoto 1833–1847; Garameki Shinden 1721–1735; Hirai 1842–1857; Ibarasone Kamiiba 1854–1868; Ibarasone Marugata \*1826–1841; Igashima 1718–1732, 1747–1773; Iiyanagi Shinden \*1662–1674; Iwafuchi 1753–1767; Kakuda 1756–1770; Kane-maki Shinden 1828–1842; Kashiwazaki Kōjakuji and its tenants 1799–1813; Kawaguchi Shinden 1683–1697; Kitakamikōya 1792–1806; Kitayama Shinden 1717–1732, \*1733–1737; Kobanachi 1833–1846; Koguchi 1743–1757; Koguriyama 1781–1794; Kōnosu 1670–1684; Magiyama 1643–1656; Miyauchi 1786–1800; Muramatsu Higashikumi \*1779–1793; Myōga Shinden 1650–1664; Myōgadani 1724–1737; Nagahashiri 1732–1746; Nakagōya 1650–1664, 1679–1693, 1720–1734; Nakatsuma 1818–1832; Nakayama 1650–1664; Nishitarada 1723–1736; Nishiyama Shin 1827–1838; Ogishima Shinden 1839–1853; Omogura 1650–1664; , 1650–1664; Sasaguchihama 1852–1866; Shakazuka Shinden 1661–1686; Shibahashi 1817–1832; Shimo-kusugawa 1811–1825, 1842–1856; Shimosankō 1856–1870; Yamaguchi 1740–1753; Yamaya 1844–1858; Yashiki, 1650–1664; Yokkamachi 1700–1714, 1743–1757; Yoshizawa 1837–1850. 

 

 

268 APPENDIX 3

*Kariwa*

Ishiguro 1686–1700; Kamiyachi Shinden 1838–1867. 

*Kubiki*

Akasawa 1654–1667; Aratogawasawa 1680–1693; Bikohama 1666–1678; Biriko 1660–1673; Chūjō 1654–1668; Daijōji 1657–1679; Fukasawa 1657–1679; Fukudaira 1695–1709; Goshōji 1654–1668; Hachiman Shinmachi 1657–1670; Haranomachi 1657–1679; Hiroshimako 1657–1671; Hyakuken 1683–1707; Irikōzō 1668–1681; Ishigami 1670–1685, 1696–1709, 1711–1741; Ishitani 1656–1670; Itao 1800–1814; Iwasawa 1656–1670, 1727–1741; Izumi 1654–1668, 1681–1695; Jōgehama 1666–1679; Kaji 1657–1682, 1713–1727; Kakino 1697–1711; Kamiarahama 1666–1678; Kamidosoko 1666–1678; Kamikofunato 1666–1678; Kamiya 1826–1839; Kanda 1657–1671; Karikohama 1666–1678; Katakuchi 1687–1701; Katata 1657–

1679; Katazu 1676–1690, 1717–1731; Kawasaki 1657–1679; Kawatani 1656–1670, 1695–

1706; Kenpōji 1657–1678; Kitataishi 1657–1679; Kitataishi Shinden 1657–1679; Koguro 1856–1870; Kudohama 1666–1678; Kunida and Nagasaka 1725–1738; Kuraban 1844–1866; Machida 1657–1671; Mitsuya 1666–1677; Morimoto 1672–1696, 1711–1725, 1824–1839; Nagasawa 1657–1671; Nagiyama 1656–1670; Nishigakubohama 1666–1679; Nishino-shima 1657–1671; Nōmi 1666–1679; Obagasawa 1654–1668; Okami 1656–1670, 1688–1700; Onawashiro 1657–1679, 1681–1695; Ōdaira Shinden 1657–1670; Ōga 1656–1670; Ōike Shinden 1743–1756; Ōnigori 1628–1645, 1681–1697; Rokumanbu 1657–1671; Sakura-machi Shinden 1657–1671; Sekkō 1806–1817; Shibukaki 1666–1678; Shimoarahama 1666–

1676; Shimodosoko 1666–1680; Shimokofunato 1666–1679; Shitamachi 1657–1695; Suwa 1683–1707; Tai 1769–1815, 1828–1866; Tajiri 1657–1671; Takasawairi 1656–1670, 1717–1731; Tanaka 1681–1695; Tani \*1844–1857; Tanukidaira 1654–1668; Teshima 1809–1863; Torigoe 1657–1694; Tozawa 1743–1757; Tsubono 1656–1670; Uchigango Shinden 1672–1682; Yachi 1657–1679; Yamagata 1657–1671; Yamaguchi 1657–1677; Yamanaka 1656–1670; Yamanōmi 1656–1670; Yokoyama 1654–1665; Yomogihira 1757–1771; Yotsuya 1666–1678; Yūkōji 1666–1679; Yukunohama 1666–1677. 

*Santō*

Kakinoki 1780–1794; Natsudo 1761–1775; Shimo 1686–1700, 1830–1844; Wakanoura 1722–

1736. 

*Uonuma*

Amanosawa 1677–1691; Haramushino Shinden 1789–1803; Horinouchi 1673–1686; Hoshibori 1825–1839; Itagi 1813–1827; Katada 1670–1684; Koidejima 1765–1778; Koizumi 1704–1718; Kotane Shinden 1746–1759; Oka Shinden 1814–1828; Okidate 1728–1739; Osaki 1648–1662, 1749–1758; Shiozawa 1682–1696; Takemata Shinden 1679–1693; Tazawa 1688–

1699; Untō 1681–1694; Yotsuko 1635–1649, 1681–1695, 1703–1714. 

KŌ Z U K E

*Agatsuma*

Iwai 1750–1764; Kanbara 1852–1865; Orida 1667–1680; Takasaki Motokon’yamachi 1730–

1744; Ueguri 1651–1665. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 269

*Gunma*

Akutsu 1843–1856; Harunasan 1676–1690; Hikima 1840–1855; Ide 1746–1758; Moku 1804–

1818; Motosōja 1783–1789, 1820–1834; Nakazato 1686–1700; Nishiyokote 1837–1839; Shibukawa 1669–1683, 1739–1753, 1853–1867; Shimokobana 1855–1869; Shimotaki 1819–1833; Tachiwada 1837–1847. 

*Kanra*

Ichinomiya 1788–1800; Kanohara 1675–1697; Kanuma 1837–1838; Motojuku 1767–1780, 1844–1861; Nippa 1731–1743; Onga 1683–1697, 1850–1865; Ōshima 1838–1852; Shimotakata 1804–1819; Tomioka Kamimachi 1783–1790; Tomioka Nakamachi 1849–1863; Yagitsure 1807–1821; Yuzurihara 1701–1748, 1756–1774, 1782–1802, 1807–1824, 1837–1860. 

*Midono*

Fujioka Fuekimachi 1837–1848; Homi 1786–1799; Midono Ayugawa 1847–1861; Sanbagawa 1670–1698, 1705–1719, 1726–1779, 1783–1786, 1838–1871; Shinozuka 1753–1767; Takayama 

\*1837–1848. 

*Naha*

Daishōji 1837–1851; Fukushima 1839–1853. 

*Nitta*

Gōdo 1855–1869; Hanakazuka 1749–1767, 1770–1791; Kamieda 1840–1854; Kanayama 1682–

1695; Saishikada 1848–1861; Shimotajima 1675–1697, 1853–1867; Shimotanaka 1677–1691; Tomizawa 1837–1851, 1856–1870. 

*Ōra*

Ebise 1740–1754, 1776–1791, 1819–1833; Ishiuchi 1819–1831; Kokai 1790–1804; Mujinazuka 1853–1870; Yotsuya 1822–1859. 

*Sai*

Ōtamachi 1847–1861. 

*Seta*

Bungō Hassaki \*1838–1852; Kamihakoda 1853–1867; Kamihassaki 1819–1833; Kaminamuro 1837–1849; Makabe 1783–1796; Shimohakoda 1837–1841. 

*Tago*

Kamihino 1785–1798. 

*Tone*

Numata Shimonochō 1790–1804; Shimokuya 1748–1771, 1789–1807, 1811–1825, 1837–1869. 

*Usui*

Goryō 1694–1707; Haraichi \*1838–1852; Iwai 1700–1714; Nakatoyōka 1837–1844; Shimo-gokan \*1820–1834. 

 

 

270 APPENDIX 3

*Yamada*

Niijima 1691–1704; Shimohisakata \*1825–1839; Shiobara 1777–1791; Yonezawa 1758–1771. 

S H I M O T SU K E

*Ashikaga*

Omata Uenoda-kumi 1821–1834. 

*Aso*

Abutsuka 1664–1678, 1743–1756; Akami 1791–1803; Kimita 1699–1707; Konaka 1849–1863; Ueno 1843–1856. 

*Haga*

Fumiya \*1837–1845; Hachijō 1827–1841; Ichihana \*1818–1832; Kyūbu 1682–1696; Shimo-sugamata 1789–1803; Shimotakanezawa 1716–1730; Tajima 1815–1829; Tsuzukiya \*1788–1802; Wakatabi 1674–1688; Yamamoto 1784–1866. 

*Kawachi*

Harajuku 1794–1806, 1812–1827, 1844–1864; Harigai 1849–1863; Iwahara 1667–1681; Iwamoto 1697–1711; Kamiarahari 1808–1816; Kamikakeshita 1805–1819; Kamiyokota 1653–

1667; Kawamuro Shinden 1824–1863; Kitakura 1774–1787; Kobayashi 1843–1870; Kobayashi Shimogō 1810–1823, 1836–1866; Kobyaku 1820–1834, 1843–1869; Kuragasaki 1794–1807, 1812–1828, 1848–1865; Kurihara 1794–1806, 1812–1829, 1848–1866; Kutsukake 1831–1863; Machiya 1703–1716, 1777–1801, 1818–1831, 1847–1860, 1862–1868; Mizunashi 1830–1846; Naga oka 1698–1712; Nemuro 1796–1834; Ōkuwa 1794–1804, 1812–1825, 1844–1865; Ōmuro 1768–1869; Otorozawa 1829–1854; Sagebu 1794–1806, 1812–1827, 1848–1864; Sawamata 1818–1870; Serinuma 1781–1795, 1802–1856; Serinuma Shinden 1747–1762, 1788–1807, \*1808–

1811, 1822–1836, 1838–1864; Shimotokami 1849–1863; Shionomuro 1724–1756, 1786–1805; Takamatsu 1664–1678; Todoroku 1809–1852; Yana 1659–1671; Yanokuchi 1778–1802, 1811–1864. 

*Nasu*

Hiyobara 1835–1849; Miage \*1844–1857; Shimohiruta \*1825–1839; Shimotaki 1821–

1835; Shinmachi 1838–1852; Tsukinuki 1835–1848; Urushizuka 1817–1831; Yokozutsumi 1817–1831. 

*Shioya*

Fujihara 1709–1723; Kamenashi 1716–1745; Kanaeda 1766–1780; Kizami 1754–1768; Kosagoe 1851–1864; Kuwakubo 1785–1799; Nakashiobara 1816–1830; Shimoshiobara 1816–1830. 

*Tsuga*

Chōka 1779–1793, 1837–1869; Dosawa 1852–1867; Funato 1670–1683; Ishibashi 1833–1846; Itaga 1775–1789; Kamewada 1832–1846; Kamiiwazaki 1851–1866; Kamikuga 1821–1835; Kamikusagyū 1820–1834; Kamimoro 1733–1746; Kaminanma 1849–1863; Kanuma Oshiwara Nishiuchimachi 1847–1862; Kichisawa 1721–1735, 1846–1869; Minamikogura 1674–1802, 1805–1820, 1846–1868; Murai 1665–1679; Muroze 1806–1820; Ōwadashima 1828–1842;  

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 271

Senbongi 1856–1870; Senō 1808–1836; Shimohinata 1684–1698; Shimoiwazaki 1777–1790, 1798–1869; Shimozawa 1782–1795; Tomioka 1680–1694; Yakuōji 1812–1826. 

H I TAC H I

*Ibaraki*

Aruga 1724–1848; Iifuchi 1735–1749; Isobe 1834–1861; Kadoge 1782–1796; Kamigachi 1666–

1680, 1720–1742, 1748–1870; Kamiyama 1843–1857; Kasahara Shinden 1650–1664; Kasama 1690–1704; Kawado 1780–1871; Nishi Shinden 1789–1803; Shishidotaira 1837–1851; Takehara Shinden 1822–1853; Yanoshita 1831–1851. 

*Kashima*

Araji 1756–1770; 1823–1837; Ōtake 1686–1700. 

*Kōchi*

Kaminemoto 1802–1817; Kamisuda 1791–1805, 1849–1863; Nakajima 1823–1842; Shimosuda 1832–1846; Shinchi 1848–1862. 

*Kuji*

Baba 1744–1758; Fukuroda 1644–1658; Takagaki 1787–1801; Tamatsukuri 1628–1637; Tochi-hara 1787–1801; Zuiryū 1628–1638. 

*Makabe*

Akahama 1845–1859; Hanawase 1684–1700, 1783–1797, 1801–1834; Hanawase Kitagumi 1788–

1802; Hanawase Minamigumi 1772–1803; Haragata 1809–1823, 1828–1869; Hatori 1739–1765, 1800–1814; Higashihozue 1687–1701; Hososhiba 1806–1829; Isaza 1769–1783, 1792–1815, 1849–

1869; Kamikobata 1839–1857; Kamiyagai 1763–1799, 1843–1868; Kuramochi 1701–1715, 1856–

1870; Kurogo 1729–1743; Machiya Kamiyadomachi 1845–1859; Machiya Nakamachi 1848–1865; Machiya Shimoyadomachi 1845–1859; Machiya Shinjukumachi 1845–1859; Machiya Takaga-mimachi 1845–1859; Matsubara 1801–1834, 1837–1852; Motogi 1757–1772; Mukōue 1826–1840, 1854–1867; Nakaueno 1807–1821, 1843–1857; Nekoshima 1843–1856; Nishigoya 1855–1869; Ōbayashi 1723–1737, 1747–1761, 1856–1870; Oshibi 1762–1776; Sagishima 1854–1868; Sakurai 1827–1869; Shiio 1814–1869; Shimokawanago 1844–1866; Shimokobata 1766–1780; Shi-mooguri 1817–1831; Shimoyagai 1668–1682, 1730–1744, 1751–1765, 1782–1839, 1841–1865; Ta 1741–1755, 1837–1852, 1854–1868; Tajuku 1775–1789, 1856–1870; Tatedaihō 1834–1848; Uchiyodo 1801–1815, 1849–1863; Yagai 1768–1789, 1816–1841, 1846–1860; Yamada 1853–1867; Yoshida 1807–1821, 1837–1851, 1856–1870; Yoshima 1771–1791; Yoshima Kumiai Tsuiji 1856–1870. 

*Naka*

Isozaki 1808–1822; Minamisakaide 1803–1817; Nakaoka 1704–1718; Noguchi 1759–1796; Shimohizawa 1667–1681; Shimooshinobe 1849–1863; \[Tome\] Nishigumi 1797–1811; Tsuda 1782–1796, 1831–1845. 

*Namegata*

Kariyado 1740–1754; Nagayama 1681–1703, 1842–1869; Ushibori 1681–1703, 1842–1869. 

 

 

272 APPENDIX 3

*Niihari*

Kamiaoyagi 1680–1694; Sakata Shinden 1655–1669; Takahama 1694–1713, 1819–1833; Yotsuga 1691–1705; Yukiiri 1770–1817. 

*Shida*

Jikkoku 1669–1703; Ōhata 1708–1732; Shishitsuka 1739–1753; Taga Akane 1698–1712. 

*Tsukuba*

Kamisugama 1741–1867; Oda Nishimachi 1683–1696; Ōshima 1683–1697; Owada 1667–1681; Sakayori 1817–1830, 1833–1866; Tegomaru 1838–1866; Yamaguchi 1683–1697. 

S H I M Ō S A

*Chiba*

Ariyoshi 1827–1841; Chiba 1844–1858; Fujisaki 1857–1871; Hoshiguki 1825–1839; Imaminato 1772–1786; Izumi 1774–1788; Kaizuka 1814–1827; Kawado 1747–1761; Mimomi 1784–1803, 1816–1846; Minamioyumi 1759–1773; Nakanishi 1850–1864; Nakano 1843–

1857; Noda 1848–1862; Noro 1839–1853; Ochii 1851–1865; Ōkanza 1818–1832; Sayama 1832–

1870; Shimada 1722–1736, 1770–1784; Tabeta 1769–1783; Tomioka 1847–1861; Yoshihashi 1831–1863. 

*Inba*

\(Fukama\) Minami Shinden 1762–1775; Hagiwara 1801–1815, 1834–1847; Hiratsuka 1849–

1866; Hossaku Shinden 1812–1825; Izumi 1856–1870; Kamagari 1711–1740; Kamenari Shinden 1770–1783; Ketsuenji 1766–1780, 1826–1841; Kōya 1856–1869; Kunō 1855–1869; Matsumushi 1832–1846, 1852–1867; Mugimaru 1828–1841; Nakagawa 1841–1855; Nagatoya 1843–1856; Nekona 1858–1872; Oshitsuke 1836–1865; Ryūfukuji 1656–1670, 1704–1719, 1834–1848; Shimoi Shinden 1831–1856; Shimokōya 1825–1839; Shōgen Shinden 1831–1844; Sōfuke Shinden 1813–1827; Sōnohashi 1773–1787, 1804–1819; Takamatsu 1856–1869; Takarada Shinden 1735–1749; Yata 1679–1693, 1831–1844, 1854–1869; Yonamoto 1838–1853. 

*Katori*

Kōri 1799–1813, 1843–1857; Nado 1849–1874; Tōkayama 1849–1862; Yoshioka Shinden 1795–

1809, 1832–1853. 

*Katsushika*

Hirakata 1852–1866; Hirakata Shinden 1833–1847; Hirakatahara Shinden 1801–1815; Isobe 1782–1796, 1819–1835; Isobe Higashikumi 1804–1818, 1836–1843; Isobe Nakagumi 1836–1843; Jūdayū Shinden 1767–1833, 1848–1862; Kamiisagoi 1808–1822; Kamishinshuku 1818–1832; Kamiyakiri 1805–1819; Kashiwai 1853–1866; Komagi Shinden 1769–1783, 1791–1805, 1807–

1821, 1843–1862; Michinobe 1845–1857; Nakanokuki 1777–1791; Nakazawa 1693–1707; Ōda 1822–1835; Ōmuro 1771–1785, 1807–1820; Ōno Mikado-gumi 1857–1871; Satsuma 1810–1824; Shibasaki 1777–1791, 1825–1862; Shōrenji 1801–1815, 1835–1849. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 273

*Okada*

Yama 1774–1788. 

*Sashima*

Kamiizushima 1811–1826; Kirinoki 1760–1775; Kōda 1799–1813; Kutsukake 1829–1844; Modo 1662–1676, 1688–1702, 1789–1803; Oigo 1823–1837; Oigo Shinden 1775–1789; Sakaigashi 1822–1836; Shimoizushima 1786–1800, 1848–1862; Shimokatada 1784–1799; Teraku 1767–

1782; Tomita 1839–1852; Uramukō 1840–1853; Yagai 1689–1704. 

*Shimohabu*

Akogi 1833–1855; Gōbu 1837–1864; Hataya 1817–1831; Higashiizumi 1834–1849, 1851–1865; Higashikanayama 1797–1811, 1832–1855; Nagata 1749–1762; Narita 1803–1818, 1824–1838, 1845–1860; Nishiizumi 1790–1840; Ōumu 1794–1808; Ōyama 1772–1785; Sano 1780–1853; Takarada 1836–1850; Teradai 1793–1807; 

*Sōma*

Abiko 1782–1796, 1806–1820, 1855–1869; Akabokke 1859–1872; Aoyanagi Minamigumi 1856–1869; Fuse 1756–1770, 1798–1812, 1827–1841, 1843–1863; Gojōya 1678–1692; Hibiri 1810–1824; Ino 1855–1868; Minowa 1829–1843; Omonma 1828–1851; Ōshika 1854–1867; Ōshimada 1815–1829; Shibasaki 1837–1851; Shimoyanado 1843–1857; Takayanagi 1691–1705; Tatsugi 1831–1845; Terahata 1773–1787, 1789–1809, 1813–1826; Toride 1779–1792, 1827–1840; Washinoya 1852–1865. 

*Toyoda*

Kayō 1817–1844. 

*Unagami \(aka Kaijō\)*

Hiramatsu Hamate 1856–1870; Iioka 1731–1744; Ikuyo 1813–1826; Kita 1823–1837; Kiyotaki 1850–1864; Kurahashi 1801–1814; Matsugai 1733–1747; Mibiro 1840–1854; Nakayari 1843–

1856; Ōmate 1793–1807, 1849–1861; Takaoi 1776–1804, 1850–1863; Yokone Hame 1839–1853. 

*Yūki*

Osaki 1779–1793; Takei 1786–1800; Yūki 1804–1813. 

K A Z U S A

*Ichihara*

Hirakawa 1843–1863; Matsuzaki 1855–1868; Ōwada 1856–1869; Wanme 1718–1741; Yonehara 1840–1853. 

*Isumi*

Arakawa 1825–1839; Fukaya 1825–1838; Hebara 1751–1764; Hosō 1681–1695; Imazeki 1825–

1838; Iwasaka 1837–1851; Kamioki 1747–1760; Kariya 1853–1866; Kubo 1825–1838; Miyata 1843–1856; Nakazato 1843–1856; Nōjitsu 1847–1860; Shimoōtaki 1705–1719. 

 

 

274 APPENDIX 3

*Mōda*

Iitomi 1829–1843; Kannō 1828–1864; Kubota 1768–1782, 1802–1829; Nakao 1816–1830; Narawa 1828–1842, 1849–1862; Nozato 1773–1787, 1789–1803; Ōyatsu 1827–1841; Yanashiro 1728–1743. 

*Musha*

Asō Shinden 1809–1823; Kamifuda 1831–1845; Kamifukiire 1831–1845; Matsuo 1856–1870; Shimoya 1848–1861; Takaya 1847–1865; Yamanaka 1841–1862. 

*Nagara*

Machibo Shinden 1747–1761, 1768–1782; Susu Hamago 1801–1836; Mute 1813–1827; Nuta-zawa 1851–1865; Ōi 1841–1853; Ōnodai 1843–1857; Sōkyū 1843–1857. 

*Yamabe*

Daikata 1802–1836, 1839–1864; Gumyō 1836–1850; Kanbō 1813–1826; Katakai 1753–1770, 1777–1791, 1826–1868; Minamidama 1838–1852; Nishino 1800–1814; Oyama 1831–1844; Taka-tsudo 1827–1841; Toke 1732–1745; Tōgane Kamijuku 1813–1826; Uekusa 1693–1707, 1809–1823. 

AWA

*Nagasa*

Kawashiro 1770–1784; Koyokō 1839–1853; Naraihara 1688–1702, 1779–1800; Sano 1800–1814; Uchiura 1789–1802. 

S O U R C E S F O R T H E V I L L AG E S I N T H E T E N P R OV I N C E S DATA S E T

Four villages derive in large part from Kawaguchi Hiroshi’s public database, Danjuro 3.0 

\(Ishibushi from 1752, Komatsukawa from 1792, Kuwanohara 1750–1858, and Tōnosu from 1790\). 

Hayami Akira and Narimatsu Saeko allowed me to enter the data for eleven villages from their “Basic Data Sheets” into my database \(Hamago, Hidenoyama, Kami Shinden, Kamiyukiai, Kannō, Koseki, Mujinazuka, Ōkanbara, Sasahara, Shimokuya, and Tendō 

Kōjimachi\). 

Th

e remaining 1,035 or so villages \(the number varies slightly depending on what defi nition of a village is used\) found their way into the dataset through two types of materials. 

About a sixth of the reconstructed person-years derive from original registers held by the following institutions and individuals: Aizuwakamatsu Municipal Library; Aomori Prefectural Library; Chiba Nobutane, Hiraizumi; Chiba Prefectural Archives; Fukushima Prefectural Archives; Gunma Prefectural Archives; Harvard Law School; Ibaraki Prefectural Archives; Ichinoseki Municipal Museum; Iwate Prefectural Library; Iwate Prefectural Museum; Library of Congress, Washington DC; Niigata Prefectural Archives; the libraries of Ibaraki University, Tōhoku University, and Utsunomiya University; and one private website, www.geocities.jp/

kounit/nitijyou-sonota/syumonaratametyou/newpage1.html. In addition, I consulted materials held at the Municipal Libraries of Funabashi and Isesaki as well as at Meiji University Museum through microfi lms kindly provided by the Family History Library of Salt Lake City. 

 

 

Villages of the Ten Provinces Dataset 275

Th

e remaining 80 percent of person-years come from local histories and a small number of articles, which I cite \(marked with an asterisk\) in the second and third sections of the bibliography. Without the eff orts of the many hundreds of archivists, historians, transcrib-ers, editors, and public-spirited owners of documents who participated in the creation of these collections of documents, this project would have been impossible. I acknowledge my profound debt to them with gratitude and admiration. 

 

 

 

## Total Fertility Rates
A PPE N D I X  F O U R

table a2 Total Fertility Rates in the Districts of the Ten Provinces, by Kuni. 

Only decades in which sample sizes reach 200 women-years are displayed. 

District 1650s 

1660s 

1670s 

1680s 

1690s 

1700s 

1710s 

1720s 

1730s 

1740s 1750s 1760s 1770s 1780s 1790s 1800s 1810s 1820s 1830s 1840s 1850s 1860s Mutsu \(Tsugaru lands\)

Tsugaru 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.6 6.4 — 5.4 4.3 5.9 5.6 5.5

Mutsu \(Nanbu lands\)

Hei 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.7 2.4 2.9 4.2

Kita 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1.8 — — — — 0.7 — —

Kunohe 

— — — — — — — — 5.0 3.6 — — — — — — — — — — — —

Ninohe 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1.9 — — — — 1.5 0.8 —

Sannohe 

— — — — — — — — 2.8 1.8 — 2.2 2.9 1.8 — — 2.0 2.2 — — — —

Shiwa 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1.5 1.8 — — — —

Mutsu \(Sendai\)

Esashi 

— 7.5 6.5 — — — — — — 4.7 3.4 — — 3.0 3.1 — 2.7 3.8 2.8 3.8 2.6 4.1

Igu 

— — — — — — 3.1 3.4 — — 1.4 3.9 — — — — 3.9 — — — — —

Iwai 

4.5 6.8 5.5 5.5 4.6 4.0 4.4 3.7 4.4 4.0 3.2 4.0 4.5 2.7 3.4 3.3 4.9 4.3 2.0 3.8 4.7 4.4

Katta 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.0 4.2 4.8 —

Kesen 

— — — 3.4 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.0 — — — — — — — — 2.5 3.8 4.7 3.2 4.9 5.0

Kurokawa 

— — — — — — — — — — 2.0 2.7 2.2 2.9 2.9 4.3 5.4 4.8 4.8 4.5 — —

Miyagi 

— 9.8 7.2 5.8 — — — — 5.4 5.1 — — — — 3.1 4.0 4.8 4.2 5.1 4.8 4.8 —

Monō 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4.5 4.3 3.9

Motoyoshi 

— 7.1 8.4 — — — — — — — — — — — 3.7 4.4 — — — 3.7 5.6 —

Oshika 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.8 5.1 5.1 — — —

 

 

Shibata 

— — — — — — — — — — — 3.6 3.1 2.9 4.9 4.7 5.4 4.5 — 6.0 7.7 6.9

Shida 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.8 1.8 — 5.0 3.6 — — —

Tamatsukuri — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 6.4 7.6

Tome 

8.6 7.2 5.5 — — — 2.8 3.3 2.9 3.8 3.2 3.7 — — — — 6.6 4.5 3.3 3.7 6.8 5.6

Tōda 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.5 4.3 — 4.0

Mutsu \(Aizu domain and Minamiyama Okurairiryō\)

Aizu 

6.4 4.5 4.9 4.8 4.6 3.4 3.4 3.2 3.4 3.2 2.8 3.8 4.0 3.4 4.0 4.3 3.6 4.2 3.5 3.6 4.3 5.0

Kawanuma 

8.0 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.7 4.3 3.7

Ōnuma 

6.0 7.6 3.7 3.3 5.1 3.5 5.5 4.9 4.3 4.3 3.7 4.0 3.5 3.5 3.9 3.9 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 3.4 3.3

Yama 

4.7 — 5.5 6.5 6.2 — — — — — 3.0 — — 3.6 — 3.9 3.4 4.1 4.1 3.8 4.2 4.0

Mutsu \(Nakadōri\)

Adachi 

5.9 5.5 5.2 4.6 — 3.8 4.3 6.2 3.6 3.8 3.0 3.6 — 2.7 3.4 3.2 3.8 4.3 3.7 3.8 4.5 4.4

Asaka 

— — — 3.4 2.5 2.4 3.4 3.4 3.0 3.8 3.1 3.9 4.0 4.2 5.1 4.2 4.3 4.5 3.7 3.6 4.6 4.6

Date 

— — — — — — — — 4.0 3.7 — 3.2 4.1 3.4 3.5 — 4.9 4.8 4.0 4.4 4.2 3.9

Higashishirakawa 

— — — — — — — — — 4.9 — — — — 5.2 4.0 4.5 2.8 4.1 5.3 4.8 5.7

Ishikawa 

— — — — — — — — — — — 4.2 3.3 — 5.0 3.8 3.9 — 3.3 4.7 5.0 4.7

Iwase 

— — 3.9 3.5 — — — — — 3.2 3.6 3.7 3.9 3.6 4.6 3.2 — — — — 4.5 3.2

Nishishirakawa 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.1 4.4 —

Shinobu 

— — — — — 5.3 3.8 4.5 3.9 — — — 5.7 — — — — — 4.8 4.6 4.9 4.3

Tamura 

— — — — — — — — 5.2 2.8 3.1 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.0 3.5 3.9 3.4 2.7 4.2 3.8 3.8

Mutsu \(Hamadōri\)

Iwaki 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.6 6.0

Iwasaki 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.5 4.5 4.0

Kikuta 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.5

Namekata 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 6.4 5.8

Shineha 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 6.3

*\(continued\)*

 

 

table a2 ***\(**continued\)*

District 1650s 

1660s 

1670s 

1680s 

1690s 

1700s 

1710s 

1720s 

1730s 

1740s 1750s 1760s 1770s 1780s 1790s 1800s 1810s 1820s 1830s 1840s 1850s 1860s Dewa

Akumi 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4.0 — —

Mogami 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.0 5.5 5.0

Murayama 

— — 4.3 4.3 4.4 3.6 2.9 4.2 3.4 4.4 3.1 4.4 3.2 2.9 3.8 3.1 3.7 4.9 4.0 4.6 5.3 4.2

Oitama 

— — — — 4.1 4.4 — 5.0 4.4 — — — — — 3.4 3.0 4.0 — — — 5.1 —

Tagawa 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.9 — — — — 3.3 — 5.1 4.5

Yuri 

— — — — — — — — — — 3.4 4.5 — — — — 4.0 3.7 — 4.3 2.9 3.0

Sado

Hamochi 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.0 — — — — —

Kamo 

— — — — — — — — 5.0 — — — — — 5.6 4.5 — — — — 3.8 2.7

Sawata 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.2 3.3 — — —

Echigo

Iwafune 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.0 3.3 4.7 4.5 4.4 3.7 4.8 4.0 2.9

Kanbara 

6.2 5.3 6.6 6.3 6.9 — 6.8 4.5 3.9 4.8 4.7 6.3 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.8 4.5 4.5 4.6 4.0 4.1

Kariwa 

— — — 6.3 5.5 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.1 2.4 4.2

Kubiki 

4.5 4.3 3.7 4.1 3.8 2.9 3.9 3.1 4.1 4.3 5.0 4.0 5.7 2.9 4.6 4.6 4.9 5.8 4.6 4.5 3.8 3.4

Santō 

— — — 8.5 3.6 — — — — — — 5.1 4.4 3.4 2.0 — — — 6.0 5.5 — —

Uonuma 

6.1 — 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.8 3.2 — 3.2 — 4.0 2.9 1.3 — 2.7 — 4.4 5.9 4.2 — — —

Kōzuke

Agatsuma 

7.7 4.6 4.8 — — — — — 2.0 — 3.2 1.5 — — — — — — — — 6.5 7.8

Gunma 

— 3.8 2.8 2.6 3.3 — — — 2.4 2.5 1.4 — — 3.2 — 8.9 4.6 3.6 4.5 3.5 4.1 3.0

Kanra 

— — 5.6 3.7 2.2 2.9 2.3 2.1 3.2 2.8 2.1 3.9 2.8 3.0 3.3 3.5 2.8 3.3 3.3 3.4 3.1 3.8

 

 

Midono 

— — 4.1 4.3 4.7 3.4 3.8 2.4 3.4 4.0 3.6 3.0 3.3 3.5 — — — — 2.1 3.0 3.7 3.3

Nawa 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5.0 — —

Nitta 

4.3 4.2 3.6 3.3 3.2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.9 5.2 4.5

Ōra 

— — — — — — — — — 3.7 3.6 — 4.4 2.7 1.7 — — 5.0 5.4 4.0 6.3 4.7

Sai 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.8 3.8 2.9

Seta 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.7 3.3 — — 3.8 3.9 3.0 4.5 2.9

Tago 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Tone 

— — — — — — — — — — 3.6 3.7 — — 3.6 3.4 4.1 5.0 4.4 4.7 4.3 5.9

Usui 

— — — — — 4.3 — — — — — — — — — — — 3.1 2.6 2.9 2.5 —

Yamada 

— — — — 3.6 2.2 — — — — — 5.1 4.5 3.4 4.2 — — — 5.3 — — —

Shimotsuke

Ashikaga 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4.0 2.1 — — —

Aso 

— — 4.1 — — 3.9 — — — 2.5 3.4 — — — — — — — — — 2.9 —

Haga 

— — 3.1 3.8 4.0 — 3.6 4.2 — — — — — 2.5 3.6 3.5 3.7 4.4 5.5 5.7 6.6 5.1

Kawachi 

4.8 4.3 4.4 — — 3.6 3.3 4.0 4.0 3.1 4.0 — 4.2 2.9 3.1 2.8 4.2 3.6 3.8 3.6 4.1 3.8

Nasu 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4.5 3.4 4.5 1.5 —

Shioya 

— — — — — — — — — — — 4.9 4.4 3.2 3.5 — 3.7 4.0 — — 2.7 1.6

Tsuga 

— 3.3 3.0 3.1 3.4 1.9 1.9 3.7 3.0 3.0 3.7 3.8 3.8 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.6 3.7 4.0 4.3 4.2 3.4

Hitachi

Ibaraki 

— — 5.5 — 3.6 4.2 — 4.6 3.4 3.2 3.3 2.9 2.4 3.0 2.9 3.3 4.0 3.2 4.4 3.8 4.1 3.7

Kashima 

— — — 4.0 4.0 — — — — — — 4.8 — — — — — 3.4 3.5 — — —

Kōchi 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.8 4.0 3.4 — 2.9 3.1 3.4 2.6

Kuji 

4.2 — — — — — — — — — 2.8 — — 3.7 3.7 — — — — — — —

Makabe 

— 3.1 4.0 3.8 3.2 2.4 3.7 — 3.1 2.9 3.2 3.3 3.7 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.6 4.7 4.6 4.7 5.0 5.5

Naka 

— 3.0 4.7 6.6 — 4.6 4.0 — — — — 3.9 3.3 2.7 3.1 4.2 4.1 — 3.2 4.0 — —

Namegata 

— — — 3.5 4.1 3.5 — — — 3.0 3.4 — — — — — — — — 4.0 3.9 3.7

Niihari 

— 3.9 — 4.4 4.8 4.0 — — — — — — — — — — — 2.0 — — — —

 

*\(continued\)*

 

table a2 ***\(**continued\)*

District 1650s 

1660s 

1670s 

1680s 

1690s 

1700s 

1710s 

1720s 

1730s 

1740s 1750s 1760s 1770s 1780s 1790s 1800s 1810s 1820s 1830s 1840s 1850s 1860s Shida 

— — 4.1 5.0 4.7 — — — — 4.8 — — — — — — — — — — — —

Taga 

— — — — — 4.2 4.3 3.2 4.3 — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Tsukuba 

— — 3.5 3.5 3.1 — — — — 3.3 3.1 2.8 3.8 2.8 3.4 3.1 5.0 4.6 4.1 4.3 5.6 4.0

Shimōsa

Chiba 

— — — — — — — 5.9 1.4 — 3.7 4.5 4.5 4.3 7.2 — 6.0 4.4 5.6 4.9 3.8 4.0

Inba 

— — — 3.1 — 1.1 0.7 2.4 3.6 — — 3.9 4.2 3.5 — 5.6 4.6 4.1 4.6 3.9 4.5 3.8

Katori 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.6 — — — 3.8 4.2 5.0

Katsushika 

— — — — 5.6 4.8 — — — — — — 3.7 3.3 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.9 4.9 4.5 5.7 4.7

Sashima 

— 5.7 5.5 4.3 4.2 2.8 — — — — — 4.2 4.0 4.1 3.6 5.9 7.1 3.8 2.0 4.9 4.1 —

Shimo 

habu — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.1 3.6 3.4 2.9 3.6 3.4 3.2 3.0 2.7

Sōma 

— — — — 5.2 5.3 — — — — 4.6 3.9 5.1 3.9 1.9 3.9 3.8 5.2 3.6 3.5 4.0 2.7

Unagami 

— — — — — — — — 3.1 2.5 — — — 3.3 3.6 4.0 4.0 5.4 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.3

Yūki 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — 2.9 3.1 — — — — — — —

Kazusa

Ichihara 

— — — — — — — 4.4 4.9 — — — — — — — — — — 5.4 5.0 5.2

Isumi 

— — — 3.8 — 4.8 3.9 — — — 4.0 2.0 — — — — — 3.8 4.2 3.5 3.2 3.0

Mōda 

— — — — — — — — 2.7 — — 2.7 3.6 4.1 — 3.8 2.8 3.8 4.0 3.8 3.7 2.7

Musha 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.6 5.0 4.3 4.1

Nagara 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Susu 

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3.7 4.2 2.7 — 3.9 4.6 —

Yamabe 

— — — — — — — — 3.6 2.5 — 3.7 — — — 2.9 2.1 3.7 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.0

Awa

Nagasa 

— — — 6.4 5.7 3.1 — — — — — — 4.7 3.9 3.1 3.2 — — — 4.5 2.6 —

 

## Regional Infanticide Reputations
A PPE N D I X  F I V E

Regional Infanticide Reputations, 

According to Contemporary Statements

Sources that state regional infanticide reputations, in chronological order. Th e list does not 

include bans and other government pronouncements that merely stated that a region’s own subjects killed their infants. 

Manabe Gen’itsu \(Chūan\), *Hokuchiku zakkō* \(Kyoto, 1675\): Chikugo. 

Seki Sokō, *Jinkokuki* \(1701 ed.; the sixteenth-century original makes no mention of infanticide\): Mutsu. 

Yusa Bokusai, *Renseishō *\(Sendai, 1702 and 1719\): Mutsu, especially its northern part \(killing of twins\). 

Nishikawa Joken, *Hyakushō bukuro* \(Nagasaki, 1721\): in the mountains. 

Matsuzaki Kataomi, *Mado no susami *\(Tanba or Edo, 1724\): Shōnai and Tōgoku \(the East\) in general. 

Habu Zen’emon, *Yūminhen* \(Asō, 1737\): Tōkai no hama \(the Pacifi c coast\); Kantō and Mutsu. 

Matsudaira Katasada, decree \(Aizu, 1745\): Aizu. 

Bukkai Tenchō, *Fushi on’aishū *\(Shimotsuke-no-kuni Haga-gun Ii-mura, 1746\): Kōzuke and Shimotsuke and from the border of Hitachi and Shimōsa all the way to Mutsu. 

Tani Mashio, *Mitsugo no gi ontazune ni tsuki mōshiage tatematsuru kōjō oboe *\(1759\) and *Kingenjō *\(1759\): Tosa. 

Hayashi Ryūō, *Sendai kango *\(Sendai, 1764\): Mutsu. 

Shogunal ban on infanticide \(Edo, 1767\): especially in Shimotsuke and Hitachi. 

Uesugi Yōzan, *Seiji hoiku no satoshi *\(Yonezawa, 1771\): Mutsu and Dewa. 

Twelve villagers in fi ve villages in Shimotsuke-no-kuni Haga-gun, petition \(1772\): Shimotsuke. 

Nagakubo Sekisui, *Sūjōdan *\(Mito, 1773\): Hitachi. 

Nakane Zen’emon and Suzuki Han’emon, infanticide ban \(Shirakawa, 1781\): the peripheries of Mutsu. 

281

 

 

282 APPENDIX 5

Suzuki Hanbei, domain order \(Echigo Takada, 1781\): remote regions \( *hendochi*\) * * of Mutsu. 

Tsunematsu Jirōemon, *Shusshōji yōiku kanben no oboe *\(Kagaminuma in Shirakawa, 1784\): Mutsu, as opposed to Echigo. 

Hirota Yaemon, *Shimazaki kafū den* \(Kōchi, 1785\): Tosa. 

Inoue Shimei, *Keizai jūniron* \(Okayama, 1787\): Mutsu and, by implication, Hitachi, Shimotsuke, and Kōzuke. 

Ban Kōkei, *Kinsei kijin den* \(Kinai, 1788\): Kantō. 

Nakai Chikuzan, *Sōbō kigen *\(Osaka, 1789\): Hyūga, Mimasaka, Tōsui \(the Eastern periphery\). 

Suzuki Busuke, *Kono atari no akufūzoku* \(Kurobane, 1789\): an area of 40 or 50 leagues’ 

radius around Kurobane. 

Ebata Jirōemon, *Ikushihen* \(Mito, 1791\): Tōgoku. 

Fujita Yūkoku, *Hikanteiki *\(stela inscription in Hiraiso, 1791\): “the poor of Tōei” \(the East\). 

Gen Senshi, *Kosodatekusa *\(Hitachi, 1791\): Azuma. 

\[Jitsumeiin\] Kōson, *Kai Kantō jaken no to eiji shōsoku *\(Kyoto Nishi-Honganji, 1791\): 

“certain provinces” of the Kantō. 

Tokugawa Harumori, order to the magistrates of Mito domain \(Mito, 1791\): Hitachi and Shimotsuke. 

Suzuki Sekkyō, *Okusoku yojō *\(Kanuma in Shimotsuke, 1791\): Kantō. 

Tachikawa Atsumi, *Ikushikun *\(Mito, 1791\): Tōgoku. 

Ueda Tōzō, proposal \(Aizu, 1791\): Mutsu, especially Aizu. 

Board of Temples and Shrines, injunction \(Edo, 1792\): fi ve of the eight Kantō provinces. 

Forty-six villagers of Kameyama, oath \(Shimotsuke-no-kuni Haga-gun, 1792\): Shimotsuke, Hitachi, Shimōsa. 

Hayashizaki Shoin \(the academy of Ise Shrine\), *Ikushihen batsu *\(Ise, 1793\): “remote places” 

\( *henchi*\). 

Sakairi Juntoku, *Ikushi kyōkabun *\(Southern Hitachi, 1793\): Hitachi, Shimōsa, Kazusa, Mutsu, Shimotsuke, and Kōzuke. 

Taiken, *Akago yōiku kanjin no hiki* \(Sendai, 1794\): Azuma. 

Takahashi Gendō, *Nōgyō shōni shikyōben *\(Sendai, 1794\): Sendai or Mutsu \(ambiguous\). 

Akita domain, decree to Shimotsuke territories \(Akita, 1797\): Shimotsuke. 

Ōhara Sakingo, *Hokuchi kigen *\(Edo, 1797\): northeast of the capital \(Edo\), especially Mutsu and Dewa. 

Honda Toshiaki, *Keisei hisaku *\(Edo, 1798\): by implication, Kantō, Mutsu, and Dewa. 

Honda Toshiaki, *Seiiki monogatari* \(Edo, 1798\): most prevalent in the ten provinces of the Kantō and the Northeast; customary in the provinces east of Hakone-tōge; to a lesser extent practiced in secret in Kamigata, Chūgoku, and Saigoku. 

Kansuke and the headmen of another ninety-six villages in Mimasaka and Bitchū, petition \(1798\): Mimasaka and Bitchū. 

Satō Kōzui, *Go-kyōyu engi* \(Sendai, 1798\): Mutsu. 

Hayakawa Masatoshi, *Kuze jōkyō* \(Kuze in Mimasaka, 1799\): Mimasaka. 

Hirose Ten, *Keisatsushi* \(Shirakawa, 1790s\): Shimotsuke and/or Kōzuke \(ambiguous\), Mutsu. 

Matsudaira Sadanobu, *Fukyō jōyaku* \(Edo, ca. 1790s\): Mutsu, Shimotsuke, and \(ambiguous\) Kōzuke. 

 

 

Infanticide Reputations 283

Uezaki Kuhachirō, *Sensaku zasshū *\(Edo, 1801\): Kantō and Okusuji \(that is, Mutsu\). 

Umebori Kokuga, *Kinoene yawa* \(Edo, 1801\): Mutsu, Hitachi. 

Sakai Tadaakira, printed infanticide ban \(Isesaki, 1802\): Kōzuke. 

Anonymous, *Asanetarō *\(1805\): Fukuoka. 

Karasuyama domain, *Kyōka no furegaki* \(Karasuyama, 1807\): Shimotsuke and neighboring provinces. 

Tomita Tokufū, *Takaoka tōwa* \(Takaoka in Etchū, 1807\): Mutsu. 

Komiyama Fūken and Suzuki Taihan, *Tokujun iji* \(Mito, 1808\): Hitachi, Shimotsuke, Kōzuke, and Mutsu. 

Onuki Banchi, *Nōka shōkeishō *\(Onuki in Shimotsuke, 1808\): Shimotsuke. 

Anonymous, *Rōnō chawa *\(1810\): Hitachi and Shimotsuke. 

Shiba Kōkan, *Shunparō hikki* \(Edo, 1811\): Chikuzen, Chikugo, Buzen, Bungo, Hyūga, Hitachi, Dewa, and Mutsu. 

Yūki Sadamori, *Zenkōroku* \(Utsunomiya, 1811\): Shimotsuke. 

Satō Nobuhiro, memorandum to Hikita Shōtōsai * *\(1812\): Akita. 

Jōfukuji Senkei, inscription on back of Jōsenji scroll \(Urizura, 1813\): Mutsu and Dewa. 

Kameda Kōsai, stela in honor of Takegaki Naoharu \(Hitachi-no-kuni Tsukuba-gun Kamigō-mura, 1815\): Hitachi, Shimotsuke, and \(ambiguous\) Kōzuke. 

Satō Nobuhiro, *Sappan keiiki* \(1816\): Tōgoku and Okusuji \(infanticide\) and Satsuma \(especially abortion\). 

Buyō Inshi, *Seji kenbunroku *\(prob. Edo, 1816\): discounts the claim that infanticide was rampant in Hitachi and Shimotsuke. 

Anonymous, Tan’ikuzuka stela \(Hanawa, 1819\): Mutsu’s border region with Hitachi. 

Ōta Zensai, *Rigon shūran* \(Edo, 1797–1829\): around Hitachi and Shimotsuke. 

Anonymous, *Yōiku ubuko nagauta *\(Southern Aizu, 1820\): fi ve of the sixty-six provinces of Japan, including Mutsu. 

Sekiguchi Toyotane, *Yōiku kyōyu* \(Iwaki, 1822\): Iwaki. 

Nabeta Shōzan, *Iwaki-shi* \(Sōma, 1826\): Mutsu, Dewa, Shimōsa, Kōzuke, and esp. Hitachi, Shimotsuke, Iwaki, and Sōma. 

Satō Nobuhiro, *Keizai yōroku* \(1827\): Mutsu, Dewa, Kantō, Chūgoku, Shikoku, and Kyushu. 

Matsudaira Sadanobu, *Uge no hitokoto *\(Shirakawa or Edo, 1816\): Kantō. 

Ryōkei of Sainenji, *Iribyakushō hottan no ki* \(Kasama, 1829\), citing an address in 1793 by Makino Sadaharu: Hitachi. 

Ōkura Nagatsune, *Denka chawa *\(1829\): rural regions far from Kyoto. 

Satō Nobuhiro, *Nōsei honron *\(1829\): throughout Japan. 

Satō Nobuhiro, *Sōmoku rokubu kōshuhō* \(1832\): Kazusa and/or Shimōsa \(ambiguous\). 

Arai Nobuaki, *Sekishi yashinaigusa* \(Sendai, 1834\): Michinoku \(i.e., Mutsu\). 

Saitō Sūzan \(in Hayakawa Masanori’s name\), *Kuse jōkyō tanwa *\(prob. Musashi, 1834\): Mimasaka and Kantō. 

Yamazaki Yoshiharu, *Zonnensho *\(Sakura, 1834\): the districts of Inba and Habu \(Shimohabu\) in Shimōsa. 

Anonymous, *Hito ha banbutsu no rei nite* \(prob. Tsuyama, 1835\): “this province” \(i.e., Mimasaka\). 

Anonymous, *Sore hito ha tenchi in’yō *\(Tsuyama, 1835\): Tsuyama in Mimasaka. 

 

 

284 APPENDIX 5

Haga Ichisaburō, *Tenpō junken nikki* \(Edo, 1837\): three districts in southern Hitachi. 

Anonymous, *Ukiyo no arisama *\(1844 or later\): Hyūga. 

Kubo Shirōzaemon, petition \(Chichibu, 1845\): Chichibu in Musashi. 

Matsuura Takeshirō, *Tōō enkai nisshi *\(1850\): Hirosaki in Mutsu, especially in the center of the domain. 

Nakamura Kannōe, *Satoshikusa *\(Hitachi, 1851\): “this province” \(i.e., Hitachi\). 

Ishida Ryūgen, *Banmin kokoro no kagami *\(Aizu, 1854\): in remote mountains. 

Maebashi domain, *Shirasubeshi* \(Maebashi, 1857 \[m.s.\]\): Kōzuke. 

Giten, *Shoaku bakusaku shozen bugyō enmei kosodate wasan* \(Kōzuke Usui, n.d. but before 1868\): “the backwoods nearby” \(Kōzuke\). 

Anonymous, *Kooroshi kyōkadan *\(ms., n.d. but before 1868.\): Shimōsa, Hitachi, and other provinces. 

Yasuda Mitsunori, *Oppu onna hitotabi ni san no wonokoko umeru no ki* \(Sendai, 1868\): Azuma in the past. 

Hashizume Bin, *Hichū *\(Tosa, 1869\): “our seven districts south of the sea” \(i.e., Tosa\). 

Ichihara Matajirō, policy proposal found in a fragment inside a sliding door \(Shirakawa, ca. 1870\): Mutsu and surrounding provinces. 

Shibahara Yawara, ordinance \(Kisarazu, October 1873\): Awa and Kazusa past and present. 

Shima Korekiyo, *Datai insatsu nado ni tsuki tatsu no ken* \(Morioka, 1873\): Sanriku \(i.e., northeastern Mutsu\), Uzen, and Ugo. 

Tsuruta Akira, discussions about the new criminal law code with Gustave Emile Boissonade \(ca. 1876\): mountains and remote regions \(abortion\). 

Watanabe Keiki, illustrated fl yer \(Aizu Minamiyama Nagano, n.d.\): Michinoku \(Mutsu\). 

R E P U TAT I O N S F O R A B S T I N E N C E F R O M I N FA N T I C I D E

Several of the references below are cited in Arimoto Masao, *Shinshū no shūkyō shakaishi*, 207–214. 

Bukkai Tenchō, *Fushi on’aishū *\(Shimotsuke-no-kuni Haga-gun Ii-mura, 1746\): Saigoku, Hokkoku \(i.e., Hokuriku\), Kyushu, Shikoku, and other provinces. 

Hirota Yaemon, *Shimazaki kafū den* \(Kōchi, 1785\): Izumo. 

Gen Senshi, *Kosodatekusa* \(Hitachi, 1791\): many of the provinces west of the Barrier \(at Hakone\). 

Honda Toshiaki, *Seibi jijō* \(Edo, 1795\): Fukuyama domain in Bingo. 

Buyō Inshi, *Seji kenbunroku *\(Edo, 1816\): all provinces where Jōdoshinshū is widespread. 

Ryōkei of Sainenji, *Iribyakushō hottan no ki* \(Kasama, 1829\): Hokkoku. 

Satō Nobuhiro, *Keizai yōroku *\(1827\): Echigo. 

Sainenji Ryōkei, *Iribyakushō hottan no ki *\(Kasama, 1829\): Hokkoku. 

Kubo Shirōzaemon, petition \(Chichibu, 1845\): Echigo. 

An unnamed merchant whom Kawai Tsugunosuke of Nagaoka met near Hiroshima in 1859 and cited in his *Chiritsubo *\(1859\): Aki. 

 

 

## Scrolls and Votive Tablets
A PPE N D I X  S I X

Scrolls and Votive Tablets with 

Infanticide Scenes

DAT E D

Tsutsumidai Kosodate Enmei Jizōson 

Daienji \(Katashina-mura, 1809\)

\(Noda-shi, 1863\)

Jōsenji \(Shirakawa-shi, 1809\)

Taiyūji \(Minamisanriku-machi, 1864\)

Sōkeiin \(Ōzu-shi, 1814\)

Kasamoriji \(Chōnan-machi, 1889\)

Jōkōji \(Kawanishi-machi, 1824; now lost\)

Dōunji \(Date-shi, 1894\)

Kokushōji \(Kawanishi-machi, 1824; now 

Fukugonji \(Date-shi, 1894\)

lost\)

Ontokuji \(Iide-machi, 1894\)

Kōtokuji \(Kawanishi-machi, 1824; 

Senseiin \(Date-shi, 1895\)

now lost\)

Doppara Jizōdō \(Sakura-shi, 1897\)

Shakuzenji \(Kawanishi-machi, 1824; now 

lost\)

N O DAT E

Taiheiji \(Minaminasu-machi, 1825\)

Banshū Kiyomizudera \(Katō-shi, probably 

Anzan Inari Shrine \(Utsunomiya-shi, 1826\)

before 1650; original location in the 

Kyūdenji \(Ishinomaki-shi, 1826; now lost\)

Kantō\)

Rakumanji \(Narita-shi, 1840\)

Hōrinji \(Takasaki-shi, 1850s\)

Mobara Kannondō \(Utsunomiya-shi, 1843\)

Hōshōji \(Utsunomiya-shi, now lost\)

Shōrenji \(Ōta-shi, 1844\)

Kannonji \(Shōō-machi, described in 1878; 

Shinkōji Yakushidō \(Shibukawa-shi, 1846\)

now lost\)

Guzeiin \(Kashiwa-shi, 1847\)

Kansenji \(Shichigashuku-machi, 

Haba Hie Shrine \(Minamikami-machi, 

abortion scene\)

1847\)

Kichijōji \(Iidemachi, aft er 1826 and before 

Fukiya Yakushidō \(Shibukawa-shi, 1852\)

1894\)

Chikatsu Shrine \(Tochigi-shi, 1856\)

Kikusuiji \(Chichibu-shi\)

Jōkōji \(Haga-machi, 1857\)

Kuriyama Kannondō \(Tsukubamirai-shi, 

Shimoyama Jizōdō \(Minamiaizu-machi, 

survival not confi rmed\)

1858\)

285

 

 

286 APPENDIX 6

Manganji \(Inashiki-shi\)

Sengen Shrine \(Sayama-shi\)

Narita Fudōdō \(Fukushima-shi\)

Shōgenji \(Tendō-shi, probably aft er 1826 

Nichirinji \(Maebashi-shi\)

and before 1894\)

Onahama Sumiyoshi Shrine 

Shōrenji \(Ōta-shi\)

\(Iwaki-shi\)

Sōjiji \(Yokohama-shi; not original 

Sarugakyō Jūni Shrine \(Minamikami-

location\)

machi\)

Taiheiji \(Minaminasu-machi\)

Seiganji Rakandō \(Ōshū-shi, before ca. 

Tokumanji \(Tone-machi\)

1840; survival not confi rmed\)

Yamamoto Kannondō \(Fukushima-shi; 

Seimonji \(Adachi-ku, possibly a 

1950s copy of Senseiin, 1895 \[see above\]\)

modern copy of Tokumanji \[see below\]\)

Yasaki Yakushidō \(Shibukawa-shi, 1870s\)

P I C T U R E S A N D D E S C R I P T I O N S O F I N FA N T I C I D E S C R O L L S A N D E M A In addition to the sources below, municipal histories, museum catalogues, and the employees of town halls provided invaluable help in locating the tablets and scrolls. In viewing the artifacts, I have relied on the assistance of priests, private owners, shrine attendants, the staff of local town halls, and museum curators, especially Jingū Yoshihiko of the Gunma Prefectural Museum. 

*Individual Authors*

Abe and Nagamura, eds., *Zusetsu Tochigi-ken no rekishi, * 180; Aida and Ōishi, eds., *Edo jidai hitozukuri fudoki 10, * 150; Chiba and Ōtsu, *Mabiki to mizuko, * 65–78; Irie, *Tochigi-ken no* *kyōikushi, * frontispiece; Ishihara and Iino, *Zusetsu Takasaki no rekishi, * 139; Komatsu, “Utsunomiya shinai”; Kuno, “Mabiki-zu ni miru kogoroshi no hōhō” and “E wo yomu shiten”; Matsuzaki, “Tōhoku chihō no mabiki-e”; Morikuri, “Mizuko kuyō,” 99; Nakahachi, *Yōikukun;* Nan’yō-shi Yuzuru-no-sato, eds., *Nan’yō no ema, * 17; Obukata, “Mabiki ema shōkō”; Ono, Satō, and Manome, eds., *Zusetsu Iwaki no rekishi, * 151; Sakamoto, “Gunma no kogaeshi ema”; Sakurai, “Mabiki to datai,” 101; Sutō, *Ōema shūsei, * 84 and 187; Takahashi, *Nihon jinkōshi 1,* 444, 709–711. 

*Museum Catalogs*

Fukushima Kenritsu Hakubutsukan, eds., *Sei no naka no shi, * 29–35; Gunma Kenritsu Hakubutsukan, eds., *Gunma no ema; * Ibaraki Kenritsu Rekishikan, eds., *Inori no rekishi* *to minzoku ema, * 69–71; Iwate Kenritsu Hakubutsukan, eds., * Sei to shi to, * 56; Matsudo-shi Hakubutsukan, eds., *Sukui no minzoku, * 36, 59; Sendai-shi Hakubutsukan, eds., *Sendai-shi* *Hakubutsukan tenji zuroku, * image 192; Tochigi Kenritsu Hakubutsukan, eds., *Tochigi no* *ema; * and Tōkyō Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan, eds., *Bijutsu no naka no kodomotachi, * 86. 

*Local Histories*

*Abiko shishi shiryō kinsekibun-hen 3, * 20; *Chiba-ken no rekishi shiryōhen Kin-Gendai, * 15; *Fujisawa chōshi, * 522; *Hanayama sonshi, * 238; *Katashina sonshi, * 232; *Komemaki sonshi, * 176; *Nakaminato shishi Kinsei, * 24; *Ojima chōshi tsūshihen, * frontispieces; *Shibukawa shishi 2 *

*tsūshihen Genshi-Kinsei, * frontispiece; *Tochigi kenshi tsūshihen 5, * 1072; *Ujiie chōshi minzoku,* 249; *Zusetsu Hitachi shishi, * 101. 

 

 

## Childrearing Subsidies
A PPE N D I X  S EV E N

Childrearing Subsidies and Pregnancy 

Surveillance by Domain

Th

e name of the domain or intendancy is followed by year of introduction. A dagger \(†\) following the date indicates subsidies; an asterisk \(\*\) indicates surveillance. 

Tsushima 1667†

Sōma 1787†

Shinjō 1694\* and 1718\* and 1733\*, 1751†

Kuse Intendancy 1789\*

Fukuoka 1736† in Munakata-gun, 1764† in 

Ichinoseki ca. 1790†

whole domain, 1800\*

Iwahana Intendancy 1791†

Shōnai 1739†

Izumi 1792†

Nihonmatsu 1745†, 1805\*

Mito 1791†\*

Miharu 1746†, 1788\*

Tsuchiura 1791†, 1833\*

Shirakawa 1749† in Sukagawa, ca. 1789 in 

Yonezawa 1792†\*

entire domain†

Yūki 1792†, 1794\*

Kurume 1749†

Hanawa 1792†, 1794\*

Shinjō 1751†

Akita 1797† in Shimotsuke possessions, 

Kurobane 1762†

1807† in Senboku-gun, 1822† in 

Sendai 1768† in Kesen-gun, fund for whole 

Hiraka-gun and Ogachi-gun, 1828† in 

domain in 1794†, comprehensive policies 

castletown, 1823\* according to one source

in 1807†\*

Mōka Intendancy 1797†\*

Kumamoto ca. 1770†\*

Fujioka Intendancy ca. 1798†

Takanabe ca. 1770†

Obata 1799†

Aizu 1776†, reinforced 1805†, 1825\*

Tayasu 1790s†, by 1858\*

Karasuyama 1779†

Kamigō Intendancy 1801†\*

Takada 1781†\*

Isesaki 1802†

Tsuyama 1781\*

Annaka 1806†, 1808\*

Ōtawara 1782†

Kasama 1809†\*

Asō 1783†\*

Kumihama Intendancy ca. 1810† in 

Karatsu 1783†\*

Yoshino-gun

287

 

 

288 APPENDIX 7

Matsuyama ca. 1810† in Kazahaya-gun, 

Moriyama 1831†

1838† in Kamiukena-gun

Obi 1832†\*

Oshi by 1810†

Komoro 1833†

Kōri Intendancy 1814†\*

Sakura 1838†, 1847\*

Nanokaichi 1816†

Ushiku 1851†\*

Minamiyama Okurairiryō ca. 1817†

Yashima 1853†\*

Numata 1818†\*

Shogunal territories in Shinano 

Maebashi 1822†

Takai-gun 1861\*

Th

e villages of Ueguri and Mishima 

Iwamurata 1863†\*

\(bannerman territory\) in 

Bannerman Kōriki in Kazusa, ca. 

Agatsuma-gun 1828†

1854–1868\*
