+++
title = "1"

+++

Before the Southern Question: "Native" Ideas on Backwardness and Remedies in the Kingdom of Two Sicilies, 1815–1849

*Marta Petrusewicz *

Recently, a historian wrote that "the Southern Question was not born with the political unification of Italy; it had its roots in the history of the Mezzogiorno" \(De Rosa 1993: v\). But this is an unusual position. For most scholars today, the "Question," understood as a global representation of the Mezzogiorno's people and heritage, was born after 1860, in the wake of the Risorgimento. The arguments are mainly about what there was in the process of Unification that caused the "Question" to crystallize as a discourse. Some scholars, following the well-known thesis of Emilio Sereni \(1974\), claim that, by broadening the market, unification simply exposed what was already there — namely the structural "backwardness" of the southern economy. Others, in the Gramscian tradition, see Unification and its aftermath as having provided an opportunity for southern agrarian conservative interests to strike a mutually advantageous alliance with northern industrialists; this so-called "historical bloc" in turn caused the economic dualism that condemned the South to the role of a permanent periphery. Yet others, influenced by the dependency school, interpret unification as straightforward colonization. In one, economically-oriented, version of this scenario, northern colonizers forcibly destroyed the existing industries of the South in order to turn the Mezzogiorno into an outlet for northern commodities and a source of cheap and compliant labor. In a second, more political version, the emphasis is placed on the "conquest of the South," the conqueror overthrowing, *manu militari*, a legitimate southern dynasty and pillaging the territory that was defeated. 

It is not only that scholars have generally located the origins of the "Southern Question" in the Risorgimento. Until recently, its dominant representation has been composed of economic, social and political elements measured against broad Enlightenment-inspired criteria of progress or development. The result was a series of narratives, at times romantic, at times merely condescending, of failure: the failure or betrayal of the intellectuals; the failure of the popular classes to understand the terms, forms, and directions of collective action; the failure of developmental institutions, from the late-eighteenth-century Cassa Sacra to the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno after the Second World War; the failure of self-government and autonomy. From the beginning of the 1980s, however, in the political climate generated in part by the Northern League movement of Umberto Bossi, the Southern Question has been rephrased as a cultural and emotional one. It has become the Question of the North as much as of the South - an issue that seems to produce more anxiety in the North than in the South. 

Meanwhile, southern historians and social scientists — the "new meridionalists" — have begun to challenge this frozen image, questioning the very concept of the "South." Numerous studies have shown that there was not one South, nor even two, as in Manlio Rossi Doria's famous "l'osso e la polpa," but many. And, whereas earlier the issue of poverty loomed large among the southern problems that scholars felt compelled to address, today other concerns have taken over, namely uncertainties surrounding law, and the rights, duties, and obligations of citizens. At the same time, social and intellectual historians and literary critics have studied the very idea of the South as a social construction.1 

In this chapter, I propose to contribute to the current debate in the following ways. First, I explore the cultural climate prevalent in the Neapolitan Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, also called the Kingdom of Naples or the Neapolitan Kingdom, before the "Southern Question" was articulated, and in particular the southern perception of this country's backwardness and possible remedies. Second, I reexamine the chronology of the Question, proposing the year 1848 as the critical moment in its emergence. Third, I suggest that Southerners themselves played a leading role in constructing the South as a Question. The discussion focuses on the ideas that were prevalent among intellectuals and in what we might call public opinion in the Kingdom, and on the social practices that helped to disseminate these ideas internally before 1848, and in exile afterwards. I concern myself here only with the discourses of the broadly defined southern intelligentsia, and shall not discuss their implementation. Nor shall I examine 'popular' representations of the country's condition. 

The culture of the southern intelligentsia had its roots in the 1700s. Some aspects of the Neapolitan Kingdom's eighteenth-century history help to clarify this background. Unlike many other political entities of the Italian peninsula, the Kingdom of Naples was a sovereign state, having achieved independence from Spain in 1734. No longer a vice-royalty, it was governed stably by one dynasty, which rapidly became "neapolitanized." The passage from vice-kingdom to kingdom meant the possibility of pursuing an autonomous foreign policy, of exploring and expanding new commercial opportunities, and of dealing with the Papacy from a position of strength. On the domestic front independence meant a lessening of burdensome fiscal pressures and the possibility of breaking with the Spanish court tradition, in which corruption, violence, and intrigue were integral aspects of rule. Although the new Kingdom remained within the Spanish sphere of influence, its independence gave considerable impetus to administrative and economic reforms. 

Many attitudes and innovations of the new age had been anticipated by the Spanish and Neapolitan reformers of the seventeenth century, but had received scant attention in their day. Now, in the climate of a remarkable recovery and a widespread effort to improve the material conditions of the country, royal councilors and men of letters read their predecessors' works assiduously, had them republished, and experimented with putting their ideas into effect. The minister Bernardo Tanucci's attempts at reform, with all their limitations, were remarkably coherent, aimed at restricting feudal privilege, restructuring public finance and taxation, reorganizing the prison system, and reducing the wealth and power of the Church. He successfully carried out the formation of a modern cadastre, reorganized the *annona* system, negotiated a Concordat with the Papacy, and expelled the Jesuits. In European eyes, Naples, although still believed to be surrounded by a countryside of exotic *barbarie*, was one of the more important cultural capitals. The splendid San Carlo theater was built in this period, art and music flourished, and the first archaeological excavations at Herculaneum and the discovery of Paestum took place. And what was of particular significance was that intellectuals began meeting and conversing in salons. 

The young king Ferdinand, who reigned from 1759 \(through Tanucci\) to 1825, was eager to build up the strength of his state and make a name for himself. Although personally not well educated, he saw himself as a member of that vigorous cohort of "enlightened despots" that included his own father, Charles I II of Spain, Frederick II of Prussia, and Joseph II of Austria. Like those monarchs, Ferdinand was at once a political conservative and a committed modernizer. Unwilling to concede a constitution, he nevertheless sought to improve the economic and social conditions of the kingdom. He encouraged industry, commerce and innovation, and attempted a fiscal reform. The Cassa Sacra, created after the huge earthquake in Calabria in 1783 to expropriate and sell ecclesiastical lands, was an attempt at a quite radical land reform that involved the redistribution of the Church's wealth and the curtailing of baronial privileges. In the end, though, the Cassa Sacra was a deceptive façade, like the contemporary villages of Potiomkin, behind which the old regime remained intact. By 1789 the French Revolution and the attendant regicide had generated the "great fear" that afflicted monarchies everywhere, and Ferdinand's program of reforms was abandoned and even reversed. Enlightened despotism, as Benedetto Croce once said, threw off the cloak of the enlightenment and remained just despotic. 

And yet, while his reforming spirit lasted, Ferdinand sought the opinions of scholars, courted their approval, and tolerated critical writings so long as they did not question the institution of dynastic monarchy. And the intelligentsia responded enthusiastically. For example, poets and scholars acclaimed the San Leucio royal manufacturing complex, an experimentation in "harmonious," almost Utopian, industrialization; the poet Eleonora Fonseca Pimentel even wrote an "Ode" to it. Meanwhile, the University of Naples was revamped, creating the first chair of political economy in continental Europe, which went to the noted economist, Antonio Genovesi. It was a period of intellectual giants whose writings made the Neapolitan Enlightenment famous in Europe. 

One of the main questions pondered by these "public intellectuals" was the backwardness of the Neapolitan Kingdom. Despite their different theoretical and political perspectives, there emerged a common catalog of evils that were argued to be hampering the country's progress. Its main points were widely publicized. First, the feudal institutions of primogeniture and entailment, and the ecclesiastical institution of *mainmorte*, were faulted for immobilizing huge tracts of land, preventing the formation of a land market. Second, the iniquity of the fiscal system burdened and stifled the entrepreneurial and laborious classes while favoring parasites. Third, baronial jurisdiction, never just, was made even more unfair and arbitrary by the indifference of its absentee administrators. Fourth, the ambiguity of the land tenure system, and in particular, the absence of clearly defined private property in land, made agricultural improvement impractical. Fifth, the poverty, ignorance and superstition of the peasants hampered social and economic "improvement". 

Thus articulated, the catalog was not, however, a specifically *southern* question, but a question of "normal backwardness," common to most of Europe, its various elements applying, *mutatis mutandis*, to many other countries. Moreover, the Neapolitan intellectuals who drew up the list relied upon the same pool of references that enlightened reformers were turning to everywhere. Throughout eighteenth-century Europe, reformers attributed social and economic evils to one structural cause, feudalism, and argued that, if progress were to occur, feudalism would have to be abolished. 

These eighteenth-century ideas, and the actions they inspired, constituted the collective cultural memory of the Neapolitan intelligentsia of the century to follow. But the younger generation was drastically separated from its enlightened *maîtres à penser* by the experiences of the period 1799-1815: revolution, civil war, foreign rule, and more than one defeat. The year 1799 had been a revolutionary year in Naples, and numerous students of the great masters — for example Vincenzo Cuoco, who was to author a rich essay on the Neapolitan Revolution of 1799, an invaluable source for future scholars \(Cuoco 1913 \[1800\]\) - participated in both the revolutionary activity and the Parthenopean Republic that overthrew the monarchy. This group directly experienced the collapse of national institutions, the flight of the monarch, the misinterpretation of their Republic's goals, the terrible "God and King" popular crusade against the Republic, and the eventual massacre of the "Jacobins" at the hands of the Neapolitan *lazzari*. Victims of the mob's rage, they lived through or witnessed cruel and semi-legal trials, mass executions, prison, and exile. In 1806, after the French kings, Joseph and then Murat, had been installed in Naples by Napoleon's troops, the survivors returned, committed to supporting the alien monarch in *his* modernizing effort. There followed the "happy decade," at the end of which the Bourbon Kingdom of Naples was restored, forcing this intelligentsia into exile yet again. The result was a decimated generation, wounded and humiliated, its members burdened with a sense of responsibility for having been witnesses and accomplices to the surrender of Neapolitan sovereignty before the generals of foreign armies. The burden was heavy even when the invader represented Reason. Considering themselves "patriots," they had, after all, given in to French demands. According to one of the most interesting of them, Cuoco, they had thereby rendered their revolution "passive." Furthermore, they had to endure a restoration as passive as the revolution. 

From those experiences came a new way of thinking, which flourished during the Restoration. The post-Napoleonic intelligentsia did not reject the *problematique* of the cohort of the revolution, but did challenge many of their founding ideas, methods, and political choices. Their main attack was directed at the universalism of the Enlightenment, the idea of the blind application of foreign recipes, contempt for native customs and institutions, and remoteness from popular sentiment.2 Yet another generation, influenced by romanticism like its contemporaries in other parts of Europe, searched for local traditions, spirits of the local territory. Rediscovering their own national past, they found inspiration in their Neapolitan forebear, Gianbatista Vico, who had held the chair of rhetoric at the University of Naples in the early 1700s. Vico's *Scienza Nuova* was prescient in arguing for an approach to historical studies that took different societies on their own terms, rather than in terms of universalizing categories like "human nature." The new "romantic generation," if we can refer to them thus, initiated programs of local action, making use of new regional forms of sociability and communication such as associations and journals. Their emphasis on "localism" made them influential in the provinces. All told, the new way of feeling, thinking, and relating helped, as it spread, to form a middle-class "opinion," increasingly focused on organizing and inhabiting what might be called a "civic" space. 

The period 1799-1815 changed not only the *Weltanschauung* of the intelligentsia but also of the country. "Murat fell in 1815; but the laws, usages, opinions, and hopes which had been impressed on the *popolo* for ten years, did not fall with him" — thus wrote Pietro Colletta \(1967 \[1834\] book VIII: 701\), himself a protagonist of the "decade." Most importantly, feudalism had been abolished. Although the Bourbons returned to the throne in 1815, they did not, and could not, restore feudal institutions. On the contrary, bound by treaties and advised by common sense, Ferdinand maintained as much of the administrative and institutional structure, and as many of the appointments, of the "decade" as possible. The fact that he made no attempt to reinstate feudalism, which had for so long been considered the primary obstacle to any successful reform, conferred upon the Restoration regime a character of its own, different from that of the *Ancien Régime*. This second restoration was also less radical and less vengeful than the first, the absolutism of the years 1815—1848 being considered generally mild. For example, freedom of the press and of expression was broad, even if punctuated by periods of aggressive censorship. Moreover, although secret societies were banned by law, this stricture on free association was more effective against the reactionary *Calderari* than against the better-organized progressive or radical *Carbonari*. Similarly, Ferdinand signed a new Concordat with Rome; but its most restrictive stipulations \(such as the power to censor or suppress any books or journals deemed heretical\) were not enforced. The King was a reactionary, but not a fanatic. More like Louis XVIII than Charles X, he favored at least some form of modernization. 

The main bone of contention between the throne and the intelligentsia was the question of the constitution and of representative government. Between 1815 and 1848 there unfolded a succession of promises and negotiations, another revolution, concessions, abrogations, repression and forgiveness. In 1815 the intelligentsia, as ignorant as everyone else about the terms of a secret treaty with Austria, were persuaded that it would be easy to obtain a constitution from Ferdinand: after all, he had conceded one in Sicily; his hostile wife, Maria Carolina, was dead; his prime minister, Luigi de' Medici, was a modernizer; and the king had already made a conciliatory gesture by sacking the rabidly reactionary minister of the police, the Prince of Canosa. Through renewed revolution, a constitution was in fact granted in 1820, along with a parliament and a reformist government. The intellectuals who thereby trusted the king were bitterly disappointed when, only a year later, he called for an Austrian invasion, abrogating the new constitution and giving the reinstated Canosa a free hand in the persecution of the *Carbonari*. 

This counter-revolution provoked a collective depression made worse by economic and fiscal difficulties. The gloomy mood did not last long, however, as hope returned in 1825 when Ferdinand died. His successor, Francis I, was weak and allowed the corrupt court *camarilla* to rule the country. Nevertheless, he dismissed Canosa, brought back de' Medici and, above all, had the sense to die quickly. Young Ferdinand II's accession to the throne in 1830 was greeted with enthusiasm. He had a clear idea of his program: no representative government, but a serious effort to modernize the state and society. As he himself put it in a letter to his uncle Louis Philippe: "With the help of God, I will give my people prosperity and the honest administration which is their right, but I will be king, alone, and always" \(quoted in Di Ciommo 1993: 21\). Although never considered friendly to intellectuals, Ferdinand captured their hope. Significantly, he also brought the exiles back and, granting them amnesty, he carried out a true administrative transformation. By initiating railroad construction, moreover, he encouraged the development of industry and banking. 

The cultural and intellectual climate was extremely lively. Naples swarmed with students coming from all parts of the country. Luigi Settembrini, who came to the city in 1828, remembered his fellow students in these words: "the young, except for a very few, are all good, with open hearts; prone to every beautiful and generous action, they have an instinct for good, and I found them all liberals" \(1934 \[1893\]: 265\). The prestige of the University was declining, but a multitude of new public and private schools, institutes and academies that had mushroomed during Murat's time continued to thrive. In a postscript to Francesco De Sanctis' *La giovinezza -* another valuable firsthand account of this history - Pasquale Villari remembered that "thousands of young people came to Naples, pursuing their professional studies in the many private schools that had emerged because the University existed in little else than name and none to speak of went there" \(Villari 1961 \[1888\]: 336\). According to historian Alfredo Zazo, some 800 private teaching institutions existed in the kingdom, in Naples and in the secondary centers of Foggia, Teramo, Lecce, Altamura, Salerno, Cosenza, and Tropea \(1927: 202ff\). 

Many of the private schools were run by the most illustrious members of the Neapolitan intelligentsia, such as De Sanctis, the great economist Antonio Scialoia, historian Francesco Trinchera, jurists Pasquale Stanislao Mancini and Silvio Spaventa, and Aurelio Saliceti. Years later, in *La giovinezza*, De Sanctis painted an extraordinary portrait of private education in Naples in that period: it was free, liberal, and original \(De Sanctis 1961 \[1888\]\). His own school was self-governed in the spirit of a Proudhon-like anarchy, a "small self-contained society, without rules, without discipline, without any authority of command, moved by sentiments of duty, value, and reciprocal respect" \(ibid.: 293\). The various institutes actively sought out talented youth from the provinces, attracting them with fellowships, free admissions, and competitive "incentive awards." Although upper-class provincial youth had always gone to Naples to study, now, in Pasquale Villari's words, "students were arriving by the thousands," above all the offspring of provincial gentry, lawyers, and even occasionally artisans. Giuseppe Massari, son of a civil engineer from Taranto and a future Risorgimento leader, and Antonio Scialoia, son of an inspector of public security and later an important economist and a member of the 1848 government, were able to study in Naples thanks to such scholarships. One of the most influential of the new institutions, the school founded and administered by the Marquis Basilio Puoti, was free and open to all young men of talent, regardless of their social class or economic circumstances. De Sanctis, who had been Puoti's pupil, remembered that some of the most "cultivated and esteemed men of the city" were associated with the school \(Villari 1919 \[1888\]: 310—11\). 

In addition to the traditional disciplines of law, medicine, the military arts, and philosophy, there were new popular pursuits such as Italian, political economy, history, engineering, and architecture. The students seemed imbued with the romantic spirit without necessarily knowing what romanticism was. Engrossed in stories, novellas and novels, fantastic and sentimental, they were attentive to all manner of "rumor" from Lombardy. With or without the encouragement of their teachers, they devoured French literature: Mme de Stael, *La Nouvelle Heloise* by Rousseau, Chateaubriand's *Martyrs*, all the novels of D'Alincourt, Victor Hugo, and Alphonse de Lamartine, *Matilde* by Cottin. In addition to the *Divina Commedia,* they read Manzoni and Hegel, and the tragedies of Vittorio Alfieri and William Shakespeare. 

The world of the fine arts was also vibrant. Naples was alive with artists, art students, and visitors and distinguished foreigners such as the Russian Silvester F. Scedrin and Francis Hayez. The domination of the classicist Academy of Fine Arts was successfully challenged by the fresher School of Posillipo of Pitloo, Gigante, and their pupils, and by such "revolutionary" romantics as Giuseppe Mancinelli. The Court actively patronized artists through exhibitions and royal commissions: in 1825, Francis I instituted an annual exhibition modeled on the French *salons*. Private patronage followed the royal example, with purchases, commissions, and fellowships for art students \(Picone Petrusa 1993\). 

The salons of wealthy intellectual patrons were important in the liberal circles of Naples, particularly during times when intensified censorship threatened literary and even theatrical life. The salons of the patrician houses were known as *case* \(sing, *casa*\): the *casa* Guacci-Nobile, *casa* Poerio, *casa* De Thomasis, *casa* Ferrigni-Pisone, *casa* Troya, *casa* Ricciardi. Many of the *case* counted scholars and authors among their family members, for example, the De Thomasis, Poerio, and Ricciardi. The already mentioned *casa* Puoti combined the salon's function with that of a true free school for the teaching of Italian, and attracted a whole world of teachers and literati. Puoti's school was undoubtedly archaic in its dedication to the cult of the Trecento and its rejection of modern literary trends, but its members were serious philologists who produced lexical and grammatical studies, classics, commentaries, and translations. As De Sanctis wrote, they liberated culture from having been "mortgaged to the seminary" \(1961 \[1888\]: 290\). 

These were years of the strong politicization of the cultural world; but politics was often mediated by culture. The *case* were generically liberal but inoffensive; they did not threaten the monarchy in a serious way. The artists, also liberal, felt obliged to the regime for its favors. The students, generally more radical, "conspired" and held secret meetings, but their discussions were indirect, focusing on the writings of Colletta, Berchet, Gioberti, and Niccolini, and on the debates then going on in the parliaments of London and Paris. Having already encountered the network of progressive secret societies, the *Carboneria*, in the provinces where they originated, these students naturally associated with the *Carbonari* in Naples. Yet their conspiracies consisted mainly in some plotting, in recitations of inflamed poems, and in hanging out in the cafés. This said, it is important to realize that political passion was building. On 15 May 1848, it became manifest when the schools took to the streets; when, as Villari wrote, soldiers' bullets scattered De Sanctis' students "through the streets, houses, and barricades" \(1961 \[1888\]: 347\). 

"Life in the provinces," wrote Raffaele De Cesare, "was of a marvelous monotony" \(1969 \[1873\]\). Still, in these years it seemed much less boring and monotonous. The activities of the *Carboneria*, which had begun to intensify during Murat's reign, continued during the Restoration and made the climate of the provincial towns lively and exciting. General Guglielmo Pepe recounts in his *Memorie* how in 1820, working through the networks of the *Carboneria*, he put together a rebel army in just a few weeks \(Pepe 1846\). The *Carbonari* - radical, anti-clerical, anti-Bourbon — were the heroes of the provincial youth. Luigi Settembrini, an affiliate of the Puoti school, remembers being offered a tricolor cockade in 1820 on his way to church — "I was a *Carbonaro* at the age of seven." The four brothers Palizzi, later to be eminent painters and participants in the 1848 revolution, grew up in the small town of Vasto in the Abruzzi. Vasto's local hero and its model of all virtues was a *Carbonaro*, Gabriele Rossetti — poet, patriot, and exile, whose sacred poem "Iddio e l'uomo" was on the Pope's *Index* of forbidden books. He was also the future father of the writer Christine and the painter Dante Gabriel. The poet's elder brother, Antonio, was Vasto's barber and himself a poet, too, who authored popular couplets mocking the government's fiscal policies. 

In the provinces, the romantic mood was overwhelming. Young people read Mme de Stael, Walter Scott, and Alessandro Manzoni. They also wrote and published their own work. The review *Il Calabrese*, the aggressive voice of Calabrian romanticism, included the contributions of the best young writers, poets, and journalists, whose poems, ballads, tragedies, and novellas were intensely romantic. So was the review's engagement with history, folklore, popular traditions, "rumanze," "impressioni," archeology, new philosophy and psychology. An anecdote can illustrate the diffusion of these romantic references. During a trial in Catanzaro, the prosecutor accused the defendant of being "more daring than the *Innominato di Manzoni."* The year was 1835\! 

There were other vehicles of cultural discourse in the provinces, including literary and artistic cafés and private circles. An important role was also played by boarding schools and *collegi*, which were part of the university system, such as the Collegio Italo Greco in San Demetrio Corone, and by many private schools of law in the towns and cities. Then, there was the theater. The Teatro Real Ferdinandeo of Cosenza, for example, staged as many as ten operas per season: in 1845 it performed operas by Donizetti, Pacini, Paisiello, and Verdi. There were other opera theaters in the Calabrias: the Real Teatro Borbonico in Reggio Calabria, the Real Francesco in Catanzaro, the 'Comunale' in Castrovillari. The drama season, although it was shorter, included plays by Alfieri, Marenco, Goldoni, and Dumas. 

In the early nineteenth century, wealthy young people traveled in Italy and in Europe. In 1827 Giuseppe Ricciardi, aged twenty, went with his family on a yearlong *bildung* tour, during which he met everybody who was somebody in the world of intellect and art: for example, Manzoni, the group surrounding the Florentine journal, *Antologia*, and even Lamartine, then secretary of the French mission in Turin. Through the journal he also encountered the Neapolitan exiles Gabriele Pepe, Giuseppe Poerio, Matteo Imbriani, and Pietro Colletta \(Ricciardi 1860\). 

Provincial youths also involved themselves in many conspiracies \(in 1834, *Giovine Italia* was founded in many towns simultaneously\). This often led to arrests, trials, and prison sentences, and also to occasional executions. The infamous Vallone di Rovito near Cosenza was the site of executions by beheading or firing-squad of the young followers of De Matteis in 1821, of De Liguoro in 1837, of the Cosenza democrats in 1843, and of the Bandiera brothers in 1844. Experiences of prison, exile, flight, and even death added further romantic zest to the conspiracies. 

Repression, however, was neither a continuous nor a universal occurrence. In "normal" times there was plenty of room to express ideas and opinions. One of the avenues was the press. The local press flourished, and non-Neapolitan journals and reviews were widely circulated. Many apparently specialized journals, such as the *Giornale Agrario* or the *Annali Universali di Statistica*, enjoyed a broad readership because of their treatment of themes of general interest. Neapolitan literary reviews appeared, as did legal journals, for example Pasquale Stanislao Mancini's *Biblioteca*, which promoted the new juridical culture. All the associations and professional organizations of the Kingdom, as well as the political and literary movements, published some kind of a periodical literature. The influential journal, *Il Progresso delle scienze, delle lettere*, *delle arti* was founded in 1832 and edited for some time by Giuseppe Ricciardi, playing the role in Naples that *Antologia* played in Florence. When the latter was closed, in fact, *Il Progresso* was the most serious candidate to take its place. 

Although Ricciardi was a radical, the journal was liberal and pluralistic, encouraging a diversity of approaches. It incorporated four political generations: the "generation of '99," then in their sixties; that of the "decade;" that of "the constitutional period;" and, lastly, the romantic one, some of them under twenty-years of age. Political views encompassed the positions of the radical and republican Ricciardi, the conservative and municipalist Luigi Blanch, and the Catholic and moderate Luigi Dragonetti. Serious scholars and academics, past and future political figures — all collaborated with *Progresso*. There were also several leftwing journals: *Le Charivari des deux Sidles*, a moderate republican paper close to the French *Le National*;, the radical and democratic *Caffé di Buono*, named after the meeting-place of the out-of-town students; *Mondo vecchio Mondo nuovo*, an example of the newly emerging critique of capitalism; and *Inferno*, which advocated a Constituent Assembly and universal male suffrage. 

This spectrum of interests and political inclinations was replicated in the provincial press. The romantic vanguard's *Calabrese*, founded in Cosenza in 1842 by Saverio Vittari and Francesco Scaglione, would breed future Risorgimento protagonists. *Il Gran Sasso d'Italia*, published in Teramo and Aquila, was founded and directed by Ignazio Rozzi, a professor and well-published agronomist, and was dedicated mostly to social and economic problems. The *Annali della Calabria Citeriore* of Cosenza pursued similar concerns; its founder and director was Luigi Maria Greco, a well-known historian, classicist, and conservative social critic. *Statistica letteraria del Regno delle Due Sicilie*, edited by Carlo De Ribas, was more eclectic, as was the *Giornale di Statistica*, founded in 1835 in Palermo by two young and brilliant liberal economists, Francesco Ferrara and Emerico Amari. Finally, there was a plethora of local journals: *Fata Morgana, II Lucifero, II Pitagora, Il Rustico*, and so on \(Zazo 1920\). 

Although these journals can be viewed as belonging to the vast arena of enlightened opinion, there were differences among them. Some were outright in their militancy, for example, Girolamo de Rada's *La bandiera albanese*, which in 1848 was renamed *L'Albanese d'Italia*, its name announcing its program. De Rada was a poet, student, and apostle of the cause of Albanian popular culture, as well as the instigator of an 1837 revolutionary uprising in Calabria. Even institutional or government-sponsored publications were used in creative, if not downright subversive, ways. This was the case of the governmental organ *Giornale del Regno delle Due Sicilie*, especially of its "Appendice." But the most influential of the institutional publications was the government-funded *Annali civili del Regno delle Due Sicilie*, founded in 1833 by a group of young journalists close to the established reformist circles. The *Annali* counted among its collaborators some of the best and most influential writers, civil servants, and administrators of the period, including Afan de Rivera and Ceva Grimaldi, and it coordinated the efforts of various economic and cultural associations. Locally, it was supplemented by the journals of the Economic Societies that proliferated in the 1830s and 1840s. 

Another, rather unexpected, vehicle of progressive opinion was the clergy. Although the Church had certainly not become a champion of modernity, nevertheless liberalism had won some followers among the provincial clergy. Many priests were members of Economic Societies \(described below\) and other similar associations; many were teachers in the agrarian academies and schools. There were, as well, projects to establish chairs of agriculture and schools of practical agronomy in the seminaries. Many parish priests actively encouraged innovation: an arch-priest in Abruzzi, Tommaso Vicentini, ordered his penitent parishioners to plant trees in numbers corresponding to their sins. 

Associationism played a crucial role in the forging of progressive opinion. Economic Societies, which began as government instruments but developed into autonomous loci of reformist activity, are especially interesting in this regard \(see de Lorenzo 1987, 1991; Petrusewicz 1991\). Instituted by Murat in 1810, reestablished by Ferdinand I in 1817, the societies flourished in the 1830s and 1840s. With fourteen of them in Southern Italy and a couple in Sicily, they constituted the largest network of their kind in the Italian peninsula. Gathering and disseminating information and statistics, they stimulated innovation. Most importantly, they set up schools, academic chairs, and scholarships, promoting both vocational and general education. And they touched a significant number of people. Not only did each Society recruit approximately two hundred members \(ordinary, honorary, and corresponding\); their plenary meetings were attended by the entire local élite, delegates from other associations, and visiting scholars and celebrities. In a variety of *comizi*, or small town meetings, the Societies brought together professionals, entrepreneurial farmers, and artisans with landowners, judges, civil servants, and university professors. Associationism thus facilitated a certain mixing of classes, which was unthinkable in a salon, providing yet another vehicle for the dissemination of reformers' ideas. Doing so, they helped to crystallize already existing opinion, the *déjà là*, in Arlette Farge's terms \(1992\). Not surprisingly, the network, the *trafila*, would be mobilized during the revolution of 1848-9. 

In other words, during the period 1815 to 1848, several *foci* of opinion emerged. Academies and learned societies, for the most part composed of landowners, high public functionaries, church officials, and established professionals, expressed views that were more or less conservative. The Economic Societies gathered in medium-size landowners, doctors, veterinarians, pharmacists, natural scientists, engineers, and agronomists, whose orientation was scientific and pragmatic. Romantic groups attracted aristocratic and petty-notable youth, sons of small landowners, and even artisans \(Lovett 1982\). These various circles of opinion were not oblivious of one another. On the contrary, they overlapped, influenced, and informed each other's discourses. Economic and political debates found their way into all the journals, including the local ones - so much so that, for example, literary reviews published long articles on political economy, statistics, and prison systems. Similarly, economic journals published articles on literature, the spirit of the times, and the psychology of the senses. Journals of all kinds commented on debates having to do with language and dialect, and reviewed grammars and dictionaries like the new *Vocabolario della Crusca* or Puoti's *La Grammatica Italiana*. 

The various *foci* of progressive opinion rarely dealt directly or explicitly with political issues until 1848; then it became clear that they had only been awaiting the opportunity to do so. Implicitly, though, their main interest had always been the overall condition of the country and its status *vis-à-vis* other kingdoms of the time. From their intermingling of opinions and interests, milieux and activities, there emerged a representation of the Mezzogiorno that was *modern* in various aspects. Progressive opinion considered the Kingdom of Naples to be part of the world-economy. Adopting the imperative of progress and the Europe-centered criteria of its measurement, it considered the conditions of *development* and *backwardness* not as a dichotomous opposition, but as different relative positions on a material and temporal *continuum*. In this representation, at once pessimistic and optimistic, the Two Sicilies was a backward country, but one in which progress was possible. 

The country's backwardness was, however, much noted, the more so as progress was considered in relation to the wider context of agricultural and industrial development, above all in France and England. Even the United States held out some kind of standard. Carmine Antonio Lippi quoted for his readers a remark by the American president, Monroe, to the effect that "a nation ... that is not able autonomously to satisfy its needs does not deserve the name of nation . . ." \(1820: 84—5\). Considered in relation to this world stage, the agrarian system of the Neapolitan Kingdom seemed to hold the whole economy back, although agriculture was argued to be the country's natural vocation. Wedded to antiquated crops, methods, and technologies, and resistant to innovation, the system was viewed as increasingly wasteful, inefficient, and even irrational. Critics lamented above all the persistence of ill-defined and confused property relations. 

The conditions of manufacturing and industry hardly fared better. Enterprises born during the *decennio* had survived, but barely, and new industries were encountering many obstacles. The Kingdom shipped out raw wool, cotton, silk, hemp, flax, olive oil, and soda, not only because its customs policies favored the export of "primary products," but also because it lacked processing industries. Meanwhile, the state of the transportation infrastructure was, in the words of a civil servant, "the really great misfortune of the Kingdom;" Afan de Rivera lamented the Kingdom's delay in canal building, while Giuseppe Zurlo regretted the deterioration of old Roman and French roads and public works. There was a correspondingly sparse presence of banks and credit institutions, which discouraged investment and enterprise. Neapolitan banks were virtually absent outside Naples, and the Banco delle Due Sicilie, although praised for its innovative policies, was devoted mostly to financing public works and the government's annual purchase of a safety supply of grain \(the *annona*\). Last but not least, there was the "social question," which in the South was synonymous with the general condition of the peasantry: poverty, poor health, insecurity of land tenure and contracts, and widespread illiteracy. 

In some respects this list resembles the older catalog of evils, but there is a fundamental difference - the absence of feudalism, formerly always topping the column as the arch-enemy of progress and the main structural cause of "la miseria pubblica." For feudalism had been abolished by a bill in 1806. The main prerequisite for advancement having been fulfilled, interpretations of the new backwardness focused instead on a range of conditions: retardation in the process of industrialization, the inadequacy of public education, flawed legislation, and the unequal distribution of public and private funds. Also discussed were the cost of wars and of the upkeep of foreign troops, erroneous government policies, corruption at the Court or the influence of the *camarilla*, and a pattern of dishonest and inefficient law enforcement. These conditions, however, did not denote "la miseria."3 The new backwardness was grave, but contingent. 

At the same time, possible remedies were the subject of lively and interesting debates. All agreed on the importance of education and good government. In fact, the reform of education engaged the energies of the best intellects of the kingdom, such as Cuoco and De Sanctis, just as the "administrative revolution" of the 1830s involved the best legal scholars of the time — for example, Giuseppe De Thomasis, leader of the new *amministrativisti*, who advocated local autonomy and communal self-administration. Other questions remained debatable: What role should the government play in furthering progress? What was the utility and impact of public works? Should land be further privatized and to what degree? How rapidly and extensively should the Kingdom commit itself to industrialization? What were the comparative advantages of centralized control versus municipal autonomy? Was total freedom of trade appropriate or even possible for a "late-comer" to industrial development? These debates reveal an intellectual maturity and creative tension that confirm the idea of a hybrid representation of the South. 

Hybridity appeared in the art of the period, too. On the one hand, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was represented as rural and traditional, with barefoot peasants in front of their huts. On the other, it was pictured as industrial and modern. Silvano Fergola's railroads, stations, and suspended iron bridges, and Giuseppe De Nittis' and Luigi Fergola's industrial landscapes with factory chimneys, are reminiscent of the subject-matter that prevailed under the July Monarchy in France. Both Louis Philippe and Ferdinand were perceived as modernizers and patrons of the arts. Mario Borgoni's large fresco "Partenope che ricompensa le arti e le industrie napoletane," today in the Naples Camera di Commercio, is a homage to the modernizing King. 

In other words, the Kingdom's overall image was not entirely bleak. The opinion that the country was endowed with enough natural resources and people to permit an economic take-off was based not only on a mythology of southern wealth, but on such well-informed pragmatists as Afan de Rivera. It seemed further confirmed by the steady growth of the population. And government policies, however cautious, were moving in the right direction, enabling the country to participate in the *Zeitgeist* of progress, so compelling at the time. In the words of the editors of *Il Progresso*, it was "an epoch during which it pleased the Supreme Being to allow that all of the passions which he had placed in the depths of human hearts should ferment again; to desire that a vast and total regeneration occur in the activities of the spirit, in the ardor of the sentiments, in the customs and ways of life ..." \(1833: 11\(4\): 208\). Naples' backwardness was not a permanent condition, but merely a lagging status *vis-à-vis* more advanced countries. Anticipating the diagnosis of twentieth-century economic historian, Alexandr Gerschenkron \(1962\), backwardness was held to be a question of relative position on a scale of comparative progress. England and France were far ahead, presenting those behind them with a picture of their future \(not free of flaws\); Lombardy, Tuscany, and Prussia were ahead, although less distantly so; and Ireland was more or less at the same point as the Kingdom; while Russia and Poland had the farthest to go. For Naples to catch up would require energy and effort; but the government was in general doing the right thing — building railroads, constructing roads to connect the two seas, encouraging manufactures, modernizing prisons, and loosening some tariff regulations. 

Thus conceived, southern "retardation" did not constitute a "Question." Intellectuals were severe in criticizing their country, but they had no inferiority complex. They even saw some advantages to relative backwardness. Industrializing later, perhaps their country could avoid some of the vexing social conflicts that were haunting England and France. We can ask: had the lively intellectual and reformist climate of the period leading up to 1848 continued until the Unification of Italy, would the "Question" have been construed in the same terms? In the following pages I will speculate on the impact that the defeat of 1848, and the changed context of the period 1849—1860, had on the southern intellectuals. We will see the respects in which the "Southern Question" may have had, after all, its roots in the South. It was, I will suggest, a representation constructed in exile, both external and "internal," and by intellectuals who were once again defeated and discouraged. 

Although the Sicilian and Neapolitan revolutions of January 1848 were the first to erupt, they were part of a more general European trend, which the King of Naples was no more able to resist than was his uncle in France \(Sperber 1994\). In other words, the Neapolitan revolution had more in common with urban revolutions of the same year in Paris, Vienna, and Berlin than with the previous southern ones of 1799 and 1820. Benedetto Croce remarked that the revolution of 1820 was dominated by old men, veterans of 1799, the soldiers and administrators of the "decade," and it was pervaded with eighteenth-century rationalism. That of 1848, by contrast, was a revolution of youth formed in the age of romanticism. The barricades of the streets of Naples were manned by the pupils of De Sanctis, Puoti, and Scialoia, who were filled with the ideas they had learned from Hegel, Chateaubriand, de Stael, Lamartine, and Hugo, It was a revolution of intellectuals, according to the well-known interpretation of Lewis Namier \(1946\); but not only of intellectuals. "\[E\]very honest heart was there with good faith, seated at the joyful banquet of January 29, 1848," wrote the novelist Francesco Mastriani \(1994 \[1863\]: 164\) — intellectuals and students, artisans and peasants, and returning exiles. The air of Naples was excited and festive; with the theaters closed, unemployed singers sang popular and revolutionary songs in the middle of the streets \(Miller 1984\). "I will always recall that Spring of 1848," wrote Giuseppe Sodano, a former monk, writer, and historian and in that year the president of the Circolo del Progresso, "Those unforgettable days when we were free ... whoever did not see those days, never saw anything truly great and sublime" \(quoted in Zenobi 1959: 92\). Many, like Sodano, looked back with nostalgia and emotion. De Sanctis tenderly evoked the mood in a letter to Giuseppe Montanelli: "it was for us all poetry, the inspiration of our revolution" \(1956 \[1855\]: 213\). 

The revolution quickly fulfilled the dreams of the Neapolitan reformers. With its new constitution and parliaments, they thought that the Kingdom had finally joined the community of civilized nations. The government of 3 April was composed, in the words of De Sanctis \(1961 \[1888\]: 231\), of "the most respected men of the land." Historian Carlo Troya was its president and jurist Raffaele Conforti its Minister of Internal Affairs. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Public Education were Luigi Dragonetti and Paolo Emilio Imbriani, respectively. Antonio Scialoia became Minister of Agriculture, Industry, and Commerce. Troya was editor of the conservative *Il Tempo*, but Dragonetti and Conforti were democrats, and Imbriani and Scialoia confirmed liberals. These men had had years of experience in public life, and were less naive and better prepared than their predecessors of 1799 and 1820. Theirs was a moderate government, sincerely opposed to absolutism and determined to carry out reforms. It granted amnesty for all political offences, abolished the Ministry of Police, took popular education away from the Bishops, and decreed the establishment of schools in even the smallest villages. 

The prevailing mood was conciliatory. The orientation of both the government and the public was moderate, neither republican nor rabidly anti-Bourbon. Aside from a few committed republicans, such as Ricciardi, or the future devotee of Cavour, Giuseppe La Farina, the leaders felt that constitutional monarchy was the best guarantee of the stability necessary for progress. They believed that the Bourbons and Ferdinand could continue to be trusted with the task of governing. On the popular level, peasant movements were less frightening than they had been in 1799, both because in the intervening years some ties had been established between the *popolo* and the liberals, and because the peasants had become less loyalist, ceasing to view the Bourbons as their protectors against landlord greed. The landlords, for their part, having spent many years discussing the peasant question, had come to accept the necessity of some kind of land reform. In an interesting recent study, Enrica Di Ciommo, challenging the interpretation of Federico Chabod and Rosario Romeo, shows that there existed in the South both a peasant structure susceptible to revolutionary mobilization *and* a growing willingness, at least on the part of democrats, to confront the agrarian question \(Di Ciommo 1993: 298—9\). 

There were, of course, many tensions in those spring months: the *de facto* secession of Sicily, the armed "extremist" mobilization in Calabria. But the election of 18 April confirmed the commitment to the revolution of both the *Libertà e Progresso* liberals and the *Giustizia e Progresso* radicals. The events of 15 May — it is still debatable whether they should be seen as a provocation, an insurrection, or a *coup d'état—* divided opinion, but not as sharply as the June Days in Paris. In Paris, as both Marx and Tocqueville agree, the great divide was class, and the workers had against them the National Guard, the bourgeoisie, the students, and the *provinceaux* who rushed to the capital. In Naples, on 15 May, the revolution was defended in the streets and on the barricades by the National Guard, and bourgeois protagonists fought alongside students, artisans, and peasants. Even the provinces rose in defense, with the Calabrians coming to Naples, conspicuous in their costumes, in a reverse evocation of 1799. Many democratic members of the parliament favored armed insurrection; others signed the *Atto di destituzione della monarchia* \(the Act of Monarchical Destitution\). It may be more appropriate to compare 15 May to the 2 December *coup* in France: like Louis Napoleon, Ferdinand dissolved the parliament, called for new elections with limited suffrage, and expelled the radicals and democrats from their positions, arresting many and forcing others underground. 

As in the South of France, a part of the rural population thereafter continued to defend the revolution. In Calabria the resistance lasted into the autumn; here the fighters were joined by a faction of the defeated parliament, led by Ricciardi and the Calabrian left. Once again, on 13 November, notwithstanding the restricted suffrage, an election returned many radicals and revolutionaries, confirming the widespread desire to resist. The break between the "country" and the "Bourbons," between "us" and "them," was complete. 

There followed the "*spergiuro."* In March 1849, Ferdinand abolished the parliament and abrogated the constitution. Repression followed: mass arrests, intimidations, assassinations, endless trials, heavy prison sentences, and years of purges. Although less bloody than in 1799 — death sentences were rarely followed by executions — the post-'48 repression lasted longer and was more pervasive. While show-trials were going on in Naples — against, for example, members of *Unità italiana*, Carlo Poerio, the "44," who included Scialoia and Spaventa, and the "40 defaulters" — thousands were arrested and tried throughout the country for having engaged in "bad conduct." Arrests and convictions cut across class barriers: noblemen, intellectuals, petty bourgeois, and artisans met each other in jail. 

As Giuseppe La Farina put it in a letter to Cavour \(quoted in Moe 1992: 79\), Ferdinand II proceeded to erect a sort of a "Chinese Wall" around his kingdom, as if he wanted to erase even the memory of the liberal efforts. The movement of people, ideas, and goods came under strict control. The Ministry of the Police was resurrected, instituting a repressive police state. Both civil and ecclesiastical authorities introduced strict censorship policies. "Loyal subjects" were encouraged to inform on their colleagues and friends, and spies infested the provinces in search of revolutionary groups. Conditions in prisons were terrible, as the whole of Europe was to learn from William Gladstone's *Two Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen*, published in 1851 after he visited Carlo Poerio and Michele Pironti in jail. Prohibitive customs duties were imposed on imported books, and protective tariff barriers were raised. The latter went far beyond any real or supposed needs of the economy, reflecting primarily the political choice of autarky and seclusion. 

The result of such policies was a forcibly prolonged period of isolation and depression. Even the most cautious attempts at reform were halted, with Ferdinand interpreting his ministers' recommendations in that line as a criticism of his rule. Public works projects were all but abandoned, and education reverted to the Church, which also recaptured primary responsibility for social services. In 1854 nearly half of all state expenditure was devoted to the army. Entrepreneurial energies were suffocated and trade diminished, both because of the stiffened tariffs and because foreign investors shunned this police state, whose reputation was now at its lowest, especially after Gladstone's *Letters*. The only groups to benefit were the police, the army, and the higher echelons of the Church. To some extent, however, the condition of the peasantry improved, because Ferdinand, in a design similar to that of his Viennese relative Franz Josef, partially addressed the question of land, and eased the fiscal pressures on the rural population by abolishing the hated mill-tax. 

Among the losers, the intelligentsia held the place of honor. They were the main victims of repression: imprisoned, silenced, or forced into exile. For the third time in half a century, the Italian South lost a significant portion of its intelligentsia, and this time for more than a decade. Many of those who stayed went into, to use an anachronism, "internal exile." They removed themselves from public life, both because they were banned from many jobs, and to avoid the humiliation and intellectual prostitution that staying in circulation required. Attorneys, university professors, civil servants, even the director of the Pompeii excavations, lost their positions. Officers of various associations were required to take an oath that they did not and would not belong to any secret society. Endless background checks were run on the political, religious, and moral conduct of candidates for government employment, with the predictable result of a shortage of qualified personnel. Even conservatives, such as Luigi Maria Greco, preferred a retreat in the Accademia Cosentina to carrying out a "police job." Most of the journals that had flourished in the previous decades *— Il Calabrese rigenerato*, *Il Progresso*, *Charivari, Mondo vecchio Mondo nuovo* — folded or were shut by the censor. The meetings of the Learned Societies became abstract and tedious. There were a few among the prominent intellectuals who collaborated, such as Giustino Fortunato, the Prince of ischitella, and Lodovico Bianchini, who became the Minister of Police. There were also a few servile or "loyal" scholars who, denouncing the "errors and fallacies of Mr. Gladstone," rejected these "undeserved accusations launched by a foreign pen" \(Accademia Cosentina, *Atti*\). In general, however, "internal exile" meant silence or at least self-censorship - discoursing only on subjects that were neutral and safe. 

At the same time, there were many who chose, or were forced into, "external exile." Some were part of Guglielmo Pepe's expeditionary force against Austria, who refused to return when Ferdinand issued a recall; others evaded arrest and fled the country, in legendary flights aboard fishing boats that spirited them to Malta or Corfu in the darkness of night; still others escaped from prisons or preempted deportation. In one way or another, the *fior fiore* of the country's intelligentsia found itself in exile. The most popular havens were Piedmont, France, Switzerland, England, and Tuscany. Many *émigrés* joined struggles elsewhere — in defense of the Roman Republic, for the independence of Albania, against Louis Napoleon's *coup*, with the liberals of Neuchâtel. At the time of the Risorgimento, many would sign up with Garibaldi's *Mille*. In their peregrinations, the exiles made new political and personal contacts while consolidating old ones. But their contacts with their homeland were few, as travel back was unlikely and correspondence controlled. Thus the two groups of *émigrés*, internal and external, began to grow apart. 

The events of 1848 were a watershed in the history of the Mezzogiorno. Significant changes took place in politics, economy, and culture on the one hand, and in the image of the Neapolitan Kingdom on the other. More and more, the image seemed to constitute the reality, as suggested by the frequent repetition of words such as backward, run down, despotic, savage, uncivilized. Of particular interest is how the exiles, in just these years, contributed to the new representation, expressing their pessimism through publications, correspondence, and debates among themselves. In the emerging discourse, they characterized their country as an unhappy wreck, ruled by an illegitimate government made up of mindless tyrants, perjurers, and traitors. Signs of barbarization were manifest in the arrests, the conditions of the prisons, the terror disseminated by general Nunziante in Calabria, the obsessive censorship, and police rule — all topics of the utmost concern. The Kingdom's stagnant economy, triumphant illiteracy, abdication of power to the Church, pitiful state of public health, and rural poverty completed the picture. Although conditions were in fact degenerating, this litany reflected the experience of the exiles as much as that of the Kingdom. Angry, bitter, and homesick, their life was hard. Nor could they help but admire the political and economic advances of the host countries in which they were living. Their sense of shame for their own country deepened accordingly \(see Moe 1994; Petrusewicz n.d.\). 

In the exiles' writings, the backwardness of the South ceased to indicate its relative position on the scale of progress, assuming instead the more sinister meaning of an opposition to progress, a counter-position of barbarism to civilization. Their South was becoming the alterity of Europe. When, in his 1851 "Introduction" to Gladstone's *Letters*, Massari spoke of the "great battle of civilization against *barbarie*, wisdom against ignorance, virtue against vice, innocence against calumny" the terms "*barbarie*, ignorance, vice, and calumny" referred to the Bourbon tyranny, while the South, the *pays réel*, stood for "civilization, wisdom, virtue, and innocence" \(Massari 1851: 11\). But already a few years later, Francesco Trinchera could write of a kingdom that appears like a desert, with "no sign of a civilized life, no civil institution, no educational establishment, private or public, no roads ... no commerce, no art, no industry ...;" a desert inhabited by a *popolo* degraded, ignorant, and cruel, with no sense of either God or law \(Anonymous \[Trinchera\] 1855: 26\). And from there, it was but a short step toward making hopelessness an integral part of southern history, or "fatalism" a leitmotif of the southern "character." The eternally primitive nature of the South's institutions, the incompetence and selfishness of its absentee landowners, the greed and arbitrariness of its administrators, the grip of the Church, the weakness of the intellectuals, the passivity of the *popolo*, mired in poverty and ignorance, crime and violence — all had become articulated as indelible themes. To put it bluntly, even before encountering the prejudice of the Piedmontese makers of Italy, the Southern Question had been born. 




## Notes

1. See, as a representative example, the journal *Meridiana* published in Rome since 1988. For an English-language review of recent literature, see Lyttelton \(1991\); Davis \(1994\); Moe \(1992\); and Dickie \(1992\). It is interesting to note that in this effort of revision, the economists lag behind, "deconstructing" the Southern Question by breaking it up into many smaller questions, like so many pieces of a puzzle, which, when put back together, reproduce the original image of backwardness. See, for example, Bottazzi \(1990\), who divides the Question into the sub-questions of: industrialization \(or lack thereof\); unemployment; growing criminality; urban areas \(in decay\); and a moral-political-administrative dimension \(incapable, inefficient, and corrupt\). The global picture that emerges replicates the original Southern Question. 

2. At that time Vincenzo Cuoco's *Historical Essay on the Neapolitan Revolution of 1799* was not yet widely read in the Kingdom. It would not come out in Naples until 1861, and there is no evidence of any wide diffusion of the 1800, 1806, or 1820 Milanese editions. 

3. The Duke of Ventignano, well known in reformist political circles, felt a need to define *miseria pubblica*, publishing a book on the subject in 1833. 




## References

+ Anonymous \[Trinchera di Ostumi, Francesco\] \(1855\) *La Quistione Napolitana: Ferdinando Borbone e Luciano Murat*. Publisher unknown. 
+ Bottazzi, Gianfranco \(1990\) "Il Sud del Sud. I divari interni al Mezzogiorno e il rovesciamento delle gerarchie spaziali *"Meridiana* **10**: 141—79. 
+ Colletta, Pietro \(1967 \[1834\]\) *Storia del Reame di Napoli*, ed. E. Barelli. Milan: Rizzoli. 
+ Cuoco, Vincenzo \(1913 \[1800\]\) *Saggio storico sulla rivoluzione napoletana del 1799*. Bari: Laterza. 
+ Davis, John \(1994\) "Remapping Italy's Path to the Twentieth Century," *Journal of Modern History* **66**: 291—320. 
+ De Cesare, Raffaele \(1969 \[1873\]\) *La fine di un regno*. Milan: Longanesi. 
+ De Lorenzo, Renata \(1987\) *Istituzioni e territorio nell'Ottocento borbonico.* Avellino: Pergola. 
+ —\(1991\) Gruppi dirigenti e associazionismo borbonico: le Società economiche. In G. M. Galanti, ed., *Dal comunitarismo pastorale ali' individualismo agrario.* Istituto storico, Giuseppe Maria Galanti, *Atti*. 
+ De Rosa, Luigi \(1993\) *Il Mezzogiorno agli inizi della Restaurazione*. Bari: Laterza. 
+ De Sanctis, Francesco \(1956 \[1855\]\) *Epistolario \(1836—1856\)*, ed. Giovanni Ferretti and Muzio Mazzocchi Alemanni. Turin: Einaudi. 
+ —\(1961 \[1888\]\) *La giovinezza; memorie postume seguite da testimonianze biografiche di amici e discepoli*, ed. Gennaro Savarese. Turin: Einaudi. 
+ Di Ciommo, Enrica \(1993\) *La nazione possibile: Mezzogiorno e questione nazionale nel 1848*. Milan: Franco Angeli. 
+ Dickie, John \(1992\) "A Word at War: The Italian Army and Brigandage, 1860-1870," *History Workshop Journal* **33**: 1—24. 
+ Farge, Arlette \(1992\) *Dire et ne pas dire. L'opinion publique au XVIIIme siècle.* Paris: Seuil. 
+ Gerschenkron, Alexandr \(1962\) *Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
+ Lippi, Carmine Antonio \(1820\) *Prime idèe concernenti il miglioramento delle nostre istituzioni*. Naples. 
+ Lovett, Clara \(1982\) *The Democratic Movement in Italy, 1830—1876*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
+ Lyttleton, Adrian \(1991\) "A New Past for the Mezzogiorno; New Approaches to the History of Southern Italy," *Times Literary Supplement*, October **4**. 
+ Massari, Giuseppe \(1851\) *Il Signore Gladstone ed il governo napoletano. Raccolta di scritti intorno alla questione napoletana*. Introduction to the Italian edition of William Gladstone, *Lettere al Lord Aberdeen*. Turin: Tipografia A. Pons e C. 
+ Mastriani, Francesco \(1994 \[1863\]\) *I Vermi: le classi pericolose in Napoli*. Naples: Luca Torre. 
+ Miller, Marion \(1984\) "The Italian Revolutions and Regional Popular Culture." Unpublished paper. 
+ Moe, Nelson \(1992\) "'Altro che Italia\!'. Il Sud dei piemontesi \(1860-61\)." *Meridiana* **15**: 53—89. 
+ —\(1994\) "Representing the South in Post-Unification Italy, *c*. 1860-1880." Unpublished dissertation, Johns Hopkins University. 
+ Namier, Lewis \(1946\) *1848: the Revolution of the Intellectuals*. London: Oxford University Press. 
+ Pepe, Guglielmo \(1846\) *Memorie della giovanezza*. Paris: Libreria Europea di Baudry. 
+ Petrusewicz, Marta \(1991\) "Agromania: innovatori agrari nelle periferie europée dell'Ottocento." In Pietro Bevilacqua, ed., *Storia dell'agricoltura italiana*, Vol. III. Venice: Marsilio. 
+ —\(n.d.\) *Come il Meridione divenne una Questione: rappresentazioni del Sud prima e dopo il Quarantotto*. Soveria Manelli: Rubettino \(in press\). 
+ Picone Petrusa, Mariaantonietta \(1993\) "Tradizione e crisi dei 'generi': col-lezionismo ed esposizioni nella pittura napoletana tra 1799 e 1860." In *La pittura Napoletana dell'Ottocento*. Naples: Tullio Pronti. 
+ Ricciardi, Giuseppe \(1860\) *The Autobiography of an Italian Rebel*. London: Bradbury and Evans. 
+ Sereni, Emilio \(1974\) *Capitalismo e mercato nazionale in Italia*. Rome: Editori Riuniti. 
+ Settembrini, Luigi \(1934 \[1893\]\) *Ricordanze della mia vita*, ed. Adolfo Omodeo. Bari: Laterza. 
+ Sperber, Jonathan \(1994\) *The European Revolutions, 1848-1851*. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
+ Ventignano, Duca di \( 1833\) *Della miseria pubblica, sue cause ed effetti applicati allo stato attuale del Regno citeriore di Napoli*. Naples: Tipografia Flautina. 
+ Villari, Pasquale \(1919 \[1888\]\) *La giovinezza di Francesco de Sanctis, frammento autobiografico*. Naples: A. Morano. 
+ —\(1961 \[1888\]\) Introduction and Postscript to De Sanctis, Francesco, *La giovinezza; memorie postume seguite da testimonianze biografiche di amici e discepoli*, ed. Gennaro Savarese. Turin: Einaudi, 
+ Zazo, Alfredo \(1920\) *Il Giornalismo a Napoli nella prima meta del secolo XIX.* Naples: Giannini. 
+ —\(1927\) *L'istruzione pubblica e privata nel Napoletano \(1767—1860\)*. Città di Castello: "Il Solco." 
+ Zenobi, Giuseppe \(1959\) *Il triumviro Aurelio Saliceti*. Teramo. 




