+++
title = "4"

+++

Biology or Environment? Race and Southern "Deviancy" in the Writings of Italian Criminologists, 1880–1920

*Mary Gibson *


The Mafia is a Sicilian variant of the ancient *Camorra*, a variant shaped perhaps by a more tenacious adherence to secrecy, typical of the Semitic race \(Lombroso 1896—7, Vol. 1: 621\). 

It is to the African and Eastern elements \(except the Greeks\), that Italy owes, fundamentally, the greater frequency of homicides in Calabria, Sicily and Sardinia, while the least occur where the Nordic races predominate \(Lombardy\) \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 30\). 


In these two propositions from his famous work, *Criminal Man*, Cesare Lombroso identified race as fundamental to the etiology of crime in Southern Italy. Renowned internationally as the father of the Italian school of scientific, or "positivist," criminology, Lombroso and his ideas were familiar to many outside of his own academic specialty and beyond the borders of Italy. The first edition of *Criminal Man*, published in 1876, had caused such an uproar that it became the main topic of intense debate at a series of international meetings in the new field of criminology and had been translated into French, the common language of all European intellectuals, by 1887.1 Within Italy, the book was reissued five times within twenty years, each edition larger and more comprehensive than the last. By the 1880s, Lombroso's house in Turin became an intellectual salon for not only criminologists but leading writers and political thinkers, such as Gaetano Mosca, Achille Loria, Robert Michels, and Anna Kuliscioff, and even for foreigners such as Max Nordau, Ellen Key, and Max Weber \(Dolza 1990: 53\). Tireless in his mission to popularize his ideas, Lombroso published over a thousand articles during his life in at least seventy journals, many of them, like *Nuova antologia*, aimed at the general educated public \(Villa 1985: 283\). 

Lombroso's assertion that race shaped social behavior, in this case deviant behavior, was of course not original or exceptional in late nineteenth-century Europe. Nations involved in imperialist ventures like the "scramble for Africa" partially justified their wars as civilizing missions of whites directed towards inferior black, brown, and yellow populations. Within Europe, Jews were increasingly defined as a race rather than a religious group and were denounced as foreign enemies bent on undermining the nation state, whether France or Germany. At the same time northern Europeans began to classify themselves as "Aryans," racially superior to and more pure than their shorter and darker neighbors to the south and east. And the new theorists of degeneration warned that even homogeneous "races" such as the French were threatened with biological and mental weakening from alcoholism, syphilis, tuberculosis, and other "social diseases." 

In Italy, race was used in a slightly different way: to explain persistent differences within the nation, especially divergences between the North and the South.2 Such a project seems self-defeating in the light of the strenuous attempts by the government in Rome to unify and centralize governance of the peninsula and make "new Italians" out of the subjects of the patchwork of old-regime states that had disappeared as recently as 1860. Yet even after the triumphant conclusion of the Risorgimento with Garibaldi's campaign, extreme differences seemed to persist between the North and South, with the South plagued by a plethora of problems such as illiteracy, poverty, disease, and crime. To many modern, anticlerical scientists like Lombroso, who had been trained as a physician, the answer to the "Southern Question" was race. 

While Lombroso and many of his fellow positivist criminologists made race central to their analysis of southern "deviancy," the term itself posed special problems for Italian thinkers. First, archeological research had revealed such a variety of peoples migrating to the Italian peninsula throughout its long history that every writer rejected the idea of one "Italian" race as ridiculous. How could one identify the races in Italy? The distinction between white and black, employed in colonial ventures, was not useful, nor was the northern European tendency to trace the origin of a nation to a pure "Aryan" stock. Were the labels that turned up in archeological research, such as Umbrians, Ligurians, Latins, and Etruscans, applicable to different races? What about the more recent migrations of Greeks, north Africans, and Albanians to the South? Could different groups be lumped together as an Italic or Mediterranean race? Having admitted the existence of more than one race in Italy, criminologists were logically forced to criticize the German passion for pure races. Could race mixing be invigorating rather than enervating and a signal of mongrelization and decline? If so, was race mixing useful only among "whites"? Not only their generally positive evaluation of race mixing, but also anti-German sentiment among many Italian intellectuals assured that they would never blindly follow the most extreme northern racial theorists. 

A second set of complications in the application of race to behavior arose from the personal biographies of positivist criminologists. Most notably, Lombroso himself was Jewish and was sensitive to the new racial anti-Semitism in northern and eastern Europe that questioned the patriotism and threatened the civil and political rights of Jews. In criticizing anti-Semitism, Lombroso de-emphasized the hereditary nature of race in a manner that contradicted many of his other writings on Southern Italy. Ambiguities also arose from the adherence of Lombroso and most of his positivist colleagues to socialism and their humanitarian impulse to improve the living conditions of the poor, whether in the North or South. Thus their writings often exhibited a tension between the biological determinism of racial analysis and a naive but often sincere desire for social reform and progress. 

The following analysis of the writings of Lombroso and other members of the positivist school, such as Enrico Ferri, Alfredo Niceforo, and Guiseppe Sergi, will outline the contours of Italian racial theory at the turn of the twentieth century. While our focus will be on the differences between Northern and Southern Italy, we must include criminologists' views of Africans, Jews, and Aryans the better to comprehend their reasoning on matters of race. The chapter will conclude with the arguments of one of the few criminologists who opposed this reasoning, Napoleone Colajanni. 



## Positivist Criminology

While positivist criminology - or, as it was also called, "criminal anthropology" is today identified almost solely with the name of Lombroso, he functioned as the nucleus of an extensive group of disciples and students. Trained in diverse professions, such as medicine, law, and anthropology, they collaborated with him in publishing the results of their research in the *Archives of Criminal Anthropology, Psychiatry, and Legal Medicine*, founded in 1881. This "positivist school" rejected the older "classical school" of penology, founded in the eighteenth century by Cesare Beccaria, that had sought to devise a scale of punishment proportionate to the severity of the crime. Instead, Lombroso and his colleagues shifted the focus from the crime to the criminal, arguing that punishments should be fashioned to fit the character of the accused. Thus even the perpetrator of a misdemeanor should be punished like a felon if his or her moral depravity constituted a threat to society. 

The main task, then, of criminal anthropology was to devise a system to sort lawbreakers according to their degree of dangerousness \(*pericolosità*\). To accomplish this task, positivists employed a form of Social Darwinism, claiming that the most dangerous criminals were arrested in their evolutionary development. "Atavisms," or physical malformations, constituted the signs of evolutionary failure, and Lombroso labeled any individual manifesting several atavisms as a "born criminal" \(*delinquente nato*\). Because positivists equated biological malformations with internal moral and psychological weakness, they considered any offender marked with atavisms as a permanent threat to society and thus deserving of harsh punishment. Those criminals exhibiting few if any physical Stigmata, labeled "occasional criminals," were classified as less dangerous; but this group received relatively little attention in positivist research. The counting of atavisms, through physical observation and measurement, seemed clear-cut and scientific and bolstered the claims of criminal anthropologists to be inventing the first objective criminology. 

Lombroso and his colleagues found evolutionary differences not only between criminals and "honest" citizens, but also between groups based on race and gender. Like most Social Darwinism of his day, Lombroso's theory was inherently racist, since it argued that "savages" and "barbarians" in Africa, Asia, and the Americas were closer to animals than to civilized humans on the ladder of evolution. "Savages" were of course black, brown, or yellow, and this atavism of skin color marked them as permanently inferior to white Europeans. Because non-whites were close to their animal origin, their crimes were "primitive" and violent like murder, assault, kidnapping, and robbery. While it was undeniable that "civilized" Europe still had crime, positivists categorized these offenses as more sophisticated property crimes — like theft, swindling, and graft — typical of advanced societies. 

Like non-whites, women as a group were assigned a lower rank on the evolutionary scale than white men. As Giuseppe Sergi pointed out, "the woman ... remains at a level that for man is imperfection but for her is the natural state" \(Sergi 1892: 8\). While white men were strong, intelligent, moral, and active, female nature was clearly inferior in its weakness, emotionality, vanity, and passivity. In the writings on race analysed below, authors made few references to women. But their more general theory held that most female deviancy took the form of prostitution. Asserting that "the primitive woman was rarely a murderess, but she was always a prostitute," Lombroso expressed the common view that sexual promiscuity was the predominant trait of "savage" women. Thus when European women fell back into their evolutionary past, they reverted to sexual deviancy, while their male counterparts reverted to violence \(Gibson 1982, 1990\). 



## Cesare Lombroso

Although Lombroso took race for granted as an important impetus for behavior, he was slipshod in his definition of the term. In *Criminal Man*, he sometimes divided Europe into two large groups designated the "Germans" and the "Latins" or, alternately, the "blondes" and the "dark-haired" \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 28, 38\). In other instances he multiplied the number of races, dividing Italy into three parts, the Semitic South, the Latin Center, and the Germanic, Ligurian, Celtic, and Slavic North \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 29\). Yet on the same page he added even more categories: Umbrians, Etruscans, Oscans, Phoenicians, Albanians, and Greeks. In no case did he provide empirical data as a basis for his system of classification. His approach in a book written specifically about the South, entitled *In Calabria*, appears at first glance more scientific. Here he divided the Calabresi into two type: Semites with long heads \(*dolicocefalo*\), eyebrows that almost met over arched noses, and either black or dark brown eyes; and Greco-Romans with short heads \(*brachicefalo*\), high broad foreheads over aquiline noses, and lively, conspicuous eyes \(Lombroso 1898: 53-4\). The attempt to identify races based on the measurement of skulls was typical of the period throughout Europe. But even in this study, Lombroso muddied the waters by alluding at times to Albanians without defining their cranial type or explaining whether they fit into either of the two major groups. 

On this scientifically unsteady base of racial classification, Lombroso built elaborate and colorful typologies of criminal behavior. At times, he would generalize about the predominance of crimes against the person in the South, or in this case, the region of Calabria: "To murder someone here with a gun ... is considered a joke and not very serious; and everyone therefore carries a gun, and he who has two barrels is more respected" \(Lombroso 1898: 95\). But more often he provided a criminal geography of southern Italy by ethnic group. Thus, the areas populated by Greeks were the least criminal, at least in crimes of blood, while the Albanian regions showed high rates of vendetta and brigandage. In Sicily, brigandage was concentrated around Palermo, 

where the rapacious Berber and Semitic tribes took up an early and long-lived residence . . . When one thinks that here, as in the Arab tribes, cattle and sheep stealing is the preferred crime, it is easy to convince oneself that the blood of these people — who are acquisitive and rapacious, hospitable and cruel, intelligent but superstitious, always mobile, restless and disdainful of restraints must have its part in . . . perpetuating brigandage \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 27\). 

Such barbaric behavior was less common in eastern Sicily, like Catania, where a richer mixture of "Aryan blood" could be found \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 27\). In Sardinia, Lombroso found less homicide and more property crime than in the rest of the South, and attributed this more evolved or northern profile of deviancy to the Phoenician — rather than Arab — stock of its inhabitants \(Lombroso 1896-7, Vol. 3: 33\). How the Phoenicians were racially different from the Arabs was never explained. 

The crudity of Lombroso's racial analysis was combined uneasily with an often more subtle psychological and social analysis of the etiology of southern crime. In *Criminal Man*, he admitted that individual temperament limited the determinism of race on behavior. Even among "the most barbarous savages" like the "hottentots" and the "kaffirs" could be found both relatively honest and industrious people and "more savage individuals who are incapable of any type of work and live on the labor of others like vagabonds" \(Lombroso 1896-7: Vol. 1: 85\). Perhaps more importantly for Southern Italy, he admitted that vestiges of feudalism were partially responsible for the high rates of southern crime. He pushed this idea much further in the conclusion to his study of Calabria, where he not only criticized the maldistribution of land, but argued for breaking up the large estates and redistributing the land by a "collective action of the State" \(Lombroso 1898: 148—51\). Disappointed with the results of the Risorgimento, in which he had believed so fervently as a youth, he sadly observed that in Calabria unification had profited only the rich, while for the poor it had added "the drawbacks of civilization to those of barbary" \(Lombroso 1898: 146\). 

Lombroso's analysis of anti-Semitism provides an interesting counterpoint to his writings on the Italian South, since he explained Jewish behavior more in environmental than racial terms. When asked by two foreign journals to express his opinion on anti-Semitism, he hesitated, feeling "that disgust which hits even the least impatient scientist when he must study the most repulsive human secretions" \(Lombroso 1894: 5\). But he agreed to make an impartial study, publishing the results in Italy in 1894 under the title *Antisemitism and Modern Science*. In this book, he begins by labeling Jews as a race, but later defines them as a mixture of Semitic and Aryan blood. On the basis of his studies in Venice and Piedmont, he concluded that Jews came in all sizes, body types, and hair color, since they took on the characteristics of the peoples with whom they lived. In terms of craniology, "the Jew \[is\] more Aryan than Semitic," through intermixing with other Europeans \(Lombroso 1894: 41\). He pronounced this race mixing as quite normal, arguing that "a mosaic of the most diverse races" inhabits each European nation \(Lombroso 1894: 10\). Race mixing was not only normal but good, for Darwin had shown the benefits of cross fertilization in plants. Alternately, where Lombroso had found "the most complete uniformity of race, as in Abyssinia and Sardinia ... the people demonstrated an inferior intelligence to those who had a variety of cranial forms. Therefore the Sardinians are infinitely inferior to the Sicilians," since the latter region had Norman, Greek, and Semitic blood \(Lombroso 1894: 56\). 

Despite their mixed blood, Jews did, according to Lombroso, exhibit a constellation of distinctive traits. For instance, they tended to cloak obstinate tenacity with humility and apparent flexibility, leaving them open to the charge of duplicity. But this flaw in character was neither hereditary nor racial, but necessary for survival through the centuries in hostile environments. Similarly, he admitted that Jews had traditionally been bankers, tax collectors, and wandering traders rather than exercising "honest occupations," but environment, not blood, had driven them to this choice \(Lombroso 1894: 18\). As nations like Italy opened all professions to Jews, they had taken immediate advantage of the new liberty to move into the universities, the state, and the army. Thus anti-Semitism was irrational and even atavistic, "an icy wind of savage hate running through even the most civilized peoples of Europe" \(Lombroso 1894: 9\). Anti-Semitism would finally cease when "little by little, in five or six centuries, the Jew will disappear" through intermarriage with Christians \(Lombroso 1894: 98\). For Lombroso, intermarriage was just another example of healthy mixing of the races, which would also promise the end of religious fanaticism in both Jewish and Christian communities. 

In contrast to the Jews, Lombroso found blacks to have a mental and emotional life almost entirely determined by biology. In a work called *White Man and Colored Man*, Lombroso argued that great inequalities mark the races, with Negroes being "the most imperfect" and whites the "most perfect." \(Lombroso 1871: 220—1\). According to his evolutionary theory, blacks represented the lowest and most primitive race, from which all others — including intermediary groups like the Semites and the Asians — had sprung under the positive influence of temperate climates. But the African had changed little for millennia, still displaying "that infantile and monkey-like manner of smiling and gesturing" \(Lombroso 1871: 840\). For Lombroso, this intellectual weakness sprang directly from physical inferiority: "the brain is undeveloped in the back and weighs less than ours. As for the skull which holds it, the face predominates over the forehead as \[their\] passions drown \[their\] intelligence" \(Lombroso 1871: 27-8\). Thus blacks were closer to monkeys than whites in language, art, and of course science. 



## Enrico Ferri

A defense attorney and law professor, Enrico Ferri formed part of the triumvirate of the founding fathers of positivist criminology along with Lombroso and Raffaele Garofalo. As evidenced in the title of his most famous work, *Criminal Sociology,* Ferri stressed sociological factors more than Lombroso did. Although it was Ferri who actually coined the term "born criminal," his eloquence on the importance of factors such as poverty and illiteracy in the etiology of crime persuaded Lombroso to reduce his estimate of the percentage of crime caused by atavism continually through all the various editions of *Criminal Man*. Yet Ferri believed in a small but dangerous group of born criminals and considered race an important element in their behavior. Only race could explain the wide variations in patterns of crime in areas with similar physical and social environments such as southern Italy. 

Like most criminal anthropologists, Ferri claimed to base his definition of race on cephalic indices that divided peoples into long-headed and short-headed types. Asserting that the distribution of races in Europe was generally understood, he identified three main groups: the Germans, Slavs, and Greco-Latins \(Ferri 1895, Vol. 1: 251\). While Italy fell into the third group, he admitted that a host of subgroups could be found within the peninsula: Ligurians in the North, Umbrians and Etruscans in the Center, and Oscans in the South, with later migrations of Germans, Celts, and Slavs into the North and Phoenicians, Arabs, Albanians, and Greeks into the South \(Ferri 1895, Vol. 1: 259-60\). Two of these groups - the Germans and the Slavs - corresponded to his major races, while the classification of the others was never clarified. Ferri also at times employed the broad categories of the "white race" and the "colored races" \(Ferri 1895, Vol. 1: 247\). 

For Ferri, race was most important as the cause of serious crimes like homicide, that is, those crimes most likely to be committed by the born criminal. He agreed with other criminal anthropologists that violent crime was giving way to property crime, since "civil evolution consists in man's continuous stripping-off of the most deep and ancient traces of his animal and savage origin" \(Ferri 1929, Vol. 1: 347\). In a work entitled *Homicide in Criminal Anthropology*, he traced this evolution, beginning with a chapter on "Murders among animals," followed by "Homicide among primitive humanity." Asking why "inferior races" were more prone to homicide, he speculated that "the Negro does not have a bad but only an unstable character like a baby, but with the difference that it is linked with mature physical development; thus this instability is the consequence of an incomplete cerebral development" \(Ferri 1895, Vol. 1: 250\). 

As for the differences between patterns of crime in Northern and Southern Italy, Ferri correlated these partly with economic disparities but also with the particular "racial energies and attitudes" of each region \(Ferri 1929, Vol. 1: 347\). Only the North had reached the modern pattern of a predominance of property crimes like theft and fraud, so that "from the provinces of Southern Italy and the islands to the northern regions one sees a progressive diminution of barbaric and violent crime" \(Ferri 1929, Vol. 1: 348\). Yet even the South was dotted with oases of low homicide, where Greek, Albanian, and "Longobard" blood was common \(Ferri 1895, Vol. 1: 265\). Elsewhere, the predominance of Semitic blood assured high rates of crimes against persons. 

Like Lombroso, Ferri tempered his racial analysis with the disclaimers that individual temperament could limit racial determinism and that environment also accounted for a large amount of crime. In fact Ferri, a more committed and consistent socialist than Lombroso at the turn of the century, suggested a future in which socialism might eliminate most lawbreaking. He rejected the rosy picture painted by some of his political colleagues in which socialism would wipe out crime entirely. For Ferri, "isolated cases of acute pathology" in born criminals could never be mitigated by benign environmental change and as such would always be dangerous to social order. But when a future socialist society guaranteed work to all citizens, the "struggle for existence" would be eased and most crime would cease \(Ferri 1929, Vol. 1: 351\). How socialism would erase the racial stigmata of entire regions was not clear. 

Interestingly, Ferri also wrote on anti-Semitism, perhaps out of deference to his friend and colleague, Lombroso. In an article published in the *Nuova rassegna* in 1893, he minimized description of Jews as a race and concentrated on a political analysis of the rise of anti-Semitism in Europe.3 Although anti-Semitism was not new, it was a new virulence fueled by conservative governments bent on diverting attention from present injustices and the new socialist parties that promised to right these injustices. For Ferri, it was not coincidental that those nations with the strongest reform movements — Germany, Russia, and Austria — exhibited the most hysterical outbursts of anti-Semitism. As a type of Christian revivalism meant to overshadow the "supreme ideal" of socialism, anti-Semitism, according to Ferri, was becoming "a huge fire" that threatened to escape the control of its conservative creators \(Ferri 1901: 538, 542\). In a chilling and unwitting prognostication of the future, he warned that "if, by a neronian hypothesis, we could imagine the destruction of all the Jews of Europe," the intellectual level of the continent would decline sharply \(Ferri 1901: 540\). As a non-Jew, he declared his agreement with Lombroso that "anti-semitism, as an individual sentiment, represents an atavistic residual of medieval barbary and ignorance" \(Ferri 1901: 541\). 



## Alfredo Niceforo

Alfredo Niceforo represented the third generation of students who took up eagerly the tools and theories of positivist criminology, after Lombroso and Ferri respectively. In fact, he dedicated an early book entitled *Crime in Sardinia*, published at the age of twenty-one, to his "affectionate teacher Enrico Fem," and Ferri returned the compliment in a laudatory preface. Based on a visit to the island two years earlier, this work seemed to refute Lombroso's assertion that Sardinia was the only part of the South relatively free of violent crime. Citing statistics on homicide, arson, aimed robbery, kidnapping, and extortion, he claimed that Sardinia rivaled and often surpassed Sicily in these felonies. He concluded that "these statistics are terribly eloquent; they indicate — in Sardinia — a vast and acute morbid process, a cancerous erosion that corrupts the moral life of that island" \(Niceforo 1897: 6\). 

Yet like his older colleagues, he found a variation in crime rates across geography and asserted that "the predominance of crime in certain regions is surely dependent, for the most part, on race" \(Niceforo 1897: 30\). Again like his colleagues, he failed to define race clearly. In one passage he divided Italy into two major groupings: the European or Celtic race that characterized Northern Italy, and the Mediterranean race, originally from Africa, that occupied the South and the Islands. Yet in Sardinia he found over four different "zones" of crime — for example vendetta in the Gallura, theft in Alghero, and slander in Bosa — and the correlation between this criminal geography and his two races is never entirely clear. He notes that Galluran women were blond and blue-eyed, so that even tourists could tell they were "perfectly celtic types" \(Niceforo 1897: 32\). But he is most interested in Nuoro, which he labeled the "delinquent zone" for its high rates of armed robbery, kidnapping, extortion, vendetta and other violent crimes. Not surprisingly, he found that the inhabitants of Nuoro exhibited more "atavistic stigmata" than other Sardinians \(Niceforo 1897: 21\). His study of Nuorese skulls turned up some new types, which he found to correspond with those of Canary Islanders, that is, Africans. 

Although Niceforo offered an unsatisfactory definition of race, he was more explicit than his colleagues in linking race to behavior. The physical atavisms common to the Nuorese corresponded to moral deficiencies, since "the moral sense ... \[is\] organized by a series of molecular variations" \(Niceforo 1897: 68\). Thus moral, like physical, traits were inborn, and this "psychological heredity is quite stable and will not disappear ... \[even\] when confronted with other models to imitate or with education; this is the psyche which is transmitted fatally from father to son, with all its accumulation of defects" \(Niceforo 1897: 68\). 

Niceforo presented a variety of evidence that the delinquent zone of Nuoro had "atrophied on the road to civilization and \[had\] retained the moral ideas of primitive society" \(Niceforo 1897: 41\). These mountaineers, like Africans, organized "armed raids against other villages, with the same enthusiasm as primitive tribes drawn up before their symbolic totems" \(Niceforo 1897: 43\). Echoing Herbert Spencer, Niceforo condemned such violence as atavistic, since modern society was evolving from egoism and war to altruism and peace. Niceforo also condemned Nuoroese men for the degradation of their wives, forced to perform the "most menial work" like women in "ancient tribes" \(Niceforo 1897: 54\). The latter judgment takes on a bit of irony in light of Niceforo's unabashed misogyny in other writings \(Gibson 1990: 23\). Even the music of Nuoro showed "great similarity to savage singing. This singing is oppressive; it penetrates the brain, rasping, whirring, and boring through it with sharpness, tenacity and insistence. It is nothing but dissonant variations on a few notes" \(Niceforo 1897: 51\). 

While Niceforo admitted that crime sprang from social as well as biological causes, he gave the former much shorter shrift in his book on Sardinia than Ferri or even Lombroso. This was also true of another work notoriously entitled *Contemporary Barbarian Italy*, in which he argued that the South represented "a real and actual social atavism" compared to the North \(Niceforo 1893: 14\). Citing statistics on education, industry, suicide, and crime, he sought to establish the existence of "two Italies" divided by race. Because of their discipline and educability, the Aryans of the North deserved a form of government based on liberty, while the Mediterraneans of the South "need energetic and at times dictatorial action ... to tear them away from the shadows" of traditionalism \(Niceforo 1893: 297\). Niceforo thus concluded that only a highly decentralized government would allow the two Italies to devise political systems consonant with their racial differences. While Niceforo lectured in the North and abroad, he was born in Sicily and taught at the University of Naples, making this pronouncement an example of southerners' complicity in the stigmatizing discourse on the South. 

Niceforo's racial analysis takes on much more complexity and subtlety in a slightly later work entitled *The Germans: History of an Idea and a Race*. Clearly irked by the German claims to racial purity and Aryan superiority, he denied the equivalence of the terms "German" and "Aryan." Now identifying three races in Europe, the Nordic, Alpine, and Mediterranean, he argued not only that the Nordic race - blond, long-headed Aryans - could be found in many other countries, but also that only about half of Germany was Nordic. Thus Germans were wrong to equate their nation with the Aryan race. He also defended Italy from German charges of "ethnic chaos" and "extensive racial mixing," asserting that Italy had a simple racial map with one group each in the North and the South \(Niceforo 1919. 74\). Furthermore, he ridiculed the Gentian notion that all great men in European history had been Aryans. In his chapter entitled "Did all Greek heroes really have blond hair?," he answered that this was "a poetic fiction," as was the absurd theory that all Renaissance geniuses, like Dante, had been German and that this Aryan blood had later been submerged in that of the lower races \(Niceforo 1919: 74-5\). 

For our purposes, it is perhaps most interesting that Niceforo softened his stance on the determinisi link between race and psychology in *The Germans*. In an attempt to deny the possibility of a superior race, he pointed out that the psychology of each people is complex, influenced by history and environment as well as race. He now pronounced it difficult to define the particular psychologies of the Nordic, Alpine, and Mediterranean peoples. Niceforo's conversion to environmentalism in the case of Aryans clearly reflected political changes in the relationship between Italy and Germany. As Germany became an overweening senior partner in the Triple Alliance and finally an enemy in the First World War, Niceforo's admiration of Aryans paled. Bristling at their claims of racial superiority, he modified a belief in biological determinism previously held to be scientifically objective. 



## Giuseppe Sergi

Of the generation of Lombroso, Giuseppe Sergi had fought with Giuseppe Garibaldi during the wars of unification before becoming a pioneer in the discipline of anthropology. He was appointed to the first Chair of Anthropology, at the University of Bologna, in 1880 and four years later moved to the University of Rome, where he founded the Institute of Anthropology. Known for his work on the typology of human races, he was quoted by the other positivist criminologists already discussed, although not always accurately. Sergi collaborated actively with Lombroso in the *Archives* and shared key positivist assumptions: that, for example, physical racial characteristics determined internal psychological traits. But his work on race was more careful than most of his colleagues, and he tried to sort out many myths and misconceptions about Aryans and their relation to Italy. 

In the preface to his work entitled *Aryans and Italics*, published in 1898, Sergi warned that his opinions opposed common wisdom about the Aryans. He criticized the Italian reliance on linguistics and ethnography to try to classify races; in this vain endeavor, "the principal defect ... was to try to establish ethnological rules without anthropology, which is quite a curious phenomenon" \(Sergi 1898; 4\). Although linguistics pointed to the unity of most Europeans based on the Indo-European roots in their languages, he believed that all these groups could be considered "neither a race nor a people" \(Sergi 1898: 2—3\). Italian intellectuals needed to get over their disdain for anthropology and accept the tools that it offered for solving this puzzle. 

Despite his allusions to cultural practices such as burial, Sergi relied mainly on the shapes of skulls and faces to categorize race. Claiming to have compared ancient and modern skulls of groups such as Egyptians and American Indians, he concluded that "the forms of the skull are *persistent,"* unchanging over many thousands of years \(Sergi 1898: 102\). For Sergi, this persistence of physical type was consistent with the "laws of animality," and only "extremist evolutionists" could believe that physical characteristics such as the shape of the skull could have changed in the short time since humans appeared on earth \(Sergi 1898: 103\). Sergi filled his book with tables of cephalic indices and photographs of skulls to underpin his classification of races in Italy. He boasted that many had praised his new system, including "a man whose powers of intuition and sharp eyes of observation are worth a thousand others, Cesare Lombroso" \(Sergi 1898: 104\). 

On the basis of his evidence, Sergi tackled the confusing multiplicity of groups found in Italian history, such as the Italics, the Terramare people, Umbrians, Latins, Etruscans, and Ligurians, After measuring skulls from each group, he concluded that all of Italy — in fact all of Europe — was populated by two general races: the long-headed Italics and the short-headed Aryans. According to his theory, the Italics had their origins in Africa and had spread over the whole of Europe in Neolithic times. Labeled "Euroafrican" by Sergi, they varied widely in skin color because of differing climates. In the Bronze Age, the Aryans invaded Europe from the east, pushing most Italics either to the south or the north. These "Euroasians" included the Germans, Slavs, and Celts, the last two of which groups entered Northern Italy and penetrated as far as the Tiber. But the late Etruscans and the Romans were Italic, so that Italy remained a mixture of Aryans and Italics in the North while being almost homogeneously Italic in the South. Even within the North, Aryan influence varied, so that it was quite weak in Rome, but "the Po valley can consider itself predominantly Aryan" \(Sergi 1898: 88\). It is noteworthy that while Sergi based his classification on biological measurement, he rejected skin color as significant. 

In the conclusion to his book, Sergi left his careful and closely-reasoned analysis of physical evidence to leap into ungrounded speculation about the psychological differences between Aryans and Italics. On the basis partially of anecdotes from his own trips to northern Europe, he asserted that Aryans were more socially-connected and orderly than the individualistic, anarchic Italics. During ancient Rome and the Renaissance, Italic individualism produced great military leaders and artistic geniuses, so that Italy had triumphed over the rest of Europe. But in modern times, the social solidarity of the Aryans had allowed them to create stronger institutions, such as schools, industry, and families, and thus European leadership had passed to them. Undocumented by any rigorous data, this analysis showed that Sergi was as careless as his colleagues in assuming that biology determined psychology. 



## Napoleone Colajanni

While Lombroso and his circle dominated criminological discourse in late nineteenth-century Italy, dissenting voices could be heard. A minority of "sociological criminologists" denied the existence of the born criminal and attributed all crime to bad environmental influences like poverty, lack of education, homelessness, unemployment, and broken families. Perhaps the most eminent figure among this group was Filippo Turati, who in 1882 attacked the biological theories of Ferri in an essay entitled "Crime and the Social Question."4 Never a vulgar materialist, Turati admitted that "the social question is not all related to the stomach" \(Turati 1962: 193\). Instead, "*poverty* means lack of *education* in the widest sense of the word. It means ignorance of the rules of social intercourse, ineptness in conforming to individual interests; bad examples, honesty betrayed, weak nerves, excitability of base passions, inability to reflect, \[and\] permanent deficiency in satisfying vital needs" \(Turati 1962: 193\). For Turati, the only answer to crime was the substitution of capitalist society with one characterized by "the egalitarian diffusion ... of wealth and education, of the joys of love and of thought." 

In his essay, Turati mentioned race only in passing, as one of many physical traits that could be ameliorated by a good environment. For a detailed deconstruction of the positivist doctrine of race and crime, we must turn to another sociological criminologist, Napoleone Colajanni. A parliamentary deputy from Sicily for many years, Colajanni showed in his denunciation of biological and racial determinism a passion partially arising from a desire to defend the South from stereotypes. With a much deeper interest in criminology than Turati, Colajanni wrote a number of books on the subject during his professorship at the Universities of Palermo and Naples, including a general text, *Criminal Sociology*. More importantly for our purposes, he addressed directly the question of race and crime in *Latins and Anglo-Saxons \(Inferior and Superior Races\)*. 

Colajanni pointed out the confusion in racial classification, despite the general agreement among anthropologists on a tripartite division into Germans, Alpines or Celts, and Mediterraneans. He quotes a variety of experts to show the myriad discrepancies among descriptions of the characteristics of even these three simple categories, as well as the existence of multiple subcategories. According to the generally-accepted scheme, Italy harbored two races, the Alpine in the North and the Mediterranean - "the cursed race" - in the South. He was amused that the Alpine race could be considered so culturally and economically superior in Northern Italy while being bemoaned as ragged, ignorant mountain folk in southern France. He was especially delighted to show that experts could not even agree on the appropriate race categorization of great men, any more than could "the inmates in an insane asylum" \(Colajanni 1906: 18\). For example, one racial theorist labeled Lord Byron "a real German" while another dismissed him as "a vulgar Celt" \(Colajanni 1906: 18\). Colajanni concluded that while pure races may have existed in the distant past, today "peoples" or better "nations" were the proper terms for groups with a collective psychology, behavior, and history. 

Even if races could be identified, Colajanni rejected a key proposition in the Lombrosian analysis: the correspondence between "anatomical characteristics and psychological characteristics" \(Colajanni 1906: 14\). The modern world showed this correlation to be absurd, since most nations harbored a variety of races and yet all citizens felt, thought, and acted in the same way. Furthermore, no race was superior, although "anthroposociological fantasy" had assigned to Anglo-Saxons "the *character* of *characters*, the highest trait which assures their superiority: educability" \(Colajanni 1906: 42—3\). For Colajanni, racial theorists were like the defenders of slavery in the time of Aristotle, who believed that "men's internal nature made them *free* or *slaves*" \(Colajanni 1906: 75\). That slaves in Aristotle's time were from northern Europe, now considered superior, made the notion of racial hierarchy even more absurd. Surely Aryans or even Celts had not been needed to build the marvels of Agrigento, Syracuse, Segesta, and Selinunte in his own Sicily. 

When turning to statistics on crime, Colajanni admitted that Italy held "very sadly, first place in violent crime" \(Colajanni 1906: 99\), But he refused to see the high homicide rate as "a measure exclusively of the greater *ferocity* of the Italians, especially those of the South" \(Colajanni 1906: 94\), Since he claimed that assault rates were higher in Germany and Scotland than Italy, violence was not inevitably linked to one race, but common in different forms to all races. Even specific types of murder, like infanticide, were higher in northern Europe than Italy. And homicide in general had declined in Sicily and Sardinia to almost one-half of what it had been twenty years previously, a rapid change incompatible with racial determinism. Even the blot of the mafia and the *camorra* in the Italian South was not unique, since bands of whites who lynched blacks similarly dishonored the United States. Dismissing the positivist racial theory as "pseudo-scientific," Colajanni saw homicide rates "simply as an index of the level of social and intellectual evolution" reached by a society \(Colajanni 1906: 97—8\). For him, the denial by criminal anthropologists of the primary influence of environment and education on crime constituted "a real madness" \(Colajanni 1906: 158\). 



## Conclusion

Even by the standards of their day, positivist criminologists failed to develop a racial theory worthy of the designation "scientific." As our analysis of the writings of Lombroso, Ferri, Niceforo, and Sergi illustrates, no consensus existed even on a general classification of race. Lombroso categorized Italians as Latins and Semites, Ferri as Greco-Latins, Niceforo as Mediterraneans, and Sergi as Aryans and Italics. Furthermore, each writer except Sergi contradicted himself within his own writings, referring to smaller groups like Umbrians, Greeks, or Phoenicians that seemed to lie outside the larger categories. Only Sergi was careful about defining his racial groups, while the others were so cavalier in their racial classification that they even misused Sergi's categories. 

Confusion in racial classification arose partially from incomplete or unpersuasive data. Sometimes positivists substituted skin color \(white and black\) or language \(Albanian or Greek\) for rigorous empirical evidence of fundamental physical differences. The most persuasive data, the cephalic indices, were used consistently only by Sergi, while the other writers supplied them for some categories and not for others. Yet, the cephalic index, with only two categories of long-headed and short-headed, was too blunt a tool to create the detailed racial maps of the South proposed by Lombroso, Ferri, and Niceforo. Without a clear definition, race shifted between biological, cultural, and political categories in their writings. 

Perhaps even more disturbing was the assumption, central to criminal anthropology, that biology determined psychology and morality. While the cephalic indices might have correctly distinguished inherited physical differences among humans, this type of data did not prove that the shape of the skull had any effect on morality. Of our writers, only Niceforo explicitly addressed this connection by asserting that thought is a function of molecules. This assertion proved inadequate when positivists admitted that the environment also influenced criminological behavior. Except for Ferri, who at least differentiated between violent crime springing from race and property crime arising from social influences, most writers never attempted to explain the interplay of race and environment in the etiology of crime. 

Curiously, the weight of race or environment in the crime equation seemed to shift depending on the groups studied. This becomes especially clear in the writings of Lombroso and Ferri on anti-Semitism or of Niceforo on the Aryans. Here, environmentalism almost triumphed over the authors' usual racial analysis as they pursued their political aims of defending Jews or criticizing Germany. On the other hand, blacks were compared to monkeys, both incapable of escaping biological instincts. Implicitly, positivists constructed a sliding scale, with heredity at one end and environment at the other: Africans and other "savages" were placed near the pole of heredity, while Jews, and, after the rise of a threatening Germany, Aryans were placed near the pole of environment. Southerners in Italy were assigned a place near the pole of heredity, but with a slight shift toward environment. Thus prejudices or political passions underpinned a supposedly scientific analysis of racial determinism. 

The illogic of racial reasoning among criminal anthropologists did not vitiate its importance at the turn of the century. In many ways, the positivist analysis simply clothed common sense, or common prejudices, in pseudo-scientific garb and was therefore readily accepted. Not loath to popularize their theories, the proponents of racial determinism were tireless in offering lectures and articles for the general educated public. Perhaps more importantly, Lombroso and his colleagues trained many students who later held important posts in the bureaucracies of the police and prisons, and possibly in Italy's African Colonies as well. Only further research can establish how these racial theories were translated in the everyday practice of the criminal justice and colonial systems. Surely such theories created an atmosphere conducive to Benito Mussolini's later racial repression, which ignored earlier interpretations of Jews or the interplay of heredity and environment. Even in the postwar era, while the names of criminal anthropologists are not remembered, sadly their notion of southern racial inferiority persists. 




## Notes

1. See Renzo Villa \(1985: 283-8\) for a comprehensive bibliography of Lombroso's writings. Lombroso's theory was the main topic of discussion at both the first and second Congresses of Criminal Anthropology, held respectively in Rome in 1885 and Paris in 1889. 

2. No biographer of Lombroso, including Villa, has focused on his racial theories. Emilana Noether was the first to treat the general question in her unpublished paper, "Race is Destiny: Latin Decadence in *Fin-De-Siècle* Italian Positivist Thought." 

3. Ferri's article "L'antisemitismo" was reprinted in *Studi sulla criminalità* \(Ferri 1901\). 

4. Reprinted in 1962, Filippo Turati's "Il delitto e la questione sociale" was originally serialized in *La Plebe* in 1882 and appeared in book form in 1883. 




## References

+ Colajanni, Napoleone \(1906\) *Latini e anglo-sassoni \(Razze inferiori e razze superiori*\), 2nd edition. Rome and Naples: Rivista popolare. 
+ Dolza, Delfina \(1990\) *Essere figlie di Lombroso: Due donne intellettuali tra '800 e '900*. Milan: Franco Angeli. 
+ Ferri, Enrico \(1895*\) L'omicidio nell'antropologia criminale*. Turin: Bocca. 
+ —\(1901\) *Studi sulla criminalità*. Turin: Bocca. 
+ —\(1929\) *Sociologia criminale*, 5th edition. Turin: UTET. 
+ Gibson, Mary \(1982\) "The 'Female Offender' and the Italian School of Criminal Anthropology," *Journal of European Studies* **12**: 155—65. 
+ —\(1990\) "On the Insensitivity of Women: Science and the Woman Question in Liberal Italy," *Journal of Women's History* **2**: 11-41. 
+ Lombroso, Cesare \(1871\) *L'uomo bianco e l'uomo di colore: Lettere suli 'origine e le varietà delle razze umane*. Padua: F. Sacchetto. 
+ —\(1894\) *L'antisemitismo e le scienze moderne*. Turin: Roux. 
+ —\(1896—7\) *L'uomo delinquente in rapporto all'antropologia, alla giurisprudenza ed alle discipline carcerarie*, 5th edition. Turin: Bocca. 
+ —\(1898\) *In Calabria* \(*1862—1897*\). Catania: Niccolò Giannotta. 
+ Niceforo, Alfredo \(1893\) *L'Italia barbara contemporanea*. Milan: Sandron. 
+ —\(1897\) *La delinquenza in Sardegna*. Palermo: Sandron. 
+ —\(1919\) *Les Germains: Histoire d'un idée ed d'une race*, 2nd edition. Paris: Bossard. 
+ Noether, Emiliana \(n.d.\) "Race is Destiny: Latin Decadence in *Fin-De-Siècle* Italian Positivist Thought." Unpublished paper. 
+ Sergi, Giuseppe \(1892\) "Sensibilità femminile," *Archivio di antropologia criminale, psichiatria, e medicina legale* **13**: 1—8. 
+ —\(1898\) *Arii e italici*. Turin: Bocca. 
+ Turati, Filippo \(1962 \[1882\]\) "Il delitto e la questione sociale." In Luigi Cortesi, ed., *Turati giovane: Scapigliatura, positivismo, marxismo*, pp. 158—236. Milan: Editore Avanti\!. 
+ Villa, Renzo \(1985\) *Il deviante e i suoi segni: Lombroso e la nascita dell'anthropologia criminale*. Milan: Franco Angeli. 




