+++
title = "5"

+++

Homo Siculus: Essentialism in the Writing of Giovanni Verga, Giuseppe Tomasi Di Lampedusa, and Leonardo Sciascia

*Frank Rosengarten *



## Introduction

The purpose of this essay is to shed critical light on the forms of essentialism and fatalism that inhere in the writing of three Sicilian novelists, Giovanni Verga, Giuseppe Tornasi di Lampedusa, and Leonardo Sciascia. I shall be looking at the two twentieth-century novelists mainly through the prism of their nineteenth-century predecessor, in order to highlight themes present in Verga that will be taken up again but in rather different ways, by Sciascia and Lampedusa. 

In *Orientalism*, Edward Said has familiarized us with the cluster of cultural prejudices and historical preconceptions that govern the thinking of many people in the West who, especially since the beginning of the nineteenth century, and for a variety of political and psychological reasons, have seen the vast geopolitical area known as the Orient, and the subdivision of the Orient called the Near East, in essentialist terms. Said argues rather persuasively that, for the stratum of Western intellectuals and policy-makers \(politicians, colonial administrators, professors, publishers, etc.\) who were responsible for shaping a serviceable conception of the East for imperial purposes, it was convenient and advantageous to construct an a-historical typology of the Eastern mind and of the Eastern way of being. Such a typology, with its array of unchanging traits and habits of mind, served the interests of the colonizing countries, for it made of the observed peoples and nations, the studied object, "another being with regard to whom the studying subject is transcendent" \(Said 1979: 97\). Among the common traits attributed to the East was \(and is\) its fatalism, its renunciation of will, what Michael Herzfeld calls its "passive and total resignation" to whatever events the shifting sands of historical circumstance might bring about \(Herzfeld 1987: 36\). 

But, as this essay hopes to show, such essentialism and fatalism also manifest themselves in the ways in which some intellectuals and writers view their own societies. Following Said's lead, Nelson Moe provides ample documentation to show that deeply prejudicial attitudes have long characterized the mind-set of many northern Italians, and of some privileged southerners as well, with respect to the southern regions of their country, and that "fatalism" has been one of the key terms in the geopolitical lexicon of educated Italians writing about the South. *Meridionalismo*, Moe argues \(1992\), like Orientalism, is a widespread phenomenon, a cluster of value-judgments that make the South seem like an irredeemable victim of its cultural and political backwardness, itself the result of a "history" that has been transmuted into an essential "nature" no longer amenable to reform and change. In any event, as applied to Sicilian reality, essentialism, often combined with fatalism and pessimism, is on full display in the writings discussed below. 

Verga's novels *I Malavoglia* \(1974 \[1881\]\) and especially *Mastro Don Gesualdo* \(1979 \[1889\]\) will be the main focus of my analysis. As for Lampedusa and Sciascia, I have limited my remarks to *The Leopard* \(1967 \[1958\]\) and to *Pirandello e la Sicilia* \(1961\), a group of essays in which Sciascia expounds his interpretation of Sicilian history and culture. The translations of passages from the original Italian texts of Lampedusa and Sciascia are my own, but in the case of Verga I will be citing English translations of *Mastro Don Gesualdo* \(1979\) by Giovanni Cecchetti and of *I Malavoglia* \(*The House by the Medlar Tree*, 1955\) by Eric Mosbacher. Cecchetti's translation, although occasionally somewhat stilted, is nonetheless an enormously earthy, rough-hewn version that has had a strong impact on me. It was Cecchetti's translation even more that Verga's original Italian that helped me to understand more clearly why D. H. Lawrence found Verga's writing to be so congenial to his own literary tastes and proclivities.1 Mosbacher is less successful, yet for the purposes of this essay, it seems to me that his translation also provides a window through which to view certain aspects of Verga's vision of life. 



## Verga's *Mastro Gesualdo* and *I Malavoglia*

"Vision" is an important word in my critical vocabulary with regard to Verga, so let me attempt to explain what I mean by it. 

The question at issue is the extent to which one thinks Verga adhered to the canons of realism and *verismo*. Put another way, one might ask whether Verga's descriptive techniques and his unflinching revelations of human greed, misery, and suffering are ends in themselves, or whether they are meant to point to something beyond - a force, a higher power, a law of necessity transcending human volition. Robert Dombroski, for example, in *Properties of Writing* \(1994: 23-43\), contrasts Verga's world-view with that of Manzoni, arguing that, unlike Manzoni, Verga "held the materialist belief that human nature was determined by social existence and that morality was essentially a socio-cultural phenomenon integrally connected to the life processes of particular social groups and societies." Dombroski situates Verga in the current of nineteenth-century thought that accepted both "naturalism's valorization of cause—effect progression" and the principles of positivist inquiry, which he sees as pervasive in *I Malavoglia*. While conceding Verga's "thoroughly pessimistic view of humanity as victim of nature and history and his pervading sense of life as a desperate struggle toward death," he believes that the truth value of Verga's narratives consists essentially "not in metaphysics or theology ... but in the material determinants of specific sociocultural systems." Like Dombroski, Romano Luperini, in *Interpretazioni di Verga* \(1976: 7—34\) also insists on Verga's materialism, which he counterposes to the long critical tradition, of which Croce was a prime exponent, that privileged "the lyrical and nostalgic" aspects of Verga's style, thus minimizing the scientific side of his literary temperament. Idealist critics, Luperini argues, have stressed idyllic moments and landscapes in Verga's stories and novels to the exclusion of other motifs rooted in the real economic, social, and political history of the period. 

This "materialist" reading of Verga is convincing as far as it goes, since there is nothing in his work that suggests belief in a personal God or in the existence of a supernatural realm in regard to which the events of this world are necessarily preparatory and subordinate. But I do think that it is possible to recognize the tragic and visionary foundation of Verga's world-view without falling into exclusively "lyrical and nostalgic" readings of his work. In other words, I do not share the view that Verga's work "contains no deep, symbolic level of meaning; rather, like ethnographic narrative, it pays attention mainly to descriptive surface. Its meaning is of a more comparative and abstract nature, allegorical rather than symbolical or representational" \(Dombroski 1994: 24\). 

Now, we may be dealing here with semantic problems, but it is my view that Verga's descriptive passages \(in both *I Malavoglia* and *Mastro Don Gesualdo*\) very often call attention to themselves in such a way as to suggest something beyond, some other level or dimension of reality that these passages serve to evoke. It is in this context that I think Verga's fatalistic "materialism" and his pessimism emerge most clearly. Let me cite a few illustrative examples of what I am talking about, drawn from the Cecchetti and Mosbacher translations of *Mastro Don Gesualdo* and *I Malavoglia*. 

*Mastro Don Gesualdo* describes a world marked by repulsion between human beings themselves and between nature and humanity. His vision of the world, although in some respects compatible with elements of Christian morality, nonetheless opposes itself resolutely to the concept of universal love animating Christianity. The novel presents us with a Hobbesian view of human life in a state of nature as "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short," and with a conception of the non-human animal and vegetative worlds that mocks the idea of a beneficent nature that one finds in the writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and in some of the English romantic poets. Verga is as subversive of all optimistic and providentially inspired notions of human betterment and progress as Leopardi, and just as fearless as the poet from Recanati in his way of confronting the problem of evil. 

The human workaday world as depicted by Verga in *Mastro Don Gesualdo* is one in which alienation, distrust, treachery, and voracious appetite predominate. A poignant example of this appears at the end of the novel, when Gesualdo, afflicted by a fatal cancer, finally lets himself know what he had always suspected, that Isabella is not his biological daughter and that she finds him repulsive. His yearning for a moment of closeness with her encounters an insuperable barrier between them that not even the imminence of his death can overcome. Isabella's resistance to him is impenetrable and absolute: 

He wanted to tell her other things, he wanted to ask her other questions, at that point opening his heart to her as if to a father confessor, and reading into hers. But she kept her head bent as if she had guessed, the Trao's obstinate wrinkle between her brow, drawing backward, shutting herself up inside herself, haughty — with her own troubles and her own secret. And he then felt himself become a Motta again, just as she was a Trao — suspicious, hostile, made from another mold. He relaxed his arms, and said no more \(Verga 1979: 327\). 

With the exception of Gesualdo's youthful emotional and sexual bond with Diodata, not a single human relationship depicted in *Mastro Don Gesualdo* is exempt from a corrosive mistrust and lurking treachery. The consolation of family life that still survives in *I Malavoglia* has now been entirely displaced by acquisitiveness, petty ambition, scheming for political advantage, and envy. Parent and child, husband and wife, worker and employer, rich and poor, aristocrat and bourgeois citizen, are divided as if by an abyss of tormented misunderstanding, of which the alienation between Gesualdo and Isabella is but one supreme example in a hierarchy of emotional pain. Yet this alienation would not be as final and definitive in its exemplification of a dystopic vision of life if it were not accompanied by the imagery with which Verga evokes the omnipresence of death, and the highly suggestive way in which he conveys his sense of nature and its impact on the human and animal worlds. 

Death, or the imminence and foreshadowing of death, is present from the very beginning of the narrative, and grows ever more ominous and pervasive as the story proceeds. The Trao family, the pathetic yet still proud and disdainful representatives of a fading aristocratic class, have nothing of the grandeur of Lampedusa's Don Fabrizio, but their vocation for death is every bit as profound as his. Bianca Trao, Gesualdo's wife, is repeatedly described as being "pale as a dead woman," a "specter" whose presence disturbs and obsesses her husband. Her brother Diego too is "pale as a dead body." His sickness and actual death occur early in the story. Verga pictures him looking at his sister from his deathbed, as he responds to her offer to bring him some broth: "At first the sick man signaled no with his head, looking into the air as he was lying on his back. Then he turned his head, staring at her with his greedy eyes from the depths of his sockets, which seemed empty, sooty" \(Verga 1979: 94\). 

Verga's death scenes are part of a tapestry dominated by the motifs of violence, devouring mouths, and mean hatred masked by subtle innuendoes and threats. The human aspect of this world is in no essential way removed or different from its animal aspect. There is a basic equality between them, they almost seem to need and complement each other. One of the first descriptions of Gesualdo, which coexists and contrasts uneasily with his humanitarian impulses, comes from the mouth of the Notary, who addresses a member of the nobility, Baron Zacco, who has "ugly ghostlike eyes." After recounting the high points of Gesualdo's impressive mastery of entrepreneurship in the areas of land speculation and construction, he notes: "The more you eat the hungrier you get ... He's quite hungry ... and he's got good teeth too, I'm telling you." When Gesualdo shows his anger, it is anger comparable to that of an "enraged bull." When his father Nunzio, who looks upon his son with a mixture of fear and envy, shouts to him across a field at the site of a collapsed bridge on property belonging to Gesualdo, the shout becomes "a cry that the gusts of wind tore from his mouth and then shredded in the distance." The canon-priest Lupi \(names are significant in Verga, as they are for many other nineteenth-century novelists\) is depicted in the process of persuading Gesualdo to marry out of his class; he proffers his advice "looking straight at Gesualdo with his sharp little rat's eyes that seemed to pierce him like two pins, his blade-shaped face sliding away on all sides." The Baroness Rubiera, afraid for her inept son Nino, who is the real father of Gesualdo's daughter Isabella, expresses her alarm by referring to the young man's enemies as "snakes, that's what they are\! Nothing but criminals\! They're going to eat up that degenerate son of mine in one bite\!" 

Images of cutting, slashing, and devouring appear throughout the novel, at times in the least suspected places. Even inanimate objects can devour their victims. Bianca falls ill, undermined by inherited weaknesses of body and soul, and retreats to her bed, where she lingers for a long time, inconclusively: "She was like one of those caged birds that try out the songs for the spring they'll never see. The bed was eating up her flesh; the fever consumed her with a slow fire." Then Gesualdo succumbs to a fatal disease. The description of his ordeal, like other similar passages, conveys a feeling that there is more than meets the eye in the poor man's suffering, that something is operative here that suggests a fate common to men and animals inhering in Verga's dystopic universe: "Don Gesualdo, sick, yellow, his mouth always bitter, had lost his sleep and his appetite; he had cramps in his stomach, like mad dogs biting inside him." The same image appears later, at the same time that Don Gesualdo's house is being sacked and looted by a mob of self-styled "revolutionaries" getting even with the rich who have exploited them. "There was a dog in his belly devouring his liver - the rabid dog of Saint Vitus the martyr that made him a martyr too." 

No segment of Sicilian society as portrayed in *Mastro Don Gesualdo* is exempt from Verga's implacable indictment of a social world that has lost its bearings, no longer able to balance means with ends, to accommodate personal with social interests, to reconcile natural impulses of the self with humane concern for the selves of others. Just as Manzoni had in *I promessi sposi* presented the established institutions of Italian society in the seventeenth century against a backdrop of pervasive greed, violence and petty ambition, so Verga, but in an even more pitiless manner, utterly subverts the common optimistic assumptions of liberal society during the Risorgimento, at least as these are embodied in representative characters from the early 1820s to the revolutionary movements of 1848. Take the new medical science, for example, which was hailed in the past century as a portent of unlimited progress. Gesualdo has summoned the best doctors from Palermo to his side. He awaits their decision. One of the physicians present mutters some encouraging words about his prospects for recovery. Then his superior intervenes: 

Doctor Muscio, more cruel, blurted straight out the only remedy they could try: the extirpation of the tumor — quite a case, the kind of surgery that would do anybody credit. He showed the ways and the means, getting excited over the proposal accompanying his words with gestures, already smelling blood, his eyes burning in his large face that turned all purple — as if he were about to roll up his sleeves and begin; so much so that the patient opened his eyes and his mouth wide, and instinctively pulled away; and the women, frightened, broke into moaning and sobbing \(Verga 1979: 309\). 

The natural elements are as cruel and devouring as the human beings depicted by Verga in this novel of Sicilian life. The sun, source of all life, inflicts terrible punishment on the pitiful humans who toil beneath its sovereign and unrelenting light. One of the most suggestive scenes of the novel occurs in the first section, where Verga blends description of the Sicilian landscape with a human encounter that one cannot help but interpret as symbolic of a fate looming over this enterprising hero of the time with a special intensity, but that spares no one from its encompassing grasp. Gesualdo is making his away across a ravine, close to his home town: 


Still grumbling, he went off at the mule's pace under the boiling sun — a sun that split rocks now, and made the stubble pop as if it were on fire. In the ravine, between the two mountains, it felt like a furnace; and the town on top of the hill, climbing above the precipices, scattered among enormous cliffs, undermined by caverns that left it as if suspended in air — blackish, rusty, looking abandoned, without a shadow, with all the windows opened wide in the torrid heat, like so many black holes, and the crosses of the bell towers swaying in the misty sky. Even the mule, covered with sweat, panted up the steep road. On the way Don Gesualdo met a poor old man, loaded with sheaves, exhausted, who began to grumble: 

"Oh, where are you going, sir, at this time? . .. You have so much money, and you give your soul to the devil\!" \(Verga 1979: 54\). 


Verga's landscapes in the novels and in most of his short stories have been characterized as "idyllic" and "pastoral" but this is misleading. The landscapes are as charged with fateful power as any other aspect of what I would like to call his "visionary realism." To think of Verga only as a social realist interested in the material conditions of life and their effect on human beings is to deprive him of an essential component of his art, just as to single out the visionary at the expense of the realistic imperatives of Verga's writing would be one-sided and unsatisfactory. 

Despite an evident desire to situate his narrative in a clearly defined historical framework, and his interest in the political ideals that contributed to the Risorgimento, Verga treats the political movements of Risorgimento Sicily in much the same way that Lampedusa treats the period from 1860 to 1900 in *The Leopard*, namely in such a way as to make them appear at best opportunistic, at worst fraudulent. One has the impression from Verga's account of events that the liberation of Sicily would do nothing for the common people of the island except give them temporary but illusory hope that they would be freer under a new order than under the present corrupt regime. 

I trust that what I have said thus far makes it clear why I feel more in tune with what Alberto Asor Rosa has to say about Verga's world-view - in the passage cited just below—than with Dombroski and Luperini. In the context of a discussion of Verga's "populism", Asor Rosa writes: 

Behind the proletarians of *I Malavoglia* and the novellas there is a vision of a more metaphysical than historical character, a moral attitude that is more ontological than this-worldly, an indignation and a pessimism more universal than human. Verga does not assign to the common people a "privileged" place in the great story of suffering. What fascinates the writer is not the suffering of subaltern groups considered as having its own laws and manifestations, but rather the cyclical inexorable reconfirmation of a law common to all classes, to all human beings, to all living creatures: from the miserable donkey of the story "Rosso Malpelo," to the fishermen of *I Malavoglia*, to the aspiring bourgeois Mastro Don Gesualdo, right up to the characters imagined but not realized of the last novels of the "ciclo dei vinti", the cycle of the vanquished \(Asor Rosa 1976: 187; my translation\). 

Such an interpretation is certainly borne out on the theoretical level by Verga's famous preface to *I Malavoglia*, written in 1881 to introduce his cycle of novels. It is borne out also, I believe, by an attentive textual analysis of Verga's novels and short stories. 

Before making a few remarks about *I Malavoglia*, a word should be said about the possibility of a Christian reading of *Mastro Don Gesualdo*. I think that such a reading has much to recommend it, not to be sure in relation to a supernatural and theistic faith, but rather in relation to the essential moral content and trajectory of Verga's work, where one can observe in action such Christian \(in some instances specifically Catholic\) ideas as sacrifice, confession, spiritual struggle, and martyrdom. I do not think that the names Gesualdo and Diodata are coincidental in *Mastro Don Gesualdo*. The first four letters of Gesualdo's name and all the letters in Diodata's name evoke the spiritual core of Christian belief. One can sense in / *Malavoglia* and *Mastro Gesualdo* what Giacomo Debenedetti, in *Verga e il naturalismo* \(1976\), calls a "Christian inheritance" requiring acceptance of suffering and resignation to one's allotted station in life. It should be remembered that both young 'Ntoni in *I Malavoglia* and the protagonist of *Mastro Don Gesualdo* are in a sense punished for their rejection of the order of things in which they found themselves at birth. It would seem that Verga joined certain fundamental aspects of Christianity with a pre-Christian conception of fate in which punishment is imposed on human beings who defy the law of necessity that governs the world's events. In Greek classical theater, violations of prescribed natural and social laws combined with inherent flaws in the characters of the transgressors are what bring about tragic dénouements. Much the same procedure is noticeable in Verga. If we add to this literary and religious tradition the "iron laws" of nineteenth-century science and positivism, which certainly influenced Verga, we can readily understand why fatalism plays such a significant role in his narratives. Classical and Christian myths live on in this disciple of nineteenth-century naturalism and scientism. 

The colors of Verga's narrative in *I Malavoglia* are softer and gentler than those of *Mastro Don Gesualdo*, and the writing more lyrical, yet most of what I have said above would pertain to the earlier novel. In *Mastro Don Gesualdo*, we watch the brilliant rise and tragic decline of a man of peasant origin who becomes a prosperous businessman, destined however to suffer the grim consequences of the very virtues and impulses that had allowed him to emerge from his class. In *I Malavoglia*, young 'Ntoni suffers the fate of one who, for good and sensible reasons, rebels against the restrictions imposed on him by his patriarchal grandfather, and launches himself into the great world beyond, only to discover that this world wants nothing of what he has to ofter, and that by leaving his native village he has renounced what is most precious and enduring in the human condition, namely the supportive and life-enhancing solidarity of family, friends, and community. 

Other disquieting motifs we have seen at work in *Mastro Don Gesualdo* are already present in *I Malavoglia*. Disease "sucks the life out of Maruzza's eyes," as she lies in bed helpless against cholera. The village money-lender also falls victim to the plague and, although he survives, is haunted by a fear of having "his blood sucked" from him by the resentful and hate-ridden recipients of his usurious loans. Alfio's donkey is endowed with the same feeling of anger and powerlessness as his master, and his animal destiny is not really dissimilar from that of his human counterparts. In sum, *I Malavoglia* contains most of the themes and character types, and many of the same situations and relationships, that Verga will draw out with more detailed attention to the social fabric of Sicilian life in *Mastro Don Gesualdo*. 



## Sciascia and Lampedusa

Looking now beyond Verga to the mid-twentieth century, I have already hinted several times at themes and tendencies in Verga that reappear in the writing of Sciascia and Lampedusa. 

With regard to the main subject of this essay, I would say that the specifically Sicilian component of a fatalistic world-view is more explicitly characteristic of Sciascia and Lampedusa than of Verga, In Verga's work, the language of his dialogues has a distinctively Sicilian rhythm \(the famous "patina siciliana" first identified by the great Sicilian literary historian Luigi Russo\), and knowledgeable readers are able to identify a host of names, places, ideas, proverbs, etc. in Verga's stories that are characteristically Sicilian. Yet despite this insular inheritance one feels that a great deal of what Verga has to say in his work could have been said just as readily about many other places and countries of the world. Probably this is because the principles of verism were applicable to the overall evolution and nature of human life in a civilization deeply influenced by the new science, by technology and industry, by the emergence of huge modern cities, and by the epoch-making discoveries of Darwin concerning the evolution of species and the biological laws of inherited traits. These laws would apply anywhere, regardless of the differences that continued to mark various societies and cultures. 

For Sciascia and Lampedusa, on the other hand, who took for granted the "universal" scientific and technological changes that had taken place from the mid-nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth, the specifically Sicilian, that is, the local and immediate cultural milieu in which they, and their fictional characters, came to consciousness, assumed much greater importance. That is to say, while Verga could let his narratives speak for themselves, Sciascia and Lampedusa felt compelled to take the measure of their native island, and of their native country, in terms that would engage the reading public in more particularly political and even polemical ways. As certain universale could be taken more or less for granted, the need to explore the particulars became more urgent. The "Southern Question" became a burning issue in Italian politics *after* the achievement of national unity, not before. 

This does not mean, however, that Verga's themes and some aspects of his visionary realism did not leave their mark on the two twentieth-century writers. Let's look first at *Pirandello e la Sicilia*, where Sciascia articulates his way of interpreting Sicilian reality. 

Despite his intellectual indebtedness to the eighteenth-century Enlightenment and his commitment to the radical reform of Italian society — evident in many of his novels, for example *Candido* \(1977\), a name consciously borrowed from the tribune of the Enlightenment, Voltaire—Sciascia seems to have adhered on a deeper level to an interpretation of Sicily not so much as the product of history as an expression of what he calls "a way of being," A way of being, we should note, not a way of life. *Pirandello e la Sicilia* begins with a quote from Americo Castro's *La Realidad histórica de España* that Sciascia makes his own. What matters for both Castro and Sciascia are not so much the causes and antecedents of the present as the attempt "to understand and evaluate Spanish and Sicilian reality." This is a reality that can be conceptualized ontologically, as being, as essentiality. "We shall refer frequently to Spanish matters," Sciascia states at the outset of *Pirandello e la Sicilia*, "because of a fundamental consideration: that if Spain is, as someone has said, more than a nation a way of being, Sicily too is a way of being." 

Sciascia argues that Sicily began to acquire its essential nature only after the Arab conquest of the island in the ninth century. It is only then, he asserts, that Sicilian life could begin to be "narrated" as a distinctive and individualized sociopolitical entity. Yet it becomes clear as one proceeds in this book that what really fascinates Sciascia is the overall pattern of Sicilian civilization, not its historical causes; its intricate mosaic of motifs and themes, not the reasons underlying them. 

The link between this way of apprehending Sicilian life and Sciascia's fictional universe is not easily identified. One might argue that his novels, especially those that directly concern the connections between the mafia and the "respectable" world of Italian politics, business, and finance, are intensely engaged "case studies" of corruption in high places that act as a stimulus to remedy the ills that beset the island within its national and international context. Yet it is my feeling that these novels \(one thinks *of A ciascuno il suo* and *Il giorno della civetta*\) are not likely to be translated into any kind of coherent politics. On the contrary, these books induce a feeling of renunciation, of fatalism, that Sciascia himself regards as an integral aspect of Sicilian reality and that he seems to share with his characters to some extent. To the outsider, what happens between people in his novels can only be glimpsed indirectly, tangentially, in dim outline. We know much more about life in contemporary Sicily after reading his novels, but the picture remains elusive and allusive, *sfumato*. 

Sciascia describes the basic elements of the Sicilian way of being as follows, First, "an extreme form of individualism whose active components ... are the exaltation of maleness and a captious cerebralism." These traits, he believes, are quintessentially Arabic in origin, but find a natural abode in the Sicilian social fabric. The historical origins of Sicilian reality are there, but in Sciascia's view it is history become nature. These are traits that seem unchanging and unchangeable. Second is the Sicilian sense of the inextricable unity of comedy and tragedy, unlike the Greek vision, which keeps the two masks separated. Third is the peculiarly Sicilian sense of self-love, of honor and dignity that is travestied in the criminal code of the mafia but that even in this travestied form is something that Sicilians recognize. Fourth, a deeply ingrained fatalism, which attaches itself to personal relationships, to political attitudes, to love and family ties, to friendship, indeed to every crucial aspect of life. Fifth, a cult of material possession, something different from the usual form of acquisitiveness one finds in consumerist societies. Material possessions, *la roba*, are a defense mechanism against another pervasive Sicilian trait, namely insecurity, the fear of dependency and isolation. This fear in its turn breeds a compulsive desire for exclusivity in familial and sexual relations. 

Although Sciascia was a man of the Left, it is clear that his "ontological" interpretation of Sicilian life is quite different from that of such figures as Gaetano Salvemini and Antonio Gramsci, for whom Sicily must be understood as part of a complex social and historical reality rooted in class relations, labor processes, and belief systems that cannot be adequately explained in essentialist terms. 

*The Leopard* \(1958\), helped along by Luchino Visconti's film starring Burt Lancaster in the role of Prince Fabrizio Salina — the protagonist through whose eyes most of the main events and characters of the novel are seen — has been translated into over thirty languages and in Italy, by 1967, in its 13th edition, had sold over half a million copies. So we are dealing here with a novel that has penetrated into mass culture, and has in some measure helped to shape our understanding of what it has meant to be a Sicilian in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The novel begins in 1860, at the time of Garibaldi's landing to liberate the Italian South, and ends fifty years later, in 1910, when the last heirs to the Salina dynasty, three unmarried sisters, face a lonely old age and the imminent extinction of their blood line. 

My interest here is not in the considerable artistic merits of this novel, but rather in its deeply ingrained pessimism, its representation of historically significant characters and events, and above all its view of Sicilian life. Of course we have to be careful not to confuse Fabrizio's opinions with those of the author, Lampedusa, yet I suspect that the two are not far apart. 

One notable feature of the book is the almost obsessive way in which the author emphasizes the protagonist's German ancestry on his mother's side \(his father is a native Sicilian\) and its accompanying physical, that is, biologically determined, traits: blond hair, blue eyes, a "honey-colored" complexion, and large, powerful body. There are eighteen references to these ancestral traits in the novel \(in only 186 pages\), which apply also to the Prince's nephew Tancredi and to several of his own children. In the very first pages, Lampedusa amuses himself and the reader with the following thumbnail sketch of the traits that distinguish Fabrizio from those of his fellow Sicilians who lack the German strain in their blood: 

But other much more uncomfortable Germanic essences fermented in the blood of this Sicilian aristocrat, in the year 1860, even if his extremely white skin and blond hair were attractive features in this milieu of olive-skinned, raven-colored people: an authoritarian temperament, a certain moral rigidity, a propensity for abstract ideas which in the flabby moral habitat of Palermo society had changed respectively into capricious arrogance, constant moral scruples and contempt for his relatives and friends, who seemed to him to be floating along adrift in the meanderings of the slow pragmatic Sicilian river. 

We should note that the author specifies the year 1860, a year that, as he tells us later, was marked not only by Garibaldi's conquest of the island but also by dishonest electoral tabulations and political hypocrisy that, for this morally scrupulous half-Sicilian, half-German aristocrat, signaled an incurable corruption in the Sicilian character: the word pragmatic is clearly no compliment here; it implies a slipshod indifference to moral issues, to which the Prince eventually succumbs, to be sure, but always with the painful awareness that springs from his German blood. There can be little doubt about it in this novel: darkness is suggestive almost always of a variety of unworthy, even contemptible traits, while the blond, blue-eyed people, although also tainted by their native Sicilian roots, are handsome, proud in their bearing, idealistic yet shrewd, like Tancredi, and able to take advantage of the changes under way in Italian society for their own and their family's benefit. It is Tancredi, after all, who convinces his uncle that his joining the Garibaldian liberators had been designed precisely to protect their privileges, not to undermine them, by saying: "If we want everything to remain as it is, it is necessary that everything change." 

Such ethnic and quasi-racial strains are active agents in Lampedusa's representation of Sicilian mores and the Sicilian character, which is relentlessly characterized as backward, apathetic, resigned, pragmatic in the bad sense, and doomed to endure the shame of irreparable sins. Thus the events of 1860 and of subsequent decades in the life of the newly united Italian kingdom are portrayed in an exceedingly unflattering light. It is to Lampedusa's credit that, like Verga before him, he helped to demystify and "deconstruct" a history too often uncritically exalted as progressive and part of a broadly European democratic heritage. He scrutinizes this history and finds much that is not to his liking. He does so, however, in my view, by erecting a new set of myths and mystifications to replace the old ones. I mean that Lampedusa indulges in the sort of essentialism that marks Sciascia's conception of Sicily, by having his main character, Fabrizio, comment on events and personalities in such a way as to give the reader the sense that these Sicilian traits have become by now a second nature, a virtually ineradicable assortment of habits and ways of thinking that make a mockery of the hope for progressive change. 

The death of Prince Fabrizio in 1883 and the symbolic destruction in 1910 of an embalmed family dog named Bendicò are two of the more obvious signposts of decay and defeat in the novel. Lampedusa's pessimism is at once historical and characterological. Let's look briefly at the scene set in November 1860 in which a Piedmontese diplomat, *cavaliere* Aimone Chevalley di Monterzuolo, tries to persuade Fabrizio to accept an honorary seat in the Italian Senate, based on his contribution to science and to the national cause. 

Fabrizio receives Chevalley in a room set aside in his vast residence for such important occasions. Above the chair destined for visiting dignitaries are miniature portraits of the Salina dynasty, including "Don Fabrizio's father, prince Paolo, dark in complexion and with lips as sensual as those of a Saracen, dressed in the black Court uniform that was striped by the ribbon of the chivalric order of San Gennaro; \[and\] the princess Carolina, already widowed, her extremely blond hair gathered in a tower-shaped hair-do, and her *severe* blue eyes ...". There are those blue eyes again, *severe* blue eyes, the source, no doubt, of Prince Fabrizio's "rigid moral code." 

Fabrizio refuses the Count's offer. The reason for his refusal lies mainly in his belief that a man of his class, the ruling aristocratic landowning class, cannot be expected to have the kind of political optimism required of a nation's political representatives. "In Sicily," Fabrizio observes, "it doesn't matter whether one does good or evil: the sin that we Sicilians never pardon is simply that of doing. We are old, Chevalley, very old." 

A short while after this scene, to reinforce the theme of disconsolate pessimism, Lampedusa enters the mind of Chevalley as he rides back to Palermo: 

He understood the bitterness and the discomfort of don Fabrizio, he saw once again in an instant the spectacle of misery, of abjection, of black indifference that he had been witness to for a month. In the previous hours he had envied the opulence, the lordly manner of the Salina family, but now he recalled tenderly his own little vineyard, his own Monterzuolo near Casale, unattractive, mediocre, but serene and alive. And he felt pity both for the Prince without hope and for the barefoot children, for the malaria-infested women, for the not-innocent victims whose names were sent to his office every day: they were all equal, basically, comrades in misfortune segregated in the same well. 

Chevalley sees the wealthy aristocrat and the poverty-stricken Sicilian women and children as equal in so far as they are all Sicilians. Class, caste, socio-economic systems, political regimes, the very stuff of history, all fade into the background, to make way once again for something called the Sicilian essence. Such a formulation probably has a powerful appeal for many people, especially when it is presented in a literary text as artfully written as *The Leopard*. Works of art, too, have a political and ideological influence in the world, which it behooves all of us to recognize and evaluate.2 



## Acknowledgments

I would like to express my appreciation to Professors Jane and Peter Schneider, for taking the initiative that led both to a memorable Conference on Southern Italy in May 1995, and to the publication of this book. 

My thanks are due also to the University of California Press, for permission to cite passages from Giovanni Cecchetti's English translation of Giovanni Verga's *Mastro Don Gesualdo* \(1979\). 




## Notes

1. Lawrence saw Verga as a writer who understood passions that "stirred the blood," whether motivated by sexual desire or by violence, and who broke through the hypocritical restraints and conventions of bourgeois morality. 

2. Readers interested in examining the question of the practical worldly impact of nineteenth- and twentieth-century works of fiction should see Michael Hanne, *The Power of the Story—Fiction and Political Change* \(Providence and Oxford: Berghahn Books, 1994\). 




## References

+ Asor Rosa, Alberto \( 1976\) "La nuova critica marxista." In *Interpretazioni di Verga*, ed. Romano Luperini, pp. 187-205. Rome: Savelli. 
+ Debenedetti, Giacomo \(1976\) *Verga e il naturalismo*. Milan: Garzanti. 
+ Dombroski, Robert \(1994\) *Properties of Writing*. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
+ Herzfeld, Michael \(1987\) *Anthropology through the Looking-Glass — Critical Ethnography in the Margins of Europe*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
+ Luperini, Romano, ed. \(1976\) *Interpretazioni di Verga*. Rome: Savelli. 
+ Moe, Nelson \(1992\) '"Altro che Italia\!'. Il Sud dei piedmontesi \(1860-61\)," *Meridiana*, 53—89. 
+ Said, Edward \(1979\) *Orientalism*. New York: Vintage Books. 
+ Sciascia, Leonardo \(1961\) *Pirandello e la Sicilia*. Caltanissetta-Rome: Salvatore Sciascia Editore. 
+ —\(1977\) *Candido*. Turin: Einaudi. 
+ Tornasi di Lampedusa, Giuseppe \(1958\) *Il Gattopardo*. Milan: Feltrinelli. 
+ Verga, Giovanni \(1952\) *I Malavoglia*. Milan: Mondadori. 
+ —\(1955\) *The House by the Medlar Tree*, trans. Eric Mosbacher. Garden City: Doubleday. 
+ —\(1956\) *Mastro Don Gesualdo*, ed. Luigi Russo, Milan: Mondadori. 
+ —\(1979\) *Mastro-Don Gesualdo*, ed. and trans. Giovanni Cecchetti. Berkeley: University of California Press. 



