+++
title = "19 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT AKOLA

WASHIM

**Abstract of applications received on tour**

*The 15th October 1954.*

 

|                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Names (if legible) and number of signatories, place, etc.**                                                                           | **Nature of complaint and request**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| \(1\)                                                                                                                                   | \(2\)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| (1)Bhartiya Jansangh, Washim taluq, (2) Bharatiya Jansangh, Washim town, (3) Swadhaya Mandal, Washim, (4) Rastra Sevika Samiti, Washim. | Washim’s population is 20,000 of which more than 200 are Christians. The main activity of the Christians is to carry on anti-Hindu propaganda and to convert the illiterate persons.  Their prachar is in the weekly markets and on festival days in abusive language against Hindu Gods particularly Lord Krishna. In hospitals patients are required to attend prayers. Discharge to a patient is delayed and patient is persuaded to embrace Christianity and if the attempts fail heavy bills are charged   History shows, that conversion is dangerous to national unity and solidarity. American missionaries are pouring the money not on t of humanitarian view but for conversions and ultimately break the nation. |

------------------------------

BASIM

*15th October 1954.*

Attendance-50.

Chairman explained the object of the State Government in setting up the
committee.

**Shri S. G. Dabir, President, Bar Association:** American Mission does
not aim at service to humanity.  The hospital here is used as an
institution for preaching Christian religion.  Some time back I had sent
a girl to the hospital for treatment.  Two missionary ladies tried to
impress on her that Hindu religion is bad and she should embrace
Christianity.  They attack such articles of our religious belief as
Mangalsutra and bangles by asking them to be removed at the time of
giving chloroform without any reason.  This leads us to the belief that
it is deliberately done against Hindu religion to hurt our feelings. 
This is also my own experience in regard to my daughter-in-law and one
other girl who was sent with her. There is no admission to males in the
hospital because it is a female hospital.  Men are not informed what
their women are suffering from. We are simply required to pay. 
Therefore they have got a free state in the hospital.  From the
political point of view, I may say that Pakistan was conquered by force
of religion.  Missionaries are on very good terms with America.  It is,
therefore, feared that politically this may lead to antinationalism. 
Prayers are compulsory every morning.  Advantage is taken of
psychological movements for impressing Christ’s Dressings to the
patients.  There are two preachers, a man and a woman, who preach to the
patients in the hospital.  The male preacher comes from the hospital
itself.  Why he is allowed to enter the hospital when no other males are
allowed.  Diagonosis is not made known to patients.  When prayers are
offered, patients are informed that they are for their cure.  Once there
was a quarrel between a man and a woman.  The woman was given shelter in
the hospital and later she became a Christian.

**Shri Bhatkhade, Pleader:** There was a nurse.  She was Christian and
her surname was Sathe.  Twins were born to a woman in the hospital.  One
of the twins was requested to be given to the hospital.  This is an
indirect attempt to convert.

**Shri Yeshya son of Ganya Mahar of Ukali:** This is a case of last
year.  I am a poor person.  My son got burns. I was given to understand
by Missionaries that he would be given free medicine.  He was kept in
the hospital for two months.  Having admitted as free, I was given a
bill for Rs. 60, when I refused to be converted I paid off the bill and
took away my son.

**Shri Narayan Nagane, Pleader:** In weekly markets, Christian preachers
use abusive language against Hindu Gods in their propaganda.  Krishna
was said to be a debauch.  Maruti was said to have a tail.  Kunti gave
birth to five sons.  And it was explained that human beings cannot have
tails or give birth to five sons.  Hindu Gods are, thus, said to be
imaginary.  On this, there was great commotion and agitation.  There was
danger to peace and order.  But the mass was pacified.  Government must
first check the finances of missionaries.  If the Mission Hospital here
is closed, we would have no objection.  The hospital is about 15 to 20
years’ old.

**Dr. Spiker:** We do not baptise, we merely preach.  We do not expect
patients to come for prayers.  There are no prayers in wards.  Regarding
the allegation of Yesha, you can see our account books. We have come to
India out of sheer love, for the people and the country. We spread the
love of  Christ wherever we go.  We do not force anybody.  We have come
with love for people.  That is Christ’s message.  In our opinion, there
will never be a Krististan in India.

**Rev. Gaikwad:** Our work is on the lines of the message of Christ. 
Christ says, “Preach, Teach and Heal”.  The missionary preacher alleged
to be living in the women’s hospital, lives in the compound and he
preaches behind the hospital, outside the building. I am from Washim
only. I was educated up to Matric here and then I went to Mysore for
theological training. I get Rs. 70 per mensem as pay.  The amount is
received from India District Assembly, which is an organised society. 
Shri S. P. Dongardeve is the treasurer of this fund.  There are 1,400
Christians in this area.  Missionary work started here since 1912. 
There are ten reverends, 22 missionaries and about 45 other preachers. 
If we are not allowed to preach, there is no point in our running the
hospital.  The Christian population here has not increased by even 150
within the last ten years because the position of Christian Mandli was
unsound.  Now, it is functioning all right.  There was practically no
work during the last ten years.  But since the last month, there is
spread of love and consequent good work.  There is a vast change now. 
We want that Christians should be good nationals.  We do not say
anything about America. I am not a national of America.  I shall spread
the Message of Christ so long as I am alive.

**Shri Bandhe, Pleader:** I had a Tahsildar friend Dhamdhere.  He was a
convert.  Once he told me that there still prevails a feeling of
casteism among the converts.  And a Brahmin convert will give his
daughter in marriage to a Brahmin convert only and not to a Mahar
convert.

**Dr. Spiker:** If Indian Christian preachers speak anything, which
would offend your religion, please inform us.  If there is any trouble
on religions grounds in the hospital, please inform me. I will set the
matters right.

**Shri Bandhe, Pleader:** Christian literature was distributed here in
the Balaji fair last year.  Similarly, they play havoc in Loni Fair. 
Yesterday, there was a fair here, but they did not distribute any
literature this year because of the Commission’s visit to this place.

**Rev. Gaikwad:** A community convention is going on in Yeotmal. 
Therefore, all of us were there.  Otherwise we would have distributed
literature this year also.  We speak against idol worship because it has
been mentioned in our religion.

**Dr. Spiker:** Our Central Body in America is known as Church of
Nazerene. Within the last ten years we did not have more than 50
converts.  I am not sad over it, because one convert means one world.

Chairman concluded with thanks.

------------------------------

AKOLA

*The 15th October 1954.*

Chairman explained the object of the State Government in setting up the
Committee and introduced the members.

**Shri R. B. Athale:** As far as I know, missionaries are doing useful
work.  They are not taking part in anti-national activities. I have
received no complaints against them.  No complaints about conversion by
force. . There may be inducement, but it is not on a scale worth the
name.

**Shri Khandare of Scheduled Castes Federation-Mahars:** Those who have
been converted to Christianity, are holding good posts in life, Mahars
have been the victims of all-Musalmans in Musalman Raj, Christians in
English Raj and Harijans in Congress Raj. There is no Government help to
Mahars even after independence.  Conversions are mostly from our
community.

**Christianity Missionary:** There is no problem as such in Akola. There
are prayers in the morning and evening in our hostel.  Anybody is
admitted to it on payment of the prescribed fees.  We go out preaching
for some days is a week or a month but that has nothing to do with our
hostel.  There is no appreciable increase or decrease in recent years in
the Christian community here.

Funds are received from America.  They come for Mission work.  Our
churches are becoming self-supporting now.  We do not gain anything by
converting people by showing them allurement.  We do give some
scholarships and help to needy persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
