+++
title = "56 Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. WASHIM (16-8-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee.*

WASHIM  
(16-8-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Nalini K. Yengad.  
*Occupation*-Nurse in hospital in Washim.

I am working as staff nurse in the Mission hospital at Washim.  There
are about 25-30 nurses.  There are two foreign American doctors, one a
male and another a lady doctor. I get Rs. 97 pay per month.  This is
paid out of the hospital fund.  Salary of the doctors is paid out of the
funds received from America.

2\. I am a born Christian.  All the nurses in the hospital are
Christians. Before we begin the regular hospital work we offer the
prayers, imploring divine aid for the recovery of the inpatients of the
hospital.  We do not invite the Hindus to join the prayers.  Prayers are
not compulsory to non-Christians.  There is a lady preacher.  She is an
Indian.  In our preaching we never deride or condemn any non-Christian
religion.  We only say like Jesus “preach and heal”.  We also preach
“good news”.  There is a complaint that we charge non-Christian patients
but grant free medicines to Christians.  Concession is given to poor
patients, Christians and non-Christians.  It is altogether false that
the babies born in the hospital are asked to be parted with by Mother. 
I do not know a man by name Dharmsing from Pusad. I do not know Mr.
Pallewar, pleader, Komti from Pusad. I do not know whether Mr.
Pallewar’s wife ever came to the hospital. I do not know that after
Shantabai, wife of Rajeshkumar, lost her baby in the hospital that the
preachers induced him to be Christian. I would never believe that
Christian preachers, Indian or foreign will ever resort to such methods.
I do not know if Khodke master’s wife had been to the hospital.  I do
not know such matters, as my duty is to coach the purses in nursing.  It
is not true that when the Mission starts work in hospital they have any
idea of doing any wrong to India.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Shrimati Bhagubai.  
*Occupation*-Nurse in Mission Hospital, Washim.

*To Mr. Tiwari.-*

There is no non-Christian who is compelled to become Christian in the
Mission hospital nor any inducement of material gain is given.  Nor do
the Missionaries act in a way as to be prejudicial to India's interest
or their allegiance to the country.  I get my pay out of the hospital
fund.  The missionaries get their salary from funds received from
America.  The Missionaries have come only for service.  I find from the
hospital record that Mrs. Palaskar by name Sindubai Komti from Pusad was
in the hospital from 9th to 18th October 1951.  She gave birth to a
female child who was also undergoing treatment up to 4th November 1951.
Although the records show that the mother was discharged from 18th
October 1951 and the baby was discharged on 5th November 1951 the fact
was the mother was staying in the hospital till 5th November 1951.  She
left the hospital with her child. I can positively say that no patient
is detained in the hospital against his will and consent.  If any
non-Christian comes to the hospital we do not lay down any condition
that unless anybody becomes a Christian we will not treat him.

*To the Chairman-*

Forty per cent of the hospital fund conies from America and 60 per cent
is collected here. (Miss Nalinibai confirms this statement).  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Haribhau.  
*Father’s name*-Narayan Yengad.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-40.  
*Address*-Washim.

I embraced Christianity.  I was originally of Harijan caste.  I became
Christian 28 years ago.  No body offered me any inducement of being
married to any Christian girl or other material gain to become
Christian. I became a Christian because so long as I was Hindu by
religion I was not even admitted to the Hindu temples and I was supposed
to inferior.  I then went to live in a boarding house at Buldana, which
was conducted by the Nazerene Mission.  At Washim also the same mission
is functioning. Formerly there was a Mission middle school at Buldana. 
In the boarding the inmates included Brahmins and other Hindu caste as
well as Christians and untouchables.  There I received the full rights
of equality.  There is the boarding house as well in School.  Christians
used to treat me with affection. I read the Bible and learnt that Lord
Jesus shed his blood cut of his love for humanity and that in his eyes
as well as in Gods eyes all human beings are equal. I felt that I was a
sinner and that by embracing Christianity I would be redeemed of my sin
with the aid of Jesus as a mediator.

I am now working as a pastor. I get Rs. 80 per month.  But before I
became a Christian no inducement was offered to me that I would be made
a pastor.  I am paid out of Church fund.  Church funds are managed by
our Indians.  The Secretary is Shri Dongardive. I have heard that now
the Congress Government is giving facilities to the Harijans in the
matter of education and other conveniences.  Now I find that the
Harijans go to the temples.  They are allowed to take water out of the
well but they are not allowed to dine with Brahmins.  At Washim Harijans
are allowed to come into the hotel.  There is no restriction now at the
railway station or so.

I will not like to be an Arya Samajist even in spite of these amenities
are granted to the Harijans. I do not want to be Arya Samajist because I
believe that my sins can be forgiven only by Jesus Christ. I know one
Dharamsing of Pusad, as also a boy named Shankar Allaya.  I was at Pusad
for 6 years from 1946-1952.  It is not true that a girl is offered to
Shankar Allaya.  In my whole life I never offered any inducement of this
kind or of any other material gain to any one who became a Christian. 
To my knowledge and within my hearing no Christian ever said that the
Congress Government was not good.  To the best of my knowledge the
Missionaries are here to render humanitarian work and not to get control
over the Indians.  In my preaching I never denounce either Ram or
Krishna or denounce Hindu religion.

*To Chairman-*

There is one Church at Washim of which I am the pastor. I am also the
preacher with the authority to baptise. 300 members constitute the
congregation.  The collections made from them every month amount to Rs.
300.  There is only one church in the whole taluq.  No contribution is
received from foreign fund into the church fund.  We maintain a baptism
register in church.  Since 1947 no non-Christian has been baptised. I go
round the villages to preach Christian religion.  Whit I tell them is
that Jesus Christ is alone the saviour of humanity and capable of
forgiving their sins.

“Do you tell them about vicarious atonement?” (The witness is not able
to follow).  The principle doctrines of the Christian religion are that
there is only one God and that he sent his own begotten son into the
world to save the humanity from sin.  This humanity inherited the sin
from Adam.  After he was crucified there was resurrection and he is
aiding humanity in order to cure.  The Americans give us training in
religion.  I was in the Bible training School for 3 years.  I know
Lord’s prayer.  By Lord I mean God who may be common to Hindus and
Christians.   In these acts of the Apostle it is said that Jehovah sent
his son to the earth.  Jehovah is the creator and lord of the universe. 
Muslims regard Jehovah as Alla.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Shankar Gopal Dabir.  
*Caste*-Brahim.  
*Age*-63 years.  
*Occupation*-Retired legal Practitioner, Washim.

I was practising lawyer for 37 years.  I was president of the Bar for
five years ending 1955.  I have been doing public work, viz., public
activities including the Congress. I have published a history of Basim. 
I have been in public life since 1920.

I know that there are foreign Missionaries working in Washim. It is my
opinion that they should not be allowed to remain in India.  The reasons
for my opinion are as follows

> \(1\) Because they convert the people to Christianity taking advantage
> of the service which they render in medical and educational
> institutions. I never came across a man who has any sense of judgment
> having embraced Christianity.  The Missionaries themselves say that if
> their humanitarian work stops, the very mission of their would be
> lost.  I concede that under the constitution any one has got the right
> to propagate their religion, but I object that the unfair advantages
> should not be taken to propagate their religion as a means of schools,
> hospitals, etc.  The foreign missionaries say that if the conversion
> is stopped they will discontinue their humanitarian work, such as
> hospitals, etc.  Pramilabai is my daughter-in-law.  She related
> certain incident to me which she will herself describe before the
> Committee.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I was born in Washim. I have been in contact with the Missionaries since
1920.  There is nobody amongst them whom I can claim to be a friend.  I
desire that no American Missionaries should come to India. I know Ram
Krishna Mission.  Ramkrishna Mission also propagates Hindu religion. 
They also go abroad for the spread of Hindu religion.  I do not want
that Ramkrishna Mission should be prevented from carrying on their work
in foreign countries.  I do not say that Christian religion should not
be propagated in India.  My objection is only to the wrong methods used
for propagation. I cannot say hole many people were induced by the hope
of material gain to become Christians. I cannot give any instance within
my personal experience of any such instance.  I heard from my
daughter-in-law that effort is made to convert people while they are
inmates of the hospital.  There was no allurement of money or any other
material gain was offered to my daughter-in-law.  From the information
which I have received I say that they preach against Hindu religion,
decry their Gods and Goddesses etc.  This I learnt from my
daughter-in-law.  It is my opinion that the very object to start
hospital is conversion of people to Christianity. I cannot say the
number of conversions which took place in the hospital. I cannot also
say that through the hospitals there were conversions outside.  In the
constitution I do not know whether there is any prohibition to giving
help to poor or medical relief to patients. I know that under the
constitution all religions have freedom to propagate their tenets.  I
concede that even foreigners have right to preach the religion.  But
they do it with a political object. From 1920 up to date I do not know
of any missionary having taken part in politics but what I mean is that
to increase the number of Christians means to ask for a separate State. 
The missionary policy is not confined to Washim but to all India. I do
not know the total population of the Christians in India.  Nor can I say
what is the total population as a whole.  From what I read in the
newspapers I gather the impression that they are demanding Isaisthan.  I
cannot point out the newspaper in which I read this.  I read in the
paper that there was attempt to create such separate state in Assam.  If
a man belonging to the Harijan Caste were to embrace Christianity
because of social impositions I do not say that he lacks sense of
judgment.  I think that if any Hindu says that he does not know
Hinduism, it is his fault.  Before 1946 the Harijans were not allowed to
enter the temple.  To my knowledge no Harijan was allowed to take part
in social function and enjoy the amenities of social intercourse.  The
Missionaries try to convert the aboriginals and the depressed classes
because they may be useful for their political purposes.  After they
become Christians the Hindus did not treat them as untouchables.  But
there were other mahars also who had not become Christians but were
allowed to sit.  Christian and non-Christian mahar can draw water out of
well.  Even now the untouchables go to the temple only for Darshan but
not for worship.  Today Mahar has access in the temple as the Brahmin
has.  Even the Brahmin cannot touch the sacred idol.  Since 1947 there
was no occasion for me to dine in company with Harijans.  Even before
1947 I have been trying for the removal of untouchability.  Those
Christians or untouchables who have got national spirit will be treated
by me as deserving of inter-dining with me but I cannot say how many
have national spirit.  According to me an Indian communist is not
inspired by national spirit if he is in alliance with the foreign
communities.  My criterion of Indian Nationality is that of a Hindu
nation.  By Hindu Dharma I mean that dharma which are Vedas.  
 

**No. 5**

*Name*-Hanumant Raghunath Bhatkhande.  
*Age*-63 years.  
*Occupation*-Pleader.  
*Address*-Washim.

I am practising lawyer since 1920. I am advocate of the High Court. I
practised in High Court at Nagpur.  I am editor of a law Journal
entitled “Nyaya Bodh”.  Shrimati Sudhabai is my wife.  She is unwell. 
She cannot come before the Commission as she is unwell.  She was in the
Mission hospital to attend on her daughter two years old who was an
inpatient.  She had to stay there twice or thrice for 15 days at a
time.  She made a complaint to me that the patients are induced to
become Christians. One of the nurses said that the younger daughter who
was a patient should be handed over to the hospital.  She said that out
of the two, one child can be given to American mission, and that she
would be sent to America and trained well.  The girl is of fair
complexion.

One Shrimati Sathe who was a nurse used to tell my wife while she was in
the hospital that Rev. Narayan Waman Tilak had become a Christian
because he disliked the Hindu religion.  They also impress upon the
inmates of the hospital that they pray every day for their relief and
that it was as result of their prayer that the patients are cured.  Once
I had invited Dr. Spiker to my house to tea.  She had come with an old
Indian lady whom she described as one who had “Sakshatkar” i.e.,
realization of God.  Christians observe castes amongst the Christians. 
This I learnt from Mr. Dhamdhere who was a Christian Tahsildar at
Washim.  He said that Christians converted from Brahmin caste enter into
marital relations with Brahmins converted to Christianity and that they
not enter into marriage relations with Harijan converts.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

My wife must have gone to hospital in 1950 or 1951. I mention the name
of Sudhabai because she was attending on her ailing daughter by name
Ranjana who was suffering from diarrhoea.  I was at Washim when she was
in the hospital. I was going to the hospital daily while she was there.
I used to stay there for about an hour every time.  I did not myself
hear any Christian preaching.  The girl was cured before she was
discharged.  The girl who was aged about two years old was ill.  Twice
my daughter was ill and once my son. I cannot say when my wife was asked
to part with my daughter. I used to attend every day for one hour.  I
cannot say why I do not remember whether it was at the time when the
daughter was asked to be given over. I have got four children, out of
which the eldest is seven years and the last is a son who is less by two
years.  The female child which was in hospital died.  The proposal was
not in definite terms that the child will be taken to America but it was
only a suggestion.  I have no Christian Missionary friend.  I do not
remember such friendship. I did not go to any Missionary's house. I had
invited Dr. Spiker to my house to tea after my daughter was cured.  Dr.
Spiker is an American. I know her since five years.  I do not say that
she is bad as doctor. I have got good opinion about her.  I do not know
whether the nurse Sathe is there now. I have read Narayan Waman Tilak’s
poem. I did not read his book “How I became a Christian”.  In merely
saying that you embrace Christianity there is a slight suggestion that
Hinduism is not good. I am of opinion that the foreign Missionaries
should go from India.  I cannot give any evidence.

The suggestion had significance because the nurse Sathe, Narayan Waman
Tilak and myself were “Chitpawans” This nurse Sathe had been to my
house.  She did not say in my presence but it was my wife who told.  
 

**No. 6**

*Name*-Trimbak Idhanji Khanjode.  
*Caste*-Maratha.  
*Age*-28.  
*Address*-Resident of Assegaon-Pan, Taluq Washim.

Assegaon is 13 miles from Washim, and is on Rishod road.  The Christian
preachers both Indians and foreign used to come to my village Assegaon. 
They used to invite the people through the loud speaker by singing songs
and then the foreign Missionary used to address the people, in marathi. 
He said that there is no life left in Hindu religion now and that the
only way of salvation was to embrace Christianity for them.  He also
recited Kirtan once, exactly in Indian style.  In the Kirtan he said
that Jesus was the only saviour and that they should all become
Christians.  If they become Christians their material comforts and need
will be solved.  He used to come every day.  Eight days later he
exhibited lantern slide.  It depicted the birth of Jesus and his life
and that Jesus was a holy person and, people should pray him.  We
opposed the Missionary propagating the religion in that way and said
your religion cannot come up to the level of Hindu religion.  Then they
went away.

2\. In the course of their lectures they denounced the Hindu idols of
Hanuman and other Gods.  If there had been God in stone why should
people like Rev. Tilak give up Hindu religion and join Christianity. I
am a cultivator.

*To Shri Tiwari-*

One foreign Missionary accompanied by 7 or 8 Indians visited my
village.  Before 3 or 4 years they had come.  They did not distribute
any clothes.  All that he said the Jesus Christ was a saviour and people
would be redeemed of sins.  He distributed some leaflets.  I never
accepted the leaflets.  None adopted Christianity in our village. 
Nobody became-a Christian even though Jesus Christ was praised but there
was no inducement given.  
 

**No. 7**

*Name*-Hari Damodar Saraf.  
*Age*-31 years.  
*Occupation*-Christian Preacher.   
*Address*-Pusad.

I became Christian at the age of 12 along with my father.  Father is
dead.  No inducement was shown to me.  MY caste was originally Brahmin.
I began to attend the 5th class in the Mission School at Buldana.  This
was in 1937.  The Bible class used to be held before the regular school
started. I was able, to understand what religion meant.  I did not
become a Christian on account of any allurement of material benefit. I
believed in the word of Jesus that he was the whole mediator through God
and man and through him salvation can he got, and he said if the heart
of man is purified, salvation can be attained.  Before that my mind was
not pure.  Now I feel that my heart is purified by the blood of Jesus. 
I get Rs. 60 per month. I am preacher of Nazeren Church.  I receive my
pay out of the Church Fund.  The Secretary of the fund is G. R.
Borghate.  The foreign Missionaries say nothing against the Government. 
I love my enemies and I bear love not only towards Christians, but to
all.  I know Mrs. Mc.  Wan who is a head mistress at Government Middle
School, Pusad.  There is a Christian nurse at Pusad. I have never heard
nor do I know that she offers an inducement to anybody to become
Christian. I never speak against any other religion but I only preach.
They never say anything ill to Hindu Gods and Goddesses.  There is a
congregation of 45 members at Pusad.  No foreign fund contributes to the
Churches.  There is an Assembly to manage all the Nazeren Churches. 
There is no foreign Missionary in this Assembly.  It is purely Indian.

*To Mr. Dhanagare-*

My family consisted of my father, mother and 3 brothers and one sister. 
Along with the father the whole family was converted.  The brothers and
sisters whom I mention were younger than me. I originally belong to
Shindkhed Raja in Buldhana district.  My father was a Diwanji of one
Kisan Kasar. I do not know what salary he got.  I had some estate out of
which I have a farm of 12 acres and one house.  It is in the, Nizam
State. I get about Rs. 75 to Rs. 100 every year.  I have no other
property except the above said.  The whole family shifted to Washim
after embracing Christianity.  We came here because my mother was ill. 
I cannot say whether we came here before or after we became Christians. 
My sister who became a Christian by name Shakuntala.  We refuse to
follow the Hindu customs after we become Christians. I have studied up
to 7th Marathi standard. I can understand English but cannot speak. 
Except for 9 months, when I was employed in War service, I have been a
preacher.  I had not read any religious books of Hinduism, when I was
12. I had not read any book on Hindu religion but I read Mathews gospel,
and especially the fifth chapter. I got the explanation of the chapter
from the Christian boarding.  In Pusad there is only one preacher and in
villages there are two more.  The total collection of the 1/10th
contribution comes to Rs. 75 per month out of which I get my salary. 
Others are paid by the Assembly.  The Assembly fund is made up of
contribution from about 30 churches under it. The Assembly is at
Washim.  These 30 Churches are located in Buldana and some part of Nizam
State, Khandeph and Akola and Yeotmal districts.  I cannot say from what
source the money comes into the Assembly Fund but only contributions are
sent.  Along with others the American Missionaries pay some
contribution.  I do not know exactly about Washim taluq but I can say
about Pusad taluq.  I cannot say from my personal knowledge how they
came to be converted.  In the course of our preaching we make no
reference to Hindu religion but we only preach our religion.  I had been
to the fairs at Loni.  We use loud speakers.  Some representatives of
the Hindu institutions also come there.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I do not believe that any inducement is offered to become Christians.  
 

**No. 8**

*Name*-Narayanrao Ganpatrao Kale.  
*Age*-36 years.  
*Address*-Cultivator, Washim.

The Christians propagate their religion in group in the towns as well as
among the villages.  They go to the fairs, to the bazars and various
parts of the villages and preach their religion.  They attack Hindu
religion, by saying ‘Dagade, Dhonde Sone Rupe yasi deo manita, kare
tumhi haknak talmalita.’ That religion which will lead to salvation is
the Christian religion and not Hindu religion.  They exhibit pictures of
Jesus Christ as also films.  I had actually been to Loni fair and I go
every year.  These people go every year there.  I also attend.  There
also their preaching goes on.  They say that Kunti was an adultness, as
child was born to her before marriage.  My farm is just close to Washim
and I notice these people addressing the people to preach. I protested
to them but they did not listen.  They not only distribute pictures but
also cloth to Harijans.  They also distribute books.  They ask them to
be Christians.  In 1946-47 while our Holi procession was passing along
the church with musical instruments the people in the church took
objection and asked the musical instruments should not be played.  The
procession was taken out to discourage the filthy things.  It was c an
orderly procession.  Since then there had not been any such thing.  The
Hindus and Christians are on good terms socially but Hindus object to
their preaching in the ways they do.

One Zangoji resident of Jodgavan village in Washim taluq had come to the
place for the treatment of his 6 months child.  It underwent treatment
for 4 or 5 days in Mission Hospital, Washim and the charges came upto
about Rs. 35.  In the hospital he was asked either to pay Rs. 35 or hand
over his child to the hospital for becoming Christian.  Evidently it was
for bringing him up as a Christian.  Then he approached me with this
complaint and I went to the hospital and paid Rs. 35 on his behalf.  The
talk as to the boy should be detained in hospital did not take place in
my presence.  Zangoji is my partner in farming.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

I am living in Washim from my birth. I had no occasion to go to the
hospital before aforesaid incident.  About 5 or 6 people came out of the
church and prohibited us from playing on music.  There were thousands in
the procession.  The procession was singing ‘Raghupati Raghav Rajaram,
Patit Pavan Sitaram’.  This is my recollection.  During the last six
months I did not go to bazar at Washim.  I have seen them preaching in
groups in 4 or 5 mohallas.  I do not remember definitely as to what work
I had in the mohalla where I had happened to go there.  I do not know
how Kunti was born but she was the mother of Pandavas. I cannot tell the
name of the preacher who said about Kunti.  It is an incident about 3 or
4 years. I go to the fair at Loni on behalf of the R.S.S. They attack
Krishna in their preaching.  I did not see them distributing cloth at
the fair.  They were spreading disaffection in the minds of the Hindus. 
There is a temporary police station at the fair.  I did not report to
the police.  The group of Christians consists about 15 or 16.  There are
also 2 or 3 foreign Missionaries.  I cannot say that the Christian
Missionaries are opposed to Congress Government. I did not receive any
cloth as I can myself distribute.  The cloth was distributed to Mahars. 
I had actually seen distributing clothes to Mahars. I cannot mention the
names.  They did not become Christians.  Not one became a Christian from
receiving cloth.  It was Zonga who told me that unless he paid up
charges he would not be permitted to take the child.  This incident
occurred 7 or 8 months ago. I did not report this incident to police.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-B.  R. Borghate.  
*Father’s name*-Raoji.  
*Age*-32 years.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Occupation*-Motor driver, Pusad.

I am a born Christian.  I am a motor driver in the employ of one
Puranmal.  The Christian preachers never decry Hindu Gods or Goddesses
and praise Jesus Christ.  I am living at Pusad for about 10 years.  The
Christian preachers do not say that under the Congress Government people
are not getting their needy things, Krishna was licentious or that Ram
was not good. I know Mrs. Mc. Wan.  She is Head Mistress of Girls A. V.
School, Pusad.  I know Mr. Saraf who is a preacher.  I do not preach;
occasionally I do go and tell people about Jesus.  There is no American
Missionary at Pusad.  They do not bring any pressure to bear upon
Indians to bring them under their control. I want the foreign
Missionaries to stay on in India as they are wanted to train according
to Bible. I do not think their idea is to establish their Raj here. I do
not think they offer money to people to become Christians and also hold
out the hope of getting a separate State for them.  At Umarkhed there is
a Nazerene Mission.  It is not true that somebody was made a Christian
being allured with the offer of a Christian girl in marriage.  In
village Mulawa there are no Christians.  To my knowledge there has been
no case of a man turned Christian being enticed with a girl.  The
Christians are not harassed by Hindus it Pusad.

*To Mr. Dhanagare, Pleader-*

I am motor driver for the last 14 to 15 years. I was never a preacher
before this.  At Pusad and Umarkhed there are preachers.  They go out
for Preaching in villages.  In the hot season I go once in a week for
preaching.  I do not know what they preach.  It is my belief that the
preachers do not indulge in such preaching.  I never accompanied any
foreign Missionary.  There is no Missionary but an American sister.  I
did not go with that lady when she went out for preaching. I have been
in contact with the foreign Missionaries at Washim.  I did not live with
the foreign Missionaries, I have no personal knowledge of what they
preach.

I do not know how they behave outside, the Missionary life but I know
they are serving the people according to Bible.  I do not personally
know how the Mission activities are conducted at Umarkhed.  What I said
about Umarkhed was hearsay. I did not go to Mulawa for preaching and I
do not know whether there are any Christians.  
 

**No. 10**

*Name*-Yeshwant Ganesh.  
*Caste*-Mahar.  
*Age*-40 years.  
*Occupation*-Labourer.  
*Address*-Ukali, taluq Washim.

I have a son by name Sudam, aged 6 years.  He was ill as a result of
burns.  I brought him to Mission Hospital, Washim, from Ukali which is 8
miles from Washim.  He was there in the hospital for 2 months.  A bill
was made out for a sum of Rs. 152. I pleaded my inability to pay that
amount as I was poor.  I paid at the hospital Rs. 15 and said that I was
unable to pay the balance.  The lady asked me to leave my child there in
the hospital. I refused to leave my child in the hospital. I took away
my child with me.  This occurred about a year and a half ago.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

The child was about 5 years of age.  No bill was offered to me but the
lady orally said that the charges amounted to Rs. 152.  No bill of Rs.
32 was given to me.

*Note*.-The hospital bill book shows that the total amount came to Rs.
32 on the 16th March 1954.  The chart of the patient is also produced
which shows that the child was in the hospital from 19th January 1954 to
11th March 1954.  
 

**No. 11**

*Name*-Shrimati Nalinibai, w/o Balkrishna Ghisad.  
*Caste*-Brahmin.  
*Age*-21 years.

Vimal Ghisad is my husband’s sister.  She was married in the month of
‘Magh’ month.  She is now Vimal Pathak.  She is now at Hyderabad. 
Dattopant Ghisad is my father-in-law and Vimal is his daughter.  Vimal
stayed with us before her marriage.  About 2 years ago I had occasion to
go to the Mission hospital at Washim, for *curetting*. I was in patient
there for 5 days, Vimal used to visit me during that period.  My
mangalsutra and bangles were taken out.  The mangalsutra was broken. I
protested, saying that it offends our sentiments.  They said that unless
I agreed to strip myself of these the operation will not be performed. I
was told that there was no sacredness about the mangalsutra and bangles
and that among Christians they do not wear such things.  What sanctity
is there in these black pearls and the string.  They forcibly removed
the bangles and. broke the mangalsutra. I had to submit to it as I had
to undergo operation.  The nurse was talking to me all this.

The patients were addressed by a lady and she said that it was no use
worshiping idols of stone which were incapable of helping one to
salvation, and the only true God was Christian God.  They used the
contemptuous word “Dagadacha deo” that is God of stone. I left the
hospital after 5 days.

In Magh last I was staying in the hospital to attend my daughter who was
ill for 3 weeks.  There was a boy of about 12 or 13 of age who was
insane and he was asked to repeat that Jesus Christ was our God and they
taught him some songs.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I know something about Arya Samaj which is the best Hindu Religion. In
the Arya Samaj Mandir there are images.  The Arya Samajists honour the
idols in temples.  I think Jesus Christ is not God.  By Arya Samaj I
understand Hindu religion.  I am residing for the last 6 years.  That
12-year boy was a Maratha and I do not know who his father was.  He was
living in a special ward. I used to occupy No. 3 and he used to occupy
No. 1. I did not visit the hospital every day, I saw 2 or 3 times that
boy being taught what said above.  This incident occurred when my
daughter was ill. I might have heard more than thrice but I am not able
to recollect.  He was a boy from some village, the name of which I do
not know.  
 

**No. 12**

*Name*-S.  P. Dongardive.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-40 years.

I embraced Christianity 25 years ago before that I was a Harijan.  I was
15 years when I became Christian.  No allurement was shown to me of any
material gain.  My father was fond of toe company of Hindu Sadhus and he
had also visited various places of pilgrimage but later on he became a
Christian.  When I found that there was a great change in my father’s
life and lie read out the Christian scripture to me and I believed in
what was said there. I believed that Jesus Christ could alone save me
from sin.  At that time the Harijans were not allowed to enter the
temples nor learn the way of religious worship.  They were excluded from
all social things. We were not allowed to take water from the well.  At
that time the Harijan boys were segregated from the other caste boys.  I
shall not become Arya Samajist even though I get all privileges. 
Because I am convinced and ardently believe that Jesus Christ alone can
save me from sin.  Now the very same people who excluded us from society
have no objection to admit us into their social life.  There is a
Mission hostel at Washim and I superintendent of it.  The hostel is run
with the aid of the money received from Church as also subsidy from
Mission as also fees received from students.  Out of 24 inmates of the
hostel 23 are christians and one non-christian. I am a preacher.  I get
pay of Rs. 66 per mensem. I am the treasurer of the Assembly which
supervises all the Nazerene churches. I have got the accounts.  We
receive about Rs. 3,250 from all the various Nazerene Churches in
England, America and others.

There are 30 indigenous churches in all in our State and the
contributions made by them to go Rs. 1,250 per month.  In all toe total
per month comes to Rs. 4,500. I am stating it as an estimate.  Rs. 3,250
are disbursed in evangelistic work as pay of preachers.  This sum
represents the total salary paid to preachers.  The surplus is certainly
not used to induce people to become Christians.  The money is spent on
meetings connected with the Assembly. I personally know all preachers
and I am sure that they never decry Krishna and that he was licentious. 
We have got self-confidence that even if this amount of Rs. 3,250 is not
received from abroad we will carry on our normal work. I have come in
contact with almost all the foreign Missionaries. I believe that the
foreign Missionaries have no idea of establishing their control over
India. I am positive that they do not wish ill of Congress Government. 
They never attack Hindu Gods or Godeesses.

*To Chairman-*

The foreign money is received through foreign Missionaries. (The Mission
Board of the Nazerene Church is in America.) We have 48 preachers who
operate within our Nazerene area.  The delegates who are sent up by each
of the churches elect members to the Assembly, which consists of about
104.  The foreign Missionaries are excluded from the Assembly.  They
have no right whatsoever either to vote or to get elected.

*To Mr. Dhanagare, Pleader-*

I have studied up to 10th class.  I entered no other service except that
in the Church. I was in the 3rd English class when I became a Christian.
I did not read any book on Hinduism.  I did not accompany my father when
he  
went to pilgrimage.  My father owns 22 acres of land, which is still
owned by me. It now yields income of Rs. 1,000 or 1,200. I do not know
what my father was getting from it. I cannot actually say what the
actual income is received out of the farm. I had myself no occasion to
go to temples but my father had experience that our caste people were
not allowed to enter the temples. I have never been to Harijan quarters
to improve their condition.  The Hindu boy in the hostel is a Harijan. 
The hostel is within Mission premises. I do not know whether he visits
Hindu temples or not.  These 48 preachers go in motor car village to
village.  The vehicles, which are used by the preachers, belong to
Missionaries.  There is a motor at Pusad, and three at Washim.  There
are a few at Chikhali and Buldano. The cost of petrol and other expenses
are paid out of the Mission fund and not from the Church.  American
Missionaries also occasionally go with the Indian preachers.

There are 24 foreign Missionaries in our Nazerene area excluding the
Indian preachers.  That number includes women.  I have never seen these
persons preaching and indulging in political propaganda.  
 

**No. 13**

*Name*-Rev. S. T. Gaikwad, Buldana.   
*Age*-35 years.

I am born Christian.  Rev. P. T. Gaikwad of Yeotmal is my brother S. T.
Gaikwad who is headmaster of Umri A.-V. School is also my brother I am
working in the Nazerene Church at Buldana. I am Headmaster of the Bible
training school at Buldana.  We do not teach the boys in that school to
decry other religion and abuse their religion.  On the other hand, we
warn them against doing such thing. I have never said anything, which
could offend their feelings.  At Buldana there are 5 Missionaries.  It
is not true that the people are made christian by inducement of material
gain. I get Rs. 70 per month from Mr. Dongardive who was a treasurer of
the District India Assembly with its headquarters at Washim. I am
positive that no Missionary ever wish ill of India. I would never agree
to establish an Isaisthan even if somebody puts up such proposal,
because the Bible says that our citizenship is of heaven and not of
world-Vers 26. We will resist any American Mission attempt to hold as in
subjection. I do not oppose Congress Government. It has never come to
notice that the Missionary propagates any movement against Government. 
It is written in the Bible that we must honour the king.  It is because
it is written in the Bible that no Christian entertains the idea. My
education was in Washim and I passed my boyhood here. I know Pathak
Christian of Washim from my boyhood.  He has been ex-communicated form
the church.  Because on account of some ill feelings, he beat a man in
church.  He is living in the church compound and civil litigation was in
progress.  Pending the proceedings he pretended repentance and relying
on this we withdrew proceedings.  There was not a single pastor who has
had no difference with other pastors.  He is therefore ex-communicated. 
I had been to Umri and I know Dr. Bidari of Umri. I know him for the
last 12 years.  To the best of my knowledge, he was sent to Nagpur for
education.  He failed.  He was a compounder in Mission hospital, Umri.

*To Shri Dhanagare, Pleader of Washim-*

There are about more than 4,000 foreign missionaries in India.  I may be
knowing about 100 or 125 missionaries. I do not know personally anything
about others but judging from the conduct of those whom I know I infer
that they keep aloof from activities of politics. I am not constantly
associated with these missionaries and as such I do not know personal
information.  There is no ill feeling between Pathak and myself.  There
is no ill will between Pathak and preachers.  My grand father became
Christian and I do not know what my caste was.  After having passed
matric I have undergone training in theological subject for 4 years, I
served as clerk in Mission on Rs. 30 and then was a teacher at Yeotmol
for 2 years.  There are 6 boys for Bible training.  They are drawn from
Nazerene area. I do not go out generally for preaching.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name-*Pramilabai, w/o Keshaorao Dabir.  
*Caste*-Brahmin.

I am the daughter-in-law of Shri S. G. Dabir.  About 2 years ago, I was
in the Mission Hospital at Washim for 4 days as an indoor patient.  I
was asked to remove my Mangalsutra and bangles.  When I refused the said
that it was necessary to remove for operation and I had no other
alternative but to submit.  Two Christian girls came and gave me some
pamphlets to read and said that, merely diving in the Ganges water will
not make you cure.  You worship a stone God but such a God can never
give you salvation.  It is the living God viz.  Jesus Christ who will be
able to save you.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

I know Nalinibai Ghisad for nearly 2 years.  I know Vimal Ghisad.  I
came with Nalinibai in the afternoon here, before the Commission.  The
doctor was Miss. Spiker.  It is only at the time of operation that I met
Dr. Spiker.  There was no operation of throat.  It was that Christian
girl and not Dr. Spiker who said that the stone God would not help me to
save. I never met Nalinibai Ghisad in hospital. I do not remember if I
had occasion to meet Nalinibai Ghisad in March 1954.  We never meet each
other and there have been no such occasional meetings between me and
Nalinibai Ghisad.  During the last 3 months I have no occasions to meet
Nalinibai.  During the last 2 years I met Nalinibai today. I do not know
whether Mangalsutra and bangles were removed of other ladies.  There was
some gold in the Mangalsutra but the bangles were not of gold.

I am informed by the hospital nurse Miss Nalini Yengad that it is the
practice of the hospital to remove ornaments of gold before operation.  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-Laxmibai, w/o Wasudeorao Deshpande.  
*Age*-40 years.

There is a municipal hospital.  It is in charge of a Assistant Surgaon. 
My daughter by name Suman was taken to the municipal hospital for an
operation.  That is about 5 years ago.  The operation was performed.  I
was there when the patient was taken into the operation room and when it
was taken out.  I had been in operation room but I was sent out of the
operation room.  Suman was a married woman at the time of operation. 
There was Mangalsutra and bangles on her person but they were not
removed at the time of operation.  Suman died.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I was not allowed to witness the operation being performed and I was
asked to leave the room Suman was given an anesthetic.  After the
operation when I went in the room I found Mangalsutra on her neck and
bangles on the hand.  I cannot say what happened in the operation room. 
About a year before this operation I was myself operated in M. C.
hospital and my ornaments were not removed, I was also given
anesthetic.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-Yeshwant Runjaji Idhole.  
*Age*-60 years.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Adoli.

About 4 years ago there were 3 or 4 visits of Christian preachers in a
month, to my village.  They preached that the Christian religion was
superior and that the Hindu religion was not good.  They said that Jesus
Christ was living God and that Hindu Gods were stone Gods and they were
dead Gods. I protested against such propaganda.  The people of the
village told him that they disliked the preaching and then they did not
come.  On the first occasion the preacher who came was an Indian and the
second time he was a foreigner who was accompanied by a foreign lady.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I am not literate but only I can make signature.  As Maratha I count
myself amongst high caste. I meet with Brahmins but we do not inter
dine.  No Brahmin had come to my house for dining.  They did not give
anything to anybody but they showed allurement and held out hopes if
they become Christians.  They said to the Mahars that if they turn to
Christianity they will be locked after carefully and they will have
comfortable life.  But as the village people were all averse to this
type of preaching, the Christian preachers went away. I do not know the
names of preachers. I am a Hindu but I cannot say why I am a Hindu.  I
always go to the Hindu temple and we are allowed to enter the temples
and offer Puja to the idols.  No Mahar came with me to go to temples. I
do not go to dine at my Mahar servants’ house.  If there is a feast at
my house, Mahars partake of it but I sit for dinner after they dine. I
do not inter dine with Mahars.  
 

**No. 17**

*Name*-Siman Pandurang Pathak.    
*Occupation*-Engine driver and smith.

I am at Washim for the last 30 years. I am a Christian.  My father also
had become a Christian. I know that there is a church and Missionaries. 
I come in contact with Missionaries.  The Nazerene Mission finances the
propagation of Christian religion.  Foreign Missionaries also take part
in such preaching.  The authority is all in the hands of foreign
missionaries.  Conversions do take place in this area.  The conversions
are mostly from the Mahar and Mang caste, they are mostly ignorant of
the Hindu religion.  In the Mission premises or in the hospital there is
no one except Christian either in service or in residence.  Among the
Christians they observe caste distinction. I think that the sooner the
foreign Missionaries go out the better it is.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

Yes, I am still a Christian.  My father became a convert from Brahmin
caste. I was educated in the Alliance Mission School, Akola.  I
definitely feel that even the Alliance Missionaries in Akola should quit
India.  My father was induced to become a Christian on the offer of my
being educated in their school.  This inducement was offered in my
presence and I heard it.  I was educated freely in the Mission School
and I was also staying in the hostel without payment. I did not get my
training in carpentry or smith. I was not getting any thing for pocket
expenses.  That was about 40 years before.  My father was already dead
when I entered the school. I was 7 or 8 years when my father became
Christian. I became a Christian because my father became a Christian. I
got no employment under the Alliance Mission.  Before the Nazarene
Mission there was Methodist Mission.  Nazarene Mission came here in
1925.  The Methodist Apostle Mission was operating here. I was a member
of that church.  After that Mission left Washim I joined the Nazerene
church. I was contributing my share. I have got a son and four
daughters.  I visited Nagpur Medical College many times. I have got my 2
daughters working in the Medical College.  The girl who is married is a
Christian.  My son-in-law’s name is Amere.  Amere is a clerk in C.P.T.S.
office and he is a Christian from Marwari caste.  There was no idea of
caste discrimination when my daughter was married to Marwari convert. 
My children were being educated in Mission School.  One of my daughters
got her training in Mission institution.  I do not know what amount of
scholarship she received. I assert that there is caste discrimination
among the Christians and even amongst the preachers.  This is not
sanctioned by the scripture.  All the authority over the finances is in
the hands of foreign Missionary and Dongardive is only a nominal
treasurer. I came to know this from Dongardive himself that he was a
nominal treasurer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
