---
title: Reading
---

## Purpose
- Enjoyment
- Learn ideas and skills.

## Choosing what to read

Whatever the purpose, some works are more suitable
than others. Recommendations of connoiseurs are paramount.

### General knowledge

News is described elsewhere.

Course-notes posted on the websites of university instructors and
encyclopedias like the wikipedia are very useful in getting some good
knowledge.

### Research papers

Theses are often more detailed and friendly than journal papers. Journal
papers are often better written than conference papers. Single author
papers are usually more carefully written. So, reading them in great
depth is a good way to enter a field.

## Focii

### Focus on ideas

In general, one must read books/ passages with the intention of mining
it for problems, ideas and knowledge, and for training the brain in
solution strategies, not to read it from cover to cover. So, ignore
unimportant information.

Given a research paper, one must get to the interesting information as
rapidly as possible.

### Focus on word-smithery

Sentence level focus is sensible in rare cases: eg: relishing exquisite
word-smithery.

### Focii in reading fiction

One may focus on various ways of being (character, intellect, desires,
behavior), uncommon circumstances (physical laws) and
socio-economic-political conditions. One may compare these characters
and conditions with those observed in actual life.

## Parsing and understanding

### History

Comprehending passages reached a peak while preparing for the GRE
general test. There reading comprehension questions tested ability to
determine the general purpose of a given passage, find answer to
specific questions using information presented, make (and critique)
inferences (verbal reasoning).

### Seeking ideas

#### Grossness and separation

To seek ideas efficiently and effectively, one needs to view the
material at various levels of grossness. For this reason, it is
important to maintain some distance from the text.

#### Getting an overview

Some portions of the text offer a more high level view than others.
These ought to be read first.

Eg: The abstract and concluding paragraphs of an article, the first and
last sentences of a paragraph. Sentences marked by structure indicators/
transition words like ’although’ and ’but’.

Determine structure from titles first. Glance at figures and captions.

#### Repeated summarization

Summarize to yourself repeatedly to understand and remember what the
passage is trying to say. Don’t just verify correctness, ask "Why?".
Guess the author’s motives whilst reading. (Eg: Why did he choose that
value for the interval?)

#### Understand the author

The author’s viewpoint, which may be different from the ideas you
identify, is often important and informative.

To understand this viewpoint, observe where the author spends much of
his time, how the text builds up support for a certain bunch of ideas.

One flaw is to be fooled by red-herrings - ideas which are not central
to the author’s thesis.

#### Iterative Progress

Reading someone’s deep work can be overwhelming. It is important to not
let this happen. Find one small idea to conquer and digest at a time,
and conquer it. Then repeat.

To ensure steady progress, keep track of your current position in the
book/ article, so that you may continue from that point at a later date:
One can recollect forgotten knowledge using one’s notes.

### Considering ideas

#### Interestingness

Pick one of the ideas the author is trying to communicate, see if you
are interested in it. Repeat this until you find an interesting idea.

#### Understandability

Check if the interesting idea is something you can understand by
attempting to understand it. If you cannot understand the idea,
determine what prerequisites you must satisfy to be able to understand
it. If you are so inclined, satisfy the prerequisites and repeat this
step with that idea.

#### Grok significance of ideas

Read examples/ counterexamples or find your own. Simulate operations in
toy models to understand general relationships.

Consider relationships with previous knowledge. Besides being very
natural and enjoyable, such exercises and associations ensure that the
brain does better at retaining important information.

### Dealing with dense passages

Read with writing material. Complicated passages may require diagrams
and external symbol manipulation to understand. Also, while reading
mathematics, writing the important parts and leaving out the fluff helps
immensely. Also, tracing mathematical formulae, which are dense in
information, ensures that all essential information is noticed.

Considering the ideas presented themselves is described elsewhere.

#### Graphical process

In each sentence/ paragraph, scan for important entities (nouns which
are objects, subjects, actors) and actions(verbs).

Understand the relationship amongst these entities by visualizing them
as a graph. This can be a slow process.

### Signs of understanding, retention

Writing short summaries and doing exercises for the purpose of retention
are described elsewhere. This can be interleaved with the process of
parsing.
