+++
title = "01 CHAPTER I IN THE NAME OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION"

+++
**CHAPTER I**

**IN THE NAME OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION**

Comrade Radek, whom Stalin liquidated in the late ‘thirties, was a
Communist intellectual endowed with acid humour. He coined many jokes at
the cost of the Communist Party and the Soviet State. One of these jokes
which did the rounds in Moscow was as follows:

One day Comrade Radek stood stark naked in the Red Square in broad
daylight. A courageous citizen approached and asked him, “Aren’t you
afraid of the police, Comrade Commissar?”

Radek stared at him, and shot back, “Police?  Where is the police?”

The citizen pointed towards a number of policemen positioned on all
sides of the Square, and said, “There is a policeman. There is another.
And yet another… Why, the whole place is crawling with policemen.”

Radek replied, “You can see them. I can’t. I am a party member. I am not
supposed to see them. For party members there is no police anywhere in
the Soviet Union.”

The ruling class of secularists and socialists in India today is in a
similar situation of ideological blindness. It is not supposed to see
the violent waves of Islamic imperialism surging all around it. That
would be a sacrilege and a serious slur on its reputation as
progressive, liberal, and large-hearted.

It is in the living memory of this ruling class that Islamic imperialism
became a blood-thirsty monster, and carved out large limbs of the
motherland on our East and West. It is in the living memory of this
ruling class that Islamic imperialism “cleaned up” its separate state of
Pakistan from the “curse” of Hindu infidels. And it is under the very
nose of this ruling class that Islamic imperialism, aided and abetted by
petro-dollars, has started claiming for itself the rest of India as
well, by a right of conquest in the past.

Islamic imperialism has only to dispute the fact that India is a Hindu
homeland, and that the age-old Hindu society constitutes the core of the
Indian nation with which non-Hindu communities should get integrated.

Our ruling class of secularists and socialists immediately starts seeing
Hindu society as a heterogeneous mass *divided* by race, religion, sect,
caste, class, language, dress, food habits, local traditions, manners
and mores, and what not, and *united* by nothing better than a shared
slavery under the erstwhile British rulers!

It is of no avail to tell this ruling class that the British rulers were
acutely aware of a deeper unity informing the vast and variegated fabric
of Hindu society. It is not convinced by any amount of evidence that the
British rulers did all in their power to undermine that unity in
pursuance of their imperialist interests.

This ruling class has inherited many things from its British mentors. It
has inherited the British state system in which the “natives” who do not
know the English language and the modern Western lore, have no say. It
has inherited the British style of high-living which sets it apart from
the “seething mass of poor and illiterate humanity”. It has inherited
the British psychology of paternalism which persuades it that it alone
knows what is good for the “common man”. Above all, it has inherited the
British “moral responsibility” for protecting the “Muslim minority”. The
only thing it has managed not to inherit is the British awareness of a
deeper unity which holds the Hindu society together.

It is, therefore, logical for this ruling class to assert, rather
aggressively, that Hindus have never been a nation. It is also logical
for this ruling class to proclaim that it is too late in the day for
Hindus to become, even try to become, a nation. India, we are told, is
now a land of many races, religions, and cultures. The best that can be
done under the circumstances, they say, is that India evolves a “secular
nationalism” based on a “composite culture”. The ruling class is
prepared to preside over the birth-pangs of such a nationalism.  The
exercise is eulogised as “national integration”.

It is significant that harangues for “national integration” become
hectic, almost hysterical, in the wake of every street riot staged by
Muslims. Our ruling class immediately starts hurling long-winded sermons
on Hindus - stop being communal killers of a helpless minority; get rid
of this big-brother behaviour; protect the lives and properties of your
younger brethren; respect the religious and cultural rights of Muslims;
and so on.

This ruling class never waits for the findings of enquiry commissions it
has itself appointed to look into the causes of earlier communal riots.
It does not remember or manages to forget the findings of many enquiry
commissions which held that almost all riots were started by Muslims.

Hindus are expected to listen to these lectures from the ruling class
with bowed heads, and with an orgy of moral self-reproach. Woe betide
the irreverent Hindu who questions the legitimacy of these lectures, or
who cites the evidence of enquiry commissions. He is not only a “Hindu
communalist” and a “Hindu chauvinist” but also a “reactionary” and a
“revivalist”, putting the future of “secular and democratic India” in
jeopardy. The ruling class is joined in this chorus by some pious people
like the Gandhians according to whom such an unrepentant Hindu is not a
Hindu at all. There is a lot of tongue-clicking all around.

In plain and simple language, therefore, national integration has come
to mean only one thing, namely, that a meek Hindu society should get
integrated with a militant Muslim *millat*. One waits in vain for a
voice which so much as whispers a why in the face of boisterous Muslim
bigotry. Muslims have a god-given right to go on raising accusing
fingers at the Hindus for refusing to give them this or that. And the
Hindus have a god-given duty to go on conceding every exclusive and
imperialist claim of an incurable fanaticism.

The results of this “national integration” patronised by our ruling
class over the past many years are there for every one to see, except,
of course, its authors who are under an ideological compulsion not to
see them. Caste which was for ages the most cohesive factor and a sure
source of strength for Hindu society, has been converted into a cancer
which poisons the very springs of our politics. Regionalism fostered by
local patriotism, missionary machinations, and sectarian separatism has
assumed alarming proportions such as imperil the very unity of the
motherland. And Islamic imperialism has become many times more
self-confident and self-righteous than on the eve of Partition.  
 

**THE CHARACTER OF HINDU UNITY**

The only stumbling block which has so far stood in the way of this
“national integration” promoted by our ruling class is the spirit of
unity that still survives in Hindu society.

It is quite some time that Hindus lost the consciousness of their
spiritual centre which unites their society, culture, and way of life.
The only source of Hindu unity now is a consciousness of common history,
particularly the history of freedom struggles fought against Islamic and
British imperialism.

Hindu society still takes pride in its great past when it made major
contributions to the spiritual, cultural, philosophical, and scientific
wealth of mankind. Hindu society still cherishes the memory of its great
sages, seers, saints, scientists, scholars, soldiers, and statesmen.
Hindu society still remembers the days of its distress when it had to
struggle ceaselessly and very hard against horde after horde of Islamic
invaders who not only slaughtered, burnt, pillaged, and enslaved but
also tried too foist by force its own brand of barbarism.

It is this common consciousness of its history which prevents Hindu
society from accepting the Mamluks, the Khaljis, the Tughlaqs, the
Bahmanis, the Sharqis, the Sayyids, the Lodis, and the Mughals as native
dynasties on par with the Mauryas, the Sungas, the Guptas, the Cholas,
the Maukharis, the Pandyas, the Palas, the Rashtrakutas, the Yadavas,
the Kaktiyas, the Hoysalas, the Sangamas, the Saluvas, the Marathas, the
Sikhs, and the Jats. Hindu society can never concede that Jaypala
Shahiya of Kabul, Maharani Nayakidevi of Gujarat, Prithiviraj Chauhan of
Delhi, Jayachandra Gahadvad of Kanauj, Singhanadeva of Devagiri, Vikrama
Pandya of Madura, Prolaya Nayak of Andhra, Harihar and Bukka and
Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara, Maharanas Kumbha and Sanga and Pratap,
Shivaji, Banda Bahadur, Maharajas Surajmal and Ranjit Singh, who
resisted the Islamic invaders, were petty local chieftains conspiring
for personal gains.  Hindu society honours these heroes as freedom
fighters against Islamic imperialism, in the same way as it honours its
freedom fighters against British imperialism.  
 

**THE CHARACTER OF ISLAMIC IMPERIALISM**

That is what causes no end of trouble for our promoters of “national
integration”. The Muslim component of the “composite nation” has serious
objections to this Hindu view of history and hero-worship. Muslim
Indians are not at all prepared to take pride in any period of
pre-Islamic Indian history, or honour any hero who flourished in that
period. They want the pre-Islamic period of Indian history to be
disowned even by Hindus as an “era of darkness”. This, they swear, is
demanded by the scriptures of Islam. But, at the same time, they want
Hindus to honour criminals, gangsters, mass murderers, criminals and
tyrants like Muhammad bin Qasim, Mahmud Ghaznavi, Muhammad Ghuri,
Alauddin Khalji, Muhammad Tughlaq, Sikandar Lodi, Babur, Aurangzeb, and
Ahmad Shah Abdali. They also expect the Hindus to denounce as
disgruntled rebels, if not as traitors, the medieval Hindu heroes who
resisted and ultimately routed Islamic imperialism in India.

Coming nearer to our own times, Muslim Indians are not prepared to
honour Hindu rebels and revolutionaries who fought for freedom against
British imperialism. They denounce as “show-boys” of the Hindus those
few Muslims who cooperated with the freedom fighters. But they insist
that Hindus should honour as freedom fighters the revivalists of Islamic
imperialism such as Shah Walliullah and Syed Ahmad Barelvi, or
separatists like Sir Syed Ahmed Khan and the Ali Brothers, or murderers
of Hindus like the Wahhabis and the Moplahs, or secessionists like
Mohammed Ali Jinnah.

In the field of culture, Muslim Indians harbour only a feeling of
indifference, if not of contempt, for the Sanskrit, Prakrit, and
Vernacular literature of ancient and medieval India. They have no use
for Indian philosophies and sciences even when a lot of their own
Islamic lore is borrowed from these sources and only dressed up in
Arabic or Persian. They denounce Hindu spiritual traditions as
polytheism and pantheism. They show no appreciation for Hindu
masterpieces of architecture, sculpture, and other plastic arts. It is
only in the field of music that they have shown some appreciation,
simply because there has never been any Islamic music as such and many
Indian musicians happen to be converts from Hinduism to Islam. The more
orthodox Muslims frown even on this Muslim fondness for Hindu music.

But when it comes to what they regard as Muslim culture, they want
Hindus to be as enthusiastic about it as they are themselves. They want
Hindus to raise a non-stop *wãh-wãh* to the “wealth” of Persian and Urdu
poetry, and accept as national heritage even the compositions of a
Hindu-hater like Amir Khusru and a promoter of Pakistan such as Sir
Muhammad Iqbal. They want Hindus to go into raptures over the beauties
of Muslim architecture, miniature painting, calligraphy, culinary arts,
dress, demeanour, and what not. They insist that Hindus should hail all
this Islamic heritage as an inseparable part of the national heritage.  
 

**THE NATURE OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION**

Our ruling class cannot see any justice in the Hindu consciousness of
its pre-Islamic past, nor any injustice in the Muslim insistence on
glorifying an inglorious interregnum in India’s long history. The only
way which this ruling sees out of what it calls “the communal strife” is
that Hindu history should be substantially diluted and tailored to the
needs of Islamic imperialism, and that Muslim history should be given a
liberal coat of whitewash or even made to pass muster as national
history. This has been the main plank in the platform for “national
integration”.

Hitherto this *Experiment with Untruth* was confined mainly to Muslim
and Communist “historians” who have come to control the Indian History
Congress, the Indian Council of Historical Research, and even the
University Grants Commission. Now it has been taken up by the National
Integration Council. The Ministry of Education of the Government of
India has directed the education departments in the States to extend
this experiment to school-level text-books of history. And this perverse
programme of suppressing truth and spreading falsehood is being
sponsored by a state which inscribes *Satyameva Jayate* on its emblem.

Mrs. Coomi Kapoor has given a summary of the guidelines prepared by the
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) in the
*Indian Express* date-lined New Delhi, January 17, 1982.  She writes:
“History and Language textbooks for schools all over India will soon be
revised radically. In collaboration with various state governments the
Ministry of Education has begun a phased programme to weed out
undesirable textbooks and remove matter which is prejudicial to national
integration and unity and which does not promote social cohesion. The
Ministry of Education’s decision to re-evaluate textbooks was taken in
the light of the recommendations of the National Integration Council of
which the Prime Minister is Chairman. The Ministry’s view was that
history had often been used to serve narrow sectarian and chauvinistic
ends.” Accordingly, “Twenty states and three Union Territories have
started the work of evaluation according to guidelines prepared by the
NCERT. In September (1981), two evaluators from each state attended a
course at NCERT headquarters in New Delhi. The evaluators are now
scrutinising the relevant texts in their home states and submitting
their reports. The evaluations will be examined by an expert committee
appointed by the state.”

We shall examine and evaluate the guidelines laid down by the NCERT in
the chapters that follow.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


