+++
title = "10 CHAPTER X THE STATUS OF HINDUS IN AN ISLAMIC STATE"

+++
**CHAPTER X**

**THE STATUS OF HINDUS IN AN ISLAMIC STATE**

Now I can take up the next NCERT guideline, namely, that historians
cannot identify Muslims as rulers and Hindus as subjects, and that the
state in medieval India under Muslim rule cannot be described as a
theocracy without examining the role of religion in political conflicts.

I will take up the second half of this guideline first.

The modern apologists of Islam have been trying to rescue this
“religion” from its macabre record as presented by the medieval Muslim
historians. Firstly, they accuse the medieval historians of gross
exaggeration.  Secondly, they blame the Turks for barbarities committed
in the name of Islam. The third pillar of this apologetics is to present
as politically motivated the dismal deeds which the medieval historians
regarded as religiously inspired.  
 

**AN EXAMPLE OF ISLAMIC APOLOGETICS**

I have already analysed the first two approaches. An example will
illustrate the third approach. M. Nazim writes in his well-known
monograph, *The Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna*: “The critics
who accuse the Sultan of wanton bloodshed and reckless spoliation of
Hindu temples forget that these *so-called barbarities were committed in
the course of legitimate warfare*, when such acts are sanctioned by the
practices of all the great conquerors of the world. Spoils captured from
the defeated enemy have always been considered lawful property of the
victorious army. In India, however, wealth was accumulated not only in
the coffers of the kings, as in other countries, but also in the vaults
of the temples, which were consecrated in the service of various
deities. The consequence was that, while elsewhere the capture of the
defeated monarch’s treasury usually gratified the conqueror’s lust for
mammon, in India temples were also ransacked to secure the piles of gold
and precious stones in them. The religious considerations rarely carry
weight with a conqueror, and the Sultan does not appear to have been
influenced by them in his schemes of conquest.” (emphasis added).

Nazim has a similar explanation for Hindu hostility to Islam. It is an
essay in philosophy and sociology, as he understands them. He writes:
“Some critics hold that a ‘burning hatred for Islam was created in the
Hindu mind because Islam was presented in the guise of plundering
armies.’ This view, however, is not convincing. The Hindus rejected
Islam as their national religion because of the fundamental and
irreconcilable differences between Islam and Hinduism. Islam with its
definite articles of faith, could not appeal to the average Hindu to
whom religion had never meant any specified set of doctrines. To regard
an idol as a helpless piece of stone instead of a source of life and
death, and to believe in one Omnipotent God instead of myriads of
deities each one of which could be played against the other, was
diametrically opposed to Hindu ways of thinking. *To this fundamental
difference was added the hostility of the Brahmin, whose keen eye must
have foreseen that the propagation of democratic principles of Islam
would undoubtedly bring about a social revolution and break-down of the
caste system on which depended his own exclusive privileges.* The
Brahmins, therefore, as a class must have thrown the whole weight of
their position against the spread of Islam. Besides this, hatred of
change inherent in the Hindu mind would in any case have offered strong
though passive resistance to the onward march of Islam.” (emphasis
added).

I am not commenting on the contradictions, prevarications, pretensions,
and plain lies contained in these lines from a “learned historian” whose
monograph was published by a prestigious British publisher. I am sure
the readers will see for themselves the sheer scoundrelism of this
apologetics. What I want to show in these quotations is the mind which
the secularists in India have swallowed - hook, line, and sinker. It is
this mind which our secularists have been cultivating over the years.
And I am absolutely sure that the NCERT is out to patronise this mind.  
 

**POISON IN THE CORE OF ISLAM**

What are the facts?

The seed is sown by the *Kalimah* - there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is *the* prophet. This is not a religious precept which may be
verified by spiritual experience, or referred to any system of logic. It
is a purely political pronouncement which divides mankind into *mu‘mins*
and *kãfirs*, like the Communist division of people into “progressives”
and “reactionaries”, or the Nazi division of them into “superior” and
“inferior” races.

Next, the Quran calls upon the *mu‘mins* “to fight them till not a trace
of unbelief is left”, or “to fight those who do not profess the true
faith till they pay *jizyah* with the hand in humility”, or to “cut
their throats wherever you find them”, or you are no prophet until “you
have made a great slaughter amongst them”. This is called *jihãd*
(glorified as holy war) which is as fundamental a tenet of Islam as the
*Kalimah, namãz, rozah, hajj*, and *zakãt*.

The Hadis and the four “pious” Khalifas elaborated the principles which
are to be applied in *jihãd* against those who do not accept Islam nor
agree to pay *jizyah*. The infidel males capable of bearing arms are to
be massacred; the infidel women and children are to be enslaved; the
movable properties of the infidels are to be plundered; their lands are
to be expropriated; their places of worship are to be destroyed; their
priests and monks are to be killed and their scriptures burnt.

Those who agree to pay *jizyah* are to be treated as *zimmîs* who are
allowed to live and work for the Islamic state under the following 20
disabilities: (1) they are not to build any new places of worship; (2)
they are not to repair any old places of worship which have been
destroyed by the Muslims; (3) they are not to prevent Muslim travellers
from staying in their places of worship; (4) they are to entertain for
three days any Muslim who wants to stay in their homes, and for a longer
period if the Muslim falls ill; (5) they are not to harbour any
hostility towards the Islamic state, or give any aid and comfort to
hostile elements; (6) they are not to prevent any one of them from
getting converted to Islam; (7) they have to show respect towards every
Muslim; (8) they have to allow Muslims to participate in their private
meetings; (9) they are not to dress like Muslims; (10) they are not to
name themselves with Muslim names; (11) they are not to ride on horses
with saddle and bridle; (12) they are not to possess arms; (13) they are
not to wear signet rings or seals on their fingers; (14) they are not to
sell or drink liquor openly; (15) they are to wear a distinctive dress
which shows their inferior status, and which separates them from the
Muslims; (16) they are not to propagate their customs and usages amongst
the Muslims; (17) they are not to build their houses in the
neighbourhood of Muslims; (18) they are not to bring their dead near the
graveyards of the Muslims; (19) they are not to observe their religious
practices publicly, or mourn their dead loudly; and (20) they are not to
buy Muslim slaves.

The “law” of Islam also prescribes death penalty for those who (1)
question the exclusive claim of Islam as the *only true* religion, and
of Muhammad as the *last* prophet; (2) try to revert to their ancestral
faith after having been forced or lured to embrace Islam; and (3) marry
Muslim women without first getting converted to Islam. Non-Muslims are
also discriminated against in matters of testimony in law courts,
taxation, and appointment to public offices. To sum up, the status of
non-Muslims in an Islamic state is that of hewers of wood and drawers of
water. They are subjected to every possible indignity and pressure in
order to force them into the fold of Islam.  
 

**DEBATE OVER “ISLAM OR DEATH”**

When an Islamic state was established over parts of northern India, the
Ulama raised a great controversy. By now the interpreters of Islamic law
had become divided into four schools - Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki, and
Shafii. The Hanafi school alone was in favour of extending the status of
*zimmîs* to the Hindus. The other three schools were insistent that the
only choice the Hindus had was between Islam and death. Ziyauddin Barani
voiced his opinion against the Hanafi school when he wrote as follows in
his *Fatwa-i-Jahãndãri*: “If Mahmud… had gone to India once more, he
would have brought under his sword all the Brahmans of Hind who, in that
vast land, are the cause of the continuance of the laws of infidelity
and of the strength of idolators; he would have cut off the heads of two
or three hundred thousand Hindu chiefs. He would not have returned his
Hindu-slaughtering sword to its scabbard until the whole of Hind had
accepted Islam. For Mahmud was a Shafiite, and according to Imam Shafii
the decree for Hindus is Islam or death, that is to say, they should
either be put to death or accept Islam. It is not lawful to accept
*jiziya* from Hindus who have neither a prophet nor a revealed book.”

Shykh Nuruddin Mubarak Ghaznavi was the most important disciple of Shykh
Shihabuddin Suhrawardi, founder of the second most important sufi
*silsilã* after the Chishtiyya, who died in Baghdad in 1235 AD. Ghaznavi
had come and settled down in India where he passed away in 1234-35 AD.
He served as *Shykh-ul-Islãm* in the reign of Shamsuddin Iltutmish (AD
1210-1236), and propounded the doctrine of *Dîn Panãhî*. Barani quotes
the first principle of this doctrine as follows in his
*Tãrîkh-i-Fîruzshãhî*. “The kings should protect the religion of Islam
with sincere faith… And kings will not be able to perform the duty of
protecting the Faith unless, for the sake of God and the Prophet’s
creed, they overthrow and uproot *kufr* and *kãfiri* (infidelity),
*shirk* (setting partners to God) and the worship of idols. But if the
total uprooting of idolatry is not possible owing to the firm roots of
*kufr* and the large number of *kãfirs* and *mushriks* (infidels and
idolaters), *the kings should at least strive to insult, disgrace,
dishonour and defame the mushrik and idol-worshipping Hindus, who are
the worst enemies of God and the Prophet*. The symptom of the kings
being the protectors of religion is this:- *When they see a Hindu, their
eyes grow red and they wish to bury him alive; they also desire to
completely uproot the Brahmans*, who are the leaders of *kufr* and
*shirk* and owning to whom *kufr* and shirk are spread and the
commandments of kufr are enforced… Owing to the fear and terror of the
kings of Islam, not a single enemy of God and the Prophet can drink
water that is sweet or stretch his legs on his bed and go to sleep in
peace.” (emphasis added; read Allah for God).

Amir Khusru, the dearest disciple of Nizamuddin Awliya and supposed to
be the pioneer of Secularism in India by India’s secularist historians,
echoed the same opinion when he wrote as follows in his
*Khazãin-ul-Futûh* also known as the *Tãrîkh-i-Alãî*: “The whole country
by means of the sword of our holy warriors has become like a forest
denuded of its thorns by fire. The land has been saturated by the waters
of the sword, and the vapours of infidelism \[Hinduism\] have been
dispersed. The strong men of Hind have been trodden under foot, and all
are ready to pay tribute. Islam is triumphant, idolatry is subdued. Had
not the law (of Hanifa) granted exemption from death by the payment of
*jiziya*, the very name of Hind, root and branch, would have been
extinguished.”

The Muslim monarchs, however, knew better. They did not live in a fool’s
paradise like the mullahs and the sufis. The exponents of the “law” of
Islam lived amidst leisure and luxury in towns protected by Islamic
armies. They could very well afford to blow any amount of hot air about
the “beauties” of their “religion”. The Muslim monarchs, on the other
hand, had to live mostly on the battlefields, and could feel in their
guts the power equations of a situation in which they had to wage a
constant war against stiff Hindu resistance and repeated reassertion of
Hindu independence. They had discovered very soon that Hindus hated
Islam as a system of black barbarism, and would fight rather than submit
to this criminal creed. Moreover, they needed the Hindus for doing work
which the mullahs, or the sufis, or the swordsmen of Islam were neither
equipped for nor inclined to do - agriculture, commerce, industry, book
keeping scavenging, and so on. No wonder the Muslim monarchs fell for
the Hanafi school of Islamic “law” as soon as it was expounded to them,
not because they liked this school but simply because they had no other
choice. They recognized the Hindus as *zimmîs*, imposed *jizyah* and
other disabilities on them, and reduced them, wherever they could, to
the status of hewers of wood and drawers of water.

The mullahs and the sufis howled at this “sacrilege”. Barani mourned:
“Should the king consider the payment of a few *tankas* by way of
*jiziya* as sufficient justification for their allowing all possible
freedom to the infidels to observe and demonstrate all orders and detail
of infidelity, to read the misleading literature of their faith, and to
propagate their teachings, how could the true religion get the upper
hand over other religions, and how could the emblems of Islam be held
high? How will the true faith prevail if rulers allow the infidels to
keep their temples, adorn their idols, and to make merry during their
festivals with beating of drums and *dhols*, singing and dancing?”  
 

**THE STATE OF HINDU SOCIETY**

But Barani and his likes were being unfair to the Muslim monarchs who
were trying their best to serve Islam, *under the circumstances*. They
were also painting far too rosy a picture of the condition of Hindu
society in areas where the Islamic state had secured a stranglehold. Of
course, the Hindus were singing and dancing in those parts of their
motherland where their Rajas had retained or regained independence. But
in areas controlled by the Muslim monarchs, Hindus had been turned into
dumb driven cattle, always at the mercy of the meanest Muslim.  Barani
himself writes: “Sultan Alauddin (Khalji) demanded from learned men
rules and regulations, so that the Hindu could be ground down and
property and possession, which are the cause of disaffection and
rebellion, could not remain in his house.” One of these “learned men”
was Qazi Mughisuddin. He advocated very stern measures and advised: “If
the revenue collector spits into a Hindu’s mouth, the Hindu should open
his mouth to receive it without hesitation.”

Alauddin Khalji raised the land revenue to one-half of the gross
produce. He imposed a grazing tax on all milch cattle and a house-tax.
Barani himself reports: “The people were brought to such a state of
obedience that one revenue officer would string twelve *khuts,
muqaddams* and *chaudharies* (all Hindus) together by the neck and
enforce payment by blows.” Hindus were so much impoverished that their
wives had to work as servants in Muslim houses. Next came Alauddin’s
market regulations which our secularists and the All India Radio have
been hailing as “the first experiment in socialism in India’s history”.
The peasants, who were Hindus, were ordered to sell their grains to the
merchants at arbitrarily fixed prices. The merchants, who were also
Hindus, were forced to sell this grain to the State, again at
arbitrarily fixed prices which hardly left any margin of profit. There
was so much grain stored in state godowns that Ibn Battutah who visited
Delhi 18 years after Alauddin’s death, ate rice which had been procured
during Alauddin’s reign. The Hindu merchants had to procure all sorts of
merchandise from areas where there was no fixation of prices. But the
prices at which they had to sell to the state were fixed without any
reference to costs involved. And the merchants had to keep their wives
and children as hostages at the capital to ensure that they brought
regular supplies. This was expropriation, pure and simple, under
conditions from which there was no escape except death.

Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq issued an ordinance which proclaimed that “there
should be left only so much to the Hindus that neither on the one hand
they should become intoxicated on account of their wealth, nor on the
other should they become so destitute as to leave their lands and
cultivation in despair”. His son, Muhammad bin Tughlaq, enhanced the
land revenue in a very steep manner. Barani reports: “The taxation in
the Doab was increased ten and twenty times and the royal officials
consequently created such *abwabs* or cesses and collected them with
such rigour that the ryots were reduced to impotence, poverty and ruin…
Thousands of people perished, and when they tried to escape, the Sultan
led expeditions to various places and hunted them like wild beasts.” Ibn
Battutah who visited Delhi during Muhammad bin Tughlaq’s reign, reports
in his *Rehla* an Id celebration in the Sultan’s palace: “Then enter the
musicians, the first batch being the daughters of the infidel rajas
captured in war that year. They sing and dance, and the Sultan gives
them away to his amirs and *aizza*. Then come the other daughters of the
infidels who sing and dance, and the Sultan gives them away to his
relations, his brothers-in-law and the malik’s sons.” At a later date,
“there arrived in Delhi some female infidel captives, ten of whom the
vazir sent to me”. Again, the Sultan sent to the emperor of China “one
hundred male slaves and one hundred slave songstresses and dancers from
among the Indian infidels”. He also reports how the Muslim commandant of
Alapur “would fall upon the infidels and would kill them or take them
prisoner”. The scoundrel was killed by the Hindus one day. His slaves
fell upon Alapur, and “they put its male population to the sword and
made the womenfolk prisoner and seized everything in it.”

Firuz Shah Tughlaq organised an industry out of catching slaves.
Shams-i-Siraj Afif writes in his *Tãrîkh-i-Fîrûz Shãhî*: “The Sultan
commanded his great fief-holders and officers to capture slaves whenever
they were at war (that is, suppressing Hindu rebellions), and to pick
out and send the best for the service of the court. The chiefs and
officers naturally exerted themselves in procuring more and more slaves
and a great number of them were thus collected. When they were found to
be in excess, the Sultan sent them to important cities… It has been
estimated that in the city and in the various fiefs, there were 1,80,000
slaves… The Sultan created a separate department with a number of
officers for administering the affairs of these slaves.”

Firuz Shah beat all previous records in his treatment of the Hindus. He
himself writes in his *Futûhãt-i-Fîrûz Shãhî*: “The Hindus and idol
worshippers had agreed to pay the money for toleration
(*zar-i-zimmiya*), and had consented to the poll-tax (*jiziya*) in
return for which they and their families enjoyed security. These people
now erected new idol temples in the city and in the environs in
opposition to the law of the Prophet which declares that such temples
are not to be tolerated. Under divine guidance I destroyed these
edifices, and killed those leaders of infidelity who seduced others into
error, and the lower orders I subjected to stripes and chastisement,
until this abuse was entirely abolished. The following is an instance.
In the village of Maluh there is a tank which they call *kund*. Here
they had built idol temples and on certain days the Hindus were
accustomed to proceed thither on horseback, and wearing arms. Their
women and children also went out in palankins and carts. There they
assembled in thousands and performed idol-worship. The abuse had been so
overlooked that the *bazar* people took out there all sorts of
provisions and set up stalls and sold their goods…  When intelligence of
this came to my ears, my religious feelings prompted me at once to put a
stop to this scandal and offence to the religion of Islam. On the day of
the assembling I went there in person, and I ordered that the leaders of
these people and the promoters of this abomination should be put to
death… I destroyed their idol temples, and instead thereof raised
mosques.”

He records another instance in which Hindus who had built new temples
were butchered before the gate of his palace, and their books, images,
and vessels of Worship were publicly burnt. According to him “this was a
warning to all men that no *zimmi* could follow such wicked practices in
a Musulman country”. Afif reports yet another case in which a Brahmin of
Delhi was accused of “publicly performing idol-worship in his house and
perverting Mohammedan women leading them to become infidels”. The
Brahmin “was tied hand and foot and cast into a burning pile of
faggots”. The historian who witnessed this scene himself expresses his
satisfaction by saying, “Behold the Sultan’s strict adherence to law and
rectitude, how he would not deviate in the least from its decrees.”

Sikandar Lodi’s “empire” was much smaller than that of Firuz Shah
Tughlaq. But he enforced the “law” of Islam with no less zeal. A typical
case of his reign is recorded by Abdulla in his *Tãrîkhi-i-Dãûdî*: “It
is related in the *Akbar Shahi* that there came a Brahman by name Bodhan
who had asserted one day in the presence of Musulmans that Islam was
true, as was also his own religion. This speech of his was aired abroad,
and came to the ears of the *ulema…* Azam Humayun, the governor of that
district, sent the Brahman into the king’s presence at Sambal. Sultan
Sikander …summoned all the wise men of note from every quarter… After
investigating the matter, the *ulema* determined that he should be
imprisoned and converted to Islam, or suffer death, and since the
Brahman refused to apostatize he was accordingly put to death by the
decree of the *ulema*. The Sultan after rewarding the learned casuists,
gave them permission to depart.”

Hindu records of what the “law” of Islam meant to the Hindus are few and
far between. But whenever they are available, they confirm the medieval
Muslim historians. Gangadevi the wife of Kumar Kampana (died 1374 AD) of
Vijayanagara writes as follows in her *Madhurãvijayam* regarding the
state of things in the Madurai region when it was under Muslim rule:
“The wicked *mlechchas* pollute the religion of the Hindus every day.
They break the images of gods into pieces and throw away the articles of
worship. They throw into fire *Srimad Bhagwat* and other holy
scriptures, forcibly take away the conchshell and bell of the Brahmanas,
and lick the sandal paints on their bodies. They urinate like dogs on
the *tulsi* plant and deliberately pass faeces in the Hindu temples.
They throw water from their mouths on the Hindus engaged in worship, and
harass the Hindu saints as if they were so many lunatics let large.”

*Chaitanya-mañgala*, a biography of the great Vaishnava saint of
medieval India, presents the plight of Hindus in Navadvipa on the eve of
the saint’s birth in 1484 AD. The author, Jayananda, writes: “The king
seizes the Brahmanas, pollutes their caste and even takes their lives.
If a conch-shell is heard to blow in any house, its owner is made to
forfeit his wealth, caste and even life. The king plunders the houses of
those who wear sacred threads on the shoulder and put scared marks on
the forehead, and then binds them. He breaks the temples and uproots
tulsi plants… The bathing in Ganga is prohibited and hundreds of scared
*asvattha* and jack trees have been cut down.”

Vijaya Gupta wrote a poem in praise of Husain Shah of Bengal (1493-1519
AD). The two qazi brothers, Hasan and Husain, are typical Islamic
characters in this poem. They had issued orders that any one who had a
*tulsi* leaf on his head was to be brought to them bound hand and foot.
He was then beaten up. The peons employed by the qazis tore away the
sacred threads of the Brahmans and spat saliva in their mouths. One day
a mullah drew the attention of these qazis to some Hindu boys who were
worshipping Goddess Manasa and singing hymns to her. The qazis went
wild, and shouted: “What! the *harãmzãdah* Hindus make so bold as to
perform Hindu rituals in our village! The culprit boys should be seized
and made outcastes by being forced to eat Muslim food.” The mother of
these qazis was a Hindu lady who had been forcibly married to their
father. She tried to stop them. But they demolished the house of those
Hindu boys, smashed the sacred pots, and threw away the *pûjã*
materials. The boys had to run away to save their lives.

This was the state of things in those parts of India which were ruled by
Muslim monarchs ever since Qutbuddin Aibak set up his first Islamic
state in Delhi in 1206 AD. Punjab upto the Ravi and the whole of Sindh
had passed under Muslim rule during the days of Mahmud Ghaznavi. Kashmir
met the same fate early in the 14th century. If the state which treated
the Hindus in such an abominable manner out of religious inspiration was
not a theocracy, the NCERT “experts” would have to redefine the concept
of theocracy. In common parlance so far, theocracy has meant the
dominance of a single creed over the state apparatus, and discrimination
against those who do not subscribe to that creed. Scoundrels like M.
Nazim and Hindu secularists who preside over our education and “national
integration”, have tried to invent political explanations for measures
which the Muslim monarchs adopted purely out of religious zeal. But in
that case politics as well as religion miss their common parlance
meanings, and become esoteric terms which scoundrels and secularists
alone can decipher.  
 

**THE MYTH OF AKBAR**

It is curious but true that the very historians who refuse to see the
pre-Akbar period of Muslim rule as a nightmare for Hindus, hail Akbar as
the harbinger of a dazzling dawn for the same Hindus. They point out as
to how Akbar abolished the pilgrim tax and the *jizyah*, how he
appointed Hindus to high positions, and how he extended to them this or
that concession which they had not enjoyed earlier. One may very well
ask these worthies that if these discriminatory taxes and disabilities
did not exist earlier, how come you find Akbar freeing the Hindus from
them? All that one is bound to get by way of an answer will be another
bundle of casuistry.

There is no dearth of Hindu historians who heap Akbar with the choicest
encomiums. Ashirbadi Lal Srivastava is a typical example. Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru goes much further and proclaims Akbar as the father of
Indian nationalism. A Hindu who takes all these high-sounding stories
with a pinch of salt, is rather rare nowadays.

On the other hand, most Muslim historians and theologians frown upon
Akbar as a villain in the history of Islam in India. Ishtiaq Husain
Qureshi who believes that Hindus were far more happy under Muslim rule
than under that of their own princes, accuses Akbar of jeopardising Pax
Moslemaica by tempering with the established tenets of Muslim polity.
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad has written that if Ahmad Sirhindi had not come
to the rescue, Akbar had almost finished Islam in India. It is only in
post-Independence India that some Muslim historians have come forward to
present Akbar as the pioneer of Secularism in this country. But we know
what Secularism means in Muslim mouths, particularly if the Muslim
happens to be a Marxist as well. For them, Akbar is no more than a
Muslim hero for Hindu consumption.

One has, therefore, to go to the original sources in order to find the
truth about Akbar. The story which these sources tell can be summed up
as follows:

> 1\. There was nothing Indian about Akbar except that he lived his life
> in India, fought his wars in India, built his empire in India, and
> dragged many Indian women into his harem. He knew nothing about
> India’s spiritual traditions, or India’s history, or India’s culture
> except for what he heard from some native sycophants who visited his
> court for very mundane reasons. No Hindu saint or scholar worth his
> salt cared to meet or educate him about things Indian. It was only
> some Jain *munis* who came close to him. But then Jain *munis* have
> always been in search of royal patronage like the Christian
> missionaries. Moreover, Akbar used these *munis* for influencing some
> Rajput princes who would have otherwise remained recalcitrant.
>
> 2\. Akbar was every inch an Islamic bandit from abroad who conquered a
> large part of India mainly on the strength of Muslim swordsmen
> imported from Central Asia and Persia. He took great pride in
> proclaiming that he was a descendant of Taimur and Babur, and longed
> to recover the homelands of his forefathers in Transoxiana. He
> continued to decorate his name with the Islamic honorific *ghãzî*
> which he had acquired at the commencement of his reign by beheading
> the half-dead Himu. The wars he waged against the only resistant Hindu
> kingdoms - Mewar and Gondwana - had all the characteristics of classic
> *jihãd*. Whenever he wanted to celebrate some happy event or seek
> blessing for some great undertaking - which was quite often - he went
> on a pilgrimage to the *dargah* of Muinuddin Chishti, the foremost
> symbol of Islam’s ceaseless war on Hindus and Hinduism. He sent rich
> gifts to many centres of Muslim pilgrimage including Mecca and Medina,
> and carried on negotiations with the Portuguese so that voyages by
> Muslim pilgrims could be facilitated. In his letters to the Sharifs of
> Mecca and the Uzbek king of Bukhara, he protested that he was not only
> a good Muslim but also a champion of Islam, and that the orthodox
> Ulama who harboured doubts about him did not understand his game of
> consolidating a strong and durable Islamic empire in India.
>
> 3\. The concessions which Akbar made to Hindus were not motivated by
> any benevolence towards Hindus or Hinduism on his part. He was out to
> win Hindu support in his fight with two inveterate foes of every
> Muslim empire-builder - the Muslim chieftains and the die-hard Ulama.
> Alauddin Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughlaq had faced the same foes
> earlier, but failed to overcome them because they could not break out
> of the closed circle of the foreign Muslim fraternity in India. Akbar
> succeeded in fixing both the foes because he tried a new method, and
> discovered very soon that it worked. He fixed the Muslim chieftains
> with the help of Rajput princes and their retinues. He fixed the Ulama
> partly by making them fall foul of each other in the Ibadat Khana, and
> partly by flirting with *jogis* and Jains *munis* and Christian
> missionaries in order to frighten them. They had nothing except royal
> patronage to fatten upon. There is no evidence that Akbar’s
> association with some spokesmen of rival religions was inspired by any
> sincere seeking on his part, or that the association improved his mind
> in any way. He remained a prisoner of Islamic thought-categories to
> the end of his days.
>
> 4\. Nor did he have to pay a heavy price for Hindu support.
> Fortunately for him, he started functioning at a time when Hindu
> resistance to Islamic imperialism stood at a low ebb except in small
> pockets like Mewar and Gondwana. Hindu resistance had been led so far
> by the Rajput princes. But numerous wars fought by them with Muslim
> marauders for several centuries had exhausted their manpower as well
> as material resources. Akbar discovered it very soon that he could buy
> Rajput help in exchange for a few gestures which might have sounded
> ominous to orthodox Islam at that time but which proved only
> superficial in the long run. In fact, when one comes to think of it
> all, Hindus had to pay a very heavy price for those gestures from
> Akbar. He demanded Hindu princesses for his harem, which meant
> surrender of Hindu honour. He employed Hindu warriors not only against
> Muslim rebels but also against Hindu freedom fighters, which meant
> prostitution of Hindu heroism. For all practical purposes, he made the
> Hindus wield the sword of Islam not only in his own lifetime but right
> upto our own times. The pecuniary loss suffered by the Islamic state
> due to abolition of the pilgrim tax and the *jizyah* was compensated
> more than many times by the consolidation of an Islamic empire with a
> streamlined revenue system such as extracted from the Hindu masses,
> particularly the peasantry, the heavy cost of extending that empire by
> means of numerous wars, maintaining Mughal pomp and pageantry, and
> building monuments like the Taj.  By the end of the Mughal empire,
> Hindu masses stood reduced to the subsistence level.
>
> 5\. It was during the reign of Akbar that Muslim adventurers from many
> Islamic countries abroad started flocking towards India on an
> unprecedented scale, and made the Islamic establishment in the country
> stronger than ever before. They occupied all the top positions in the
> army as well as the administration of the Mughal empire. Statistics
> may be marshalled in order to show that Hindu *share* in government
> posts went on increasing till the time of Aurangzeb. But there is no
> gainsaying the fact that Hindu say in the policies of the Mughal
> empire went on decreasing from the days of Akbar’s immediate successor
> onwards. Even during the reign of Akbar, Muslim functionaries at the
> lower levels did not stop molesting Hindus in various ways normal to
> Islam. Many instances can be cited. Many a magnate in Akbar’s court
> were in close contact with the orthodox Ulama and Sufis led by Shykh
> Ahmad Sirhindi who went about saying publicly that Hindu should either
> be made to embrace Islam or treated like dogs. They came out into the
> open as soon as Akbar was dead, and their progeny continued to
> progress towards renewed power and prestige from the reign of Jahangir
> onwards till they again rose to the top under Aurangzeb.

It is true that the main fault lay with the Hindus for not being able to
see through Akbar’s camouflage, and for helping him in consolidating an
imperial power which Islam had never known in India in the pre-Akbar
period of Muslim rule. But the fact remains that but for Akbar laying
the firm foundations, there would have been no sadist scoundrel like
Jahangir, no abominable criminal like Shah Jahan, and no Islamic monster
like Aurangzeb for heaping endless torments and humiliations on Hindus.
Let there be no doubt that far from being a dazzling dawn, the reign of
Akbar was only the beginning of a darker night which continues till
today in the form of Nehruvian Secularism.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


