+++
title = "12 CHAPTER XII ISLAM VERSUS INSÃNIYAT (HUMANISM)"

+++
**CHAPTER XII**

**ISLAM VERSUS INSÃNIYAT (HUMANISM)**

A few friends had expressed misgivings about my starting upon this
series on the basis of a report in the Indian Express. They were
apprehensive that in the process I may have been unfair to the NCERT.

A journalist friend has now kindly given me an authentic copy of
*Guidelines And Tools For Evaluating School Text-books From the
Standpoint of National Integration*. I have studied the mimeographed
document and compared it carefully with the report in the *Indian
Express*. I find that Mrs. Coomi Kapoor’s reporting of the official
position was fully faithful.

My heart sinks at the very idea of such a sinister scheme being
sponsored by an educational agency set up by the government of a
democratic country. It is an insidious attempt at thought-control and
brainwashing.  Having been a student of these processes in Communist
countries, I have a strong suspicion that this document has also sprung
from the same sort of mind. This mind has presided for long over the
University Grants Commission and other educational institutions, and has
been aided and abetted by the residues of Islamic imperialism
masquerading as secularists.

India is not a clean slate on which any ideological language can be
transcribed at will, even if the inscriber happens to be a leviathan
which the state in India is increasingly tending to become. India
happens to be a country with a hoary history. National memory and
consciousness of cultural traditions instilled by that history can be
ignored only if we are prepared to pay the price in terms of
self-forgetfulness which will render the task of national integration
well-nigh impossible.  
 

**PROPER BASIS OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION**

A worthwhile climate for national integration can be created only on the
basis of truth, justice, and a deeper perception of human culture. If we
ignore these criteria and surrender to the unjust demands of intolerant
ideologies, either because we are impelled by temporary political
expediency or because we are moved by a shallow and self-defeating
Secularism, the result will inevitably be national disintegration, and,
in the prevailing conditions of our encirclement by an aggressive
Islamic Bloc, national enslavement.

Hindus were never very good political historians or biographers. Their
historical interest was always centred on the life-stories of
exceptionally outstanding heroes and saints, where also they enlarged
the merely terrestrial in the image of the transcendent. One searches in
vain the entire corpus of Itihasa-Purana for such historical data as the
Greeks, the Romans the Chinese, and the Muslims have datelined about
their kings and other luminaries. The three *RãjatarañgiNis* written by
KalhaNa, Jonaraja, and Srivara are the only exceptions. What passes as
Hindu political history before the advent of the Islamic invaders is
mostly a patchwork pieced together by modern scholars out of epigraphic
evidence, accounts of foreign travellers, and some indigenous
literature. There is hardly anything in this history of India which
needs correction except the perspective which has suffered substantial
perversions, wittingly or unwittingly, during the days of the white
man’s supremacy.

It is only when we come to Islamic invaders of India that we have
voluminous historical materials collected and compiled by hundreds of
Muslim chroniclers. These materials have been carefully collated,
compared, edited, annotated, and translated by a band of Western and
Indian scholars. No one who is familiar with the results of this
scholarship and wants to be fair can fail to vouchsafe that the scholars
concerned have been, by and large, scrupulous and painstaking. It will
be difficult to find significant instances of distortion and
misrepresentation in this great endeavour, except when we come to the
Stalinist “historians” like Mohammad Habib and Romila Thapar, to name
only two from a fraternity which has multiplied fast under Nehruvian
Secularism. It is not the fault of modern scholarship if the histories
written by medieval Muslim historians are so damaging to the democratic,
equalitarian, humanistic, and religious pretensions which Islam puts
forth at present. The scholars have not invented any of the stories
which sound so monstrous even after plenty of pruning away of what may
be honestly held as poetic exaggeration.

Some other scholars have gone further and tried to find out if the
monstrous deeds from which most Muslim monarchs, mullahs, and sufis
derived such great satisfaction, are sanctioned by the basic tenets of
Islam as expounded in the Quran, the Sunnah of the Prophet, and the
sayings and doings of the first four pious caliphs. They have confirmed,
more or less unanimously, that the enormities are enjoined by the
scriptures of Islam in such an unequivocal language as leaves no scope
for any misunderstanding whatsoever. The heroes of Islam can take
legitimate pride that they have literally and very faithfully followed
the teachings of Islam, and the legacy left by the Prophet and the pious
caliphs.

A healthy and humanitarian system of education would have placed all
these facts before our young men and women coming from the Muslim
community, and put to them the following proposition: These are the
words and deeds credited to Muslim kings, saints, and theologians by the
historians of Islam in medieval India; these words and deeds compare
very well with the words and deeds of Islamic kings, saints, and
theologians in all other lands swept over by the armies of Islam; these
words and deeds also conform quite closely to the tenets of Islam as
expounded in the Quran and the Sunnah and the Shariat; we do not want
you to evaluate these words and deeds and tenets in terms of any
non-Islamic religion or culture; our only appeal to you is to evaluate
them in terms of natural human reason, man’s natural moral sense, and
elementary principles of human brotherhood without resort to the
casuistry marshalled by the mullahs and sufis, or the apologetics
propped up by the Aligarh and Stalinist schools of historians; you have
in you as much of the rational and the moral in human nature as the
young men and women belonging to any other community; we wait for your
verdict.

I am quite hopeful that approached in this manner most Muslim young men
and women are likely to respond in a positive manner. At least a good
beginning would have been made in opening up the minds and hearts of
these young people to normal human values, and leading them out of the
prison-house of Islam in which most Muslims have lived over the past so
many centuries. Muslims in India as elsewhere have been living in a Dark
Age ever since they were forced or lured into the fold of Islam, the
same way as the Christians in the West had lived during the medieval
period presided over by the Catholic Church. Christians in the West
experienced an Age of Reason and Renaissance when they processed
Christian doctrines and history in terms of rationalism and humanism,
and reawakened to some extent to their ancient pagan heritage. There is
no reason why the Muslims in India and elsewhere should not experience
the same reawakening, once they recover the ancient cultural traditions
of their respective countries, and start standing by rationalism and
humanism.  
 

**IS ISLAM A RELIGION?**

Some people are prone to confuse Islam with its victims, that is, the
Muslims, and condemn the latter at the same time as they come to know
the crudities of the former. This is a very serious confusion, which
should be avoided by all those who believe in building up a broad-based
human brotherhood as opposed to narrow, sectarian, self-centred, and
chauvinistic nationalism or communalism. Let there be no doubt that an
average Muslim is as good or bad a human being as an average Hindu or,
for that matter, any average person belonging to any race, religion, or
culture. What concerns us here is the worth of Islam as an ideology, and
not the worth of Muslims as human beings.

This is not the occasion to discuss the deeper question whether Muhammad
was a prophet, or whether what he claimed to be the Quran, is a
revelation from some divine source. I am also postponing for the time
being, and leaving for better minds than my own, the discussion whether
Islam is a religion or a political ideology of imperialism. Here I will
only ponder over some of the persistent pretensions of Islam -
pretensions which have so far remained unquestioned in this country or
elsewhere.

The first pretension of Islam to which many learned or pious people fall
an easy prey is Monotheism as contrasted with Polytheism, that is, the
pitting of ‘True One God’ against ‘false many gods’. The mere sound of
the word ‘monotheism’ spreads such a hypnotic spell over certain minds
that they suspend their thought operations, and refuse to look into the
meaning and implications of this concept which is shared in common by
the three prophetic creeds - Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

Ram Swarup has studied the scriptures of Christianity and Islam, and
meditated over Monotheism and Polytheism for a number of years. I will
reproduce below what he has to say on this subject in his book, *The
Word As Revelation: Names of Gods:*

“The fact is that the problem of One or Many Gods is born of a
theological mind, not of a mystic consciousness. In the *Atharvaveda*
(2.1.1), the sage Vena says that he ‘sees That in that secret station of
the heart in which the manifoldness of the world becomes one form’, or
as in the *Yajurveda* (32.8) where the ‘world is rested in one truth’.
But in another station of man where not his soul but his mind rules,
there is opposition between the One and Many, between God and Matter,
between God and Gods. On the other hand, when the soul awakens, Gods are
born in its depths which proclaim and glorify one another.

“The Hindus do not call their Gods either ‘One’ or ‘Many’. According to
them what they worship is One Reality, *ekam sat*, which is differently
named. This Reality is everywhere, in everything, in every being. It is
One and Many at the same time and it also transcends them both.
Everything is an expression, a play, an image, an echo of this Reality.

“Spiritual life is one but it is vast and rich in expression. The human
mind conceives it differently. If the human mind was uniform without
different depths, heights and levels of subtlety; or if all men had the
same mind, the same psyche, the same imagination, the same needs, in
short, if all men were the same, then perhaps One God would do. But a
man’s mind is not a fixed quantity and men and their powers and needs
are different. So only some form of polytheism alone can do justice to
this variety and richness.

“Besides this variety of human needs and human minds, the spiritual
reality itself is so vast, immense and inscrutable that man’s reason
fails and his imagination and fancy stagger in its presence. Therefore,
this reality cannot be indicated by one name or formula or description.
It has to be expressed in glimpses from many angles. No single idea or
system of ideas could convey it adequately. This too points to the need
for some form of polytheism.

“A purely monotheistic God unrelieved by polytheistic elements tends to
become lifeless and abstract. A purely monotheistic unity fails to
represent the living unity of the spirit and expresses merely the
intellect’s love of the uniform and the general.

“In the cultural history of the world, the replacement of Many Gods by
One God was accompanied by a good deal of conflict, vandalism, bigotry,
persecution and crusading. They were very much like the ‘wars of
liberation’ of today, hot and cold, openly aggressive or cunningly
subversive. Success in such wars played no mean role in making a local
deity, say Allah of certain Arab tribes, win a wider status and assume a
larger role.”  
 

**GOD AND THE NEIGHBOUR**

Ram Swarup has further simplified the proposition and placed it in a
social context in another work which is yet to be published. He says:

“In the spiritual realm there are two categories: God and your
neighbour. And correspondingly there are two ways of looking at them:
you could look at God through your neighbour or at the neighbour through
your God. In the first approach, you will think that if your neighbour
has the same needs and constitution and impulses as you have, then his
God, in whatever way he is worshipped and by whatever name he is called,
must mean the same to him as your God means to you. In short, if your
neighbour is as good as you are, his God also must be as good as yours.

“But if you look at your neighbour through your God, then it leads to an
entirely different outlook. Then you say that if your God is good enough
for you, it should be good enough for your neighbour too. And if your
neighbour is not worshipping the same God in the same way, he must be
worshipping Devil and qualifies for conversion or liquidation.

“The first approach promotes tolerance, though it gives a plurality of
Gods and varieties of modes in worship. The other approach gives one God
and one mode of worship, but breeds intolerance. The one idea tries to
generalise itself through conquest and calls itself the truly one, the
truly universal.”  
 

**MONOTHEISM IS DISGUISED MATERIALISM**

If the theologians of Christianity and Islam can be considered
authoritative exponents of Monotheism, it means that God or the Supreme
Power or whatever the name we give to the Ultimate Reality, remains
outside the Cosmos, that is, becomes extra-cosmic after the act of
Creation. These theologians praise God as Omnipotent and Omniscient, but
frown at any association of Omnipresence with Him. The very thought that
God could be present in the human heart (*antarayãmin*), in the Universe
(*sarvanivãsin*), in Nature, in animals, in plants, and even in matter
is denounced by them as Pantheism which, according to them, is as great,
if not greater, a blasphemy as atheism itself. Islam denounces
Polytheism as *shirk*, that is associating creatures with the Creator,
which, according to it, is the same as thing as seeing God’s presence in
his creation.

Looked at in this manner, an inescapable implication of Monotheism is
that the Cosmos is completely denuded of any inherent Divinity, and made
very, very material. There is no divinity inherent in human beings, or
animals, or in material things. Monotheism thus becomes a disguised form
of Materialism. What is worse, it leads to the lowest type of idolatry
because it places God at the mercy of an historical person, hailed as
the Prophet or the Son on whom the extra-cosmic deity must depend for
communicating with his creatures. Songs and sermons in praise of a Jesus
or a Muhammad soon surpass the hymns addressed to God Almighty.  
 

**ALLAH IS AN EGO-GOD**

The Allah of Islam is not even a monotheistic God of the initial
Biblical conception. On the contrary, it is what Ram Swarup calls an
Ego-God:

“The Upanishads say that God chooses whom he will. This is true in a
deeper sense. It means that He is beyond our choices and preferences,
our likes and dislikes, and our conceptions of Him, or definitions of
right and wrong, false and true.

“But there is a sense in which we choose our own Gods. God made man in
His own image. But man also makes God in his own image. Our God is what
we are. If our heart is pure, our God is also pure, but if our hearts
are impure, our Gods too are impure.

“Most men want a God who humours them and gratifies them, who vindicates
and justifies their way of life, who sanctifies them in their own eyes
and in those of their friends… They want their kingdom to extend, they
want war-booty, particularly in the form of gold and young girls; they
want their enemies to be slain and humbled.

“Ego-Gods come fully into their own when our desires take on moral and
theological disguises: when the Ego uses a higher principle for a lower
satisfaction, the truth itself is perverted and Ego-Gods are born. We
worship the Ego-Gods when we worship the lower in the higher.”

This is the true import of the *Kalima* - there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is the Prophet. It seems that the prophet of Islam had no use
for a God who could have his own independent will, who could have and
express his own opinions of men and matters, and who could exercise his
own judgement about right and wrong. On the contrary, the Prophet needed
a proxy disguised as god who would echo precisely, though in a pompous
language, the personal proclivities of the Prophet in every situation,
domestic as well as public, which the Prophet had to face. This
conclusion is confirmed by a reading of the Quran in a chronological
order, side by side with the orthodox biographies of the Prophet. The
close correspondence between what the Prophet was planning or pining for
in his normal moments, and what was revealed to him in a state of wahy
that followed soon after, is quite striking. The chronological confusion
in the compilation of the Quran has helped a good deal to hide this
correspondence.

So much for the first pretension of Islam.  
 

**BROTHERHOOD OF BANDITS**

The second pretension of Islam is that it stands for human brotherhood
and social equality as contrasted with the caste divisions and class
hierarchies rampant in other societies, particularly the Hindu society.
Many people with socialist preferences or pretensions are duped by what
they describe as the “social progressivism” of Islam. We have in this
country a whole battalion of Hindu-baiters who have no use for Allah or
for Muhammad but who strongly recommend Islam on the rebound because
they have come to believe that Islam stands for better social values.
And there is no dearth of Hindus, who, while they love their own
religion and culture, admit at the same time that Hindu society has a
lot to learn from Islam in matters of brotherhood and equality.

Islam had never put forward these claims before the rise of democracy
and socialism in modern times. The old theologians of Islam were
meticulous in placing various people in their proper places. The
*mu‘mins* (believers) constituted the master class (*millat*) entrusted
with the mission of imposing the faith and law of the Prophet on all
mankind. The *kãfirs* were the scum of the earth who were to be
consigned to eternal hell-fire whenever they could not be killed or
converted outright. The zimmîs were people who accepted the supremacy of
the Islamic state and agreed to live as non-citizens under severe
disabilities. The slaves were mere merchandise who could be bought and
sold in the bazar, and killed without any compunction if they tried to
escape into freedom. And the women (*zan*) were men’s personal property
comparable to gold and silver (*zar*) and land (*zamin*), to be kept
veiled and hidden in the harem if they happened to be legal wives, or to
be presented as gifts if they happened to be newly captured beauties, or
to be circulated among friends if they happened to be concubines. Within
the *millat* itself, the Quraish had primacy over the plain Arabs at the
start of Islamic imperialism. The civil list devised by Caliph Umar for
monetary grants given to Arab families out of the booty obtained in
wars, reflects this class hierarchy in Arab society. As the Arab empire
expanded east and west, the non-Arabs everywhere were treated as
inferior people, in law as well as in practice, even when the latter
became *mu‘mins*. Later on, the Turks took over the Arab legacy of being
a master race. Islam has never known any brotherhood or equality even
within its *millat*.

But the theologians of Islam look the other way when Islam gets sold in
a new garb, and that too by people who do not profess Islam. They are
also prepared to participate in the crudest casuistry in interpreting
the Quran in line with the latest demagogies of social philosophy. The
“only true faith” has to be served even if it means a fraud on the
“hallowed scripture”.

The Quran is quite frank and straight-forward on the subject of human
brotherhood and social equality. It says: He who seeks a faith other
than Islam will never be accepted (3.85). You fight them till not a
trace of unbelief is left (8.39). When you meet the *kãfirs*, cut their
throats until you have made a great slaughter amongst them, and when you
have defeated them, take them prisoners so that you may earn ransom.
Fight them till they surrender (47.4). War is prescribed for you, and
you dislike. But it is possible that you dislike what is good for you
(2.216). And so on, it all reads like a manual of war on mankind rather
than a charter of human brotherhood. It neatly divides humanity into
mu‘mins and *kãfirs*, and leaves not the slightest scope for any mutual
understanding or normal morality between the two.

So much for the second pretension of Islam.  
 

**ISLAM BRUTALISED ARAB SOCIETY**

The third pretension of Islam is that it rescued Arabia from an era of
darkness (*jãhiliyya*), and put her squarely on the path of cultural
progress. The proposition needs a very close examination. No records of
pre-Islamic culture have survived except a bit of poetry, which by
itself is a telling evidence of the havoc wrought by Islam on a society
whose only fault was that it did not take seriously the prophethood of
Muhammad. Even so, something of the pre-Islamic Arab society and culture
shines through the lies told about them by the biographers of Muhammad.
It was a tribal society no doubt.  But the tribes had a long tradition
of large-hearted religious liberalism which made the worshippers of many
Gods and Goddesses live peacefully side by side. The Jews and the
Christians also enjoyed full religious freedom in this environment of
tolerance and understanding. It was this liberalism and tolerance which
permitted the prophet of Islam to preach and practise all that he did.
If pre-Islamic Arab society had been what Islam made of it after
Muhammad’s mailed fist had triumphed, there would have been no prophet
and no Islam.

The pre-Islamic Arabs were honest in their dealings with other people,
and chivalrous towards their enemies. They practised a code of honour in
all give and take. The women in pre-Islamic Arabia had a very high
status. They presided over business and commerce. They took part in
public debates and poetic contests. They rode freely by themselves for
visiting friends and lovers. They accompanied and stood by their men on
the field of battle. They never wore the veil which Islam forced on
them.

It was this simple, straight-forward, and essentially human society
which Islam divided by mutual hatred sown by a monopolist of “divine
revelations”. Brother was turned against brother, sons and daughters
against parents, wives against husbands, and neighbour against
neighbour. A ruthless gang of wholetime hoodlums was let loose on this
society by a preacher of “perfect virtue”. This gang led many surprise
expeditions against unsuspecting tribal settlements without any
provocation whatsoever, looted caravans which were not expecting to be
waylaid, massacred many innocent men and women and children in the most
cruel manner, enslaved many more who had always been free citizens,
forced many helpless women into slavery and concubinage, and deprived
whole communities of their inherited as well as hard-earned properties,
movable and immovable. The victims were at first baffled by this
unprecedented and uncivilised conduct on the part of those whom they
regarded as their own kith and kin. They fought back half-heartedly when
their patience was exhausted. And they surrendered to superior military
strategy and armed force which they had neither the time nor the
resourcefulness to match.

The Arab people were brutalised after Islam destroyed their ancient and
humane culture, and forced them to fulfil its fiendish behests. The Arab
people now became a brotherhood of bandits who fell like hungry wolves
on the neighbouring lands, who massacred other people *en masse* in the
name of Monotheism, who desecrated and demolished other people’s places
of worship in the name of Allah, who looted and pillaged whole countries
and populated them with bastard progenies begotten on helpless native
women without number, and who carried away whole masses of men and women
and children and sold them into slavery. This “civilizing” mission of
Islam was taken over by the Turks at a later stage, particularly in
India.

It is high time that we see through the pretensions of a pernicious
political ideology masquerading as religion, and expose the truth which
is being suppressed by the hawkers of Nehruvian Secularism. It is high
time that the Muslims everywhere are made to know that Islam has been
and remains as far from *Insãniyat* as the North Pole from the South
Pole. The Dark Night which dwells over many lands invaded by Islam and
which is trying to spread farther afield with the help of petro-dollars,
has to be rolled back till every Muslim receives his normal share of
daylight. A beginning of this mission can be made in India, the land of
Sanãtana Dharma.

But before we set out to accomplish that mission, we have to use
discretion in defining what is *dharma*. We should not sloganise the
truths of Sanatana Dharma as is evident when we practise
*sarva-dharma-sama-bhãva* vis-a-vis Islam and Christianity.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


