+++
title = "06 5.1 V.P. Singh and Ayodhya"

+++
# 5. Ram Janmabhoomi politics

## 5.1 V.P. Singh and Ayodhya

The centuries-old struggle over the **Babri Masjid - Ram Janmabhoomi**
came in a critical phase on November 9, 1989, when the first stone of
the Ram Janmabhoomi Mandir was laid, in a grand Shilanyas ceremony. The
astrologers who had chosen the time, had clearly picked a very
auspicious stellar configuration, for on the very same day, the Berlin
wall was broken. Jay Dubashi wrote : *"While a temple was going up in
Ayodhya, a Communist temple was being demolished five thousand miles
away in Europe"* If this is not history, I don't know what
is.[³⁷](notes.htm#note37)

The actual construction had been announced for February, but then the
VHP leadership decided to give the new prime minister V.P. Singh, who at
that time enjoyed a lot of goodwill, four months time to work out an
amicable agreement among all the parties concerned. During those four
months nothing was done. At least, that is the impression among the
public. Later, one of V.P. Singh's aides was to come out in defense of
his boss saying that a lot of consultations had taken place, but that a
compromise was just not possible. And it is true : no compromise is
possible between the demands of the Vishva Hindu Parishad and those of
the Babri Masjid Action Committee and the Babri Masjid Movement
Co-ordination Committee.

In July 1990, well after the four months' grace period had elapsed, the
VHP announced it would start temple construction on October 30.

On August 7, V.P.Singh announced that his government was going to
implement the recommendations of the Mandal Commission Report, giving
27% reservations in government jobs to the so-called Other Backward
Classes (i.e. Castes). It was a surprise move, for which he had not even
consulted his allies, the BJP and the Communist parties. The move was
calculated to divide all other non-caste-based parties along caste
lines, to attract the massive OBC vote bank (and prevent it from being
*hijacked* by legitimate OBC leader Devi Lal), and last but not least,
to divide the Ram Janmabhoomi movement.

Prime Minister V.P. Singh really did seek a compromise solution for the
Ayodhya dilemma. Behind the screen, he had worked out an arrangement on
October 15 to 18, which was divulged only after it had fallen through,
by Arun Shourie[³⁸](notes.htm#note38). The plan was that the disputed
area would be acquired by the government. For further decision, it would
be divided in the structure itself and the adjoining land including the
Shilanyas site. The structure itself would be referred to the Supreme
Court for determining its character. On the adjoining land, the VHP
would be allowed to start building the Mandir. Since part of the land
was private property, it could only be acquired through the **Land
Acquisition Act** procedure, which would take at least three weeks even
in an emergency formula. However, it could be acquired immediately under
a special Ordinance.

On October 19, by 3 p.m., the formula was agreed upon by several
ministers and leaders of the BJP, VHP, RSS. Then, V.P. Singh had a
meeting with the Muslim leaders. So, at 5 p.m. he told his aides he had
changed his mind : all the land considered disputed before the Allahabad
High Court would be referred to the Supreme Court, and there was no
question of handing over the Shilanyas area to the VHP. His law officer
explained to him that once the government has acquired the land, all
disputes about the land titles would end, so no further decision on the
land surrounding the structure itself was needed. Nevertheless, that
night the Ordinance came, without anything of the distinction between
the structure and the surrounding land, which the prime minister himself
had worked out and agreed upon with the VHP leaders.

The VHP felt it had been taken for a ride, and was furious.
Nevertheless, the land had been acquired, so perhaps it was a very small
step in the right direction (that is what L.K. Advani had to say about
it). But the Muslim leaders, whom the prime minister had already tried
to appease with his unilateral change in the Ordinance, were not
appeased enough. That's the way it goes with appeasement policies : the
concession made is never the final concession. By October 21, they
realized that this acquisition of property claimed as Waqf property
could be a precedent for more such take-overs, and they didn't want to
take any chances. So they called on the prime minister. What happened
there behind closed doors can be deduced from the outcome: the
Ordinance, issued in the name of the President of India, was withdrawn.

Arun Shourie has made the point that V.P. Singh gave in twice to the
pressure from such secularists as Imam Bukhari, when they threatened
V.P. Singh with the prospect of the Muslim vote bank deserting him the
way it had deserted Rajiv Gandhi in 1989.

One might also wonder if this agreement between the government and the
BJP/VHP, which must have been in preparation for some time, has not also
influenced the Ram Janmabhoomi campaign. Could it be that when in
September, the BJP threw its full weight behind the VHP campaign, and to
an extent even took it over, it acted on the understanding that the
government would allow the start of the temple construction from the
Shilanyas site?

At any rate, this is the story of one of the most impressive episodes in
the Ram Janmabhoomi movement. BJP president L.K. Advani set out on a
Rathyatra from Somnath to Ayodhya, where he would join in the Kar Seva,
the actual bricklaying of the temple, on October 30. The trip took him
through Gujarat, Maharashtra, a tip of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Delhi. Everywhere the popular response was
massive and enthusiastic. No riots took place. In some places, caste
riots that had been triggered by the Mandal plan, subsided. It seems
that when Hindus utter the name Rama, they forget their differences.

From Delhi, Advani took the train to Bihar, and resumed his Rathyatra.
Even in the sensitive tribal belt, the response was enthusiastic and not
tainted by riots. But as Advani came nearer to the Uttar Pradesh border,
the political fever was rising. Mulayam Singh Yadav, chief minister of
Uttar Pradesh, had announced he would arrest mr. Advani as soon as he
would enter the state. At the same time, behind the scene, he was
challenging prime minister V.P. Singh to intervene. The latter finally
obliged, via his political friend Laloo Prasad Yadav (Mulayam, while
still a fellow partyman, was fast turning into a political enemy), the
chief minister of Bihar. In the early morning of October 22, i.e. after
the Ordinance plan had fallen through, L.K. Advani was arrested.

The BJP reaction was prompt. The party wrote to president Venkataraman
that it withdrew its support from V.P. Singh's minority government. It
also announced an all-India strike (Bharat bandh) on October 24.

With the fall of the government now a certainty, the ruling Janata Dal
fell apart. Dissidents led by Chandra Shekhar and Devi Lal, soon joined
by Mulayam Singh Yadav, formed the Janata Dal (Socialist). V.P. Singh
insisted on proving his majority in the Lok Sabha, on November 7,
knowing that only a rump of some 90 Janata Dal MPs plus the Communists
would support him. Chandra Shekhar started working out an arrangement
for a JD(S) minority government supported by the Congress-I. For the
first time, a government had to step down for its anti- Hindu policy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 5.2 Mulayam's Emergency rule and Kar Seva

Meanwhile in Uttar Pradesh, chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav was
playing it rough. He pre-emptively arrested all leaders of organizations
involved in the Ram Janmabhoomi movement. In order to prevent Kar Sevaks
from going to Ayodhya, he suspended all public transport in the state,
blocked roads, and imposed curfew in a number of cities. House-to-house
searches for hiding Kar Sevaks were carried out, the borders were
sealed, and massive numbers of Hindus (as well as a number of Muslim Kar
Sevaks) were jailed. The numbers cited vary between one and eight lakhs,
which is a lot more than during the Emergency or the Quit India movement
in the whole county.

On October 30, when according to Mulayam's boast, no bird would be able
to fly into Ayodhya, thousands of Kar Sevaks broke through the police
defenses thanks to their sheer numbers (not through force of arms :
hardly any policeman got hurt). A gate was actually opened by policemen,
who later justified this action by saying it was the lesser evil in the
circumstances, otherwise many people would have been killed.

Some Kar Sevaks climbed the domes and planted saffron flags there. The
structure got damaged a little bit, far less than what the crowd could
have done if it had really wanted to demolish it. Gradually, the police
forces regained control and drove the Kar Sevaks out, arresting many,
and killing about 10, others cite figures from 5 to 50.

On November 2, the Kar Sevaks came back. As they were sitting or
standing in the narrow lanes near the Janmabhoomi site (secularists say
they were slowly moving towards it), the police opened fire. According
to press reports, it skipped the normal procedure of first warning,
lathi-charge and teargas, shooting in the air, and ultimately shooting
at the legs. Most of the dead bodies had bullet wounds in the head and
chest. Well, hitting the legs without hitting the heads may have been
difficult as the security forces were shooting from the rooftops.

The death toll is a matter of dispute, as many of the bodies have been
carried off in Army vans, and unceremoniously disposed of in an unknown
place. The papers said 9, or 17, or 25 at most. The Chief Minister said
16, and stuck to it. The official Home Ministry
figures[³⁹](notes.htm#note39) for the communal violence in 1990 mention
45 as the total death toll in Ayodhya, which implies that less than 30
got killed on November 2. But many local people, including eyewitnesses,
say that several thousands have been killed. The BJP appealed to the
president to depose Mulayam, and cited the figure of 168 people killed.
Some days after, the VHP claimed it could substantiate a death toll of
about 400, or as many as were killed by general Dyer at Jallianwala
Bagh.

It has been briefly mentioned in a few press reports that some of the
bullets found in dead or wounded Kar Sevaks' bodies, were not of the
kind the security forces normally use. Some people infer from this, that
Mulayam or someone else who has a say in the deployment of the security
personnel, had allowed *minority* snipers to take up positions and join
in the shooting. It sounds a bit fantastic, but given the high
criminalization of politics especially in Bihar and U.P., it is not
entirely impossible. Then again, it is hard to imagine that legitimate
security men would accept it and that none of them would have leaked out
the precise facts, which we would have heard by now.

The prevalent explanation for the merciless shooting, is that the
security men wanted (or had been told) to make up for their weak
performance on October 30. That is not entirely convincing. It certainly
does not explain why the prescribed steps before an actual shooting were
not gone through. One can understand the police immediately resorting to
shooting when it is attacked. But here, no-one has claimed that the Kar
Sevaks were attacking the police and threatening their lives.

Could it be that the security men had received orders to be purposely
ruthless, as a show of strength on the part of the Chief Minister ? Many
Muslims seem to have appreciated his tough stand. Communist Chief
Minister of West Bengal, Jyoti Basu, had insisted that he be tough and
unflinching. As Jay Dubashi has observed, with a Communist Chief
Minister, not hundreds but thousands would have been shot.

At any rate, the Chief Minister would regret his ruthlessness. He became
overnight the most hated man in Hindu India. With the split in the
Janata Dal, he had to seek Congress support. The Congress, feeling it
was massively losing popularity because of its non-opposition and now
even support to Mulayam, started to put pressure on Mulayam to tone down
his anti-Mandir stand, and to make goodwill gestures towards the Hindus.
Even after a month of climbing down, Mulayam was still too controver-
sial for Congress, and Rajiv Gandhi expressed the desire that Mulayam
step down. Only because the Congress party was divided on the issue and
very afraid of elections, could Mulayam stay on.

The general change of atmosphere made Mulayam suggests that a Mandir be
built by the government, starting from the shilanyas site, but in such a
direction as not to come in the way of the Masjid. That the Hindu claim
was justified, even anti-Hindu politicians had come to
concede.[⁴⁰](notes.htm#note40) The question for them became: how, where
and by whom can the temple be built without really antagonizing the
Muslim ?

Rajiv Gandhi wrote a letter to brandnew prime minister Chandra Shekhar,
to suggest that the historical and archaeological evidence on whether
the Masjid had indeed replaced a Mandir, be considered as a decisive
element in the Ayodhya solution. In practical terms : if experts agree
that a Mandir had been destroyed to make way for the Masjid, then the
government should treat the disputed site as a Hindu site. Still vague
enough, and yet a remarkable departure from the earlier anti-historical
position that the courts should decide (which meant that the issue had
to be treated as purely an ownership dispute).

The government then invited the AIBMAC and the VHP to come forward and
present the evidence for their respective cases. On December 23, the VHP
submitted a carefully prepared argumentation full of exact references to
authentic material, with 28 annexures. The AIBMAC submitted nothing but
a pile of documents, with no explanation of how it proved what. Most of
these documents were just recent newspaper clippings, statements of
opinion by non-experts and outright cranks, and Court documents
concerning legal disputes emanating from the situation created by force
in 1528, totally irrelevant to the question what was on the site before
the Masjid was built.

On January 6, both sides submitted rejoinders to the other party's
evidence. At least, that was what had been asked of them, but only the
VHP had done so, The AIBMAC had nothing to offer but an even bulkier
pile of documents without any proof value whatsoever. Since the AIBMAC
had not even challenged the VHP documents with a formal rebuttal, the
objective position was that it conceded the validity of the VHP
evidence. Both the press and the Babri activists, who till a month
before had been decrying the VHP's "suppression of history in favour of
myth" etc., now started downplaying the importance of the historical
evidence. As N. Kunju put it : *"History obscures, not
clarifies."*[⁴¹](notes.htm#note41)

Syed Shahabuddin, conveyor of BMMCC, declared that regardless of the
evidence, the title suit had to be decided as such by the Allahabad High
Court, even if the government would ask the Supreme Court for its
opinion on the historical evidence. Apart from an admission of weakness
on the historical evidence front, Shahabuddin's demand was just tactics
: the more forums deliberating on the issue, the more chance that one of
them would go against the Hindu demand ; and if all of them go against
the Muslim position, the Committees can always launch an *agitation*, as
in the Shah Bano case. He also said he would not allow the rival AIBMAC
to concede the Masjid. The AIBMAC itself declared that it would only
concede the Masjid if proof was offered that Ram was born on that exact
site.

Short, faced with the evidence that the Masjid had indeed forcibly
replaced a Mandir, they just raised their demands and made it clear that
this evidence talk was for them just a tactical device to keep the
Hindus busy with everything except building the new Ram Janmabhoomi
Mandir. But at least they had effectively conceded what everybody had
known all along : that the Babri Masjid was one of the thousands of
mosques built on destroyed Pagan temples.

With the scholarly contest about the historical evidence yielding only a
firm historical conclusion, but not the concomitant political consensus
to leave this Hindu sacred site to the Hindus, the matter was again down
to its bare essentials : a power struggle.

On the ground, the VHP had taken to softer tactics. After the killing on
November 2, in which many sadhus had also died, the feeling among at
least the non-VHP leaders of the movement in Ayodhya itself, was to
tread slowly and to avoid more of this mass martyrdom. Hinduism has no
cult of martyrdom (to avoid the Islamic term shaheed, the Sanskrit word
hutatma, "sacrificed self", was used), and prefers to advance without
this waste of human lives.

There were rumours that the Bajrang Dal had prepared a *hit list* of
culprits for the massacre, who would have to be punished (after the
Khalistani example). The rumour apparently sprung from a pamphlet in
which the officers directly responsible for the massacre were mentioned
by name. But it turned out that no police officers with those names
existed. This ridiculous pamphlet incidentally does show to what a
miserably low level even a movement for a just cause can stoop. The
propensity to indulge in silly and reprehensible rumours is of course
encouraged by the stress on emotionalism (quite different from the
normal Hindu cool) and the lack of factual information and ideological
education of which the Ram Janmabhoomi movement has suffered on some
occasions.

Anyway, I have asked Vinay katiyar, Bajrang Dal leader, what the truth
was of this *hit list* story : did activist Hindus think that a need for
armed struggle had arisen ? He told me : **Where is the need for hit
lists, for revenge ? Mulayam will be boycotted by the people. We have
the people on our side. It is only when you cannot count on the support
of the people, that you have to take to assassinations. So, let them
live, let them feel the anger of the people. We have no intention of
turning murderers into martyrs.**[⁴²](notes.htm#note42)

Some days after the massacre, the Hindu leadership in Ayodhya decided to
organize a Satyagraha, with one thousand people courting arrest every
day, from December 6 till January 15. But, as more people than one
thousand per day volunteered to participate, the total number of people
who courted arrest in those forty days was over two lakhs.

Meanwhile, on the political front the wind was turning. In different
quarters, the mood was increasingly in favour of hijacking the
Janmabhoomi movement rather than suppressing it. Alright, let the Mandir
be built, but let us build it and take the credit. The Kar Seva
campaign's material success on the ground might have been limited, but
that change in the mental atmosphere would be decisive for the further
development of the issue. No matter who would lay the actual bricks of
the Ram Mandir, the credit for that change of mood in favour of the
Mandir certainly goes to the Ram Bhaktas who were there in Ayodhya in
the autumn of 1990.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 5.3 Reactions in neighbouring countries

In November 1989, Muslims in Bangla Desh destroyed more than 200 Hindu
temples, on the pretext of reacting against the Shilanyas in Ayodhya.
The government agreed to pay for the repairs of 10 of them. I have no
information on how much it has paid already. Moreover, during this
anti-Hindu violence, many women were raped, some people killed and many
wounded, and many shops looted and burned down.

In November 1990, another forty or fifty temples were razed or burnt
down in Bangla Desh. Or at least, those are the figures given by the
secularist press. The Hindu-Buddha-Christian Oikya Parishad, the Bangla
minorities' association, reported that in the a village in Chittagong
district more than fifty Hindu women had been raped, two killed, and
that hundreds of temples had been damaged or burnt down.

Both the opposition parties and the Hindu-Buddhist- Christian Unity
Council of Bangla Desh have alleged a strong government involvement in
the communal violence. They pinpointed ministers and leaders of the
ruling party as having instigated the communal violence. More : *"We
directly blame the president for these heinous anti-human incidents...
they were staged in a planned way under a blueprint in co-operation with
law-enforcing agencies."*[⁴³](notes.htm#note43)

But the government indulged in the same anti-communal rhetoric as the
Indian governments usually do : president Ershad declared that *"the
glorious tradition of communal harmony would be preserved at all costs
and trouble- makers indulging in anti-social activities would be dealt
with severely"*.[⁴⁴](notes.htm#note44) And it even got praise from the
Indian secularists : *"President Ershad acted firmly in handling the
riots... The fact that Hindus were free to organize a protest march
shows that the government had placed no curbs on such
demonstrations."*[⁴⁵](notes.htm#note45) I think it shows in the first
place that Hindus had reason to protest.

You see, the secularists are like the followers of Big Brother in George
Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four (a parody of Stalinism). When Big Brother
has raised the prices, they hold a demonstration to thank him for
lowering the prices. And when a Muslim government organizes pogroms
against the Hindus, the secularists thank it for keeping communal
harmony.

But Bangla Desh has not returned the compliment. On the contrary.
General Ershad gave speeches attacking *"a neighbouring country"* for
*"hatching a conspiracy"* and *"inspiring destructive activities"* etc.
So far, no problem. But his deputy prime minister, Shah Moazzem *"went a
step further, questioning the identity, religion and citizenship of the
people behind the disturbances \[in opposition anti-government
strikes\]... Giving a call for resisting the designs of **a neighbouring
country**, Shah Moazzem almost incited communal violence by calling upon
people to identify the particular community, which, he said, is very
easy."*[⁴⁶](notes.htm#note46) Meanwhile, "the opposition parties, the
United Minority Council and independent groups of lawyers, professionals
and teachers have accused the government of organizing communal violence
last month to distract the ongoing opposition movement".

In Pakistan too, Muslims used the Ayodhya news as an occasion for
temple-burning, rape, murder, and looting. The Indian secularist papers
highlighted the Pak army intervention in Quetta (Baluchistan), in which
two Muslim rioters were shot dead. However, in Dera Murad Jamali, *"the
police was unable to control the mob"*, which ransacked fifteen shops
belonging to Hindus and set a temple on fire. Little was said about the
large-scale outbursts in sindh. In Latifabad and Hyderabad , at least
three temples were destroyed, in neighbouring Siroghat the Rama Pir
temple was looted and set on fire, etc. Islamic student organizations
also took the occasion to attack a Christian school and church in
Peshawar.

Of course, Pakistan didn't take this as an occasion for being criticized
(in fact, official India has only reacted to the Pak interference, but,
as always, it has failed to criticize the persecution of Hindus).
Rather, it was on the offensive, constantly feeding its citizens gory
stories of a mosque being demolished and Muslims being oppressed by
India's Hindu government. So Pakistan lectured India about human rights,
religious freedom, secularism. The Senate Committee on Religious and
Minority Affairs *took serious note of the desecration of the Babri
Masjid in India*, and referred to the Liaqat- Nehru pact, which promised
safeguards to the minorities in both India and Pakistan. Adds
commentator Aabha Dixit : *"The committee, however, maintained a
deafening silence on the need for Islamabad to fulfill its part of the
obligation."*[⁴⁷](notes.htm#note47)

To the credit of the secularist People's Union for Civil Liberties, it
must be said that they have protested against Pak interference : *"The
Pakistani leaders must clearly understand that theirs is a theocratic
state where religious and other minorities are denied fundamental
freedoms including the freedom to worship..."*[⁴⁸](notes.htm#note48)

In Nepal, the Hindu kingdom, some five Hindu temples were burnt down by
Muslim gangs, who had probably come over from Bihar. No official
protests from any side have been reported.

Some secularists have made a confession : *"The trouble, both in
Bangladesh and in Pakistan, might have been averted if the media had not
played up the Ayodhya incidents in highly provocative and exaggerated
tones."*[⁴⁹](notes.htm#note49)

Not that journalists have suddenly become modest and self-critical :
these Indian journalist are just blaming their Pak and Bangla
colleagues. However, it is they themselves who are most to blame for
precisely those undeontological practices they mention. They themselves
have highly provoked Muslims into action by telling them that *a mosque*
(in fact mosque architecture functioning as a Hindu temple) was about to
be *demolished* (relocated, was the BJP/VHP plan). And they themselves
have exaggerated, to say the least, by describing the Hindus as
*extremists* and even *fascists*, who systematically start riots against
the wretched Indian Muslims. The disinformation on which the Pakistani
Muslims have acted, was not only there in their own papers, but just as
much in the Times of India or the Illustrated Weekly of India.

The following is quoted as an example of distorted reporting in Pak
papers : **A wave of anti-Muslim riots has engulfed all corners of India
these days and more than 50 cities are under curfew. Despite this,
however, Muslims are being killed mercilessly...**[⁵⁰](notes.htm#note50)
In India, this is something of a standard secularist column phrase on
riots (see [ch.11](ch11.htm)). And Aabha Dixit adds a comment on Pak
reporting : **The headlines only refer to the desecration of the Babri
mosque. There is never a mention of the Hindus who fall to police
bullets.** Replace headlines with editorials, and this describes the
situation in Indian secularist papers.

It is not only the papers who have broadcast lies about Ayodhya. They
were hand in glove with the secularist political establishment. As V.K.
Malhotra, BJP national secretary, remarked : *"The responsibility for
what has happened in Pakistan and Bangla Desh is entirely that of the
Union and U.P. governments. They have been making so much anti-Hindu
propaganda on this issue that those countries are getting all the excuse
for this."*[⁵¹](notes.htm#note51)

Incidentally, for those who believe in SAARC and in Indo- Pak
friendship, it may be interesting to hear the comment of Abdul Qayyum
Khan, the *president* of Pak-occupied Kashmir. He said the controversy
was *"paying the way for a movement \[in India\] for an independent and
liberated Islamic country within India"*.[⁵²](notes.htm#note52)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
