+++
title = "10 9.1  Separatism and anti-Hinduism"

+++
# 9. Secularism and India's integrity

## 9.1 Separatism and anti-Hinduism

In the present context, the link between history-writing and actual
politics is extra-ordinarily strong. Witness the crucial role of the
Aryan invasions theory in the secularist and casteist/Ambedkarist
ideologies, as earlier in the missionary and colonial ideologies. In
fact, I can not think of any situation in world history where
history-writing was so intertwined with both long- term political
philosophy and short-term political equations. This is partly because an
unusually large chunk of India's history is fundamentally under debate,
either because it has not yet been mapped (so many unknowns may be
decided on overnight once the Indus script is conclusively deciphered),
or because it has been questioned for ideological reasons even while
well- established (like the denial of Islam's utterly destructive role).
Nowhere else can so much be read into history according to one's
ideological compulsions, because nowhere else is so much history so
undecided and disputed.

This link between the two, history and politics, works in both
directions. Secularism as a political philosophy is intellectually
dependent upon the secularist version of history. Conversely, once
secularism as the official state ideology is fully discredited,
secularist history- writing cannot survive for long. Now in fact,
Nehruvian secularism as a political philosophy has effectively lost its
credibility. It has proven worthless as a national motivating force and
as a moral framework, judging by the many forms of corruption at every
level. It has proven unable to create a secular national unity
*(Bharatiyatva, Indian-ness)*. Secularists go on lambasting the Ram
devotees that with their Janmabhoomi demand they cannot expect the
minorities to remain in India, that they are driving the minorities to
separatism. This contention unfortunately draws an objective outsider's
attention to the fact that these minority separatisms are already there.

There are Muslim, Sikh, Communist and Christian separatist movements who
carry on an armed struggle against the Indian secular republic. The
Dravidian movement in Tamil Nadu has, after the Chinese invasion in
1962, decided to limit itself to demands within the Constitution, and to
drop its separatism ; however, with the DMK talking of the need to go
*back to the roots*, and depending on the outcome for the Tamils in Sri
Lanka, it might reassert its separatist tendencies. It is significant
that it was Annadurai, the least anti-Hindu among the Dravidian leaders
(he supported the RSS in putting up the Vivekananda Rock Memorial,
against the Christians) who called off the separatist programme.

There are also Dalit fringe groups who demand a separate Dalitastan or
Achootistan. Some of these groups are militantly atheist (like the
Dravidian movement), some are Christian-or Muslim-leaning, some profess
Buddhism of the Ambedkarite variety. The one thing that all these
separatist movements without exception have in common at the ideological
level, is their hatred of Hinduism. Every separatist movement in India
is an anti-Hindu movement.

In fact, as I write this, the papers report on pamphlets being spread
among the tribals in Gujarat, demanding for a separate tribal state
Bhilistan, as well as for five more tribal states in other parts of
India. And what is the punch line in the pamphlet ? Exactly : *"We are
not Hindus"*. Of course, the number of tribals rallied behind this
demand may not exceed a handful, but the point that separatism in India
invariably implies anti-Hinduism is certainly corroborated.

The Hindus may profess secularism as much as they want : for their
enemies they are still too Hindu. And their enemies will try to separate
from them from the very day they feel strong enough to do it, in order
to create a Pakistan, a Khalistan etc. Secularism, which is purely a
negative ideology, which merely divorces one of the strongest motivating
forces in an individual's life from public life, is proving incapable of
overcoming these separatisms.

I am not saying that all minorities ipso facto harbour separatist
tendencies and will invariably launch a separatist movement if
strategically given a chance. The Parsis or the Jains are not going to
start their own Khalistan agitation, I am sure. The ordinary members of
the Christian community, everywhere where it is living mixed with other
communities (i.e. except in parts of the Northeast), have a constructive
attitude and are, as far as I can see, increasingly being absorbed into
the *mainstream*. Among the Sikhs too, the separatist movement can still
not claim a majority of the community as supporters of the Khalistan
cause. And among the Muslims, it is only in Kashmir that they massively
support separation from India. I have to agree with the remark of some
secularist, that the Muslims who stayed behind in India in 1947, in a
sense *"voted for India with their feet"*. All I am saying is that those
who are bent on creating a separate communal state, will want to do so
regardless of whether the Hindus call themselves Hindu or secular.

Therefore, V.P. Singh missed the point when he declared on Doordarshan
(with an explicitness that bordered on incitement) that, if the Hindus
claimed the Ram Janmabhoomi, there was no ground for stopping the Sikhs
from demanding Khalistan, and other such separatist demands. The
separatists have not waited until the Hindu mobilization for Ram
Janmabhoomi to start their anti- India movement ;nor will they call it
off if the Hindus call off the Janmabhoomi campaign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 9.2 Secularist-separatist nexus

The nexus between the anti-Janmabhoomi demand and anti- Hindu
separatism, has been worked out more closely by Tavleen Singh in her
article Apocalypse Soon.[¹²²](notes.htm#note122) Let us take a close
look at her analysis and prediction. She starts out by mentioning the
opinion, fairly common in Pakistan, that India should be partitioned
once more, and a big chunk of the North given to the India Muslims.
Since Ayodhya, she thinks that this prospect has acquired a grim chance
of materialization. After all, the VHP Hindus have become so fanatical
that they think : *"We will have to get rid of these Muslims. They must
be kicked out and sent to Pakistan, after all it was made for them."*
So, on the Hindu side, we have strong words.

On the Muslim side, according to Tavleen Singh, the radicalization has
already gone a big step further. Just a week before, the Muslim Personal
Law Board has issued a religious sanction to fight, if necessary, for
the Babri Masjid. *"All God-fearing Muslims will consider it their
religious duty to participate in the new jihad. This would lead
automatically to the internationalizing of the dispute... If the mosque
is knocked down, \[not only Pakistan but\] many an oil-fat Arab country
would be only too willing to come to the defense of the faith."*

What is our secularist commentator implying ? That India should let its
policy on Ayodhya be sidetracked at the Muslim countries' gunpoint ?
Politically, it is a concession (i.e. a reward and an encouragement) to
threats of coercion and aggression, if the Ayodhya or Kashmir policies
are made dependent on the assent of mujahedin either inside India or in
the Muslim countries. Strategically however, it is very useful and
timely, that an unsuspected secularist points to the danger of jihad.
While Hindus would be politically justified in ignoring such
undemocratic and terrorist threats, in terms of strategy they should
think twice before provoking a reaction for which they are not prepared.

When the Shilanyas ceremony took place, thirty-five Muslim countries
have protested. At that time, there was no call for jihad. If we add
pan-Islamic solidarity to the call for jihad, then India is in for some
serious trouble. However, at the time of writing, no Islamic country has
voiced any threat against India. So far it is only the secularists who
have tried to intimidate the Ram Mandir campaigners with threats of
international Muslim retaliation.

As part of the same effort, they have also been accusing the Ram
activists of endangering the safety of the Hindus in Muslim countries.
This effectively means that, in the secularists' perception, those
minority Hindus are really hostages, and the secularists are supporting
the anti-Janmabhoomi demands of the hostage-takers, the Muslim
majorities in Pakistan, Bangla Desh, Malaysia. *"Be good, otherwise
something very unpleasant will happen"*, so the secularists say,
repeating the canonical line of hostage-takers.

Even if those countries with Hindu minorities are Islamic republics,
they still have laws against looting, arson, temple- destruction, and
rape and slaughter of citizens even if these belong to the minorities.
Moreover, India has treaties with Pakistan (inherited also by its
partial successor state Bangla Desh) concerning the safety of the
minorities. As for actual jihad from Muslim countries against India,
there are international treaties (as well Nehru's famous *"five
principles of peaceful co- existence"*, accepted by the Non-Aligned
Movement to which many Muslim countries belong) prescribing respect for
a nation's sovereignty, and guaranteeing non-interference in internal
affairs, and non-aggression. All these safeguards against aggression on
Hindus and India are a juridical reality.

However, in the present discourse, our secularists have exchanged these
realities belonging to the level of Right, for the logic of brute Power.
They choose to treat the situation not in juridical but in strategic
terms. Maybe they are right. But then it implies that *"the friendship
with the Arab countries that Nehru so wisely built"*, which in the
spring of 1990 had seemed to hold out against Pakistan's attempt to
rally support for its claim on Kashmir, is not resistant even to the
Ayodhya affair, i.e. the relocation of one non-mosque. What kind of
*friendship* is this, where a sovereign act can get punished with jihad
? To say the least, this is not a tribute to Nehru's international
legacy by his otherwise devout followers.

This jihad will also (if not primarily) come from inside India : *"Even
on a domestic level, there are likely to be serious problems. So far, we
have been spared Muslim terrorist groups, at least outside Kashmir, but
for how long ?"* Tavleen Singh even quotes *a Muslim leader* saying :
*"Once Muslims feel that the state is not going to protect them and they
are on their own, it is only a question of time before they start doing
what the Sikhs are doing in Punjab. As it is, when we visit a town after
a communal riot, people say : if the police wasn't there, we could take
the Hindus on."*

It is an interesting though experiment, what Tavleen Singh presents
here. Some people will say that already the riots are mostly started by
Muslims and that they too are a form of terror. Even if that is true,
there is still an essential difference with a real terrorist campaign :
there is no well-defined and persistent demand animating each of those
separate instances of violence. What would the explicit objective be
around which an all- India Muslim terrorist campaign would rally ? Does
she really think that this miserable non-mosque is a sufficient occasion
to get such a terrorist campaign going ?

Then Tavleen Singh assesses the Sikh reaction. In Amritsar, she talked
to a lot of Sikh *militant* leaders, who *almost all of them* brought up
the Ayodhya issue. Incidentally, I know decent anti-fanatical Sikhs who
would get killed if they went near Tavleen's militant friends, merely
because they call terrorists by their proper name. In November 1990, the
Sikh terrorists have issued orders to the press, one of these being that
no negative terms like *terrorist* can be applied to
them.[¹²³](notes.htm#note123) It struck me that most secularists in the
press are not affected by the death threats issued to journalists who
don't fall in line, because they already use the terrorist-friendly (or
at least neutral) language. It does not in the least surprise me that
Tavleen Singh is on such good terms with the *militants*. After all, the
main plank in the separatist and the secularist platforms is the same :
*We are not Hindus*.

So, the militants told her that *"they felt now that the struggle for
Khalistan was entirely justified because if the minorities in India
could not even be ensured protection for their places of worship then
Indian secularism is nothing but a lie"*. This statement calls for some
serious comment.

Let me point out first of all that no place of worship of any minority
is threatened by the building of the Ram Mandir. The place has already
been a functioning Hindu temple since 1949. If at that time it was a
functioning mosque (which is very doubtful, see
[ch.4.1.](ch4.htm#ch.4.1)), then a minority place of worship was not
properly protected at that time, in 1949, the glory years of Jawaharlal
Nehru. But now that it is a Hindu temple of long standing, the whole
affair really concerns a simple architectural reform entirely internal
to the Hindu community. It is the fault of press people like Tavleen
Singh, that people inside and outside India have come to believe that a
mosque is threatened.

As the Chinese philosopher Confucius has pointed out, we can only begin
to set the world in order, if we call things by their proper names. This
whole Ayodhya problem would not have existed if secularist politicians
and intellectuals had called the disputed building a non- mosque and an
effective Hindu temple. Because that is what it is : a building
containing idols is by definition not a mosque, and a building not used
for namaz is in effect not a mosque. But a building where Hindus come to
worship idols, is called a temple or Mandir.

But now the damage has been done. With their false language, the
secularists have convinced crores of people that the Ayodhya dispute is
a struggle between majority Mandir and minority Masjid. So, the
*militants* think that the minorities are under threat.

The second damage that has been done, with full co- operation of the
secularists, is that the status of Sikhism as a separate religion has
become firmly established in the minds of many Sikhs. This separate
status is entirely a British fabrication, later amplified by Sikh who,
like many Hindus, had come to think that being a Hindu is a shameful
thing. The Sikhs have always been one of Hinduism's many panths (sects).
The claim to being a separate religion, which is now being propped up in
many anti-Hindu books, has been conclusively disposed of by Rajendra
Singh Nirala, an ex-granthi who came to realize that what the Akalis
told him was not the same as what he used to recite from the
Granth.[¹²⁴](notes.htm#note124)

Nonetheless, it is the secularists, including Khushwant Singh (the
*dirty old man* of Indian secularism), who have been championing the
Sikhs' right to preserve their communal
identify.[¹²⁵](notes.htm#note125) As if any Hindu has challenged that
right or even just asked them to drop their distinctive ways : it is not
Hindu pressure, but the impact of modernity that was making Sikhs shed
those outer emblems that constitute their distinctness. It is again the
secularists who, with their anti-Hindu propensities have laid the blame
for Sikh separatism at the door of those Hindus who restate the
demonstrable historical truth that Sikhs are nothing but a Hindu sect.
*Assimilative communalism*, they call it. When Hindu historians point
out the radical and irreducible difference between Hinduism and the
closed monotheistic creeds like Islam, they are dubbed *communalists*;
but when the same people point out the radical sameness of Sikhism and
other varieties of Hinduism, then for that they are again dubbed
*communalists*.

Anyway, the situation today is that the armed *representatives* of the
Sikh community (remark that Tavleen Singh only quotes *militant* Sikhs :
in the strategic assessment they are indeed the ones who count) consider
themselves a separate non-Hindu minority, and identify with the Muslim
communalist viewpoint on Ayodhya. They don't want to see anymore how
many times the name Ram is reverentially mentioned in the Guru Granth
Sahib[¹²⁶](notes.htm#note126), and what horror Guru Nanak has expressed
at Babar's Islamic acts of mass slaughter However, it is yet something
else to suggest (as they seem to do) a causal relation between the Ram
Janmabhoomi movement and the fact that *"they felt now that the struggle
for Khalistan was entirely justified"*.

The contention that the Ayodhya events could add one percent to their
100% dedication to the Khalistan cause, is nothing but rhetoric. If the
Hindus give up their Ram Mandir, the Khalistani terrorists will not fire
one bullet less, let alone give up their demand for Khalistan. Before
the Ram Mandir became hot news, they already felt *justified* in killing
dozens of people every week, for Khalistan. Postulating a causal link
between Ram Janmabhoomi and Khalistani terrorism, is just a ploy to lay
the blame for their communalist crimes at someone else's door. And of
course, the secularists, from V.P. Singh to Tavleen Singh, rhetorically
support them in their ploy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 9.3 Victory through more concessions ?

Passing the buck from the machinegun-wielding communalists in the
Khalistani camp, to the Ram campaigners with their tridents and Ram
hymns, Tavleen Singh writes : *"Ironic, isn't it, that those who believe
that Ayodhya has become the symbol of Indian nationalism and that
Hindutva is virtually synonymous with patriotism, could well be
responsible for dividing the country once more."* Ironic, isn't it, that
those who lecture others on being responsible for dividing the country,
and who declare that secularism is virtually synonymous with patriotism,
are effectively giving the armed separatists a good conscience by
putting the blame for their communalist crimes on people who merely want
to renovate their own Ram temple.

By now, the reader should understand fully why Tavleen Singh is such a
welcome guest in *militant* circles. The Khalistani terrorists say : If
you can have your Ram Mandir, we must have our Khalistan. And Tavleen
Singh says : If you really want your Ram Mandir, you should be ready for
Khalistan. The terrorists don't talk in terms of rights, but in military
power terms (*"facing the consequences"*). Tavleen Singh helps us think
about the matter in those same terms.

Tavleen Singh's pious advice to the Janmabhoomi activists is this : *"A
temple built beside the mosque would be a far more powerful symbol of
Indian nationalism than a temple built in place of a mosque."* Well how
utterly ignorant. In the 18th and 19th century, the Hindus worshipped
Ram on a platform just next to the Babri Masjid. That didn't stop the
Muslims from attacking the nearby Hanumangarhi temple in 1855. The
Hindus accommodated themselves with the mosques that replaced the Hindu
temples in Mathura and Varanasi, by building a temple next to them :
that didn't stop the Muslim League from creating Pakistan and committing
countless atrocities on the Hindus. When in 1905 the Akalis threw out
the *"Hindu"* idols from their Gurudwara, Pandit M.M. Malaviya refrained
from even protesting, and built a new idol temple next to it. That
didn't stop the Akalis from developing into a separatist movement.

So, one more Hindu concession, viz. building the new temple next to the
existing structure, is certainly not a *"powerful"* symbol. It may be
nice, it may be harmless, but it is by no means powerful. India is full
of examples (not mere symbols) of Hindu accommodation, but that has not
stopped the separatist movements from multiplying and hardening their
demands. The Indian Constitution is a mighty case of Hindu accommodation
to some minorities' demands for privileges, but that hasn't stopped the
Khalistanis from burning it, nor has it stopped the Babri Masjid
movement from calling for a boycott of Republic Day 1987.

If the Muslims would finally take their turn at making concessions, and
agree to let the Hindus build their Mandir, and then build their own
Masjid next to it, that would indeed be a powerful symbol of Indian
nationalism.

But Tavleen Singh is fooling someone if she thinks that yet another
Hindu concession is going to mollify any armed
separatist.[¹²⁷](notes.htm#note127) Such people have only respect for
strength. In fact, even ordinary people have more respect for strength
than for pliability. All these cries of *"We are not Hindus"*, which are
mostly coupled with separatist demands, are partly the result of the
over-all image of weakness which Hinduism has continued to acquire
during the last few centuries. Nobody wants to belong to such a weak
community with so little self- respect. The day Hinduism shows strength,
all these separatists will proudly declare : *"We are Hindus"*. They
will even shout at each other: *"We are better Hindus than you"*.

Summing up, we must thank Tavleen Singh for not pontificating about
secular principles, and for rightly pointing out that this is fast
becoming a matter of strength more than of principles. Guns are pointed
at India, or rather at Hindu India, and if Hindus don't behave nicely,
they will *justify* Khalistani terrorism and *provoke* Muslim terrorism,
and then *"we need to be prepared to deal with the spread of the AK-47
on an undreamed-of scale"*.

What does this state of affairs have to say about four decades of
secularism ? Apparently, something has gone wrong. Let us take a closer
look at that peculiarly Indian variety of secularism. We need to plunge
deep into fundamentals and initiate a thorough diagnosis, because this
patient is gravely ill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
