+++
title = "11 10.1.  Its definition"

+++
# 10. Secularism as it is

## 10.1. Its definition

To start with the beginning, Indian secularism was borrowed from Europe.
There, secularism meant that society took the freedom to organize itself
without caring about the dogmas of the Churches. At the intellectual
level, it meant that thinkers took the freedom to independently
formulate insights regardless of their conformity with Church teachings.
This included the freedom to frontally criticize these Church teachings.

In the modern times when it became a political term, secularism meant
basically : freedom from religion. But then it did not mean a
state-enforced *freedom* from religion. It was not totalitarianism, the
freedom of the authorities to meddle in people's intimate beliefs or
commitments. Freedom means having the options to take something or to
leave it. The communist effort to weed out religion has never gone by
the name of secularism, it was called totalitarianism.

So, secularism rather means freedom regarding religion : the freedom to
take it or to leave it (freedom without a choice between alternatives is
hardly freedom). By guaranteeing this freedom, secularism subjects the
adherence or submission to the tenets of a religion to individual
choice. Secularism recognizes the logical priority of the individual's
choice to follow a religion, to this religion's actual claim on the
individual's adherence.

By placing the free choice of the individual above the duties or dogmas
imposed by religion, secularism has done enough to emancipate man from
religion. Man can choose a religious view or commitment rather than
having it imposed on him. In that sense, secularism does not mean
anti-religious activism. It only means subjecting religion to human
choice, which was revolutionary enough in the European context of Church
power trying to impose itself.

Since the individual's freedom of choice regarding religion or
Weltanschauung was made the norm, the state authority was bound to
neutrality in these matters. Imposing any view of the ultimate,
including atheism, was precisely what the state was prevented from doing
by secularism. Yet, some Marxists in India have called this simple
concept of state neutrality regarding religion a *non-modern* concept of
secularism. They think the state should actively campaign against
religion.[¹²⁸](notes.htm#note128)

If any concept of secularism is *non-modern*, it is the feudal concept
that the people are not capable of thinking for themselves, and that a
priesthood should be empowered to drill the new world view (such as
atheism) into them and to persecute and otherwise fight any alternative
views. What is modern, what is the essence of modernity, is not the
belief that a certain belief system should be imposed on the people by
the state ; on the contrary, it is the confidence in human freedom, in
free exploration, in man's capability of learning for himself from his
own experience.

So, secularism as a political term means : neutrality of the government
in religious matters. That is all. Secularism does not mean that the
state promotes one belief system, it means that the state limits itself
to guaranteeing the individual's freedom to find out about these matters
for himself. That at least is the correct meaning of the term
*"secularism"* as it has historically developed in the West, in a period
when individual freedom was considered the topmost value. If one chooses
secularism as a component for a state system, it remains to be seen how
this fundamental concept is worked out in the details of a secular
Constitution, but that state neutrality and respect for the individual's
intellectual and religious freedom should be the spirit of such a
Constitution, is certain.

About the origin of the term, this much should be known. The Latin word
saeculum, exactly like the Hebrew word olam ( Arabic alam), means : time
cycle, eternity, era, world. From *era*, the more common meaning
*century* is derived. For Sanskrit equivalents, one would think of
kalpa, and of samsara. As a synonym for secular, the word temporal is
sometimes used ; as its antonym, spiritual or eternal. These terms have
entered the modern languages mostly via Church parlance.

Originally, *"secular"* as a political term does not imply non-religion,
or freedom from religion, or any specific attitude to religion
whatsoever. In fact, the source of the term's political meaning is a
case of Church terminology. Among priests, regular priests are rule-
bound, i.e. monastic, and fully dedicated to spiritual life, while
secular priests are worldly i.e. involved in world-oriented or
*temporal* duties, especially as parish priest. Both are religious, but
regulars have a spirit- oriented and seculars a world-oriented
life.[¹²⁹](notes.htm#note129)

In its acquired political meaning, secularism, being a doctrine
concerning the state, leaves any spirit-oriented choices to the
individual, and limits the state to pursuing world oriented objectives.
Secularism does not limit the individual who is left free to pursue
religion, with the state guaranteeing this freedom. Secularism limits
the state, and prevents it from espousing other causes than its worldly
functions. Secularism limits the state's authority over the individual
to the latter's behaviour, and refuses it access to his
mind.[¹³⁰](notes.htm#note130)

In a larger context of civilizational philosophy, we may criticize the
essentially individualistic character of this historically developed,
visibly European secularism. But for the time being, if at all one wants
to practice secularism, I think this is the sane and genuine variety, as
opposed to the existing alternative, the totalitarian attempts to weed
out religion from people's minds and private lives.

Dictatorship is an unrestricted (as opposed to a restricted, esp. by
democratic feedback) claim on people's lives. Totalitarianism is
stronger, it is a claim on people's minds. The demand voiced by a
section of the Indian *secularists*, that the state be used in order to
spread atheism, is the product of a totalitarian mentality. It is
moreover a clear aberration of the modern concept of secularism as it
has historically taken shape in Europe. So to the extent that there is
no conceptual apparatus outside the *modern* Europe- originated thought
categories, secularism should be defended in its genuine European sense,
against the Stalinist perversion of *secularism* that still has quite a
following in India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.2 Hindu secularism

Concerning secularism, there is however another discussion going on : is
it true that Hindu culture is intrinsically
secular?[¹³¹](notes.htm#note131) Not only many Hindu leaders, even Javed
Habib, one of the BMAC leaders, is no record as saying : *"India has
survived as a secular nation because the majority is
Hindu."*[¹³²](notes.htm#note132) And is there not within Hindu tradition
an alternative, if not superior or more adapted, type of secularism?

When we say that secularism is in a sense a very individual-centered
doctrine, we must realize that that is not a very alien thing to Hindu
culture. While Hindu culture historically has its basis in a strong
community structure, with joint family, gotra, jati, varna, as grades of
integration between the individual and society as a whole, in matters of
religion it has always been individualistic. There is no regular group
gathering in temples prescribed in Hindu tradition. Of course, there are
social rituals surrounding life events like marriage and cremation, and
religious festivals, and for these the community congregates. But the
innermost and actually religious level of Hindu culture is an individual
affair. And it could not have been otherwise. Action and ritual may be
community affairs, but the basis of real religion is a culture of
consciousness, and consciousness is individual.

In Islam and Christianity, any concept of consciousness culture is very
marginal. Of course, when saying prayers with genuine intent, people are
in fact practicing a kind of bhakti yoga. These Pagan elements that
treat religion as a matter of individual mental experience, are
unavoidable and in fact indispensable in any religion, because they
spring from man's intrinsic religious instinct.

In Christianity these elements of a culture of inner life have sometimes
appeared, but the stray occasions of Christian *mysticism* have never
developed into a systematized tradition, because the Church opposed it.
The Church correctly saw in this culture of consciousness an implicit
Pagan doctrine of liberation from ignorance through meditation, contrary
to the Christian doctrine of salvation from sin through Christ.

Islam too knows of consciousness culture only through the Pagan infusion
of Sufism. Doctors of Islam like Al- Ghazali and Ibn Taymiyyah correctly
rejected mysticism as unfounded in the Quran and the traditions of the
Prophet : these don't teach any technique of access of the individual to
a spiritual reality, but on the contrary claim for the Prophet a sole
and final intercessory status between God and man. All that Islam wants
its followers to do, is to perform certain actions (saying prayers,
giving alms, participating in jihad), it does not at all focus on any
culture or exploration of individual consciousness.

In Hindu culture, even in its most unsophisticated popular forms, this
focus on individual consciousness is always there. No group prayers,
one's religious experience is one's personal affair. Therefore, the
concept of leaving religion to the care of the individual, with no
authority above him empowered to dictate beliefs or religious practices,
which in the West constituted a cultural revolution called secularism,
is nothing new to Hindu culture.

This is not an idealization but a firm reality : no matter what the
*"evils of Hindu society"* may have been, subjecting the individual's
freedom of religion to any public authority is not one of them. No
wonder that Voltaire, who strongly opposed the Church's totalitarian
grip over men's lives, and may count as one of the ideologues of
secularism, mentioned the religions of India and China as a model of how
religion could be a free exploration by the individual.

So, religion is a personal affair. The Hindu state has no right to
forbid or promote any religious doctrine (the way Ashok, the hero of the
Nehruvians, is said to have promoted Buddhism). And religious
organizations have no say in political decision-making.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.3. Marxism and secularism

Marxists reject as *non-modern* the Gandhian conception of secularism as
*"equal respect for all religions"* (about which, see
[ch.10.6](ch10.htm#ch10.6)). And they defy Mahatma Gandhi where he said
that secularism should mean *"equal respect, not equal disrespect, for
all religions"*. The Leftists' version of secularism quite certainly
intends *"equal disrespect for all religions"*.

Indian Leftist intellectuals (I am not aware of the existence of leftist
proletarians in India) do advocate a deliberate policy of eradicating
religion from the people's consciousness. You do not hear a lot of this
long-term project, but occasionally yet another *Platform for
Secularism* (or Action Committee, or People's Rally, etc., for
Secularism) is set up, and then they announce their demand that
religious TV programmes be banned, that any presence of religious
symbols or texts at state functions be banned, that use of state
buildings for any religious event be banned, that religious education be
banned from schools set up to impart secular education, etc. Since
Marxists dismiss freedom as a bourgeois- liberalist illusion, they don't
feel inhibited in making bans and suppression their central demands.

Of course, the Marxist programme of using state power to eradicate
religion is, in the countries where it has been practiced, a memory
[¹³³](notes.htm#note133) of horror as well as an outrageous failure. It
is totally objectionable and we will not waste any more paper on it.
However, we do have to deal with the rationale for this intention, which
gives them a good conscience in advocating an all-out government
campaign against religion.

The Marxists start from Marx' perception that religion is an
anti-rational superstition from the primitive age, and an *opium of the
people* which prevents men from living in reality and emancipating
themselves.

Let us start with the opium part. It is quite correct that religion,
like drug-taking, is practiced in order to have a certain mental
experience. And it is a fact that people spend a lot of time and money
on arranging for such mental experiences. A missionary told me that he
has a very hard time to extract from the villagers one Rupee per month
for the upkeep of the village well, but when someone comes from the city
with a video-set and some films, they can all take out five Rupees to
spend a Sunday watching films. A mental kick is worth a lot more to
people than the necessities of humdrum existence. That is why people can
spend vast sums on a Durga Puja or some such religious festival, only to
throw the Murti into the river at the end of the festival.

But the difference is that religion, in its best sense, is not a
benumbing drug. Religious consciousness is not amnesia,
forgetfulness.[¹³⁴](notes.htm#note134) It is quite the opposite, it is
an awakening. In its more profound dimension, it is an awakening to the
inner reality. In its more outward dimension, the festivals and rituals,
it is an awakening to and a celebration of the world's time-cycles and
life-cycles, an explicitation of participation in the world order (the
Vedic concept of Rta). It is a very successful and time-tested way of
giving colour and meaning to our existence. It breaks through the grey
and prosaic life that the Communists want to impose on us.

But the Marxists think that religion is an evil, because it is
anti-reason ; while reason is a good in itself, which moreover
emancipates man by equipping him with the intellectual as well as
technological means to determine his own destiny. Now this notion of
reason and religion stems from a specifically European situation, that
conditioned Marx' thought about religion. The fact that Indian Marxists
have simply transposed Marx' limited view to the Indian situation is
just another example of how dogmatic Marxists generally are. It also
shows how utterly ignorant the Indian Leftist (and generally secularist)
intelligentsia is of India's home-grown religious culture.

*"Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."* That is what
Saint Paul said, borrowing it from many Pagans before him. It was an
injunction to practice religion. And yet, it could be the motto of
Reason.[¹³⁵](notes.htm#note135) What Saint Paul meant with this dictum
is a different chapter, but fact is that Pagan religions saw themselves
as a culture of truth, as an exploration, as an experience, not at all
as a belief in a set of dogmas.

By the time Marx was writing, the dominant religion taught man something
very different from seeking out the truth for himself. The Protestants
(to which Marx' family formally belonged) as well as the Jews (of whom
Marx' father used to be one, before conversion for careerist reasons)
extracted their doctrines from Scripture. Reason was to be used in
interpreting Scripture, but it was not radical and autonomous. The
Catholics paid much less attention to Scripture, but were subject to
Church tradition and the doctrinal authority of the Holy See ; Catholic
philosophy was equally barred from being a radical and autonomous
exploration by Reason.

It is a Christian curiosity that *religion* connotes authoritative
Church teaching, or Scripture teaching, and therefore implies *belief*.
That is why, in the European Enlightenment context, the dichotomy
secular/non-secular has come to connote rational/non-rational, or
reason/belief. For instance, *secular morality* is usually taken to mean
*"morality not based on scriptural belief, but rationally founded in the
human experience"*. However, it must be stressed that this connotation
of secular/non-secular with reason/belief results from a Christian
peculiarity, viz. the appropriation of the entire spiritual as well as
ethical domain by the Church, sole guardian of Salvation.

A second typical element that made religion as Marx knew it, into an
*opium*, was this notion of the Hereafter. While many cultures have
believed in a life after death, some even in an eternal such life, it is
typical for Christianity (as opposed to even Judaism) that this
afterlife was treated as the hour of truth, as the life that really
matters, and of which the quality depends on your conduct (sometimes
taken to mean passive acceptance of your position and obedience to the
worldly authorities) in this finite time in the lower world.

So, in order to bring man back to the verifiable reality of this life,
and in order to make him fully use and explore reason, the belief in
infallible Church dogma or in infallible Revealed Scripture had to be
abolished. Since no religion was known to Marx except the anti- rational
belief systems based on Revelation and Dogma, the struggle for Reason
and against belief in Dogma and Revelation, seemingly became a struggle
against religion. In that context, secularism could be seen as more than
a separation of politics and religion, not as the best way of letting
the two domains flourish on their own terms, but as an offensive of
anti-religious reason against anti-rational beliefs. The secularization
of the state was then not seen as the full realization of the desired
separation of politics and religion but only as a step in an ongoing
offensive against religion: from a full control of religion, via a
secularized state, to a full destruction of religion even in the private
sphere. If religion is an evil, why stop at chasing it from the public
domain ? It should be destroyed altogether.

To restore the term secularism to its fundamental meaning, we have to
take it out of this peculiar perception determined by the European
context. And we hasten to add that while secularism is an established
and unchallenged value in European culture today, the perception that
religion as such is an evil, is limited to certain ideological groups,
and by no means considered an integral part of secularism. Christians,
among them the dominant Christian-Democratic parties, have fully
accepted secularism as a state doctrine. This is of course due to the
influence which humanism has had on modern Christianity. Hardly any
Christian today believes he should impose his doctrines on others
through state power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.4. Real secularism through real religion

Secularism is fundamentally not a matter of reason versus belief.
Because religion is not intrinsically a matter of belief. The demand
that you believe that Jesus was the Saviour from original sin, and that
He was resurrected, and that He was God's only-begotten Son, or the
demand that you believe that Mohammed was Allah's final spokesman and
that the Quran is Allah's own word : these claims on human assent and
belief, even though they have grabbed a major part of the world, and
even though they have become synonymous with religion in the minds of
many millions, are a caricature of religion.

In the vast majority of religions that have existed in humanity's
history, beliefs were never a defining element. Of course, people had
their beliefs. But that did not put them either inside or outside the
community. Religion was not so much a matter of doctrine (which in turn
should not be reduced to belief), but of practice. There is on the one
hand the exploration of consciousness, which as such was mostly limited
to a class of adepts. This could involve an unsystematic seeking of
visions, as by taking hallucinogenic drugs, or it could be developed
into a systematic discipline. This was all a matter for experience, not
for dogma. There is on the other the outward aspect of religion, ritual.
What our modernists decry as *empty ritual* was not so empty at all. It
was a very effective way to order life, celebrate the cosmic cycles, and
consecrate the community.

As dr. Schipper, the Dutch sinologist and practicing Taoist priest, has
stressed, ritual is not a symbolic representation of a specific
doctrine.[¹³⁶](notes.htm#note136) Of course, philosophically-minded
practitioners may choose to shape ritual so as to physically reflect
certain cosmological conceptions. But that is not the point of ritual.
By far the most people in world history who have participated in
rituals, had little idea of any cosmological or otherwise doctrinal
content of the ritual, and yet it performed its function impeccably. A
new religious movement, back in the old days, meant not a new doctrine,
but a new ritual.

So, treating religion as a hotchpotch of beliefs that have no place in a
reason-oriented society, that should therefore be thrown out of the
public arena, and ultimately also chased out of the private sphere, is
based on a crude identification of religion with the crude belief
systems of Christianity and Islam. It is only when we discard these
narrow ideas about religion, when we broaden and deepen this
understanding of religion, to encompass more rational and humanist
religions than those two which happen to have conquered the world, that
we can have a correct understanding of secularism. It is their utterly
superficial notion of religion that has made the secularists devise such
a crude and despotic kind of *secularism*.

But are there then no objectively negative and harmful beliefs which a
secular state should actively endeavor to weed out ? It is a fact that
in the lower stretches of religion, which is a much-encompassing human
phenomenon, you find very base superstitions and practices (like
witchcraft, but I add that this meaning of the term does injustice to
the historical witches, women who had kept a lot of pre-Christian lore
alive, and were consequently blackened in Christian preaching and
writing, and burned at the stake). Where such things come in conflict
with public morality, health and the law of the land, the state has to
intervene on purely secular grounds. But when it comes to *"weeding out
superstitions"* from people's minds, then the secular state has to stand
aside and leave it to educators in the broadest sense of the term to
transform popular consciousness.

Thus, I don't believe the Indian state should wage a campaign against
superstitions like the belief that the Creator of the universe has
spoken through a prophet, or the belief that a section of humanity has a
God-given right to lord it over the unbelievers, or the belief that
there is merit in attacking the unbelievers that their religious
practices. Even if these beliefs have terrible consequences in the
secular filed, like Partitions and riots, it is not the duty of the
state to campaign against them.

Such superstitions which are in flagrant conflict with scientific
universalism, should be dealt with by intellectuals, and the state will
have done more than its share if it does not impede the broadcasting of
their criticism of these superstitions. The state should just refrain
from banning books eventhough they *hurt the feelings* of those steeped
in the said superstitions. It should refrain from pressurizing or
boycotting or prosecuting people who perform their legitimate task of
educating people concerning such superstitions. It should refrain from
imposing history-distortions on schoolbooks, i.e. from concealing the
truth about the evil effects of such superstitions. (That the Indian
state is so far not secular enough to refrain from this sabotage of the
intellectual struggle against superstition, is shown in [ch.
12](ch12.htm))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.5 Secularism and Chaturvarnya

The doctrine that the realm of thought and the realm of power have to be
scrupulously separated, is not an 18th- century European invention. It
is abundantly present in the Indian tradition. It is implied in a
doctrine and an institution which no-one dares to mention without
putting on a grimace of horror and uttering shrieks of indignation :
Chaturvarnya, usually mistranslated as *the caste system*.

I may briefly repeat that there is a radical distinction between the
division of Hindu society (as of some disappearing tribal societies) in
endogamous groups (castes or jatis), and the idealized division into
four *colours* (varnas), which historically has come to be superimposed
upon the actual division in castes. Within the varna ideology one should
make the distinction between its historically acquired hereditary
dimension[¹³⁷](notes.htm#note137) and its fundamental categorization of
the social function into four groups, each with its own duties.

So, when I mention varna, please don't start fuming about *Brahmin
tyranny* and the "*wretched condition of the downtrodden*". What I mean
is the distinction between four functions in society : Brahmin,
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, quite apart from the way in which the
personnel for these functions gets selected or the way they treat each
other.

It is a fact of life that "*the apple does not fall far from the tree*",
that children have a statistical tendency to resemble their parents, not
only in appearance but also in aptitudes. This trend is strengthened by
the traditional social setting, in which children would automatically
receive training in their parents' professional skills, in the family
business. Nevertheless, the relation between parents' and children's
aptitudes is only statistical : there are plenty of cases where young
people have a genuine desire for a different kind of profession.
Therefore, the Bhagavad Gita says (apparently against a swelling trend
to fix profession on birth) that not birth, but aptitude or quality
(guna) determines one's varna. The Buddha too said that moral conduct
and mental disposition, not birth, determined who is a
Brahmin.[¹³⁸](notes.htm#note138) So, the division of human society in
four varnas is distinct from its fixation into a hereditary caste
system.

Another important component of the varna ideology, is the strict
separation between the activities of the varnas. In the discussion of
indigenous Hindu secularism, we should draw attention to the separation
between the two authority-wielding varnas, the Brahmins and the
Kshatriyas. In the Varna ideology, the Brahmin is the man of knowledge,
whose authority is intellectual and universal : truth does not change
with crossing borders. The Kshatriya is the man of action, whose
authority is political and subject to limitation in time and space: his
authority lasts a legislature and is limited to a state.

The idea of separation between these two varnas can ideally be
understood as a separation between the *secular* domain of action and
politics, and the *non- secular* domain of knowledge and spirituality.
Like the separation between the three powers in the modern democracy
(legislative, executive and judicial), this separation between the
domain of power and the domain of the Word must be welcomed as the best
way of letting the two domains flourish
optimally.[¹³⁹](notes.htm#note139) The separation between the domain of
government and the sphere of thought is not a matter of universal
consensus : its antithesis is Plato's notion of the
"*philosopher-king*". This notion is contradictory as well as utopian
(which is why the thoroughly realistic social philosophy of Hinduism
rejects it), and the philosopher Karl Popper correctly saw it as the
ideological core of totalitarianism and as an "*enemy of free society*".

Swami Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo have sometimes described social and
political developments in varna terms. Thus, feudalism was Kshatriya
Raj, capitalism Vaishya Raj, and communism Shudra
Raj.[¹⁴⁰](notes.htm#note140) Even in all those countries where no jati
system exists, varna categories can be meaningfully applied. For
example, modern problems can be described as a mixing-up of caste
activities or attitudes. Commercial gurus like Rajneesh are a mix of
Brahmin and Vaishya (the profit-oriented varna), corrupt politicians are
a mix of Kshatriya and Vaishya.

For a poisonous mix of Kshatriya and Brahmin, a classic example is
Jawaharlal Nehru. He acted as a Brahmin where he should have been a
Kshatriya, and he wanted to use Kshatriya political power to push an
ideology and destroy other ideologies, something he should have left to
people in Brahmin functions.[¹⁴¹](notes.htm#note141)

When the Chinese invaded Tibet, action was called for, a Kshatriya
approach.[¹⁴²](notes.htm#note142) Instead, Nehru philosophized that the
Chinese felt strategically insecure, and that therefore their annexation
of Tibet was understandable.[¹⁴³](notes.htm#note143) But understanding
is a Brahmin's business, not the duty of a Kshatriya at the helm of a
state.

In his dealings with Pakistan too, he tried to "*see their viewpoint
also*", and consequently made concessions of which millions of Hindus
have suffered the consequences (handing over pieces of territory,
stopping the reconquest of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir when it was
succeeding, refraining from efforts to enforce the Pakistani part of the
Nehru-Liaqat pact). The duty of a ruler is not to see the other party's
viewpoint (in the political arena all parties are well capable of
looking after their own interests), but to take care of his own people's
interests.

The 1962 Chinese invasion was the final demonstration that Nehru was
singularly unfit to rule the country : instead of keeping an eye on
strategic realities, he was indulging in his ideological trip of
socialism and non- aligned "*peaceful co-existence*". This incurable
sleepwalker could have made a fine editor of a secularist paper, or some
such lower-end Brahmin job, but in Kshatriya functions like ruling a
country besieged by enemies, his qualities were quite misplaced.

So, the Brahmin and Kshatriya functions have to be kept separate. Rulers
should not wage ideological campaigns, they should govern the country
taking ideology-based realities as they are. On the other hand, in a
modern state, the ruler is constrained by a philosophy embodied in the
Constitution. And his decision are influenced by a general framework of
values and ideas. So there is also an intimate connection between
ideology and polity, between Brahmin and Kshatriya. More precisely :
there is a subordination of polity to ideology, though only to the
extent that the exigencies of the political reality leave room for
ideological choices.

In a sense, that is the application of the hierarchical principle
inherent in the varna doctrine : while there is equality in the sense
that the actual groupings in society, the jatis, should have a maximum
of internal autonomy (their own mores, their own judiciary), and that
all people have different duties according to their varna, and need not
be concerned with other people's duty, there is a hierarchy in the
functions of the varnas. The Shudra (the worker who serves an employer,
the artist who please an audience) is subordinate in the sense that he
is employed by the other varnas. The Vaishya citizenry is subordinate to
the public order enforced by the Kshatriya. And the Kshatriya rulers
are, in framing their policies, subordinate to the Brahmin realm of
literate culture and ideology. A policy necessarily stems from a social
philosophy, which in turn is integrated in a larger world-view. it is in
this functional co-operation that the different social functions
(varnas) of thought and government, are co- ordinated into a larger
social order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.6. Sarva Dharma Samabhava

The slogan "*Sarva dharma samabhava*", or "*equal respect for all
religions*" is not a part of Hindu tradition, it is a recent creation of
Mahatma Gandhi. One may of course argue that it is in the spirit of
Hindu tradition. But that is precisely the question : does "*equal
respect for all religions*" really sum up traditional Hindu secularism?

We need not go into the exact meaning of the word *dharma* here. The
Mahatma wrote and thought largely in English, and the original phrase is
the English one, so *dharma* merely figures as a translation of
*religion*. What he meant, was in effect: equal respect for Christianity
Islam and Hinduism.

Now, some people take this to mean that all religions are equally true.
It seems the Mahatma himself has on several occasions put it like that.
Latter-day cults like the Baha'i and the Ramakrishna Mission in its new
non-Hindu colours, declare that all Prophets, as well as their messages
and Scriptures, are "*equally true*". Of course, this is rank nonsense.

The utterances of *prophets* are just as much statements on which
logical operations are possible, as anyone else's statements. Of course,
where they use metaphors and other figures of speech, that special type
of language has to be taken into account, just as when non- prophets use
such language. but effectively, even prophets' statements can be true
and untrue, and if that is too hard to swallow, let us at least agree
that two prophetic statements can be in conflict, or logically
irreconcilable.

When Krishna says that it is always He who is the object of devotion, no
matter what the form of the mental and physical focus of worship may be
(such as gods and idols), he is in logical conflict with Mohammed who
declares that Allah does not tolerate other gods beside Himself and
wants idols to be destroyed. These two cannot be true at the same time.
Either these many forms are fit for worship, or they are not.

Now, one might try to be clever and say that at some higher logical
level, a synthesis of two opposites is possible. Alright : God's unity
and God's multiplicity through many forms are indeed compatible, are two
ways of looking at the same thing. But the point in exclusivist
doctrines is precisely that this synthesis is rejected. Only one
viewpoint takes you to heaven, all the others, and especially
syncretistic attempts to associate idolatrous viewpoints with the strict
monotheist viewpoint, lead straight to hell.

When two *prophets* give an opposite opinion on the same question, one
can still say that both were not really talking about the same thing,
because the cultural circumstances were different. Thus, some founders
taught non-violence and non-killing, including strict vegetarianism,
while others exhorted their followers to kill and gave the example
themselves, and sanctioned animal sacrifices. But then, what is
*prophethood* if it is so determined by cultural circumstances ? If the
one and eternal God had one plan for humanity and wanted to teach it his
one religion, why is He sending a Mahavira teaching absolute
non-violence to one place and a Mohammed teaching war to another place ?
It seems there is something wrong with the notion of *prophet* as an
agent sent by the one God.

One may distort history and say that the Indians to whom Mahavira
preached were less warlike than the Arabs to whom Mohammed preached.
This does injustice to both peoples, but mostly to the Pagan Arabs, who
were far more humane in their warfare than the Prophet ; but let us now
suppose it is true. Then what was the point of God sending prophets, if
He just gave the different peoples what they already had ? He sent the
Prophets precisely to change things. So, if He could, through Mohammed,
make the Arabs give up idolatry, totally alter the position of women,
and other such drastic changes, why didn't He also order them to become
vegetarians as He had done to the Indians long before via Mahavira ?

The answer is that Mahavira wasn't God's spokesman. His insight was
human, and he never pretended more than that.[¹⁴⁴](notes.htm#note144)
Anyone can see for himself that getting killed is an occasion of
suffering, so it is something one should not inflict on other sentient
beings : that is how non-violence can be thought up without needing
God's intervention. And the state of Liberation or Enlightenment which
Upanishadic teachers taught, was always presented as a state which
everyone can achieve, not as something which God has exclusively given
to this or that chosen prophet.

The truth is universal, and to the extent that religions hold up this
universal truth, they can be said to be *true*. But what constitutes the
difference between religions, is mostly the way and degree of putting
other things than the universal truth in the centre. Some religions take
the natural aspiration for truth in their followers, and then channel it
towards peculiar and exclusivistic doctrines that have little in common
with the universal truth.

Let us drop this pipe-dream that all religions are equally true. We may
say that the spiritual aspirations in human beings, regardless of the
culture they happen to be born into, are equally true. But the belief
systems that feed on this basic human urge for universal truth, often by
mis-educating and misdirecting man towards non- universalist beliefs,
cannot at all be said to be equally true.

It should be clear that "*Sarva dharma samabhava*", if interpreted as
"*equal truth of all religions*" oversteps the limits of secularism as a
doctrine of the state, unconcerned with the internal affairs of religion
: it is a far-reaching statement about the nature of religion itself. It
is moreover an untenable statement. It is, on top of that, at least in
most of its formulations, far from religiously neutral : it rejects the
Hindu humanist conception of religious teachings (as being products of
the universal human consciousness), and espouses the Islamic prophetic
conception of religious teachings (as being God-given messages).
Finally, it discourages critical thought about religion, and is thus
opposed to the scientific temper. So, this doctrine of the "*equal truth
of all religions*" is not really helping anyone. We better discard it.

Both the line taken by the Communists, that all religions are equally
untrue and deserve equal disrespect, and the line taken by the
sentimentalists, that all religions are equally worthy of respect
because equally true, do injustice to the fundamentally human character
of religious culture. The human intention behind a given religious
practice is worthy of respect. But the belief systems and concomitant
moral codes are open to criticism, like any human construction, and some
of them may be discarded, even while others may stand the test of
experience and remain sanatana, forever. So, there is no apriori
equality between religions. It is a different matter that people
believing in superstitious doctrines still deserve equal respect with
the people whose insight is more advanced. In that sense there should of
course be "*equal respect for all religions*".

To conclude this reflection on the "*equality of all religions*", let us
mention the view that secularism is really a synthesis of all religions.
Secularist Mahesh Jethmalani agrees with the BJP view that a common
civil code for members of all religious communities in India is a
legitimate demand of *secularism*, but he agrees on the basis of an
unusual interpretation of the term: "*The \[uniform civil code\] is in
keeping with the needs of a modern Republic. It is devoid of Hindu
ritualism and is rational in the extreme. It is religiously neutral, in
that it calls upon the Hindu as much as the Muslim to eschew traditional
ways of life in the interests of a new 'national religion' which
synthesizes the best from all the religions in the
land*."[¹⁴⁵](notes.htm#note145)

It goes without saying that our secularist's bias is showing. On top of
his explicit exclusives against *Hindu ritualism*, there is his stress
on *synthesis*, which very word is enough to enchant a Hindu, but
incapable of arousing a Muslim's interest.[¹⁴⁶](notes.htm#note146) This
synthesis of the best of all religions is a make-believe, which is held
up to fool Hindus, but which the members of a number of religions will
scornfully reject, because it would go against the exclusive claims
which constitute the basic identity of their religions.

Moreover, our secularist's utter superficiality and non- comprehension
of religion is showing. As Mahatma Gandhi understood well enough, in
spite of his prayer-sessions with readings from different Scriptures,
one religion (in his case Hinduism) is quite sufficient to guide an an
individual all through life. A "*combination of religions*" is as
nonsensical as two suns shining in the sky. What is possible is one
broad-minded religion which can assimilate new forms : one Sanatana
Dharma which is intrinsically pluralist, and can appreciate new accents
(as on *brotherhood* and social service[¹⁴⁷](notes.htm#note147))
proposed by other religions. But a *synthesis* of the doctrines that
everyone makes his own Liberation through yoga,, that Jesus has brought
Salvation once and for all, and that you get a ticket to Heaven by
affirming that Mohammed is the final Prophet, is simply nonsense.

Synthesis implies the rejection of the rejection of synthesis. So it
means the rejection of the exclusivist claims of Islam and Christianity.
I agree with our secularist that *synthesis* and a "*new national
religion*" are the solution. That "*national religion*" is age-old, it
is Sanatana Dharma. But this Dharma is sanat kumar, eternally young, so
it is indeed *new*, especially to those who are under the spell of
secularism and have blacked out from their consciousness this age-old
heritage.

The most surprising thing about Mahesh Jethmalani's secularism, is that
it is quite the opposite of a separation of state and religion : it has
the ambition of creating and promoting a religion through state
arrangements like the common civil code. In my secularist homeland, we
have a uniform civil code, but no one there is fantastic enough to see
it as a stratagem in a larger project of floating a new religion. In
fact, we think it is none of the state's business to create, destroy,
promote, discourage, or indeed to synthesize a religion. We think it is
none of the state's business to "*call upon \[members of the different
religions\] to eschew traditional ways of life*": those ways that are in
conflict with the law, are simply forbidden, and all others, traditional
or not, are simply left to the people's own choice. The secular state is
not making any *call* to *eschew* any ways of life whatsoever.

A truly secular state is by definition not a despotic state. It does not
choose or devise or *synthesize* a religion for you. It is a
self-restrained state. That is why the Nehruvian socialist doctrine of a
hungry state, with state initiative and state guidance, has naturally
combined with a perverted and despotic kind of secularism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.7. Dharma

The official Hindi term for *secularism* is dharmanirpekshata, i.e.
*dharma-neutrality*. Critics of Nehruvian secularism say the correct
translation would be panthanirpekshata or sampradayanirpekshata, i.e.
*sect- neutrality*.

Of course, sect-neutrality is an indispensable component of secularism.
Perhaps the secularist translators wanted to add another component by
preferring the term dharma- neutrality.

The word *religion*, in most European languages, can be both an
uncountable and a countable substantive.[¹⁴⁸](notes.htm#note148) As an
uncountable, it means "*the religious dimension*", and leaves any
sect-wise or belief-wise contents to that religious dimension
unspecified. As a countable, it means "*a religion*", "*a set of
religious doctrines and practices*", "*a sect united around common
doctrines and practices*".

As a translation of both these uses of the term *religion*, westernized
Indians have employed the word dharma. As an example of the countable
use, the well- known Gandhian slogan sarva-dharma-samabhava means
"*equal respect for all religions*". "*A dharma*" here means "*a
religion*". By contrast, the expression Dharma Rajya uses *dharma* as an
uncountable. it is, however, not normally rendered as "*rule of
religion*" but as "*rule of righteousness*". And that opens the
discussion of the exact meaning of the term *dharma*.

**Dharma means : that which sustains.**

Every singular or composite entity has its own dharma, its swadharma.
All the composite classes to which an entity belongs, have again their
own dharma. Thus, an individual his dharma, which is partly specific to
himself, partly in common with the family he belongs to : kula-dharma.
This in turn is partly in common with the jati to which the family
belongs : the jati-dharma. In the varna-ideology, every jati is
categorized under one of the four varnas, so the jati-dharma will partly
be differentiating from the other classes within the varna, and partly
be the common dharma of the entire varna. Further, all varnas, and all
classifications of any kind, ultimately share in a universal human
dharma, manava- dharma. And this in turn is part of the over-all cosmic
dharma (the cosmic ordered pattern, for which the specific Vedic term is
Rta).

Let us give another example that has nothing to do with traditional
Hindu society. Every individual cow has her own dharma. While partly
individual, it is largely a common dharma of the cow species : the
biological characteristics and functions that define the cow's role in
the larger ecosystem. The cow dharma is partly specific, partly in
common with the mammal dharma (skipping several intermediate
classifications), which is again partly mammal-specific, partly in
common with the all-vertebrates dharma. The vertebrate dharma is partly
the all-animal dharma, which is partly specific and differentiating from
the plant dharma, and partly the common dharma of all living beings.
Thus, self- regulation and procreation are the dharma of all living
beings, but the animal dharma involves breathing oxygen while the plant
dharma involves breathing carbondioxide.

Materially, one's dharma is the actualization of an inner programming
(primarily, but not exhaustively, the genetic programming). Formally, it
is the playing of a role within the larger ecosystem, in interaction
with all the other entities with their own allotted dharmas.

This inner programming which determines one's dharma, is called guna,
quality, characteristics, or more uniquely swabhava, own nature. In
lower species, this programming is exclusively biological, i.e. mostly
genetical and partly environmental. In man, one section of the
environmental factors, called learning or education, gains immensely in
importance. So, an individual's guna is partly uniquely individual,
partly in common with his family, tribe, etc. through genetics as well
as through a common environment (common experiences), and it is partly a
matter of learning (a directed programme of experiences), and to that
extent it is in common with those who go through the same learning.

The integration into the larger system is an automatical affair in the
lower species. In man, it is in large measure a matter of conscious
assent to what is consciously perceived as one's role in the larger
whole. In lower life forms, as in machine, dharma is the actual
functioning of a norm, the fact that processes do not take place at
random, but conform to and preserve a given order, e.g. the
thermoregulation processes which preserve a constant body temperature in
mammals, or the maintenance of the optimum population level of a given
species within a given ecosystem. In human society, it is partly that,
because man participates in the general biological laws ; but partly,
the human dharma is a conscious participation in the actualization and
the upholding of a system of norms. To that extent, the manava-dharma is
not merely the actual functioning of an in-built norm, but the conscious
acceptance and fulfilling of one's duty.

So, for the individual human being, dharma primarily means duty. Dharma
means the acceptance and fulfillment of one's duty, i.e. the behaviour
and occupation corresponding to one's place within the system. For
society as a whole, it means the integrative system comprising all
individual and group duties. it is the social order which is upheld by
the conscious participation of all members.

Now what does this have to do with religion ? Hindu social philosophy
recognizes four goals (purusharthas) in human life: Kama (pleasure),
Artha (gain), Dharma (duty) and Moksha (liberation). It is clear that
religion in its strictest and highest sense, as the individual's
spiritual life, belongs to the fourth aim, liberation. The inner
spiritual process, the freeing oneself of bondage through purification
of the mind, is directed towards moksha. Then where did dharma get to be
associated with religion ?

The dharma is the norm system which ideally regulates all human
activity. Man's life is ordered by the social as well as by the larger
cosmic order. Now, there is a specific category of activities, which
have no other use or function, except to explicitate man's integration
in a social or cosmic order. For instance, one ordering of human society
is the division in age groups. Every *primitive* society has rituals
explicating this ordering dimension : the rites of passage from one age
group to the next. For another instance, one dimension of the cosmic
order, is the division of the year cycle in seasons. The starting-points
of the seasons may be defined astronomically (solstice, equinox, full or
empty moon), or through atmospherical or terrestrial events (end of the
harvest, first rain), but at any rate, they divide the year into
different stages, each with its own characteristics and concomitant
human activities (its own dharma), which altogether form a cycle or
recurring totality. The celebrations at each of these fixed points of
the year cycle, have no other function but to explicitate this aspect
(of unity through a differentiation into different phases each with its
own dharma) of the cosmic order.

Celebrations and rituals are an essential aspect of dharma. One can be
born, become a man, start living with a woman, exchange this life for
the next, all without any pomp or ritual. It can be done : animals do
it. but it is not done. Precisely because man is a conscious being, he
wants to give conscious expression to the different phases that make up
a cycle, and to the different functions that make up a society. That is
one of the reasons why people wear job-specific uniforms. That is the
reason why children are baptized, why diplomas are handed out in a big
ceremony, why couples are wedded in great gathering of friends and
relatives, with a specific ritual, why another ritual is gone through to
say farewell to someone who has died, etc.

So, in that sense, rituals and celebrations are the most human component
of our participation in the social and cosmic order, of our dharma. Take
for instance, the Holi festival. Holi is first of all a spring
celebration. The exuberant ritual of throwing paint at eachother and not
sparing eachother at all, is a variety of the standard elements of
spring rituals the world over. In some places in Europe, on the first
real spring day, i.e. when the sun is out and it unmistakably feels like
spring, youngsters from upper-storey windows pour buckets of water on
unsuspecting passers-by. The logic is that on the first day of spring,
people need to wake up from their winter slumber. So, spring rituals
like Holi are shocking and unrespectful.

On top of that, it seems that Holi also has a varna connotation : it is
the day of the Shudra varna, when the class of people who habitually get
their hands dirty, are free to draw the other varnas into a celebration
of their own part in society. Similarly, Raksha Bandhan ("*bond of
protection*", the day of the thread) is the celebration of the Brahmin
varna, Vijayadashami (victory day) of the Kshatriya varna, and Deepawali
(apart from being a typical autumn festival, with candles to get through
the dark months) celebrates the Vaishya varna. So, every function in
society gets explicit expression on a specially reserved day. This is
how dharma, the system of duties, gives rise to rituals and
celebrations, the things that we often categorize under the heading
*religion*.

So, dharma, or duty, in its broader sense implies also the activities
that explicitate the world order, the *useless* rituals and
celebrations, which from the outer or public part of religion.

Modernist bores, of course, are against all this *waste* of money and
especially of time. Under their pressure, some religious people have
tried to de-emphasize the role of rituals and celebrations, and stressed
the religious dimension of useful work: "*Work is worship*". But the
modernists can't be appeased with this defensive excuse, so in a recent
seminar in Delhi, they countered it with an extended slogan : "*Work is
worship, but worship is not work*". So, it is time to explain to these
people that the value of these rituals and celebrations resides in the
very fact that they are not *work*, that they are meant not to be
*useful*. They are a popular way of directly tuning in to the larger
order, of explicating the order of which our activities are implicitly a
part, of strengthening the awareness that makes the daily treadmill of
*useful work* meaningful. This expression of awareness of the world
order constitutes the difference between animals, who simply obey and
fulfill this order, and human being, who consciously participate in it.

Anyway, we have established that dharma basically means *duty* and
"*participation in the social order*". In the broader sense, it means
all the customs and rituals that give expression to this social order,
to its values and norms. In a broad sense, we could call this *culture*.
The purely non-functional, expressive and ritual part of it, can be
called *religion*, as long as we don't forget that there is a deeper,
inner dimension to religion which is not concerned with the world order,
but on the contrary with moksha (i.e. unconcern with the world).

From the basic meaning, we may derive the meaning : the virtue of being
conscious of and faithful to one's duty. And since duty is defined
relative to the world order, this can be re-worded as : the virtue of
respecting and upholding the world order. The common translation of this
derived meaning is righteousness. Thus, Dharma Rajya is "*rule of
righteousness*". That is what Ram Rajya, Ram's rule, is supposed to
epitomize and symbolize.

The same meaning, we find in Dharma Yuddha, the "*war of
righteousness*". Some people, very ignorant or inspired by anti-Hindu
motives, translate this as *religious war*. And then they conclude :
see, you Hindus, you also have this concept of crusade or jihad. In
reality, the "*war of righteousness*" is not a jihad at all. Dharma
Yuddha means firstly a chivalrous war, a war in which a number of rules
are observed, a war in which the world order is respected, as opposed to
the all-out war in which anything goes as long as it results in victory.
Secondly, it can be stretched to mean (but this is non- classical) a war
in defense of the world order, against those violate and threaten this
order. Dharma is concerned with people's conduct (achaar), not with
their belief or opinion (vichaar). Therefore, a Dharma Yuddha is by
definition never directed against *unbelievers* or "*heterodox
believers*", but exclusively against people who through their actions
break the rules and arrangements that constitute the world order.

In this connection, the Mahabharata, and especially its episode known as
the Bhagavad Gita, is sometimes mentioned as containing the Hindu
doctrine of "*Religious War*". In reality, the Gita is explicitly not
about a war between Believers and Unbelievers, between Chosen ones and
Doomed ones. For instance, Dronacharya is equally attached to the
Pandavas as to the kauravas, both have been his pupils, but because of
his specific secular status, he is duty-bound to fight on the Kaurava
side.

It is purely worldly events that had pitted the two camps against
eachother, not a theology. The Kauravas had violated the order by
breaking an agreement with the Pandavas and remaining irreconcilable in
their unrighteous position. They had not refused to accept some belief
system, they had merely violated a secular agreement. After that, honour
and the secular interest of their family force the Pandavas to take up
arms. This is now their duty, as Krishna reminds the wavering Arjuna.
The *religious* element in the Gita pre-battle discussion is, that the
capacity for doing one's secular duty is grounded in an insight into the
true nature of the Self, who is a foreigner incarnated in this world,
and not affected by the worldly situations in which he finds it his duty
to operate.

So, the concepts of "*dharma*" and "*religion*" overlap only partly. The
term dharmanirpekshata becomes a bit absurd or even sinister when it
turns out to say "*duty- neutrality*" or "*righteousness-neutrality*"
(though it applies accurately to the utter corruption in which Nehru's
secular socialism has plunged the Indian state). The absurdity really
comes out when we translate it as "*value-system-neutrality*". You just
cannot have a polity without a value-system that sustains the unity and
integrity of the whole. Even secularism implies something of a
value-system.

So, if we start from the uncountable use of the word dharma
(righteousness etc.), we have to reject dharmanirpekshata as the
translation for the Western concept of "*secularism*".

Let us consider the countable use : one dharma, two dharmas, etc. As we
have seen, this use of the word exists. There is the soldier's dharma,
the sweeper's dharma, the schoolboy's dharma, etc. There is the
individual dharma, the occupational dharma, the family dharma, the
tribal dharma, and of course the state dharma. So there are indeed many
dharmas. Every entity has its own duty or value system, based on its
definition, its characteristics, its place in the larger whole. The
state too has its own dharma. The state's dharma is not at all neutral,
it is very specific. It is different from the school dharma, from the
prison dharma, from the village dharma. To illustrate its distinct
dharma, the state, like every entity, has its own dharma-typical
celebrations. In a Saint Thomas school, they celebrate Saint Thomas
feast. In a family (at least in the West), they celebrate every member's
birthday. In a village, they have a celebration upon completion of the
harvest. And the Indian Republic celebrates Independence Day and
Republic Day.

So, in a world of many dharmas, the secular state too has its own
dharma. There is no room for any *dharma- neutrality*. Let us use the
words in their proper meaning. Secularism is *sect-neutrality*,
sampradayanirpekshata. This term at once expresses the opposition to
sampradayikta, *sectarianism* (or *communalism*).

This precise and unambiguous translation also clinches the issue
regarding yet another term proposed as the equivalent of *secularism* :
Lokayat. This term means *worldliness*. It was the name of an ancient
school of thought, mostly known as the *materialists*. One could say
they were atheist and even anti-religious (the two are not synonymous,
cfr. Buddha's atheist religion), but they were just as much a
sampradaya, a *sect*. And materialism and atheism are just as much
*belief systems* as theism, monotheism, pantheism and the rest. By
contrast, secularism is not a belief system. It is merely a political
arrangement that separates the state from sects and belief systems. So,
regarding the Lokayat-sect, both ancient and modern (the Leftist
sampradaya), and regarding the atheist belief system, the secular state
has to kept strict non-commitment and neutrality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
