+++
title = "14 13.1  Facing the past"

+++
# 13. Facing the truth the only solution

## 13.1 Facing the past

The chronic disease of communal riots is not going to end by all the
talk of secularism and national integration. Some people in Indian
politics and in the press seem to think that by repeating the mantra
*secularism* often enough, you will get secularism. But by saying *food,
food, food* your hunger will not be satisfied. Rather, you will starve
to death, or get bored to death by this insupportable repetitiveness.

Superficial Sadbhavana bla-bla is not capable of stopping communal
hatred. A minimum requirement for communal harmony is that

1.  the historical and ideological roots of communal hatred are faced
    squarely, and
2.  the general and theoretical insight into the roots of the problem
    are actualized by a formal acceptance of historical
    responsibilities.

After 1945, the Germans have apologized to the Jews for what they had
done to them. They also have payed huge reparations to the Polish,
Russian and Jewish peoples, for them it was more than just a gesture ;
but it is the gesture which we want to consider here. The Japanese
needed till 1989 before they apologized to the Koreans. The fact that
the Japanese occupation of Korea had ended since 44 years was not
invoked as an excuse for just disregarding that unfortunate chapter in
history. Also in 1989, the Soviet authorities have recognized their
guilt in the Katyn massacre of Polish officers, and held a ceremony on
the site with Polish leaders. In 1990, the Soviets have apologized to
the Koreans for starting the Korean war in 1950, as well as for shooting
down the Korean airliner in 1983.[²¹⁷](notes.htm#note217) In 1990, the
American government has apologized to the Japanese who had pre-
emptively been arrested and put in concentration camps during World War
II, and payed a compensation in cash to the affected people still alive.
On December 29, 1990, the Centenary of the Native Americans' last battle
in Wounded Knee was marked with a ceremony in which the South Dakota
governor offered words of sorrow and apology. It was the culmination of
a *Year of Reconciliation*.[²¹⁸](notes.htm#note218) And the Dutch
Reformed Church of South Africa publicly apologized to the blacks, and
asked them for forgiveness, for the ideological support it had given to
Apartheid. The way to make a new beginning goes via recognizing and
formally terminating the faults of the past.

The application of this principle to the Indian situation is
crystal-clear; the Muslim community should come out and recognize the
atrocities which its earlier generations have inflicted on the Hindus,
and make a gesture of goodwill to formally terminate that chapter in
history.

Leaving the Ram Janmabhoomi spot to the Hindus, to do with it as they
please, would have been just such a gesture. A very easy one, for it
cost nothing. The Muslim community was not even in control of the place,
all they would have to do was not to interfere in what already was an
internal Hindu affair. The fact that even this easy goodwill gesture was
not made, at least by the externally recognized leadership of the Muslim
community, is a very sad thing. On a world-wide scale, the time is ripe
for such a recognition of past mistakes.

The Christians are facing their past. Even in religion class in Catholic
schools in Belgium, we gave attention to the gruesome part in Church
history. In Latin America, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' arrival
has sparked some serious reconsideration both within and outside the
Church, about the role of Christianity in the wholesale destruction of
all the cultures without exception in the entire *New World*. In Delhi,
I have asked a Roman Catholic Father, head of an important institute,
what he had to say about the acts of fanaticism perpetrated by many of
his predecessors in the Mission. He said: *"We are not uptight about
it."*

While this past is by no means forgotten, the Christians have, by and
large, accepted that in the name of Christianity very large-scale crimes
against humanity have been committed. They now reorient themselves,
making a distinction between the original spirit of Christianity, and
the later aberrations. It is possible to live with the realization that
the community to which one belongs, is or has been responsible for less
than uplifting practices (Dante, the greatest of Christian poets,
described how utterly depraved the Church had become in his time, and
then added that to him it still remained the Church of Christ).

So, it is time to face the truth. Judging by the glasnost in the Soviet
block and in the Catholic Church regarding past crimes, the time is ripe
to finish the glossing-over which the secularists have been practicing
and propagating. The rosy presentation of Islam which the secularist
press is feeding the public, should be debunked.

In Europe there are also people, very few, who insist on denying the
Nazi crimes, the genocide on the Jews and the
Gypsies.[²¹⁹](notes.htm#note219) These people are called revisionists or
negationists, and their stand is considered highly objectionable (France
has even gone a little too far, in my opinion, by making it a punishable
offence to deny the Nazi extermination camps). In India, by contrast,
the negationists who deny the existence of the centuries-long jihad, in
which a systematic oppression and slaughter of Kafirs was pursued, are
calling the shots.

Even if the Muslims themselves don't feel ready yet for coming to terms
with their communal past (which may be humanly difficult, and should in
no way be forced on them), that is no reason for secular intellectuals
to stick to this negationist glossing-over.

In 1987 the Japanese ministry of education decided to tone down the
report of the *Rape of Nanching* (a massacre in China by the Japanese
occupation forces in World War II) in Japanese history books. They
wanted to put in a new version : this massacre was nothing special, it
just happens in any war, it had nothing to do with Japanese national
supremacism, and therefore it doesn't deserve any special highlighting.
They did not intend much more than changing the proportions of this
episode vis-a-vis the totality of the war. They were not going to deny
that it had happened. Yet, China reacted angrily. The Chinese government
filed a strong official protest against this rewriting of history, and
Chinese communities in different countries held demonstrations in front
of the Japanese embassies.

So, that is how particular the Chinese are about setting the historical
record straight.[²²⁰](notes.htm#note220) Now, even if Japan ever
whitewashes its entire role in World War II (which it does not consider
doing at all), even if Chinese protests could not prevent such a
development, then that still would not make any neutral historian, much
less the Chinese themselves, rewrite their own history-books to absolve
the erstwhile Japanese aggressors. But in India, we find the
unbelievable situation, that not only Muslim historians and public
figures refuse to face the truth about Muslim history : neutral
*secular* historians are also covering up and denying the crimes which
Islam has systematically committed, and even many Hindus are denying the
crimes committed against their own society.

It is a matter of self-respect as much as a matter of respect for the
historical truth, that Hindus face their own history and tell their
children about the crimes of the closed creeds like Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 13.2. Islam and Nazism

It may sound shocking to some people that I have compared the
Hindu-Muslim relations with the Jewish-German relations of the Nazi
period. While in Israel you get to hear more comparisons of Muslims with
Nazis, in India it may still be unfashionable. I would like to point out
that comparing people to the Nazis is not so uncommon. In fact, the
communists call non-communists fascists all the time. In the communalism
debate, the Hindu side has been bracketed with Nazism by all sorts of
people, even by a smug bourgeois like Mani Shankar Aiyar (in several
episodes of his Sunday column, where he considerably distorts German
history to make it fit, see [ch.14.10](ch14.htm#ch14.10)) or a
preacherous do-gooder like Rajmohan Gandhi, as much as by rank fanatics
like Syed Shahabuddin.

Now, I don't have to distort history in order to make my comparison of
Islam with Nazism. In very essential characteristics, the role of Islam
in Indian history is the same as the role of Nazism in German-Jewish
history.

Firstly, both uphold an absolute division of humanity in a superior and
glory-bound community, and an evil and hell-bound community. The Quran
says dozens of times that the Kafirs are condemned in an absolute and
eternal sense, whereas the Momins or believers are promised eternal lust
in heaven. Nazism didn't have those otherworldly pretensions, but in
this world the Jew was identified with everything evil, and made to
suffer for it. This is just like Islam, which from its absolute and
eternal division of humanity logically deduced their radically different
status in the other world, and imposed a radically inferior status on
the Kafirs in worldly matters also.

Secondly, on the conscience-quietening bedrock of this divisionist
ideology, they both set up a program for the total extermination of the
inferior species. Here there was one difference : since Nazism
postulated biological determination, and erroneously thought Judaism as
a racial unit, there was no way out for anyone born from Jewish parents.
Facing the sword of Islam, Kafirs had one escape : conversion. If they
had been taken captive when fighting or fleeing the Muslim armies, even
conversion could not save them from slavery, but at least it saved their
lives in most cases.

I estimate that the Muslim conquerors killed more than six million
Hindus, the number of Jews killed by the Nazis.[²²¹](notes.htm#note221)
Of course, they had a bigger number of victims to pick from, and they
had centuries while the Nazis had a few years. But then, they didn't
have the technology, nor the total control of the country. They didn't
have the means to be as thorough. Among the systematic killers, like
Ghaznavi, Ghori, Teimur, Babar, there was a clear drive to physically
finish the Kafirs. Fortunately they didn't have gas chambers, but they
had no inhibition in using all the killing apparatus at their disposal.
The Bahmani sultans made it a point to kill one lakh Hindus every year.

On top of outright massacres, there were several other ways in which the
Muslim conquerors and rulers caused the death of many lakhs of Hindus.
Many died a nameless death under the hardships of slavery. Many were
made to fight in special infantry cohorts in the Muslim armies, and
systematically used for the risky and suicidal
tasks.[²²²](notes.htm#note222)

This absolute disrespect for the lives of the Kafirs was founded in
Islamic doctrine. It was not an isolated incident, but part of a pattern
that was also in evidence in other parts of the Muslim empire. The
Egyptian-born scholar Mrs. Bat Ye'or has presented a collection of
documents about the Jewish and Christian communities living under Muslim
rule, and of whom Muslim apologetics always boasts that they were
treated better than minorities in Christian
countries.[²²³](notes.htm#note223) In reality, they were often subjected
to all kinds of harassment and humiliation, large-scale abduction of
women and children, and occasional mass slaughter. As late as 1915, the
Turks slaughtered about 15 lakh Christian Armenians, more than
one-fourth of the Armenian population, or a percentage close to that of
the Jews killed by the Nazis. They never expressed regret or payed
reparations. Hitler, when criticized by his aides about the
extermination camps, explicitly invoked the Armenian genocide as a
precedent.

There are also smaller points of similarity. Before the extermination of
the Jews began, the Jews were tolerated but they had to suffer a number
of restrictions and humiliations, which correspond closely to the
restrictions imposed on the Zimmis by the Muslims. A telling example is
that they had to make themselves physically recognizable by wearing a
David's star on the chest, just like the Muslims imposed the wearing of
specific dress on the Jews in Morocco, the Christians in Egypt, the
Hindus in Gujarat.

Like the Muslims, the Nazis acknowledged an intermediate status between
the Jews/Kafirs who have to be exterminated, and the Herrenvolk/Muslims
who should rule the world. The Nazis did not want to exterminate
*inferior* races like the Slavs, but they wanted them to remain as
third-class citizens, with no say in power, wholly subordinate to the
*superior* race. And the Muslims did not declare total war on the
*People of the Book* (Jews and Christians), who could remain as third-
class citizens, with no say in power, wholly subordinate to the Muslims.

This is the heritage which the Muslim community has to face. It can be
done. In fact it is only hard to the extent that you keep identifying
yourself with those rulers who conducted such policies, and with the
doctrines that inspired them. It can be taken as a glorious opportunity,
to free one's community from those awful heroes and doctrines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 13.3. Seeing the bright side

While some secularists are outright liars and conscious
history-distorters, this falsified history has become so widespread that
there is now a generation of *intellectuals* who genuinely believe that
Aurangzeb was *the unifier of India*, rather than a cruel fanatic, or
that Mahmud Ghaznavi plundered for wealth rather than to terrorize the
Kafirs. In the case of non-historians, I will give the benefit of the
doubt and assume that their whitewashing of Muslim history is in good
faith.

For instance, Mani Shankar Aiyar has said :*"All \[Uma Bharati\] sees,
knows or cares to know are Mahmud Ghaznavi, Aurangzeb and others. It is
not germane to her world view that Islam brought brotherhood to the
world and initiated the greatest self-improvement movement, a part of
which were Sant Tukaram, Namdev, Mirabai, Guru Nanak and
Kabir."*[²²⁴](notes.htm#note224)

As for this *brotherhood*, the facts are that Islam practiced slavery on
an unprecedented scale, and that its treatment of Kafirs was anything
but brotherly (unless you think Aurangzeb's treatment of his
broad-minded brother Dara Shikoh is normative). If the saints mentioned
by Mani were that great, then the credit goes to Hindu culture, of which
each of them was a part. Even Kabir, the only one among them with an
unmistakable Islamic connection (an Arabic name), has never said that
*"there is no contact with the divine except through the Quran"*, which
is essential in Islam ; he has said on the contrary that liberation is
not to be found in Scripture (a stand always held up against Brahmins,
but in fact more shattering for Islam with its total belief in one
definitive Scripture). I have it on good authority that Kabir's thought
is Hindu through and through.[²²⁵](notes.htm#note225) The simplest proof
that his contribution to Indian culture was un-Islamic, is that he was
persecuted for his Kafir ideas by the Muslim ruler Sikandar Lodi.

One well-known Indian journalist told me that *"this Ram Janmabhoomi
movement is finishing the tolerance which was brought into Hinduism by
the Sufis like Kabir and Nanak"*. My God, what a distortion. First, the
statements of tolerance in Hinduism can be found in pre-Sufi books like
the Rig-Veda and the Bhagavad Gita :*"Let good thoughts come to us from
all sides"*, or *"The truth is one but the wise call it by many names"*,
or Krishna saying that *"Whoever invokes a deity by whatever name, it is
Me he invokes"*. Second, it is a myth that the Bhakti movement owes a
lot to the Sufi movement.

If anything, it was the reverse. But by that, I do not mean, as
secularists would hope, that Sufis took over a lot from these Bhakti
saints : they didn't, in fact they scrupulously avoided Kafir
influences. But Bhakti was a late-medieval re-statement of doctrines
that had always been present in Hindu tradition. And its universalism
and stress on direct experience had been expressed in the teachings of
many sects, some of which had a following outside Hindusthan proper. It
was there that they left traces which have reappeared in Muslim
religious thought as Sufism.

When Islam had overrun Iran and Turkestan, the local religions were
exterminated, but they started a second life as the Sufi movement, which
brought distinctly un- Islamic elements back into the official culture,
but in Islamic garb. The original Sufis, like Jalal ud-Din Rumi, brought
a lot of the open-mindedness and universalism of pre-Islamic culture
back into the Islamized world. However, the later Sufis who came to
India, were largely just missionaries, who may have practiced mysticism
which was un-Islamic enough, and yet joined in the fanatical drive to
exterminate Paganism, by conversion or otherwise. (For some authentic
testimony, I could advise you to read Eaton's book Sufis of Bijapur, but
with the secularists active or passive support, it has been banned).

It should be stressed that what is worthwhile in Sufism, is the
un-Islamic part. The consciousness exploration, the universalism, the
commonality (or should I say: the *communalism*) with all creature, this
is very nice but very un-Islamic, nowhere to be found in the Quran or
the Hadis. The orthodox doctors of Islam knew it well enough that this
was heresy.[²²⁶](notes.htm#note226) But increasingly, Sufism was
integrated into Islam, not to make it more humane, but to become less
humane itself. And when Sufism reached India, it was not the stuff that
could attract genuine saints like Guru Nanak or Tulsidas (who, perhaps
because of his devotion to Ram, is absent from Mani Shankar Aiyar's
list), or Kabir. It was these Hindus who gave some attention to the fact
that Muslims too had devotion and a universal spiritual urge, and even
in the face of Islam's fanatic challenge, these Hindu saints held high
the banner of universalism.

If I try to understand where these people get the wholly erroneous
notion that it is Sufism that brought tolerance into Hinduism, I surmise
they might be meaning the *attacks* on the social *intolerance* of the
caste system, which are attributed to these Bhakti saints (mis- termed
Sufis). Well, that has to be looked into. To my knowledge, Kabir has
only said that social differences disappear during the Bhakti
experience. And the same thing counts for Guru Nanak, and, for that
matter, for Gautama Buddha. They were not social
reformers.[²²⁷](notes.htm#note227) At most, they had to make certain
social choices in the practical organization of their sect.

It is the deep influence of Marxism, together with a total ignorance
concerning religion, that makes it hard for people to see these
religious teachers for what they were : teachers of a spiritual path. In
Ambedkar I see no religious enthusiasm for the Buddha's teachings. All
he does with the teaching of Compassion, is using it as a stick to beat
Brahminism with: a complete subordination of the Buddha's spiritual
message to Ambedkar's own political compulsions.[²²⁸](notes.htm#note228)
Another example of this essentially Marxist exaggeration of social
concerns is the *Sanskritization* theory (which holds that lower castes
adopted Brahmin ways to raise their status), where it says that some
castes adopted vegetarianism for prestige reasons, off-hand denying the
possibility that spiritual teachers convinced people of the intrinsic
spiritual, ethical or health value of vegetarianism.

So, While here I don't want to give my final opinion on the matter, it
seems to me that the Bhakti saints were religious teachers rather than
social reformers. I think the compulsion to see social reformers
everywhere in Indian history, follows from a Marxist prejudice, from an
ignorance of religion as a field of experience in its own right, and
from a far too grim image of the structure and living conditions in
traditional Hindu society.

The journalist I just quoted, also praised these *Sufis* for being
*iconoclasts*. Again, what he meant was probably that they went against
obsolete or harmful practices, both at the social and the religious
level. Well, very good of them. But what does it say about my secularist
spokesman, that he praises people for being *iconoclasts*? This : he is
totally alienated from pluralist Hindu culture, and has imbibed the
monotheist contempt for *idols* to this extent that he uses *idol-
breaker* as a synonym for *free-thinker*. What he doesn't realize, is
that an *idol-breaker* is by definition intolerant. Breaking something
that is sacred to someone, is not a proof of free-thinking and open-
mindedness at all. Breaking your own false gods of self- righteousness
and sweet illusions, and giving up your own claims to dictate to others
what to believe and what not, that is more convincing proof of a free
and positive mind.[²²⁹](notes.htm#note229)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 13.4. Tolerance in Islam

In spite of all the untruth in pro-Islamic myths that have recently been
floated, it is all right that people try to see the bright side of
Islam, be it in *brotherhood* or in Sufism. However, they should make
sure it is the real Islam they are talking about, not some syrupy
misrepresentation by latter-day apologists or by self- deceiving Hindus
like Vinoba Bhave (whose Essence of the Quran is nothing but a
suppressio veri, and thus a suggestion falsi : it nicely keeps out of
the reader's view all the most repulsive verses). Nobody has any quarrel
with the private version of Islam that some people entertain, but
general statements about the *"tolerance (or otherwise) of Islam"*,
should be checked against the real, official Islam. And even in
presentations of Islam as tolerant, we may be facing not the heartfelt
belief of an open-minded Muslim, but a shameless attempt at deception.

For instance, I have heard Hindutva people sing the praise of Maulana
Azad, for being a model of a tolerant Muslim. And they quoted him as
saying that Hindu-Muslim unity was for him more important than
independence, and that this was in keeping with the example of the
Prophet, who had also made a covenant with the Jews in Medina. Well, the
truth about this covenant of Mohammed with the Jews is that within a few
years, two of the three Jewish clans had been driven out of Medina, and
the third one was slaughtered to the last man. This statement by the
Maulana only proves how dishonest he was, and that he counted on Hindus
not knowing anything about Mohammed's career. The fact that Hindus
quoted this statement with enthusiasm, proves that the Maulana's
estimation of the absolute Hindu ignorance was correct.

Two more recent varieties of the same *tolerant Islam* rhetoric, are the
following. Asghar Ali Engineer writes :*"It is too simplistic to put
\[Hindus\] in the category of kafirs. It is neither doing justice to the
teachings of Islam nor to those of Hinduism."*[²³⁰](notes.htm#note230)

It does complete justice to both traditions to put Hindus in the
category of kafirs. They don't recognize the prophethood of Mohammed nor
the exclusive pretense of his chosen deity, Allah. That makes them
non-Muslims. They also do not believe in any prophetic tradition, i.e.
in people who are exclusive beneficiaries of divine revelation, from
whom others have no choice but to borrow knowledge about the divine. On
the contrary, they believe that everybody can attain the Awakened state
which gurus have been teaching. They also reject the notion that the
final truth is contained in one book : any book is merely an attempt to
approximate in the terms of discursive or poetic reason the unspeakable
truth, and it cannot be more than one viewpoint among others.

Disregarding the essential difference between the role of Sutras and
Shastras among the Hindus, and that of Scripture among the Jewish and
Christian *people of the Book*, we might say that all of them at least
use books in their religious practice. But what about tribals for whom
writings and a fortiori Scriptures are simply unknown ? By no
manipulation can Asghar Ali Engineer recognize them as *people of the
Book*. So they are unmitigated Kafirs, and have to be given a choice
between Islam and death. That is the true tradition of Islam. And if Mr.
Engineer wants to bring communal amity, he should not try to bring
people in the *people of the Book* denomination, but repudiate the
notion of Kafir (with its attached doctrine of killing or forcibly
converting them) altogether. Considering Hindus or tribals as Kafirs is
not just *simplistic*, it is anti- human and criminal.

Until Mr. Engineer rejects the Islamic division of mankind into Muslims
and Kafirs, with or without the intermediate category of *people of the
Book*, he is exactly as guilty of communal strife as the worst
fundamentalist. Defeat him.

Why does Mr. Engineer want to declare the Hindus *people of the Book*?
The practical impact is, that they can become Zimmis, *protected ones*.
That means, third-class citizens in an Islamic state. When he and the
*secularists* want to shout abuse at Hindu Rashtra, they say it will be
a theocratic state in which the Muslims will be second-class citizens,
and they call that *fascism*. That same thing which they call fascism
when they wrongly attribute it to Hindu Rashtra, is effectively accepted
in the case of a Muslim Rashtra, such as Pakistan. I at least have never
heard any of them refer to Pakistan as *fascist*. Muslim Rashtra is not
only not called *fascism*: Mr. Engineer even seems to take it for
granted as a political framework, and therefore he tries to secure a
place for the Hindus in it by declaring them *people of the Book*,
rather than just Kafirs who could not be tolerated alive. Well how
generous of him.

The category *people of the Book* is an arch-communalist notion, an
integral part of a doctrine which divides humanity into Muslims or
Momins (rulers and freemen, the first-and second-class citizens), Zimmi
Kafirs (inferior third-class citizens), and non-Zimmi Kafirs (to be
exterminated). I agree with the secularists that no compromise
whatsoever should be made with communalism. Therefore I advocate an
all-out intellectual attack on this distinction between Momins, Kafirs
and Zimmis, the communalist doctrine par excellence.

Asghar Ali Engineer continues his theological discourse as follows
:*"The holy Prophet, in his treaty with the Zoroastrians of Bahrain,
recognized them as ahl-al-kitab (people of the book) though they are not
mentioned in the Quran as such. No wonder that some Sufi saints like
Jan- i-Jahan considered the Hindus too as people of the book."* One more
good reason to show no interest whatsoever in Mr. Engineer's little
favour of including Hindus in the *people of the Book*, is the effective
record of the treatment of the Zimmis. All right, in a generous (or
maybe just tactical) gesture of the Prophet, the Zoroastrians of Bahrain
were recognized as *people of the Book*; but where are they now ? Apart
from a few thousand Zoroastrians living in abject poverty in a few
villages in Iran, the Zoroastrians have been wiped out by Islam (only
those who fled to Hindusthan have survived and prospered). If Sufis and
*moderate Muslims* want to recognize Hindus as *people of the Book*,
they may have the same future in mind for them as for the Zoroastrians
of Bahrain.

The second recent example of a *moderate Muslim* trying to fool Hindus,
is Maulana Wahiduddin Khan. He quotes from an Arabic book, so maybe the
fault lies with its writer, though from a Maulana I would expect some
familiarity with early Islamic history. He tells the following story
:*"Jama Masjid in Damascus built during the early period of Islam under
Ummayad rule...saw its completion in 715 and is in existence till today.
But in its early days, the Christians objected to a strip of land
belonging to an old abandoned church having been annexed during its
construction"*.[²³¹](notes.htm#note231)

So, in the centre of the metropolis Damascus, there was an *old
abandoned church*? The truth of the matter is that this church was a
famous and celebrated cathedral. The Christians were *people of the
Book*, so they became Zimmis and could, after the surrender of Damascus
to the Muslims, keep their places of worship (though not build new
ones). But, as already mentioned in [ch.8.6](ch8.htm#ch8.6), the Muslims
badly wanted to take over this big building, so the Christians had to
bribe the Caliph in order to prevent the Muslims from taking it over,
After decades of taking ever bigger bribes, the Caliph gave in to Muslim
pressure, and had the cathedral transformed into a Jama Masjid. So, if
moderate Maulanas tell you stories, don't believe them.

But he continues :*"A delegation of Christian Syrians, therefore, came
to Umar the second...with the complaint that his predecessor had annexed
a part of the church, having incorporated it into the building of the
mosque."* So, they risked trouble with the Muslim ruler for nothing but
an *old abandoned church*, and that in an age when there was no need of
creating communal friction in order to built vote-banks.

*Now we seek justice from you,* they said. Umar ibn Abdal-Aziz promptly
appointed Muhammad ibn Suwayd an- Nahri as the arbiter....The
latter...arrived at the conclusion that the Christians were justified in
their complaint. Then Umar issued orders for the part of the mosque
which belonged to the church to be returned in its entirety to the
Christians. However, this order was never executed, for the Christians
had only intended to put Islamic justice to the test. When they found
that it came up to the mark, they gladly announced that they were happy
to donate this part of the church to the mosque. **Conclusions**: even
in the story, the Christians don't get redress. This is explained as a
voluntary gesture, but it must have been just as voluntary as Rushdie's
embracing Islam. And in reality, the Christians were not even protected
against the take-over of their cathedral by their Zimmi status.

So, Pagans are not interested in recognition as *people of the Book*.
They want moderate Muslims to stop denying the intolerance inherent in
Islamic theology. They want them to give up the anti-human division of
humanity in Muslims, Zimmi Kafirs, and Kafirs for whom there is no
mercy.

The fundamental intolerance and fanaticism of Islam are an undeniable
fact. They can readily be proven from a large number of Quranic verses.
Since quoting the Quaran may get this book banned, I will merely give
the verse numbers, so you can check it for yourself. Islam promises hell
to the Kafirs in Quran 3:85, 4:56, 5:37, 5:72, 8:55, 9:28, 15:2,
21:98-100, 22:19-22, 22:56-57, 25:17-19, 25:55, 29:53-55, 31:13, 66:9,
68:10-13, 72:14- 15, 98-51. Islam warms against mixing with Kafirs in
Quran 2:21, 3:28, 3:118, 5:51, 5:144, 9:7, 9:28, 58:23, 60:4. Islam
calls on Muslims to wage war against the Kafirs in Quran 2:191, 2:193,
4:66, 4:84,5:33, 8:12, 8:15-18, 8:39, 8:59-60, 8:65, 9:2-3, 9:5, 9:14,
9:29, 9:39, 9:73,9:111, 9:123, 25:52, 37:22-23, 47:4-5, 48:29, 69:30-37.
Islam encourages the war against the Kafirs by glorifying it in Quran
2:216, 9:41, 49:15, or by promising lust in paradise to the Shaheeds who
die in such a war, in Quran 3:142, 3:157-158, 9:20--21. The Hadis is
also explicit enough, and proves that Prophet put the Quranic
injunctions into practice.

However, defenders of the Faith have been trying to prove that Islam to
tolerant. They have some very few arguments, and these seem convincing
as long as they are not closely scrutinized (like the Maulana's
reference to the Medina covenant with the Jews)[²³²](notes.htm#note232).
One classic is:*"There is no compulsion in religion"* (2:256). Isn't
that tolerant? Well, when people quote from the Quran to prove that
Islam is inhuman and fanatical, the standard reply is :*But you are
quoting our of context*. So, let us not make that mistake here, for the
context is the key to the meaning of the text. If we read the whole
passage, we find that it ends if by stating :*But those who don't
listen,... they are the people of the Fire, and will live forever in
it.* So, while not mentioning the duty of war against the unbelievers,
the passage at least confirms that they will go to hell forever.

The thrust of this passage is that Allah himself chooses who becomes
Muslim and who doesn't. Not that the two options are equal: the Muslim
will enjoy paradise, the Kafir will suffer forever in hell. But Allah
says that the Prophet need not worry, since it is Allah who makes people
convert. The larger context of this passage is that Mohammed is getting
discouraged because the Arabs, like the Jews, ridicule his claim of
Prophethood, so Allah gives him some confidence by assuring him that
these care of by Himself. At any rate, this Quranic verse does not at
all say that it is all right to stick to another religion than Islam.
Only by carefully keeping the context out of view, can it be presented
as a statement of tolerance.

The same situation explains Quran 10:99:*"If the Lord had wanted, all
people would have entered the Faith together."* Will you then force
people to accept Islam. But when he is weak, he gets revelations that
Allah will take care of everything, even of conversations (an
application of the Islamic notion of Taqdeer, fate or divine pre-
ordination).

The same thing counts for this other verse presented as proof of Islamic
tolerance:*"Unto you your religion, unto me my religion"*. (Quran 109:6)
This appears in one of the earliest Suras, when Mohammed is still weak
and unimportant. The Sura says repetitively that :*"I do not serve what
you serve, I will not worship what you will worship,...To you your
religion, to me my religion"*. All it says is that Mohammed breaks with
the Meccan religion, and that he doesn't want to have anything to do
with it. He rejects all *composite culture* and proclaims the
incompatibility of the prevalent religion and his own Islam. This sura
is not yet a declaration of war on the Pagan religions of Arabia and of
the entire world, but it is certainly a preamble to such a declaration
of war. At that time, Mohammed could not yet afford more than such a
formal distancing from the prevalent religion, because he was not yet
strong enough for an all-our confrontation.

Only by concealing the proper context, can one create the impression
that Islam contains even one single positive injunction to tolerant
co-existence and pluralism.

So, let us not be fooled by two or three seemingly tolerant statements
in the Quran. Once Mohammed was powerful, and had a free choice between
tolerance and intolerance, he shed all tactical semblance of *live and
let live*, and opted for persecution and mass-slaughter of Kafirs. In
the Medina Suras, there is ample testimony of Allah's desire that Muslim
make war on the Kafirs, and that they do not anyhow integrate and make
friendship with them. We can safely say that the Quran does teach
intolerance. Those *moderate* Muslims who deny this, thereby prove that
they are apologists who put the interests of Islam higher than the
truth. Expose them.

However, it is equally a historical fact that people have outgrown the
fanaticism present in the earlier layers of their tradition. When you
read how Moses and Joshua exterminated the tribes that stood in the way
of the chosen people, all at Yahweh's explicit command, you would except
the Jews, the followers of Moses, to be ruthless persecutors of
non-Jews. But in fact, for the last fourteen centuries, the Jews have
not persecuted anyone.[²³³](notes.htm#note233) Even today, now that they
have a state, they are the ones who have guaranteed freedom of worship
as well as free access to the sacred places of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam (as well as Baha'ism) for the respective believers, in contrast to
the earlier Islamic regime. If there is tension with the non-Jews of the
area, it is not due to any persecution in the name of Yahweh of Moses.
Even the Biblical justification for the Israeli hold over Palestine, is
only put forward by a minority of religious *fundamentalists*: for most
Israelis and for their secular government, it is merely a matter if
living in a sustainable state with defensible borders, which is a
legitimate secular concern.[²³⁴](notes.htm#note234)

So, if the Jews could grow out of the stage of bloody persecution, and
develop a stable attitude of *live and let live* long ago, can the
Muslims not do the same?

The fact that so many Muslim apologists are saying that Islam is really
very tolerant, raises hopes that, regardless of what the Quran says,
they at least accept that tolerance is a positive value. Of the simple
Muslims who think Islam consists of drinking alcohol or eating pork,
this tolerance is not a problem. But for Muslims who know Islamic
doctrine and Islam's exclusivist claims, it is a lot more difficult. And
many seeming champions of tolerance and communal amity are at second
sight only more sophisticated than their separatist brethren.

Take the case of those Muslims who opposed Jinnah and his *communalist*
demand for partition. While Aligarh was a hotbed of Pakistani agitation,
the Deoband school advocated the gradual Islamization of the entire
united India. The godfather of modern Islamic fundamentalism, Maulana
Maudoodi, was one of the staunchest opponents of Partition. He claimed
that the Muslims had a right to rule all of India. In fact, many Hindus
are glad that India was partitioned. They argue that a Muslim population
of 24% (now more than 30%) in united India would never allowed Hindu
society to function, and would have created trouble until it was safely
and totally in power.

So if today *moderate Muslims* criticize Pakistan and the policies that
led to Partition, I wonder if there is not some pan-Islamist design
behind it.[²³⁵](notes.htm#note235) At any rate, Maulana Azad, that
moderate that would have given 50% of all power positions to the
Muslims, with the rest to be divided between Hindus, Christians,
Ambedkarites, and others. Short, Azad was in favour of a Muslim India.

So, before the Muslim moderates can become credible, they will have to
do better than their predecessors of the Azad generation, who, on closer
inspection, turn out to be just as Muslim-imperialist as the
*communalists*. A very little gesture, by far not sufficient but a
minimum proof of good intention, would be that they come out in support
of Salman Rushdie. Now that the man has become a Muslim, this doesn't
even require any deals Kafirs anymore. On December 28, 1990, Rushdie
made an appeal to the Indian Muslims to come out and convince the
Iranian leadership to cancel the death sentence.[²³⁶](notes.htm#note236)
So, far, I have not seen this little gesture from any influence to stop
the oppression of the non-Muslims in Pakistan, Bangla Desh and Kashmir.

The gentle scenario for the future is that Muslim leaders accept the
value of tolerance and pluralism, and that they continue for some time
to swear by the Quran even while effectively repudiating its intrinsic
intolerance. Since crores of people have a sentimental attachment to the
forms and names of Islam, the body of Islam will be kept alive for some
more time, even while its spirit is giving way to the rational humanist
spirit. The Hindu solution for Islam is not a dramatic mass-conversion,
but a change in the spirit even while leaving the outer from intact.
Allow the Muslims a stage of upholding the Quran rhetoric but claiming
that it means something else that what it says. After that stage, the
empty husk of Islam, with its Jihad phraseology and prophetic pretense,
will be dropped easily.

This is the approach which Mahatma Gandhi tried: respecting the
Scriptural and organizational body of Islam, and trying to influence and
charge its spirit. The Mahatma's failure should be studied, together
with the success of the humanists in Europe who managed to create an
intellectual climate in which Christians started outgrowing their
exclusivism and self- righteousness (and mostly also Christianity
itself). One conspicuous difference is that the Mahatma never criticized
Islam, while the European humanists did criticize the evils of
Christianity. In order to encourage the monotheists to discover the
value of pluralism and tolerance, it is necessary to make a clear
diagnosis of their exclusivism an intolerance, and to be frank about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 13.5 How to say it

Since we cannot be fooled by the humanist pretenses of Muslim
propagandists, we will henceforth be straightforward about the following
established facts concerning Islam. Islam is an ideology based on an
unreasonable claim to the possession of a unquiet and final revelation
from the Creator of this universe. Islam makes a dangerous division in
humanity between believers and unbelievers, and builds an absurd
theology around it: for the superficial act of declaring or not
declaring belief in Mohammed's presence at prophethood, the one half
will enjoy eternal lust in heaven, while the other will suffer eternal
damnation in hell. Islam preaches and practices the systematic
oppression and persecution of the non-Muslims. Because of its belief
that the Quran, the historically contingent product of Mohammed's own
limited mind, is God's eternal and final revelation, Islam prevents
itself from adapting to new developments. It is bound to become
backward, and it loses itself in outward details that do not have an
authentic stamp of *eternity* at all.

All right, we reject Islam. And we can say to the Hindus that there is
no reason at all to feel that Islam is somehow superior to Hinduism. On
the contrary, Islam is a very defective ideology, very crude and
superficial. It is also anti-humanist, since it makes the absolute
distinction in mankind between Muslims and non-Muslims, who have a
totally different status both in this world and in the next. Now, in
this age, you cannot say those things to one group without another group
also knowing about it, if at all you would want to proceed that
secretively. How to say these things, knowing that Muslims are listening
too?

For all his tactical mistakes, Mahatma Gandhi essentially had a powerful
vision, centered on two concepts: satya (truth) and ahimsa
(non-violence). We have to say the truth about Islam, but in a
non-violent way. We have to combine truthfulness about Islam with
non-violence and even non-hurtfulness towards the Muslims.

Being sensitive means: taking into account the way the other person will
perceive things. So, let us imagine the situation of the Muslim
regarding this discussion. Suppose you have believed that Mohammed was
God's unique and final spokesman, and that his life is to be emulated in
every way. And then you get to here people say, with an air of
competence, that these revelations were only in Mohammed's head, that no
sane person hears voices the way Mohammed did, that these revelations
were very much centered around Mohammed's life situation and there is
nothing universal and eternal (i.e. worthy of the eternal Creator) about
them. In other words: all you have believed in, is a big mistake. Does
that not cause a big crisis?

It depends on whether you believe the skeptics or not. If you don't
believe them, you may get angry with them. You may even issue a fatwa
condemning them to death. But this anger will partly be determined by
the presentation of the skeptical viewpoint. If someone express his
viewpoint in a personal conversation, and also patiently listens to your
objections, if will be easier to tolerate than if someone speaks
scornfully about your beliefs or mocks them in public.

If you are inclined to believe the skeptical viewpoint, you get into an
inner rethinking of all the things that are somehow linked with the
belief system. But once you get through that, it is a liberating
experience. I have seen so many people of my generation, as well as some
older people, go through this process of outgrowing Christianity. It is
a very interesting experience. You just wouldn't want to have missed it.

This large-scale process of people outgrowing the Christian belief
system has seldom been the result of anti-Christian campaign. It has
gone gradually, with people developing doubts and sharing these with
friends, or with coming across books that opened up a different view on
the life of the life of the soul. Where anti- religion campaigns in the
Soviet block have failed, this gradually spreading of the spirit of free
inquiry has severely undermined the hold of Christianity on the European
mind.

This is the way the hold of unwholesome Islamic doctrines over people's
minds will have to be tackled. It is useless to propagandistically beat
it out of them, it is even counterproductive. Look where Islam really
lost it grip. Earlier in this century, people in countries like Iran and
Egypt came under the influence of modernity, and gradually dropped
Islamic ways and beliefs. They also rediscovered their glorious
pre-Islamic past. This effect was stronger in proportion to the degree
of education. There was no pressure on them to leave Islam, they
themselves discovered that there are other things to life. Of course, we
know that the process has been reversed in the seventies and eighties.
But that is only temporary, because the relevant cultural factors at
work in the earlier part of the century, are still there, and growing
stronger.

As people are mentally or formally leaving a religion, you see the
religion also opening up and listening to its critics. As people
criticized Roman Catholicism, the Church itself changed : it dropped the
Inquisition, the Index, the forced conversions, the intolerance of non-
Church-members in Catholic institutions. It recognized the values of
humanism, and corrected its social philosophy accordingly. In other
words: the Church had ideologically been put on the defensive, and
therefore it gave up its self-righteousness.

Similarly, Islam has to be put ideologically on the defensive. One
should not go from door to door telling an unwilling Muslim audience
what you think of their Prophet. Let the Muslims discover for themselves
what the rational and scholarly views on the Prophet and the Islamic
doctrines are. Those who are interested, will certainly find out what is
being said in the public arena, and within non-Muslim communities, there
Islam should definitely be put on the defensive.

Imagine the day when the fanatic leaders in the Muslim community
notice:*"On, people have found out that the Prophet taught something
else than brotherhood. They know that the wars on the infidels have not
been waged 'in spite of the Prophet's teaching of tolerance' but rather
in fulfillment of the Prophet's injunctions. They have realized that the
infidel society was not that much worse than Islamic society, and in
many respects actually better."* That day they are bound to lose some of
their self-righteousness. When a thief realizes people are aware of his
thieving designs, he will think twice before starting again. Today these
Muslim fanatics bask in all the praises heaped on Islam, and enjoy all
the self- criticism among the Hindus: all this merely vindicates their
sense of divine mission.

The day when Muslims join the humanist culture and freely express their
uninterestedness in the claims of the prophet, and get supported by
society at large, the fanatics will start doubting their case.

At the human level, I am aware that at first it may be very painful for
those people who have really devoted their lives to Islam, to find out
about its not so divine and not so superior nature. I really feel for
them. Giving up one's beliefs is harder in proportion to the part of
one's life that one has invested in them.

A Jesuit who, later in life, during his Bible research, started seeing
that the Bible is really just a human creation, and that there is little
God-given and eternal about the Christian teachings, morals and
institutions, wrote in the epilogue to one of his scholarly books
:*"This has been a very painful process for me. Finding out that one has
wasted one's life on absurd beliefs..."*[²³⁷](notes.htm#note237) Not
that he regretted having come to this insight : the painful thing was
that it had happened so late in life, that he had already missed so much
because of the narrow Christian theological window through which he had
experienced life so far. So, I can imagine that realizing the
unfoundedness of one's fond belief in belonging to a superior part of
humanity, chosen for rule in this world and eternal lust in the next,
may create a bitter feeling. Not bitterness against those who helped you
to wake up from your fond illusions (if anything, jealousy because they
were free from this particular illusion before you), but a kind of
bitterness against your own earlier gullibility.

We may conclude that in exposing the falsehood and the inglorious record
of Islam, we have to proceed in a dispassionate way, free of
triumphalism, as gently as humanly possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
