+++
title = "87 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 4 -- \[Narrow sectarianism holds us back from obtaining Swaraj\]  


**\[A\]** The observations made in the last article raise several
cognate questions, which may profitably be discussed before we come to
the political and economic aspects of the problem. Are the Hindu and
Muhammadan religions and cultures so fundamentally different, or to be
more exact, so antagonistic, as to make their followers naturally and
instinctively hostile to each other? If so, what chances are there of
our being able to bring about a unity between the two? It is said that
Hinduism is not a dogma, that it is almost impossible to define it, that
it is a system of life of which caste is an essential feature; and that
as long as caste is there, it is impossible to make it sufficiently
tolerant and progressive, so as to make unity and co-operation with
other religious communities either easy or even possible.

Yet it is an admitted fact that in spite of a rigid caste system and a
rigid code of social morality, Hinduism is the most tolerant of all the
great religions of the world. Hinduism does not ridicule or despise
other peoples' beliefs or faiths: nay it does not question other
peoples' right to foIlow their own faiths and attain spiritual
satisfaction thereby. It lays no exclusive claim to be the only royal
road to salvation. It is not out to convert other people and thereby
save them from hell or perdition. In fact it expressly lays down that
for different people, in different stages of physical, mental, and
spiritual developments, there are different ways of approaching God and
obtaining satisfaction and salvation. To its own followers it allows the
fullest freedom to believe what they like and to worship as they please.

**\[B\] \[\[185\]\]** Even its rigid social code and its caste system
are in the melting pot. While formerly Hindu society allowed its members
to go out of it, nay actually expelled and outcasted them on the
slightest pretext and on the flimsiest possible ground, at the present
moment it is prepared to make all kinds of allowances for the disregard
of its social code by its members, and is anxious to keep them within
its fold. There was a time when high-caste families, rich, influential,
and cultured, were outcasted and thrown out of Hindu society on the most
intangible grounds, out of sheer suspicion and bigotry. Now even open
beef-eaters are tolerated, excused and honoured. There are numerous men
and women in Hindu society, honoured and respected members of it, who
openly defy and violate the most important canons of its social code–men
who have not only married out of caste but even foreigners, men who eat
prohibited food and make no secret of it, who take prohibited drinks
without any efforts to conceal the fact, men who ridicule the Vedas and
are atheists. We find that amongst these latter are some of the most
notable leaders of Hindu society.

How can we explain this strange change? To what is this due, and what
does this signify? To my mind the change indicates the realization by
the society and its members of a higher Hindiusm which is above forms
and formalities–a culture that is more of the mind and of the spirit
than consisting in eating, drinking, or even marrying, along certain
accepted lines. It is this realization which makes men and women who
have risen above forms and formulas to still feel proud of Hinduism, to
be anxious for its assured continuance in their country for the benefit
of their children and their children's children. It is this realization
which explains the phenomenon of beef-eaters, husbands of foreign women,
scoffers of the Vedas, in short, extremely unorthodox and outwardly
un-Hindu people, champion\[ing\] the cause of Hinduism, standing
shoulder to shoulder with the orthodox in the defence of their temples,
shrines, festivals, customs etc., and resenting as strongly as the
latter, the attacks of non­Hindu missionaries, preachers, and
proselytizers on Hinduism and \[the\] Hindu community.

But there is another reason also which explains the phenomenon. The
material and political prospects of his class are bound up with those of
the rest of their community. It was not so very long ago that many of
these people dissociated themselves from the great bulk of the Hindus,
while **\[\[186\]\]** some of them openly said, rather with pride, that
they were not Hindus. The recognition by Government of the communal
system changed the situation. They found that except as Hindus they had
no status, and their children would have none, unless they chose to
adopt Islam. This they were not prepared to do. So, willy-nilly, they
had to declare themselves Hindus and seek elections from general
non-Muslim constituencies, basing their claim on their championship of
Hindu rights.

**\[C\]** Unlike Hinduism, Islam is a faith of dogmas and doctrines.
Every Muhammadan must believe not only in the existence of God without a
second (*La Allah Il Allah*) but also that Muhammad was His prophet ,and
that the Quran is his final word. He must also believe, according to the
orthodox school, that Muhammad was the last of the prophets and whatever
he said and did is binding on all his faithful followers. There have
been expounders of Islam who have tried to raise it to a kind of high
occultism, but their efforts have not met with any considerable success,
and Islam remains, to all intents and purposes, with the majority of its
followers, what it has been all through centuries past. My Muslim
friends will pardon me if I venture to say that too great an insistence
on dogma has been the bane of Islam, the cause of its political
downfall, and that unless it is given up, it will stand in the way of
Islam ever regaining its lost position as a world-wide political factor.
Islam is as much divided and sub-divided into sections and factions as
Christianity once was and perhaps to this day is.

**\[D\]** The division and sub-division of Hindu society into sects have
one redeeming feature. The general tolerance of Hinduism prevents them
from destroying each other. History shows that this cannot be said of
Islam.

**\[E\]** Religious intolerance of the severest kind has been a handmaid
of chivalry, bravery, zeal, learning, and piety among the Muslims
throughout Muslim history. Three out of the four first Khalifas were
murdered by theIr feIlow Muslims. The pages of Muslim history are full
of similar acts done by religious zealots or political adventurers. One
would have thought that recent events in Turkey and Egypt**[/8/](#n08)**
would have chastened Islam at least in this respect. But the stoning to
death of an Ahmadia by the orders of the Government of Kabul, and the
approval of that barbarous act by some of the most prominent and
educated leaders of Muslim India, have **\[\[187\]\]** shown that the
canker is still there and has not lost an iota of its original violence.

Egypt and Turkey, however, seem to be in a different mood. It appears
that they, at any rate, have realized the necessity of marching with the
times and making a clear distinction between essentials and
non-essentials. The Indian  
"Maulanas" may call them "bad Mussalmans," but they do not care, as long
as they can retain and protect their political freedom. A religiously
"bad Mussalman" (a Turkish Nationalist told me that an Indian Mussalman
once called him a bad Mussalman because he occasionally took a peg \[=an
alcoholic drink\]) is an infinitely better person than a Mussalman who
bows his head to a foreign power and who prates of his "Sharia" to
perpetuate. his bondage. The "bad Mussalmans" of Turkey are in my eyes
infinitely superior to those pious Mussalmans of India who, though
professing great regard for the most insignificant and minor details of
"Sharia" and "Hadis," are willing tools of a foreign bureaucracy, and
are purchasing places and preferments for themselves and their feIlow
Mussalmans by resorting to various questionable means.

It is a sign of the times that while \[the\] Mussalman's piety finds
such eloquent expression in its fights with Hinduism, it is dumb and
powerless in the presence of leaders who openly defy, by acts of
omission and commission, some of the most sacred canons of Islamic Law.
Is it not a fact that just as in the case of Hindus, Muslims accept as
leaders, men who do not believe in the infallibility of the Quran, who
disclaim any faith in "Hadis" and "Fiqah," who openly and undisguisedly
drink wine, eat bacon, do not say prayers, and do not observe fast in
the month of Ramzan, not to mention minor matters, such as their
opinions about *purdah*, keeping \[a\] beard, etc?

It comes to this: that while Hindus and Mussalmans are prepared to be
led by men who openly flout all the sacred canons of their respective
faiths, they are not prepared to relax by a hair's breadth the severity
of their customs and rituals and observances, in order to live in peace
and neighbourly goodwill with one another. A united India will mean
freedom for both Hindus and Mussalmans, but they prefer the strict
observance of the most futile and non-essential elements of their
respective faiths to freedom. Is this not a sight for the gods to weep
over?

**\[F\]** I am firmly convinced that we cannot create a united India and
cannot win Swaraj in any shape, unless the religious canker
**\[\[188\]\]** is removed. "*Mazhab*" (in its narrow sense), as my
beloved friend Stokes**[/9/](#n09)** often reminds me, is the curse of
India, and as long as it rules supreme, there is no hope for India. The
idea that we can remain "good Hindus" and "good Mussalmans" in the
narrowest sense of these terms, and yet win Swaraj, is in my judgment,
an absurd one. It has done a lot of mischief within the last fout years.
I still believe that we do not need to depart in any manner or degree
from the true and essential spirit of Islam and Hinduism in order to be
free and united. There are good and true Christians, Roman Catholics and
Protestants, Presbyterians and Anglicans, Jews and Gentiles, in Great
Britain, France, and Germany, but the earnestness of their religious
faith does not prevent their being free citizens of their respective
countries. A hundred years ago, who could have imagined that a Jew would
one day be the Prime Minister of Great Britain, another a Secretary of
State, and a third a Viceroy of India?**[/10/](#n10)**

**\[G\]** The Jews are perhaps the smallest religious community in Great
Britain. They never claimed any special representation in Parliament or
any specific share of Government posts. In fact about 150 years ago, the
communal consciousness of the Roman Catholics and Protestants in Great
Britain was as keen and exclusive as that of the Hindus and Mussalmans
today. For a long time the Roman Catholics were excluded from Parliament
and could not be employed in any Government office, and still they never
claimed any special representation. Now all these disabilities have been
removed, and Roman Catholics, equally with the Protestants, hold the
highest positions in the State. In this matter the example of Great
Britain has been followed in all the great countries of Europe and in
the United States of America, and the result is what we see. I am
certain in my mind that Turkey, Egypt and Syria are going to do the same
thing; and if they do not, they will never be free. Does anyone expect
India to be the only exception to the rule?  


NOTES

**[/8/](#m08)** Turkey was declared a Republic on 29 October 1923 under
Mustafa Kamal and on 3 March 1924 the Great National Assembly of Turkey
abolished the Caliphate. This was an important step in the process of
secularization of the State and modernization of Turkey.  
 A new constitution was promulgated in Egypt on 19 April 1923 and
a Parliament was established. The new constitution was based on
principles of liberal nationalism which formed a radical departure from
traditional Islamic doctrines. The secularization of Turkey under Kamal
Ataturk had a deep impact on Egypt and under Zaghlul Pasha, who assumed
power in 1924, Egypt too started on the road to gradual secularization
of the State.  
**[/9/](#m09)** S. E. Stokes, an American missionary, who became \[a\]
naturalized Indian and accepted Hinduism. He settled at Kotgarh in Simla
Hills and was imprisoned during the Non-co-operation movement.  
**[/10/](#m10)** The reference is to three eminent British Jews–Benjamin
Disraeli, Prime Minister of Britain, 1874-80 and 1898; E. S. Montagu,
Secretary of State for India, 1917-22; and \[the\] Earl of Reading,
Governor-General of India, 1921-25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 5](05part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
