+++
title = "04 CHAPTER IV THE NATURE OF CONFLICT IN MEDIEVAL INDIA"

+++
**CHAPTER IV**

**THE NATURE OF CONFLICT IN MEDIEVAL INDIA**

Another guideline laid down by the NCERT for school-level textbooks of
history exhorts that “no exaggeration of the role of religion in
political conflicts is permitted”.

Let us for the time being forget the fiat of the State as to what is
permitted and what is forbidden while writing the new textbooks of
history. Let us first find out the facts as recorded by medieval
historians, and review the various interpretations of those facts.  
 

**HINDU VIEW OF THE CONFLICT**

The Hindus of medieval India have not left many accounts of the numerous
wars which they were forced to fight with Muslim invaders over a period
of several hundred years. All we have from the medieval Hindus are some
settled sentiments expressed by them in contemporary literature
regarding the nature of the Muslim menace. The Hindus advance the
following seven accusations against the Muslims:

1\. They kill the Brahmins and the cows;

2\. They violate the chastity of Hindu women;

3\. They demolish temples, and desecrate the idols;

4\. They cut the tuft of hair on the head (*šikhã*) and break the sacred
thread (*sûtra*);

5\. They circumcise people and make them eat beef, that is, convert
people by force;

6\. They capture people, particularly women and children, and sell them
into concubinage and slavery.

7\. They plunder people’s properties, and set fire to whatever they
cannot carry away.

In the records referring to the rise of Vijayanagara, the Marathas, and
the Sikhs, the religious motive is brought into a sharper focus. These
records leave us in no doubt that the defence of Hindu Dharma was
uppermost in the minds of Madhava Vidyaranya, Samartha Ramdas, and Guru
Teg Bahadur. The purpose for which the sword was unsheathed by Harihar
and Bukka, Shivaji and the Sikhs, becomes quite clear in many poems
written in praise of these heroes by a number of Hindu poets. The
purpose, we are told, was to save the cow, the Brahmin, the *šikhã*, the
*sûtra*, the honour of Hindu women, and the sanctity of Hindu places of
worship.

The Hindu records about pre-Islamic foreign invasions present a striking
contrast. The Greeks, the Scythians, the Kushans, and the Hunas are
accused by them of savagery and lust for plunder. But they are never
accused of making Hindu Dharma or its outer symbols the specific targets
of their attacks. We have also the accounts of these alien invaders
becoming good Shaivites, and Vaishnavas, and Buddhists after their first
fury was spent, and they settled down in India.  
 

**MUSLIM VIEW OF THE CONFLICT**

On the other hand, many Muslim historians of medieval India have left
for posterity some very detailed, many a time day-to-day, accounts of
what happened during the endless encounters between Hindus and Muslims.
The dominant theme in these accounts is of *mu’mins* (Muslims) martyred;
of *kãfirs* (Hindus infidels) despatched to hell; of cities and citadels
sacked; of citizens massacred; of Brahmins killed or forced to eat beef;
of temples razed to the ground and mosques raised on their sites; of
idols broken and their pieces taken to imperial headquarters for being
trodden underfoot by the faithful on the steps of the main mosque; of
booty captured and carried away on elephants, camels, horses, bullock
carts, on the backs of sheep and goats, and even on the heads of Hindu
prisoners of war; of beautiful Hindu maidens presented to the sultans
and distributed among Muslim generals and nobles; of Hindu men, women
and children sold into slavery in markets all over the Islamic world;
and of *kãfirs* converted to the true faith at the point of the sword.
The Muslim historians treat every war waged against the Hindus as a
*jihãd* as enjoined by the Prophet and the Pious Caliphs.

In these Muslim accounts we never notice any note of pity, or regret, or
reflection over deeds of wanton cruelty and rapacity.  On the contrary,
the Muslim historians express extreme satisfaction and gleeful gratitude
to Allah that the mission of the Prophet has been fulfilled, the light
of Islam brought to an area of darkness, and idolatry wiped out. These
historians go into raptures over the richness of the booty acquired for
the service of the Islamic state, for distribution among the *mujãhids*
and the ulama and the sufis, for the promotion of Islamic learning, and
for securing the seats of Islamic power.

The same Muslim historians also narrate many wars fought between Muslim
princes. Significantly, here we find no dramatisation of *mu’mins*
against *kãfirs*, mosques against temples, iconoclasts against
idolaters, beef-eaters against Brahmins, ravishers against maidens, and
captors against child and female captives of war. They only talk of
treaties violated, tributes not paid, strategy and tactics employed,
horses and elephants mobilised, armaments assembled, defeats suffered,
victories won, and men and equipment lost in battle. In between, there
are some accounts of sacks and massacres, plunder and pillage. But there
is always a wail of extreme anguish about Muslims fighting and killing
other Muslims, which the Prophet had strictly prohibited.  
 

**NO CONTROVERSY ON RECORDED FACTS**

These are the facts of recorded history. Only a small fraction of these
facts is found in Hindu records, and that too in a stray and scattered
manner. The overwhelming wealth of these facts is stored in histories
written by Muslim historians in a systematic manner, dynasty by dynasty,
reign by reign, battle by battle. And these Muslim histories are
available in manuscript form, in cold print of modern critical editions,
in original as well in translations, in major world languages, in
archives and libraries all over the civilised world. Collections of
these histories have always been prized as priceless possessions in the
palaces of Muslim aristocracy.

There can, therefore, be no serious controversy about the facts of
recorded history. There may be some differences in different accounts of
the same event, reign, or regime. There may be some internal
contradictions in the same account. But these are minor details which
can be sorted out by critical analysis and cross-referencing.

Sharp differences arise only when we come to the interpretation of these
facts, and the passing of value judgements on them. It is here that the
subjective and ideological inclinations of the interpreters and
evaluators come into play. It is the varying interpretations and
evaluations which have raised controversies regarding the desirability
or otherwise of some textbooks in India’s schools and colleges. The
guidelines laid down by the NCERT are also aimed at sorting out these
interpretations and evaluations.  
 

**THE VARYING INTERPRETATIONS**

The orthodox or fundamentalist Muslim historians, who are coming to the
forefront again with the help of petro-dollars, share the satisfaction
expressed by medieval Muslim historians. They approve of and applaud
unashamedly the triumphant sweep of the sword of Islam over India. They
have no doubt that the medieval wars between Hindus and Muslims were
fought by the Hindus as *Hindus* and by the Muslims as *Muslims*. They
concur that these conflicts were armed contests between Islam and
infidelity. The NCERT guidelines are aware of these orthodox Muslim
historians, and warn us that “there should be no over-glorification of
the medieval rule” and that “the writer should not under-emphasise
condemnation of bigotry, intolerance and exclusiveness”.

The academic historians, who have ruled the roost since the British
bureaucrats devised our system of education in the middle of the 19th
century and wrote the first textbooks of Indian history, have mostly
compiled, in a chronological order, the data available in the source
books and evaluated it mostly with an eye to its credibility. They have
seldom conceptualised or drawn clinching conclusions regarding the
nature of the conflict between Hindus and Muslims in medieval India.
Their moral judgements are confined mostly to minor matters such as the
justification or otherwise of a twist given to a particular treaty by a
particular party. Most of the time they are preoccupied with finding the
reasons for the success of those who succeeded, and the factors
responsible for the failure of those who failed.

Many secularists have accused the British historians of deliberately
presenting Muslim rule in India in a prejudicial, even perverse manner,
in order to alienate the Hindus from the Muslims in pursuance of the
British policy of divide-and-rule. A sober reflection should absolve the
British of that guilt. In any case, the British have departed, and the
secularists have taken over. But the Hindu-Muslim problem is far from
being solved. The secularists are trying to hide their failure by
advancing against “Hindu communal historians” the same accusation as
they once advanced against the British historians. The only fault of the
British historians was that they did not try to suppress the facts of
history as recorded by Muslim historians of medieval India. Most
academic historians in India after independence have followed in the
footsteps of the British pioneers. The new secularist fashion of
branding them as Hindu communalists is nothing short of scoundrelism.

The “modernist” Muslim historians, particularly from the Aligarh Muslim
University, have increasingly come forward to “correct the perspective”
of the academic historians. It is significant that the Aligarh school
did not try to correct the perspective in pre-partition India except for
a few Communist historians like the late lamented Mohammad Habib. In his
case also the Communist version of medieval history was only a clever
cloak for the orthodox Muslim version. For the rest, the Aligarh
historians shared the pride which Muslim fundamentalists like Hali and
Iqbal and Maulana Azad took in the Muslim conquest of India, and the
painful consequence it had for the Hindus. It is only after the
Independence that the Aligarh school has changed its strategy.  
 

**THE ALIGARH APOLOGISTS**

To start with, the Aligarh school warns us against confusing the Turkish
imperialism with Islam. The Turks had become converted to Islam no
doubt. But that did not mean that they had ceased to be Turks, that is,
barbarians from the steppes of Central Asia. Islam could not cure the
Turks of their traditional habits of cruelty in the short spell they had
spent under its sway. The cruelties which the Turks committed in India
should not be laid at the door of Islam. The Turks were only using Islam
as a convenient cloak for doing what they did.

Secondly, the record of atrocities attributed to the Turks needs a
rigorous re-examination. We should not forget that the Muslim historians
of medieval India were courtiers first and foremost. They let go their
imagination, and exaggerated in an unbridled manner to please their
royal patrons. Suppose a hundred Hindus and a few score Muslims were
killed in a combat. The court historians manipulated the count, and
reported that a thousand Hindus had been despatched to hell while a few
Muslims attained martyrdom. Such reports flattered the martial vanity of
Muslim potentates. Again, suppose a temple had been plundered by some
insubordinate Muslim soldiers purely for the sake of the treasure it
contained. The court historians reported that ten temples had been razed
to the ground, twice as many idols broken to pieces, and thrice as many
mosques made out of the debris. Such reports flattered the iconoclastic
zeal of pious Muslim princes. And so on so forth. The tall tales told by
medieval Muslim historians regarding the killing of cows and Brahmins,
the molestation of maidens, the capture of booty and prisoners of war,
and the conversion of Hindus by force should be taken with a fistful of
salt.

To buttress this belittling of Turkish (not Muslim, mind you)
barbarities, we are told that if force had been used in the service of
religious zeal on a scale such as reported by the medieval Muslim
historians, the whole of India would have been converted to Islam under
the long spell of Muslim rule. The very fact that India was still a
Hindu majority country at the end of the long period of Muslim
domination, should dispel all doubts that the use of force for religious
purposes was an exception rather than the rule. If there was any
religious contest between Hindus and Muslims, it was of an ideological
character such as that between the sufi *silsilãs* on the one hand and
the various sects of Hinduism on the other.

The “correct perspective”, therefore, would be to treat as purely
political the wars waged by some states ruled by Muslim sultans against
others ruled by Hindu rajas. The Muslim sultans were interested in
building their own empires, the same as the Hindu rajas had been
throughout Hindu history. It should not be held against the Muslim
sultans if the peculiar caste structure of Hindu society made them
victorious most of the time.  In the words of Mohammad Habib, the
contest was between the smiritis on the one hand and the Shariat on the
other.  
 

**THE COMMUNIST “HISTORIANS”**

At this point, the defence of Islam is taken over by Communist
“historians”, and turned into a formidable offensive against Hindu
society, Hindu culture, and Hindu Dharma. The Communists accuse the
“Hindu communalist historians” of always meditating morbidly on a minor
mote in the Muslim eye rather than take the big beam out of their own,
and have a honest view of men and matters in medieval India.

The upper caste Hindus, we are told, have always oppressed, exploited,
trodden under foot, and killed at will members from a large section of
Hindu society, throughout the ages. Why should they shed crocodile tears
if the Turks also killed a few of these unfortunate serfs under
compulsion of circumstances?

The women in Hindu society, we are informed, have always been slaves who
could be molested and dishonoured without arousing so much as a ripple
among the Hindu ruling classes. Why be so squeamish if the Turks freed a
few of these female slaves, and gave them some status in their harems?

The whole of India, we are told, has always been a vast prison-house so
far as the poor people are concerned. Why raise hell if the Turks freed
some of these prisoners, and took them out to see the wide world?

Were not Hindus big beef-eaters in the Vedic times, and did they not
give up this wholesome food because of the priestcraft practised upon
them by those goddamned Brahmins? Why fly into a hysterical fit if the
Turks made some of these Brahmins revert to healthier food habits?

Was not the vast wealth which the priests had hoarded in those “holy”
temples ill-gotten in so far as it represented a limitless loot of the
toiling masses, and was it not lying absolutely useless in those dark
dungeons? Why make a hue and cry if the Turks freed some of this frozen
capital, and put it to some productive use?

As regards the idols, we are told that even if they were made of gold
and studded with precious stones, they symbolised nothing better than
primitive superstition and puerile priestcraft. The Turks did a lot of
good to the mental health of the Hindus by smashing those molochs
masquerading as gods.

The truth about the so-called Muslim conquest of India, they say, is
simple and straight-forward. The Turks only helped the enslaved Hindu
masses to rise in revolt against their age-old oppressors. Islam had
brought with it a message of social equality and human brotherhood which
worked a miracle on Hindu society. Look at Kabir and Nanak and Ravidas
and a hundred other Hindu reformers who took up the Muslim message in
right earnest, and struggled for a casteless and classless Indian
society.

These are not exactly the words which Communist “historians” use
explicitly in their presentation of medieval Muslim history. This,
however, is the exact psychology which guides their “interpretation” of
events in that period. The Aligarh apologists can heave a sigh of relief
at the sight of these Communist “historians” coming to their rescue, and
taking the argument to its logical culmination. Perhaps they themselves
could have never mustered the courage shown by the Communists. Moreover,
most of the Communist “historians” being Hindus, they carry greater
credibility.

The Communist psychology of treating with contempt everything Hindu and
restoring respectability to most things Muslim, is largely shared by the
socialists, the assorted secularists, and the rest of the Hindu
“intellectuals” who pride in calling themselves modern. It is this
psychology which has seeped into the ranks of those who are now out to
re-write the history of India, particularly the history of medieval
India under Muslim rule. The politicians in power also share this
psychology, and are out to manipulate it with an eye on the Muslim
vote-bank.  
 

**HINDU SCHOOL OF HISTORY NEEDED**

A Hindu school of historians, alas, is not yet in sight. I cannot,
therefore, present a Hindu interpretation of the history of medieval
India under Muslim rule. But I believe that as soon as a Hindu school of
historians is born and takes up the task of interpreting medieval Indian
history, it will have little reason not to agree with the medieval
Muslims historians that the medieval period was largely a period of
Hindu-Muslim conflict, and that religion played a dominant role in it.
Its only difference with these Muslim historians will be that it will
treat as villains all those who are treated as heroes by the latter, and
vice versa. It will also treat the so-called triumph of Islam in
medieval India as the greatest tragedy which Islam suffered in its
history after the well-deserved fate it met in 15th century Spain.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


