+++
title = "06 CHAPTER VI THE MAGNITUDE OF MUSLIM ATROCITIES - I"

+++
**CHAPTER VI**

**THE MAGNITUDE OF MUSLIM ATROCITIES - I**

The world famous historian, Will Durant has written in his *Story of
Civilisation* that “the Mohammedan conquest of India was probably the
bloodiest story in history”.

India before the advent of Islamic imperialism was not exactly a zone of
peace. There were plenty of wars fought by Hindu princes. But in all
their wars, the Hindus had observed some time-honoured conventions
sanctioned by the Šãstras. The Brahmins and the Bhikshus were never
molested. The cows were never killed. The temples were never touched.
The chastity of women was never violated. The non-combatants were never
killed or captured. A human habitation was never attacked unless it was
a fort. The civil population was never plundered. War booty was an
unknown item in the calculations of conquerors. The martial classes who
clashed, mostly in open spaces, had a code of honour. Sacrifice of
honour for victory or material gain was deemed as worse than death.

Islamic imperialism came with a different code - the Sunnah of the
Prophet. It required its warriors to fall upon the helpless civil
population after a decisive victory had been won on the battlefield. It
required them to sack and burn down villages and towns after the
defenders had died fighting or had fled. The cows, the Brahmins, and the
Bhikshus invited their special attention in mass murders of
non-combatants. The temples and monasteries were their special targets
in an orgy of pillage and arson. Those whom they did not kill, they
captured and sold as slaves. The magnitude of the booty looted even from
the bodies of the dead, was a measure of the success of a military
mission. And they did all this as *mujãhids* (holy warriors) and
*ghãzîs* (kãfir-killers) in the service of Allah and his Last Prophet.

Hindus found it very hard to understand the psychology of this new
invader. For the first time in their history, Hindus were witnessing a
scene which was described by *KãnhaDade Prabandha* (1456 AD) in the
following words: “The conquering army burnt villages, devastated the
land, plundered people’s wealth, took Brahmins and children and women of
all classes captive, flogged with thongs of raw hide, carried a moving
prison with it, and converted the prisoners into obsequious Turks.” That
was written in remembrance of Alauddin Khalji’s invasion of Gujarat in
the year 1298 AD. But the gruesome game had started three centuries
earlier when Mahmud Ghaznavi had vowed to invade India every year in
order to destroy idolatry, kill the *kãfirs*, capture prisoners of war,
and plunder vast wealth for which India was well-known.  
 

**MAHMUD GHAZNAVI AND SON**

In 1000 AD Mahmud defeated Raja Jaipal, a scion of the Hindu Shahiya
dynasty of Kabul. This dynasty had been for long the doorkeeper of India
in the Northwest. Mahmud collected 250,000 *dinãrs* as indemnity. That
perhaps was normal business of an empire builder. But in 1004 AD he
stormed Bhatiya and plundered the place. He stayed there for some time
to convert the Hindus to Islam with the help of mullahs he had brought
with him. In 1008 AD he captured Nagarkot (Kangra). The loot amounted to
70,000,000 *dirhams* in coins and 700,400 *mans* of gold and silver,
besides plenty of precious stones and embroidered cloths. In 1011 AD he
plundered Thanesar which was undefended, destroyed many temples, and
broke a large number of idols. The chief idol, that of Chakraswamin, was
taken to Ghazni and thrown into the public square for defilement under
the feet of the faithful. According to *Tãrîkh-i-Yamînî* of Utbi,
Mahmud’s secretary, “The blood of the infidels flowed so copiously \[at
Thanesar\] that the stream was discoloured, notwithstanding its purity,
and people were unable to drink it. The Sultãn returned with plunder
which is impossible to count. Praise he to Allah for the honour he
bestows on Islãm and Muslims.”

In 1013 AD Mahmud advanced against Nandana where the Shahiya king,
Anandapal, had established his new capital. The Hindus fought very hard
but lost. Again, the temples were destroyed, and innocent citizens
slaughtered. Utbi provides an account of the plunder and the prisoners
of war: “The Sultãn returned in the rear of immense booty, and slaves
were so plentiful that they became very cheap and men of respectability
in their native land were degraded by becoming slaves of common
shopkeepers. But this is the goodness of Allah, who bestows honour on
his own religion and degrades infidelity.”

The road was now clear for an assault on the heartland of Hindustan. In
December 1018 AD Mahmud crossed the Yamuna, collected 1,000,000
*dirhams* from Baran (Bulandshahar), and marched to Mahaban in Mathura
district. Utbi records: “The infidels… deserted the fort and tried to
cross the foaming river… but many of them were slain, taken or drowned…
Nearly fifty thousand men were killed.” Mathura was the next victim. 
Mahmud seized five gold idols weighing 89,300 *miskals* and 200 silver
idols. According to Utbi, “The Sultãn gave orders that all the temples
should be burnt with naptha and fire, and levelled with the ground.” The
pillage of the city continued for 20 days.

Mahmud now turned towards Kanauj which had been the seat of several
Hindu dynasties. Utbi continues: “In Kanauj there were nearly ten
thousand temples… Many of the inhabitants of the place fled in
consequence of witnessing the fate of their deaf and dumb idols. Those
who did not fly were put to death. The Sultãn gave his soldiers leave to
plunder and take prisoners.” The Brahmins of Munj, which was attacked
next, fought to the last man after throwing their wives and children
into fire. The fate of Asi was sealed when its ruler took fright and
fled. According to Utbi, “the Sultãn ordered that his five forts should
be demolished from their foundations, the inhabitants buried in their
ruins, and the soldiers of the garrison plundered, slain and captured”.

Shrawa, the next important place to be invaded, met the same fate. Utbi
concludes: “The Muslims paid no regard to the booty till they had
satiated themselves with the slaughter of the infidels and worshippers
of sun and fire. The friends of Allah searched the bodies of the slain
for three days in order to obtain booty… The booty amounted in gold and
silver, rubies and pearls nearly to three hundred thousand *dirhams*,
and the number of prisoners may be conceived from the fact that each was
sold for two to ten *dirhams*. These were afterwards taken to Ghazni and
merchants came from distant cities to purchase them, so that the
countries of Mawaraun-Nahr, Iraq and Khurasan were filled with them, and
the fair and the dark, the rich and the poor, were commingled in one
common slavery.”

Mahmud’s sack of Somnath is too well-known to be retold here. What needs
emphasising is that the fragments of the famous Šivaliñga were carried
to Ghazni. Some of them were turned into steps of the Jama Masjid in
that city. The rest were sent to Mecca, Medina, and Baghdad to be
desecrated in the same manner.

Mahmud’s son Masud tried to follow in the footsteps of his father. In
1037 AD he succeeded in sacking the fort of Hansi which was defended
very bravely by the Hindus. The *Tãrîkh-us-Subuktigîn* records: “The
Brahmins and other high ranking men were slain, and their women and
children were carried away captive, and all the treasure which was found
was distributed among the army.” Masud could not repeat the performance
due to his preoccupations elsewhere.  
 

**MUHAMMAD GHURI AND HIS LIEUTENANTS**

Invasion of India by Islamic imperialism was renewed by Muhmmad Ghuri in
the last quarter of the 12th century. After Prithiviraj Chauhan had been
defeated in 1192 AD, Ghuri took Ajmer by assault. According the
*Tãj-ul-Mã’sîr* of Hasan Nizami, “While the Sultan remained at Ajmer, he
destroyed the pillars and foundations of the idol temples and built in
their stead mosques and colleges and precepts of Islãm, and the customs
of the law were divulged and established.”

Next year he defeated Jayachandra of Kanauj. A general massacre, rapine,
and pillage followed. The Gahadvad treasuries at Asni and Varanasi were
plundered. Hasan Nizami rejoices that “in Benares which is the centre of
the country of Hind, they destroyed one thousand temples and raised
mosques on their foundations”. According to *Kãmil-ut-Tawãrîkh* of Ibn
Asir, “The slaughter of Hindus (at Varanasi) was immense; none were
spared except women and children, and the carnage of men went on until
the earth was weary.” The women and children were spared so that they
could be enslaved and sold all over the Islamic world. It may be added
that the Buddhist complex at Sarnath was sacked at this time, and the
Bhikshus were slaughtered.

Ghuri’s lieutenant Qutbuddin Aibak was also busy meanwhile. Hasan Nizami
writes that after the suppression of a Hindu revolt at Kol (Aligarh) in
1193 AD, Aibak raised “three bastions as high as heaven with their
heads, and their carcases became food for beasts of prey. The tract was
freed from idols and idol-worship and the foundations of infidelism were
destroyed.” In 1194 AD Aibak destroyed 27 Hindu temples at Delhi and
built the *Quwwat-ul-Islãm* mosque with their debris. According to
Nizami, Aibak “adorned it with the stones and gold obtained from the
temples which had been demolished by elephants”. In 1195 AD the Mher
tribe of Ajmer rose in revolt, and the Chaulukyas of Gujarat came to
their assistance. Aibak had to invite re-inforcements from Ghazni before
he could meet the challenge. In 1196 AD he advanced against Anahilwar
Patan, the capital of Gujarat. Nizami writes that after Raja Karan was
defeated and forced to flee, “fifty thousand infidels were despatched to
hell by the sword” and “more than twenty thousand slaves, and cattle
beyond all calculation fell into the hands of the victors”. The city was
sacked, its temples demolished, and its palaces plundered. On his return
to Ajmer, Aibak destroyed the Sanskrit College of Visaladeva, and laid
the foundations of a mosque which came to be known as *ADhãî Din kã
JhoMpaDã*. Conquest of Kalinjar in 1202 AD was Aibak’s crowning
achievement. Nizami concludes: “The temples were converted into mosques…
Fifty thousand men came under the collar of slavery and the plain became
black as pitch with Hindus.”

A free-lance adventurer, Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji, was moving further
east. In 1200 AD he sacked the undefended university town of Odantpuri
in Bihar and massacred the Buddhist monks in the monasteries. In 1202 AD
he took Nadiya by surprise. Badauni records in his
*Muntakhãb-ut-Tawãrîkh* that “property and booty beyond computation fell
into the hands of the Muslims and Muhammad Bakhtyar having destroyed the
places of worship and idol temples of the infidels founded mosques and
Khanqahs”.  
 

**THE SLAVE (MAMLUK) SULTANS**

Shamsuddin Iltutmish who succeeded Aibak at Delhi invaded Malwa in 1234
AD. He destroyed an ancient temple at Vidisha. Badauni reports: “Having
destroyed the idol temple of Ujjain which had been built six hundred
years previously, and was called Mahakal, he levelled it to its
foundations, and threw down the image of Rai Vikramajit from whom the
Hindus reckon their era, and brought certain images of cast molten brass
and placed them on the ground in front of the doors of mosques of old
Delhi, and ordered the people of trample them under foot.”

Muslim power in India suffered a serious setback after Iltutmish. Balban
had to battle against a revival of Hindu power. The Katehar Rajputs of
what came to be known as Rohilkhand in later history, had so far refused
to submit to Islamic imperialism. Balban led an expedition across the
Ganges in 1254 AD. According to Badauni, “In two days after leaving
Delhi, he arrived in the midst of the territory of Katihar and put to
death every male, even those of eight years of age, and bound the
women.” But in spite of such wanton cruelty, Muslim power continued to
decline till the Khaljis revived it after 1290 AD.  
 

**THE KHALJIS**

Jalaluddin Khalji led an expedition to Ranthambhor in 1291 AD. On the
way he destroyed Hindu temples at Jhain. The broken idols were sent to
Delhi to be spread before the gates of the Jama Masjid. His nephew
Alauddin led an expedition to Vidisha in 1292 AD. According to Badauni,
Alauddin “brought much booty to the Sultan and the idol which was the
object of worship of the Hindus, he caused to be cast in front of the
Badaun gate to be trampled upon by the people. The services of Alauddin
were highly appreciated, the jagir of Oudh also was added to his other
estates.”

Alauddin became Sultan in 1296 AD after murdering his uncle and
father-in-law, Jalaluddin. In 1298 AD he equipped an expedition to
Gujarat under his generals Ulugh Khan and Nusrat Khan. In an earlier
chapter I have already quoted *Tãrîkh-I-Wassãf* on the “achievements” of
this expedition. The invaders plundered the ports of Surat and Cambay.
The temple of Somnath, which had been rebuilt by the Hindus, was
plundered and the idol taken to Delhi for being trodden upon by the
Muslims. The whole region was subjected to fire and sword, and Hindus
were slaughtered *en masse*. Kamala Devi, the queen of Gujarat, was
captured along with the royal treasury, brought to Delhi and forced into
Alauddin’s harem. The doings of the Malik Naib during his expedition to
South India in 1310-1311 AD have already been described.  
 

**THE TUGHLAQS**

Muslim power again suffered a setback after the death of Alauddin Khalji
in 1316 AD. But it was soon revived by the Tughlaqs. By now most of the
famous temples over the length and breadth of the Islamic empire in
India had been demolished, except in Orissa and Rajasthan which had
retained their independence. By now most of the rich treasuries had been
plundered and shared between the Islamic state and its swordsmen. Firuz
Shah Tughlaq led an expedition to Orissa in 1360 AD. He destroyed the
temple of Jagannath at Puri, and desecrated many other Hindu shrines.
According to *Sîrat-i-Fîrûz Shãhî* which he himself wrote or dictated,
“Allah who is the only true God and has no other emanation, endowed the
king of Islãm with the strength to destroy this ancient shrine on the
eastern sea-coast and to plunge it into the sea, and after its
destruction he ordered the image of Jagannãth to be perforated, and
disgraced it by casting it down on the ground. They dug out other idols
which were worshipped by the polytheists in the kingdom of Jãjnagar and
overthrew them as they did the image of Jagannãth, for being laid in
front of the mosques along the path of the Sunnis and the way of the
*musallis* (Muslim congregation for *namãz*) and stretched them in front
of the portals of every mosque, so that the body and sides of the images
might be trampled at the time of ascent and descent, entrance and exit,
by the shoes on the feet of the Muslims.”

After the sack of the temples in Orissa, Firuz Shah Tughlaq attacked an
island on the sea-coast where “nearly 100,000 men of Jãjnagar had taken
refuge with their women, children, kinsmen and relations”. The swordsmen
of Islam turned “the island into a basin of blood by the massacre of the
unbelievers”. A worse fate overtook the Hindu women. *Sîrat-i-Fîrûz
Shãhî* records: “Women with babies and pregnant ladies were haltered,
manacled, fettered and enchained, and pressed as slaves into service in
the house of every soldier.”

Still more horrible scenes were enacted by Firuz Shah Tughlaq at
Nagarkot (Kangra) where he sacked the shrine of Jvalamukhi. Firishta
records that the Sultan “broke the idols of Jvãlãmukhî, mixed their
fragments with the flesh of cows and hung them in nosebags round the
necks of Brahmins. He sent the principal idol as trophy to Medina.”  
 

**AMIR TIMUR**

The climax came during the invasion of Timur in 1399 AD. He starts by
quoting the Quran in his *Tuzk-i-Timûrî*: “O Prophet, make war upon the
infidels and unbelievers, and treat them severely.” He continues: “My
great object in invading Hindustan had been to wage a religious war
against the infidel Hindus… \[so that\] the army of Islam might gain
something by plundering the wealth and valuables of the Hindus.”

To start with he stormed the fort of Kator on the border of Kashmir. He
ordered his soldiers “to kill all the men, to make prisoners of women
and children, and to plunder and lay waste all their property”. Next, he
“directed towers to be built on the mountain of the skulls of those
obstinate unbelievers”. Soon after, he laid siege to Bhatnir defended by
Rajputs. They surrendered after some fight, and were pardoned. But Islam
did not bind Timur to keep his word given to the “unbelievers”. His
*Tuzk-i-Timûrî* records: “In a short space of time all the people in the
fort were put to the sword, and in the course of one hour the heads of
10,000 infidels were cut off. The sword of Islam was washed in the blood
of the infidels, and all the goods and effects, the treasure and the
grain which for many a long year had been stored in the fort became the
spoil of my soldiers. They set fire to the houses and reduced them to
ashes, and they razed the buildings and the fort to the ground.”

At Sarsuti, the next city to be sacked, “all these infidel Hindus were
slain, their wives and children were made prisoners and their property
and goods became the spoil of the victors”. Timur was now moving through
Haryana, the land of the Jats. He directed his soldiers to “plunder and
destroy and kill every one whom they met”. And so the soldiers
“plundered every village, killed the men, and carried a number of Hindu
prisoners, both male and female”. Loni which was captured before he
arrived at Delhi was predominantly a Hindu town. But some Muslim
inhabitants were also taken prisoners. Timur ordered that “the Musulman
prisoners should be separated and saved, but the infidels should all be
despatched to hell with the proselytising sword”.

By now Timur had captured 100,000 Hindus. As he prepared for battle
against the Tughlaq army after crossing the Yamuna, his Amirs advised
him “that on the great day of battle these 100,000 prisoners could not
be left with the baggage, and that it would be entirely opposed to the
rules of war to set these idolators and enemies of Islam at liberty”.
Therefore, “no other course remained but that of making them all food
for the sword”. *Tuzk-i-Timûrî* continues: “I proclaimed throughout the
camp that every man who had infidel prisoners should put them to death,
and whoever neglected to do so should himself be executed and his
property given to the informer. When this order became known to the
*ghãzîs* of Islam, they drew their swords and put their prisoners to
death. One hundred thousand infidels, impious idolators, were on that
day slain. Maulana Nasiruddin Umar, a counsellor and man of learning,
who, in all his life, had never killed a sparrow, now, in execution of
my order, slew with his sword fifteen idolatrous Hindus, who were his
captives.”

The Tughlaq army was defeated in the battle that ensued next day. Timur
entered Delhi and learnt that a “great number of Hindus with their wives
and children, and goods and valuables, had come into the city from all
the country round”. He directed his soldiers to seize these Hindus and
their property. *Tuzk-i-Timûrî* concludes: “Many of them (Hindus) drew
their swords and resisted… The flames of strife were thus lighted and
spread through the whole city from Jahãnpanah and Siri to Old Delhi,
burning up all it reached. The Hindus set fire to their houses with
their own hands, burned their wives and children in them and rushed into
the fight and were killed… On that day, Thursday, and all the night of
Friday, nearly 15,000 Turks were engaged in slaying, plundering and
destroying. When morning broke on Friday, all my army… went off to the
city and thought of nothing but killing, plundering and making
prisoners… The following day, Saturday the 17th, all passed in the same
way, and the spoil was so great that each man secured from fifty to a
hundred prisoners, men, women, and children. There was no man who took
less than twenty. The other booty was immense in rubies, diamonds,
garnets, pearls, and other gems and jewels; *ashrafis*, tankas of gold
and silver of the celebrated Alãi coinage: vessels of gold and silver;
and brocades and silks of great value. Gold and silver ornaments of
Hindu women were obtained in such quantities as to exceed all account.
Excepting the quarter of the Saiyids, the *ulama* and the other
Musulmãns, the whole city was sacked.”  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


