+++
title = "11 CHAPTER XI OF ASSIMILATION AND SYNTHESIS"

+++
**CHAPTER XI**

**OF ASSIMILATION AND SYNTHESIS**

Another major NCERT guideline regarding writing of medieval Indian
history is that “neglect and omission of trends and processes of
assimilation and synthesis, and growth of a composite culture” is
“prejudicial to national integration”.

The right hand does not know what the left hand has done. First, we are
told not to treat the Islamic invaders as foreigners. Next, we are asked
not to neglect trends and processes of assimilation and synthesis. One
may very well ask: If the Islamic invaders were not foreigners, who was
getting assimilated by whom? If the culture which these invaders brought
with them was not alien, what was getting synthesised with what? And
where is the need for inventing and sponsoring a composite culture,
unless the Islamic culture is found to be working at cross purposes with
the indigenous Hindu culture?

The Islamic invaders were not the first foreigners to come and settle
down in India. In earlier times, the Iranians, the Greeks, the
Parthians, the Scythians, the Kushanas, and the Hunas had also invaded
India, and settled down here. There were some Mongolian incursions also
in the north and the north-east. But by the time the Islamic invaders
came to India, all these foreigners had been fully assimilated in the
native population, and their cultures synthesised with the indigenous
Indian culture. We have never had an Iranian, or a Parthian, or a Greek,
or a Scythian, or a Kushana, or a Huna, or a Mongolian minority, or
culture, or problem.

On the other hand, the Parsis came to India almost at the same time as
the Muslims. They have remained a distinct minority with their own
characteristic culture. It has never occurred to any historian, or
sociologist, or politician to talk of the assimilation of Parsis in the
native Hindu population, or of the synthesis of Parsi culture with Hindu
culture. Till the other day, we had a Jewish minority which had kept its
racial and cultural identity intact for almost two thousand years
without creating any social, political, or cultural problem for the
Hindus. The Syrian Christians in South India were another religious and
cultural minority which was carved out of the native population by early
Christian missionaries, and which never threatened or felt threatened by
the local people till the militant missionaries who started coming with
the dawn of Western imperialism, began instigating them for mischief.

The point that I want to emphasis is that it is not necessary for
different racial groups to get assimilated, or for different cultures to
get synthesised before they can live in peaceful co-existence. It is
only when a culture is exclusive, intolerant, and aggressive that
peaceful coexistence runs into deep waters.  
 

**MUSLIMS ARE A PROBLEM EVERYWHERE**

It is not in India alone that the indigenous population has found it
well-nigh impossible to co-exist peacefully with the Muslims. Greece had
the same problem till it expelled its Muslim population. Yugoslavia and
Cyprus in the West and the Philippines in the East, have an unsolved
Muslim problem till today. Spain has no Muslim problem because it did
not allow Muslims to remain within its borders after it defeated its
Muslim invaders in a struggle spread over several centuries. Russia and
China have ‘solved’ their Muslim problem for the time being in quite
another wav - by massive terror and ruthless suppression. One wonders
for how long the experiment would survive.

On the other hand, no country where Islam has attained unrivalled power
has allowed non-Islamic minorities to survive. The Jews and the
Christians were given the status of zimmîs by the Prophet himself. But
what has happened to them in the lands of their birth? The Jews have
been finally driven out from all Islamic countries after having suffered
persecutions and humiliations in silence over the centuries. The
Christian Minority has met the same fate. Whatever Christian minorities
have managed to survive, as in Egypt and Lebanon, they are having a very
hard time at the hands of the latest wave of what is described as
Islamic fundamentalism. There are no Zoroastrians in Iran any more. One
wonders how long the Hindus of Bali and Malaysia will survive the
renewed Islamic offensive powered by petrodollars. The Hindus of
Bangladesh, for establishing which the Hindus shed their own blood, are
being harassed and hounded out.

The ruling class of secularists and socialists in India is trying to
solve the Muslim problem by concocting a composite culture which, in
their opinion, started taking shape in medieval India in the aftermath
of Islamic invasions and in course of the Muslim rule. I wish them
success. But I seriously doubt that the concoction will ever become a
concrete reality.  
 

**WHERE IS THE COMPOSITE CULTURE?**

The patron saint of India’s secularism, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, saw the
seeds of this composite culture sprouting in Muslim harems to which a
large number of Hindu women had been dragged by force. The proposition
is too preposterous to invite comment. Native women have always been a
game for foreign invaders. The process would have had some meaning if
the Hindu women had been allowed to retain their ancestral religion, or,
better still, if Hindu men also had been permitted to marry Muslim
women. Many Muslims in India today have one side of their ancestry in
the helpless Hindu women of medieval India. But how many of them take
pride in the Hindu part of their parentage? A one-way street should not
be termed a two-lane highway.

Another bird of the same feather has come out with the ‘bright” idea
that Hindu employees of the Muslim state in medieval India and even some
Hindu rulers and rich men had started donning Muslim dresses, adopting
Muslim mores and manners, and patronising Persian language and
literature. But even at its best, it was only cultural imposition or
imitation. Here also the relevant point is: Did the Muslim invaders,
except a microscopic minority, don any Hindu dress, or adopt any Hindu
mores and manners, or patronise any indigenous language and literature?
In any case, social usages like early marriage and *purdah* which Hindus
learnt from the Muslims can hardly be called “culture”. Something can be
said in favour of *pãn* which Muslims took from the Hindus, and *hennah*
which Hindus took from the Muslims.  But they are not very significant
parts of Hindu or Muslim culture. The same is true of *halwã, sherbat,
gulqand, achkan, chapkan, chapãtî, kharbûzã*, and *tarbûz*.

Some other stalwarts of the same secular tribe point towards many social
and cultural traits which were Hindu in their origin and which many
Muslims in India, particularly its peasant and artisan communities,
display at present. They forget that the vast majority of Muslims in
India are Hindu converts who have retained many native customs even
after they were forced or lured into the fold of Islam. For this failing
of theirs, the native Muslims have always been despised by their
*ashrãf* (Muslims of foreign descent) co-religionists, in spite of all
the tall talk of Islamic brotherhood. The mullahs have been constantly
mounting campaigns of *tablîgh* to cleanse the “native” Muslims of the
remnants of *jãhiliyya*. India has known quite a few movements trying to
finish the unfinished job - Islamizing the converts so completely that
not a trace of their earlier Hindu culture remains in either their
consciousness or outer way of life.  
 

**NOT IN ARCHITECTURE**

Some champions of composite culture go into a trance over the synthesis
of Hindu and Muslim architectural traditions. The Muslim rulers built
many mosques, *mazãrs, khãnqahs*, palaces, and picnic spots. The
materials used in these monuments had to be of Indian origin. The skills
employed at the lower levels were also that of the native masons and
labourers. These monuments, therefore, have quite a few features of the
Hindu architectural styles. On the other hand, some Hindu rulers and
rich men also built some monuments with domes and true arches - the two
elements of architecture which Muslims had borrowed from the Byzantine
empire and brought to India. But foreign rulers everywhere have always
used native materials, native skills, and even native styles to build
monuments which portray their power and wealth. And some native subjects
have always tried to tread in the footsteps of their foreign masters.

Whatever synthesis and assimilation has gone into the making of these
monuments has taken place at the purely physical level, and is entirely
a result of outer circumstances. I thought that assimilation and
synthesis meant some inner fusion, some psychological process also. Some
Hindu temples or *samãdhis* of Hindu saints built or even sponsored by
some Muslim monarchs would have been significant signs of synthesis. But
we search in vain for such signs. On the other hand, we find many
mosques, *mazãrs, khãnqahs*, and palaces built over the sites and out of
the debris of deliberately demolished Hindu temples, *samãdhis,
vihãras*, and palaces. And it is hard to find a mosque or a *mazãr*
built in the style of a Hindu temple or *samãdhi*, which is quite
significant.  
 

**NOR IN PAINTING, MUSIC, OR DANCE**

Muslims in India hardly patronised any painting till the time of the
Mughals. But the Mughal miniatures are purely Persian even when painted
by Hindu artists, or patronised by Hindu princes. The Rajput and other
Hindu schools of painting breathe an entirely different spirit, and draw
their inspiration from an altogether different source. There is no
synthesis, or assimilation, or even mutual influencing here.

It is only in the field of Hindustani music that we find Hindus and
Muslims sharing the same tradition. But the fact that many Muslims
specialise in this music does not make it Islamic. Islam has never had
any music of its own. What is known as Hindustani music today has always
been and remains Hindu music. Simply because some Hindu musicians
converted to Islam in order to obtain patronage, does not mean that
their music also underwent a similar conversion. *Qawwãlî* music
patronized by sufis is perhaps the only contribution of Islam. But it
has remained confined to Muslim society, particularly Muslim *dargahs*
and *mazãrs*. Hindus sing their own *bhajans*, in their own diction and
style, in their own places of worship.

The same is true in the field of dance and drama. The major schools and
styles remained purely Hindu even when Muslim princes patronised them.
*Mujrah* performed by prostitutes is perhaps the only Muslim
contribution, patronised by both Hindu and Muslim profligates. For the
rest, all folk dances and folk dramas all over India - the *swãng*, the
*bhañgrã*, the *jãtrã*, the *nautañkî*, the *tamãshã*, the South Indian
stage - are entirely Hindu in dress as well demeanour. It is quite a
different matter that Muslim masses enjoy them whole-heartedly even when
the mullahs frown upon them. The presence of Muslim audiences at these
performances proves nothing so far as composite culture is concerned. It
means only that Muslim masses retain some Hindu tastes in spite of
conversion to Islam.  
 

**NOR IN SCIENCE, OR LITERATURE**

Muslims had always a lot to learn from the Hindus and very little to
teach in the field of science. The only major science they brought with
them was the Greek system of medicine. But Hindus were not quite
unfamiliar with the system before the advent of Islam. Many Hindu
*hakîms* specialised in this system of medicine, and many more Hindus
benefited from it over the years. It is a great science. But so is
Ayurveda. What is significant in the present context is that we wait in
vain to find a Muslim practitioner of this Hindu system of medicine,
such has been the Muslim bias against most things Hindu. I wonder if a
Muslim ever went to a *vaidya* unless absolutely unavoidable because a
hakîm was not available.

The next secular historian compiles a list of Arabic and Persian
translations of Sanskrit and Prakrit classics to conclude that Muslims
and Hindus in medieval India travelled quite far towards one another.
But none of these translations helped the Muslims to appreciate, far
less to imbibe, any part of the Hindu spirit, or the Hindu cultural
vision. Nor did these translations soften the Muslims towards the
inheritors of such vast literary treasures, and regard them as anything
better than despicable *kãfirs* and *kirãDs*. Jayasi, Kutuban, Manjhan
and some other sufis wrote their epics in Indian languages because they
knew none of the languages patronised by Islam and, what is more
important, because Islam had not yet corroded the cultural soul of these
recent converts from the Hindu fold. I can cite several sufis who wrote
in Indian languages but who invited Muslim monarchs to impose on the
Hindus the disabilities decreed by the “laws” of Islam. Muslims like
Rasakhan were rare exception. Let us find a latter-day Muslim literature
or sufi who has some kind words to say about such “renegades”.

Hindu and Muslim literary traditions have been two separate streams
which have hardly influenced one another. Indian languages have borrowed
and assimilated many Arabic, Turkish, and Persian words. But these
classic languages of Islam have remained, by and large, impervious to
Hindu linguistic influences. They have kept every word of Indian origin
at an arm’s length. Urdu held some promise because its syntax as well as
a large part of its diction had its roots in this land. But Muslims
started claiming Urdu as the language of their culture, and the bridge
that might have been built was destroyed. Over the years, this language
has been heavily Arabicised and Persianised, and made more or less Greek
for the Hindus at large.  
 

**MUCH LESS IN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION**

Philosophy has never been a forte of Islam. Almost all its philosophical
speculations have been borrowed from the Greeks, and borrowed very
badly, because of the limitations imposed by the crudities of the Quran
and the Hadis. But even this bit of borrowing has always invited severe
indictment from the Ulama of Islam. Allama Iqbal was more than sure that
Greek philosophy had corrupted and corroded the pristine purity of
Islamic monotheism. And Muslim thinkers, by and large, have suffered
from the same dread vis-a-vis Hindu schools of thought. Hindu monism was
as much of an anathema to them as Hindu pantheism. On the other hand,
Hindu philosophy throughout medieval India followed an independent
course, free from any Islamic influence.

Our secular scholar feels on a firmer ground when he comes to the sufis
and Hindu saints of the so-called *NirguNa* school. Here, he says, is a
sure sign of synthesis, and that too at the highest level of human
aspiration. But all those who have made a comparative study of the
subject - Sufism and *NirguNa Bhakti* - are agreed that our secularist
is making a serious mistake. It is significant that no *NirguNa* saint
has mentioned the name of a single Indian sufi, while most of them have
spoken warmly of earlier sufis like Rabia, Mansur Al-Hallaj, Junaid,
Bayazid, Shams Tabriz and Adham Sultan. This is because these earlier
sufis were genuine mystics who lived before Islam was able to
extinguished finally the spiritual traditions of Arab Paganism,
Neo-Plantonism, Zoroastrianism, and Buddhism prevalent in the Middle
East. The Ulama of Islam came down very heavily upon these earlier sufis
as soon as the tone and temper of sufi poetry was noticed by the Ulama.
Al-Gazzali worked out a compromise - the sufis could sing and dance or
indulge in austerities provided they served Islam in its pursuit of
world-conquest and world-conversion. It was not long before Sufism
became an instrument and Islamic imperialism and terrorism. Even a sufi
of the stature of Fariduddin Attar relates with great approval the
following tale in his *Mantiq-ut-Tãir*: “It is said that when the Sultan
(Mahmud Ghaznavi) captured Somnath and wanted to break the idol, the
Brahmins offered to redeem it with its weight in gold. His officers
pointed out to him the advantage of accepting the offer, but he replied:
‘I am afraid that on the day of judgement when all the idolaters are
brought into the presence of God, He would say, bring Adhar and Mahmud
together; one was an idol-maker, the other an idol-seller.’ The Sultan
then ordered a fire to be lighted round it. The idol burst and 20
*manns* of precious stones poured out from its inside.”

The sufi *silsilãs* which travelled to India after the advent of
Muinuddin Chishti were departments of the imperialist establishment of
Islam. None of these sups looked kindly at the Hindus, nor did the
Hindus honour any of them with the exception of some simpletons who were
taken in by the show of sufi piety, or some self-seekers who were out of
curry favour with the Muslim courts with the help of sufis. Most sups
were like the latter-day Christian missionaries whose animus against the
Hindus is very well known. The *NirguNa* saints could not have been and
were not impressed by them. In fact, some noted sufis are named in
*NirguNa* poetry as shopkeepers and swindlers. On the other hand, the
*NirguNa* saints constantly questioned the exclusive claims of Islam.
They gave strength to Hindu society which the sufis were out of subvert
and supplant.

To sum up this subject of synthesis, assimilation, and composite
culture, I would better quote Dr. R.C. Majumdar, one of the best and
certainly the most versatile historian which modern India has known. He
writes: “There was no reapprochement in respect of popular or national
traditions, and those social and religious ideas and beliefs and
practices and institutions which touch the deeper chord of life, and
give it a distinctive form, tone and vigour. In short, the reciprocal
influences were too superficial in character to affect materially the
fundamental differences between the two communities in respect of almost
everything that is deep-seated in human nature and makes life worth
living. So the two great communities, although they lived side by side,
moved each in its own orbit and there was yet no sign that the twain
shall ever meet.” Again: “Nor did the Muslims ever moderate their zeal
to destroy ruthlessly the Hindu temples and images of gods, and their
attitude in this respect remained unchanged from the day when Muhammad
bin Qasim set foot on the soil of India till the 18th century A.D. when
they lost all political power.”

The other day, an artist friend of mine told me an interesting story:
“There was a painter who was fired by an irrepressible ambition to
produce a female figure which would be the most beautiful when compared
to all past and future performances in this field. He wandered all over
the world visiting art galleries and studying poets and prose writers in
many languages, in order to compile a collection of the most perfect
female feature - eyes, ears, nose, lips, chin, cheeks, bust, breasts,
hips, and so on. Finally, he sat down to compose and paint the portrait.
And it took him many more years to achieve the miracle…”

My friend fell silent at this point. I was agog with admiration, and
asked him: “Where is this masterpiece? Can I see a facsimile of it in
some book on art?” My friend smiled and said, “Sorry, I cannot help you.
The artist destroyed his handiwork as soon as he had finished it, and
then committed suicide.” I was shocked and asked him - why? My friend
replied: “Because the artist discovered that it was the most hideous
composition which had ever come out of a painter’s brush.”

This is no more a matter of joke. The promoters of composite culture
have been busy over the years in completing the job. They have gone a
long way in dismembering Hindu culture and presenting its separate limbs
as legacies of several socio-cultural streams - Austric, Dravidian,
Aryan, Mongolian, Scythian, and so on. They will not rest till they have
destroyed the unity of Hindu culture, and placed its components in such
a juxtaposition as will look like a hideous patchwork. But that is not
even half of the heart-rending story, They are bent upon forcing a
marriage between Hindu and Muslim cultures. The end-product will surpass
all possible horrors.

By all that I have written on the subject of composite culture, I do not
intend to say that I am opposed to an understanding and reconciliation
between the two communities. All I want to say is that no significant
synthesis or assimilation took place in the past, and history should not
be distorted and falsified to serve the political purposes of a
Hindu-baiting herd. If there is any lesson which we can profitably learn
from medieval Indian history, it is that no understanding between Hindus
and Muslims is possible unless the very first premises of Islam are
radically revised in keeping with reason, universality, and humanism.

A mere swelling of secular enthusiasm for Hindu-Muslim *Bhãi Bhãi*
without analysing and eradicating the basic causes of conflict, has
served only to harden the heart of Islam, and made it more
self-righteous. None of our secularists has the stature or sincerity of
Mahatma Gandhi in search of a settlement between Hindus and Muslims. In
fact, our secularists have a vested interest in the Hindu-Muslim
conflict which gives them their sense of superior heights as well as
protects their self-seeking. But assuming that they are sincere like the
Mahatma, they have no reason to harbour any illusion in a field where
the Mahatma failed so staggeringly. The secularists should search their
own minds and hearts, and study Hindu and Muslim cultures seriously
rather than go on a wild goose chase in the pages of past history.

The mind of the secularists was exhumed by Dr. R.C. Majumdar in his
Kamala Lectures delivered at the University of Calcutta in 1965. He said
with great anguish: “In India today there is an Islamic culture as also
an Indian culture. Only there is no Hindu culture. This word is now an
untouchable (*apãñkteya*) in civilised society. They very word Hindu is
now on the way to oblivion. Because many people believe that this word
symbolises a narrowness of mind and a diehard communalism.”  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


