+++
title = "13 APPENDIX"

+++
**APPENDIX**

(These articles appeared in the weekly *Organiser* and invited some
comments from the readers, particularly Dr. K.K. Mittal with whom I
developed almost a debate spread over several issues of the weekly. I
discovered that Dr. Mittal had equated Islam with Urdu poetry with which
he happened to be in love. The following questions from Sindhu, the
pseudonym used by the editor, Shri K.R. Malkani, and the answers I gave
are relevant to this book.)  
 

**ANY SILVER LINING?**

(Sindhu, New Delhi)

I have been following the Sitaram Goel series - and the Goel-Mittal
Debate - with much interest.

I agree with the intent of both, Shri Goel and Shri Mittal.

Shri Sitaram is only recapitulating recorded history. But the account
makes such sad reading that Dr. Mittal tries to see some silver linings.
Maybe he is only looking in a dark room for a black cat, that is not
there. But the effort is laudable.

Shri Goel is speaking the truth and nothing but the truth. But is it the
“whole truth”? Is it possible that Muslim rule was not all jet-black -
but also part-gray?

According to Max Weber, more ‘tribals’ joined the Hindu mainstream as a
result of the Muslim shock, than the number of Hindus who converted to
Islam.

As a friend once put it, it was in reaction to Muslims we became
“Hindus”; and it was in reaction to the British that we became
“Indians”.

While Hindu rulers through much of history contented themselves with
local hegemony, few of them had any idea of the political unity of
India. On the other hand, even regional Muslim chieftains were always
trying to expand and, if possible, to capture the centre. Could this be
interpreted as a contribution to the political unity of India?

A centralised State under the Sultans created a huge Common Market. Did
this encourage trade and industry?

When Europeans arrived in India, they found Delhi and Agra much bigger
and richer than London and Paris. Would this have been the case if
Muslim rule had been an unmitigated evil?

Even during Muslim rule, we produced great poets like Tulsi, Mira, Sur,
Kabir - apart from innumerable Sufi saint-poets. Why are these poets
silent about Muslim misrule? Is it because even the misrule was governed
by a certain rule of law?

I do not know. But perhaps Shri Goel, Dr. Mittal and other friends could
enlighten us all on these and other related points.  
 

**MUSLIM RULE HAD NO SILVER LINING**

(Sita Ram Goel)

Sindhu has raised certain questions in the *Organiser* dated April 11-
17, which I should like to answer. I may, however, state my final
conclusion first - Muslim rule in India was an unmitigated evil.

1\. I have never read Max Weber and do not know how he has arrived at
the conclusion that “more tribals joined the Hindu mainstream as a
result of the Muslim shock than the number of Hindus who were converted
to Islam”. Perhaps he had in mind the people of Assam whom Bakhtyar
Khalji and a few other Muslim invaders tried to subjugate, or the hill
people all over our northern borders whom Muhammad Tughlaq tried to
conquer but failed, or the Gonds who fought Akbar under Maharani
Durgavati, or the Bhils who fought for freedom under Maharana Pratap, or
the Mavlas who joined Shivaji at a later date. But the very fact that
these so-called “tribals” fought spontaneously against the Muslim
marauders rather than walk over to the winning side goes to prove that
they shared a common culture with the rest of the natives. Of course,
the term “Hindu” can be defined in a narrow manner to mean people within
the fold of *VarNãšrama* in which sense the so-called tribals were not
the so-called Hindus. But that is only proving what one has already
assumed. A Hindu should not walk into that trap.

2\. It is true that the natives of Bharatavarsha became known as Hindus
to themselves only after the Islamic invasion, as they were known
earlier only to the foreigners. But that was not a happy outcome which
we could welcome. We were a great culture before the Muslims came to
this country - the culture sustained by Sanãtana Dharma. The Muslim
invasion converted us into a mere community which was now called upon to
defend its very existence. We have to hug the term Hindu because
Bharatavarsha now is also inhabited by communities which do not share
the culture of Sanãtana Dharma. We have to have a distinct identity of
our own, however defective the name we choose or are forced by
circumstances to choose, for ourselves. Moreover, the term Hindu has now
become hallowed by association with countless heroes and martyrs who
lived and died for Hindu Dharma and the Hindu homeland. Even so, it
would be the beginning of a new dawn if we can win our alienated
brethren back to their ancestral faith and become once again a single
family sustained by Sanãtana Dharma. The term Hindu will then become
superfluous, and can be dropped.

3\. Hindu rulers on the eve of Muslim invasion had not totally forgotten
the idea of the political unity of India. The ancient tradition
enshrined in the Mahabharata and the Puranas and honoured by Indian
emperors as late as Samudragupta, namely, that the whole of
Bharatavarsha was a *cakravartî-kshetra*, was still smouldering when
many princes joined the Hindu Shahiyas in their fight against
Subuktigin. But the tradition had become greatly weakened, though it did
not die till 1947 when we accepted Partition and conceded to the
aggressor the fruits of his aggression. Of course, the ancient idea of
political unity was not the same as that brought in by Islam which has
always stood for a monolithic and militarised state serving a system of
an incurable fanaticism. Our concept of *sãmrajya* was derived from
Sanãtana Dharma and fostered a true federation of many *janapadas*
enjoying *swarãjya*, local autonomy, on the basis of *swadharma*, local
tradition and culture. Islam made no contribution to the unity of
Bharatavarsha; on the contrary, it seriously damaged the deeper fabric
of our national unity and, in the final outcome, dismembered the nation
into fragments like Afghanistan, Pakistan, Hindustan, Bangladesh, and
Nepal.

4\. The eulogisation of a common market is a capitalist-imperialist
innovation. It only means that the common people in the interior who
produce the wealth, are not permitted to enjoy it. The fruits of their
labour, enterprise, and skill are taken away from them by tampering with
the terms of trade, and made available to a parasitic population in
metropolitan centres; or, worse still, the common people in the interior
are forced or lured to produce not what they need for themselves but
what a parasitic urban population requires for a life of profligacy and
waste. The infrastructure created by the ancient culture of this country
was informed by the spirit of *swadeshi* - local materials, local
techniques, and local labour are mobilised for the satisfaction of local
needs, and only the surplus is sent out in exchange for useful goods
from outside. The Muslim rule damaged this infrastructure to a certain
extent under pressure from its parasitic court and aristocracy. But, by
and large, it survived the Muslim rule till it was undermined to a great
extent by inroads from British capitalism-imperialism. We are now
dealing to it the final death blows by our five-year plans. Let us be
fair to the Muslim rule in India. It did not create any significant
centralised market, nor, consequently, did it damage very significantly
the infrastructure which had proved an infallible source of strength
throughout our long history.

5\. The Europeans might have found Delhi and Agra bigger than London and
Paris at that time. But what was Europe as compared to India till the
end of the 18th century? It was a poor continent sending out large
armies of its anti-social elements in search of loot under the banner of
Christianity. Agra and Delhi should be compared with Pataliputra,
Varanasi, Ujjain, Kanauj, Kanchipuram, Madura and Tanjore which
flourished before the advent of Islam or even with contemporary
Vijayanagara, to find out what a sorry figure the former make. These
renowned seats of Muslim rule were small towns in comparison to the
leading cities in ancient India. Moreover, all Muslim cities were
networks of narrow slums which would have outraged the classical tastes
of our ancient town planners. The layout of Mohenjo-daro is the oldest
and that of Jaipur the latest specimen of what wide spaces entered the
imagination of an urban culture which derived its inspiration from an
infinitude of the inner Spirit. The Muslim cities were mostly ghettos -
the material manifestation of a spiritual ghetto which is Islam.

6\. Sufis during the Muslim rule might have been poets. I cannot judge
because I am no connoisseur of Persian poetry. But I seriously doubt if
they were saints, except a few on whom Islam continues to frown even
today. Nor were the sufis specific to India. Islam produced whole armies
of them in all lands it invaded during its heyday. In any case, I cannot
take pride in Indian sufis who were a part of the imperialist
establishment of Islam. On the other hand, Muslim rule had nothing to do
with the rise of Hindu saints like Kabir, Nanak, Tulsi, Sur and Mira.
They arose in spite of Islam, and flourished only because Islam could
not reach out to kill them. Shall we attribute the rise of Solzhenytsin
to the rule of Stalin? Human spirit is unconquerable in the long run.
Kabir and Nanak have referred to the inequities of Islam in very clear
terms. Tulsi, Mira and Sur did not refer to Islam because it was beneath
their contempt. At the same time, let us not forget that Mira flourished
in Mewar which was never under Muslim rule, and Tulsi and Sur flourished
under Akbar who had largely dismantled the edifice of the Islamic state
in India and struck up a deal with the Rajputs. The misrule of Islam was
of course governed by a rule of law - the “law” of Islam. But the “law”
of Islam never became universal in India. How gray Jewish, Christian,
Zoroastrian and Buddhist mystics and saints flourished in lands where
the “law” of Islam attained a universal sway?

I wonder if I have answered the 6 questions raised by Sindhu to his
entire satisfaction. But this is the best I know.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


