---
title: 06 IR part6

---
<div class="Section1">

VI

1940-1950

(This section consists of excerpts from writings, letters, and
messages.)

Early 1940

        At present mankind is undergoing an evolutionary crisis in which
is concealed a choice of its destiny.... Man has created a system of
civilisation which has become too big for his limited mental capacity
and understanding and his still more limited spiritual and moral
capacity to utilise and manage, a too dangerous servant of his
blundering ego and its appetites....

        Because the burden which is being laid on mankind is too great
for the present littleness of the human personality and its petty mind
and small life-instincts, because it cannot operate the needed change,
because it is using this new apparatus and organisation to serve the old
infraspiritual and infrarational life-self of humanity, the destiny of
the race seems to be heading dangerously, as if impatiently and in spite
of itself, under the drive of the vital ego seized by colossal forces
which are on the same scale as the huge mechanical organisation of life
and scientific knowledge which it has evolved, a scale too large for its
reason and will to handle, into a prolonged confusion and perilous
crisis and darkness of violent shifting incertitude. Even if this turns
out to be a passing phase or appearance and a tolerable structural
accommodation is found which will enable mankind to proceed less
catastrophically on its uncertain journey, this can only be a respite.
For the problem is fundamental and in putting it evolutionary Nature in
man is confronting herself with a critical choice which must one day be
solved in the true sense if the race is to arrive or even to survive.¹²⁷

\*\*\*

July 4, 1940

(In this letter, Sri Aurobindo is referring in particular to the
Allies.)

        If the nations or the governments who are blindly the
instruments of the divine forces were perfectly pure and divine in their
processes and forms of action as well as in the inspiration they receive
so ignorantly they would be invincible, because the divine forces
themselves are invincible. It is the mixture in the outward expression
that gives to the Asura the right to defeat them.¹²⁸

\*\*\*

September 19, 1940

(A message to the Governor of Madras, accompanied by a contribution.
This declaration was Sri Aurobindo's first public intervention since he
withdrew in 1910.)

        We feel that not only is this a battle waged in just
self-defence and in defence of the nations threatened with the
world-domination of Germany and the Nazi system of life, but that it is
a defence of civilisation and its highest attained social, cultural and
spiritual values and of the whole future of humanity. To this cause our
support and sympathy will be unswerving whatever may happen; we look
forward to the victory of Britain and, as the eventual result, an era of
peace and union among the nations and a better and more secure
world-order.¹²⁹

\*\*\*

March 31, 1942

(The British government, partly realizing the inevitability of India's
future independence and partly under American pressure to secure her
support during the war, sent Sir Stafford Cripps to India in March,
1942, with a proposal for dominion status after the war, as a first step
towards full independence. Sri Aurobindo sent Cripps the following
message.)

        As one who has been a nationalist leader and worker for India's
independence, though now my activity is no longer in the political but
in the spiritual field, I wish to express my appreciation of all you
have done to bring about this offer. I welcome it as an opportunity
given to India to determine for herself, and organise in all liberty of
choice, her freedom and unity, and take an effective place among the
world's free nations. I hope that it will be accepted, and right use
made of it, putting aside all discords and divisions.... I offer my
public adhesion, in case it can be of any help in your
work.^(130 [\[1\]](#_ftn1))

\*\*\*

August 7, 1943

*(From a talk.)*

        It was after Dunkirk that I openly came out with my declaration
and gave the contribution openly. If I had believed in appearances I
should not have. It is in spite of opposite appearances that you have to
act on faith.... If you depend upon reason then you can't know what is
Truth....

        Our people cannot understand why one who has the Divine
consciousness or Brahmic consciousness should take sides in a fight.
That is all right if you want to remain in the static Brahman; then you
can look upon the whole thing as Maya and it may not exist for you.

        But I believe in Brahman siding against Brahman—that the
Brahman, I think, has always been doing.... Krishna took sides openly in
the Mahabharata and Rama also.

\*\*\*

September 3, 1943

*(From a letter to a disciple.)*

        We \[Sri Aurobindo and Mother\] made it plain in a letter which
has been made public that we did not consider the war as a fight between
nations and governments (still less between good people and bad people)
but between two forces, the Divine and the Asuric. What we have to see
is on which side men and nations put themselves; if they put themselves
on the right side, they at once make themselves instruments of the
Divine purpose in spite of all defects, errors, wrong movements and
actions which are common to human nature and all human collectivities.
The victory of one side (the Allies) would keep the path open for the
evolutionary forces: the victory of the other side would drag back
humanity, degrade it horribly and might lead even, at the worst, to its
eventual failure as a race, as others in the past evolution failed and
perished. That is the whole question and all other considerations are
either irrelevant or of a minor importance. The Allies at least have
stood for human values, though they may often act against their own best
ideals (human beings always do that); Hitler stands for diabolical
values or for human values exaggerated in the wrong way until they
become diabolical (e.g. the virtues of the Herrenvolk, the master race).
That does not make the English or Americans nations of spotless angels
nor the Germans a wicked and sinful race, but as an indicator it has a
primary importance.

        ...

        Even if I knew that the Allies would misuse their victory or
bungle the peace or partially at least spoil the opportunities opened to
the human world by that victory, I would still put my force behind them.
At any rate things could not be one-hundredth part as bad as they would
be under Hitler. The ways of the Lord would still be open—to keep them
open is what matters. Let us stick to the real, the central fact, the
need to remove the peril of black servitude and revived barbarism
threatening India and the world....

        P.S. Ours is a Sadhana which involves not only devotion or union
with the Divine or a perception of Him in all things and beings but also
action as workers and instruments and a work to be done in the world or
a force to be brought in the world under difficult conditions; then one
has to see one's way and do what is commanded and support what has to be
supported, even if it means war and strife carried on whether through
chariots and bows and arrows or tanks and cars and American bombs and
planes, in either case *ghoram karma* \[a dreadful work, *Gita,*
3.1\].... As for violence etc. the old command rings out for us once
again after many ages: *“Mayaivaite nihatah purvameva nimittamatram
bhava Savyasacin”* \[By me and none other already they are slain, become
only the occasion, O Arjuna, *Gita*, 11.33\].¹³¹

\*\*\*

Mid-1940s

*(From a letter.)*

        I do not regard business as something evil or tainted, any more
than it is so regarded in ancient spiritual India.... All depends on the
spirit in which a thing is done, the principles on which it is built and
the use to which it is turned. I have done politics and the most violent
kind of revolutionary politics, *ghoram karma*, and I have supported war
and sent men to it, even though politics is not always or often a very
clean occupation nor can war be called a spiritual line of action. But
Krishna calls upon Arjuna to carry on war of the most terrible kind and
by his example encourage men to do every kind of human work,
*sarvakarmani.* Do you contend that Krishna was an unspiritual man and
that his advice to Arjuna was mistaken or wrong in principle?

        ...

        I do not regard the ascetic way of living as indispensable to
spiritual perfection or as identical with it. There is the way of
spiritual self-mastery and the way of spiritual self-giving and
surrender to the Divine, abandoning ego and desire even in the midst of
action or of any kind of work or all kinds of work demanded from us by
the Divine.... The Indian scriptures and Indian tradition, in the
Mahabharata and elsewhere, make room both for the spirituality of the
renunciation of life and for the spiritual life of action. One cannot
say that one only is the Indian tradition and that the acceptance of
life and works of all kinds, *sarvakarmani*, is un-Indian, European or
western and unspiritual.¹³²

\*\*\*

September, 1945

(From a letter.)

        About the present human civilisation. It is not this which has
to be saved; it is the world that has to be saved and that will surely
be done, though it may not be so easily or so soon as some wish or
imagine, or in the way that they imagine. The present must surely
change, but whether by a destruction or a new construction on the basis
of a greater Truth, is the issue. The Mother has left the question
hanging and I can only do the same.¹³³

\*\*\*

October 19, 1946

(From a letter to a disciple who expressed anguish at the widespread
horrors perpetrated on Hindus by Muslims in Bengal, notably in Noakhali
and Tippera districts, now in Bangladesh; this organized violence—which
the British government did nothing to stop—was part of Jinnah's plan of
“Direct Action” which was intended to demonstrate the impossibility for
Hindus and Muslims to live together, and therefore the inevitability of
Pakistan.)

        As regards Bengal, things are certainly very bad; the conditions
of the Hindus there are terrible and they may even get worse in spite of
the Interim *mariage de convenance* at Delhi.[\[2\]](#_ftn2) But we must
not let our reaction to it become excessive or suggest despair. There
must be at least twenty million Hindus in Bengal and they are not going
to be exterminated,—even Hitler with his scientific methods of massacre
could not exterminate the Jews who are still showing themselves very
much alive and as for Hindu culture, it is not such a weak and fluffy
thing as to be easily stamped out; it has lasted through something like
five millenniums at least and is going to carry on much longer and has
accumulated quite enough power to survive. What is happening did not
come to me as a surprise. I foresaw it when I was in Bengal and warned
people that it was probable and almost inevitable and that they should
be prepared for it. At that time no one attached any value to what I
said although some afterwards remembered and admitted, when the trouble
first began, that I have been right; only C. R. Das had grave
apprehensions and he even told me when he came to Pondicherry that he
would not like the British to go out until this dangerous problem had
been settled. But I have not been discouraged by what is happening,
because I know and have experienced hundreds of times that beyond the
blackest darkness there lies for one who is a divine instrument the
light of God's victory. I have never had a strong and persistent will
for anything to happen in the world—I am not speaking of personal
things—which did not eventually happen even after delay, defeat or even
disaster. There was a time when Hitler was victorious everywhere and it
seemed certain that a black yoke of the Asura would be imposed on the
whole world; but where is Hitler now and where is his rule? Berlin and
Nuremberg have marked the end of that dreadful chapter in human history.
Other blacknesses threaten to overshadow or even engulf mankind, but
they too will end as that nightmare has ended.¹³⁴

\*\*\*

December 2, 1946

(From a letter.)

        Mother India is not a piece of earth; she is a Power, a Godhead,
for all nations have such a Devi supporting their separate existence and
keeping it in being. Such Beings are as real and more permanently real
than the men they influence but they belong to a higher plane, are part
of the cosmic consciousness and being and act here on earth by shaping
the human consciousness on which they exercise their influence. It is
natural for man who sees only his own consciousness individual, national
or racial at work and does not see what works upon it and shapes it, to
think that all is created by him and there is nothing cosmic and greater
behind it.¹³⁵

\*\*\*

December 22, 1946

(A remark to a disciple on India's political scene.)

        Out of all of them, Patel[\[3\]](#_ftn3) is the only strong
man.¹³⁶

\*\*\*

April 9, 1947

(From a letter.)

        The difficulties \[you feel\] are general in the Ashram as well
as in the outside world. Doubt, discouragement, diminution or loss of
faith, waning of the vital enthusiasm for the ideal, perplexity and a
baffling of the hope for the future are the common features of the
difficulty. In the world outside there are much worse symptoms such as
the general increase of cynicism, a refusal to believe in anything at
all, a decrease of honesty, an immense corruption, a preoccupation with
food, money, comfort, pleasure to the exclusion of higher things and a
general expectation of worse and worse things awaiting the world. All
that, however acute, is a temporary phenomenon for which those who know
anything about the workings of the world-energy and the workings of the
Spirit were prepared. I myself foresaw that this worst would come, the
darkness of night before dawn; therefore I am not discouraged. I know
what is preparing behind the darkness and can see and feel the first
signs of its coming. Those who seek for the Divine have to stand firm
and persist in their seeking; after a time, the darkness will fade and
begin to disappear and the Light will come.¹³⁷

\*\*\*

August 15, 1947

(A passage from Sri Aurobindo's message on the occasion of India's
independence. August 15 is also Sri Aurobindo's own birthday.)

        India is free but she has not achieved unity, only a fissured
and broken freedom.... The old communal division into Hindu and Muslim
seems to have hardened into the figure of a permanent political division
of the country. It is to be hoped that the Congress and the nation will
not accept the settled fact as for ever settled or as anything more than
a temporary expedient. For if it lasts, India may be seriously weakened,
even crippled: civil strife may remain always possible, possible even a
new invasion and foreign conquest. The partition of the country must
go,—it is to be hoped by a slackening of tension, by a progressive
understanding of the need of peace and concord, by the constant
necessity of common and concerted action, even of an instrument of union
for that purpose. In this way unity may come about under whatever
form—the exact form may have a pragmatic but not a fundamental
importance. But by whatever means, the division must and will go. For
without it the destiny of India might be seriously impaired and even
frustrated. But that must not be.^(138 [\[4\]](#_ftn4))

\*\*\*

1947 (?)

(From notes to biographers.)

        The idea of two nationalities in India is only a newly-fangled
notion invented by Jinnah for his purposes and contrary to the facts.
More than 90% of the Indian Mussalmans are descendants of converted
Hindus and belong as much to the Indian nation as the Hindus themselves.
This process of conversion has continued all along; Jinnah is himself a
descendant of a Hindu, converted in fairly recent times, named Jinahbhai
and many of the most famous Mohammedan leaders have a similar origin.¹³⁹

\*

        History very seldom records the things that were decisive but
took place behind the veil; it records the show in front of the
curtain.... My action in giving the movement in Bengal \[at the
beginning of the century\] its militant turn or founding the
revolutionary movement is very little known.¹⁴⁰

\*

        In some quarters there is the idea that Sri Aurobindo's
political standpoint was entirely pacifist, that he was opposed in
principle and in practice to all violence and that he denounced
terrorism, insurrection, etc., as entirely forbidden by the spirit and
letter of the Hindu religion. It is even suggested that he was a
forerunner of the gospel of Ahimsa. This is quite incorrect. Sri
Aurobindo is neither an impotent moralist nor a weak pacifist.

        The rule of confining political action to passive resistance was
adopted as the best policy for the National Movement at that stage \[in
1905 and after\] and not as a part of a gospel of Non-violence or
pacifist idealism. Peace is a part of the highest ideal, but it must be
spiritual or at the very least psychological in its basis; without a
change in human nature it cannot come with any finality. If it is
attempted on any other basis (moral principle or gospel of Ahimsa or any
other), it will fail and even may leave things worse than before.

        ...

        Sri Aurobindo's position and practice in this matter was the
same as Tilak's and that of other Nationalist leaders who were by no
means Pacifists or worshippers of Ahimsa.¹⁴¹

\*\*\*

July 18, 1948

(From a letter.)

        I am afraid I can hold out but cold comfort—for the present at
least—to those of your correspondents who are lamenting the present
state of things. Things are bad, are growing worse and may at any time
grow worst or worse than worst if that is possible—and anything however
paradoxical seems possible in the present perturbed world. The best
thing for them is to realise that all this was necessary because certain
possibilities had to emerge and be got rid of, if a new and better world
was at all to come into being; it would not have done to postpone them
for a later time.... Also they can remember the adage that night is
darkest before dawn and that the coming of dawn is inevitable. But they
must remember too that the new world whose coming we envisage is not to
be made of the same texture as the old and different only in pattern,
and that it must come by other means—from within and not from without;
so the best way is not to be too much preoccupied with the lamentable
things that are happening outside, but themselves to grow within so that
they may be ready for the new world, whatever form it may take.¹⁴²

\*\*\*

December, 1948

(Extracts from a message to the Andhra University, which on December 11
conferred on Sri Aurobindo the Sir Cattamanchi Ramalinga Reddy National
Prize.)

        India, shut into a separate existence by the Himalayas and the
ocean, has always been the home of a peculiar people with
characteristics of its own recognisably distinct from all others, with
its own distinct civilisation, way of life, way of the spirit, a
separate culture, arts, building of society. It has absorbed all that
has entered into it, put upon all the Indian stamp, welded the most
diverse elements into its fundamental unity. But it has also been
throughout a congeries of diverse peoples, lands, kingdoms and, in
earlier times, republics also, diverse races, sub-nations with a marked
character of their own, developing different brands or forms of
civilisation and culture, many schools of art and architecture which yet
succeeded in fitting into the general Indian type of civilisation and
culture. India's history throughout has been marked by a tendency, a
constant effort to unite all this diversity of elements into a single
political whole under a central imperial rule so that India might be
politically as well as culturally one. Even after a rift had been
created by the irruption of the Mohammedan peoples with their very
different religion and social structure, there continued a constant
effort of political unification and there was a tendency towards a
mingling of cultures and their mutual influence on each other; even some
heroic attempts were made to discover or create a common religion built
out of these two apparently irreconcilable faiths and here too there
were mutual influences.

        ...

        The ancient diversities of the country carried in them great
advantages as well as drawbacks. By these differences the country was
made the home of many living and pulsating centres of life, art,
culture, a richly and brilliantly coloured diversity in unity; all was
not drawn up into a few provincial capitals or an imperial metropolis,
other towns and regions remaining subordinated and indistinctive or even
culturally asleep; the whole nation lived with a full life in its many
parts and this increased enormously the creative energy of the whole.
There is no possibility any longer that this diversity will endanger or
diminish the unity of India. Those vast spaces which kept her people
from closeness and a full interplay have been abolished in their
separating effect by the march of Science and the swiftness of the means
of communication. The idea of federation and a complete machinery for
its perfect working have been discovered and will be at full work. Above
all, the spirit of patriotic unity has been too firmly established in
the people to be easily effaced or diminished, and it would be more
endangered by refusing to allow the natural play of life of the
sub-nations than by satisfying their legitimate aspirations. The
Congress itself in the days before liberation came had pledged itself to
the formation of linguistic provinces, and to follow it out, if not
immediately, yet as early as may conveniently be, might well be
considered the wisest course.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) India's national life will
then be founded on her natural strengths and the principle of unity in
diversity which has always been normal to her and its fulfilment the
fundamental course of her being and its very nature, the Many in the
One, would place her on the sure foundation of her Swabhava and
Swadharma....

        A union of States and regional peoples would again be the form
of a united India.

        ...

        In this hour, in the second year of its liberation the nation
has to awaken to many more very considerable problems, to vast
possibilities opening before her but also to dangers and difficulties
that may, if not wisely dealt with, become formidable.... There are
deeper issues for India herself, since by following certain tempting
directions she may conceivably become a nation like many others evolving
an opulent industry and commerce, a powerful organisation of social and
political life, an immense military strength, practising power-politics
with a high degree of success, guarding and extending zealously her
gains and her interests, dominating even a large part of the world, but
in this apparently magnificent progression forfeiting its Swadharma,
losing its soul. Then ancient India and her spirit might disappear
altogether and we would have only one more nation like the others and
that would be a real gain neither to the world nor to us. There is a
question whether she may prosper more harmlessly in the outward life yet
lose altogether her richly massed and firmly held spiritual experience
and knowledge. It would be a tragic irony of fate if India were to throw
away her spiritual heritage at the very moment when in the rest of the
world there is more and more a turning towards her for spiritual help
and a saving Light. This must not and will surely not happen; but it
cannot be said that the danger is not there. There are indeed other
numerous and difficult problems that face this country or will very soon
face it. No doubt we will win through, but we must not disguise from
ourselves the fact that after these long years of subjection and its
cramping and impairing effects a great inner as well as outer liberation
and change, a vast inner and outer progress is needed if we are to
fulfil India's true destiny.¹⁴³

\*\*\*

April, 1950

(From a Postcript Chapter to The Ideal of Human Unity.)

        The indwelling deity who presides over the destiny of the race
has raised in man's mind and heart the idea, the hope of a new order
which will replace the old unsatisfactory order, and substitute for it
conditions of the world's life which will in the end have a reasonable
chance of establishing permanent peace and well-being.... It is for the
men of our day and, at the most, of tomorrow to give the answer. For,
too long a postponement or too continued a failure will open the way to
a series of increasing catastrophes which might create a too prolonged
and disastrous confusion and chaos and render a solution too difficult
or impossible; it might even end in something like an irremediable crash
not only of the present world-civilisation but of all civilisation.

        ...

        The terror of destruction and even of large-scale extermination
created by these ominous discoveries[\[6\]](#_ftn6) may bring about a
will in the governments and peoples to ban and prevent the military use
of these inventions, but, so long as the nature of mankind has not
changed, this prevention must remain uncertain and precarious and an
unscrupulous ambition may even get by it a chance of secrecy and
surprise and the utilisation of a decisive moment which might
conceivably give it victory and it might risk the tremendous chance.¹⁴⁴

\*

(In October, 1950, six months after Sri Aurobindo wrote what follows,
China invaded Tibet; an appeal by Tibet to the United Nations fell on
deaf ears, and India remained a silent spectator. In October, 1962,
China launched an offensive on India's northern borders.)

        In Asia a more perilous situation has arisen, standing sharply
across the way to any possibility of a continental unity of the peoples
of this part of the world, in the emergence of Communist China. This
creates a gigantic bloc which could easily englobe the whole of Northern
Asia in a combination between two enormous Communist Powers, Russia and
China, and would overshadow with a threat of absorption South-Western
Asia and Tibet and might be pushed to overrun all up to the whole
frontier of India, menacing her security and that of Western Asia with
the possibility of an invasion and an overrunning and subjection by
penetration or even by overwhelming military force to an unwanted
ideology, political and social institutions and dominance of this
militant mass of Communism whose push might easily prove irresistible.
In any case, the continent would be divided between two huge blocs which
might enter into active mutual opposition and the possibility of a
stupendous world-conflict would arise dwarfing anything previously
experienced....¹⁴⁵

\*\*\*

April 4, 1950

(From a letter to a disciple.)

        You have expressed in one of your letters your sense of the
present darkness in the world round us.... For myself, the dark
conditions do not discourage me or convince me of the vanity of my will
to “help the world”, for I knew they had to come; they were there in the
world nature and had to rise up so that they might be exhausted or
expelled and a better world freed from them might be there. After all,
something has been done in the outer field and that may help or prepare
for getting something done in the inner field also. For instance, India
is free and her freedom was necessary if the Divine Work was to be done.
The difficulties that surround her now and may increase for a time,
especially with regard to the Pakistan imbroglio, were also things that
had to come and to be cleared out. Nehru's efforts to prevent the
inevitable clash are not likely to succeed for more than a short time
and so it is not necessary to give him the slap you wanted to go to
Delhi to administer to him. Here too there is sure to be a full
clearance, though unfortunately, a considerable amount of human
suffering in the process is inevitable. Afterwards the work for the
Divine will become more possible and it may well be that the dream, if
it is a dream, of leading the world towards the spiritual Light, may
even become a reality. So I am not disposed even now, in these dark
conditions, to consider my will to help the world as condemned to
failure.¹⁴⁶

\*\*\*

June 28, 1950

(From a letter.)

        I do not know why you want a line of thought to be indicated to
you for your guidance in the affair of Korea.[\[7\]](#_ftn7) There is
nothing to hesitate about there, the whole affair is as plain as a
pike-staff. It is the first move in the Communist plan of campaign to
dominate and take possession first of these northern parts and then of
South East Asia as a preliminary to their manoeuvres with regard to the
rest of the continent—in passing, Tibet as a gate opening to
India.[\[8\]](#_ftn8) If they succeed, there is no reason why domination
of the whole world should not follow by steps....¹⁴⁷

\*\*\*

 (Some forty years earlier, on September 18, 1909, Sri Aurobindo wrote
...)

        The end of a stage of evolution is usually marked by a powerful
recrudescence of all that has to go out of the evolution.

\*\*\*

November, 1950

(From Sri Aurobindo's last writings.)

        This world is not really created by a blind force of Nature:
even in the Inconscient the presence of the supreme Truth is at work;
there is a seeing Power behind it which acts infallibly and the steps of
the Ignorance itself are guided even when they seem to stumble.... In
this vast and apparently confused mass of existence there is a law, a
one truth of being, a guiding and fulfilling purpose of the
world-existence.¹⁴⁸

\*\*\*

On December 5, 1950, Sri Aurobindo left his body. For ten years he had
worked to free India from the clutches of an alien rule; for forty years
thereafter he laboured to free the earth from the clutches of a dying
age. But among all the nations of the world, India always held a special
place in his consciousness: to him she was the Mother, a being with a
unique mission and destiny in these birth-throes of a new age.

For a long time now, the ancient Mother has lain prostrate, half
slumbering, half decaying, a prey to a thousand cancers. But even today,
if we awaken to what makes her a country unlike any other, if we
rediscover in ourselves the simple secret of her ancient Shakti, if we
see her bleeding flesh and hear her prayer to us, we can yet bring about
her rebirth.

\*\*\*

June 6, 1967

(An inner communication from Sri Aurobindo to Mother.)

        All the countries live in falsehood.

        If only one country stood courageously for truth,

        the world might be saved.¹⁴⁹  
\*\*\*

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) The next day, on April 1, Cripps replied with the
following telegram: “I am most touched and gratified by your kind
message allowing me to inform India that you who occupy unique position
in imagination of Indian youth, are convinced that declaration of His
Majesty's Government substantially confers that freedom for which Indian
Nationalism has so long struggled.”

          Sri Aurobindo in addition sent a personal messenger to the
Congress to urge them to accept Cripps' proposal; he also sent a
telegram to C. Rajagopalachari, in which he said: “... Appeal to you to
save India. Formidable danger new foreign domination when old on way to
self-elimination.” (Japan was then threatening to invade Burma and
India; a few days earlier, it had also become known that Subhas Bose was
in Germany and, confident of Germany's victory, was trying to organize
with its help an anti-British front.)

          Sri Aurobindo's advice was ignored: “He has retired from
political life, why does he interfere?” said Gandhi to Duraiswamy Iyer,
Sri Aurobindo's messenger. Although Nehru and Rajagopalachari favoured
acceptance of Cripps' offer, Gandhi found it unacceptable “because of
his opposition to war.” Maulana Azad, President of the Congress, also
opposed it, and the Congress finally turned it down. Had Cripps'
proposal been accepted, the Partition and the blood bath that followed
might have been averted, as also the three Indo-Pakistan wars.

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) A reference to the Interim Government worked out
between the British and the Congress, which the Muslim League had just
agreed to join.

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel (1875-1950), who as India's
Home Minister after Independence showed great firmness in negotiating
the integration of the princely states, Kashmir's accession to India,
and the merger of the Hyderabad state.

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Newly created Pakistan invaded Kashmir two months
later. The Indian army was able to repulse the attack and was about to
drive Pakistani forces out of Kashmir when Nehru called a halt to the
fighting and brought the “dispute” before the United Nations—with the
result that Kashmir is still today divided and its Pakistan-occupied
part a continual source of terrorism flowing into India, as part of the
preparation for what Pakistani leaders have called “the need for a
second partition of India.”

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) The formation of Indian states along linguistic lines
in the following years, while meeting Sri Aurobindo's suggestion on the
surface, was in practice accompanied by such a high degree of
centralization and all-pervasive bureaucratization that the “natural
play of life” of the provinces was stifled rather than encouraged; the
rigid and uniform machinery of parliamentary representation imposed on
the states, which admittedly has served mainly to generate corruption
and foster divisions, was also hardly capable of providing the “perfect
working” Sri Aurobindo had in mind for an Indian federation.

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) A reference to the recent discovery and use of
nuclear weapons.

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) A few days earlier, North Korean forces launched an
attack on South Korea with Soviet support; Chinese troops joined in a
few months later.

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) China invaded Tibet four months later, in October.

</div>

</div>
