+++
title = "11 CHAPTER TEN THE PRE-ISLAMIC ARABS"

+++
**CHAPTER TEN**

**THE PRE-ISLAMIC ARABS**

Muslim theologians and historians present a pretty dark picture of
pre-Islamic Arabia. Its people, we are told, were unrepentant pagans and
polytheists unware of the Unity of God and the succession of his
Prophets. They believed that Allãh, the one and only True God, stood in
need of partners who could mediate between him and his creatures. Worse
still, they gave daughters to Allãh while they preferred sons for
themselves. They worshipped stones (*authãn*) and statues (*aSnãm*) and
offered sacrifices to satans. They had had no Prophet (*Rasûl*) and
possessed no scripture (*Kitãb*) of their own. Consequently, they were
ignorant of the Last Day (*Qiyãmat*), as also of Heaven (*Jannat*) and
Hell (*Jahannam*). They revelled in blood feuds, and buried alive their
female infants. Sons married their step-mothers, and the same man two or
more uterine sisters. And so on, till the conviction grows on the
readers or listeners that the pre-Islamic Arabs were despicable
barbarians.

Christian theologians and historians follow suit. They do not endorse
Muhammad as a prophet; in fact, they call him an impostor. All the same,
they prefer him to the pagans and polytheists whom he fought and
subdued. They do not concede that Muhammad’s message was spiritually
sound or morally adequate. Yet they hail his teachings as a marked
improvement on the mode of worship and morals which prevailed earlier.
Thus they stand solidly, though negatively, united with their Muslim
counterparts in denouncing the state of affairs in pre-Islamic Arabia.

And there is no dearth of Hindu scholars, even Hindu saints, who join
the chorus. Even those Hindus who are by no means enamoured of Islam and
distrust or despise it as a religion, regard it none-the-less an immense
improvement over what went in Arabia before its advent. They say that
Islam united the “Arab rabble” into a “nation”, and gave them at least
the “rudiments of culture”. It never occurs to these Hindus that Muslim
scholars who denounce pre-Islamic Arabia view pre-Islamic India also as
an “area of darkness” to which Islam brought “illumination” for the
first time. Though Hindus have been victims of Islamic aggression for
several centuries, few of them feel sympathy for victims of the same
aggression elsewhere.

The pre-Islamic Arabs seem to have no case simply because no one and
almost nothing has survived to tell their side of the story. Unlike the
Hindus who have survived the onslaught of Islam and can compare what
they had with what was brought in by Islam, the pre-Islamic Arabs have
passed into what is more or less a total oblivion. The Prophet of Islam
and his rightly-guided Caliphs saw to it that no trace was left of the
pre-Islamic religion and culture of Arabia, not even in the
consciousness of the converts. Franz Babinger writes vis-a-vis the
pre-Islamic Sabaean civilization of Arabia: “The new creed had the
greatest interest in obliterating all recollection of the pagan period,
not only in stone monuments which still survived the natural
weathering--these were destroyed to provide material for new buildings,
or burned for lime or sometimes out of sheer vandalism--but also in
literature, and even in consigning the ancient language to
oblivion.”^([1](#1)) Whatever could not be wiped out was converted so
completely as to look like a contribution of Islam. The Ka’ba and the
Hajj ceremonies provide excellent examples. So does the Arabic language
which, although it retains its old sounds and syntax, has been made to
convey meanings and concepts which were foreign to it in its pristine
state.

The greatest blow which pre-Islamic Arabia has suffered is the
perversion of its history. An overwhelming majority of the Arabs had
never heard of Abraham before Muhammad started mentioning him; those few
who had, had no reason to like him in view of the contempt which his
people, the Jews settled in Arabia, had continued to pour on the
Arabs. Moreover, it was not long before the birth of Muhammad that the
king of Yemen who had converted to the creed of Abraham had massacred
thousands of Christianised Arabs. Therefore, the Arabs who were
extremely tolerant in matters of belief could not but have looked
askance at the very name of Abraham.^([2](#2)) Yet the Prophet
proclaimed that the Arabs were the progeny of Abraham through his elder
son, Ismael!  He went much farther. He “discovered” that the foremost
Arab temple, the Ka‘ba at Mecca, had been built by Adam, renovated by
his son, Seth, and rebuilt by Abraham!  He accused the Arabs of having
usurped, for polytheistic worship, a place which was originally meant to
be a mosque! The theologians and historians who followed, abolished the
real forefathers of the Arabs altogether and linked them to lineage of
the Jews. Small wonder that every comprehensive history of Arabia
written by pious Muslim chroniclers starts with Adam and Eve, and fills
its spaces with the progeny of Abraham.^([3](#3))

This Islamic version of Arab history would have continued to prevail if
modern scholarship had not rescued the true version by means of
painstaking research. “Our knowledge of the history,” writes F. Hommel,
“we owe partly to inscriptions found in the country, partly in
contemporary literatures and monuments of other nations (Babylonians and
Assyrians, Egyptians, Hebrews, Greeks and Romans) and partly also (for
the centuries immediately preceding Muhammad) to early Islamic
tradition… As early as the 3rd millennium BC the old Babylonian
inscriptions mention a king Manium (also in the fuller form Mannudannu)
or Magan of East Arabia; there is much to be said for the view that
Magan was only a Sumerian rendering of an Arabic Ma’ãn and that from
this centre was founded (at a date unknown to us) the South Arabian
kingdom of Ma’ãn (later vocalisation Ma’în) or the Minaean state which
perhaps in the beginning embraced the whole of South Arabia… In addition
a district named Melukh is mentioned as lying further off, probably
covering Central and North West Arabia from which as well as from Magan
the Sumerians e.g. Gudea of Sirgulla (about 2350 BC) imported a large
quantity of products (wood, stone and metals) for their
temples…”^([4](#4))

The same sources tell us about the Sabaeans who flourished in Arabia
from 800 BC onwards, till they were “swept away by the wave of
Muhammadan conquest.” They practised “an ancient natural religion” in
which “the sun, the moon and the planets” figured prominently. They
“believed in the migration of the soul and in great world periods
constantly renewed in an everlasting revolutions,” which remind us of
the Hindu theories of rebirth and the yugas. They built “massive
temples” and “handsome gold and silver statues of their chief
gods.”^([5](#5)) The Greeks and the Romans knew “Saba and three other
South Arabian kingdoms… as the areas which produce frankincense, myrrh,
cassia and cinnarnon”^([6](#6)) and praised them “as brave soldiers,
industrious tillers of the soil and traders and skilful sailors” who
“sent out colonies or at least trading settlements into foreign lands,
especially India.”^([7](#7)) Modern archaeology has exposed “sculptures
and remains of colonnades, palaces, temples, city walls, towers, public
works, especially water-works etc., which confirm the brilliant picture
of Sabaean culture…”^([8](#8))

Similar is the story of the Nabataeans who arose in North Arabia or
Arabia Petraea about the same time as the Sabaeans in Arabia Flex or
South Arabia, and extended their sway upto the frontiers of Hijaz. They
were “never completely subjected either by the Assyrians, or the Medes,
Persians or the Mecedonian kings.” It was the Romans who conquered for
the first time a part of the Nabataean kingdom in the north in AD 106
and named it *Provincia Arabia*. The Nabataeans too were great traders
who “attained… the position of monopolists in Near Asia.”^([9](#9)) In
their pantheon, which we know “mainly from tombs and votive
inscriptions… the principal God was Dushara (Dhu’l-Sharã), the principal
goddess Allãt.”^([10](#10))

None of the Minaean or Sabaean or Nabataean inscriptions mentions
Abraham or Ismael or any term indicative of the Judeo-Christian belief
system which Muhammad will impose on the Arabs in the form of Islam. It
is only towards the end of the pagan period that a South Arabian
inscription dated AD 542-543 mentions for the first time “the power and
grace and mercy of the Merciful (*RaHmãnãn*) and his Messiah and the
Holy Spirit.”^([11](#11)) The inscription was set up by Abraha, the
Governor of South Arabia, on behalf of the Christian king of Abyssinia.
How Abraha became what he became is an interesting story which explains
the repugnance felt by the pagan Arabs for both Judaism and
Christianity, as also for the names and terms associated with these
creeds.

The Monophysite sect of Christianity had found refuge in Najran, a
province of South Arabia, after it was expelled by the official Church
from the Byzantine territory in the reign of Justinian I (AD 527-565).
Some Arabs of Najran had also become converts to Christianity. Around
the same time, Dhû Nûwas, king of Yemen which included Najran, had
embraced Judaism. He declared war on the Christians of Najran when he
found them unwilling to come into the fold of his own creed. “Dhû 
Nûwas,” writes Ibn Ishãq, “came against them with his armies and invited
them to accept Judaism, giving them the choice between that or death:
they chose death. So he dug trenches for them; burnt some in fire, slew
some with the sword, and mutilated them until he had killed nearly
twenty thousand of them.”^([12](#12))

The Christians of Najran appealed for help to the Negus, the Christian
king of Abyssinia. An Abyssinian army under Aryãt descended on Yemen,
defeated and killed Dhû Nûwas, and occupied the land. Under orders from
the Negus, a third of the women and children of Yemen were captured,
sent to Abyssinia, and sold into slavery.^([13](#13)) The Arabs who had
embraced Judaism were massacred. In due course, Abraha succeeded Aryãt
as the Abyssinian Governor of Yemen. He set up the aforementioned
Christian inscription. Later on, he swore that he would destroy the
Ka‘ba, the foremost temple of the pagan Arabs. He led an army to Mecca
in AD 570, the same year in which Muhammad was born. The Ka‘ba, however,
escaped unhurt because of a miracle which turned away the Abyssinian
horde and which the Arabs credited to Allãh, the presiding deity of
their pantheon. Meanwhile, the pagan Arabs had had a first hand
experience of what Judaism and Christianity stood for.

The religious strife which these alien creeds had brought to Arabia was
unknown to the pre-Islamic Arabs who, like all pagans, were very liberal
in matters of belief and modes of worship. They witnessed how the two
exclusive creeds had combined to cause not only large-scale bloodshed
but also a foreign invasion, entailing enslavement of Arab women and
children and occupation of Arab territory by an alien army. The name of
Abraham was associated with both the creeds, as also the word
*“RaHmãn”*. Naturally, the Arabs could not be expected to be fond of
either the name or the word.

The historians of Islam mention Abraha’s march on Mecca, as also his
frustration and retreat in the face of a miracle. But they conceal the
fact that the Ka‘ba at that time was a place of pagan worship crowded
with numerous idols of Gods and Goddesses. Instead, they lie and credit
the miracle to the God of Abraham. That God, however, was nowhere near
the Ka‘ba during that period. Allãh who presided over the pagan pantheon
had not yet been hijacked by Muhammad and converted into the exclusive
God of Islam. In fact, it was the pagan character of the Ka‘ba which had
invited the attack by a Christian iconoclast. And it was the God of the
pagans who had performed the miracle.  
 

**Character of Pre-Islamic Arabs**

Modern scholars have not only salvaged pre-Islamic Arab history; they
have also pieced together a picture of the pagan Arabs among whom
Muhammad was born. For the latter purpose they have had to depend solely
on Islamic sources. They have done a creditable job in view of the fact
that these sources were deliberately intended to black out or blacken
whatever functioned in Arabia before the birth of Islam. They have
succeeded in gleaning some good glimpses of people who stood up to
Muhammad and challenged his claim of monopoly over truth. The material
they have collected is meagre. Yet it does help us meet some men and
women of sterling character and heroic bearing. The adversaries of
Muhammad score over him and his companions hands down so far as
qualities of head and heart are concerned.

This is not the occasion to go into greater detail about the shape of
pre-Islamic society and culture in Arabia. In the present context, we
have to confine ourselves to its pre-Islamic religion which Muhammad
destroyed root and branch and replaced with alien prescriptions. So far
as Muhammad’s adversaries are concerned, let a professor from Pakistan
speak, even though his views are coloured considerably by the historical
lore of Islam:

“Although religion had little influence on the lives of pre-Islamic
Arabs,^([14](#14)) we must not suppose them to be an altogether lawless
people. The pagan society of ancient Arabia was built on certain moral
ideas, which may be briefly described here. They had no written code,
religious or legal, except the compelling force of traditional custom
which was enforced by public opinion; but their moral and social ideals
have been faithfully preserved in their poetry, which is the only form
of literature which has come down to us from those old days.

“The virtues most highly prized by the ancient Arabs were bravery in
battle, patience in misfortune, loyalty to one’s fellow tribesmen,
generosity to the needy and the poor, hospitality to the guest and the
wayfarer, and persistence in revenge. Courage in battle and fortitude in
warfare were particularly required in a land where might was generally
right and tribes were constantly engaged in attacking one another. It
is, therefore, not a mere chance that in the famous anthology of Arabian
verse, called the *Hamãsah*, poems relating to inter-tribal warfare
occupy more than half of the book. These poems applaud the virtues most
highly prized by the Arabs-bravery in battle, patience in hardship,
defiance of the strong, and persistence in revenge.

“The tribal organization of the Arabs was then, as now, based on the
principle of kinship or common blood, which served as the bond of union
and social solidarity. To defend the family and the tribe, individually
and collectively, was, therefore, regarded as a sacred duty; and honour
required that a man should stand by his people through thick and
thin. If kinsmen sought help, it was to be given promptly, without
considering the merits of the case. Chivalrous devotion and
disinterested self-sacrifice on behalf of their Kinsmen and friends
were, therefore, held up as a high ideal of life.”^([15](#15))

The king of Persia had said to one of the pre-Islamic Arab princes that
the latter’s people were inferior to every other people. The prince had
replied, “What nation could be put before the Arabs for strength or
beauty or piety, courage, munificence, wisdom, pride, or fidelity?… So
liberal was he that he would slaughter the camel which was his sole
wealth to give a meal to the stranger who came to him at night. No other
nation had poetry so elaborate or a language so expressive as theirs.
Theirs were the noblest horses, the chastest women, the finest raiment…
For their camels no distance was too far, no desert too wild to
traverse. So faithful were they to the ordinances of their religion that
if a man met his father’s murderer unarmed in one of the sacred months
he would not harm him. A sign or look from one of them constituted an
engagement which was absolutely inviolable… If other nations obeyed a
central government and a single ruler, the Arabs required no such
institution, each of them being fit to be a king, and well able to
protect himself, and unwilling to undergo the humitiation of paying
tribute or hearing rebuke.”^([16](#16)) One is reminded of the
republican clans in north Uttar Pradesh and Bihar among whom the Buddha
was born, as also of those in Punjab and Sindh who robbed Alexander of
his reputation of invincibility when they blunted his sword and turned
him back. The Arabs who got regimented as Muhammad’s *mujãhids* (holy
warriors) lost this sense of honour and love of freedom. Treachery
towards whomsoever the Prophet chose as his enemy, became their
stock-in-trade. On the other hand, a mere frown from the Prophet made
them cringe and crawl.

If a society and culture is to be judged by the status of its women, the
pre-Islamic Arabs come out with flying colours. The very fact that they
had many Goddesses in their pantheon, made them give a place of pride to
their women. “Institutions of paganism,” observes Margoliouth, “were not
unfavourable to the prominence of those women who had the requisite
gifts of courage or insight. And the ensuing narrative will show
examples of women acting with originality and resolution, when there was
room for the display of these qualities.”^([17](#17)) Muhammad’s first
wife, Khadîjah, provides an excellent example of the independence which
women enjoyed, and the enterprise they could display in the pre-Islamic
Arab society. She was not only a wealthy merchant who managed her own
business; she was also in a position to turn down proposals from
powerful suitors and marry the man of her own choice. Hind, the wife of
Muhammad’s chief adversary, Abû Sufyãn, was herself a firebrand who
opposed Muhammad, tooth and nail.  She followed her husband to the
battlefield and sustained his morale in peace. When Abû Sufyãn
surrendered Mecca to Muhammad without a fight, she caught hold of him in
the market-place and cried, “Kill this fat greasy bladder of lard! What
a rotten protector of the people!”^([18](#18)) She was at her best when
circumstances forced her to embrace Islam. The Prophet who baptised her
asked her not to commit adultery. “Does a free woman commit adultery, O
apostle of God?” she asked. Next, the Prophet advised her not to “kill
your children.” She said, “I brought them up when they were little and
you killed them on the day of Badr when they were grown up, so you are
the one to know about them.”^([19](#19)) It was Islam which robbed women
of their high station in society and put them behind the veil or buried
them in the harem. Ever since, the language of Islam has bracketed women
(*zan*) with personal property (*zar* and *zamîn*) of the male. Chapters
on marriage (*nikãh*) and divorce (*talãq*) in orthodox collections of
*Hadîs*, and other standard works such as the *Hidãya* and the
*Fatwa-i-‘Ãlamgîrî*, tell the true story of what Islam has done to
women.

But the one great virtue for which the pre-Islamic Arabs put the Prophet
and his companions to shame, was their catholicity in matters of
religious belief and practice. The respect they showed towards other
people’s persuasions was fully in keeping with their pagan spiritual
tradition. Ibn Ishãq testifies, “When the apostle openly displayed Islam
as God ordered him, his people did not withdraw or turn against him, so
far as I have heard, until he spoke disparagingly of their
gods.”^([20](#20)) The Meccans made a very reasonable offer when Abû
Tãlib, Muhammad’s uncle and protector, was on his death-bed. “You know,”
they said, “the trouble that exists between us and your nephew, so call
him and let us make an agreement that he will leave us alone and we will
leave him alone; let him have his religion and we will have ours.” It
was Muhammad who remained adamant. “You must say,” he demanded, “There
is no God but Allãh and you must repudiate what you worship beside
him.”^([21](#21)) It cannot be held against the Meccans that they
refused to be bullied. Abû Tãlib himself stands out as an embodiment of
the pagan virtue in this respect. He protected Muhammad to the end,
without himself agreeing to renounce the religion of his forefathers.
His only fault-and that has been the fault of all pagans-was his failure
to understand that what his nephew was selling was not religion but
something else.

It is, therefore, nothing short of slanderous to say that the
pre-Islamic Arabs were barbarians devoid of religion and culture, unless
we mean by religion and culture what the Muslim theologians mean. They
were nothing of the sort. The fact that they failed to understand the
ways of Muhammad and could not match his mailed fist in the final round,
should not be held against them. It was neither for the first nor the
last time that a democratic society succumbed in the face of determined
gangsterism. We know how Lenin, Hitler and Mao Tse-tung succeeded in our
own times. Nor should the image of what the Arabs became after they were
forced into the fold of Islam be confused with what they were before.
The crimes committed by the Islmaized Arabs should not be blamed on the
pagan Arabs. For it was Islam which brutalized the Arabs and turned them
into bloodthirsty bandits who spread fire and sword, far and wide. In
the majority of mankind, the baser drives of human nature are never far
from the threshold. Islam brought them to the fore in case of the
majority of Arabs.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913-1936*, Leiden, 1987, Vol.
VII, P. 15.

[²](#2a) See D.S. Margoliouth, *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, London,
1905, New Delhi Reprint. 1985, p. 73, “To the Meccans,” he says, “he
\[Abraham\] was not even a name.”

[³](#3a) Converts to Islam in every other land follow the pattern. They
disown their real forefathers and link themselves to this or that tribe
of Jews or Arabs. Muslims of Afghanistan and Kashmir for instance regard
themselves as descended from some lost tribes of Israel. Muslims of
Bangladesh have produced learned treatises tracing their descent to
Islamized invaders. But for the labours of Firdawsî, the Muslims of Iran
would not have known that their infidel forefathers were great and
glorious.

[⁴](#4a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 377.

[⁵](#5a) *The Encyclopaedia Americana*, New York, 1952, Vol. XXIV, p.
77.

[⁶](#6a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 5.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 7.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p. 17.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 801.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 802.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., Vol. I, p. 377.

[¹²](#12a) Ibn Ishãq, *Sîrat Rasûl Allãh*, translated into English by A.
Gillaumne, OUP, Karachi, Seventh Impression, p. 17. Ibn Ishãq (d. AD
767) was the first biographer of Muhammad.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p 19.

[¹⁴](#14a) This statement has no basis, as we shall see. The pagan Arabs
fought Muhammad in defence of a religion which they cherished. They had
no other reason to quarrel with the Prophet.

[¹⁵](#15a) Shaikh Inayatullah, former Professor of Arabic in the
University of the Punjab, Lahore, ‘Pre-Islamic Arabian Thought’, an
article in *A History of Muslim Philosophy*, edited by M.M. Sharif,
Lahore, 1961, Vol. I, pp. 133-34. The legend of Hãtim Tayy, poet and
knight, is still popular among Muslims. He represents the “ideal type of
the Pre-Muhammadan Arab” because he “displayed in a high degree the
virtues of *Murûwa*. particularly hospitality and liberality in the
practice of which he paid no regard to his own needs”.  His “generosity
has become proverbial” (*First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol.
III, p. 290. 

[¹⁶](#16a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit, pp. 2-3.

[¹⁷](#17a) Ibid., p. 30.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 548.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., p. 533. It is a despicable lie that the pre-Islamic
Arabs killed their children. Muhammad asked the Arabs not to commit this
crime simply because the Jewish prophets had spoken against it, and not
because he saw the Arabs committing it. Hind gave a fitting reply.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., op. cit., p. 118. Muslim apologists may say that
abusing other people’s Gods not intolerance because that is what Islam
means. But that is a different proposition.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., p. 191-92.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
