+++
title = "05 CHAPTER V ISLAM WAS THE CULPRIT"

+++
**CHAPTER V**

**ISLAM WAS THE CULPRIT**

The Aligarh apologists accuse the medieval Muslim historians of
exaggerating the barbarities committed by the Muslim invaders and
rulers. Next, they blame on the inherent barbarism of the Turks whatever
irreducible minimum of atrocities cannot be hushed out of recorded
history. And they end by absolving Islam of every crime committed in its
name.

My first question is: How is it that what the Prophet of Islam did in
Arabia and the Arab armies in Syria, Iraq, Iran, North Africa, Sicily,
Spain and Sindh, bears such close resemblance to what the Turks did in
India?

The Aligarh school is never tired of telling us that Islam would have
had a brighter record in India had it been brought by the Arabs instead
of the “terrible” Turks. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru has swallowed this lie,
hook, line, and sinker, and relayed it to two generations of Hindu
students through his best-sellers.

Here the Aligarh apologists depend upon the ignorance of the average
Hindu about the history of Arab imperialism inspired by Islam ever since
the city of Yathrib was converted into Medina after conversion of its
pagan citizens and massacre of the Jews. Otherwise, they would not have
risked smuggling in such a stupendous lie without batting an eye.

We need not travel to distant lands in order to discover the truth about
Islamic imperialism as practised and perfected by the Arabs. What the
Arabs did in Sindh, as soon as they entered this unfortunate province of
Bharatavarsha, provides every detail of the pattern they had repeated
elsewhere.  
 

**THE ARAB RECORD IN SINDH**

The *Chachnãma* which is the most famous Muslim history of the Arab
conquest of Sindh, describes graphically what Muhammad bin Qasim did
after that “accursed Dahir” had been “despatched” while defending the
fort of Rawar: “Muhammad took the fort and stayed there for two or three
days. *He put six thousand fighting men, who were in the fort, to the
sword and shot some (more) with arrows. The other dependents were taken
prisoner with their wives and children…* When the number of prisoners
was calculated, it was found to amount to thirty thousand persons
amongst whom thirty were the daughters of the chiefs, and one of them
was Rãî Dãhir’s sister’s daughter whose name was Jaisiya. They were sent
to Hajjãj. The head of Dãhir and the fifth part of prisoners were
forwarded in charge of K’ab, son of Maharak.” (emphasis added).

How did Hajjãj react towards these helpless people from Sindh? The
*Chachnãma* continues: “When the head of Dãhir, the women and the
property all reached Hajjãj, *he prostrated himself before Allah*,
offered thanks-giving and praises… Hajjãj then forwarded the head, the
umbrellas, and wealth, and prisoners to Walîd the Khalifa.” (emphasis
added).

The behaviour of the *Amîr-ul-mu‘minîn*, (commander of the faithful) was
also true to type. The *Chachnãma* relates “When the Khalifa of the time
had read the letter (of Hajjãj), *he praised Allah the great. He sold
some of those daughters of the chiefs, and some he granted as rewards*.
When he saw the daughter of Rãî Dãhir’s sister he was much struck with
her beauty and charms, and began to bite his finger with astonishment.
Abdullah bin Abbãs desired to take her, but the Khalifa said: ‘O my
nephew! I exceedingly admire this girl and am so enamoured of her, that
I wish to keep her for myself. Nevertheless, it is better that you take
her to be the mother of your children’.” (emphasis added).

Meanwhile, Muhammad bin Qasim had been conspiring with some merchants of
Brahmanabad and promising protection to the common people, provided they
committed treason and threw open the gates of the fort in the thick of
the fight. He had some doubts whether he had done the right thing. He
referred the matter to Hajjãj in a letter which was sent post haste.
According to *Chachnãma*, Hajjãj replied as follows: “O my cousin! I
received your life-inspiring letter *…I learnt that the ways and rules
you follow are confirmable to the Law (of Islam), except that you give
protection to all, great and small, and make no distinction between
enemy and friend. Allah says - Give no quarter to infidels but cut their
throats*. Then know that this is the command of Allah the great. You
should not be too ready to grant protection, because it will prolong
your work. After this, give no quarter to any enemy except to those who
are of rank. This is a worthy resolve, and want of dignity will not be
imputed to you.” (emphasis added).

So Muhammad bin Qasim carried out the command of Allah conveyed to him
by Hajjãj. The *Chachnãma* carries the story forward after the fall of
Brahmanabad: “When the plunder and the prisoners of war were brought
before Qãsim and enquiries were made about every captive, it was found
that Lãdî, the wife of Dãhir, was in the fort with two daughters of his
by other wives. Veils were put on their faces and they were delivered to
a servant to keep them apart. *One fifth of all the prisoners were
chosen and set aside: they were counted as amounting to twenty thousand
in number, and the rest were given to the soldiers. He sat on the seat
of cruelty, and put all those who had fought to the sword. It is said
that about six thousand fighting men were slain, but according to some,
sixteen thousand were killed.”* (emphasis added).

After “peace” had thus been restored, the conqueror took the next step.
The *Chachnãma* records: “Muhammad bin Qãsim fixed a tax upon all
subjects *according to the laws of the Prophet*. Those who embraced
Islam were exempted from slavery, the tribute and poll-tax, and from
those who did not change their creed a tax was exacted according to
three grades.” (emphasis added).

Then followed the privilege reserved for every Muslim, conqueror or
convert. According to the *Chachnãma*: “As the commander of the
faithful, Umar, son of Khattãb, had ordered respecting the people of
Shãm (Syria), so did Muhammad bin Qãsim also make a rule that every
(Muslim) guest should be entertained (in Hindu homes) for one day and
night, but if he fell sick then for three days and nights.”

Another massacre followed at Askalanda which was surrendered by the
common people after the Hindu commandant had fled: “He went into the
fort, *killed four thousand fighting men with his bloody sword and sent
their families into slavery.” And Multan: “Six thousand warriors were
put to death, and all their relations and dependents were taken as
slaves.”* (emphasis added). The *Chachnãma* chooses a Brahmin of Multan
to proclaim Muhammad bin Qãsim’s momentous victory in the following
words: “Heathenism is now at an end, the temples are thrown down, the
world has received the light of Islam, and mosques are built instead of
idols temples.” The Brahmin was a new convert.

Al Biladuri who died in 892-893 AD wrote another account of the Arab
conquest of Sindh. He tells us in his *Futûhul-Buldãn*: “We are told
that Hajjãj caused a calculation to be made of the sums expanded in
fitting out this expedition of Muhammad bin Qãsim, and the riches which
resulted from it. He had spent 60 million *dirhams* and that which had
been sent to him amounted to 120 millions *dirhams*.”

This 120 million *dirhams* represents only one-fifth of the total loot
which was paid into the Caliph’s coffers according to a rule laid down
by the prophet of Islam. Another four hundred and eighty million
*dirhams* were distributed among Muslim soldiers in the field. Again,
this total of 600 million *dirhams* does not include the sale proceeds
of nearly two hundred thousand Hindu men, women and children who were
taken prisoners and put to auction all over the world of Islam at that
time.  
 

**PERFORMANCE OF THE PATHANS**

My second question is: How come that the Pathans, who hated the Turks
and fought them tooth and nail throughout the medieval period, followed
the Turks so faithfully in their treatment of the Hindus?

Take Sikandar Lodi. He was the son of a Pathan father. His mother was
the daughter of a Hindu goldsmith of Sirhind. Abdullah records as
follows in his *Tãrîkh-i-Dãûdî* written in the reign of Jahangir: “It is
also related of this prince that before his accession, when a crowd of
Hindûs had assembled in immense numbers at Kurkhet, he wished to go to
Thanesar for the purpose of putting them all to death… He was so zealous
a Musalmãn that he utterly destroyed diverse places of worship of the
infidels and left not a vestige remaining of them. He entirely ruined
the shrines of Mathura, the mine of infidelism, and turned the principal
Hindû places of worship into caravanserais and colleges. Their stone
images were given to the butchers to serve as meat-weights, and all the
Hindûs in Mathura were strictly prohibited from shaving their heads and
beards and bathing at the *ghãts*.” Badauni writes in his
*Muntakhãb-ut-Tawãrîkh* that “he took the fort (of Untgarh) and gave the
infidels as food for the sword. He then cast down the idol temples and
built there a lofty mosque.” He repeated the performance at Narwar next
year, and at many other places in the years that followed  
 

**BEHAVIOUR OF HINDU CONVERTS**

My third question is: How do we explain the behaviour of marauders who
were not Turks but Hindus converted to Islam, and who behaved no better,
if not worse, than the much-maligned Turks?

The story of Kalapahar and his exploits in Bengal and Orissa may be
dismissed by the Aligarh apologists as a cock-and-bull story cooked up
by “Hindu old women”. But the achievements of Malik Kafur are recorded
by no less an authority than Amir Khusru who was also a contemporary.
Malik Kafur was a handsome young Hindu who was captured and enslaved
when Ulugh Khan and Nusrat Khan, two generals of Alauddin Khalji,
invaded Gujarat in 1298 AD. He was bought by Nusrat Khan for a thousand
*dinãrs*, converted to Islam, and presented to the emperor at Delhi.
Alauddin was infatuated by Kafur who rose rapidly to be the topmost
officer of the empire, titled Malik Naib.

Kafur led his famous expedition to the South in 1310-1311 AD. Devagiri
was already a tributary of the Delhi Sultanate. The Hoysala King of
Dvarasamudra was frightened into surrender. But the Pandya prince of
Madurai refused either to purchase peace or fight a pitched battle. He
tired out the Malik Naib by his hit and run tactics. The Malik Naib took
it out on the non-combatant common people and their temples. At
Brahmastapur (modern Chidambaram), he massacred the citizens, demolished
the golden temple, and dug up its foundations. Next, the temples at
Srirangam and in the neighbourhood of Kannanur were sacked. At Madurai
he set fire to the temple of Sokkanatha. He had to beat a retreat in the
face of fierce Hindu resistance. But he did not forget to capture and
carry with him an immense booty and hordes of prisoners who were sold
into slavery all along his long route to the imperial headquarters at
Delhi.

Or take the case of Suhabhatta, the chief minister of Sikandar Butshikan
of Kashmir (1389-1413 AD). Suhabhatta who had renounced his ancestral
faith for Islam is known as Suhã in the *RãjatariñgiNî* of Jonarãja.
This historian of Kashmir records: “Instructed by *mlechhas*, (Suhã)
instigated the king to break down the images of Gods. The king forgot
his kingly duties and took a delight day and night in breaking images…
He broke the images of MãrtaNDa, Vishaya, Îšãna, Chakravaratî and
Tripurešvara… There was no city, no town, no village, no wood where Suhã
and the Turushka left the temples of Gods unbroken.

Suhabhatta continued to be the chief minister under Sikandar’s son, Ali
Shah (1413-1420 AD). During Sikandar’s reign, he had stopped at
destroying Hindu temples. Under the new regime, he started persecuting
the Brahmins. Their religious performances and processions were banned.
The traditional allowances of the Brahmins were stopped. The Brahmins,
therefore, became beggars “who had to move from door to door, like dogs,
for food”. Many of them tried to flee the land to escape oppression and
save their caste. But they could not do so without an official permit.
As a result, many of them committed suicide by fire, poison, drowning,
hanging, and jumping from precipices. Amidst all this, Suhabhatta
maintained that he bore no malice towards the Brahmins, and that he was
only doing his duty towards Islam!  
 

**TURKS WERE BRUTALISED BY ISLAM**

My fourth question is: Were the Turks really such black barbarians as
they have been painted by the Aligarh apologists? How then do we explain
the glaring contradiction in the behaviour of many Turkish kings who
were such fearsome fiends when dealing with Hindus, but who became
benevolent monarchs when dealing with Muslims?

Take Mahmud Ghaznavi who tops the list of Muslim invaders most hated by
Hindus. Muhammad Nazim, a “modern historian,” writes as follows in his
well-documented monograph, *The Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud of
Ghazna*: “The Sultan was affectionate by nature… Sultan Mahmud was
strict in the administration of justice… Sultan Mahmud was a poet and
scholar of some reputation. He is said to have been the author of a book
named *Tafridul-Furu* which was regarded as a standard work on Fiqh… The
Sultan was a great patron of learning and his court was the rendezvous
of scholars from all parts of the Muslim world… His meanest rewards were
calculated in thousands of *dinãrs*, and the later generation of poets
cherished his memory chiefly as a giver of ‘elephant loads’ of gold and
silver.” Firishta records that he used the war booty captured from
Kanauj for building at Ghazni a magnificent mosque, a university
well-stocked with books, and a museum full of many curiosities.

Or take Jalaluddin Khalji. He was second to none among the Muslim kings
when it came to heaping atrocities on Hindus. But when Malik Chhajju,
who had rebelled against him and caused bloodshed, was brought before
him in chains, he overruled his advisers for harsh punishment with the
remark that he would rather renounce his throne than shed the blood of a
Muslim! Again, when the Rana of Ranthambhor refused to surrender,
Jalaluddin gave up the siege of the fort, in spite of protests from his
generals, with the remark that he did not consider ten such forts worth
a single hair of a Muslim’s head!

Firuz Shah Tughlaq was a great patron of learning, a builder of new
cities, and patron of many public works such as tanks, gardens, and
canals. In his autobiography he writes: “Better a people’s weal than
treasures vast; better an empty chest than hearts downcast.” But by
“people” he meant only the Muslims. For Hindus he was nothing short of a
monster.

The much-maligned Turk did have another face which was far from being
that of a barbarian. It is quite another matter that the benevolent face
of the Turk was always and exclusively turned towards his Muslim
*Ummah*, and never towards the “accursed” Hindus. What is relevant here
is that crimes committed by the Turks in India cannot be explained away
in terms of a barbarism inherent in his race. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru
who also blames the crimes of Islam on the barbarism of the Turks says
in the same breath that the Turks were Buddhists before they got
converted to Islam. Was it Buddhism that had brutalised the Turks?  Or
had Buddhism failed to humanise them?

But even if we concede, for the sake of argument, that the Turk was a
born barbarian, the basic question remains unanswered. Some of the
medieval Muslim historians were not Turks. They were Arabs and Persians
whom the Aligarh apologists credit with the quintessence of Islamic
culture. Quite a few of them were learned mullahs conversant with the
commandments of Islam. The positions and privileges they obtained in the
courts of their Turkish patrons were entirely due to their erudition.

So my fifth and final question is: Why did these medieval Muslim
historians credit their patrons with crimes which the latter had not
committed, or exaggerate the scale of some minor misdemeanours?

Before we find answers to these five questions let us first have a look
at the scale and magnitude of the crimes which medieval Muslim
historians have laid at the doors of most of the Muslim monarchs and
their minions. Let us see if the narrations of those crimes reveal a
pattern. Then we shall proceed to inquire if the pattern conforms to the
crudities of normal human nature, or to the commands of an inhuman and
imperialist ideology masquerading as religion.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


