+++
title = "07 CHAPTER VII "

+++
**CHAPTER VII**

**THE MAGNITUDE OF MUSLIM ATROCITIES - II**

The NCERT is not the only villain in the game of propping up palpable
falsehoods in the field of medieval Indian history. For quite some time,
the All India Radio has been presenting a programme in Hindi - *Itihãsa
Ke Jharokhe Se* (Window on History). The refrain is that medieval India
under Muslim rule was a period of peace and amity between Hindus and
Muslims, and that Muslim rulers, particularly Aurangzeb, went out of
their way to be kind and considerate to the Hindus. The insinuation is
that the Hindu-Muslim strife was a creation of the British imperialists
whose “nefarious game” is now being continued by “Hindu communalists”.

The evidence cited by the speakers in this AIR programme is always an
exercise in *suppressio veri suggestio falsi*. For instance, Aurangzeb’s
petty donations to 2-3 Hindu temples patronized by some pet Hindu
courtiers, are played up with great fanfare. But his systematic
demolition of thousands of Hindu temples and defilement of countless
images of Gods and Goddesses, throughout his long reign, is never
mentioned. Such pitiable attempts at pitting molehills of munificence
against mountains of malevolence, go against all sense of proportion in
judging a whole period of Indian history. It is also a very sad
spectacle of the slave mentality which was imbibed by a certain section
of Hindu intelligentsia during the long spell of Islamic imperialism in
India: The master has a god-given right to kick his slave a hundred
times a day. But the master deserves gratitude from the slave if the
former smiles on the latter once in a blue moon. It is understandable if
an apologist of Islam sings the glories of the Islamic empire in India.
But for a Hindu to participate in this programme is the limit of
self-abasement. No amount of swearing by Secularism can cover up the
sin.

One may very well ask the purveyors of this puerile propaganda that if
the record of Islam in medieval India was so bright and blameless, where
is the need for this daily ritual of whitewashing it. Hindu heroes like
Chandragupta Maurya, Samudragupta, Harihar, Bukka, Maharana Pratap, and
Shivaji, to name only a few of the notables, have never needed any
face-lift. Why does the monstrous mien of an Alauddin Khalji, a Firuz
Shah Tughlaq, a Sikandar Lodi, and an Aurangzeb, to name only the most
notorious, pop out so soon from the thickest coat of cosmetics?

The answer is provided by the Muslim historians of medieval India. They
painted their heroes in the indelible dyes of Islamic ideology. They did
not anticipate the day when Islamic imperialism in India will become
only a painful memory of the past. They did not visualise that the
record of Islam in India will one day be weighed on the scales of human
values. Now it is too late for trying to salvage Islam in medieval India
from it blood-soaked history. The orthodox Muslim historians are honest
when they state that the medieval Muslim monarchs were only carrying out
the commandments of Islam when they massacred, captured, enslaved, and
violated Hindu men, women and children; desecrated, demolished, and
destroyed Hindu places of worship; and dispossessed the Hindus of all
their wealth. The Aligarh “historians” and their secularist patrons are
only trying to prop up imposters in place of real and living characters
who played life-size roles in history.

I have already related what some of the sultans were doing to the Hindus
from their imperial seat at Delhi. The provincial Muslim satraps who
became independent whenever Delhi had a weak Muslim monarch, behaved no
better.  
 

**THE PROVINCIAL MUSLIM SATRAPS**

In 1391 AD the Muslims of Gujarat complained to Nasiruddin Muhammad, the
Tughlak Sultan of Delhi, that the local governor, Farhat-ul-Mulk, was
practising tolerance towards the Hindus. The Sultan immediately
appointed Muzaffar Khan as the new governor. He became independent after
the death of the Delhi Sultan and assumed the title of Muzaffar Shah in
1392 AD. Next year he led an expedition to Somnath and sacked the temple
which the Hindus had built once again. He killed many Hindus to chastise
them for this “impudence”, and raised a mosque on the site of the
ancient temple. The Hindus, however, restarted restoring the temple soon
after. In 1401 AD Muzaffar came back with a huge army. He again killed
many Hindus, demolished the temple once more, and erected another
mosque. Muzaffar was succeeded by his grandson, Ahmad Shah, in 1411 AD.
Three years later Ahmad appointed a special *dãrogah* to destroy all
temples throughout Gujarat. In 1415 AD Ahmad invaded Sidhpur where he
destroyed the images in Rudramahalaya, and converted the grand temple
into a mosque. Sidhpur was renamed Sayyadpur.

Mahmud Begrha who became the Sultan of Gujarat in 1458 AD was the worst
fanatic of this dynasty. One of his vassals was the Mandalika of
Junagadh who had never withheld the regular tribute. Yet in 1469 AD
Mahmud invaded Junagadh. In reply to the Mandalika’s protests, Mahmud
said that he was not interested in money as much as in the spread of
Islam. The Mandalika was forcibly converted to Islam and Junagadh was
renamed Mustafabad. In 1472 AD Mahmud attacked Dwarka, destroyed the
local temples, and plundered the city. Raja Jayasingh, the ruler of
Champaner, and his minister were murdered by Mahmud in cold blood for
refusing to embrace Islam after they had been defeated and their country
pillaged and plundered. Champaner was renamed Mahmudabad.

Mahmud Khalji of Malwa (1436-69 AD) also destroyed Hindu temples and
built mosques on their sites. He heaped many more insults on the Hindus.
Ilyas Shah of Bengal (1339-1379 AD) invaded Nepal and destroyed the
temple of Svayambhunath at Kathmandu. He also invaded Orissa, demolished
many temples, and plundered many places. The Bahmani sultans of Gulbarga
and Bidar considered it meritorious to kill a hundred thousand Hindu
men, women, and children every year. They demolished and desecrated
temples all over South India.  
 

**BABUR**

The scene shifted once mere to Delhi after Babur came out victorious
against the Lodis and the Rajputs. The founder of the Mughal empire has
received much acclaim from Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru for his fortitude in
adversity, his daring against heavy odds, his swimming across many
rivers, his love of flowers and fruits, and so on so forth. But his
face, presented by himself in his *Tuzuk-i-Bãburî*, suffers irreparable
damage if it is denuded of the rich hues of horrible cruelties in which
he habitually indulged. The lurid details he provides of his repeated
massacres of the infidels, leave no doubt that he was mighty proud of
his performance. He was particularly fond of raising higher and higher
towers of Hindu heads cut off during and after every battle he fought
with them. He loved to sit in his royal tent to watch this spectacle.
The prisoners were brought before him and butchered by his “brave”
swordsmen. On one occasion, the ground flowed with so much blood and
became so full of quivering carcases that his tent had to be moved
thrice to a higher level. He lost no opportunity of capturing prisoners
of war and amassing plunder. In the dynasty founded by him it was
incumbent upon every king that he should style himself a *Ghãzî*, that
is, slayer of infidels. When he broke vessels of wine on the eve of his
battle with Rana Sangram Singh, he proclaimed that he would smash idols
in a similar manner. And he destroyed temples wherever he saw them.  
 

**SHER SHAH SUR**

Sher Shah Sur’s name is associated in our textbooks with the Grand Trunk
Road from Peshawar to Dacca, with caravanserais, and several other
schemes of public welfare. It is true that he was not a habitual
persecutor of Hindus before he became the emperor at Delhi. But he did
not betray Islam when he became the supreme ruler. The test came at
Raisen in 1543 AD. Shaykh Nurul Haq records in *Zubdat-ul-Tawãrîkh* as
follows: “In the year 950 H., Puranmal held occupation of the fort of
Raisen… He had 1000 women in his harem… and amongst them several
Musulmanis whom he made to dance before him. Sher Khan with Musulman
indignation resolved to conquer the fort. After he had been some time
engaged in investing it, an accommodation was proposed and it was
finally agreed that Puranmal with his family and children and 4000
Rajputs of note should be allowed to leave the fort unmolested. Several
men learned in the law (of Islam) gave it as their opinion that they
should all be slain, notwithstanding the solemn engagement which had
been entered into. Consequently, the whole army, with the elephants,
surrounded Puranmal’s encampment. The Rajputs fought with desperate
bravery and after killing their women and children and burning them,
they rushed to battle and were annihilated to a man.”  
 

**AKBAR**

Humayun had hardly any time free from troubles to devote to the service
of Islam. But his son, Akbar, made quite a good start as a *ghãzî*. He
stabbed the half-dead Himu with his sword after the Second Battle of
Panipat. The ritual was then followed by many more “brave warriors” of
Islam led by Bairam Khan who drove their swords in the dead body. In
1568 AD Akbar ordered a general massacre at Chittor after the fort had
fallen. Abul Fazl records in his *Akbar-Nãma* as follows. “There were
8,000 fighting Rajputs collected in the fortress, but there were more
than 40,000 peasants who took part in watching and serving. From early
dawn till midday the bodies of those ill-starred men were consumed by
the majesty of the great warrior. Nearly 30,000 men were killed… When
Sultan Alauddin (Khalji) took the fort after six months and seven days,
the peasantry were not put to death as they had not engaged in fighting.
But on this occasion they had shown great zeal and activity. Their
excuses after the emergence of victory were of no avail, and orders were
given for a general massacre.” Akbar thus improved on the record of
Alauddin Khalji. Watching the war and serving the warriors were
re-interpreted as acts of war! To top it all, Akbar travelled post-haste
to Ajmer where he offered profuse thanks to Allah and the Prophet, and
his (Akbar’s) patron saint, Muinuddin Chishti, and issued a *Fathnãma*
in which many appropriate verses of the Quran were cited in order to
prove that he had followed faithfully in the footsteps of the Prophet.  
 

**JAHANGIR**

Jahangir was primarily a drunkard and a sadist scoundrel.  He was too
indolent to keep his promise, given to Nawab Murtaza Khan at the time of
his accession, that he would uphold the Shariat. He was too much devoted
to women and the wine-cup to care much for Allah and the Prophet. But he
encouraged conversions to Islam by giving daily allowances to the
converts. In the very first year of his reign, he tortured Guru Arjun
Dev to death. His contempt for Hindus comes out clearly in his
*Tuzuk-i-Jahãngîrî*: “A Hindu named Arjun lived in Govindwal on the bank
of river Beas in the garb of a saint and in ostentation. From all sides
cowboys and idiots became his fast followers. The business had
flourished for three or four generations. For a long time it had been in
my mind to put a stop to this *dukãn-e-bãtil* (mart of falsehood) or to
bring him into the fold of Islam.” According to other accounts, he asked
the Guru to include some *sûrahs* of the Quran in the *Ãdi Grantha*,
which the Guru refused to do. In the eighth year of his reign, he
destroyed the temple of Bhagwat at Ajmer. He persecuted the Jains in
Gujarat, and ordered that Jain monks should not be seen in his kingdom
on pain of death. Finally, he sent Murtaza Khan to Kangra for reducing
that city of temples. The siege lasted for 20 months at the end of which
he himself went to Kangra for slaughtering cows in that sacred place of
Hindus, and building a mosque where none had existed before.  
 

**SHAH JAHAN**

The pendulum started swinging towards the true spirit of Islam at the
very start of Shah Jahan’s reign in 1628 AD. Its outer symbol was the
reappearance of the beard on the face of the emperor. Abdul Hamid Lahori
records in his *Bãdshãhnãma*: “It had been brought to the notice of His
Majesty that during the late reign many idol temples had been begun, but
remained unfinished at Benares, the great stronghold of infidelism. The
infidels were now desirous of completing them. His Majesty, the defender
of the faith, gave orders that at Benares, and throughout all his
dominions in every place, all temples that had been begun should be cast
down. It was now reported from the province of Allahabad that 76 temples
had been destroyed in the district of Benares.” That was in 1633 AD.

In 1635 AD, Shah Jahan’s soldiers captured some ladies of the royal
Bundela family after Jujhar Singh and his sons failed to kill them in
the time-honoured Rajput tradition. In the words of Jadunath Sarkar,
“Mothers and daughters of kings, they were robbed of their religion and
forced to lead the infamous life of the Mughal harem.” Shah Jahan
himself made a triumphal entry into Orchha, the capital of the Bundelas,
demolished the lofty and massive temple of Bir Singh Dev, and raised a
mosque in its place. Two sons and one grandson of Jujhar Singh who were
of tender age, were made Musalmans. Another son of Jujhar Singh,
Udaybhan, and a minister, Shyam Dawa, had fled to Golconda where they
were captured by Qutbul-Mulk and sent to Shah Jahan. According to
*Bãdshãhnãma* again, “Udaybhan and Shyam Dawa, who were of full age,
were offered the alternative of Islam or death. They chose the latter
and were sent to hell.”  
 

**AURANGZEB**

With the coming of Aurangzeb, the policy of sulah-i-kul (peace with all)
initiated by Akbar in the later part of his reign suffered a complete
reversal. Aurangzeb had started his career as a *but-shikan*
(iconoclast) 13 years before he ascended the throne at Delhi. According
to *Mirãt-i-Ahmadî*, the temple of Chintaman situated close to Sarashpur
(Gujarat) and built by Sitaldas jeweller was converted into a mosque
named *Quwwat-ul-Islãm* (might of Islam) by order of Prince Aurangzeb in
1645 AD. A cow was slaughtered to “solemnize” the “ceremony”. Three
years after he became king, he sent Mir Jumla on an expedition to Cooch
Bihar. Mir Jumla demolished all temples in that city and erected mosques
in their stead. The general himself wielded a battle-axe to break the
image of Narayana.

In 1665 AD, it was reported to Aurangzeb that the temples he had
demolished in Gujarat during his viceroyalty had been rebuilt by the
Hindus. He immediately issued a *farmãn* to the governor of Gujarat
which said: “In Ahmedabad and other parganas of Gujarat in the days
before my accession temples were destroyed by my order.  They have been
repaired and idol-worship resumed. Carry out the former order.” In 1666
AD, he ordered the *faujdãr* of Mathura to remove a stone railing which
had been presented by Dara Shukoh to the temples of Keshav Rai. He
explained: “In the Muslim faith it is a sin even to look at a temple and
this Dara had restored a railing in a temple!”

A general policy towards Hindu temples was proclaimed in April 1669.
*Maasir-i-Ãlamgîrî* records: “On the 17th of Zil Kada 1079 (9th April
1669) it reached the ears of His Majesty, the protector of the faith,
that in the province of Thatta, Multan, and Benares, but especially in
the latter, foolish Brahmans were in the habit of expounding frivolous
books in their schools, and that students and learners, Muslims as well
as Hindus, went there, even from long distances, led by a desire to
become acquainted with the wicked sciences they taught. The Director of
the Faith, consequently, issued orders to all governors of provinces to
destroy with a willing hand the schools and temples of the infidels and
they were strictly enjoined to put an entire stop to the teaching and
practising of idolatrous forms of worship. On the 15th Rabiul-akhir (end
September) it was reported to his religious Majesty, leader of the
unitarians, that in obedience to order, the government officers had
destroyed the temple of Bishnath at Benares.”

*Maasir-i-Ãlamgîrî* continues: “In the month of Ramzan 980 H. (January
1670) this justice-loving monarch, the constant enemy of tyrants,
commanded the destruction of the Hindu temple of Mathura known by the
name of Dehra Keshav Rai, and soon that stronghold of falsehood was
levelled with the ground. On the same spot was laid, with great expense,
the foundation of a vast mosques… Glory be to Allah who has given us the
faith of Islam that in this reign of the destroyer of false gods, an
undertaking so difficult of attainment has been brought to a successful
culmination. The richly jewelled idols taken from the infidel temples
were transferred to Agra and there placed beneath the steps leading to
the Nawab Begum Sahib’s (Jahanara’s) mosque in order that they might be
pressed under foot by the true believers. Mathura changed its name into
Islamabad and was thus called in all official documents.”

In the same year, Sitaramji temple at Soron was destroyed as also the
shrine of Devi Patan at Gonda. News came from Malwa also that the local
governor had sent 400 troopers to destroy all temples around Ujjain.
According to *Muraqãt-i-Abul Hasan*, civil officers, agents of
*jãgirdãrs, karoris* and *amlas* from Cuttack in Orissa to Medinipur in
Bengal were instructed as follows: “Every idol house built during the
last 10 or 12 years… should be demolished without delay. Also, do not
allow the crushed Hindus and despicable infidels to repair their old
temples. Reports of the destruction of temples should be sent to the
court under the seal of the *qazis* and attested by pious Shaikhs.”

In 1672 AD, several thousand Satnamis were slaughtered near Narnaul in
Mewat for which act of “heroism” Radandaz Khan was tided Shuja‘at Khan
with the *mansab* of 3000 and 2000 horse. In 1675 AD, Guru Tegh Bahadur
was tortured to death for his resistance against the forcible conversion
of the Hindus of Kashmir. The destruction of *gurudwãras* thereafter is
a well-known story which our secularists have succeeded in suppressing
because the Akali brand Sikhs have been forging ties of friendship with
Islam as against their parent faith, Hindu Dharma.

The year 1679 AD was the year of triumph for the “true faith”. On April
2, *jizyah* was reimposed on Hindus to “spread Islam and put down the
practice of infidelism”. The Hindus of Delhi and around organised a
protest and blocked Aurangzeb’s way to the Jami Masjid on one Friday.
The mighty Mughal Emperor ordered his elephants to be driven through the
mass of men. Many were trampled to death. Shivaji also wrote a letter of
protest from distant Maharashtra. But it fell on deaf ears.
*Mirãt-i-Ahmadî* records: “Darab Khan was sent with a strong force to
punish the Rajputs of Khandela and demolish the great temples of that
place. He attacked the place on 8th March 1679 A.D. and pulled down the
temples of Khandela and Sanula and all other temples in the
neighbourhood.” *Maasir-i-Ãlamgîrî* adds: “On 25 May 1679 A.D. Khan
Jahan Bahadur arrived from Jodhpur bringing with him several cart-loads
of idols, taken from the Hindu temples that had been demolished. His
Majesty gave him great praise. Most of these idols were adorned with
precious stones. It was ordered that some of them should be cast away in
the outer offices and the remainder placed beneath the steps of the
grand mosque, there to be trampled under foot. There they lay a long
time until at last not a vestige of them was left.”

The year 1680 AD brought an equally “rich harvest” for Islam.
*Maasir-i-Ãlamgîrî* goes ahead: “On 6th January 1680 A.D. Prince
Mohammad Azam and Khan Jahan Bahadur obtained permission to visit
Udaipur. Ruhullah Khan and Yakkattãz Khan also proceeded thither to
effect the destruction of the temples of the idolators. These edifices
situated in the vicinity of the Rana’s palace were among the wonders of
the age, and had been erected by the infidels to the ruin of their souls
and the loss of their wealth… Pioneers destroyed the images. On 24th
January the king visited the tank of Udayasagar. His Majesty ordered all
three of the Hindu temples to be levelled with the ground. On 29th
January Hasan Ali Khan made his appearance… and stated that… 172 temples
in the neighbouring districts had been destroyed. His Majesty proceeded
to Chitor on 22nd February. Temples to the number of 63 were destroyed.
Abu Tarab who had been commissioned to effect the destruction of idol
temples of Amber, reported in person on 10th August that 66 temples had
been levelled to the ground.” The temple of Someshwar in western Mewar
was also destroyed at a later date in the same year. It may be mentioned
that unlike Jodhpur and Udaipur, Amber was the capital of a state loyal
to the Mughal emperor.

According to *Kalimãt-i-Tayyibãt*, Aurangzeb wrote to Zulfiqar Khan and
Mughal Khan that “the demolition of a temple is possible at any time, as
it cannot walk away from it place”. Even so, he was annoyed by the solid
strength of temples in Maharashtra. *Kalimãt-i-Aurangzeb* reproduces his
following message to Ruhullah Khan: “The houses of this country are
exceedingly strong and built solely of the stone and iron. The
hatchet-men of the government in course of my marching do not get
sufficient manpower and time to destroy and raze the temples of infidels
that meet the eye on the way. You should appoint a darogha who may
afterwards destroy them at leisure and dig up their foundations.”
Aurangzeb himself acted as such a *darogha* in one instance. He reports
in *Kalimãt-i-Aurangzeb*: “The village of Satara near Aurangabad was my
hunting ground. Here on the top of hill stood a temple with an image of
Khande Rai. By Allah’s grace I demolished it and forbade the temple
dancers to play their shameful trade.”

Demolition of Hindu temples remained Aurangzeb’s pastime during his long
campaign in the South. Khafi Khan records in his *Muntakhãb-ul-Lubãb*:
“On the capture of Golconda, the Emperor appointed Abdur Rahim Khan as
censor of the city of Haiderãbãd with orders to put down infidel
practices and innovations, and destroy the temples and build mosques on
the sites.” That was in 1687 AD. In 1690 AD, he ordered destruction of
temples at Ellora, Trimbakeshwar, Narasinghpur, and Pandharpur. In 1698
AD, the story was repeated at Bijapur. According to *Mirãt-i-Ahmadî*:
“Hamid-ud-din Khan Bahadur who had been deputed to destroy the temples
of Bijapur and build mosques there, returned to court after carrying out
the order and was praised by the Emperor.” As late as 1705 AD, two years
before he died, “the emperor, summoning Muhammad Khalil and Khidmat Rai,
the *darogha* of hatchet-men… ordered them to demolish the temple of
Pandharpur, and to take the butchers of the camp there and slaughter
cows in the temple.” Cow-slaughter at a temple site was a safeguard
against Hindus rebuilding it on the same spot.

The story can be continued to cover similar crimes committed by later
Muslim monarchs and chieftains. But I am not continuing it because my
theme at present is medieval India under Muslim rule, which period ended
with the death of Aurangzeb.

The magnitude of crimes credited to Muslim monarchs by the medieval
Muslim historians, was beyond measure. With a few exceptions, Muslim
kings and commanders were monsters who stopped at no crime when it came
to their Hindu subjects. But what strikes as more significant is the
broad pattern of those crimes. The pattern is that of a *jihãd* in which
the *ghãzîs* of Islam 1) invade infidel lands; 2) massacre as many
infidel men, women, and children, particularly Brahmins, as they like
*after* winning a victory; 3) capture the survivors to be sold as
slaves; 4) plunder every place and person; 5) demolish idolatrous places
of worship and build mosques in their places; and 6) defile idols which
are flung into public squares or made into steps leading to mosques.

Still more significant is the fact that this is exactly the pattern 1)
revealed by Allah in the Quran; 2) practised, perfected and prescribed
by the Prophet in his own life-time; 3) followed by the pious Khalifas
of Islam in the first 35 years of Islamic imperialism; 4) elaborated in
the Hadis and hundreds of commentaries with meticulous attention to
detail; 5) certified by the Ulama and the Sufis of Islam in all ages
including our own; and 6) followed by all Muslim monarchs and chieftains
who aspired for name and fame in this life, and houris and beardless
boys hereafter.

It is, therefore, poor apologetics to blame the Islamized Turks alone of
being barbarous. Islamic barbarism was shared in equal measure by all
races and communities who were forced or lured into the fold of Islam -
the Arabs, the Turks, the Persians, the Pathans, the Hindu converts. The
conclusion in inescapable that Islam brutalizes all those who embrace
it. And that is where the blame should be laid in all reason and
justice.

We can now return to the NCERT guideline which proclaims that the
conflict between Hindus and Muslims in medieval India shall be regarded
as political rather than religious. There is no justification for such a
characterisation of the conflict. The Muslims at least were convinced
that they were waging a religious war against the Hindu infidels. The
conflict can be regarded as political only if the NCERT accepts the very
valid proposition that Islam has never been a religion, and that it
started and has remained a political ideology of terrorism with
unmistakable totalitarian trends and imperialist ambitions. The first
premises as well as the procedures of Islam bear a very close
resemblance to those of Communism and Nazism. Allah is only the
predecessor of the Forces of Production invoked by the Communists, and
of the Aryan Race invoked by the Nazis.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


