+++
title = "00 The Demographic Siege"

+++
<div class="Section1">

*The Demographic Siege*

**BY KEONRAAD ELST**

**1. Visions of a demographic doomsday**

**1.1. Hindus, the dying race**

       Demography can change the cultural orientation of a country or
region by making an originally small group numerically dominant.  Thus,
demographic success was a decisive factor in the Christian take-over of
the Roman Empire: in the first three centuries, Christian numbers grew
by 40% per year, due to conversion and to the rejection of birth control
(whether primitive contraception, abortion or
infanticide).[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Demographic shifts can lead to violence:
in Lebanon, the tilt of the demographic balance in favour of the
Muslims, leading to demands of a redistribution of political power
shared with the Christians, was one of the causes of the civil war. 
Hindus ought to know, for they themselves have also done it once: "After
years of immigration by ethnic Nepalis, \[Sikkim\] lost its sovereignty
when a Nepali majority chose to be part of India."[\[2\]](#_edn2) 
Finally, a certain demography can lead to self-annihilation: many
members of India's Parsi community have resigned to the perspective that
their community will soon disappear due to a suicidal demographic
self-forgetfulness.[\[3\]](#_edn3)       

       In today's India, demography is a hot item, not just because of
the economic and ecological burden of overpopulation, but even more
because of the differential between Hindus and Muslims with its real or
perceived political implications.  One of the classic statements of this
concern is *Hindu Sangathan, Saviour of the Dying Race* (Delhi 1926), in
which Swami Shraddhananda briefly sketches the problem of demographic
decline threatening Hindu survival: "while Muhammadans multiply like
anything, the numbers of the Hindus are dwindling
periodically".[\[4\]](#_edn4) 

 

**1.2. Ominous census figures**

       Swami Shraddhananda quotes from the 1911 Census Report (para 172
ff.) to show the reasons why the Muslim population is growing faster
than the Hindu population, whose percentage of the total population is
steadily declining.  The Census Director had written: "The number of
Muhammadans has risen during the decade \[1901-11\] by 6.7 per cent as
compared with only 5 p.c. in the case of Hindus.  There is a small but
continuous accession of converts from Hinduism and other religions, but
the main reason for the relatively more rapid growth of the followers of
the Prophet is that they are more prolific."[\[5\]](#_edn5)  Follow a
number of social  customs which encourage the Muslim birth rate, e.g.
fewer marriage restrictions and common remarriage of widows, and the
Muslim insistence that the children of mixed marriages be brought up as
Muslims.

       In 1909, on the basis of demographic trends visible in the census
results (1881, 1891, 1901), Colonel U.N. Mukherji had projected the rate
of Hindu decline into the future in a strictly linear fashion, and
calculated logically (if somewhat simplistically) that it would take
less than 420 years for the Hindu race to disappear completely from the
face of India.  This was a "correction" on 1891 Census Commissioner
O'Donnell's prediction that the Hindus would die out in 620 years.  The
series of articles in the *Bengalee* of 1909 in which Mukherji proposed
his analysis was titled: "Hindus, a Dying Race".[\[6\]](#_edn6) 

       This pessimistic prognosis of the numerical Hindu-Muslim
proportion defines the problem to which Swami Shraddhananda (who knew
Mukherji personally) tried to offer a solution.  One of Mukherji's
concluding sentences, "They count their gains, we calculate our losses",
became the title of a Hindu Mahasabha pamphlet as late as
1979.[\[7\]](#_edn7)  If anything, the fever of Hindu demographic
pessimism is only rising.

 

**1.3. "Hindus talking nonsense"**

       The Hindu suspicion that Islam is using demography to increase
its strength and to wrest territories from Hinduism is a constant theme
in Hindu Revivalist writing from at least 1909 till today.  The rhetoric
is often shrill and exaggerated and the case is wrapped in the wrong
arguments, most notably the claim that "Muslims have lots of children
because they have four wives".  A typical example, referring to the
official birth-control slogan, *"we are two, our \[children\] are two"*,
is the following: "For the Hindu the slogan is: *We are two, and we have
two*.  The slogan for a Moslem is: *We are five and we have
twentyfive*."[\[8\]](#_edn8)  Sometimes, outside authorities (the BBC,
the WHO) are falsely claimed as confirming the Hindus' worst fears: "The
United Nations census projections have indicated that the uncontrolled
birthrate of the Moslems of India coupled with huge infiltrations will
turn India into a Moslem majority country before the year 2000
AD."[\[9\]](#_edn9)

       It is, therefore, no surprise that *The Economist* ridicules
these demographic doomsday scenarios: "Hindu militants are talking
nonsense by predicting that chunks of the country will gain Muslim
majorities and then secede".[\[10\]](#_edn10)  There is no doubt that
some of the rhetoric generated by this Hindu unrest about the future is
plain nonsense, but it doesn't follow that the proportional decline of
the Hindus is mere fantasy.  *The Economist* itself acknowledges the
numerical gains of the Indian Muslim community, and explains that
Muslims are less willing to use birth control, and that the infant
mortality rate is lower among Muslims because they are more concentrated
in the cities where medical care is better.      

       For those who dismiss U.N. Mukherjee's reasoning as an obvious
and ridiculous case of paranoia, it may be useful to verify this
prediction for the subsequent 80 years.  Official census data show that
the Hindu percentage has declined, and the Muslim percentage increased,
in every single successive census in British India, free India, Pakistan
and Bangladesh.  As we are about to demonstrate in some detail, the
demographic trends confirm Mukherji's general prediction of a steady
decline, though a quantitative prognosis is more complex than he
envisaged.

 

**1.4. Demography: the facts**

       Considering the pivotal role of the Hindu Revivalist perception
that Hinduism is besieged and that demography is one of the weapons used
by Islam against Hinduism, I believe that a meaningful discussion of
Hindutva ideology is only possible after verification of this
fundamental perception.  Indeed, on this verification depends whether we
ought to consider the Hindutva movement as a bunch of dangerous lunatics
spreading lies and paranoia (a fairly common assumption among
India-watchers) or merely a group of realistic people who try to face up
to real challenges.

       The following table shows the percentage of Hindus and Muslims in
British India in every successive census since 1881:[\[11\]](#_edn11)

      

       yr. 1881   1891   1901   1911   1921   1931   1941

       H.  75.09  74.24  72.87  71.68  70.73  70.67  69.46

       M.  19.97  20.41  21.88  22.39  23.23  23.49  24.28 

 

       And these are the figures for the Indian
Republic:[\[12\]](#_edn12)

       year   1951    1961    1971    1981   1991 est.

       H.[\[13\]](#_edn13)  84.98   83.51   82.72   82.29   81.8

       M.     9.91   10.70   11.21   11.73   12.2

 

       These official figures are not altogether accurate for 1981 and
1991, for Assam was not counted in 1981 and neither was the state of
Jammu & Kashmir in 1991.  Adjusted on the basis of an estimate for these
states, the figures for 1991 become: Hindus 81.54%, Muslims
12.60%.[\[14\]](#_edn14)  The figure of 12.60% for Muslims in 1991 is
confirmed by independent secularist observers on the basis of official
data and standard procedures for extrapolation.[\[15\]](#_edn15) I will
use that figure in preference to the Government figure.  This brings the
Hindu percentage down to ca. 81.5%.

       In truncated India, the Muslim population has grown 2.69% in
forty years (from 9.91% to 12.6% in 1951-91), but Muslim leaders like
Imam Bukhari routinely claim that the true figure of the Muslim
population in the Indian Republic is about 3% higher.[\[16\]](#_edn16) 
There are indeed some problems with the official figures for the Indian
Republic, e.g. there is a suspicion that many illegal Bangladeshi
immigrants are lying low and avoiding the census personnel because they
are used to a regime which is not so lenient with unsolicited immigrants
(Bangladesh pushed back the Muslim Rohingya refugees from Myanmar in
1992-93).  But for the present discussion, it is probably best to keep
these alleged unregistered millions outside our considerations and stick
to verified figures.  Even without this unknown "dark figure" of
unregistered Muslim inhabitants, it is only very slightly exaggerated to
say that in the Indian Republic, ever since 1951, "the proportion of
Muslims has been gradually but steadily increasing every decade by
roughly one percentage point".[\[17\]](#_edn17)

       All kinds of local and regional data confirm the faster muslim
growth rate.  The two provinces with the highest relative population
growth between 1981 and 1991 are Kashmir (28%) and Lakshadweep (27%),
both with a Muslim minority though in very divergent economic and
political conditions; followed by Madhya Pradesh (26%) and Uttar Pradesh
(25%).[\[18\]](#_edn18)  In Uttar Pradesh, between 1981 and 1991, the
Muslim percentage rose from 15.53% to 17.33 %, in Bihar from 14.13% to
14.81%, in West Bengal from 21.51 to 23.61%.  While in Bihar birth
control seemed to have a slight effect in a decrease of the decadal
increase from 30.03% in 1971-81 to 29.5% (still more than 5% higher than
the Hindu figure) in 1981-91, there was a much larger increase in the
decadal increase in U.P. from 29.11% to 36.54%, and in West Bengal from
29.55% to 36.89%.[\[19\]](#_edn19)

 

**1.5. Extrapolation**

       How does all this work out for U.N. Mukherji's demographic
doomsday prognosis?  Mani Shankar Aiyar, the Congress Party's leading
anti-Hindutva polemicist, predicted in 1993 that until at least the
mid-21st century, the proportion of Muslims will remain stable "bar a
decimal point up or down from time to time, at 11.2 per
cent."[\[20\]](#_edn20)  But even the conservative estimate for 1991
(not yet published at the time of his writing) already refuted his
prediction by putting the Muslim population more than 1% higher.  In the
contest between Mukherji's prediction of a continuous Muslim growth and
Aiyar's prediction of a stable percentage for the next sixty years,
Mukherji has obviously won.  

       Other secularist observers admit that "it is true that the growth
rate amongst Muslims is higher than amongst Hindus", and have
calculated, on the basis of the 1971 and 1981 census figures, that "if
both the communities continue to grow at the same rate, Muslims at the
turn of the century will account for only 13.55% of the country's
population."[\[21\]](#_edn21)  That constitutes a refutation of the
still-recent rumour that Muslims will outnumber Hindus by the year
2,000, but also an admission that the Muslim percentage shows a
continuous substantial increase.  For the long term, their estimate is:
"It will take 316 years for Muslims to outnumber
Hindus".[\[22\]](#_edn22)  Here, the difference with Mukherji is merely
one over the exact quantity of time needed to do the job.

       The projection just quoted is a strictly linear extrapolation of
the Hindu-Muslim differential in the decade 1971-1981.  But this
approach fails to take into account at least two important factors which
we will now consider more closely: the Muslim increase is not linear,
but is itself increasing; and there is a large immigration of Muslims
from Pakistan and Bangladesh, which can only increase.

 

**1.6. The long-term trend**

       Ever since regular census operations were started, the percentage
of Muslims has grown every decade in British India, independent India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh.  The only *seeming* exception is Pakistan
between 1971 and 1981, due to the official declaration of Ahmadiyas (ca.
3%) as non‑Muslims in 1974.  We will include the Ahmadiyas in the Muslim
category, as they themselves also do.

       In the subcontinent, Muslims were 19.97% in 1881 and 24.28% in
1941 when the last pre-Partition census was held.  According to the last
census (1991), the Muslim percentage in the subcontinent was as follows:

      

       Bangla Desh: 86.8% of 108,760,000, or ca.
94,403,608.[\[23\]](#_edn23) 

       Pakistan: 97.0% of 126,406,000, or ca.
122,613,820.[\[24\]](#_edn24)

       India: 12.6 % of 846,349,050, or ca.
106,639,980.[\[25\]](#_edn25)

       Total: 29.92% of 1,081,515,050, or ca. 323,657,480. 

 

       The Muslim percentage has not only increased, but the rate of
increase itself has increased.  This is very clear when we take a
long-term perspective: in the *fifty* years between 1941 and 1991, their
percentage has risen 5.64% (from 24.28% to 29.92%), substantially more
than the 4.31% gain in the *sixty* years between 1881 and 1941.  At this
rate, the Muslims in the Subcontinent must have passed the 30% mark in
the mid-1990s and will pass the milestone of becoming more than half the
number of Hindus (ca. 32% to ca. 64%) before the census of 2011. 

       Similarly calculating from the available figures for the three
countries, the Hindu percentage had come down to 65.15% in
1991.[\[26\]](#_edn26)  To evaluate the trend of the Hindu percentage,
we must take into account that the pre-Independence census always had a
tentative category "tribal" or "animist", variously defined and
therefore making odd quantitative jumps (but always between 2.26% and
3.26%), from 2.57% in 1881 to 2.26% in 1941.[\[27\]](#_edn27)  After
Independence, this category was included in the Hindu category.  So,
putting everything on the post-Independence denominator, we include the
"animists" in the Hindu percentage to get a total Hindu percentage of
77.35% for 1881, 71.72% for 1941, and 65.15% for 1991.  Here again, we
see a long-term acceleration of the observed trend: a decrease of 5.63%
in the sixty years between 1881 and 1941, and a larger decrease of 6.57%
in the shorter period of fifty years between 1941 and 1991.

       So, all the predictions quoted above are far too conservative,
for they are based on a linear projection.  In reality, the observed
trends are accelerating, so Muslims will need far less than 316 years to
outnumber the Hindus.  According to Mukherji, the Hindu percentage of
ex-British India (including India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Burma)
should now have declined by about 13%, down to 54% of the total.  This
was too pessimistic, he overestimated the rate of Hindu decline, but in
the future the increasing rate of Hindu decline will catch up with
Mukherji's estimate.

 

**1.6. Muslim testimony**

       A very unexpected prediction which more than confirms this trend
is implicitly given by one of those authors who ridicule Hindu fears
about the demographic evolution: Rafiq Zakaria claims that to outnumber
Hindus, "Muslims will need no less than 365 years"[\[28\]](#_edn28), but
in another discussion in the same book he complains that according to an
all-India governmental survey in 1984, Muslim children were
underrepresented among primary school pupils: "the enrolment of Muslim
children at the primary school level in the relevant period was 12.39
per cent as against the child population of 16.81 per
cent."[\[29\]](#_edn29)  So, Rafiq Zakaria claims that in 1984, Muslim
children in the primary-school age group constituted 16.81% of the
total. 

       This means that approximately by the time this group reaches the
median position on the age pyramid of their community (i.e. when the
number of people younger than them will equal the number older than
them), certainly before 2010 (when they will be in their mid-thirties),
the native Muslim population of India, not counting the millions of
post-1984 immigrants, will be 16.81% of the total.  That is even faster
than all the above (admittedly cautious) calculations suggest, as if the
religious differential in the use of birth control since the 1960s is
having a bigger impact than hitherto assumed. 

       It gets even more dramatic when you look at it this way: in 1984,
a generation of Muslims which was about 12% of the population had
produced a generation of children, certainly not more than 30 years
younger on average, which constituted more than 16%.  This would mean an
unprecedented growth rate of more than 4% in less than 30 years, or
rather, a growth with over a third of the original percentage (4 to
12).  For a little thought experiment: if this differential growth rate
is kept constant, we get 16.81% of Muslims in ca. 2014, over 22% in
2044, nearly 30% in 2074, 40% in 2104, crossing 50% in ca. 2125 etc.,
all without counting the effect of Muslim immigration.

       Of course, demographic prediction is a difficult task, which has
to factor in many different types of data and influences, so we should
not take any amateur predictions too seriously, nor those of specialists
paid by political institutions with an interest in popularizing this or
that impression about demographic trends.  Let us not pin ourselves down
on precise predictions but let us not ignore the generally visible trend
either.  The one general prediction to which the data certainly compel
us, is that the Muslim percentage will be increasing at an accelerating
rate for at least another generation; and also beyond that, unless the
present generation of young adult Muslims brings it procreation rate
down to the average Indian level.

 

**1.7. The Subcontinental context**

       The subcontinental total shows a faster growth of the Muslim
percentage than the official figures for the Indian republic, and should
be considered the more important indicator for the long‑term evolution,
given the increasing spill‑over of population surplus from Pakistan and
especially Bangladesh.  Apart from the millions of Bangladeshis staying
illegally in India, there is also an increasing number of Pakistanis
overstaying their visas or otherwise settling in
India.[\[30\]](#_edn30) 

       In Pakistan and Bangladesh, the Muslim percentage has continually
increased, partly by pestering the non-Muslims out, partly by
conversions under pressure (pressurizing people to marry their daughters
off to Muslims, allocating jobs on conditon of conversion, etc.), and
partly by higher birth-rates.  Bangladeshi Muslim expansion has already
destroyed the Chakmas and other non-Muslim populations in the Chittagong
Hill Tracts, with the ethnically cleansed minorities fleeing to India's
North-East, there to create friction with the host population.  But the
most worrying from the Indian viewpoint is not the rise in percentage
but the rise in absolute figures: in parts of Pakistan and in the whole
of Bangladesh, sheer living space is becoming extremely scarce, and
these countries may pursue a policy of pushing their surplus population
into India. 

       Incidentally, in Nepal the breakthrough of Islam (nearly
non-existent in the 1970s) is simply spectacular, and is again due in
large measure to immigration from Bangladesh.  In Sri Lanka, the Muslim
percentage is slowly rising by demographics alone.

         So, every decade the Muslim percentage in the Subcontinent
increases by more than 1%, with the rate of increase itself increasing. 
In India, the rate of increase in the Muslim percentage is considerable,
though lower than the subcontinental total, but is rising faster due to
the differential in the use of birth control and the increasing Muslim
immigration.  In Hindutva circles, this remarkable demographic
differential is interpreted as the result of Muslim "demographic
aggression".[\[31\]](#_edn31) 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  Estimate given by Rodney Stark: *The Rise of
Christianity* (1996); this book has received jubilant reviews in
Christian circles because it downplays the factor of suppression of
Paganism by Christian emperors and highlights positive factors such as
the effectiveness of Christian charity in attracting converts, see e.g.
the review by Marcel van Nieuwenborgh: "Toen Nieuwe Testament nog nieuw
was", *De Standaard* (Brussels), 27-6-1996.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  "Etnisch konflikt in Boetan leidt tot
vluchtelingendrama" (Dutch: "Ethnic conflict in Bhutan leads to refugee
drama"), *De Standaard*, 11-8-1992.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  Among the Parsis, 36% is over 55, and 25% of the
adults are unmarried.  Their numbers have plummeted to ca. 50,000, half
of what it was in mid-20th century.  See e.g. Nergis Dalal: "The Parsis
are allowing themselves to die out", *Times of India*, 20-3-1990; Bachi
J. Karkaria: "Dying embers", *Illustrated Weekly of India*, 28-1-1990;
and Arnavaz Mama: "Survival strategies", *Sunday Observer*, 7-1-1990.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[4\]](#_ednref4)  Shraddhananda: *Hindu Sangathan*, p.99.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[5\]](#_ednref5)  Shraddhananda: *Hindu Sangathan*, p.18-19.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[6\]](#_ednref6)  See also P.K. Datta: "'Dying Hindus' -- Production
of Hindu communal common sense in early 20th century Bengal", *Economic
and Political Weekly*, 19-6-1993, p.1307; and C. Jaffrelot: *Hindu
Nationalist Movement* (Viking/Penguin 1996), p.24.  Typically, both
exclusively discuss the presumed sociological determinants and other
externals of Mukherji's analysis, not its degree of accuracy.   

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[7\]](#_ednref7)  Indra Prakash: *They Count Their Gains, We Calculate
Our Losses*, HMS, Delhi 1979.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[8\]](#_ednref8)  S.K. Bhattacharyya: *Genocide in East
Pakistan/Bangladesh* (A. Ghosh, Houston 1987), p.159.  In the Hindi
original: *Ham do hamâre do -- Ham pânch hamâre pachîs*.  The saying is
sometimes accompanied by a cartoon showing the Government poster
(father, mother, boy, girl) plus its Muslim variant: a man with
goat-beard and four veiled wives surrounded by a sea of children.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[9\]](#_ednref9)  S.K. Bhattacharyya: *Genocide in East
Pakistan/Bangladesh*, A. Ghosh, Houston 1987, p.151.

</div>

<div id="edn10" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[10\]](#_ednref10)  *The Economist*, 7/11/1992.

</div>

<div id="edn11" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[11\]](#_ednref11)  Reproduced in K.R. Malkani: *The Politics of
Ayodhya and Hindu-Muslim relations* (Har-Anand, Delhi 1993), appendix 4.

</div>

<div id="edn12" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[12\]](#_ednref12)  Reproduced in K.R. Malkani: *The Politics of
Ayodhya and Hindu-Muslim relations*, appendix 4.

</div>

<div id="edn13" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[13\]](#_ednref13)  Unlike in British India, the census category
"Hindu" here includes the pre-Independence category "tribal" or
"animist".

</div>

<div id="edn14" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[14\]](#_ednref14)  Syed Shahabuddin: "Census 1991, Muslim Indians and
Sangh Parivar", *Muslim India*, September 1995, p.386.  The estimate for
Jammu & Kashmir is based on the assumption of a constant ratio between
the religions, which understates the Muslim percentage by ignoring the
higher Muslim birth rate and the Hindu emigration from the state.

</div>

<div id="edn15" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[15\]](#_ednref15)  Ashish Bose: "1991 Census data: Muslim rate of
growth", *Indian Express*, 9-9-1995.

</div>

<div id="edn16" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[16\]](#_ednref16)  In a letter published in *Organiser*, 15-6-1997,
Syed Shahabuddin opines that the Indian Muslims may well be "the largest
Muslim community in the world", i.e. larger than the Indonesian Muslim
community.

</div>

<div id="edn17" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[17\]](#_ednref17)  Ashish Bose: "1991 Census data: Muslim rate of
growth", *Indian Express*, 9-9-1995.

</div>

<div id="edn18" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[18\]](#_ednref18)  Calculated on the basis of province-wise
population figures given by Joachim Betz: "Indien", *Informationen zur
politischen Bildung* no.257/1997, p.31.

</div>

<div id="edn19" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[19\]](#_ednref19)  Figures given in Violette Graff: "L'islam indien à
la croisée des chemins", *Relations Startégiques et Internationales*,
p.118.

</div>

<div id="edn20" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[20\]](#_ednref20)  M.S. Aiyar: "Sex, lies and *tushtikaran*",
*Sunday*, 24-1-1993.  *Tushtikaran*: "appeasement".

</div>

<div id="edn21" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[21\]](#_ednref21)  Namita Bhandare, Louise Fernandes and Minu Jain:
"A pampered minority?", *Sunday*, 7-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn22" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[22\]](#_ednref22)  N. Bhandare, L. Fernandes, M. Jain: "A pampered
minority?", *Sunday*, 7-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn23" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[23\]](#_ednref23)  *Encyclopaedia Brittannica, Book of the Year
1992*, entry *Bangladesh*, official figure for 1991.

</div>

<div id="edn24" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[24\]](#_ednref24)  UNO estimate for religion-wise percentage given in
*Jaarboek 1996* of *Winkler Prins-Encyclopedie*; the *Encyclopeadia
Brittannica* yearbooks 1991-96 only give the 1981 figure: 96.7%.

</div>

<div id="edn25" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[25\]](#_ednref25)  Total population figure based on preliminary
census data, given in various media, e.g. W.M. Callewaert: "De moslims
in India", *Kultuurleven* (Leuven), 1997/3, p.44.  The *Encyclopeadia
Brittannica* yearbook 1991 only gives a UNO estimate.

</div>

<div id="edn26" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[26\]](#_ednref26)  This assumes the *Encyclopaedia Brittannica*
figure for the Hindu percentage in Bangladesh in 1991, viz. 11.9%, which
is probably too high.

</div>

<div id="edn27" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[27\]](#_ednref27)  See in Malkani: *Politics of Ayodhya*, appendix 4.

</div>

<div id="edn28" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[28\]](#_ednref28)  R. Zakaria: *The Widening Divide* (Viking/Penguin
1995), p.181.

</div>

<div id="edn29" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[29\]](#_ednref29)  R. Zakaria: *The Widening Divide*, p.146.  The
survey was conducted by the "High Power Panel for Minorities", with Dr.
Gopal Singh as Chairman and Zakaria himself as Member-Secretary.

</div>

<div id="edn30" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[30\]](#_ednref30)  "10,000 Pakistani untraceable after expiry of
visas", *Indian Express*, 13-7-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn31" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[31\]](#_ednref31)  Most explicitly in the title of retired police
officer Baljit Rai's book *Demographic Aggression against India: Muslim
Avalanche from Bangladesh* (B.S. Publ., Chandigarh 1993), about the
spill-over of Bangladesh's demographic surplus into India.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part2.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/index.html)**

</div>

</div>
