+++
title = "01 2. Immigration from Bangladesh"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**2. Immigration from Bangladesh**

** **

**2.1. The uses of migration**

       In the demographic competition, simple procreation is not the
only factor.  There are cases where Muslims are in a minority and use
migration to remedy their minority condition.  This does not, of course,
mean that all Muslims involved in such migration are conscious soldiers
in a demographic offensive ("infiltrators"), but an element of planning
may nonetheless be involved, or may arise in certain activist circles
once the political potential of an ongoing migration process becomes
apparent. 

       Thus, about the situation in Europe, Bat Ye'or observes: "The
Islamicist movement does not conceal its intention to islamize Europe at
all.  Brochures sold in European Islamic centres explain goal and means,
including conversion work, marriages with native women, and especially
immigration.  Knowing that Islam always started as a minority in the
countries it conquered, these ideologues consider the implantation of
Islam in Europe and the USA as a great chance for
Islam."[\[1\]](#_edn1) 

       The Islamic calendar starts with a momentous migration, that of
Mohammed and his followers from Mecca to Medina.  The result of this
immigration from the Medinese viewpoint was that the city lost its
autonomy to Mohammed, who became its dictator and expelled or killed
sections of its population.

       A recent case of the use of demography in the interest of Islam
was on the occasion of the 1994 provincial elections in the Malaysian
province of Sabah: "The number of Muslim‑dominated constituencies in
Sabah has increased from 17 in 1990 to 24 in 1994.  The
\[Christian‑led\] Parti Bersatu Sabah has accused \[the ruling party\]
of flooding the state with Muslim immigrants from Indonesia and the
Philippines.  Some estimates put the number of immigrants as high as
800,000", with Sabah's original population numbering 1.5
million.[\[2\]](#_edn2) 

       The situation in India follows the same pattern: higher Muslim
birth rate, and migration creating Muslim majorities in strategic
places.  This is most visible in the problem of illegal immigration from
Bangladesh in the 1980s and 90s, the most common occasion for using the
term "demographic aggression".  In the case of immigration, the
intentionality is undeniable but it is not necessarily or at least not
exclusively motivated by Islamic concerns: Bangladesh is simply
overpopulated and wants to get rid of its population surplus by all
means available.  Non-Muslim governments would probably pursue a similar
policy in similar circumstances.

       One factor which makes India the prime target of Bangladesh's
demographic dumping policy, apart from its geographical contiguity, is
the tough policy of other countries vis-à-vis illegal or even legal
immigrants: "At the end of last year, there were still more than 100,000
illegal immigrant workers from Bangladesh in Malaysia.  As of early
February 1997 they are massively expelled by the Malay Government. (...)
Bangladesh has some experience with such disasters: last year already,
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar expelled some 50,000
illegal Bangladeshis. (...) Three years ago, the Malaysian Government
signed an agreement with the Government in Dhaka agreeing to take in
50,000 new guest workers from Bangladesh.  But when more and more
Bangladeshis entered the countries secretly and started to work without
work permit, Malaysia canceled the agreement
unilaterally."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  Against Bangladesh's aggressive policy of
encouraging its citizens to trespass against the laws of other countries
by settling there without permit, most other countries defend themselves
with a non-nonsense policy of cracking down on these infiltrators.

 

**2.2. Refugees and migrants**

       Immigration from Bangladesh is of two types.  Firstly there are
members of the minority communities fleeing occasional waves of
persecution or the more general sense of being second-class citizens
under the Islamic dispensation.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  Few Hindus would dispute
their right to settle down in India.  Secondly, there are Muslims
seeking economic opportunities or sheer living space, which dirt-poor
and intensely overcrowded Bangladesh cannot offer to the ever-larger
numbers of newcomers on the housing and labour market.

       Hindu Revivalists are glad to quote unsuspect secular sources to
confirm their worst misgivings about Muslim demographic aggression from
Bangladesh.  A 1992 report prepared by B.B. Dutta for the North-Eastern
Congress Coordination Committee meeting in Guwahati looked into both
types of immigration and notes:

       "Between 1971 and 1981, Bangladesh census records show a
reduction of 39 lakhs in the minority population.

       "Between 1981-89, 36 lakh religious minorities were missing from
that country.

       "In 1972, there were 7.5 lakh Bihari Muslims in the camps in
Dacca.  As a result of mediation by Saudi Arabia only 33,000 of them
were accepted by Pakistan.[\[5\]](#_edn5)  At present, there are less
than two lakhs in the camps, where have the rest gone? (...)

       "It would be interesting to note that a group of intellectuals in
Dacca is seeking to legitimise the migration of Muslims into the
adjoining areas of North East region by invoking the theory of
*lebensraum* or living space.  A number of Dacca dailies carried
articles written on these lines by university professors.  They were not
at all apologetic about the infiltration.  People are sought to be
inspired by the hope that one day the north-eastern region will be added
to Bangladesh giving it a natural boundary in place of present one which
throttles Bangladesh."[\[6\]](#_edn6)

       So, there is a large emigration of non-Muslims, but there is also
a large emigration of Muslims, as exemplified by the case of the Bihari
Muslims in Bangladesh, of whom the great majority, feeling unwelcome
both in Bangladesh and in Pakistan, have simply returned to Bihar and
adjoining areas, whence their parents had left for the promised land of
(East) Pakistan in 1947.  Moreover, the intentionality of the population
shift from Bangladesh to India is expressed quite candidly by opinion
leaders in Bangladesh.

       The BJP argues that refugees from persecution and illegal
economic migrants merit a different treatment, as is assumed in the
arrangements for refugee relief of most countries.  But secularists see
it differently, for "unlike the BJP, the Congress (I) views both Hindus
and Muslim from Bangladesh as infiltrators".[\[7\]](#_edn7)  Terminology
is a part of the problem here, with secularists systematically
describing Hindu refugees as "migrants" if not "infiltrators", and
Muslim illegal immigrants as "refugees".

 

**2.3. An estimate of the numbers**

       Arun Shourie has brought the findings of the police and other
Government agencies to the notice of the public.  According to an
Internal Note prepared by the Home Ministry, "large-scale infiltration
has changed the demographic landscape of the borders", and it also
affects Delhi, Maharashtra, Gujarat, etc.[\[8\]](#_edn8) 

       By 1987, the number of illegal immigrants in West Bengal alone
was ca. 4.4 million, and 2 to 3 million in Assam, so that "large
stretches of the border in these states are becoming predominantly
inhabited by Bangladeshi Muslims.  The simmering communal tension in
some of the border areas is one of the manifestations of the effects of
large-scale illegal migration of Bangladeshi nationals who have slowly
displaced or dispossessed the local population, particularly those
belonging to the Hindu community".[\[9\]](#_edn9)  Moreover: "In the
metropolitan cities of Delhi and Bombay not less than 4 to 5 lakh
Bangladeshi Muslims have been residing".[\[10\]](#_edn10)

       The Hindu population in East Bengal had declined from 33% in 1901
to 28% in 1941.  It fell to 22% by 1951 due to the Partition and the
post-Partition exodus, and to 18.5% in 1961.  By 1971, it had fallen to
13.5%, partly due to the 1971 massacre by the Pakistani Army, partly due
to intermittent waves of emigration.  The 1981 figure was 12.1%.  In
1989 and 1990, due to "large-scale destruction, desecration and damage
inflicted on Hindu temples and religious institutions"[\[11\]](#_edn11),
"clandestine migration by the Hindus to India went up".[\[12\]](#_edn12)

       On top of the continuous trickle of Hindu‑Buddhist refugees
fleeing discrimination and harassment, the big majority of clandestine
immigrants consisted of Muslims seeking "living space".  It is very hard
to count them, but the difference between the actual Bangladesh
population in 1991 and predictions for 1991 based on the birth rate and
other data shows that millions of people have disappeared from the radar
screen of Bangladeshi census workers: "The net shortfall, according to
Bangladesh government projection was between 7.24 and 9.24 million, and
according to UNDP estimates it was between 12.24 and 14.24
million."[\[13\]](#_edn13)  And since 1991, millions more have been
added to that number.

 

**2.4. Indian worries**

       All the BJP's "genuine secularists" are, in their heart of
hearts, worried about the demographic increase of the minorities, but
they don't want to admit it in so many words.  Thus, in its 1996
Election Manifesto, the BJP warns that because of Bangladeshi
infiltration, "various demographic entities are bound to come in
conflict" due to "an alarming growth of a section of the population";
already, "a section of the population has grown by almost 100 per cent"
in certain northeastern areas.[\[14\]](#_edn14)  Not wanting to sound
anti-Muslim, the BJP avoids being explicit about the "communal" angle. 

       Even to the extent that the BJP does identify the problem as
"illegal Bangladeshi *Muslims*", it dooms itself to an unimaginative
(and by now probably unrealistic) solution, viz. to physically push
these people back across the border, and then build a hermetic fence
around Bangladesh.  However, the BJP state government in Delhi, voted to
power in 1993 on a platform prominently including a crackdown on
Bangladeshi "infiltrators", has totally gone back on this promise.  Few
people seem to realize that the only *democratic* way to conduct this
policy of allowing illegal immigration is to have Parliament pass a law
declaring: "Henceforth, India gives up the right to control its borders
and the access to its territory", a right which is one of the defining
elements of sovereignty.  Allowing illegal immigration to continue is an
act of contempt for India's democratic laws and institutions.

       Even a secularist paper has noticed the seriousness of the
problem: "The police say that Bangladeshis are behind most of the
robberies, stabbings and other crimes being committed in the capital. 
Their area of operation includes posh localities in South Delhi where
most of them work as domestic help.(...) Scarce job opportunities are
thus being hijacked by these foreigners.  Pakistan claims to be a great
friend of Bangladesh, but it is unwilling to allow even one Bangladeshi
to stay on.  In fact, Pakistan gunned down hundreds of Bangladeshis who
were trying to sneak into its territory.  If this is how Pakistan is
dealing with the situation, there is no need why we should be so
generous.  As a first step, India's borders with Bangladesh should be
effectively sealed.  As for those Bangladeshis who are already in the
country, they should be identified and deported.  Otherwise, the whole
country will be paying a very heavy price."[\[15\]](#_edn15)

       As against the reassuring view that Muslims can only outnumber
Hindus in India in a matter of centuries, the evolution in the
North-East suggests that the problem of a Muslim majority will take the
form of the successive *Unterwanderung* ("to overwhelm by walking in")
of designated parts of India within decades.  The demographic evolution
is bound to create successive Kashmir-type situations, with local Muslim
majorities in a (decreasingly) Hindu-majority republic.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  Bat Ye'or: *Les chrétiens d'Orient entre Jihad et
Dhimmitude* (Le Cerf, Paris 1991), p.256.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  *The Economist*, 26/2/1994.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  *De Wereld Morgen* (Brussels), April 1997, p.17.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[4\]](#_ednref4)  Published information about the oppression of and
the violence against the minorities in Bangladesh is extremely scarce. 
The most accessible general information can be found in Taslima Nasrin's
controversial fact-novel *Lajja* (1993, Penguin 1994); an actual report
is *Communal Discrimination in Bangladesh: Facts and Documents*,
compiled and published by the Bangladesh Hindu-Buddhist-Christian Unity
Council, 1993.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[5\]](#_ednref5)  Urdu-speaking Bihari Muslims migrated from Bihar to
East Pakistan in 1947.  In the Urdu-Bengali controversy and in the
Bengali freedom struggle they sided with Pakistan, a position which
turned them into unwanted refugees after the creation of Bangladesh.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[6\]](#_ednref6)  "Report 'C' -- 1992 of Congress (I)", excerpts
reproduced as appendix 2 in Arun Shourie: *Secular Agenda* (ASA, Delhi
1993), quotation on p.299-300; as annexure B in Baljit Rai: *Is India
Going Islamic?* (B.S. Publ., Chandigarh 1994), quotation on p.91-92; and
in S.N.M. Abdi: "No place to call their own", *Illustrated Weekly of
India*, 14-11-1992.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[7\]](#_ednref7)  Statement by Mr. D.P. Roy, joint secreatry of the
All-India Congress Committee, quoted by Tapan Sikdar, president of the
West Bengal BJP: "How West Bengal Congress is providing fillip to Muslim
infiltrators", *BJP Today*, 1-10-1992.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[8\]](#_ednref8)  Appendix 1 in Arun Shourie: *A Secular Agenda*,
spec. p.269.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[9\]](#_ednref9)  In Shourie: *Secular Agenda*, p.269-270.

</div>

<div id="edn10" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[10\]](#_ednref10)  In Shourie: *Secular Agenda*, p.270.

</div>

<div id="edn11" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[11\]](#_ednref11)  A list of over 200 Hindu places of worship
attacked or destroyed in November 1989, compiled by the
Hindu-Buddhist-Christian Unity Council of Bangladesh, is given in
Shourie, Goel et al.: *Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them*, vol.1
(Voice of India 1990), appendix.

</div>

<div id="edn12" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[12\]](#_ednref12)  Shourie: *Secular Agenda*, p.272.

</div>

<div id="edn13" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[13\]](#_ednref13)  Internal Note, in Shourie: *Secular Agenda*,
p.273.

</div>

<div id="edn14" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[14\]](#_ednref14)  *BJP Election Manifesto 1996*, p.39.  Though
intended as quite serious, this could practically be read as a parody of
the Press Council rules pertaining to riot reporting (where "Muslims
burned a temple down" becomes "members of a particular community damaged
a religious building").  BJP spokesmen have tried to justify this
wording with reference to a crackdown on Hindu refugees by the CPM
Government of West Bengal, who wanted to show that Hindus would suffer
first if anything was undertaken against Bangladeshi immigrants.

</div>

<div id="edn15" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[15\]](#_ednref15)  Rajiv Shukla: "The unwanted guests. Isn't it time
we sorted out the Bangladeshi illegal immigrants issue?", *Sunday*,
12/2/1995.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part3.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part1.html)**

</div>

</div>
