+++
title = "03 4. Islam and birth control"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**4. Islam and birth control**

**4.1. Islam condoning birth control**

       It is routinely assumed in Hindu circles that Islam prohibits
family planning.  But against the talk of Muslim "demographic
aggression", secularists like to emphasize that, unlike Christianity and
Judaism, Islam explicitly allows birth control.  And this is entirely
correct.  As Yoginder Sikand argues, "Islam is one of the few religions
that allow for birth control".[\[1\]](#_edn1)     

       In the Golden Age of Islam (7th-11th century), various writers
freely wrote instructions for birth control, e.g. Al-Jahiz wrote in a
book about the animal kingdom: "The difference between human beings and
other species is that only human beings practise birth
control."[\[2\]](#_edn2)  Of the four Sunni schools of jurisprudence,
the Malikite prohibits abortion altogether, the Hanbalite and Shafiite
allow it in the first forty days, while the Hanafite school allows
abortion in the first four months of pregnancy.  All the schools permit
the use of contraceptives.  The Shiites consider birth control, in
pre-modern times mostly *co√Øtus interruptus*, the normal practice in
case of temporary (*Muta*) marriages, "so much so that a man who wanted
children had to make a special provision in the Muta Marriage Contract
so as not to practise 'withdrawal'."[\[3\]](#_edn3) 

       For this reason, there is a lot of practical advice on birth
control in Islamic literature, far more than in the fabled Hindu and
Chinese sex manuals.  A number of medieval authorities on Islamic law
and medicine have written about birth control in a matter-of-fact,
non-judgmental way.  The greatest Muslim medic, Ibn Zakaria al Razi
(Latin *Razes*) has given a list of 176 contraceptive or abortive
techniques or preparations, while Abu Ali ibn Sina (*Avicenna*)
mentioned several dozen.[\[4\]](#_edn4)  The Hanafi jurist Ibn Abadin
allowed women to use birth control and to have an abortion until the
120th day of pregnancy, even without their husbands'
consent.[\[5\]](#_edn5) 

       Even Ibn Taimiya, the 13th-century Hanbali theologian who in most
matters is the acknowledged godfather of today's "fundamentalists",
permitted the use of contraceptive devices.  Ibn Taimiya's argument was
based on a paradoxical implication of the doctrine of God's omnipotence:
no matter how you try to prevent conception, if God has decided that a
child will be conceived, scheming human beings are powerless to thwart
His designs.  Now, since God can always overrule the plans of man, the
use of contraceptives does not *really* interfere with God's designs,
ergo it is permitted.[\[6\]](#_edn6)

       In their innocence, some Islamic apologists use arguments to
prove Islam's progressiveness concerning birth control regardless of
their negative implications in other respects.  Thus, the principal of
an Islamic college writes: "Islamic jurisprudence has always allowed the
above-mentioned family planning method with slave girls as it is one of
its fundamental dictates that a slave girl becomes free the moment she
gives birth to a child."[\[7\]](#_edn7)  So, to keep her in slavery it
was allowed to prevent her from getting pregnant, which says a lot about
the centrality of the institution of slavery to Islamic civilization. 

       Even more troubling is the context of the main incident in
Mohammed's career which justifies birth control (and is therefore
routinely mentioned as proof of Mohammed's progressiveness).  Mohammed's
men had captured women from Mecca in the raid on a Meccan caravan at
Badr (see next para), intending to sell them back to their families for
a handsome ransom, but asked Mohammed if they could use them for their
sexual gratification.  Considering that the ransom would go down if the
women were not returned in their original condition, the Prophet told
his men that they could freely go and rape them as long as they
practised *coitus interruptus* (Arabic *azl*).  So, the Prophet condoned
hostage-taking and rape.[\[8\]](#_edn8)  Nonetheless, these two
instances of clumsy apologetics do confirm that Islam approves of birth
control.

 

**4.2. Islam prohibiting birth control**

       In spite of this solid tradition of at least tolerance to birth
control, there is now a strong countercurrent which objects to birth
control and propagates a natalist policy.  After attacking "the
protagonists of Hindutva" for having "perfected the art of demagogy,
deception and venomous communal propaganda" including the "oft-repeated
accusations that Islam is strictly opposed to family planning", Yoginder
Sikand admits: "Their loud proclamations have been further legitimised
by some ignorant and obscurantist *mullah*s, who also assert that Islam
and family planning are not compatible with each other."[\[9\]](#_edn9) 
Even the alleged Hindutva propaganda that "Muslims are furiously
multiplying as part of a grand Islamic conspiracy to swamp the country
and convert it into a Muslim-majority state"[\[10\]](#_edn10) is
candidly confirmed by these "ignorant and obscurantist mullahs". 

       Leave alone Urdu pamphlets, a neatly published English book from
the impeccably Islamic *Noor Publishing House* (Delhi), Muhammad
Samiullah's *Muslims in Alien Society*, is sufficiently explicit about
the demographic designs of contemporary Islam.[\[11\]](#_edn11) 
Samiullah rejects family planning as a Western ploy to diminish the
numbers of the Muslim population in order to maintain its hegemony.  The
core of his argument is that birth control has no sanction from the
Quran nor from the example and sayings of the Prophet.  Since others
have claimed just the opposite, a close reading of the source texts of
Islam is needed.  

       As Samiullah notes, Mohammed sanctioned, even commanded, the
practice of *coitus interruptus*, the then most readily available method
of birth control, in the aftermath of the battle of Badr, his first
great victory which yielded him a number of woman hostages.  For the
present discussion, the point which Samiullah wants to make is that this
guideline laid down by the Prophet was contradicted by the Prophet
himself on later occasions.  Samiullah recounts a number of *Ahadis*
(episodes of the Prophet's life serving as the authoritative basis of
Islamic law) where the Prophet opposed this method of birth
control.[\[12\]](#_edn12)

       Thus, after the campaign against the Banu al-Mustaliq, the
Muslims wanted to rape the hostages and asked Mohammed whether they
should practise *azl*, but the Prophet replied, with reference to the
futility of human scheming before God's omnipotence: "It does not matter
if you don't do it, for every soul that is to be born up to the Day of
Resurrection will be born."  Since this (and similar ones) is a later
Hadis than the one containing his pro-*azl* injunction at Badr, it
overrules the earlier one, at least according to the theological
principle that in case of contradiction, the earlier pronouncement is
overruled by the later one.[\[13\]](#_edn13)

       Admittedly, the fact that the Prophet encouraged *azl* on at
least one occasion does create some legal room for birth control, and
Samiullah concedes that it is explicitly permitted in case the woman is
in poor health and could not bear the burden of pregnancy and the effort
of delivery.  But the main weight of Mohammed's normative opinion,
Samiullah argues, is certainly on the side of natalism and against
birth-control.  Hence the Prophet's prohibition, at least on one
occasion, of knowingly marrying a sterile woman; his prohibition of
non-vaginal intercourse (another primitive form of birth control); and
his strict prohibition of sterilization and of voluntary celibacy.

 

**4.3. Islamic natalism**

       Hindu Revivalist authors have dug up some more quotations to
support the perception of natalist designs in Islam.  K.S. Lal quotes
Mohammed as saying in so many words: "Marry women who will love their
husbands and be very prolific, for I want you to be more numerous than
any other people".[\[14\]](#_edn14)  Ram Swarup quotes the Prophet as
saying: "In my Ummah, he is the best who has the largest number of
wives."[\[15\]](#_edn15)  Even a secular Muslim candidly calls it "one
of the fundamental tenets of Islam -- namely, to multiply the
tribe."[\[16\]](#_edn16)

       Samiullah's point is that as a general policy, the Prophet
opposed any behaviour which was demographically wasteful and
unproductive.  He was less fussy about occasional loss of semen in
sterile forms of intercourse than Moses' laws had been, but as a rule he
favoured the same natalist policy.  Samiullah opines: "Had the monster
of 'Birth Control' as an instrument of state policy raised its head in
the days of the Holy Prophet, he would surely have declared Jihad
against it in the same manner as he waged Jihad against Shirk
(polytheism)."[\[17\]](#_edn17)  And he concludes: "The Qur'an says that
'Children are an ornament of life' and Hadith literature views with
favour larger families for the greater strength of Ummah, and as such
birth control / family planning cannot be in any way compatible with the
Shari'ah."[\[18\]](#_edn18)

       Samiullah argues, not unconvincingly, that the Sharia position is
supported by modern science.  He cites findings that both the
birth-control pill and vasectomy, once (or still) propagated as entirely
harmless, are in fact harmful to the concerned person's
health.[\[19\]](#_edn19)  He also shows that the popularization of the
pill and other modern forms of contraception has contributed immensely
to freer sexual mores in the West, or what he calls immorality.  With
all this, Samiullah has put together a battery of Islamic plus secular
arguments which are bound to sound convincing to the Muslim
masses.[\[20\]](#_edn20) 

       Another Indian Muslim author telling Muslim women to "shun birth
control" is Muhammad Imran, whose book is published by the Markazi
Maktaba Islami ("Islamic Educational Centre"), Delhi, the leading
provider of Islamic schoolbooks.[\[21\]](#_edn21)  He emphasizes that
"birth control should be resorted to only in cases of extreme necessity,
such as the wife's ill-health owing to constant births.  Imam Abu Hanifa
holds it *makruh* (abominable)."[\[22\]](#_edn22)  He too invokes the
authority of Western scientists to dismiss it as unhealthy, and points
to its "undermining" effects on morality in Western
society.[\[23\]](#_edn23)

 

**4.4. The Rabita's natalism**

       The Indian Muslim authors quoted are not alone.  Thousands of
preachers instil the same natalist resolve into their flock, even in
countries like Egypt and Bangladesh where this position is actually
subversive of the Government's official anti-natalist policies: "Even in
overpopulated Egypt the theologians reject family planning, at best they
merely tolerate the generally ineffective steps which the Government
takes."[\[24\]](#_edn24)

       The natalist and anti-contraceptive line is even defended by the
world's most powerful Islamic organization, the *Rabita al-Alam
al-Islamiyya* (World Islamic League).  At the UN Conference on
Population in Cairo 1994, a number of Muslim countries joined hands with
the Vatican in opposing contraceptives and abortion.  On the occasion of
this UN conference, the Rabita called a meeting chaired by the Saudi
king, where a resolution was passed "against the legalization of
abortion (...) against a policy of conceding sexual rights to
adolescents and unmarried persons (...) against raising the marriageable
age (...) We want to make it clear: the Islamic Sharia is against
abortion. (...) We strongly oppose the proposed resolution which pleads
for complete equality between man and woman."  The resolution also
alleges that birth control policies are but a Western ploy to mask
exploitative designs, and concludes: "If the world's riches are honestly
divided, there will be enough for all, and there will be no reason to
limit the number of children."[\[25\]](#_edn25)

       The Cairo Conference was a bone of contention in the Muslim
world.  Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Malaysia boycotted the Conference.  The
Egyptian Grand-Mufti Mohammed Sayed Tantawi defended the Conference
against a condemnation of its agenda by Al-Azhar
university.[\[26\]](#_edn26)  Egyptian opposition newspapers attacked
the Conference, alleging that its anti-natalist agenda would lead to all
kinds of immorality and the undermining of parental
authority.[\[27\]](#_edn27)  Thirty prominent Muslims approached the
courts in a failed attempt to have the Conference
banned.[\[28\]](#_edn28)  Islamic spokesmen denounced the UNO plans as a
conspiracy against "the Islamic bomb, viz. the exponential increase of
the number of Muslims worldwide".[\[29\]](#_edn29) 

       The Sudanese Government denounced the Conference as "a ploy to
depopulate the Arab countries \[and\] to minimize the population
increase in the Muslim world", and applauded the statement by a
professor of Al-Azhar that the Conference intended to "destroy the
Muslim nation".[\[30\]](#_edn30)  While some Muslims favour a realistic
population policy, it is undeniable that others approach the matter in
terms of demographic warfare.

 

**4.5. Why Muslim natalism?**

       The contrast in the Muslim world between the medieval tolerance
of birth control and the modern opposition to it can be explained. 
First of all, even these medieval writings on contraceptive methods have
never preached population control as a general policy.  Samiullah is
probably right to the extent that he distinguishes between people's
private lives, where Mohammed did not prohibit birth control, and public
policy, where Mohammed took a natalist position.  In practice, birth
control as condoned by Mohammed and the medieval Muslim authors was
never on such a scale that it endangered the steady increase of the
Muslim percentage, if only because there was a constant trickle of
converts from the non-Muslim communities.  Most importantly, there was a
situation of unchallenged Muslim domination, not one of Muslim decline
and subservience to other powers, as in the 20th century, nor one of
permanent confrontation with a non-Muslim majority as in contemporary
India. 

       Demography is a bigger concern today because Islam is fighting
for its survival, if not for world supremacy.  Muhammad Samiullah is
explicit about the good reason for natalism: "There is no denying the
fact that the political prestige and military strength of a country
depends upon the size of its population. (...) In the Islamic context
greater population has a double significance because one cannot wage an
effective Jihad without an expanding population."[\[31\]](#_edn31)

       We may probably generalize that the demographic ebullience of
Muslim communities is for the largest part the innocent and automatic
result of, firstly, the age-old desire to see the tribe increase, which
Mohammed merely confirmed but did not invent; and secondly, of the
status of woman in Islam, which is strongly conducive to her exclusive
motherhood.  However, in the present geopolitical circumstances, certain
powerful Islamic organizations have added to these natural factors a
deliberate strategy of strengthening the position of Islam by
multiplying its numbers.  Though they do not have a monopoly on Islamic
orthodoxy, they do influence Muslim collective behaviour to a
substantial extent, especially in (what is to Islam) a frontline state
like India. 

 

**4.6. So, who was right?**

       The Hindu revivalists are essentially right about the ongoing
substantial increase in the Muslim percentage of the Indian population. 
A realistic extrapolation into the future of present demographic
(including migratory) trends does predict a Muslim majority in the
Subcontinent well before the end of the 21st century, and a Muslim
majority in the Indian Union sometime later, but in some regions much
earlier.  The demographic differential is not of such a magnitude that
Muslims will soon outnumber Hindus in the whole of India; but it is
large enough to create Muslim‚Äëmajority areas in strategic corners of the
country, "two, three, many Kashmirs!" 

       Hindu revivalists who argue that Muslim have a higher birth rate,
that their percentage is growing fast, and that this is the result of an
intentional policy on the part of at least a section of the Muslim
leadership, are right.  It is not just that they "have a point" or that
they "deserve a hearing", no: they are nothing less than *right*.  Only
the exact quantity of the trend is a matter for dispute.

       And why stop our conclusion with finding the Hindu position
right?  The data just surveyed also teach us something about the
secularists who have ridiculed and thoroughly blackened the said Hindu
position: they are wrong.  We have not used any esoteric figures
inaccessible to the common man; all these data were at the disposal of
the secularists.  Yet, some of them insist that the Muslim percentage
will remain constant, or that the Muslim increase is proportionate to
relative Muslim poverty.  The fact deserves to be noted: a whole class
of leading intellectuals brutally denies easily verifiable facts, i.c.
the accelerating increase of the Muslim and the decrease of the Hindu
percentage, and the intentionality behind this Muslim demographic
offensive.

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  Yoginder Sikand: "Bogey of family planning and
Islam", *Observer of Business and Politics*, 27-2-1993, with reference
to B.F. Musallam: *Sex and Society in Islam* (Cambridge 1933).

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  Quoted in Lucas Catherine: *Islam voor Ongelovigen*
(EPO, Antwerp 1997), p.215.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  Yoginder Sikand: "Bogey of family planning and
Islam", *Observer of Business and Politics*, 27-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[4\]](#_ednref4)  Quoted in Lucas Catherine: *Islam voor Ongelovigen*,
p.216.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[5\]](#_ednref5)  Quoted to this effect by Yoginder Sikand: "Bogey of
family planning and Islam", *Observer of Business and Politics*,
27-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[6\]](#_ednref6)  Quoted to this effect by L. Catherine: *Islam voor
Ongelovigen*, p.216.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[7\]](#_ednref7)  Wasi Ahmad Siddiqi: "Family Planning and Prophet",
letter in *Indian Express*, 30-4-1990.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[8\]](#_ednref8)  Though Ram Swarup discusses this and similar
episodes (*Understanding Islam through Hadis*, p.61-62, ref. to *Sahih
al-Muslim* 3371), he does not draw attention to this revealing aspect
pertaining to Islamic ethics.

</div>

<div id="edn9" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[9\]](#_ednref9)  Yoginder Sikand: "Bogey of family planning and
Islam", *Observer of Business and Politics*, 27-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn10" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[10\]](#_ednref10)  Yoginder Sikand: "Bogey of family planning and
Islam", *Observer of Business and Politics*, 27-2-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn11" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[11\]](#_ednref11)  Muhammed Samiullah: *Muslims in Alien Society*
(Delhi 1992), esp. ch.8: "Islam and Birth Control", p.86-97.

</div>

<div id="edn12" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[12\]](#_ednref12)  Samiullah: *Muslim in Alien Society*, p.87.

</div>

<div id="edn13" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[13\]](#_ednref13)  This exegetical principle (called *nashk*) is
disputed by some progressive theologians.  Thus, concerning the
relations with non-Muslims, the older verses are more restrained while
later verses are very combattive; but Mahmud Shaltut, Rector of Al-Azhar
in 1958-63 (*Koran and Fighting*, reproduced in R. Peters: *Jihad in
Classical and Modern Islam*, Markus Wiener, Princeton 1997, esp.
p.80-82) rejects the view that the more peaceful verses stand abrogated
by the later, more warlike ones.  His argument is that all of them are
divinely revealed and therefore valid; it is up to the interpreter to
rhyme seemingly contradictory verses together, rather than arrogantly
declaring some of God's verses invalidated.

</div>

<div id="edn14" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[14\]](#_ednref14)  Quoted from T.P. Hughes: *Dictionary of Islam*,
p.314, who refers to book 13 of *Mishkatu'l Masabih* ("niches for lamps
\[of the tradition\]", a compilation of Sunni traditions by the
12th-century Imam Husain al-Baghawi, expanded in the 14th century by
Shaykh Waliuddin).

</div>

<div id="edn15" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[15\]](#_ednref15)  Katib al-W√¢qid√Æ (= Ibn Sa'd): *Tabaq√¢t Ibn Sa'd*,
vol.2, p.146 of the Urdu translation from Nafees Academy, Karachi;
quoted by Ram Swarup: *Understanding Islam through Hadis* (Voice of
India 1989), p.57n.

</div>

<div id="edn16" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[16\]](#_ednref16)  Saeed Naqvi: *Reflections of an Indian Muslim*
(Har-Anand, Delhi 1993), p.32.

</div>

<div id="edn17" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[17\]](#_ednref17)  M. Samiullah: *Muslims in Alien Society*, p.90.

</div>

<div id="edn18" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[18\]](#_ednref18)  M. Samiullah: *Muslims in Alien Society*, p.97.

</div>

<div id="edn19" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[19\]](#_ednref19)  See e.g. Dr. Ellen Grant: *The Bitter Pill* (Elm
Tree Books, London 1985), which presents the (grim) medical case against
the birth-control pill.

</div>

<div id="edn20" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[20\]](#_ednref20)  That this natalist position has struck roots among
ordinary Muslims may be illustrated with the case of Mohammed Tofazzal
Mollah: he was sacked as Imam at the village mosque of Bahipara
(northern Bangladesh) because his wife had been sterilized after having
given birth to six children.  The village population rallied behind the
two Maulanas who had issued the *fatwa* condemning the poor Imam.  See:
"Imam faces fatwa as wife refuses to conceive", *Indian Express*,
18-11-1993.

</div>

<div id="edn21" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[21\]](#_ednref21)  M. Imran: *Ideal Woman*, Delhi 1994 (1981), p.66.

</div>

<div id="edn22" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[22\]](#_ednref22)  M. Imran: *Ideal Woman in Islam*, p.66.

</div>

<div id="edn23" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[23\]](#_ednref23)  M. Imran: *Ideal Woman*, p.68.

</div>

<div id="edn24" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[24\]](#_ednref24)  "Iranische Theologen f√ºr Geburtenkontrolle"
(German: "Iranian theologians in favour of birth control"), *Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung*, 19-1-1990.  The main thrust of the article is that
in Iran's Islamic Republic, the theologians are more loyal to the regime
and its policies (i.c. the switch from a natalist to a moderately
anti-natalist policy), while in Egypt, they take a doctrinaire Islamic
line against the "secular" Government policies.

</div>

<div id="edn25" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[25\]](#_ednref25)  Mecca, 3-9-1994, quoted in L. Catherine: *Islam
voor Ongelovigen*, p.217.

</div>

<div id="edn26" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[26\]](#_ednref26)  "Ka√Øro-konferentie verdeelt moslims" (Dutch:
"Cairo Conference divides Muslims"), *De Morgen* (Brussels), 24-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn27" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[27\]](#_ednref27)  "Egyptische islamisten verwerpen konferentie"
(Dutch: "Egyptian Islamists reject conference"), *De Standaard*,
17-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn28" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[28\]](#_ednref28)  "Rechter weigert konferentie te verbieden" (Dutch:
"Judge refuses to prohibit conference"), *De Morgen*, 31-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn29" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[29\]](#_ednref29)  "'Vrouwen zijn sleutel voor de ontwikkeling'"
(Dutch: "'Women are key to development'"), *De Morgen*, 17-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn30" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[30\]](#_ednref30)  "'Westerse delegaties zullen ernstige risico's
lopen': Khartoem waarschuwt VN-bevolkingskonferentie in Ka√Øro" (Dutch:
"'Western delegations will run serious risks': Khartum warns UN
Conference in Cairo"), *De Morgen*, 27-8-1994.

</div>

<div id="edn31" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[31\]](#_ednref31)  M. Samiullah: *Muslims in Alien Society*, p.95-96.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part5.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part3.html)**

</div>

</div>
