+++
title = "05 "

+++
<div class="Section1">

 

***Appendix (1998, but not included in the book *The Demographic
Siege*):***

 

**Using Kafir women in the service of Muslim demography**

 

       One of the most painful aspects of Muslim demographic warfare is
the open attempt by Muslims to grab non-Muslim girls to use them for
their own demographic ambitions, meanwhile also inflicting a good dose
of humiliation on the accursed kafirs.  In Bangladesh and in
Muslim-majority areas inside India, this often takes the form of simply
kidnapping girls, or of threatening their families to marry them out to
Muslims.  In the open market-place of the West and of westernized
circles in India, it takes the form of normal courtship, with the
limitation that in case of a Muslim girl befriending a non-Muslim,
family pressure is used on her, or physical threats on him or on both,
to stop the affair; since the same is much less likely to happen in the
reverse case, the net result is a considerable traffic of non-Muslim
girls into Muslim households.

       For example, after summing up some discriminations imposed by the
Muslim state and district authorities on the Buddhists of Kargil (in
Jammu & Kashmir), representatives of the Ladakh Buddhist Association
complain: "As if this is not enough, there is a deliberate and organised
design to convert Kargil's Buddhists to Islam.  In the last four years,
about 50 girls and married women with children were allured and
converted from village Wakha alone.  If this continues unchecked, we
fear that Buddhists will be wiped out from Kargil in the next two
decades or so.  Anyone objecting to such allurement and conversions is
harassed."[\[1\]](#_edn1)

       In NRI papers, you can occasionally read the testimony annex
warning of Hindu women who sorely regret their mistake of having married
a Muslim.  E.g. one Hindu woman from the West Midlands (UK) warns Hindus
to be alert when "some undesirables (...) who cannot tolerate a Muslim
girl marrying a Hindu boy even in a movie, let alone in real life (...)
try to take advantage of the innocence of Hindu girls to trap them in
marriages."  When a Hindu girl is approached by a Muslim, "she should be
immediately alerted that he is actually fulfilling the Islamic command
of grabbing and converting non-believer women by all possible means.  It
is not a reflection of my personal bitterness, I remind you of fatwas
issued by Mullahs in England for Muslim boys in colleges and
universities to marry Christian, Hindu and Sikh girls".[\[2\]](#_edn2)

       In late 1995, "the Chalvey Muslim boys" in the Chalvey area of
Slough (between London and Oxford), circulated a "notice" in and around
the Slough & Eton Secondary School, informing the public that: "We
Muslims don't want *Kafir*s such as Sikh and Hindu children to mix with
our children, specially our girls.  Two years ago a Sikh boy was
friendly with a Muslim girl and we made his life so difficult that he
committed suicide.  If your children come to this school, we will bully
your boys the way we did to the boy who committed suicide, and we will
make your daughter pregnant and change them into Islam.  We mean what we
are saying, and if you ignore it you will be very sorry."

       A Sikh youth writes to the editor, lamenting yet another case of
a girl trapped in a Muslim marriage and about to be taken to Pakistan:
"It seems to be fashionable amongst some misguided members of our
community to think that the Muslims aren't really out to convert and
brainwash young Sikh and Hindu schoolgirls.  They think that all these
Sikh-Muslim fights are about young hotheads and extremists just out to
cause trouble.(...) What I want to know is what these people are going
to do about this schoolgirl.  Is their idle chit-chat about Asian unity
going to return her to her family? (...) Brothers and sisters, don't
take anybody's word for it but see for yourself what the Muslims are
doing to us.(...) Just talk to the schoolboys who have been bullied and
terrorised for years by Muslim gangs.  Just talk to schoolgirls whom the
Muslims have threatened with rape.  Just talk to the parents of Sikh and
Hindu girls who have run off and converted.(...) These problems are real
and becoming worse.(...) time is not on our side and the number of Sikh
and Hindu schoolgirls who are running away and converting is increasing
each day." 

       I know plenty of Westerners who married Muslim girls and
converted to Islam as the *conditio sine qua non*.  Mostly working-class
people with little knowledge about Islam, they believe that, just like
so many church weddings these days, it is merely a formality without
consequences.  But once there are children and their religious education
is decided on, these converts find that the entry of the new family into
Islam was not just a matter of giving in to the sentimental obsession of
the parents-in-law, but a firm commitment guarded by every Muslim
around.  These people usually have more children than their brothers
with less exotic marriages, in obedience to what a Muslim calls "one of
the fundamental tenets of Islam -- namely, to multiply the
tribe."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  This way, they add a little extra to the numbers
of immigrant Muslim communities, which are already growing fast enough
without them. 

       One more additional factor of numerical growth is new immigration
through marriage, i.e. young immigrants getting a bride or groom from
the homeland.  In a little country like Holland, with about 400,000
Muslims, some 8,000 marriage partners are brought in every year, mostly
steeped in the good old ways, including the expectation of having many
children.  The population surplus is transferred from countries where
Muslim hegemony is unchallenged to countries or regions where fresh
numbers may tip the scales in favour of the Muslim community.  This way,
Islam tries to usurp both the women and the land of the infidels as its
own breeding-ground.

       Even Mohammed's prohibition of infanticide (post-natal abortion)
should be seen in the same light.  It is well-known that people living
in extreme ecological circumstances, like the Inuit (Eskimoes) until
recently, limit their numbers by means of infanticide.  The logic behind
it is that the alternative would be overpopulation relative to the
scarce resources, hence civil war and far more destructive suffering
than is caused by infanticide.  Precisely the same argument is used by
ecologists in favour of birth-control: like rats in an overpopulated
cage, mankind on an overpopulated planet would self-destruct, not just
back to a sustainable population level, but entirely.  Islamic sources
allege that the Pagan Arabs also practised infanticide, and if this is
true, Mohammed's prohibition of the same would be one of his more humane
interventions in Arab custom.  But that should not make us overlook its
intentional demographic impact: the Arabs in their inhospitable desert
environment could only be encouraged to drop all population-controlling
practices because the Islamic conquests provided an outlet for the
population surplus.  While Arabia itself remained as thinly populated as
in the days before Mohammed's natalist policies, the neighbouring
countries (Syria, Iraq, Egypt) were not just culturally and
linguistically but even biologically arabicized to a large extent.  

       So, is Islamâ€™s demographic offensive inevitably leading to the
demographic islamization of the whole world?  Not if  Hindus and others
challenge the Muslims' adherence to Islam.  They should make sure that
Islam loses its teeth before it can swallow their country.  In most of
Europe, Christianity is no longer dangerous to the unbelievers, neither
by numbers nor by ideological commitment.  Similarly, before the
demographic presence of Islam becomes too strong, there is time enough
to neutralize the political threat which Islam poses.  Hindu society
will be alright if it resolves to mentally liberate that section of
Indians whose ancestors have fallen prey to Islam and who have been
conditioned since childhood to revere the Quran as exclusive revelation
and to consider the non-Muslims as enemies. 

       A short version of this approach is sometimes suggested by Hindus
as a solution to the problem of infiltration from overpopulated
Bangladesh: mass conversion of the Bangladeshi immigrants.  But like so
many Hindus making schemes, they do not reflect on how this is to be
done.  It would have been much easier if at the time of Partition, the
Congress leadership had accepted the oft-heard proposal of a full
exchange of population: in that case, a Bangladeshi crossing the border
would know that he is entering territory vacated by the Muslims, where
he has no place except by converting.  But now, it will be the long road
of freeing the intellectual atmosphere from the morbid compulsion to
praise Islam, replacing it with a frank criticism of Islam, and making
sure that not a single Muslim remains ignorant of it.  Learn from the
way the Christian stranglehold on Western society was broken: make them
think again about their ideological commitment by exposing its
irrational basis.

       A piece of practical advice to conclude with: before you start
teaching Muslims, teach your own community first.  Your daughter will
think twice about becoming the breeding cow of a Muslim family if she is
properly informed about Islam.  And to get a proper perspective on
Islam, she should first know what mighty heritage she is carrying, what
treasure she would throw to the wind if she were to drop her native
tradition in favour of Islam.  

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  Tundup Tsering and Tsewang Nurboo, representing the,
Mar-yul Tsogapa, Kargil: "Ladakh visited", *Pioneer*, 4/12/1995.  They
suggest: "Therefore, to protect the religious and cultural identity of
the Ladakhi people, an anti-conversion law must be enacted for Kargil as
is presently in force in states like Arunachal Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh."

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  Pratibha Bhambri: "Hindu Girls, Don't Get Trapped!",
*India Post*, 26/7/1996.  The line about Muslims not tolerating a Muslim
girl marrying a Hindu boy even in a movie refers to Mani Ratnam's movie
*Bombay*, a target of Muslim protests for showing just such an affair.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  Saeed Naqvi: *Reflections of an Indian Muslim*,
p.32.

 

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part5.html)**

**[HOME](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/index.html)**

 

 

# ***THE END***

\~\*\~

 

</div>

</div>
