+++
title = "79 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++


\*[Open Letters to Sir Syed Ahmed Khan](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index)\*
(1888) by Lala Lajpat Rai

LETTER ONE

  
  
  

Would you excuse me if I encroach upon your valuable time for a short
while? Before I address you on the subject matter of discussion I think
it advisable to state for your information that I have been a constant
reader and admirer of your writings. From childhood, I was taught to
respect the opinions and the teachings of the white-bearded Syed of
Aligarh. Your *Social Reformer* \[the Urdu journal *Tahzib ul-Ikhlaq*\]
was constantly read to me by my fond father, who looked upon you as no
less than a prophet of the nineteenth century. Your writings in the
\[English-language journal\] *Aligarh Institute Gazette* and your
speeches in Council and other public meetings, were constantly studied
by me and preserved as a sacred trust by my revered parent.

It was thus that I came to know that you once approved of the contents
of John Stuart Mill's book on "Liberty," and it was thus that I came to
know (if my memory does not deceive me) that the present Chief Justice
of Hyderabad \[Mehdi Hasan Khan\], a staunch opponent of the National
Movement, once translated Jeremy Bentham's book on "Utility" for the
readers of your *Social Reformer*. Is it strange then that I have been
astonished to read what you now speak and write about the "National
Congress"?

Any person, in my circumstances, would shout out. Times have changed;
and with them, convictions! Flattery and official cajoleries have
blinded the eyes of the most far-seeing; cowardice has depressed the
souls of the foremost of seekers after truth, and high-sounding titles
and the favours of worldly governors have extinguished the fire of truth
burning in many a noble heart. Is it not a sad spectacle to \[see\] the
men whose days are numbered, whose feet are almost in the grave, trying
to root out all the trees planted with their own hands!

Under these circumstances, Syed Sahib, it is, surely, not strange if I
ask what has been true cause of this lamentable change in you. Old age
and exhaustion of faculties may, perhaps, have some share in causing you
to forget what you once wrote and spoke. Has your memory lost its
retentiveness, or is it the blindness of dotage which has permitted you
to stray into your present unhappy position? If the former, I from
amongst your old admirers will take upon myself the duty of reminding
you of what, in moments of wisdom, was recorded and published by your
pen and tongue, and this duty, I promise, I will fulfil with the utmost
pleasure and with feelings of the highest satisfaction.

I will begin with your book on the "Causes of the Indian Revolt," which
was written in 1858, though only translated and published in English in
the year 1873. It may be worth while to note here that the translators
of this were no others than Sir Auckland Colvin, the present
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Provinces, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Graham, the writer of your biography \[*The Life and Works of Sir Syed
Ahmed Khan*, 1885\]. In this book, after having tried to prove that the
Mutiny of 1857 was no "religious war," nor the result of a preconcerted
conspiracy, you say that "most men, I believe, agree in thinking that it
is highly conducive to the welfare and prosperity of Government --
indeed, that it is essential to its stability -- that the people should
have a voice in its Councils. It is from the voice of the people that
Government can learn whether its projects are likely to be well
received. The voice of the people can alone check errors in the bud, and
warn us of dangers before they burst upon and destroy us."

To make the matter more clear you go on saying that "this voice,
however, can never be heard, and this security never acquired, unless
the people are allowed a share in the consultations of Government. The
security of a government, it will be remembered, is founded on its
knowledge of the character of the governed as well as on its careful
observance of their rights and privileges." These are noble words, nobly
spoken; words of sterling honesty and independence of spirit. Can they
bear any other meaning than that which attaches to that resolution of
the National Congress which prays for the introduction of a
representative element into the constitution of our Legislative
Councils? Pray, tell me how can the people have a voice in the Councils
of a Government if not by representation? How can the people of a
country have their voice constantly heard if not through
representatives?

But, to leave no doubt on the subject, I will go on giving quotations in
proof of my assertion that you have yourself in former times strongly
advocated the introduction of a representative element into the
Legislative Councils of India. After laying much stress upon the
necessity of a Government respecting the opinions of the people it
governs, you say: "The evils which resulted to India from the
non-admission of natives into the Legislative Councils of India were
various.... It (i.e. the Government) could never hear, as it ought to
have heard, the voice of the people on the laws and regulations which it
passed." Again you say: "But the greatest mischief lay in this, that the
people misunderstood the views and the intentions of the Government.
They misapprehended every act." After this you proceed to say that "if
Hindustanis had been in the Legislative Councils, they would have
explained everything to their countrymen, and thus these evils which
have happened to us would have been averted."

In your opinion, as expressed there, this non-representation of the
voice of the governed in the Legislative Council of the realm was "the
one great cause" and the "origin of all smaller causes of
dissatisfaction," Nay, further, not to leave any doubts in the matter,
and to prove that in your book you even go to the length of saying that
your countrymen should be selected to form an assembly like the English
Parliament (which demand, at the time you advanced it, was certainly
more premature than it now is, though the National Congress, with all
the advantages that the country has had in the way of education and
enlightenment since that miserable year of 1858, only advocates the
partial introduction of a representative element in the Legislative
Councils), I shall give some more extracts from the same work.

There you say: "I do not wish to enter here into the question asto how
the ignorant and uneducated natives of Hindustan could be allowed a
share in the deliberations of the Legislative Council, or as to how they
should be selected to form an assembly like the English Parliament.
These are knotty points. All I wish to prove is that such a step is not
only advisable but absolutely necessary, and that the disturbances are
due to the neglect of such a measure."

Could clearer words be used than what have been quoted above? Is there
any doubt as to their meaning? Because if so, I shall be obliged to
quote the exact Hindustani words used by you to express the ideas
propounded in the above lines. But no, I do not suppose you can feel any
doubt on that point, because the English rendering was undertaken by no
others than Sir Auckland Colvin and Lieutenant-Colonel Graham, the
former of whom, at least, is. now being proclaimed (whether rightly or
wrongly, God knows) as an opponent of the National Congress.

Sir Syed, does it not sound strange that the writer of the words above
quoted should put himself forward as the leader of the antiÂ­Congress
movement? Is it not one more proof of India's misfortune, that the
writer of the above words should impute bad motives to the supporters of
the National Congress, mainly because they advocate the introduction of
some sort of representation in the Legislative Councils of India? Is not
your charge of sedition against the promoters of the Congress, in the
face of these, a mere mockery, a contradiction in terms?

Thirty years ago, you advocated the institution of a Parliament, and yet
you chide us saying that we want an Indian Parliament, notwithstanding
that we protest that for the present, and for a long time to come, we do
not claim any such thing? Mark the difference. India is no longer what
it was thirty years ago. In the course of this period it has made a
marked advance towards a higher civilization. The natives of India are
no longer, with very few exceptions, ignorant or uneducated. The rays of
education are penetrating and shedding their wholesome light inside most
Indian homes; hundreds of thousands of Indians are as well educated as
any average English gentleman, and we see scores of our countrymen every
year crossing the "black waters" to witness. with their own eyes the
proceedings of the great British Parliament, and personally familiarize
themselves with the political institutions of the English nation.

Can you in face of these facts still call us "seditious"? According to
your writings, we are the most loyal subjects of the Government, and if,
notwithstanding what you have written, you still deserve to be called
"the ablest of our loyal Mahomedan gentlemen," why do we not deserve to
be styled as "the ablest of the most loyal subjects of the English
Government"?

To give a still more clear idea of what you thought about the fitness of
India for this sort of Government, I give one more extract to the point,
and then I will have done with your old writings for the present. After
giving many arguments in proof of your position that the law which
allowed the sales of land for "arrears of Government revenue" was also a
cause of the outbreak of disturbances in 1858, you say: "A landed estate
in Hindustan is very like a kingdom. It has always been the practice to
elect one man as the head over all. By him matters requiring discussion
are 'brought forward' (mind, not decided --LLR), and every shareholder,
in proportion to his holding, has the power of speaking out his mind on
the point."

You are wrong when you say "in proportion to his holding." However, let
it remain as it is. You proceed and say: "The cultivators and the
choudhries of the villages attend on such an occasion and say whatever
they have to say. You have here, in great perfection, a miniature
kingdom and parliament." How is it that now you have changed your mind,
and have come to opine that these kingdoms, as you called them, should
have no voice in the making of laws which materially affect the person,
the property, and the reputation of the people?

Some persons insinuate that these writings which I have quoted came from
an honest, uncorrupted mind, at a time when the writer had no prospect
of being raised to the Legislative Council by mere favour. No, Sir Syed,
no! I, on my own part, do not want to make such an insinuation against
the fearless writer of those noble words which have been quoted above.
Then the problem to be solved remains the same, viz., why this change,
why this inconsistency"?

I pause for a reply, with a promise of more in my next; and in the
meanwhile beg to be allowed to subscribe myself,

The Son of an old Follower of Yours

27th October 1888

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- ["Open Letters" index page](txt_lajpatrai_1888.html#index) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html) -- [FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
