+++
title = "bhUmihar v1 claim"
+++

Bhumihars of Bihar and U.P. did not participate in the common front of Brahmins and Rajputs in 1857. Maharajas of Benaras, Hathua and Bettiah rendered signal service to the British during 1857. On the other hand the Britishers believed that 1857 was the mechinations of Brahmins and Rajputs in Bihar and U.P. Maharani Victoria's declaration on Ist November, 1858, obliquely accepted the Caste hierarchy of Hindu Society. The result was the acceptance of Brahmin superiority and Kunwar Singh's Rajput caste as second in caste category. A furore was created in the minds of Bhumihars, as they were placed third in the ad-hoc census of 1865 in U.P. and Bihar. The Regular Census began in 1881. The Bhumihars were greatly shocked and felt humiliated, finding themselves in the third position in the Regular Census. 

Maharajas of Benaras, Bettiah. Hathua. Tikari and others reacted immediately. They were shocked that they had assisted the British during 1857, but instead of getting any privilege, they were pointedly humiliated. The Bhumihars coalised, and formed "Bhumihar-Brahmin Mahasabha" in 1889. The Bhumihar Mahasabha launched a vigorous movement to get the first position in the census. Maharaja Prabhu Narayan Singh, of Benaras Raj was an enthusiastic crusador for this cause as Benaras was the Capital of Hindu India. But Brahmins opposed this Brahmin claims of Bhumihars in an organised manner. The social condition became tense. 

The British Government engaged some distinguished ethnologists to make an observant and objective research into the claims of Bhumihars. But none of the ethnologists supported the claims of Bhumihars, that they were superior Brahmins. John Beams, the distinguished writer, in the background of his close contact and knowledge, maintained that Bhumihars were "a fine manly race with the delicate Aryan type of feature in full perfection. Their character was bold and overbearing and decidedly inclined to be turbulent. They called themselves Brahmins, but this statement was vigorously countered by the Brahmins. Other European authorities like Oldham, Ropper Lothbridge, George Campbell, Henry Elliot, Risley, Richard Temple etc. were also veering round the views expressed by John Beams. Dr. Harprasad Shastri delved deep. Dr. Shastri stated that "Bhumihars were formerly Budhists and were later on gradually absorbed into the fold of Hinduism." Dr. Harprasad Shastri found Bhumihars quite a different race of people on account of their physical feature. Their stalwart physique, sturdy build, broad forehead, an aquiline nose, the cheek and jaw bones and intelligence indicated their Aryan origin. 

Distinguished Officer like Risley, the home secretary was not in favour of accepting the demands of Bhumihar-Brahmin Mahasabha. Even Curzon, the Governor General was not in favour of accept. ing the demands of Bhumihars. But, Minto, the Governor General gave up the policy of dilly-dallying. In hope of getting political support of Bhumihars in Bihar and U.P. against the Bengal dominated Congress he accepted the decade old demands of Bhumihars in 1905. 

In the Census of 1911, the Bhumihars were enumerated with Brahmins in U.P. But in Bihar, Edward Gait, the Census Superintendent did not agree with this proposition. The Bhumihars were enumerated separately though equal in status with Brahmins. The Brahmins opposed this status gain of Bhumihars. They wrote "Bhumihar Vram Varjan", a book in order to counter their claims. On the eve of the Provincial Bhumihar-Brahmin Sabha in Patna in 1918, posters were found stuck up on the walls, challenging the claims of Bhumihars. 

On the social plane, Sahjanand Sarswati spearheaded the cause of Bhumihars. In order to oppose the move of Orthodox Brahmins, he wrote his famous book "Brahmarshi Vansh Vistar". Pandit Surya Narayan Sharma wrote his book "Sainik Brahmin".