+++
title = "American arrival"
+++
> Sir, did the Australasians travel to S.America across the Pacific ? If so how far back would they have made the journey ?

If you see the thread that's what I think is currently the most parsimonious explanation. Conservatively if we take the Monte Verde II site to be their presence, it will be ~ 14200 YBP. However, it could be much earlier based less studied sites.

[Some](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspb.2022.1078) south American ancient human genomes. Putting together all the S. & N.  American a.genomes it seems so far that the Onge/Papuan-like ancestry is not only there in deep South Americans but also Panama. This ancestry might also related to the to the excess of Denisovan ancestry they see in some populations: Thus, we have a likely signal of the Onge/Papuan like ancestry in Panama, Pacific coast of S.America& Uruguay on the Atlantic. Side. However, it is still missing in North America. Thus, at this point in time still the proposal of this ancestry reaching south America by sea on the Pacific coast & spreading thereafter either after admixture with the classic native Americans or independently of them remains viable. Thus, we can now say with some confidence that the deep pre-Clovis sites in S.America likely originated from these Onge/Papuan-like peoples who had probably mixed with Denisovans in the Indo-Pacific (is)lands. They were largely wiped out & absorbed by the Clovis successors who invaded S.A from the north, much like the megafauna.