+++
title = "35 Replies submitted by Shri F. B. Lucas, President, Independent Christian Association, Yeotmal"

+++
**Replies submitted by Shri F. B. Lucas, President, Independent
Christian Association, Yeotmal**

Sir,

We, the undersigned members of the Independent Christian Laymen
Association, Yeotmal, beg to answer some of the questions, out of the
questionnaire set up by the Committee.

1\. The General Missionary Secretary of Free Methodist Mission had paid
a visit to Yeotmal in the year 1948 and we other, Christians who do not
work for the Mission had put a representation, dated April 4, 1948,
before him explaining him how Christians like us are treated by the
Missionaries, vide paragraph 2 of our letter quoted above (original and
copy enclosed).  To this, he has replied on August 6, 1948, in paragraph
4 of his letter stating that Missionaries were sent to India in the
first instance to serve the real needs of the people in your country. 
In paragraph 14 of his letter he has stated that he has drawn the
attention of the Director of the Commission on Missions and accordingly
we have brought this to the notice of the Chairman of this Mission in
India and requested him whether he got any instructions from the
Directors regarding our grievances in paragraph 6 of our letter dated
November 27, 1948 (original and copy enclosed).  To this the Chairman
never replied.  In the mean the Missionaries here got angry with us
because we continued our correspondence with the General Missionary
Secretary in U. S. A.

2\. Due to this, the Missionaries here severed all relations with us and
as it to prove their anger against us, in a meeting held on August 8,
1950, Dr. F. A. Puffer, insulted us by uttering the words ‘Shut Up’.  By
this the things became worse as stated in paragraph 2 of our letter
dated October 9, 1954, presented to the Missionary-Enquiry Committee, on
October 10, 1954, at Yeotmal.  Consequently Dr. Puffer called a meeting
of the Official Board of this Mission on September 30, 1950, and put
before it a proposal to dismember the Christian Laymen who were not
working tinder them and fed by the Mission money.  No decision was taken
in this meeting but was declared that the decision would be taken in the
next meeting.  On this we requested Dr. Puffer, Chairman of the above
Board, in a letter, dated September 30, 1950, i.e., the same day, that
he should intimate us the time and place of the next meeting in which
our case would be considered (original and copy enclosed).  He never
intimated us this and subsequently he declared us dismembered in the
service on the following Sunday.

3\. This fact was brought to the notice of the Home Board of this
Mission in America on October 10, 1950, (Original and copy enclosed). 
We again wrote to Rev. E. S. Root on May 17, 1951, and October 20, 1951,
to Dr. F. A. Puffer, on October 20, 1951, March.20, 1952, and December
27, 1952, to the Pastor of this Church on October 21, 1951. and to the
Bishop Head of this Mission in America on March 1/17, 1951, (original
and copies of all letters quoted in paragraph 3 above, are enclosed),
and requested them to settle our grievances and reconcile the matters. 
But nothing has been done till the Missionary Enquiry Committee arrived
here on October 10, 1954, before which we were compelled to put our
grievances.  On this the Missionaries got infuriated and when on
November 7, 1954, we went to morning Sunday School, they caused the
Pastor of this Church not to open the Church for us.  This fact has
already been brought to the notice of Deputy Commissioner, Yeotmal
(original and copy enclosed).  From this thou-h it may seem that the
Indian Pastors, our people are locking the Church for us we strongly
suspect that there is the hand of these Foreign Missionaries behind the
action.

4\. The Field Secretary of this Mission Rev. E. C. John had come here
and we requested him also to settle our matters with the Missionaries
here and other Indian leaders of this Mission in our letter, dated
November 18, 1954, and further requested him that we desire to see him
in this connection.  He called one of us and one Indian leader Rev. P.
T. Gaikwad, and tried to set right the matters.  Rev. P. T. Gaikwad
promised him to do so, but till this time, though we met him several
times in the meantime, did not take any action to set right the
matters.  Again we requested the Field Secretary to grant us an
opportunity to have an interview of all the Laymen Christians with him. 
To this the Secretary never replied.  In our nation we see temples are
thrown open to any individual who desires to worship the God.  But here
in our Church we see that we are not allowed to enter our own Church. 
We therefore, strongly suspect that a big game is being played by these
Foreign Missionaries through their pets.

5\. We had an occasion of meeting the Indian Pastor of this Mission Rev.
P. T. Gaikwad, and he told us that the Foreign Missionaries have given
the Church into the hands of the Indian Christians.  This fact was also
told by Rev. F. J. Kline and R. N. Davis when they appeared before the
Enquiry Committee at Yeotmal on October 10, 1954, that they have handed
over the affairs of the Indian.  Church into the hands of the Indian
Christians.  But we see that for the administration of the Church they
have applied the American Discipline.  This is illegal.  If they have
given the Church into the hands of the Indian Christians then they
cannot apply the American Discipline applicable to this Church.  This
means that their handing over the affairs is bogus.  While handing over
the Church to Indian Christians they must also stop the Foreign
Discipline.  The property acquired by this Mission is for charitable
purposes and solely for the welfare of the Indian Christians and thus we
have hereditary right to own all the property which has been acquired
for us.  They possessed the property up to this time but now we desire
that this property should be given to Indian Christians unconditionally
and that Government should ask these Missionaries by law to give the
possession of this property to Indian Christians and that should vacate
the big bungalows occupied by them free of rent.  If they want to live
in India and preach the gospel, they should take on rent other
bungalows.  There is a big space lying fallow in the compounds where
they live now.  They use the bungalows and do not even allow the Indian
Christians to live on the site lying fallow round about their
bungalows.  This means that they are using the land for themselves and
nor allowing the usage of the land for whom it has been acquired. 
Really speaking they have no right to use the land for themselves.  The
very purpose for which the property has been acquired has thus been
defeated.  Nowadays there is an acute problem of housing and if the land
lying fallow in these big compounds is given to poor Indian Christians
they would not feel the scarcity of housing.  Man; Indian Christians had
applied to Rev. R. N. Davis many times for a site from the Mission
compounds to live on, but they have given to none of them.  These
applications can be had from Rev. R. N. Davis, Missionary here.

Suggestions:- From all the foregoing paragraphs it will he seen that the
Foreign Missionaries are here not to preach the gospel but for ruling
the Indian Christians and enjoying a kingly life in India. Their
attitude is such that they do not allow the Indian Christians to prosper
socially and do not desire to heighten the standard of Christian Society
by not allowing the Indian Christians to manage their own Church
affairs.  This will be clear from the fact that they have not repealed
the Foreign Discipline as yet though they say that the affairs of the
Church have given into the hands of the Indian Christians.  And hence we
earnestly request that these Foreign Missionaries should immediately be
asked to quit India as they do not prove themselves of any utility to
the growth of Indian culture or Christian Society.  We are now able to
manage our own affairs and we do not want their interference any
longer.  We are now in Free India and likewise we think our Social
affairs should free from any religious Foreign policy.

Yes, I desire on behalf of the, ‘Independent Christian Laymen
Association, Yeotmal, to appear before the Committee to give evidence
orally.

<div align="right">

F. B. LUCAS,  
President, Independent Christian Association,   
Yeotmal.

</div>

Yeotmal:   
The 30th December 1954.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
