+++
title = "03 3. The Residue of Christianism"

+++
**3. The Residue of Christianism**

The British rule in India crystallised two residues-Christianism and
Macaulayism.

Certain strains of Macaulayism developed what is euphemistically
described as a “revolutionary temper” in the later stages of the British
rule and joined hands with Communism after the Bolshevik victory in
Russia. The whole of Communism, which is also hostile to Hindu society
and culture, is not Macaulayism. Yet, if Macaulayism had not prepared
the ideological ground, Communism could not have made the strides it did
in this country.

We shall analyse Christianism first. It was the first to make itself
felt forcefully at the onset of the British rule in India,

We, however, wish to make it clear at the very outset that Christianism
in India does not refer to the Christians in this country. They are our
own people who at a certain stage of our history went over to a foreign
faith in an atmosphere created and exploited by Christianism. But
although they have renounced their ancestral faith, they have, by and
large, not shown any marked hostility towards Hindu society and culture.
Nor have they so far served as vehicles of Christianism except in
certain areas of the Northeast, notably Meghalaya, Mizoram and
Nagaland.  Christianism in India is centered in the numerous Christian
missions operating all over the country, particularly in the so-called
tribal belts.

The eight fundamentals of Christianism in India may be summarised as
follows:

> 1\. That the Hindus have never had a Saviour whose historicity can be
> ascertained, with the possible exception of the Buddha;
>
> 2\. That Jesus Christ whose historicity cannot be questioned has
> superseded all earlier Saviours of Hinduism (if they were Saviours at
> all and not disciples of Lucifer) and rendered superfluous all
> subsequent Hindu saints and sages;
>
> 3\. That St. Thomas, an apostle of Jesus himself, was specially chosen
> by the Church to win India for his Master’s message:
>
> 4. That St. Thomas could not complete his mission in India because he
> met an untimely martyrdom at the hands of some Hindu, most probably
> Brahmin, heathens;^([1](#1))
>
> 5\. That the converts made by SL Thomas, the first century Christians
> of the South, establish beyond doubt that Christianity is an ancient
> *Indian* religion and not a Western import as alleged by the Hindus;
>
> 6\. That it is the sacred task of the Christian Church to complete the
> mission of St. Thomas and see to it that India becomes a Christian
> country, once and for all;
>
> 7\. That if there is any thing good and wholesome in Hindu religion,
> it is not because Hindu saints and sages ever made any direct or
> conscious contact with Truth but because they merely stumbled upon
> some of it in the workings of Universal Nature which was preparing
> itself over a long time for the advent of Jesus Christ;
>
> 8\. That no Hindu, even if he follows the Ten Commandments in letter
> and spirit and lives by the Sermon on the Mount, can ever hope to
> escape eternal hell-fire unless he has been baptised in a Christian
> church and administered the Christian sacraments.

These tenets have their source in the Christian religion which also,
like Islam, is an extremely exclusive religion.^([2](#2)) Christianity
too claims for itself a monopoly of truth and virtue, swears by the only
true God, the only true Saviour or the only Son of the only true God,
the only true Revelation, the only true way of worship, and so on. It
too has to its discredit a long and unrelieved record of wanton
destruction of ancient religions and cultures and a large-scale killing
of heathens. The annals of Europe, Asia Minor, North Africa and America,
particularly Central and South America, provide harrowing details of
this destruction and bloodshed.

We in this country do not associate Christianity with misdeeds similar
to those of Islam because the British invaders who finally succeeded in
capturing power in India did not allow the Christian crusaders to use
state power, directly and in an uninhibited manner. They had perhaps
become wiser by a reading of Muslim history in India and did not allow
their religion to interfere with the business of building a stable
empire. A more tenable explanation of this British refusal to patronise
Christianity beyond the point of no return is the Renaissance in Europe
which had considerably discredited this creed in its own homeland by the
time British arms were triumphant in India.

But we did have a taste of the intrinsic spirit of Christian aggression
in our first encounter with the missionaries who swarmed towards our
shores in the wake of Western victories from the 16th Century onwards.
When the Portuguese seized Goa and adjoining territories the Catholic
Church lost no time in setting up an Inquisition for the benefit of
native converts who were likely to recant or relax in their faith.
Francis Xavier, whom the Catholic Church hails as the Patron Saint of
the East, expressed a deep satisfaction at the sight of six thousand
dead Muslims whom the Portuguese had slaughtered. He also made forcible
conversions, demolished Hindu temples, smashed Hindu idols, and
inaugurated that anti-Brahmanism which has by now become the *sine qua
non* of all progressive thought and politics in India.

The triumphal march of British arms in India in the second half of the
18th Century convinced the Christian missionaries that British victories
were due *not* to a superiority in the art of warfare but to the
superiority of the Christian creed by which the British generals and
soldiers swore. They immediately started pouring venom on Hindu
religion, culture and society. No lie was vile enough in the service of
Christian “truth”. No fraud was foul enough in the service of Christian
“virtue”.

An example will serve to illustrate the spiteful spirit of the Christian
missionaries at that time. They spread a canard in India and abroad that
many Hindus voluntarily rushed under the wheels of the great chariot
during the annual *rathayãtrã* at Puri, and got themselves crushed to
death in order to attain salvation. The great chariot, according to
them, was always accompanied by droves of dancing girls who sang
lascivious songs and made obscene gestures towards crowds on both sides
of the broad street. The “great” William Wilberforce, who ruled the
circle of Christian crusaders in Britain and who adamantly advocated the
Christianization of India by an unstinted use of state power, demanded
immediately that the temple of Jagannath be demolished to stop this
“devil-dance” for good. The British Commissioner of Puri at that time
saved the situation by writing a long letter to a liberal British M.P.
in which he stated that he along with many other British civilians in
the district had been a regular witness of the *rathayãtrã* for twenty
years but had never witnessed a single victim under the wheels nor found
anything immodest in the songs and symbolic gestures of the dancing
girls. The English word “Juggernaut”, which according to the *Chambers
Twentieth Century Dictionary* means “any relentless destroying force”,
is a living witness to the inventive imagination of the early Christian
missionaries.

This campaign of calumny against everything Hindu continued till late in
the 19th Century. Swami Vivekanada was referring to this crude campaign
when he cried with anguish in the Parliament of Religions at Chicago
that “if we Hindus dig out all the dirt from the bottom of the Pacific
Ocean and throw it in your faces, it will be but a speck compared to
what your missionaries have done to our religion and culture”.

Had not the Hindus come out in defence of their religion and culture,
this missionary mischief would have multiplied by leaps and bounds. The
Brahmo Samaj and the Arya Samaj were the earliest expressions of this
Hindu spirit of resistance. A notable contribution was made by the
Theosophical Society whose founder, Madame Blavatsky, exposed the
spiritual and moral claims of Christianity and whose chief apostle in
India, Mrs. Annie Besant, inspired no small pride in the Hindu heritage.
The Ramakrishna Mission also came to the rescue at a later
stage. Mahatma Gandhi gave no quarters to Christian theology or to Jesus
Christ as the only Son of God and Saviour of mankind. He had his own
charming method of recommending Sermon on the Mount while showing
compassion for the victims of the missionaries whom he described as
“rice Christians”.^([3](#3))

Perhaps the main reason for the weakening of this malicious and
mendacious campaign was the collapse of Christianity in its own
homeland, the Western countries. The West had taken a decisive turn
towards the scientific spirit. Meanwhile, the message of Hindu
spirituality had also spread to the centres of learning in the West. The
exponents of Hindu religion and culture like Ramakrishna Paramahansa,
Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Raman Maharshi, Rabindranath Tagore,
Ananda Coomaraswami and Mahatma Gandhi were demonstrating by their words
and deeds the profound promise which Hindu Dharma held for mankind. The
missionaries had to change their methods.

The core of Christianism in India, however, remains intact. They now
know that the fortress of Hindu society cannot be seized by a frontal
assault. They are, therefore, busy in the backyards and have hidden
themselves behind the smoke-screens of several theologies. Some of these
covert methods can be listed as follows:

> 1\. Training of more and more native missionaries in their far-flung,
> well-equipped and fabulously financed seminaries so that missionary
> work looks no more like an undertaking manned mostly by foreigners;
>
> 2\. Hinduising the outer accoutrements of Christian priests, liturgy
> and sacraments in order to convince the Hindus that Christianity is
> not an imported creed, and that Christianism is not out to corrode
> Hindu culture;
>
> 3\. Directing their powerful press and publishing houses not to attack
> Hindu religion and culture openly but to develop a scholarly and
> comparative critique of Hindu religion, culture and society, always to
> the ultimate disadvantage of the latter;
>
> 4\. To establish and extend educational institutions which at least
> immunise the upper class Hindu children and youth against whatever
> Hindu ways still survive in their homes, wherever they do not succeed
> in attracting them towards Christianity;
>
> 5\. To build and expand hospitals and undertake other social work in
> order to attract an all-round respect for the Christian spirit of
> social service, and neutralise as narrow bigotry any questioning of
> their missionary motives;
>
> 6\. To open orphanages and homes for the handicapped where
> proselytization can proceed safely and unnoticed;
>
> 7\. To concentrate on Hindu “tribals” who are removed from the main
> centres of Hindu population, so that there is no untoward publicity;
>
> 8\. To take out promising candidates for conversion on prolonged tours
> of Western countries in order to impress upon them the wonders worked
> by Christian culture and civilization;
>
> 9\. To encourage well-to-do and willing Christians in the West to
> adopt boys and girls from poor Indian families, send them to
> missionary schools and colleges, and provide them with monetary
> assistance till they are converted;
>
> 10\. To finance and promote political campaigns for separate states,
> inside or outside the Union of India, in those areas where the
> Christian population has attained majority or dominance.

There are plenty of methods which the missionaries employ to harangue
and/or hoodwink the unsuspecting Hindus. Some of these methods are
pretty crude, especially those employed by the American missionaries who
aim a loud and simplistic promise, “you also can be saved” or a sweet
scolding, “don’t you want to save yourself?” through big advertisements
in daily newspapers, regular radio broadcasts and door to door pedlars
of salvation. The other methods are sophisticated and disguised as
“Indian theology.”^([4](#4))

But what looms large at the back of all these methods is the mammoth
finance which flows in freely from the coffers of the Christian churches
and communities in Europe and America. An idea of the magnitude of this
finance can be got from a recent incident which was widely reported in
the daily press. An imaginative and enterprising but poor South Indian
palmed off on a Christian missionary a lot of faked literary and
archaeological evidence about the adventures of St. Thomas in South
India against a cash payment of *fifteen lakh rupees*-a paltry sum in
the total budget of the mission concerned. And there are hundreds of
such missions in India.

*The Statesman* dated 17 August 1981 has published an interesting news
item from Aachen in West Germany: “The Nobel Peace Prize Winner, Mother
Teresa, has asked her supporters to suspend charity donations, reports
UNI-DPA. The German Section of the International Association of Friends
of Mother Teresa which donated *six million marks* in 1980 is to be
disbanded at the end of this year in response to the plea. Mother Teresa
who won the prize in 1979 after years of work aiding the poorest of the
poor called for a *temporary halt to contributions* ‘until we have used
up what we have’. ‘I will then ask you again’, the founder of the
Missionaries of Charity said in a circular. Excessive support of a
single charity leading to the needs of *thousands of others* being
forgotten was probably behind the request.” (emphases added).

Six million West German marks amount to approximately *two and a half
crores* of rupees. The amounts contributed by other sections of the
International Association of Friends of Mothers Teresa are most likely
to total up to many times this sum. Mother Teresa is not in a position
to use all the money that has already been given to her. So the torrent
has been halted temporarily. It will start pouring again as soon as she
gives the signal. And hers is only one of the “thousands of other
charities”.  One can well imagine the staggering finance at the disposal
of Christianism in India.

The free flow of this Western wealth enables the missionaries to live in
and have at their disposal palatial mansions in which their missions and
seminaries are housed. Their vow of poverty never comes in the way of
their having modern sanitation facilities, kitchens, communications and
transport. They can travel not only over the length and breadth of this
country but to the ends of the earth to attend conferences,
congregations, seminars and symposia. Everywhere they go they can stay
in similar sumptuous style. It is but human if the superiority of their
style of living gets confused with the superiority of the Christian
creed.

Recently some missionaries, particularly in the Catholic missions, have
started talking a new language-the language of radicalism and
revolution. It is not unoften that this language comes most easily to
those who do not have to share the woes and wants of people with whom
they commiserate. They make the best of both the worlds. Our Communist
leaders are an excellent example of such synthetic radicalism.

The West has lost its fascination for the faith. It is becoming
increasingly difficult to find men and women in the West who would take
the holy orders and become wedded to vows of chastity, poverty and
obedience. But the West does not mind parting with plenty of cash which
its prosperity can spare with ease. Christianity is, therefore, making a
bold bid to establish a safer haven in the East while the going is good.

India provides a particularly soft target. The Christian missions are
welcome to open their purse strings in the Islamic and Communist
countries of Asia. But the missions there are *barred* from winning new
converts. Hindu India, drowned in poverty and suffering from cultural
self-forgetfulness, is the only country in Asia which provides the *quid
pro quo*.^([5](#5))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) See Ishwar Sharan, *Myth of St. Thomas and the Mylapore Shiva
Temple*, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1991.

[²](#2a) See Sita Ram Goel, *Papacy: Its Doctrine and History*, Voice of
India, New Delhi, 1986.

[³](#3a) See Sita Ram Goel, *History of Hindu-Christian Encounters*,
Voice of India, New Delhi, 1989.

[⁴](#4a) See Catholic Ashrams: Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma, Voice
of India, New Delhi, 1988.

[⁵](#5a) See Ram Swarup, *Cultural Self-Alienation and Some Problems
Hinduism Faces*, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1987.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


