+++
title = "09 CHAPTER 7 DOCTRINE OF THE ISLAMIC STATE"

+++
**CHAPTER 7**

**DOCTRINE OF THE ISLAMIC STATE**

The doctrine of *jihAd*, which is the whole of the Quran, deals
primarily with the performance of the militarized Muslim Ummah till the
time an “infidel land” is conquered and Muslim hold is consolidated over
it by terrorising its people through slaughter and pillage.  The
operations of the same military machine after the conquest are dealt
with by another department of Islamic theology - doctrine of the Islamic
state.  A very clear exposition of this doctrine is provided by
Professor Jadunath Sarkar who had spent a life-time in studying the
theology and history of Islam.  We reproduce below what he stated in
1928.  Once again we have replaced the word “God” by the word “Allah”.

**Islamic State is an Agency for Spreading the Faith**

“By the theory of its origin the Muslim State is a theocracy.  Its true
king is Allah, and earthly rulers are merely His agents, bound to
enforce His law on all.  Civil Law is completely subordinated to
Religious Law and, indeed, merges its existence in the latter.  The
civil authorities exist solely to spread and enforce the true faith.  In
such a State, infidelity is logically equivalent to treason, because the
infidel repudiates the authority of the true king and pays homage to His
rivals, the false gods and goddesses.  All the resources of the State,
all the forces under the political authorities, are in strict legality
at the disposal of the missionary propaganda of the true faith.

**Tolerance towards Infidels is Tantamount to Sin**

“Therefore, the toleration of any sect outside the fold of orthodox
Islam is no better than compounding with sin.  And the worst form of sin
is polytheism, the belief that the one true Allah has partners in the
form of other deities.  Such a belief is the rankest ingratitude
(*kufr*) to him who gives us our life and daily bread…

“The conversion of the entire population to Islam and the extinction of
every form of dissent, is the ideal of the Muslim State.  If any infidel
is suffered to exist in the community, it is as a necessary evil, and
for a transitional period only.  Political and social disabilities must
be imposed on him, bribes offered to him from the public funds to hasten
the day of his spiritual enlightenment and the addition of his name to
the roll of true believers.  The growth of the infidel population in
number or wealth would, therefore, defeat the very end of the State…

**Status of Non-Muslims in an Islamic State**

“A non-Muslim, therefore, cannot be a citizen of the State; he is a
member of a depressed class; his status is a modified form of slavery. 
He lives under a contract (*zimma*) with the State: for the life and
property that are grudgingly spared to him by the Commander of the
Faithful.  He must undergo political and social disabilities, and pay
commutation-money (*jaziya*).  In short, his continued existence in the
State after the conquest of his country by the Muslims is conditional
upon his person and property being made subservient to the cause of
Islam.

“He must pay a tax for his land (*kharaj*), from which the early Muslims
were exempt; he must pay other exactions for the maintenance of the
army, in which he cannot enlist even if he offers to render personal
service instead of paying the poll-tax; and he must show by humility of
dress and behaviour that he belongs to a subject class.  No non-Muslim
(*zimmi*) can wear fine dresses, ride on horseback or carry arms; he
must behave respectfully and submissively to every member of the
dominant sect…

“In addition to the poll-tax and public degradation in dress and
demeanour imposed on them, the non-Muslims were subjected to various
hopes and fears.  Rewards in the form of money and public employment
were offered to apostates from Hinduism.  The leaders of Hindu religion
and society were systematically repressed, to deprive the sect of
spiritual instruction, and their religious gatherings and processions
were forbidden in order to prevent the growth of solidity and a sense of
communal strength among them.  No new temple was allowed to be built nor
any old one to be repaired, so that the total disappearance of all
places of Hindu worship was to be merely a question of time.  But even
this delay, this slow operation of Time, was intolerable to many of the
more fiery spirits of Islam, who tried to hasten the abolition of
‘infidelity’ by anticipating the destructive hand of Time and forcibly
pulling down temples.”^([1](#1))

**Earlier Conclusions Confirmed**

Professor Jadunath Sarkar confirmed his earlier conclusions after a
further and deeper study of Islam.  In an article published in the 1950
Pooja Number of the *Hindustan Standard*, Calcutta, he observed:

“*The poison lay in the very core of Islamic theocracy*.  Under it there
can be only one faith, one people and one all overriding authority.  The
State is a religious trust administered solely by His people (the
faithful) acting in obedience to the Commander of the Faithful, who was
in theory, and very often in practice too, the supreme General of the
Army of militant Islam (*Janud*).  There could be no place for
non-believers.  Even Jews and Christians could not be full citizens of
it, though they somewhat approached the Muslims by reason of their being
‘People of the Book’ or believers in the Bible, which the Prophet of
Islam accepted as revealed.

“As for the Hindus and Zoroastrians, they had no place in such a
political system.  If their existence was tolerated, it was only to use
them as hewers of wood and drawers of water, as tax-payers,
‘*Khiraj-guzar*’, for the benefit of the dominant sect of the Faithful. 
They were called *Zimmis* or people under a contract of protection by
the Muslim State on condition of certain services to be rendered by them
and certain political and civil disabilities to be borne by them to
prevent them from growing strong.  The very term *Zimmi* is an insulting
title.  It connotes political inferiority and helplessness like the
status of a minor proprietor perpetually under a guardian; such
protected people could not claim equality with the citizens of the
Muslim theocracy.

“The *Zimmi* is under certain legal disabilities with regard to
testimony in law courts, protection under criminal law, and marriage. 
The State, as the other party in the contract (*zimma*), guarantees to
him security of life and property and a modified protection in the
exercise of his religion: he cannot erect new temples, and has to avoid
any offensive publicity in the exercise of his faith.  But everything
short of open physical persecution, - everything that would not be a
flagrant breach of the contract of protection, can be legitimately
practised by the Muslim ruler to reduce the number of the undesirable
alien sect…

“*Thus by the basic conception of the Muslim State all non-Muslims are
its enemies, and it is in the interest of the State to curb their growth
in number and power. The ideal aim was to exterminate them totally*, as
Hindus, Zoroastrians and Christian nationals have been liquidated
(sometimes totally, sometimes leaving a negligible remnant behind) in
Afghanistan, Persia and the Near East.”^([2](#2))

**Hindus should he grateful to Imam Hanifa**

Hindus should be grateful to Imam Hanifa for some mercy shown to them. 
He had recommended that Hindus, though idolaters, could be accepted as a
“People of the Book” like the Jews, the Christians and the Zoroastrians,
and granted the status of *zimmis*. The Muslim swordsmen and theologians
in India happened to follow his school of Islamic law.  That enabled
them to “upgrade” the “crow-faced infidels”^([3](#3)) of this country to
the status of *zimmis*.  Hindus could save their lives and some of their
properties, though not their honour and places of worship and
pilgrimage, by paying *jizyah* and agreeing to live under highly
discriminative disabilities.  The only choice which the other great
Imams of Islam - MAlik, ShAfii and Hanbal - gave to the Hindus was
between Islam and death.

Alauddin Khilji had consulted the most learned Maulana of his realm -
Qazi Mughis-ud-din of Bayana - on this point.  The Qazi pronounced the
correct position as follows: “The Hindus are designated in the law as
‘payers of tribute’ (*kharaj-guzar*); and when the revenue officer
demands silver from them, they should, without question and with all
humility and respect, tender gold.  If the officer throws dirt into
their mouths, they must without reluctance open their mouths wide to
receive it.  By these acts of degradation are shown the extreme
obedience of the *zimmi*, the glorification of the true faith of Islam,
and the abasement of false faiths.  Allah himself orders them to be
humiliated, as He says, ‘till they pay (*jaziya*) with the hand and are
humbled.’…  *The Prophet has commanded us to slay them, plunder them and
make them captive*.  No other religious authority except the great Imam
(Hanifa) whose faith we follow, has sanctioned the imposition of the
*jaziya* on Hindus. According to all other theologians, the rule for
Hindus is ‘Either death or Islam’.”^([4](#4))

**Imam Hanifa criticized by Amir Khusru**

Amir Khusru was a contemporary of Qazi Mughis-ud-din.  He is presented
by the “modem” Muslims and lionised by the “educated” Hindus as the
“pioneer of secularism in India”.  He had, however, something very
specific to say on the status of Hindus vis-à-vis the Islamic state. 
“Happy HindUstAn”, he wrote, “the splendour of Religion. where the Law
finds perfect honour and security.  In learning Dehli can now compete
with BokhAra, for IslAm has been made manifest by its kings.  The whole
country, by means of the sword of our holy warriors, has become like a
forest denuded of its thorns by fire.  The land has been saturated with
the water of the sword, and the vapours of infidelity have been
dispersed.  The strong men of Hind have been trodden under foot, and all
are ready to pay tribute.  IslAm is triumphant, idolatry is subdued. 
*Had not the law \[of Imam Hanifa\] granted exemption from death by the
payment of poll-tax, the very name of hind, root and branch, would have
been extinguished*. From GhaznI to the shore of the ocean you see all
under the domination of IslAm.  Cawing crows^([5](#5)) see no arrows
pointed at them; nor is the TarsA (Christian) there, who does not fear
(*taras*) to render the servant equal with Allah; nor the Jew who dares
to exalt the Pentateuch to a level with the KurAn; nor the *Magh* who is
delighted with the worship of fire, but of whom the fire complains with
its hundred tongues.  The four sects of MusulmAns are at amity and the
very fish are SunnIs.”^([6](#6))

It has to be remembered that Amir Khusru was one of the foremost
disciples of Nizam-ud-din Awliya of Delhi who is counted among the five
great sufis of the Chishtiyya school.  He is himself regarded as an
outstanding sufi on whose *mazAr* in Delhi urs is held every year.  His
Hindi verses are cited as a proof positive of his love for the land of
his birth.  But what the Amir says about Hindustan and Hindus speaks
volumes about sufis and Sufism.  The few “educated” Hindus who admit
that Prophetic Islam is “somewhat fanatic”, believe that Sufistic Islam
is “large-hearted and liberal”.  The Chishtiyya school of Sufism in
particular is supposed to have “built bridges between the two
communities”.

**True Face of Sufism**

But the evidence that is available points towards a contrary
conclusion.  The Chishtiyya school was foisted on India by Muin-ud-din
who had settled down in Ajmer before the Second Battle of Tarain. 
According to the sufi lore, he had made a few converts from among the
local Hindus and started issuing orders to Prithivi Raj Chauhan, the
Hindu king, for the benefit of these converts.  When the king ignored
him, he invited Muhammad Ghuri to invade the Chauhan Kingdom. 
*Sir-ul-Awliya*, the most famous history of the Chishtiyya school
written by Khwaja Amir Khurd, another disciple of Nizam-ud-din Awliya,
tells the following story: “His \[Muin-ud-din’s\] blessed tongue uttered
spontaneously, ‘We have handed over Pithora alive to the army of Islam.’
In those very days, Sultan Muiz-ud-din Sam arrived in Ajmer from
Ghazni.  Pithora had to face the army of Islam.  He was captured alive
by Sultan Muiz-ud-din…  The Khwaja \[Muinud-din\] was a worker of great
wonders.  Before he reached Hindustan, all its cities right upto the
point of sunrise were sunk in tumult and infidelity and were involved
with idols and idolatry.  Everyone among the rabble \[Gods\] of
Hindustan claimed to be the great God and a co-sharer in the divinity of
Allah.  The people paid homage to stones, sods of clay, trees,
quadrupeds, cows and bulls and their dung.  The darkness of infidelism
had made still more firm the seals on their hearts…  Muin-ud-din was
indeed the very sun of the true faith.  As a result of his arrival, the
darkness that had spread over this country was dispelled.  It became
bright and glowed in the light of Islam... Anyone who has become a
Musalman in this country will stay a Musalman till the Day of
Dissolution.  His progeny will also remain Musalman… The people \[of
Hindustan\] will be brought out of *dAr-ul-harb* into *dAr-ul-IslAm* by
means of many wars."^([7](#7))

There is plenty of primary literature available in Arabic and Persian
regarding the rise, development, and doings of numerous sufi silsilas in
India.  Some of this literature has been translated into Urdu and
English as well.  A study of this literature leaves little doubt that
sufis were the most fanatic and fundamentalist elements in the Islamic
establishment in medieval times.  Hindus should go to this literature
rather than fall for latter-day Islamic propaganda.  The ruin of Hindus
and Hinduism in Kashmir in particular, can be safely credited to sufis
who functioned there from the early thirteenth century onwards.  
 

**Footnotes: **  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


