+++
title = "02 CHAPTER II ARAB FAILURE IN SINDH, KABUL AND ZABUL"

+++
**CHAPTER II**

**ARAB FAILURE IN SINDH, KABUL AND ZABUL**

In Chapter I of his book, Dr. Misra gives dates as well as details
regarding the rapid conquests made by the armies of Islam after the
death of its prophet in AD 632. The Byzantine provinces of Palestine and
Syria fell to them after a six month’s campaign in AD 636-637. Next came
the turn of the Sassanid empire of Persia which included Iraq, Iran, and
Khorasan. The Persians were defeated decisively in AD 637, and their
entire empire was overrun in the next few years. “By A.D. 643 the
boundaries of the Caliphate touched the frontiers of India.”^([1](#1))
The Turkish speaking territories of Inner Mongolia, Bukhara, Tashkand,
and Samarkand, etc. were annexed by AD 650. Meanwhile, in the west, the
Byzantine province of Egypt had fallen in AD 640-641. The Arab armies
marched over North Africa till they reached the Atlantic and crossed
over into Spain in AD 709.

These were not mere territorial conquests. Dr. Misra observes:
“Astonishing as these victories of Islamic armies were, equally amazing
was the ease and rapidity with which people of different creeds and
races were assimilated within the Islamic fold. Syrians, Persians,
Berbers, Turks and others - all were rapidly Islamised and their
language and culture Arabicised.”^([2](#2)) He also quotes an
appropriate passage of the Quran which had inspired the Arabs to
decimate and denationalise those who were defeated by them: “Fight and
slay the pagans wherever you find them, and seize them, beleaguer them
and lie in wait for them in every stratagem till they repeat and
establish regular prayers and practise regular charity.”^([3](#3))

The same Islamic armies, however, had to struggle for 69 long years to
make their first effective breach in the borders of India. In the next
three centuries, they pushed forward in several provinces of Northern
and Western India. But at the end of it all, India was far from being
conquered militarily or assimilated culturally. The Arab invasion of
India ended in a more or less total failure. Dr. Misra tells the full
story in the next two chapters of his book.  
 

ARAB FAILURE IN SINDH

The Arab invasion of Sindh started soon after their first two naval
expeditions against Thana on the coast of Maharashtra and Broach on the
coast of Gujarat, had been repulsed in the reign of Caliph Umar (AD
634-644). The expedition against Debal in Sindh met the same fate “The
leader of the Arab army, Mughairah, was defeated and
killed.”^([4](#4)) Umar decided to send another army by land against
Makran which was at that time a part of the kingdom of Sindh. But he was
advised by the governor of Iraq that “he should think no more of
Hind”.^([5](#5)) The next Caliph, Usman (AD 646-656), followed the same
advice and refrained from sending any expedition against Sindh, either
by land or by sea. The fourth Caliph, Ali (AD 656-661), sent an
expedition by land in AD 660. But the leader of this expedition and
“those who were with him, saving a few, were slain in the land of Kikan
in the year AH 42 (AD 662)”. Thus the four “pious” Caliphs of Islam died
without hearing the news of a victory over “Sindh or Hind”.

Muawiyah, the succeeding Caliph (AD 661-680), sent as many as six
expeditions by land. All of them were repulsed with great slaughter
except the last one which succeeded in occupying Makran in AD 680. For
the next 28 years, the Arabs did not dare send another army against
Sindh. The next expedition was despatched to take Debal in AD 708. Its
two successive commanders, Ubaidullah and Budail, were killed and the
Arab army was routed. When Hajjaj, the governor of Iraq, asked the
Caliph for permission to send another expedition, the Caliph wrote
back: “This affair will be a source of great anxiety and so we must put
it off, for every time an army goes, \[vast\] numbers of Mussalmans are
killed.  So think no more of such a design.”^([6](#6))

But Hajjaj was a very tenacious imperialist. He spent the next four
years in equipping an army more formidable than any which had so far
been sent against Sindh. While sending off his nephew as well as
son-in-law, Muhammad bin Qasim, with this army in AD 712, Hajjaj said:
“I swear by Allah that I am determined to spend the whole wealth of
Iraq, that is in my possession, on this expedition.”^([7](#7)) Muhammad
was successful in overcoming the fierce resistance he met at every step
in his progress through Sindh. By AD 713 he had occupied the whole of
this province as well as Multan. He was helped to a certain extent by
the treachery of some merchants and local governors at a few places. But
as soon as he was recalled in AD 714, “the people of India rebelled, and
threw off their yoke, and the country from Debalpur to the Salt Sea only
remained under the dominions of the Khalifa.”^([8](#8)) This was only a
narrow coastal strip.

Subsequently, the Islamic armies reconquered Sindh, and advanced through
Rajputana upto Ujjain in the east and Broach in the south. “But the
success of the Arab armies was short-lived. Their advance to the south
was signally checked by the Chalukya ruler of Lat (S. Gujarat),
Pulakesin Avani-Janasraya. The Navasari inscription (A.D. 738) records
that Pulakesin defeated a Tajika (Arab) army which had defeated the
kingdoms of Sindhu, Cutch, Saurashtra, Cavotaka, Maurya and Gurjara and
advanced as far south as Navasari where this prince was ruling at this
time. The prince’s heroic victory earned him the titles of ‘solid Pillar
of Dakshinapatha (*Dakshinapatha-sadhata*) and the Repeller of the
Unrepellable (*Anivarttaka-nivartayi*)’. The Gwalior inscription of the
Gurjara-Pratihar King, Bhoja I, tells us that Nagabhatta I, the founder
of the family who ruled in Avanti (Malwa) around A.D. 725, ‘defeated the
army of a powerful Mlechha ruler who invaded his
dominions’.^([9](#9)) The Gurjara-Pratiharas were known to the Arab
historians as ‘kings of Jurz’. Referring to one of these kings, an Arab
historian wrote that ‘Among the princes of India there is no greater foe
of the Mohammaden faith than he’.”^([10](#10))

The Arabs also made advances to the north of Sindh into the Punjab and
towards Kashmir. Here they were blocked and driven back by Lalitaditya
Muktapida (AD 724-760) of Kashmir. He was in alliance with Yasovarman of
Central India. “He is said to have ordered the Turushkas to shave off
half of their heads as a symbol of their submission.” Dr. Misra cites
Biladhuri who wrote that “the Mussalmans retired from several parts of
India and left some of their positions, nor have they upto the present
advanced so far as in days gone by”.^([11](#11)) And he mourned, “The
people of India returned to idolatry with the exception of the
inhabitants of Qasbah. A place of refuge to which the Moslems might flee
was not to be found, so he \[Arab governor\] built on the further side
of the lake, where it borders on al-Hind, a city which he named
at-Mahfuzah \[the protected\] establishing it as a place of refuge for
them, where they should be secure and making it a capital.”^([12](#12))

Arab travellers to India of the 10th century “all speak of only two
independent Arab principalities with Multan and Mansurah as their
capitals”. The Pratihara kings waged constant war “against the Arab
prince of Multan, and with the Mussalmans, his subjects on the
frontier”. Multan would have been lost by the Arabs but for a Hindu
temple. Dr. Misra quotes Al-Istakhri who wrote about AD 951 that in
Multan “there is an idol held in great veneration by the Hindus and
every year people from distant parts undertake pilgrimages to it… When
the Indians make war upon them and endeavour to seize the idol, the
inhabitants \[Arabs\] bring it out pretending that they will break it
and burn it. Upon this the Indians retire, otherwise they would destroy
Multan.” Finally, he observes: “Thus after three centuries of
unremitting effort, we find the Arab dominion in India limited to two
petty states of Multan and Mansurah. And here, too, they could exist
only after renouncing their iconoclastic zeal and utilizing the idols
for their own political ends. It is a very strange sight to see them
seeking shelter behind the very *budds*, they came here to
destroy.”^([13](#13))

It has to be kept in mind all along that the Arab empire in this period
was the mightiest power on earth. Compared to this monolithic and highly
militarised giant, the Hindu principalities of Sindh and other border
areas were no better than pygmies. Yet the pygmies had the last laugh at
the end of the 10th century when the Islamised Turks took over from the
Arabs the Islamic crusade against “Sind and Hind”. It was the old story
of Alexander and the small republics of the Punjab and Sindh, all over
again.  
 

INSIDE STORY OF ARAB “LIBERALISM”

Dr. Misra concludes his chapter on Sindh with a very meaningful note.
“From a political or missionary point of view,” he writes, “the Arab
conquest of Sindh was certainly a minor affair. The Arab conquest of
other countries, outside India, had been followed by wholesale
conversions and supplanting of local institutions by Islamic ones… The
Islamic law had divided unbelievers into two classes, viz., the People
of the Book (*Ahl-i-Kitãb*), the possessors of Scriptures - the Jews and
the Christians - and the idolaters. The former were not to be lawfully
molested in any way so long as they accepted the rule of the conquerors
and paid the Jezia. But for the idolaters, the choice was between Islam
and death. In Central Asia, the idolaters had been rooted out. But this
experiment failed in Sindh as Islam was confronted with a faith which,
though idolatrous, defied death and looked at life in this world as one
link in the eternal chain of births and deaths. The experiment was only
tried at Debal where the ‘temples were demolished and mosques founded; a
general massacre endured for three days, prisoners were taken captive;
plunder was amassed’. Thus under compulsion of events, the stem code of
Islam was relaxed, the Hindus were allowed to rebuild their temples and
perform their worship and the three per cent which had been allowed to
the priests under the former government was not
discontinued.”^([14](#14))

Many historians, particularly the apologists for Islam, have presented
this expediency as a proof of Islamic liberalism under the early Arabs.
They have contrasted this Arab “liberalism” with the “fanaticism” of the
Turks who joined the fold of Islam at a later stage. Dr. Misra does not
make this mistake. He has laid bare the true motivation at the back of
this “liberalism”, and thus restored the perspective on the plasticity
of Islamic polity in the over-all framework of the fundamental Islamic
law regarding treatment of non-believers. The mullahs and sufis of Islam
might have howled over this dilution of the dogma. But the military and
political leaders always knew when and where to make a compromise in the
interests of self-preservation, and till the next stage of
aggrandisement arrived in the vicissitudes of war. Lenin has also
exhorted the party to know exactly when to practise tactics of retreat.
Islam, after all, is Communism plus Allah, as Allami Iqbal has observed
so aptly.  
 

HEROIC DEFENCE OF KABUL AND ZABUL

The same story was repeated by the Hindu kingdoms of Kabul (Kapisa) and
Zabul (Jabal) which lay to the north-west of Sindh, and which the
Islamic armies had started attacking soon after they annexed Khorasan in
AD 643. It was in AD 650 that the first Islamic army penetrated deep
into Zabul by way of Seistan, which at that time was a part of India
territorially as well as culturally. The struggle was grim and
prolonged. The Islamic army suffered heavy losses. In the final round,
the invader was defeated and driven out.

Another attack followed in AD 653. The Arab general, Abdul Rahman, was
able to conquer Zabul and levy tribute from Kabul. The king of Kabul,
however, proved desultory in paying regularly what the Arabs thought to
be their due. Finally, another Arab general, Yazid ibn Ziyad who had
been the governor of Seistan for some time, attempted retribution in AD
683. He was killed by the Hindus, and his army was put to flight with
great slaughter. The Arabs lost Seistan also, and had to pay 5,00,000
*dirhams* to get one of their generals, Abu Ubaida, released.

But the Arabs, inspired as they were by an imperialist ideology, did not
give up. They recovered Seistan some time before AD 692. Its new
governor, Abdullah, invaded Kabul. The Hindus trapped the Arab army in
the mountain passes after allowing it to advance unopposed for some
distance. Abdullah agreed to cease hostilities, and the king of Kabul
agreed to renew payment of an annual tribute. But the treaty was
denounced by the Caliph who dismissed Abdullah. The war against Kabul
was renewed in AD 695 when Hajjaj became the governor of Iraq. He sent
an army under Ubaidullah, the new governor of Seistan. Ubaidullah was
defeated and forced to retreat after leaving his three sons as hostages
and promising that “he shall not fight as long as he was
governor”.^([15](#15)) Once again, the treaty was denounced by the
Caliph, and another general, Shuraih, tried to advance upon Kabul. He
was killed by the Hindus, and his army suffered huge losses as it
retreated through the desert of Bust. Poor Ubaidullah died of grief.
That was the third round won by the Hindu kingdom of Kabul.

In the next round, Hajjaj commissioned Abdul Rahman once again. He made
some conquests but could not consolidate his hold. Hajjaj threatened to
supersede him. Abdul Rahman revolted and entered into a treaty with the
Hindu king to “carry arms against his master”.^([16](#16)) The treaty
did not work, and Abdul Rahman committed suicide. The Hindu king,
however, continued the war. Masudi, the Arab historian, “makes mention
of a prince in the valley of the Indus who after having subjugated
Eastern Persia, advanced to the bank of the Tigris and
Euphrates”.^([17](#17)) Hajjaj had to make peace according to which the
Hindu king was entitled to keep his kingdom in exchange for an annual
tribute. The Hindu king, however, stopped payment in the reign of Caliph
Sulayman (AD 715-717). Some attempts to force him into submission were
made in the reign of Caliph Al-Mansur (AD 745-775). But they met with
only partial success, and we find the Hindus ruling over Kabul and Zabul
in the year AD 867. The Arabs had failed once again to conquer finally
another small Hindu principality, in spite of their being the mightiest
power on earth. The struggle had lasted for more than two hundred years.

The kingdom of Kabul suffered a temporary eclipse in AD 870 but not on
account of the Arabs, nor as a result of a clash of arms. The Turkish
adventurer, Yaqub bin Layth, “who started his career as a robber in
Seistan and later on founded the Saffarid dynasty of Persia”, sent a
message to the king of Kabul that he wanted to come and pay his homage.
The king was deceived into welcoming Yaqub and a band of the latter’s
armed followers in the court at Kabul. Yaqub “bowed his head as if to do
homage but he raised the lance and thrust it into the back of Rusal so
that he died on the spot”. A Turkish army then invaded the Hindu
kingdoms of both Kabul and Zabul. The king of Zabul was killed in the
battle, and the population was converted to Islam by force. That was a
permanent loss to India. But the succeeding Hindu king of Kabul who had
meanwhile transferred his capital to Udbhandapur on the Indus, recovered
Kabul after the Saffarid dynasty declined. Masudi who visited the Indus
Valley in AD 915 “designates the prince who ruled at Kabul by the same
title as he held when the Arabs penetrated for the first time into this
region”.^([18](#18))

The Hindus lost Kabul for good only in the closing decade of the 10th
century. In AD 963 Alaptigin, a Turkish slave of the succeeding Samanid
dynasty, had been able to establish an independent Muslim principality
in Kabul with his seat at Ghazni. It was his general and successor,
Subuktigin, who conquered Kabul after a struggle spread over two
decades. The Hindus under king Jayapala of Udbhandapur made a bold bid
to recapture Kabul in AD 986-987. A confederate Hindu army to which the
Rajas of Delhi, Ajmer, Kalinjar and Kanauj has contributed troops and
money, advanced into the heartland of the Islamic kingdom of Ghazni.
“According to Utbi, the battle lasted several days and the warriors of
Subuktigin, including prince Mahmood, were ‘reduced to despair.’ But a
snow-storm and rains upset the plans of Jayapala who opened negotiations
for peace. He sent the following message to Subuktigin: ‘You have heard
and know the nobleness of Indians - they fear not death or destruction…
In affairs of honour and renown we would place ourselves upon the fire
like roast meat, and upon the dagger like the sunrays.’”^([19](#19)) But
the peace thus concluded proved temporary. The Muslims resumed the
offensive and the Hindus were defeated and driven out of Kabul. Dr.
Mishra concludes with the comment that Jayapala “was perhaps the last
Indian ruler to show such spirit of aggression, so sadly lacking in
later Rajput kings”.^([20](#20))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ibid., p. 3.

[²](#2a) Ibid., p. 4.

[³](#3a) Quran, 11.5.

[⁴](#4a) Ram Gopal Misra, op. cit., p. 11.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p. 12.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 14.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., p. 15.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., p. 17

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 18.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 4.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., p. 20.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p. 21.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., p. 22.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., p. 29.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid.

[¹⁷](#17a) Ibid., p. 30.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ibid., p. 32.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., p. 33.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., p. 34.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


