+++
title = "05 CHAPTER FOUR THE MARXIST HISTORIANS"

+++
**CHAPTER FOUR**

**THE MARXIST HISTORIANS**

What was uncovered at Sidhpur only to be covered up again was verily
*the tip of an iceberg* which remains submerged in hundreds of histories
written by Muslim historians, in Hindu literary sources which are slowly
coming to light, in the accounts of foreign travellers who visited India
and the neighbouring lands during medieval and modern times, and above
all in the reports of the archaeological surveys carried out in all
those countries which had been for long the cradles of Hindu culture. No
systematic effort has yet been made by scholars to see the iceberg
emerge from the dark depths and tell its own story in a simple and
straight-forward manner. Rare is the historian or archaeologist who had
related this vandalism to the theology of Islam based on the Qur’ãn and
the Sunnah of the Prophet. On the contrary, the subject has been
politicised by the votaries of Secularism who become hysterical by the
very mention of the untold story. Politicians in power have made and are
making frantic efforts to suppress every tip of the iceberg which
chances to surface in spite, of the conspiracy to keep it out of sight.

Some of these politicians are masquerading as academicians and selling
far-fetched and fantastic apologies for the havoc caused by Islamic
iconoclasm. The following story illustrates what happens whenever the
subject comes into the open and invites attention.

One day in August, 1986, *The Times of India* printed on its front page
the photographs of two stones carrying defaced carvings of some Hindu
deities. There was a short statement beneath the photographs that the
stones had been found by the Archaeological Survey of India in course of
repairs to the Qutb Mînãr at Delhi. The stones, according to the Survey,
had been built into a wall with the carved faces turned inwards.  But
the daily had dropped this part of the news.

Some correspondence cropped up in the letters-to-the-editor column of
the newspaper. The majority of writers congratulated the editor for
breaking a conspiracy of silence regarding publication of a certain type
of historical facts in the mass media. A few writers regretted that a
news item like that should have been published in a prestigious daily in
an atmosphere of growing communal tension. None of the writers raised
the question or speculated as to how those stones happened to be there.
None of them drew any inference from the fact that the Qutb Mînãr stands
near the Quwwat al-Islãm Masjid which, according to an inscription on
its eastern gate, was built from the materials of twenty-seven Hindu
temples.

The correspondence would have closed after a few days but for another
photograph which was front-paged by *The Times of India* dated September
15, 1986.  It depicted the Îdgãh built by Aurangzeb on the site of the
Kešavadeva temple at Mathura and gave the news that a committee had been
formed by some leading citizens for the liberation of what is known to
be Šrî KrishNa’s place of birth. A few more letters for and against the
photograph and the news item were published in the newspaper. None of
them was well-informed. None of them threw any light on what was the
Kešvadeva temple and why and when Aurangzeb converted it into a mosque.

But even these meagre and ill-informed comments were too much for a
dozen professors from Delhi. They wrote a long letter of protest which
was published in *The Times of India* on October 2, 1986. The letter is
being reproduced in full because it reveals the line laid down by a
well-entrenched clique which has come to control all institutions
concerned with the researching, writing and teaching of history in this
country. They said:

“Sir-We have noted with growing concern a recent tendency in *The Times
of India* to give a communal twist to news items and even to editorial
comments. An example of this is a report from Mathura dated 15 September
and entitled, ‘Krishna’s Birthplace after Aurangzeb.’ It evoked
considerable correspondence some of which, as could be expected, was
markedly communal in tone.

“Your readers should know that historical analysis and interpretations
involve more than a mere listing of dates with an eye to pious
sentiments. The Dera Keshava Rai temple was built by Raja Bir Singh Deo
Bundela during Jahangir’s reign. This large temple soon became extremely
popular and acquired considerable wealth. Aurangzeb had this temple
destroyed, took the wealth as booty and built an Idgah on the site. His
actions might have been politically motivated as well, for at the time
when the temple was destroyed he faced problems with the Bundelas as
well as Jat rebellions in the Mathura region. It should be remembered
that many Hindu temples were untouched during Aurangzeb’s reign and even
some new ones built. Indeed, what is really required is an investigation
into the theory that both the Dera Keshava Rai temple and the Idgah were
built on the site of a Buddhist monastery which appears to have been
destroyed.

“Your news report also gives credence to the suggestion that this site
was the birthplace of Krishna. This is extraordinary to say the least,
when even the historicity of the personality is in question. It creates
the kind of confusion such as has been created, probably deliberately,
over the question of the birthplace of Rama in the matter of the
Ramajanam-bhumi. A Persian text of the mid-nineteenth century states
that the Babari mosque was adjacent to the Sita-ka-rasoi-ghar and was
known as the Rasoi-Sita mosque and adjoined the area associated with the
birthplace of Rama. It would be worth enquiring whether there is
reliable historical evidence of a period prior to the nineteenth century
for this association of a precise location for the birthplace of Rama.
Furthermore such disputes as there were between Hindus and Muslims in
this area upto the nineteenth century were not over the Babari mosque
but the totally different site of Hanuman-baithak.

“It cannot be denied that acts of intolerance have been committed in
India by followers of all religions. But these acts have to be
understood in their context. It is a debasement of history to distort
these events for present day communal propaganda.

“The statement in your news report that the site at Mathura is to be
‘liberated’ and handed over to the ‘rightful owners’ as the birthplace
of Krishna raises the question of the limits to the logic of restoration
of religious sites (and this includes the demand for the restoration to
worshippers of disused mosques now under the care of the Archaeological
Survey of India). How far back do we go? Can we push this to the
restoration of Buddhist and Jaina monuments destroyed by Hindus? Or of
pre-Hindu animist shrines?”

The letter was signed by Romila Thapar, Muzaffar Alam, Bipan Chandra, R.
Champaka Lakshmi, S. Bhattacharya, H. Mukhia, Suvira Jaiswal, S.
Ratnagar, M.K. Palat, Satish Saberwal, S. Gopal and Mridula Mukherjee.
Most of them are minor fries who merely lent their names to the protest
letter. But four of them, namely, Romila Thapar, Bipan Chandra, H.
Mukhia and S. Gopal are well-known as Marxist historians. It is for
future scholarship to judge the worth of their work in the field of
historical research.  What is relevant to our present purpose is that
the prestige which they have come to enjoy in our times, succeeded in
suppressing what might have been an informative and interesting debate
in *The Times of India*.

Quite a few readers of *The Times of India* including several professors
of equal rank wrote letters challenging the facts as well as the logic
of the Marxist professors. But none of these letters was published in
the letters-to-the-editor column of the newspaper. After a fortnight,
the daily published some nondescript letters from its lay readers and
announced that the “controversy has been closed”. It was a curious
statement, to say the least. The controversy had only started with the
publication of the long letter from the Marxist professors, accusing
*The Times of India* of spreading “communalism” and making a number of
sweeping statements. The other side was waiting for its rejoinders to
appear in print. *The Times of India* would have been only fair to
itself and its readers to let the other side have its say. But it
developed cold feet. Perhaps it was not prepared to get branded as
“communalist” for the sake of “a few facts from the dead past.” Perhaps
it was in a hurry to retrieve its reputation which had been
“compromised” by the publication of the “controversial photographs.”
Whatever the reason or calculation, the Marxist professors walked away
with victory in a match which the other side was not permitted to
contest, leaving an impression on the readers of the newspaper that the
Marxist case was unassailable.

It would, therefore, be worthwhile to examine the Marxist case and find
out if it has any worth.  Incidentally, the Marxist historians have
equipped the Muslim historians as well with what is now considered to be
a fool-proof apologetics vis-a-vis the destruction of Hindu temples
during Muslim rule in India. An examination of the Marxist case in this
context, therefore, constitutes an examination of the Muslim case as
well.

We are leaving aside die Marxist accusation of “communalism” against
*The Times of India*. Marxist of all hues have a strong nose for
smelling communalism in the faintest expression of Indian nationalism
which they have fought with great vigour and vigilance ever since they
appeared on the Indian scene in the twenties of this century. Their
writings and doings during nearly seven decades testify to the type of
patriotism they preach and practise.

We are also overlooking the ex-cathedra tone which characterises their
pronouncements regarding interpretation of history. The tone comes quite
easily to those who have enjoyed power and prestige for long and,
therefore, begun to believe that they have a monopoly over truth and
wisdom. We shall confine our examination to what they have stated as
facts and what they claim to be the correct interpretations of those
facts.  
 

**The Kešavadeva Tradition at Mathura**

It is true that the temple of Kešavadeva which was destroyed and
replaced with an Îdgãh by Aurangzeb, was built by Bir Singh Deva Bundela
in the reign of Jahãngîr. But he had not built it on a site of his own
choosing. An age-old tradition^([1](#1)) had continued to identify the
KaTrã mound (on which Aurangzeb’s Îdgãh stands at present) with the spot
where KaMsa had imprisoned the parents of Šrî KrishNa, and where the
latter was born. The same tradition had also remembered with anguish
that an earlier Kešavadeva temple which stood on this spot had been
destroyed by an earlier Islamic iconoclast.

Romila Thapar has herself testified to this tradition about Kešavadeva.
Referring to descriptions of the Mathura region by Greek historians, she
writes, “The identification of Sourasenoi, Methora and Iobares/Jomanes
do not present any problem. But the identification of Cleisobora or
Carisobora or the other variants suggested such as Carysobores remain
uncertain.... The reading of Cleisobora as KRSNpura has not yielded any
firm identification. A possible connection could be suggested with
Keshavadeva on the basis of this being an alternative name for KRSNa and
there being archaeological evidence of a settlement at the site of
Keshavadeva during the Mauryan period.”^([2](#2))

Dr. V.S. Agrawala is well-known for his study of the sculptures and
inscriptions found on the ancient sites of Mathura and around. He was
Curator of the museum at Mathura as well as that at Lucknow. He makes
the following observations:

> 1. “Mathurã on the Yamunã is famous as the birthplace of KRishNa. It
> was the scat of the Bhãgvata religion from about second century BC to
> fifth Century AD…^([3](#3))
>
> 2. “Brãhmanical shrines of Mathurã began to be built quite early as
> shown by the discovery of an epigraph, viz. the Morã Well-Inscription
> as well as other records like the lintel of the time of ŠoDãsa. It was
> in the reign of Chandragupta Vikramãditya that a magnificent temple of
> VishNu was built at the site of KaTrã Kešavadeva… ^([4](#4))
>
> 3\. “The rich store of Brãhmanical images in Mathurã Museum is
> specially noteworthy. The formulation of these images was a natural
> result of the strong Bhãgavata movement of which Mathurã had been the
> radiating centre from about the first century BC… The chronological
> priority in the making of Brãhmanical images to that of the Buddha
> should be taken as a settled fact on the basis of an image of Balarãma
> from JãnsuTî village. It is definitely in the style of the Šuñga
> period. Patañjali also writing in the same age informs us of the
> existence of shrines dedicated of Rãma and Kešava i.e., Balarãma and
> KrishNa…”^([5](#5))

An inscription of Svãmî MahãkSatrapa ŠoDãsa recovered by Pandit Radha
Krishna in 1913 testifies that a temple dedicated to Vãsudeva existed at
Mathura in the first century BC. “From an examination of the stone,”
writes Professor H. Luders, “Mr. Ram Prasad Chanda came to the
conclusion, which undoubtedly is correct, that the epigraph was
originally incised on a square pillar which was afterwards cut
lengthwise through the inscribed side into two halves and turned into
door jambs.”^([6](#6)) Scholars have differed regarding the location of
the temple mentioned in the epigraph. The latest to study and interpret
the inscriptions of ŠoDãsa is Professor R.C. Sharma. “Luders thought,”
he writes, “that it belonged to the Bhãgvata shrine of Morã about 12 kms
to the west of Mathurã. But V.S. Agrawala opined that it must have
originated from the site of KaTrã, the famous Bhãgvata spot. We shall
see that the conjecture of Agrawala carries weight… The upper part of
the inscription is corroded and five lines cannot be made out properly.
The remaining part is better preserved and it can be translated as: ‘At
the great temple of Lord Vãsudeva, a gateway and a railing was erected
by Vasu son of Kaušiki Pãkšakã. May Lord Vãsudeva be pleased and promote
the welfare of Svãmî Mahãksatrapa ŠoDãsa.’ This is the earliest
archaeological evidence to prove the tradition of the building of
KRSNa’s shrine.”^([7](#7)) It is possible that some more inscriptions
may surface in future and take the tradition of KrishNa-worship at
Mathura still farther in the past.

Another inscription found at the same site points to the same tradition
prevailing in the seventh and eighth centuries AD. “A fragment of an
inscribed stone slab,” writes Dr. D.C. Sircar, “was discovered in 1954
at Katra Keshavdev within Mathurã city, headquarters of the District of
that name in Uttar Pradesh. It was presented by the Shri Krishna
Janmabhumi Trust, Mathurã, to the local Archaeological Museum.” After
describing the size of the slab and the style of writing that has
survived on it, he continues, “The characters resemble those of such
inscriptions of the seventh and eighth centuries belonging to the
Western parts of Northern India as the Banskhera plate of Harsh (AD
606-47), the Kundesvar inscription (vs 718 = AD 661) of Aprajita, the
Jhalarpatan inscription (vs 746 = AD 689) of DurgagaNa, the Kudarkot
inscription of about the second half of the seventh century, the Nagar
inscription (vs 741 = AD 684) of Dhanika, and the Kanaswa inscription
(vs 795 = AD 738) of ŠivagaNa.”^([8](#8)) The inscription was composed
“in adoration of a god whose epithets *kãl-ãñjana-rajah-puñja-dyuti,
(ma)hãvarãha-rûpa* and *jañgama* have only been preserved”. It leaves
“no doubt that the reference is to the god VishNu since the expression
*mahãvarãha-rûpa* certainty speaks of the Boar incarnation of the
deity.”^([9](#9)) The hero of the prašasti is a king named DiNDirãja of
the Maurya dynasty. “It therefore seems,” concludes Dr. Sircar, “that
the king performed the deed in question in the chain of many other pious
works and at the cost of a large sum of money. The purpose seems to have
been to put garlands around the head of a deity whose name seems to read
Šauri (i.e. VishNu; cf. the Vaishnavite adoration in verse
1).”^([10](#10))

That Bir Singh Dev Bundela’s choice of the site was not arbitrary is
proved by another inscription discovered by Dr. A. Fuhrer in 1889 “from
the excavations made by railway contractors at the Kešava
mound.”^([11](#11)) It is a long *prašasti* in Sanskrit stating that
“Jajja, who long carried the burden of the *varga* together with the
committee of trustees (*gosThîjana*) built a large temple of VishNu
brilliantly white and touching the clouds.”^([12](#12)) The colophon in
prose informs us that the *prašasti* was composed by “two ‘wise’ men,
Pãla and Kuladdhara (?)” and “incised by the mason Somala in SaMvat 1207
on the full moon day of Kãrttika, during the reign of his glorious
majesty, the supreme king of kings, Vijayapãla.” The king cannot be
identified with certainty. But SaMvat 1207 corresponds to AD
1149-51. “This king,” concludes the epigraphist, “certainly was the
ruler of Mathurã at this period, and Jajja was one of his vassals. This
much is absolutely certain, and the inscription also settles the date of
at least one of the temples buried under the Kešava
mound.”^([13](#13))  
 

**Why Aurangzeb Destroyed the Temple**

There is no substance in the Marxist statement that the temple was
destroyed because it had “acquired considerable wealth” which attracted
Aurangzeb’s greed for booty or that the destruction of the temple was
“politically motivated as well, for at the time when the temple was
destroyed he faced problems with the Bundela as well as the Jat
rebellions in the Mathura region.” We have only to refer to contemporary
records to see how these explanations are wide of the mark.

The temple of Kešavadeva was destroyed in January, 1670. This was done
in obedience to an imperial *firmãn* proclaimed by Aurangzeb on April 9,
1669.  On that date, according to *Ma’sîr-i-Ãlamgîrî*, “The Emperor
ordered the governors of all provinces to demolish the schools and
temples of the infidels and strongly put down their teaching and
religious practices.”^([14](#14)) Jadunath Sarkar has cited several
sources regarding the subsequent destruction of temples which went on
all over the country, and right up to January 1705, two years before
Aurangzeb died.^([15](#15))

None of the instances cited by him make any reference whatsoever to
booty or the political problem of rebellion. The sole motive that stands
out in every case is religious zeal. Our Marxist professors will find it
very hard, if not impossible, to discover economic and/or political
motives for all these instances of temple destruction. The alibis that
they have invented in defence of Aurangzeb’s destruction of the
Kešavadeva temple are, therefore, only plausible, if not downright
fraudulent. It is difficult to believe that the learned professors did
not know of Aurangzeb’s *firmãn* dated April 9, 1669 and the large-scale
destruction of Hindu temples that followed. If they did not, one wonders
what sort of professors they are, and by what right they pronounce
pontifically on this subject.  
 

**Putting the Cart Before the Horse**

The veneer of plausibility also comes off when we look into the
chronology of Hindu rebellions in the Mathura region. We find no
evidence that Aurangzeb was faced with any Hindu rebellion in that
region when he destroyed the Kešavadeva temple. There was no Bundela
uprising in 1670 when the Kešavadeva temple was destroyed. The first
Bundela rebellion led by Jujhar Singh had been put down by December,
1635 in the reign of Shãh Jahãn when that Rajput prince was killed and
the ladies of his house-hold were forced into the Mughal harem. The
second Bundela rebellion had ended with the suicide of Champat Rai in
October, 1661. The third Bundela rebellion was still in the future. 
Champat Rai’s son, Chhatrasal, had joined the imperial army sent against
Shivaji in 1671 when Shivaji drew his attention to what was being done
to the Hindus by Aurangzeb. It may also be pointed out that our
professors stretch the Mathura region too far when they include
Bundelkhand in it.

The professors have put the cart before the horse by holding the Jat
rebellion in the Mathura region responsible for the destruction of the
Kešvadeva temple. The Jats had risen in revolt under the leadership of
Gokla (Gokul) *after* and not *before* Aurangzeb issued his *firmãn* of
April, 1969 ordering destruction of Hindu temples everywhere. This
highly provocative *firmãn* had come as a climax to several other
happenings in the Mathura region. The Hindus of this region had been
victims of Muslim high-handedness for a long time, particularly in
respect of their women. Murshid Qulî Khãn, the *faujdãr* of Mathura who
died in 1638, was notorious for seizing “all their most beautiful women”
and forcing them into his harem. “On the birthday of Krishna,” narrates
*Ma’sîr-ul-Umara*, “a vast gathering of Hindu men and women takes place
at Govardhan on the Jumna opposite Mathura. The Khan, painting his
forehead and wearing *dhoti* like a Hindu, used to walk up and down in
the crowd. Whenever he saw a woman whose beauty filled even the moon
with envy, he snatched her away like a wolf pouncing upon a flock, and
placing her in the boat which his men kept ready on the bank, he sped to
Agra. The Hindu \[for shame\] never divulged what had happened to his
daughter.”^([16](#16))

Another notorious *faujdãr* of Mathura was Abdu’n Nabî Khãn. He
plundered the people unscrupulously and amassed great wealth. But his
worst offence was the pulling down of the foremost Hindu temple in the
heart of Mathura and building a Jãmi‘ Masjid on its site. This he did in
AD 1660-61. Soon after, in 1665, Aurangzeb imposed a pilgrim tax on the
Hindus. In 1668, he prohibited celebration of all Hindu festivals,
particularly Holi and Diwali. The Jats who rightly regarded themselves
as the defenders of Hindu hounour were no longer in a mood to take it
lying.

It is true that the capture and murder of Gokul with fiendish cruelty
and the forcible conversion of his family members to Islam, coincided
with the destruction of the Kešavadeva temple. But there is no reason to
suppose that the temple would have been spared if there was no Jat
rebellion. There were no rebellions in the vicinity of many other
temples which were destroyed at that time or at a later stage. The
temples were destroyed in obedience to the imperial *firmãn* and for no
other reason.  
 

**The Logic of the Argument**

The real worth of the defence of Aurangzeb put up by the professors
becomes evident if we lead their argument for economic and political
motives to its logical conclusion. The Kešvadeva temple was not the only
place of worship which was wealthy. Many mosques and dargãhs and other
places of Muslim worship were bursting with riches in Aurangzeb’s time.
But he is not known to have sought booty in any one of them. There were
several rebellions led by Muslims against the rule of Aurangzeb. Some of
these rebellions had their centres in places of Muslim worship. Yet
Aurangzeb is not known to have destroyed any one of these places before
or after suppressing the rebellions. So, even if we accept the economic
and political motives for the destruction of Hindu temples, an
irreducible minimum of the religious motive remains. That alone can
explain the erection of an Îdgãh on the site of the Kešavadeva temple
and taking away the idols to Agra for being trodden under foot by the
faithful.  
 

**The Argument about Historicity**

Now we can take up the last point by raising which the professors seem
to clinch their case in defence of Aurangzeb. They question the
historicity of Šrî KrishNa and dismiss him as a mythological character
who can have no place of birth. The implication is that Hindus are
getting unduly excited by associating the Kešavadeva temple with the
birth-place of Šrî KrishNa and should cool down after discovering that
the temple was built by a Rajput protege of Jahãngîr, at a nondescript
place and on a much later date. This is a strange argument, to say the
least. It means that the sanctity of a religious place declines in
proportion to its dissociation from a historical personality. One
wonders if the professors would extend the logic to Muslim *ziãrats* and
*qadam-sharîfs* which are associated with characters who cannot be
traced in any history. Some of these *ziãrats* have been built on the
sites and from the debris of Hindu temples according to unimpeachable
archaeological evidence. The *qadam-sharîfs* are without a doubt the
Buddha’s feet carved in the early phases of Buddhism and worshipped in
subsequent ages by the Buddhists as well as the Hindus. The Ka‘ba at
Mecca was taken over by Muhammad because, according to him, it was built
by Abraham in the first instance and occupied by the polytheists at a
later stage. Should the Muslims take the desecration or demolition of
the Ka‘ba less seriously if they are told that Abraham has never figured
in human history?  There is no evidence that he did.

Of course, Šrî KrishNa is a historical character which the professors
can find out for themselves by reading Bankim Chandra, Šrî Aurobindo and
many other savants who have, unlike them, studied the subject. But that
is not the point. The Šrî KrishNa for whom the Hindus really care is a
far greater figure than the Šrî KrishNa of history. What they really
worship is the Šrî KrishNa of mythology. There are many temples and
places of pilgrimage all over India associated with this mythological
Šrî KrishNa. So are the various *šaktipîThas* associated with the limbs
of Pãrvatî scattered by Šiva during the course of his anguish over her
death. So are the various *jyotirliñgas* and most other places of Hindu
pilgrimage. In fact, a majority of the renowned places of Hindu worship
and pilgrimage have only mythology in support of their sanctity. Are the
professors telling the Hindus that the desecration or destruction of
these places should cause no heart-burn to them because the characters
associated with these places are drawn from mythology, and that an
iconoclast is badly needed in every case for blowing up the myth?  
 

**The Birth-Place of Šrî Rãma**

Having cleared the “confusion” over the birth-place of Šrî KrishNa, the
professors proceed to clear a similar “confusion” regarding the
birth-place of Šrî Rãma. We are ignoring their insinuation that the
second “confusion” has been created “probably deliberately”. The
insinuation has its source in political polemics and not in academic
propriety to which professors are expected to adhere. We are also
ignoring the implication that Šrî Rãma being another mythological
character is not entitled to a place of birth because, mercifully, the
professors concede that a place called *Rãma-janmabhûmi* did exist at
Ayodhya, and that it did not occupy the site of a Buddhist monastery
demolished by the devotees of Šrî Rãma. We shall only examine the point
they have raised, namely, that the mosque known as the Babari Masjid
does not stand on the site of the *Rãma-janmabhûmi*.

The professor have referred us to a “Persian text of the mid-nineteenth
century” which “states that the Babari mosque was adjacent to the
Sita-ka-rasoi-ghar and was known as Rasoi-Sita mosque and adjoined the
area associated with the birthplace of Rama”. What they mean in plain
language is that the real Babari Masjid, also known as Rasoi-Sita
Masjid, has disappeared or been demolished by the Hindus at some stage,
and that there is no substance in the current Hindu claim that die
mosque known as the Babari Masjid at present stands on the site of a
temple built on the *Rãma-janmabhûmi*.

This contention could have been examined satisfactorily if the
professors had named the Persian text and told us whether, according to
it, the Rasoi-Sita Masjid stood on the right or left of the
Sita-ka-rasoi-ghar. We can, therefore, thank the professors only for
admitting that the Muslims did raise a mosque on a spot which, we may be
permitted to infer, was also sacred for the Hindus. But, at the same
time, we cannot help wondering why the professors are at pains to
pin-point the exact spot where Šrî Rãma was born instead of conceding
that the temple built in his memory must have occupied a large area.
Maps of the area in which the mosque now known as the Babari Masjid
stands, show clearly that the site of the Sita-ka-rasoi-ghar is adjacent
to the mosque. Is it not possible that what is now known as the Babari
Masjid was also known as Rasoi-Sita Masjid in the mid-nineteenth
century? Moreover, the mosque in dispute has been named as the Babari
Masjid by the Muslims and not by the Hindus.

Thus the Persian text dragged in by the professors creates complications
rather than clear the “confusion” which, according to the professors,
exists in the Hindu mind. On the face of it, it looks like a deliberate
attempt to side-track the issues involved. The suspicion gets
strengthened when the professors go on to suggest that prior to the
nineteenth century the dispute was not over the *Rãma-janmabhûmi* but
over “the totally different site of Hanuman-baithak.” No doubt the
suggestion admits, although inadvertently, that there was a Hanuman
temple at Ayodhya which also the Muslims had converted into a mosque.
But we are trying to straighten the record regarding a mosque standing
on the site of the *Rãma-janmabhûmi* temple.^([17](#17))

Finally, their thesis is that “acts of intolerance have been committed
in India by followers of all religions.” Having found it difficult to
hide the atrocities committed by Islam in India, they have invented
stories of Buddhist, Jain and Animist temples destroyed by the Hindus.
We shall examine these stories in some detail at a later stage in this
study. Here it should suffice to say that in their effort to whitewash
Islam they have ended by blackening Hinduism. The exercise is devoid of
all academic scruples and is no more than a neurotic exhibition of their
deep-seated anti-Hindus animus.^([18](#18))  
 

**The Appropriate Context**

What is most amazing about our Marxist professors, however, is that
while they are never tired of preaching that facts of history should be
placed in their proper context, they have studiously managed to miss the
only context which explains simply and satisfactorily the destruction of
Hindu temples by Islamic invaders. Our reference here is to the theology
of Islam systematised on the basis of the Qu’rãn and the Sunnah of the
Prophet. This theology lays down loud and clear that it is a pious act
for Muslims to destroy the temples of the infidels and smash their
idols. Conversion of infidel temples into mosques wherever practicable,
is a part of the same doctrine. We have presented this theology at some
length in Section IV.

Destruction of idols and conversion of infidel places of worship into
mosques became obligatory on Muslim conquerors and kings whenever they
got the opportunity. The plunder which the iconoclasts obtained from
infidel places of worship was not the main motive; that was only an
additional bounty which Allãh had promised to bestow on them for
performing pious deeds and earning religious merit. Those who want to
know the relevant prescriptions of Islam should read the orthodox
biographies of the Prophet, the orthodox collections of Hadîth, and the
authentic commentaries by recognised imãms rather than swallow old
wive’s tales told by Marxist professors.

This is the simple and straightforward explanation why Muslim invaders
of India destroyed Hindu temples on a large scale and converted many of
them into mosques. The economic and political motives, invented by the
Marxists, are not only far-fetched but also do not explain the
destruction and/or conversion of numerous temples which contained no
riches, and where no conspiracy could be conceived.

The Muslim apologists who have been in a hurry to borrow the Marxist
explanation do not know what they are doing. The explanation converts
Islam into a convenient cover for brigandage and the greatest Muslim
heroes into mere bandits. In the mouth of those Muslims who know what
their religion prescribes vis-a-vis infidel places of worship, this
apologetics is dishonest as well. They should have the honesty to admit
the tenets of the religion to which they subscribe. It is a different
matter whether those tenets can be defended on any spiritual or moral
grounds. That is a subject on which Islam will have to do some
introspection and hold a dialogue with Hinduism some day.

Finally, the professors want us to remember that “many Hindu temples
were untouched during Aurangzeb’s reign, and even some new ones were
built”. The underlying assumption is that Aurangzeb’s writ ran in every
nook and corner of India, all through his reign. But the assumption is
unwarranted. There is plenty of evidence in Persian histories themselves
that there were regions in which Hindu resistance to Aurangzeb’s terror
was too strong to be overcome even by repeated expeditions. It is no
credit to Aurangzeb that the Hindus in those regions were able to save
their old temples and also build some new ones. The Hindus all over
north India were up in arms against the Muslim rule during Aurangzeb’s
long absence in the South. If they built some new temples, it was in
spite of Aurangzeb. The subject needs a detailed scrutiny on the basis
of concrete cases located in space and time. It must, however, be
pointed out that the professors bid goodbye to all sense of proportion
when they gloat on the few temples that survived or were newly built
while they forget the large number of temples that were destroyed. They
also forget that, in the present context, exceptions only prove the
rule.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) The Varãha PurãNa says, The is no God like Kešava and no
BrãhmaNas like those of Mathurã.

[²](#2a) Romila Thapar, ‘The Early History of Mathurã upto and including
the Mauryan period’ in *Mathurã: The Cultural Heritage*, edited by Doris
Meth Sriniwasan, New Delhi, 1989. p. 15. It is her habit to speak with
two tongues - one when she is in the midst of scholars who know the
facts, and another when she functions as a professional Hindu-baiter.

[³](#3a) V.S. Agarawala, *Masterpieces of Mathura Sculpture*, Varanasi,
1965.  p. 1.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., P. 2.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p. 11.

[⁶](#6a) *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. XXIV (1937-38), New Delhi, Reprint,
1982, p. 208.

[⁷](#7a) R.C. Sharma, ‘New Inscriptions from *Mathurã’ in Mathurã: The
Cultural Heritage*, op. cit., p. 309.

[⁸](#8a) *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. XXXII (1957-58), New Delhi, Reprint,
1987, p. 206.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 208.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., pp. 208-209.

[¹¹](#11a) *Epigraphia Indica*, Vol. I (1892), New Delhi, Reprint, 1983,
p. 287.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., p. 288.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., 289.

[¹⁴](#14a) Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar, op. cit., p. 186.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., pp. 186-89.

[¹⁶](#16a) Quoted by Ibid., pp. 193-94. The Jat rebellion is dealt with
in detail by Girish Chandra Dwivedi in his book, *The Jats: Their Role
in the Mughal Empire*, New Delhi, 1979.

[¹⁷](#17a) The Hindu case is presented in two publications of Voice of
India - *Ram Janmabhoomi Vs. Babri Masjid*, by Koenraad Elst (1990) and
*History Versus Casuistry: Evidence of the Ramajanmabhoomi Mandir
presented by the Vishva Hindu Parishad to the Government of India in
December-January* 1990-91 (1991).

[¹⁸](#18a) See Appendix 4 for the Marxist proposition of placing
Hinduism on the same level as Islam.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
