+++
title = "00  Foreword"

+++
Foreword

The Reawakening of Dharmic and Native Traditions

There are two major groups of religions in the world today. First are
the conversion-based religions of Christianity and Islam. Each holds
that it is the only true faith for humanity and solely represents God's
plan and God's will. Both reflect an exclusivist ethos of One God, a
single holy book, a final prophet or single savior, an historical
revelation, salvation from sin, and heaven or hell as the ultimate
resting-place for the soul. Christianity and Islam became the dominant
religions of the Western world over the centuries through a long process
of struggle and warfare, as they displaced, often cruelly, all other
religions that came in their path. Both conversion-based religions are
based on an older Jewish monotheistic tradition that was critical of the
diverse Pagan cults around it. They turned this rejection, which for the
Jews was meant to preserve their own culture, into an article of faith
and a need to eradicate all other beliefs.

The second major group of world religions are the dharmic or meditation
traditions of India - Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism - of which Hinduism
is the oldest and largest. Chinese Taoism and Japanese Shinto have an
affinity with these and can easily be placed among them. Dharmic
traditions reflect a spiritual ethos of natural law (dharma), karma and
rebirth, yogic practices, and a pursuit of direct experience of truth
and self-realization through meditation. They became the dominant
religions of the Eastern world, not through any process of intimidation,
but by growing up organically with the cultures of these lands. Dharmic
traditions define the Divine more as an impersonal and timeless
consciousness than the personal Creator of Biblical traditions. They are
tolerant and pluralistic and can accept other spiritual paths as valid
and have no need to displace them.

In addition there are various indigenous traditions and native creeds
like those of the pre-Christian Europeans, the ancient Egyptians and
Babylonians, and the many Native American, Asian, Pacific Islander and
African groups. These appear more like the dharmic traditions of the
East than the conversion-based religions of the West, which disdainfully
call them pagans, heathens, kafirs or barbarians - the same terms that
they use to characterize dharmic approaches. Like dharmic traditions
these native ways have an experiential spirituality, ritual worship, use
of images, multiplistic ideas of divinity, connection to the Earth and
nature, and the recognition of a Great Spirit, though perhaps not as
clearly defined as in dharmic paths.

As the world has now moved out of colonial domination by monotheistic
creeds, a new respect for Eastern dharmic traditions is arising
everywhere. The impersonal consciousness of Indic traditions has much
more in common with the universe as perceived by modern science than
does the jealous God of the Bible and the Koran. Karma and rebirth make
more sense to people than do heaven and hell for explaining the fruit of
our actions. Yoga and meditation done on a personal level have become
more meaningful spiritual activities than attending churches or getting
involved in missionary efforts. Overall, a new era is dawning in which
organized religion and institutionalized belief - the characteristics of
conversion-based creeds - is being set aside in favor of diverse
spiritual and cultural approaches that characterize the paths of dharma.

As part of this process, a new awakening is happening in native
traditions from a Celtic revival in Europe to a resurgence in the native
religions of Africa. Even Anglo-Americans are looking to the Native
American religion and its sweat lodges and vision quests - which their
forefathers denigrated as the base superstitions of the Red Man - for a
connection to life and nature that Christianity has failed to bring
them. Many people see the need for religion to be connected to the land,
to a people and to a culture, that is not a mere belief but a way of
life, emphasizing spiritual practice. Slowly but inevitably, Eastern
dharmic traditions and native traditions are finding a common cause and
creating a new alliance to this end.

At the same time, there is an awakening among non-Western peoples to
their oppression not only by colonial armies but also by the missionary
cults that blessed their aggression. They are now recognizing how their
own more spiritual native traditions were denigrated and destroyed by
less tolerant beliefs employing violence and deception to further their
conversion aims. Conversion-based creeds are being revealed as unethical
and inhumane, dividing up humanity into the believers and the
non-believers and allowing the believers to oppress the non-believers
with a vengeance justified from on high. The righteous zeal of the
missionaries is being unveiled as a form of bigotry and prejudice, not a
means of salvation.

This awakening has led to some apologies by Christians for their
excesses, particularly for their history of racism and enslavement of
the Blacks. However, so far it has not led to any Christian rejection of
its exclusive claim to salvation or an honoring of such native religions
as the Black Africans as valid in their own right.

Dharmic traditions are also beginning to speak out against the ongoing
missionary aggression against them, though missionary beliefs have done
little to respond to their legitimate questions. Hindus are beginning to
face their history in which their temples were destroyed, their
libraries burned and their priests killed by Islamic votaries of the One
God. They are uncovering the bloody history of the Portuguese
Inquisition in India that employed torture to bring Christianity to the
Hindus. They are recognizing the intolerance behind the continuing need
of Christians and Muslims to convert them. Hindus and Buddhists are
uniting and trying to create a common front against the missionary
efforts that continue blindly today.

  
The Importance of Hindu Dharma

Hinduism remains the largest of these dharmic and native religions and
the most representative of pluralistic and non-conversion-based beliefs.
Therefore, a study of it is essential for understanding the spiritual
urges of humanity, for discovering the religion of the future as well as
the past as the hold of monotheism over the minds of people gradually
fades.

Hinduism has given rise to profound philosophies like Vedanta that
project a Supreme Self (Atman) and Absolute (Brahman) of
Being-Consciousness-Bliss (*Sacchidânanda*) behind the magical universe
in which we live. It has spiritual and meditational practices like the
many types of yoga (*jñâna, bhakti, karma* and *râja*), which show
systematically how to develop a higher consciousness from a non-dogmatic
approach.

Yoga and Vedanta are now popular and respected all over the world. Many
Hindu gurus travel the globe and have disciples in all countries. Books
and classes on Yoga and meditation from an Eastern perspective are
available everywhere. Sanskrit terms like guru, mantra and shakti have
entered into common parlance even in the Western media. Yet there is
still much confusion about what Hinduism really is. People approach
Hinduism more through a particular guru or sect and often fail to
recognize, much less understand the greater tradition behind it.

Hinduism views religion as a way of Self-realization and
God-realization. It sees religion as a science or way of knowledge,
*vidyâ*, to discover eternal truth. It can accept modern science into
its worldview that has always acknowledged the value of such disciplines
as mathematics, astronomy and medicine for understanding the external
world. Hinduism does not have the religion/science dichotomy such as
characterizes Biblical beliefs. It is a tradition of knowledge, not
faith that helps us uncover the truth of ourselves and of the unbounded
universe in which we live, which are both pervaded by a common spirit.

Hinduism is also a culture that contains art, music, dance and
literature. It sees the universe as a manifestation of Divine bliss/love
energy (*ânanda*) and creation as a play of *rasas* or moods of Divine
delight. It does not separate art and imagery from the spiritual life,
as Biblical traditions tend to so violently to do. Though Hinduism has a
clear set of social principles as revealed in its many Dharma-Shastras
it treats these only as general guidelines to be adjusted on an
individual basis and attuned to the needs of every age. It is not tied
to any system of religious law, like the Sharia of Islam, and can easily
adapt itself to different social orders and the demands of new ways of
living.

Hinduism has perhaps the largest and most ancient literature of all
religions with its many Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas, Tantras and Yoga
Shastras. Its literature defies any stereotype and has an encyclopedic
view of culture and the universe that is detailed and inclusive of all
nature and of the occult worlds as well. Yet most of this literature is
unstudied and misunderstood, particularly in academic institutions of
the West which, dominated by an outer looking intellect, have failed to
really come face to face with the enlightened mind of the East.

Hinduism is like life. Hinduism is the very religion of life and accepts
all life into itself. It works through the spirit of life, not through
some sterile, artificial or purist creed. Hinduism is a religion of
nature and the Earth, finding holy places in every mountain, stream,
valley or shore. Its roots are organic. It arises out of the soul and
out of the land, like other Pagan and native traditions. It is universal
but encourages local variations, being able to embrace native cultures
and customs without denigrating or subverting them.

Hinduism is not a proselytizing cult. It sees no need for all people to
have the same religious label any more than it regards it necessary for
all people to eat the same food or wear the same clothes. For it
religion is an internal practice of self-development, not an external
battle to conquer the world. It holds that the world and all creatures
are inherently saved or one with God. All that is necessary is to dispel
the ignorance that prevents us from seeing this inherent divinity and
leading a truly divine life.

Hinduism has endured throughout the centuries, as other countries,
cultures and religions have come and gone. It has withstood the
onslaughts of Islam, Christianity and Communism, which other great
countries of Asia fell to. It has preserved many of the oldest and
highest spiritual urges of humanity. It invents itself anew in every
generation, looking to modern teachers and gurus over old books and set
rules.

  
Distortions of Hinduism

Unfortunately, Hinduism is without doubt the most denigrated and
misunderstood of the major world religions, if it is recognized as a
world religion at all. It is common to look down on Hinduism as
primitive and those who call themselves Hindus as backward or obsolete.
Instead of looking at Hinduism in terms of its profound philosophies and
deep mysticism, it is associated with idolatry, caste and various social
evils, as if there were nothing more to it.

Those used to more monotone religions claim that Hinduism with its
organic pluralism is not a religion at all, but only a group of cults or
sects with little in common. Such people are so jaded by the
monotheistic code they cannot appreciate the broader and deeper
spiritual urges that are as varied as the types of creatures on this
planet. Many of them complain about the primitive idol worship in Hindu
religion.

After all, Hindu gods like Hanuman and Ganesha have animal faces and
forms. Such people are offended to see an animal face on God, though
they eat animals, and their God with his wrath often has traits that
would be regarded as tyrannical or egoistic in a person.

Others complain that Hinduism, particularly Vedanta, with its concept of
the Absolute and liberation from the cycle of rebirth lacks compassion
and a sense of caring for the world. They compare this with the
compassion of the monotheistic concept that wants to save everyone and
is concerned about the poor and the sick (though conversion-based
religions have commonly destroyed peoples and cultures, and only offer
help where there is a chance of conversion). That seeing the Self in all
beings and all beings in Self, which is the Vedantic vision, is the very
essence of Divine love and compassion escapes them.

This denigration has occurred largely because Hinduism has borne the
brunt of missionary propaganda, perhaps unparalleled by any religion in
the world. After all, Hinduism is a religion that includes an extensive
set of images or idol worship, such as the Biblical prophets, the
Christian fathers and the Muslim prophets criticized not only as unholy,
but often as positively evil. Everything associated with Paganism in the
Biblical mind has a clear manifestation in Hinduism with its many gods
and goddesses, its gurus and godmen, its understanding of the occult and
its practice of yoga.

Hinduism represents the survival of the very type of traditions that the
conversion-based religions have tried so hard and so long to stamp out.
While the Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks and Pagan Arabs have all long
fallen to the missionary assault, Hinduism has survived remarkably the
onslaughts of both missionary religions for a period of over a thousand
years! And to their dismay in the modern world, Hindu teachings are
spreading again and getting revitalized.

Hinduism has also been under siege by Marxist thinkers, who have been
strong in India for some decades, because it represents a spiritual
tradition that obstructs their road to power and challenges their
materialistic worldview. The other dharmic traditions of Asia have been
under the same type of attack. Buddhism in China was marginalized by the
Communists that have also nearly succeeded in destroying Tibetan
Buddhism in its own homeland. While Indian Marxists have not wielded
such power, they have worked hard to harm Hinduism through their
influence in the media and academic realms in India, which has been
significant.

Indian Marxists have even formed a common front with the missionaries to
eliminate Hinduism, their common enemy. Now that Marxism is dying in the
world, Indian Marxists are becoming more strident, trying to hold on to
their last bastions of power in the intellectual realm, which only makes
their anti-Hindu propaganda more shrill and more irrational.

While dharmic traditions are gaining respect in the West, the assault on
them by conversion-based creeds is increasing in Asia. Christian
missionaries, for example, are very active in Mongolia, where the
Tibetan religion has one of its last strongholds. Islamic
fundamentalism, fueled by petrodollars, continues its assaults,
particularly in India where they can use the Islamic minority as a means
of expanding their influence, building mosques and encouraging
separatism.

Christian missionary groups, leaning on the great wealth of the West,
have targeted India and China for conversion with massive millennial
evangelization plans using the weapons of the modern media. They have
made headway in smaller Asian countries like South Korea, which has been
largely Christianized, and hope to do the same in larger Asian
countries.

The Catholic Church has spread its tentacles into India, hoping like
what it did to ancient Greece to subvert the profound philosophies of
the region into tools of the Christian faith, reformulating the Hindu
Upanishads like the Aristotelian philosophy of the Greeks into a form of
Christian theology. Its priests are dressing up like swamis, its rituals
and symbols are getting Hinduized, not out of respect for Hindu
traditions, but to aid in conversion in the post-colonial world by
convincing Hindus that Christianity is not really an alien or foreign
cult.

Evangelical Christians in America like the Southern Baptists, the
largest Protestant sect in America, are targeting India with their,
cruder but more forceful and vitalistic creed, preaching of hell, fire,
damnation and the impending end of the world. Part of this is a
counterattack against the influence of Hinduism in America, which
Christian fundamentalists see behind the New Age movement that so
disturbs them. The New Age movement, combining alternative medicine,
eastern spirituality and new life-styles, has now become a major
cultural force, influencing a significant percentage of the American
population and challenging the intolerant Christian mind in its own
backyard. One Christian fundamentalist in America noted that there are
only two religions in the world, Christianity which excludes everything
and Hinduism which includes everything. Clearly they see Hinduism as the
perennial Pagan enemy of the children of God.

In America, Evangelical Christians like to bring Hindu women who have
converted to Christianity onto their programs to denigrate firsthand the
"terrible" religion that they came from. Such groups have gone so far as
to publicly describe Hinduism as a religion of the Devil, Satan,
darkness, superstition and evil. They associate all of India's social
problems with its polytheistic religion of idolatry that is an affront
to God and Jesus. While one may ridicule these groups - which even in
America are perceived as backward - one should not underestimate their
resolve in achieving their aim, whatever disruption it requires. It is
amazing that such groups still think of themselves as enlightened and
don't see how much out of touch they really are with the modern world
and any global perspective. Unfortunately, though a minority in America,
they can still marshal extensive resources for their overseas missionary
activity, through the great wealth of America today that they hold part
of.

Such conversion efforts are bound to fail in the long run but they can
do much damage along the way. Asia is still recovering from Marxism and
colonialism, which makes the poor and uneducated, who are basically
looking for social upliftment, vulnerable to missionary work which
promises that as a by-product of conversion. Asians tend to uncritically
embrace the West for its economic and technical advancement, and think
that Western religions, which are really fossils from the Middle Ages,
are necessary parts of modernization. They don't realize that
Evangelical Christianity with its rejection of the theory of evolution,
which they want removed from the schools, represents one of the most
regressive trends in American culture and is largely a religion of the
farm belt ridiculed in the universities.

Even Catholicism has become primarily a religion of backward countries
of South and Central America and is only nominally followed in North
America and Europe. The most devout Catholics in the world are the poor
and uneducated Catholics of the Third World, not the scientific or
intellectual elite of the West that is largely agnostic. Christianity is
not a politically or educationally advanced religion of the modern West
but the shadow of the very forces that have for centuries resisted
modernization. Asian countries that accept Catholicism are more likely
to end up poor like the Philippines, the main Catholic country in Asia,
not developed like Japan which did not accept Christianity as a part of
modernization but relied on its own warrior spirit instead.

Unfortunately, many of the Western followers and well-wishers to dharmic
traditions do not understand the degree and danger of this new
missionary assault in Asia and are doing little to deal with it. This is
because Christianity has become so marginalized in the West that they
don't see its danger elsewhere in the world. Their interest in dharmic
traditions is more personal and often lacks any sense of social
responsibility. People in post-independence India are also failing to
notice the missionary threat because its effort is aimed mainly at poor
and rural Hindus that they really don't want to take care of anyway. It
is this scenario that makes the work of Ram Swarup so important. He,
perhaps most poignantly and directly of modern thinkers, has understood
the current world situation, the dangers to Hinduism, the value of
Hinduism for the future of humanity, and a practical way to both
overcome the dangers an d promote the opportunities for the good of all.

  
Ram Swarup

Many people today think that Hinduism is not an intellectual religion
and does not have, in spite of its many great spiritual philosophies,
any real modern intelligentsia to represent it. They look on Hinduism as
a religion of an uncritical, if not naive faith in various gods and
gurus. Or if Hinduism has an intellectual side they see it only as a
transcendent Vedanta that offers no real critique of other religions, no
plan for society, and does not make itself relevant to current problems
or pressing human needs.

Ram Swarup shows that this is not at all true. He reveals the Hindu mind
in action as a creative and spiritual force to change both the
individual and the society for both the inner and the outer good. He
outlines a Hindu approach to the problems of the world that offers deep
and lasting solutions that go beyond the limitations of Western
religions or Western science, following the development of consciousness
as the real thrust in civilization.

One of the problems with Hindu thinkers is that they seldom express
themselves well in an English idiom, which has now become the global
language of communication. However insightful their ideas their impact,
therefore, becomes limited in the global forum. Ram Swarup is a thinker
who can use the English language with forcefulness, wit, logic and irony
that can serve as a powerful conduit for Hindu ideas into the collective
psyche and reach the English-trained audience all over the world. He can
communicate ideas in English that have traditionally required the
precision of Sanskrit to get across.

The global Hindu magazine *Hinduism Today* has described Ram Swarup as
"perhaps Hinduism's most cogent analyst." The Prime Minister of India,
Atal Behari Vajpayee, spoke of him as "a representative of India's rishi
tradition in the modern age." Ram Swarup had a unique ability to go to
the essence of a problem and, with profound simplicity, form a clear
understanding of it and practical line of response to correct it. He was
a Hindu thinker of the first order, comparable to the many great Hindu
thinkers of previous centuries. He-approaches all issues not from a
merely intellectual or academic side, but from a deeper spiritual and
yogic vision that characterizes the Hindu mind. He sees Hinduism as a
living tradition and is in contact with its most vital currents, not
only in the outer world but also and more importantly in the cosmic
mind.

Ram Swarup has thoroughly and critically studied the religions of the
world, and Marxism, the secular or materialistic religion, as well. He
can speak of these systems with an in-depth knowledge and ability to
quote and mirror what they really think, which even their dedicated
followers seldom possess. He was perhaps India's foremost critic of
Marxism and exposed its danger to the country decades ago when it was
fashionable for every intellectual and every journalist to uncritically
follow it. He preserved Hindu intellectualism during its Marxist Dark
Age and has initiated its revival in the post-Marxist era.

I was fortunate enough to contact Ram Swarup personally and known him
over the last ten years. He was a helpful guide and provided a steady
inspiration to my own work relative to India, Hinduism, and the Vedas.
Ram Swarup was a notably cheerful and loving person, with a great
respect for each individual. He was considerate and soft spoken and a
good listener. He never tried to aggrandize himself, build a following
around him, gain donations or create institutions. He seemed unaware of
material needs and compulsions. Though not officially a sadhu he lived
like one. There was nothing extreme, abrasive or fanatical about his
life or his expression. Though he was aware of critical global problems
he also realized the transience of all human affairs. Though he spoke
eloquently he realized that the real truth is beyond words. Though he
made sure to take a stand on important issues, he also realized that
whatever he did was small in the greater scheme of things and just a
vehicle for the workings of a higher power. He did not make too much of
himself for all that he knew.

  
The Present Book

Ram Swarup has left an important legacy of many works on a broad range
of topics including religion and philosophy, yoga, mysticism and social
issues. His *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam* is a classic in the
field of comparative religion, for the first time perhaps introducing a
yogic view of altered states of consciousness to understand the powerful
and sometimes dangerous workings of religious experience. The present
volume consists of various essays on Hinduism, including several
important essays never published before. It covers a wide spectrum of
ideas. The overall theme is Hinduism and its articulation in the present
world context. It begins with a new model of Hinduism, discusses how and
why Hindus view themselves in a distorted light, and then focuses on the
relationship between Hindu and Western thought.

Hinduism has many teachings on dharma that explain right living on all
levels, personally and collectively, socially and spiritually. It has
different *darSanas* or philosophies that allow us to understand
ourselves and the universe at the deepest level of the mind. It has many
manuals of *sâdhanâ* or spiritual practice that deal with all religious
practices from prayer and ritual, to sophisticated meditation
techniques. But it lacks a systematic and overall presentation of its
essence to the modern mind. We might say that approaching Hinduism is a
question of missing the forest because of the trees. Ram Swarup,
probably better than any other modern thinker, puts Hinduism into its
proper perspective so that we can understand its foundation and its
motivation.

*On Hinduism* shows how to revive and revitalize the tradition in a
practical way and to present it in the modern forum with clarity,
conviction and universality. It is a manual of Hindu resurgence, not
simply a commentary or set of personal observations. The first chapter
on "Sanatana Dharma: Anusmriti and *Anudhyâyana*" is a masterpiece in
this regard. It sets forth a new explication of Hinduism and its
principles that is perhaps the best primer on the religion - concise,
succinct and deep. While many great spiritual teachers have come out of
India in modern times, perhaps no one has formulated the tradition in
such a relevant manner.

An important issue is how different dharmic traditions should relate,
given the common missionary assault upon them, particularly Hinduism and
Buddhism, the two largest such traditions and the main forces of
enlightenment in the world. Unfortunately, many Hindus want to turn
Buddhism into another form of Hinduism without really looking into its
unique tenets and practices. Ram Swarup's study of Hinduism and Buddhism
is one of the best of its kind, pointing out both the similarities and
differences between these kindred paths and their need for a common
agenda in the modern scene. He shows how both can be united in a common
dharma, in which Buddhists can return to a broader Hindu ethos once they
understand Hinduism in a more genuine way. The missionary distortions of
Hinduism have even prevented other dharmic traditions from understanding
it. Ram Swarup dispels these illusions in this chapter. He also helps
Hindus understand how Buddhism works and how Buddhist ideas can be
relevant to them.

A similar important issue is the relationship between India, the
fountainhead of Asian culture, and Greece, the fountain-head of European
culture. We tend to think of both types of culture as different and as
constituting a dichotomy of East versus West, orient versus occident.
But if we really look at ancient Greeks and Hindus we discover much in
common. We find similar idealistic philosophies from Parmenides, Plato
and Plotinus to the Upanishads and the Gita. We find similar elaborate
mythologies with the many Greek and Hindu Gods, Goddesses and heroes. We
find similar religions of temple worship, the use of rituals and images,
and honoring sacred places in nature. Even the names of deities like
Zeus and Dyaus are cognate. A yogic type mysticism and belief in rebirth
can be found in the Greek mystery religions as well. We find a similar
concern for science and mathematics and early experiments with republics
in ancient India as well as in Greece. Ram Swarup draws such a
connection to enable us to reintegrate these two great sources of world
culture.

The dialogue between India and Europe is another vital concern. Over the
last century it has been more of a non-dialogue with the West ignoring
India and Indian thinkers slavishly imitating the West. The eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries in Europe saw either a romanticism about India
that was almost naive, or a colonialism that was generally ugly. The
same trends continue today in a New Age romanticism of India that is
seldom deep, and a disdain for India in the intellectual establishments
of the West that is at best condescending.

So far there has been little mature interaction between the thinkers of
India and Europe, either intellectually or spiritually, owing to
deficiencies in both camps. Ram Swarup addresses this issue with great
acumen, using the work of Wilhelm Halbfass, one of the few Westerners
with real insight into India, as the basis for discussion. Much of the
spiritual potential of the West lies hidden in its older and ongoing
connections to India. Ram Swarup opens the ground for such a mature
interaction. He follows this with an important essay on Aldous Huxley,
one of the few Western thinkers who had a real understanding of India
and its spiritual systems. Huxley provides a good foundation to launch
such an East-West dialogue that unfortunately was not followed by other
Western thinkers. Ram Swarup sets this process in motion again.

Two of his essays address the issue of education. Modern India has
followed a British model of education that it has modified in a Marxist
direction. That such an approach would fail to awaken the country or
bring about a real understanding of its older traditions is hardly
surprising. He shows how the current illiteracy in India is not the
product of traditional educational systems - which the British
dismantled in the nineteenth century - but of the damage to that
traditional system which began with them. Old India had a high rate of
literacy, particularly because of its educational system, its Sanskrit
and its *gurukulams*. Ram Swarup also shows how Hindu models of
education remain relevant in the modern world, where we need to
reintroduce spiritual values and models of consciousness to prevent the
moral decay and decline in intelligence that we see rapidly increasing
in the affluent West. America today imports a large number of its
scientists from Asia, including India, because its own system of
education, falling under the lassitude of a culture of self-indulgence,
is failing to produce them.

  
The Challenge of Ram Swarup's Work

Ram Swarup's work has already influenced a number of important groups in
the world, from the Swamis of *Hinduism Today* to some of Pagan Europe's
most profound thinkers. His influence has reached far, not by the power
of big organizations, a sophisticated media, or by any proselytizing
effort but by the sheer force and inevitability of his ideas. The
question is how will people respond to the challenges set forth by his
present volume?

How will the missionary beliefs respond to his critique of their
motivations as springing from an undeveloped spiritual consciousness?
Clearly an enlightened yogi does not need to convert the world to his
belief, nor will he formulate the Divine as an exclusive or jealous God
with a chosen people and day of judgement. Probably such groups will
ignore or condemn Ram Swarup as another unsaved and unregenerate Pagan.

How will Western intellectuals respond to an intellectually resurgent
Hinduism such as Ram Swarup indicates? They may also want to ignore or
belittle it, as the intellect tends to have its own arrogance and the
West has tried to hold a monopoly in the global thought field for some
time. But they will soon have to hear its voice and deal with its logic.
They will have to accept a deeper spiritual truth beyond their personal,
rationalistic or aesthetic approaches. They will have to recognize a
higher state of the *buddhi* or intellect that reflects dharmic truth,
rather than mere human theories. While many Western intellectuals are
examining Buddhism in a more sensitive light, they cannot leave its
sister religion of Hinduism far behind, though it has been more tainted
with missionary and Marxist stereotypes so that it is harder for them to
appreciate than Buddhism's more rational and humanistic creed.

Above all, how will modern Hindus, who are often lazy thinkers and lack
a global or historical perspective, respond? They passively accept
Marxist, missionary or colonial denigrations of their traditions, and
may be surprised with Ram Swarup's deeper and more thorough
presentation. They may feel initially disturbed to be woken up from
their slumber, even though it has only given them bad dreams. But Ram
Swarup's ideas can revitalize them not in a narrow or fundamentalist way
but to real creative action. His writings can serve as a lightning flash
to break the veil of ignorance and show a way beyond the darkness of
intellectual servitude and sloth that is perhaps even more weakening to
the soul than political bondage.

The future of India hangs in the balance of the intellectual and
spiritual challenge posed by Ram Swarup's work, with important
ramifications for the entire world. While most groups may not want to
listen to this voice, they can no longer pretend that it does not exist.

Hindus need their own voice and their own intellectual
self-determination. They should no longer accept their definition by
less evolved missionary religions or by unspiritual materialistic
creeds. It is time for them to question Eurocentric interpretations of
their history and culture that are based on colonial prejudices or
cultural arrogance. In this regard Ram Swarup is a great pioneer
pointing out the way out of this wilderness.

With Ram Swarup the Hindu voice has spoken clearly to the modern world.
The voice of the oldest and largest spiritual tradition of India or the
world, and its ancient rishi heritage, hag sounded its clarion call to
the minds and hearts of people today. It has taken the challenge of the
modern and scientific age to present a truth that is global and
universal. It has used reason but also brought in a higher yogic
perception - a truth of consciousness and self-realization not merely
material prosperity or monotheistic salvation as the ultimate goal of
life.

Many Hindu modern teachers have been too accommodating in their
definition of Hinduism and left it devoid of any real critical voice.
They say that you can find God by following faithfully whatever religion
you like -whether Hinduism, Christianity, Islam or Buddhism - as if the
differences of religious doctrine and practice had no meaning at all.
They give the impression that anything called a religion should be
accepted and the results can only be good. They have left behind the
great Hindu tradition of debate and turned the religion into a blind
acceptance of all creeds, including a whitewash of their history,
however bloody, and however anti-Hindu.

Part of this has been a sincere effort to be tolerant of other faiths,
and we should be open to what other people say and honor different
creeds. But perhaps a greater part of it has arisen from a lack of
self-confidence. Those under foreign rule tend to praise or flatter
their rulers out of fear. Those who have been told that their religion
is that of heathens or kafirs first respond by saying that their
religion is equal to any other, before taking a critical view of the
religions so rudely denigrating them.

Ram Swarup questions such politically comfortable statements of
religious accommodation and appeasement. Hinduism is a pluralistic path
that accepts One truth and many ways to it. It holds that all
individuals should be free to find the truth according to their nature
and temperament. However, like all things in human life religion is a
varied phenomenon and contains both the good and the bad, the high and
the low. That there are many paths does not mean that all paths can only
be good or that all must lead to the highest goal. A religion that does
not recognize liberation as the goal of life, that does not have a path
to Self-realization, that has no living yoga tradition cannot take you
to that Divine Self whatever you may do with it. This is not a statement
of intolerance or religious bigotry but the plain and honest truth that
cannot be ignored. You can't climb a mountain by digging a hole into the
ground, however well you can dig!

Hinduism is a religion with a strong sense of dharma. It cannot accept
anything or everything that calls itself a religion as true. From its
point of view religion should be a *moksha*-dharma and a yoga-*pantha*,
a teaching that gives inner liberation and projects a path to achieve
it. Its purpose is not to make one subservient to a particular God,
prophet, guru, savior, holy book, church or institution but to free us
from all external bondage. Religions which do this are not true
*moksha*-dharmas or spiritual paths but just additional forms of
conditioning that keep us trapped in the worldly mind and its egoistic
motives.

  
Conclusion

Most people, including Hindus, have never looked into what Hinduism
really is. If you ask people about Hinduism, most Westerners will have
quick answers about its polytheism, idolatry or castism, but if you ask
them about the Upanishads or the Gita, about Atman and Brahman, they
will have little to say. Most Western textbooks define Hinduism as a
conglomeration, an ethnic religion, a castist creed, or a worship of
many gods. Such people need to read Ram Swarup to really know what they
are dealing with in what is called Hinduism. He will not let them get
away with such a sloppy and superficial approach to what is perhaps
humanity's oldest heritage of spiritual knowledge.

Hinduism, perhaps more so than any religion, has always formulated
itself as a Sanatana Dharma, an eternal and universal tradition of truth
and natural law. While its formulation may be imperfect and worn by
time, it is hardly dead or out of date. It is like a great Banyan tree,
with many roots and branches, growing into the air as well as into the
earth, accommodating a great variety of creatures and reducible to no
pattern or conclusion.

Out of its background in the twentieth century have come such great
saints and sages as Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Ramana
Maharshi, and Anandamayi Ma to mention but a few. These great souls were
not conscious of themselves as sectarian Hindus opposed to other
religious beliefs but as part of Sanatana Dharma and its great lineages
and approaches. Ram Swarup unfolds this Sanatana Dharma with both a
panoramic vision and a pinpoint accuracy so that it comes alive to the
reader as an internal force of consciousness and light.

For those who really want to understand the heart and soul of Hindu
Dharma, the work of Ram Swarup is perhaps the best place to start. His
expression is lucid, modern and concise, but firmly rooted in ancient
traditions and a yogic understanding. He is aware of the many
misconceptions and systematically works to remove them to arrive at the
underlying truth that is helpful to all.

For those who want to understand the Hindu religion as a whole, Ram
Swarup's work is perhaps the best available guide. He is not speaking in
terms of any particular guru or *sampradâya* but about the essence of
the entire tradition, which pervades all of its multifarious
manifestations. He is going back to an older, perhaps more rigorous but
more honest presentation of this greater tradition which is beyond time
and person, and which stands fearless in itself, not bowing down to any
inferior creeds.

Let us hope that the message of Ram Swarup travels far and wide - that
people take the time and care to really listen to what he is saying and
contemplate it deeply. College students, particularly, need to hear his
views in order to remove the confusion caused by all the misinformation
about this venerable religion. Hindu teachers, who often find themselves
groping for words to explain their traditions to a modern audience,
should ponder over it thoroughly. Non-Hindus as well should look into
these writings that explore the essence of all religion and philosophy.
Though it may challenge worn patterns of thought, if not stir up
deep-seated prejudices, for those who accept his message, it will
ennoble their minds and hearts, and sharpen their discrimination to
reach a real understanding of our true nature and purpose in life.

May the Divine Mother, whose words are the Vedas and whose global
embodiment is India, again smile upon us!

DAVID FRAWLEY  
(Vamadeva Shastri)

April 4, 2000  
(Chaitra Shukla Pratipad,  
beginning of the year Vikrama or Victory)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
