+++
title = "08  Chapter 8         India and Greece"

+++
Chapter 8  
India and Greece

The movement of men and ideas from the West to the East is a recent
phenomenon. There was a time when the movement was in the opposite
direction and the East had gone to the West in a big way.

At that time, India's cultural frontiers too were wider than her
political frontiers and her ideas influenced lands and people far away
from her physically. Vedic India shared many of her Gods with Iran and
one of them, Mithra (*Mitra*), went on a long journey to the West.
Mithraea, temples dedicated to Mithra, have been found all over Syria,
Asia Minor, Spain and even in many Western ports. One Mithraeum was
found in London in 1954. Many relics have been found in Germany too, as
at Hedernheim, near Frankfurt-on-Main.

The great Manu makes a very interesting observation. He says that
originally the Paundrakas, Andhras, Dravidas, Yavanas, Shakas, Paradas,
Pahlvas, Chinas, Kiratas, Daradas and Khasas were Khsatriyas, but at
some stage they lost the guidance of the Brahmins; as a result, they
lapsed from their sacred sacraments (*kriyâlopa*) and lost their caste
(10.43-4). At what time and under what compulsions of history Brahmanic
guidance ceased is an interesting question.

  
Greeks

Hindu thought also exerted a great influence on ancient Greek thought as
M.E. Pococke shows in his *India in Greece*. It is believed that
Pythagoras visited Indian and learnt the doctrine of transmigration and
many ascetic practices from here. One meets many parallel ideas in the
Upanishads and Plato. These similarities are not fortuitous but they
emanated from a common deeper vision and life-philosophy. Apollonius the
"wise man of Tyana", perhaps the greatest saint of the Hellenistic
world, a contemporary of Jesus, visited the wise men of India and was
highly satisfied. Later on, he also visited Ethiopia to meet her naked
ascetics, who, he believed, had borrowed their spirituality from India.
But, as he already suspected, he did not find them worthy pupils of
India.

Pythagoras and Orphic mysteries stand very high in Greek religion and
they have family likeness with Hinduism. Lecky in his *History of
European* Morals quotes an old tradition in Greece that Pythagoras had
himself come to India and learnt philosophy from the gymnosophists. It
seems he believed in an "all-pervading soul" which is at least one
important attribute of Hindu *âtman*. He believed in rebirth or
transmigration; he taught and practised harmlessness or non-injury;
chastity was the leading virtue of his school of thought; he taught
silence; he taught that the end of man is to "become like God". Orphic
mysteries taught release (*lysis*) from all material entanglements,
which is close to moksha of the Hindus.

Pythagoras taught the doctrine of the witness, *drashTâ* of the Hindus.
He said that life is like a gathering at the Olympic Games, where some
come to buy and sell, others to play, but the best of them come to look
on. This is just like the Upanishads' two birds on a tree, one eating
its fruits and the other just looks on. It has reference to the witness
self of the Upanishads, the *kûTastha* of the Gita. In higher Greek
religion the doctrine of the life of a spectator holds a high place.

When we come to the period of recorded history, we find that India had
intimate contacts with Greece which at this time was more a part of Asia
than of Europe. Greek religion, philosophy and literature show lively
Indian influences. India even at this time was known for its wisdom and
many Greek philosophers like Democritus, Anaxarchus and Pyrrho visited
India and according to Lucianus, the Goddess of philosophy first
descended upon "the Indians, the mightiest nation upon the earth".

  
Apolionius

Apollonius of Tyna (born c. 4 AD), the great saint of the Greek world,
was a Pythogorian teacher, a great ascetic, a celebate, a vegetarian; he
was against every form of cruelty to animals; he protested against
gladiatorial shows. He was a great name throughout the Pagan world. Dio
Casius tells us that that Caracalla (211-216) erected a chapel to his
memory. Apuleius ranked him with Moses and Zoroaster. Lampridius tells
us that Alexander Severus included Apollonius with Abraham, and Orpheus
amongst his household Gods. For this very fact, he became a hated name
among the Christians. In their struggle against Christianity, Pagan
philosophers often invoked his name. Hierocles, proconsul of Bithynia
under Diocletian (c. 305) cited Apollonius' miracles to show that
miracles were not the peculiar property of Christianity. Eusebius and
later on Lactantius (c. 315) attacked Hierocles for this. But orthodox
Christians could not believe that there could be such a great ethical
and divine character outside the Christian fold. Augustine did not speak
ill of him but rebuked those who regarded him as equal of Jesus. Among
the early Christians he acquired the name of Antichrist, and he
continued to be berated by the Church. Even in the fifteenth century, he
was denounced as a detestable magician.

  
*Âtma-vâda* and Advaita

He visited India to meet its wise men. He met one Iarchus and was deeply
satisfied. The latter asked him: "What knowledge do you think we have
that you lack?" Apollonious replied: "It is my opinion that your ways
are wiser and much more godly. But if I were to find among you nothing
that I do not know, I would also have learned that there is nothing
further for me to learn." Iarchus told him: "You, our visitor, have
(already) a share of this wisdom, but yet not all of it." Then the
teaching began but what it was and about its nature nothing is said. The
biographer, however, relates many anecdotes and throws interesting
sidelights. He tells us that in their very first meeting, Iarchus told
Apollonius everything about him, his ancestry on his father's and
mother's side, his journey and the people he met and talks he had with
them. Apollonius was amazed. Iarchus also told him about Apollonius'
nature and said: "We discern every kind of soul, and have countless
clues to discover them." "Ask me whatever you like, since you have come
among men who know everything," said the chief of the Indian wise men to
his distinguished visitor. He in turn asked the Indians if they knew
themselves, expecting them to be like the Greeks in thinking it is
difficult to know oneself. But to his surprise, Iarchus replied: "We
know everything because we begin by knowing ourselves. None of us would
approach our kind of philosophy without knowing himself first."
Apollonius had no difficulty in accepting this statement for it was also
his own belief. He asked Iarchus what they thought they were, and the
latter replied: "Gods." And why? "Because we are good men," Iarchus said
(p. 80). Later on in his life when he used this doctrine before the
Emperor of Rome when he was being tried for instigating treason, he also
told him that Iarchus and Phraotes, the two Indians, "are the only
humans whom I consider Gods and worthy of being called so".

Apollonius discussed the Greek heroes with Iarchus, and he well knew
them. Iarchus said: "Troy was destroyed by the Achaeans that sailed
there then, and you Greeks have been destroyed by the tales about it.
You think the only heroes are those that attacked Troy, and so you
neglect a larger number of more godlike men produced by your own
country, by Egypt, and by India." Discussing Achilles, the hero of the
Trojan war, he remarked that Homer makes Achilles come to Troy for
Helen, and says that on his way he had captured twelve cities by sea and
eleven by land. Then he compares him with an old Indian hero - in fact,
he himself in an old incarnation - who founded sixty cities, most
esteemed in the country. And who could believe that "sacking cities is
more glorious than building them?" he asks. He further observes that "to
prove your courage defending the liberty of your own land is far better
than bringing slavery on a city, especially when it is because of a
woman who probably did not mind being carried off".

Earlier when he had met an Indian king at Taxila, the descendent of
Porus, the meeting with him was as memorable. The king lived simply and
wisely. Asked about his diet, the king replied: "Of wine I drink as much
as I sacrifice to the sun. What I catch in the hunt others eat: the
exercise is enough for me. My food is vegetables, the centre of
date-palms and their fruit and everything that grows beside the river. I
also eat many things that grow on trees: they are harvested by these
hands of mine."

Not that the king neglected kingly duties and military arts. He
practised javelin and discus even while he went out to bathe. Learning
shooting and archery went on while the king's party ate. "Shooting
through a sling, using a hair as a target, and drawing an outline of
one's own son in arrows while he stands against a board are others of
their convivial pursuits." These continued even while they dined and
drank.

The Greek saint was highly satisfied with his Indian visit. When he left
the Indian philosophers, he wrote to them that they had shown him "a
path through heaven," and that "I will continue to enjoy your
conversation as if still with you, if I have not drunk of the cup of
Tantalus in vain". He said that "he would recall all this to the Greeks,
and enjoy your conversations as if you were present". He often spoke of
these wise men to his audience later on in his life. To the Egyptians,
he said: "I saw the Indian Brahmans living on the earth and not on it,
walled without walls, and with no possessions except the whole world."

Apollonius believed that Egypt and Ethiopia derived their wisdom from
India, and that the Naked Philosophers of Ethiopia were emigrants from
India. He also believed that Pythagoras (about 500 BC) and his sect
derived their philosophy from India.

Apollonius's idea of a spiritual life was the same as that of the
Hindus. He believed that spirituality belongs to purified *buddhi* and
it was native to man and he distrusted those who hawked revealed truths.
He advised a Roman emperor, Euphrates, to "approve and pursue the kind
that is in accordance with nature. But avoid the kind that claims to be
inspired: people like that about tell lies about Gods, and urge us to do
many foolish things" (p. 130).

Once when asked why he studied philosophy, he said that it was "to know
the Gods and to understand men, since knowing oneself was less difficult
than knowing another" (p. 106).

He visited all the shrines and he could see his God in all the Gods. He
said that "none of the Gods refuse me, but they let me share their
roof". We are told by his biographer that Apollonius lived in different
sanctuaries, moving and changing from one to another. When criticized
for this, he said, "Even the Gods do not live in heaven all the time.
They travel to Ethiopia, to Olympia and to Athos. I think it illogical
that the Gods travel around every country of mankind, while men do not
visit all the Gods" (p. 103).

It seemed that while he was outside the Greek and Roman world visiting
barbarian countries which included India, all shrines were open to him.

It seems that it was not the custom even in Rome, so hospitable to all
the Gods, for Telesinus, a Roman consul commented: "The barbarians have
anticipated the Romans in a very praise-worthy deed."

He spoke of two Zeuses: one the statue of Zeus made by Phidias at
Olympia; it was seated since that was the decision of the artist. But
there was also another Zeus, Homer's Zeus "whom the poet describes in
many shapes, and who is a more marvellous creation than the Zeus of
ivory; for this Zeus was visible on earth, while the other was supposed
to be in everything in the universe"[1](#1) (p. 90-91).

Apolonious was not only open to various Gods, he was open to worshipping
them with different rites. Not to him one rite or creed. When he met the
wise men of India, he wanted to participate in all their religious
worships. "I would certainly be doing a wrong to the Caucasus and the
Indus, which I passed coming here to see you, if I did not steep myself
in all your rites," he told the chief of the wisemen of India.

He practised non-injury to living beings. On one occasion he refused
even when invited even by a kinge to participate in the chase. He
believed in non-injury to living beings. He made no blood sacrifice.
Apollonious said that "men make virtuous requests when their sacrifices
are pure"; he said that "he believed that the Gods shared these opinion
about sacrifice". He was accused of being a magician, of being able to
foresee. To this he answered that his food was different from other men;
that it was light which "keeps my senses in a kind of mysterious
clarity, and prevents cloudiness from affecting them; and causes me to
discern everything that is and will be, as if it were reflected in a
mirror... Gods are aware of things before they happen, men when they
happen, and wise men when they are about to happen" (p. 218-9).

Apollonius explains why he and Pythagoras stayed away from meat and used
linen in their dress: He said that Earth grows everything for mankind
and those who are willing to live at peace with the animals need
nothing. But some "disobey the earth and sharpen knives against the
animals to gain clothing and food. The Indian Brahmans disapproved of
this personally and taught the Naked Philosophers of Egypt to disapprove
of it too. From there Pythagoras, who was the first Greek to associate
with Egyptians, borrowed the principle. He let the earth keep living
creatures, but held that what the earth grows is pure, and so lived off
that because it was sufficient to feed body and soul. Clothing made from
dead creatures, which most people wear, he considered impure; he dressed
in linen and, for the same reason, made his shoes of plaited bark. He
derived many advantages from this purity, above all that of perceiving
his own soul" (p. 212).

He believed in rebirth. Pythogoras had many births. In one birth, he
also fought at Troy, and then "passed into several bodies according to
the law of *Adrasteia*, whereby souls migrte. (according to tradition, a
name of Namesis derived from an altar erected to her by Adrastus. But
could it be Hindu *adrishTa* in the ultimate analysis?). Finally, he
returned to human form and was born the son. of Mensarchides of Samos,
so that he became a wise man who had been a barbarian, an Ionian who had
been a Trojan, and a man so immortal that he did not even forget he had
been Euphorbus" (p. 212). Apollonius also knew his past and future
births though as he himself says, "I did not announce before the Greeks
what my soul had changed into or changed from in the past, or what it
will in future, even though I know" (p. 215). Apollonius believed in the
doctrine of the immortality of the soul but discoursed his pupils from
meddling too much in such questions:

"The soul's an immortal thing, not yours to own  
But Providence's. When the body wastes,  
Like a swift horse that breaks its bonds, the soul  
Leaps nimbly out, and mingles with light air,  
Shunning its hatred, dreary servitude.  
But what is this to you, who when you've gone  
Will know it well? And why among the living  
Bother yourself with thinking on such things?"

  
Buddhism goes West

In later times, Buddhism followed the track left by the Upanishadic
teachers. Emperor Ashoka facilitated but did not initiate the process.
In fact, long before he came on the scene, there were contacts,
commercial and cultural, between India and Egypt through Yemen for a
thousand years. The celebrated Girnar inscription of King Ashoka says
that Buddhism was followed even in the domain of Antiochus, the Greek
king whose empire included Syria, Phoenicia, Babylonia, Persia, Medea
and Abyssinia.

Later on, though Buddhism withdrew from this region, the memory of this
contact lingered for a long time. Alberuni (997-1030 AD) tells us that
"in former times, Khurasan, Persia, Irak, Mosul the country upto the
frontiers of Syria, was Buddhistic". Later on it "had to emigrate to the
countries east of Balkh" when King Gushtasp came under the influence of
Zaruthusthra's religion and his son, Isfendiyar, persecuted the
Buddhists. But though Buddhism withdrew, it kept exerting its influence.
According to the same authority, when the prophet Mani (216-76 AD) was
banished from Iranshahr, he went to India, the usual asylum for those
who faced religious persecution at home. Here he learnt the doctrine of
transmigration and incorporated it into his own system. Later, through
Manichaeism and other parallel channels. it became part of early
Christianity.

  
Darkness descends on the Mediterranean World

A new phenomenon was taking place all over the Mediteranean world. While
Rome was expanding outwards, it was contracting internally and losing
inwardness. Its deeper spirituality connected with the names of
Pythagoras, Plato, Stoics, and Plotinus began to withdraw within.
Whether there was something in the new social and political environment
or there was a change in the psyche is difficult to say; but old
spirituality was getting to be understood less and less. On the other
hand, there was a demand for Saviours and there were Saviours all
around. A spirituality of hell and heaven, and last day, apocalyptical
and millenarian, occupied the stage. Dogmas were fashionable. The
external mind was taking over and projecting its own religions and Gods.
A spirituality, not of seekers, but useful and serviceable to the kings
was in the forefront.

This new religious cast of mind was forging a new iron-curtain, a far
more effective one than a physical one. The new mind that was taking
over was incapable of understanding deeper things of the spirit; it
understood dogmas and creeds; it dropped the law of karma, the theory of
the Self. Antoninus, a neo-Platonist of the 4th century predicted that
"a fabulous and formless darkness is about to tyrannize over all that is
beautiful on earth" (*Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics*, 9.317).

But Indian spirituality remained an attraction throughout even when
Europe was getting confused and swept off its feet. Plotinus whose name
shines even up to this day, wanted to visit India.

Hindu thought, however, continued to exert influence on Europe through
various channels. One channel was the works of Dionysius the Arepogite.

His work were seen and translated by John Scotus Erigena of the 9th
century. He questioned the presence of Christ in consecrated bread and
wine. He exalted reason above Biblical and clerical authority. He said
that while "all authority that is not approved by true reason seems
weak, but true reason, since it rests on its own strength, needs no
reinforcement by any authority". He said that "God is everything that
truly is, since He makes all things and is made in all things"; he also
said that there was no creation in time, that God was neither masculine
nor faminine; that God as "Father" merely meant that he was the creative
substance or essence of every thing, and "Son" merely meant the divine
Wisdom according to which all things are made or governed, and "Spirit"
merely meant life and vitality of creation. This was dissolvent of the
whole Trinity. He also said that heaven and hell are not places, but
conditions of the soul. He said that all things are immortal, that
animals too, like men, have souls that pass back, after death, into God
or creative spirit from whom they emanated, that all history is a vast
outward flow of creation by emanation, and an irrestible inward tide
that finally draws all things back into God. Pope Nicholas in 865 wrote
to Charles the Bald either to send John to Rome for trial, or dismiss
him from the Palace School, "that he may no longer give poison to those
who seek for bread". We do not know what happened but we hear no more of
him. William of Malmesbury relates that he "came to England and our
monastery, as report says; was pierced with iron pens of the boys whom
he instructed", and died from the results. He was later on forgotten but
in the thirteenth century his book *De divisions naturae* was exhumed
from oblivion; it was condemned by the Council of Sens (1225), and Pope
Honorious III ordered that all copies should be sent to Rome and there
be burned (Will Durant, *The Age of Faith*, pp. 477-79).  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) It does not mean Apollonius was opposed to image-worship. We
are told of an interesting dialogue he had on the subject with an
Egyptian priest. Apollonius defended the Greek fashion of worshipping
the Divinity under the form of human image, sculptured by Phidias and
Praxiteles, this being the noblest form we can conceive and therefore
the least inadequate to the Divine perfections. Speaking for the
Egyptian fashion of worshipping the Deity in the form of animals, the
Egyptian priest said that as it is blasphemous to attempt to conceive an
image of the Deity, the Egyptians therefore concentrate the imagination
of the worshipper on objects that are plainly allegorical or symbolical,
and do not pretend to offer any such image (Philostraus, *Apollonius of
Tyna*, vi. 19).

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
