+++
title = "v1"

+++
## Contents

Part I—Volume I

    Page   Introductory Essay on Caste  1   Articles on the Religions and Sects of the People of the Central Provinces  199   Glossary of Minor Castes and Other Articles, Synonyms, Subcastes, Titles and Names of Exogamous Septs or Clans  337   Subject Index  419   

Part II—Volumes II, III and IV

Descriptive Articles on the Principal Castes and Tribes of the Central Provinces  1

## Detailed List of Contents

Part I 

Articles on Religions and Sects 

*The articles which are considered to be of most general interest are shown in capitals* 

+ Arya Samāj Religion 201  
+ Brahmo Samāj Religion 208  
+ Dādupanthi Sect 215  
+ Dhāmi Sect 216  
+ Jain Religion 219  
+ Kabīrpanthi Sect 232  
+ Lingāyat Sect 244  
+ Muhammadan Religion 247  
+ Nānakpanthi Sect 277  
+ Parmārthi Sect 281  
+ Pārsi or Zoroastrian Religion 284  
+ Saiva Sect 302  
+ Sākta Sect 304  
+ Satnāmi Sect 307  
+ Sikh Religion 317  
+ Smārta Sect 325  
+ Swāmi-Nārāyan Sect 326  
+ Vaishnava Sect 330  
+ Vām-Mārgi Sect 333  
+ Wahhābi Sect 335  

Articles on Minor Castes and Miscellaneous Notices Included in the Glossary 

+ Agamudayan.  
+ Alia.  
+ Arab.  
+ Are.  
+ Arora.  
+ Bahelia.  
+ Bahrūpia.  
+ Bānka.  
+ Bargāh.  
+ Bayar.  
+ Belwār.  
+ Besta.  
+ Bhānd.  
+ Bhātia.  
+ Bhima.  
+ Bhona.  
+ Bind.  
+ Birhor.  
+ Bopchi.  
+ Chenchuwār.  
+ Chero.  
+ Dāngur.  
+ Daraihān.  
+ Dhālgar.  
+ Dhera.  
+ Dohor.  
+ Gāndli.  
+ Girgira.  
+ Goyanda.  
+ Hatwa.  
+ Jasondhi.  
+ Jokhāra.  
+ Kāmad.  
+ Kāmāthi.  
+ Kamma.  
+ Kammala.  
+ Kandra.  
+ Kāst.  

+ Khadāl.  
+ Khadra.  
+ Kotwār.  
+ Kumrāwat.  
+ Kundera.  
+ Londhāri.  
+ Mādgi.  
+ Malyār.  
+ Mangan.  
+ Marori.  
+ Medara.  
+ Mīrdha.  
+ Mukeri.  
+ Mutrāsi.  
+ Nagārchi.  
+ Otāri.  
+ Pābia.  
+ Pahalwān.  
+ Panchāl.  
+ Pandra.  
+ Parka.  
+ Periki.  
+ Redka.  
+ Rohilla.  
+ Sais.  
+ Santāl.  
+ Sātani.  
+ Segidi.  
+ Siddi.  
+ Sidhira.  
+ Sikligar.  
+ Solaha.  
+ Sonkar.  
+ Tānti.  
+ Tirmale.  
+ Tiyar.  
+ Vellāla.  
+ Wakkaliga.  

Part II—Vol. II 

Articles on Castes and Tribes of the Central Provinces in Alphabetical Order 

+ Agaria \(*Iron-worker*\) 3  
+ Agharia \(*Cultivator*\) 8  
+ Aghori \(*Religious mendicant*\) 13  
+ Ahīr \(*Herdsman and milkman*\) 18  
+ Andh \(*Tribe, now cultivators*\) 38  
+ Arakh \(*Hunter*\) 40  
+ Atāri \(*Scent-seller*\) 42  
+ Audhelia \(*Labourer*\) 45  
+ Badhak \(*Robber*\) 49  
+ Bahna \(*Cotton-cleaner*\) 69  
+ Baiga \(*Forest tribe*\) 77  
+ Bairāgi \(*Religious mendicants*\) 93  
+ Balāhi \(*Labourer and village watchman*\) 105  
+ Balija \(*Cultivator*\) 108  
+ Bania \(*Merchant and moneylender*\) 111  
+ Subcastes of Bania     
	+ Agarwāla.  
	+ Agrahari.  
	+ Ajudhiabāsi.  
	+ Asāthi.  
	+ Charnāgri.  
	+ Dhūsar.  
	+ Dosar.  
	+ Gahoi.  
	+ Golapūrab.  
	+ Kasarwāni.  

	+ Kasaundhan.  
	+ Khandelwāl.  
	+ Lād.  
	+ Lingāyat.  
	+ Maheshri.  
	+ Nema.  
	+ Oswāl.  
	+ Parwār.  
	+ Srimāli.  
	+ Umre.  

+ Banjāra \(*Pack-carrier*\) 162  
+ Barai \(*Betel-vine grower and seller*\) 192  
+ Barhai \(*Carpenter*\) 199  
+ Bāri \(*Maker of leaf-plates*\) 202  
+ Basdewa \(*Cattle-dealer and religious mendicant*\) 204  
+ Basor \(*Bamboo-worker*\) 208  
+ Bedar \(*Soldier and public service*\) 212  
+ Beldār \(*Digger and navvy*\) 215  
+ Beria \(*Vagabond gipsy*\) 220  
+ Bhaina \(*Forest tribe*\) 225  
+ Bhāmta \(*Criminal tribe and labourers*\) 234  
+ Bharbhūnja \(*Grain-parcher*\) 238  
+ Bharia \(*Forest tribe*\) 242  
+ Bhāt \(*Bard and genealogist*\) 251  
+ Bhatra \(*Forest tribe*\) 271  
+ Bhīl \(*Forest tribe*\) 278  
+ Bhilāla \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 293  
+ Bhishti \(*Water-man*\) 298  
+ Bhoyar \(*Cultivator*\) 301  
+ Bhuiya \(*Forest tribe*\) 305  
+ Bhulia \(*Weaver*\) 319  
+ Bhunjia \(*Forest tribe*\) 322  
+ Binjhwār \(*Cultivator*\) 329  
+ Bishnoi \(*Cultivator*\) 337  
+ Bohra \(*Trader*\) 345  
+ Brāhman \(*Priest*\) 351  
+ Subcastes of Brāhman     
	+ Ahivāsi.  
	+ Jijhotia.  
	+ Kanaujia, Kanyakubja.  
	+ Khedāwāl.  
	+ Mahārāshtra.  
	+ Maithil.  

	+ Mālwi.  
	+ Nāgar.  
	+ Nāramdeo.  
	+ Sanādhya.  
	+ Sarwaria.  
	+ Utkal.  

+ Chadār \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 400  
+ Chamār \(*Tanner and labourer*\) 403 
+ Chasa \(*Cultivator*\) 424  
+ Chauhān \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 427  
+ Chhīpa \(*Dyer and calico-printer*\) 429  
+ Chitāri \(*Painter*\) 432  
+ Chitrakathi \(*Picture showman*\) 438  
+ Cutchi \(*Trader and shopkeeper*\) 440  
+ Dahāit \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 444  
+ Daharia \(*Cultivator*\) 453  
+ Dāngi \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 457  
+ Dāngri \(*Vegetable-grower*\) 463  
+ Darzi \(*Tailor*\) 466  
+ Dewār \(*Beggar and musician*\) 472  
+ Dhākar \(*Illegitimate, cultivator*\) 477  
+ Dhangar \(*Shepherd*\) 480  
+ Dhānuk \(*Bowman, labourer*\) 484  
+ Dhanwār \(*Forest tribe*\) 488  
+ Dhīmar \(*Fisherman, water-carrier, and household servant*\) 502  
+ Dhoba \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 515  
+ Dhobi \(*Washerman*\) 519  
+ Dhuri \(*Grain-parcher*\) 527  
+ Dumāl \(*Cultivator*\) 530  
+ Fakīr \(*Religious mendicant*\) 537  

Part II—Vol. III 

+ Gadaria \(*Shepherd*\) 3  
+ Gadba \(*Forest tribe*\) 9  
+ Gānda \(*Weaver and labourer*\) 14  
+ Gandhmāli \(*Uriya village priests and temple servants*\) 17  
+ Gārpagāri \(*Averter of hailstorms*\) 19  
+ Gauria \(*Snake-charmer and juggler*\) 24  
+ Ghasia \(*Grass-cutter*\) 27  
+ Ghosi \(*Buffalo-herdsman*\) 32  
+ Golar \(*Herdsman*\) 35  
+ Gond \(*Forest tribe and cultivator*\) 39  
+ Gond-Gowāri \(*Herdsman*\) 143  
+ Gondhali \(*Religious mendicant*\) 144  
+ Gopāl \(*Vagrant criminal caste*\) 147  
+ Gosain \(*Religious mendicant*\) 150  
+ Gowāri \(*Herdsman*\) 160  
+ Gūjar \(*Cultivator*\) 166 
+ Gurao \(*Village Priest*\) 175  
+ Halba \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\) 182  
+ Halwai \(*Confectioner*\) 201  
+ Hatkar \(*Soldier, shepherd*\) 204  
+ Hijra \(*Eunuch, mendicant*\) 206  
+ Holia \(*Labourer, curing hides*\) 212  
+ Injhwār \(*Boatman and fisherman*\) 213  
+ Jādam \(*Cultivator*\) 217  
+ Jādua \(*Criminal caste*\) 219  
+ Jangam \(*Priest of the Lingāyat sect*\) 222  
+ Jāt \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 225  
+ Jhādi Telenga \(*Illegitimate, labourer*\) 238  
+ Jogi \(*Religious mendicant and pedlar*\) 243  
+ Joshi \(*Astrologer and village priest*\) 255  
+ Julāha \(*Weaver*\) 279  
+ Kachera \(*Maker of glass bangles*\) 281  
+ Kāchhi \(*Vegetable-grower*\) 285  
+ Kadera \(*Firework-maker*\) 288  
+ Kahār \(*Palanquin-bearer and household servant*\) 291  
+ Kaikāri \(*Basket-maker and vagrant*\) 296  
+ Kalanga \(*Soldier, cultivator*\) 302  
+ Kalār \(*Liquor vendor*\) 306  
+ Kamār \(*Forest tribe*\) 323  
+ Kanjar \(*Gipsies and prostitutes*\) 331  
+ Kāpewār \(*Cultivator*\) 342  
+ Karan \(*Writer and clerk*\) 343  
+ Kasai \(*Butcher*\) 346  
+ Kasār \(*Worker in brass*\) 369  
+ Kasbi \(*Prostitute*\) 373  
+ Katia \(*Cotton-spinner*\) 384  
+ Kawar \(*Forest tribe and cultivator*\) 389  
+ Kāyasth \(*Village accountant, writer and clerk*\) 404  
+ Kewat \(*Boatman and fisherman*\) 422  
+ Khairwār \(*Forest tribe; boilers of catechu*\) 427  
+ Khandait \(*Soldier, cultivator*\) 436  
+ Khangār \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 439  
+ Kharia \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\) 445  
+ Khatīk \(*Mutton-butcher*\) 453  
+ Khatri \(*Merchant*\) 456  
+ Khojāh \(*Trader and shopkeeper*\) 461  
+ Khond \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 464  
+ Kīr \(*Cultivator*\) 481  
+ Kirār \(*Cultivator*\) 485 
+ Kohli \(*Cultivator*\) 493  
+ Kol \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\) 500  
+ Kolām \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 520  
+ Kolhāti \(*Acrobat*\) 527  
+ Koli \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 532  
+ Kolta \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 537  
+ Komti \(*Merchant and shopkeeper*\) 542  
+ Kori \(*Weaver and labourer*\) 545  
+ Korku \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\) 550  
+ Korwa \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 571  
+ Koshti \(*Weaver*\) 581  

Part II—Vol. IV 

+ Kumhār \(*Potter*\) 3  
+ Kunbi \(*Cultivator*\) 16  
+ Kunjra \(*Greengrocer*\) 50  
+ Kuramwār \(*Shepherd*\) 52  
+ Kurmi \(*Cultivator*\) 55  
+ Lakhera \(*Worker in lac*\) 104  
+ Lodhi \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 112  
+ Lohār \(*Blacksmith*\) 120  
+ Lorha \(*Growers of* san-*hemp*\) 126  
+ Mahār \(*Weaver and labourer*\) 129  
+ Mahli \(*Forest tribe*\) 146  
+ Majhwār \(*Forest tribe*\) 149  
+ Māl \(*Forest tribe*\) 153  
+ Māla \(*Cotton-weaver and labourer*\) 156  
+ Māli \(*Gardener and vegetable-grower*\) 159  
+ Mallāh \(*Boatman and fisherman*\) 171  
+ Māna \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 172  
+ Mānbhao \(*Religious mendicant*\) 176  
+ Māng \(*Labourer and village musician*\) 184  
+ Māng-Garori \(*Criminal caste*\) 189  
+ Manihār \(*Pedlar*\) 193  
+ Mannewār \(*Forest tribe*\) 195  
+ Marātha \(*Soldier, cultivator and service*\) 198  
+ Mehtar \(*Sweeper and scavenger*\) 215  
+ Meo \(*Tribe*\) 233  
+ Mīna or Deswāli \(*Non-Aryan tribe, cultivator*\) 235  
+ Mirāsi \(*Bard and genealogist*\) 242  
+ Mochi \(*Shoemaker*\) 244 
+ Mowar \(*Cultivator*\) 250  
+ Murha \(*Digger and navvy*\) 252  
+ Nagasia \(*Forest tribe*\) 257  
+ Nāhal \(*Forest tribe*\) 259  
+ Nai \(Barber\) 262  
+ Naoda \(*Boatman and fisherman*\) 283  
+ Nat \(*Acrobat*\) 286  
+ Nunia \(*Salt-refiner, digger and navvy*\) 294  
+ Ojha \(*Augur and soothsayer*\) 296  
+ Oraon \(*Forest tribe*\) 299  
+ Pāik \(*Soldier, cultivator*\) 321  
+ Panka \(*Labourer and village watchman*\) 324  
+ Panwār Rājpūt \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 330  
+ Pardhān \(*Minstrel and priest*\) 352  
+ Pārdhī \(*Hunter and fowler*\) 359  
+ Parja \(*Forest tribe*\) 371  
+ Pāsi \(*Toddy-drawer and labourer*\) 380  
+ Patwa \(*Maker of silk braid and thread*\) 385  
+ Pindāri \(*Freebooter*\) 388  
+ Prabhu \(*Writer and clerk*\) 399  
+ Rāghuvansi \(*Cultivator*\) 403  
+ Rājjhar \(*Agricultural labourer*\) 405  
+ Rājpūt \(*Soldier and landowner*\) 410  
+ Rājpūt Clans     
	+ Baghel.  
	+ Bāgri.  
	+ Bais.  
	+ Baksaria.  
	+ Banāphar.  
	+ Bhadauria.  
	+ Bisen.  
	+ Bundela.  
	+ Chandel.  
	+ Chaubān.  
	+ Dhākar.  
	+ Gaharwār.  
	+ Gaur.  
	+ Haihaya.  

	+ Hūna.  
	+ Kachhwāha.  
	+ Nāgvansi.  
	+ Nikumbh.  
	+ Pāik.  
	+ Parihār.  
	+ Rāthor.  
	+ Sesodia.  
	+ Solankhi.  
	+ Somvansi.  
	+ Sūrajvansi.  
	+ Tomara.  
	+ Yādu.  

+ Rajwār \(*Forest tribe*\) 470  
+ Rāmosi \(*Village watchmen and labourers, formerly thieves*\) 472  
+ Rangrez \(*Dyer*\) 477  
+ Rautia \(*Forest tribe and cultivators, formerly soldiers*\) 479  
+ Sanaurhia \(*Criminal thieving caste*\) 483  
+ Sānsia \(*Vagrant criminal tribe*\) 488  
+ Sānsia \(Uria\) \(*Mason and digger*\) 496  
+ Savar \(*Forest tribe*\) 500  
+ Sonjhara \(*Gold-washer*\) 509  
+ Sudh \(*Cultivator*\) 514 
+ Sunār \(*Goldsmith and silversmith*\) 517  
+ Sundi \(*Liquor distiller*\) 534  
+ Tamera \(*Coppersmith*\) 536  
+ Taonla \(*Soldier and labourer*\) 539  
+ Teli \(*Oilman*\) 542  
+ Thug \(*Criminal community of murderers by strangulation*\) 558  
+ Turi \(*Bamboo-worker*\) 588  
+ Velama \(*Cultivator*\) 593  
+ Vidur \(*Village accountant, clerk and writer*\) 596  
+ Wāghya \(*Religious mendicant*\) 603  
+ Yerūkala \(*Criminal thieving caste*\) 606  

Note.—The Gonds are the most important of the non-Aryan or primitive tribes, and their social customs are described in detail. The Baiga, Bhīl, Kawar, Khond, Kol, Korku and Korwa are other important tribes. The two representative cultivating castes are the Kurmis and Kunbis, and the articles on them include detailed descriptions of Hindu social customs, and some information on villages, houses, dress, food and manner of life. Articles in which subjects of general interest are treated are Darzi \(clothes\), Sunār \(ornaments\), Kachera and Lakhera \(bangles\), Nai \(hair\), Kalār \(veneration of alcoholic liquor\), Bania \(moneylending and interest\), Kasai \(worship and sacrifice of domestic animals\), Joshi \(the Hindu calendar and personal names\), Bhāt \(suicide\), Dahait \(significance of the umbrella\), and Kanjar \(connection of Indian and European gipsies\). The articles on Badhak, Sānsia and Thug are compiled from Sir William Sleeman’s reports on these communities of dacoits and murderers, whose suppression he achieved. For further information the Subject Index may be consulted. 

## Maps

+ Map of India *Frontispiece*  
+ Map of the Central Provinces  
+ Map of the Central Provinces, showing principal linguistic or racial divisions 6  

## Illustrations

Volume I 

+ 1. Hindu temple of the god Siva 16  
+ 2. Hindu sculptures 26  
+ 3. Peasant’s hut 40  
+ 4. Group of religious mendicants 56  
+ 5. Drawing water from the village well 72  
+ 6. Gāyatri or sacred verse personified as a goddess 108  
+ 7. Image of the god Jagannāth, a form of Vishnu 118  
+ 8. The god Rāma, an incarnation of Vishnu, with attendant deities 144  
+ 9. Hindu bathing party 158  
+ 10. Pilgrims carrying Ganges water 184  
+ 11. A meeting of the Arya Samāj for investing boys with the sacred thread 202  
+ 12. Jain temples at Muktagiri, Betul 220  
+ 13. Jain ascetics with cloth before mouth and sweeping-brush 224  
+ 14. Jain gods in attitude of contemplation 228  
+ 15. Jain temple in Seoni 230  
+ 16. Kabīr 232  
+ 17. Beggar on artificial horse at the Muharram festival 248  
+ 18. Carrying the horse-shoe at the Muharram festival 252  
+ 19. Tāzia or tombs of Hussain at the Muharram festival 256  
+ 20. Famous Tāzia at Khandwa 260  
+ 21. Representing a tiger at the Muharram festival 272  
+ 22. Temple of Siva at Bāndakpur, near Damoh 302  
+ 23. Images of Siva and his consort Devi, or Pārvati, with the bull and tiger 304  
+ 24. Devotees, possessed, embracing each other, while supported on tridents, at Siva’s fair at Pachmarhi 306  
+ 25. Image of the prophet Swāmi Nārāyan in the Teli temple at Burhānpur 326  
+ 26. Images of Rāma, Lachman and Sīta, with attendants 330  
+ 27. Image of Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, the consort of Vishnu, with attendant 332  
+ 28. Image of the boar incarnation of Vishnu 334  
+ 29. Bahrūpia impersonating the goddess Kāli 344  
+ 30. Dāsari religious mendicant with discus and conch-shell of Vishnu 406  

Volume II 

+ 31. Aghori mendicant 14  
+ 32. Ahīrs decorated with cowries for the Stick Dance at Diwāli 18  
+ 33. Image of Krishna as Murlidhar or the flute-player, with attendant deities 28  
+ 34. Ahīr dancers in Diwāli costume 32  
+ 35. Pinjāra cleaning cotton 72  
+ 36. Baiga village, Bālāghāt District 88  
+ 37. Hindu mendicants with sect-marks 94  
+ 38. Anchorite sitting on iron nails 98  
+ 39. Pilgrims carrying water of the river Nerbudda 100  
+ 40. *Coloured Plate*: Examples of Tilaks or sect-marks worn on the forehead 102  
+ 41. Group of Mārwāri Bania women 112  
+ 42. Image of the god Ganpati carried in procession 116  
+ 43. The elephant-headed god Ganpati. His conveyance is a rat, which can be seen as a little blob between his feet 120  
+ 44. Mud images made and worshipped at the Holi festival 126  
+ 45. Bania’s shop 128  
+ 46. Banjāra women with the *singh* or horn 184  
+ 47. Group of Banjāra women 188  
+ 48. Basors making baskets of bamboo 210  
+ 49. Bhāt with his *putla* or doll 256  
+ 50. Group of Bhīls 278  
+ 51. Tantia Bhīl, a famous dacoit 282  
+ 52. Group of Bohras at Burhānpur \(Nimār\) 346  
+ 53. Brāhman worshipping his household gods 380  
+ 54. Brāhman bathing party 384  
+ 55. Brāhman Pujāris or priests 390  
+ 56. Group of Marātha Brāhman men 392  
+ 57. Group of Nāramdeo Brāhman women 396  
+ 58. Group of Nāramdeo Brāhman men 398  
+ 59. Chamārs tanning and working in leather 416  
+ 60. Chamārs cutting leather and making shoes 418  
+ 61. Chhīpa or calico-printer at work 430  
+ 62. Dhīmar or fisherman’s hut 502  
+ 63. Fishermen in dug-outs or hollowed tree trunks 506  
+ 64. Group of Gurujwāle Fakīrs 538 

Volume III 

+ 65. Gond women grinding corn 42  
+ 66. Palace of the Gond kings of Garha-Mandla at Rāmnagar 46  
+ 67. Gonds on a journey 62  
+ 68. Killing of Rāwan, the demon king of Ceylon, from whom the Gonds are supposed to be descended 114  
+ 69. Woman about to be swung round the post called Meghnāth 116  
+ 70. Climbing the pole for a bag of sugar 118  
+ 71. Gonds with their bamboo carts at market 122  
+ 72. Gond women, showing tattooing on backs of legs 126  
+ 73. Māria Gonds in dancing costume 136  
+ 74. Gondhali musicians and dancers 144  
+ 75. Gosain mendicant 150  
+ 76. Alakhwāle Gosains with faces covered with ashes 152  
+ 77. Gosain mendicants with long hair 154  
+ 78. Famous Gosain Mahant. Photograph taken after death 156  
+ 79. Gūjar village proprietress and her land agent 168  
+ 80. Guraos with figures made at the Holi festival called Gangour 176  
+ 81. Group of Gurao musicians with their instruments 180  
+ 82. Ploughing with cows and buffaloes in Chhattīsgarh 182  
+ 83. Halwai or confectioner’s shop 202  
+ 84. Jogi mendicants of the Kanphata sect 244  
+ 85. Jogi musicians with *sārangi* or fiddle 250  
+ 86. Kaikāris making baskets 298  
+ 87. Kanjars making ropes 332  
+ 88. A group of Kasārs or brass-workers 370  
+ 89. Dancing girls and musicians 374  
+ 90. Girl in full dress and ornaments 378  
+ 91. Old type of sugarcane mill 494  
+ 92. Group of Kol women 512  
+ 93. Group of Kolams 520  
+ 94. Korkus of the Melghāt hills 550  
+ 95. Korku women in full dress 556  
+ 96. Koshti men dancing a figure, holding strings and beating sticks 582 

Volume IV 

+ 97. Potter at his wheel 4  
+ 98. Group of Kunbis 16  
+ 99. Figures of animals made for Pola festival 40  
+ 100. Hindu boys on stilts 42  
+ 101. Throwing stilts into the water at the Pola festival 46  
+ 102. Carrying out the dead 48  
+ 103. Pounding rice 60  
+ 104. Sowing 84  
+ 105. Threshing 86  
+ 106. Winnowing 88  
+ 107. Women grinding wheat and husking rice 90  
+ 108. Group of women in Hindustāni dress 92  
+ 109. *Coloured Plate*: Examples of spangles worn by women on the forehead 106  
+ 110. Weaving: sizing the warp 142  
+ 111. Winding thread 144  
+ 112. Bride and bridegroom with marriage crowns 166  
+ 113. Bullocks drawing water with *mot* 170  
+ 114. Māng musicians with drums 186  
+ 115. Statue of Marātha leader, Bīmbāji Bhonsla, in armour 200  
+ 116. Image of the god Vishnu as Vithoba 248  
+ 117. Coolie women with babies slung at the side 256  
+ 118. Hindu men showing the *choti* or scalp-lock 272  
+ 119. Snake-charmer with cobras 292  
+ 120. Transplanting rice 340  
+ 121. Group of Pardhāns 350  
+ 122. Little girls playing 400  
+ 123. Gujarāti girls doing figures with strings and sticks 402  
+ 124. Ornaments 524  
+ 125. Teli’s oil-press 544  
+ 126. The Goddess Kāli 574  
+ 127. Wāghya mendicants 604 

