+++
title = "v2"

+++
Part II

## Contents of Volume II

Articles on Castes and Tribes of the Central Provinces in Alphabetical Order

*The articles which are considered to be of most general interest are shown in capitals* 

+ Agaria \(*Iron-worker*\) 3  
+ Agharia \(*Cultivator*\) 8  
+ Aghori \(*Religious mendicant*\) 13  
+ Ahīr \(*Herdsman and milkman*\) 18  
+ Andh \(*Tribe, now cultivators*\) 38  
+ Arakh \(*Hunter*\) 40  
+ Atāri \(*Scent-seller*\) 42  
+ Audhelia \(*Labourer*\) 45  
+ Badhak \(*Robber*\) 49  
+ Bahna \(*Cotton-cleaner*\) 69  
+ Baiga \(*Forest tribe*\) 77  
+ Bairāgi \(*Religious mendicants*\) 93  
+ Balāhi \(*Labourer and village watchman*\) 105  
+ Balija \(*Cultivator*\) 108  
+ Bania \(*Merchant and moneylender*\) 111  
+ Subcastes of Bania     
	+ Agarwāla.  
	+ Agrahari.  
	+ Ajudhiabāsi.  
	+ Asāthi.  
	+ Charnāgri.  
	+ Dhūsar.  
	+ Dosar.  
	+ Gahoi.  
	+ Golapūrab.  
	+ Kasarwāni.  

	+ Kasaundhan.  
	+ Khandelwāl.  
	+ Lād.  
	+ Lingāyat.  
	+ Maheshri.  
	+ Nema.  
	+ Oswāl.  
	+ Parwār.  
	+ Srimāli.  
	+ Umre.  

+ Banjāra \(*Pack-carrier*\) 162  
+ Barai \(*Betel-vine grower and seller*\) 192  
+ Barhai \(*Carpenter*\) 199  
+ Bāri \(*Maker of leaf-plates*\) 202  
+ Basdewa \(*Cattle-dealer and religious mendicant*\) 204  
+ Basor \(*Bamboo-worker*\) 208  
+ Bedar \(*Soldier and public service*\) 212  
+ Beldār \(*Digger and navvy*\) 215  
+ Beria \(*Vagabond gipsy*\) 220  
+ Bhaina \(*Forest tribe*\) 225  
+ Bhāmta \(*Criminal tribe and labourers*\) 234  
+ Bharbhūnja \(*Grain-parcher*\) 238  
+ Bharia \(*Forest tribe*\) 242  
+ Bhat \(*Bard and genealogist*\) 251  
+ Bhatra \(*Forest tribe*\) 271  
+ Bhil \(*Forest tribe*\) 278  
+ Bhilāla \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 293  
+ Bhishti \(*Water-man*\) 298  
+ Bhoyar \(*Cultivator*\) 301  
+ Bhuiya \(*Forest tribe*\) 305  
+ Bhulia \(*Weaver*\) 319  
+ Bhunjia \(*Forest tribe*\) 322  
+ Binjhwār \(*Cultivator*\) 329  
+ Bishnoi \(*Cultivator*\) 337  
+ Bohra \(*Trader*\) 345  
+ Brāhman \(*Priest*\) 351  
+ Subcastes of Brāhman     
	+ Ahivāsi.  
	+ Jijhotia.  
	+ Kanaujia, Kanyakubja.  
	+ Khedāwāl.  
	+ Mahārāshtra.  
	+ Maithil.  

	+ Mālwi.  
	+ Nāgar.  
	+ Naramdeo.  
	+ Sanādhya.  
	+ Sarwaria.  
	+ Utkal.  

+ Chadār \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 400  
+ Chamār \(*Tanner and labourer*\) 403  
+ Chasa \(*Cultivator*\) 424  
+ Chauhān \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 427  
+ Chhīpa \(*Dyer and calico-printer*\) 429  
+ Chitāri \(*Painter*\) 432  
+ Chitrakathi \(*Picture showman*\) 438  
+ Cutchi \(*Trader and shopkeeper*\) 440  
+ Dahāit \(*Village watchman and labourer*\) 444  
+ Daharia \(*Cultivator*\) 453  
+ Dāngi \(*Landowner and cultivator*\) 457  
+ Dāngri \(*Vegetable-grower*\) 463  
+ Darzi \(*Tailor*\) 466  
+ Dewār \(*Beggar and musician*\) 472  
+ Dhākar \(*Illegitimate, cultivator*\) 477  
+ Dhangar \(*Shepherd*\) 480  
+ Dhānuk \(*Bowman, labourer*\) 484  
+ Dhanwār \(*Forest tribe*\) 488  
+ Dhīmar \(*Fisherman, water-carrier, and household servant*\) 502  
+ Dhoba \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\) 515  
+ Dhobi \(*Washerman*\) 519  
+ Dhuri \(*Grain-parcher*\) 527  
+ Dumāl \(*Cultivator*\) 530  
+ Fakīr \(*Religious mendicant*\) 537  





## Illustrations in Volume II

+ 31. Aghori mendicant 14  
+ 32. Ahīrs decorated with cowries for the Stick Dance at Diwāli 18  
+ 33. Image of Krishna as Murlidhar or the flute-player, with attendant deities 28  
+ 34. Ahīr dancers in Diwāli costume 32  
+ 35. Pinjāra cleaning cotton 72  
+ 36. Baiga village, Bālāghāt District 88  
+ 37. Hindu mendicants with sect-marks 94  
+ 38. Anchorite sitting on iron nails 98  
+ 39. Pilgrims carrying water of the river Nerbudda 100  
+ 40. *Coloured Plate*: Examples of Tilaks or sect-marks worn on the forehead 102  
+ 41. Group of Mārwāri Bania women 112  
+ 42. Image of the god Ganpati carried in procession 116  
+ 43. The elephant-headed god Ganpati. His conveyance is a rat, which can be seen as a little blob between his feet 120  
+ 44. Mud images made and worshipped at the Holi festival 126  
+ 45. Bania’s shop 128  
+ 46. Banjāra women with the *singh* or horn 184  
+ 47. Group of Banjāra women 188  
+ 48. Basors making baskets of bamboo 210  
+ 49. Bhāt with his *putla* or doll 256  
+ 50. Group of Bhīls 278  
+ 51. Tantia Bhīl, a famous dacoit 282  
+ 52. Group of Bohras at Burhānpur \(Nimār\) 346  
+ 53. Brāhman worshipping his household gods 380  
+ 54. Brāhman bathing party 384  
+ 55. Brāhman Pujāris or priests 390  
+ 56. Group of Marātha Brāhman men 392  
+ 57. Group of Nāramdeo Brāhman women 396  
+ 58. Group of Nāramdeo Brāhman men 398  
+ 59. Chamārs tanning and working in leather 416  
+ 60. Chamārs cutting leather and making shoes 418  
+ 61. Chhīpa or calico-printer at work 430  
+ 62. Dhīmar or fisherman’s hut 502  
+ 63. Fishermen in dug-outs or hollowed tree trunks 506  
+ 64. Group of Gurujwāle Fakīrs 538  



