+++
title = "v3"

+++
## Contents of Volume III

Articles on Castes and Tribes of the Central Provinces in Alphabetical Order



*The articles which are considered to be of most general interest are shown in capitals*

+  Page 
+ Gadaria \(*Shepherd*\)  3 
+ Gadba \(*Forest tribe*\)  9 
+ Gānda \(*Weaver and labourer*\)  14 
+ Gandhmāli \(*Uriya village priests and temple servants*\)  17 
+ Gārpagāri \(*Averter of hailstorms*\)  19 
+ Gauria \(*Snake-charmer and juggler*\)  24 
+ Ghasia \(*Grass-cutter*\)  27 
+ Ghosi \(*Buffalo-herdsman*\)  32 
+ Golar \(*Herdsman*\)  35 
+ Gond \(*Forest tribe and cultivator*\)  39 
+ Gond-Gowāri \(*Herdsman*\)  143 
+ Gondhali \(*Religious mendicant*\)  144 
+ Gopāl \(*Vagrant criminal caste*\)  147 
+ Gosain \(*Religious mendicant*\)  150 
+ Gowāri \(*Herdsman*\)  160 
+ Gūjar \(*Cultivator*\)  166 
+ Gurao \(*Village priest*\)  175 
+ Halba \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\)  182 
+ Halwai \(*Confectioner*\)  201 
+ Hatkar \(*Soldier, shepherd*\)  204 
+ Hijra \(*Eunuch, mendicant*\)  206 
+ Holia \(*Labourer, curing hides*\)  212 
+ Injhwār \(*Boatman and fisherman*\)  213  
+ Jādam \(*Cultivator*\)  217 
+ Jādua \(*Criminal caste*\)  219 
+ Jangam \(*Priest of the Lingāyat sect*\)  222 
+ Jāt \(*Landowner and cultivator*\)  225 
+ Jhādi Telenga \(*Illegitimate, labourer*\)  238 
+ Jogi \(*Religious mendicant and pedlar*\)  243 
+ Joshi \(*Astrologer and village priest*\)  255 
+ Julāha \(*Weaver*\)  279 
+ Kachera \(*Maker of glass bangles*\)  281 
+ Kāchhi \(*Vegetable-grower*\)  285 
+ Kadera \(*Firework-maker*\)  288 
+ Kahār \(*Palanquin-bearer and household servant*\)  291 
+ Kaikāri \(*Basket-maker and vagrant*\)  296 
+ Kalanga \(*Soldier, cultivator*\)  302 
+ Kalār \(*Liquor vendor*\)  306 
+ Kamār \(*Forest tribe*\)  323 
+ Kanjar \(*Gipsies and prostitutes*\)  331 
+ Kāpewār \(*Cultivator*\)  342 
+ Karan \(*Writer and clerk*\)  343 
+ Kasai \(*Butcher*\)  346 
+ Kasār \(*Worker in brass*\)  369 
+ Kasbi \(*Prostitute*\)  373 
+ Katia \(*Cotton-spinner*\)  384 
+ Kawar \(*Forest tribe and cultivator*\)  389 
+ Kāyasth \(*Village accountant, writer and clerk*\)  404 
+ Kewat \(*Boatman and fisherman*\)  422 
+ Khairwār \(*Forest tribe; boilers of catechu*\)  427 
+ Khandait \(*Soldier, cultivator*\)  436 
+ Khangār \(*Village watchman and labourer*\)  439 
+ Kharia \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\)  445 
+ Khatīk \(*Mutton-butcher*\)  453 
+ Khatri \(*Merchant*\)  456 
+ Khojāh \(Trader and shopkeeper\)  461 
+ Khond \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\)  464 
+ Kīr \(*Cultivator*\)  481 
+ Kirār \(*Cultivator*\)  485 
+ Kohli \(*Cultivator*\)  493 
+ Kol \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\)  500  
+ Kolām \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\)  520 
+ Kolhāti \(*Acrobat*\)  527 
+ Koli \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\)  532 
+ Kolta \(*Landowner and cultivator*\)  537 
+ Komti \(*Merchant and shopkeeper*\)  542 
+ Kori \(*Weaver and labourer*\)  545 
+ Korku \(*Forest tribe, labourer*\)  550 
+ Korwa \(*Forest tribe, cultivator*\)  571 
+ Koshti \(*Weaver*\)  581 





## Illustrations in Volume III

+  Page 
+ 65. Gond women grinding corn  42 
+ 66. Palace of the Gond kings of Garha-Mandla at Rāmnagar  46 
+ 67. Gonds on a journey  62 
+ 68. Killing of Rāwan, the demon king of Ceylon, from whom the Gonds are supposed to be descended  114 
+ 69. Woman about to be swung round the post called Meghnāth  116 
+ 70. Climbing the pole for a bag of sugar  118 
+ 71. Gonds with their bamboo carts at market  122 
+ 72. Gond women, showing tattooing on backs of legs  126 
+ 73. Māria Gonds in dancing costume  136 
+ 74. Gondhali musicians and dancers  144 
+ 75. Gosain mendicant  150 
+ 76. Alakhwāle Gosains with faces covered with ashes  152 
+ 77. Gosain mendicants with long hair  154 
+ 78. Famous Gosain Mahant. Photograph taken after death  156 
+ 79. Gūjar village proprietress and her land agent  168 
+ 80. Guraos with figures made at the Holi festival called Gangour  176 
+ 81. Group of Gurao musicians with their instruments  180 
+ 82. Ploughing with cows and buffaloes in Chhattīsgarh  182 
+ 83. Halwai or confectioner’s shop  202 
+ 84. Jogi mendicants of the Kanphata sect  244 
+ 85. Jogi musicians with *sārangi* or fiddle  250 
+ 86. Kaikaris making baskets  298 
+ 87. Kanjars making ropes  332 
+ 88. A group of Kasārs or brass-workers  370 
+ 89. Dancing girls and musicians  374 
+ 90. Girl in full dress and ornaments  378  
+ 91. Old type of sugarcane mill  494 
+ 92. Group of Kol women  512 
+ 93. Group of Kōlams  520 
+ 94. Korkus of the Melghāt hills  550 
+ 95. Korku women in full dress  556 
+ 96. Koshti men dancing a figure, holding strings and beating sticks  582 










Part III

Articles on Castes and Tribes

Garardia—Koshti
