---
title: Poisons
---

## Sugar

One must avoid rapid rises and fall in sugar levels in most
circumstances - except after exercise, when it is used up by muscles.
Reasons: According to
[link](http://nutritiondiva.quickanddirtytips.com/how-sugar-affects-your-body.aspx):
suppression of immune system and growth hormone secretion, promotion of
inflammation, glycation, and insulin-resistence (by promoting fat livers
even in lean people according to
[link](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/17/magazine/mag-17Sugar-t.html?_r=1)
).

Further complications include: higher blood pressure, higher trglyceride
levels, lower HDL cholesterol levels, higher LDL cholesterol levels (aka
metabolic syndrome), thence leading to both type 2 diabetes and heart
disease (surprise\!).

There are also observations leading to speculation about its role in the
increased incidence of cancer with western diet/ lifestyle: insulin
promotes tumor growth\!

## Trans-fats

### Structure
Unrefined fats include double bonds in the carbon chain, which lead to a
molecular structure which is not a straight chain. Upon hydrogenation,
single bonds are formed in place of double bonds, with a strong
preference for the formation of trans-hydrocarbon backbone rather than
cis-bonds. Such molecules have a more linear structure.

### Hydrogenated oil
Most trans fats consumed today, however, are industrially created as a side effect of partial hydrogenation of plant oils. Partial hydrogenation changes a fatâ€™s molecular structure (raising its melting point and reducing rancidity), but this process also results in a portion of the changed fat becoming trans fat. 

### Effects

Trans facts tend to accumulate and eventually harden in blood-vessels,
particularly in the heart and the brain, leading to heart disease and
higher blood pressure.

## Lead

Affects cognition.

After several reports of lead poisoning in Indian children in the Boston
area were linked to consumption of Indian spices.
[Reference](http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1971906,00.html)