+++
title = "08 Arrest of Sita Ram Goel resented"

+++
EIGHT  
Arrest of Sita Ram Goel resented[1](#1)

Express News Service

NEW DELHI, Dec. 26 - Several writers and intellectuals have protested
against the arrest of Mr. Sita Ram Goel by the Delhi police on December
19 for printing the Hindi translation of the book Understanding Islam
Through Hadis.

The book written by Ram Swarup was published abroad in 1982 and has been
through two reprints in India. The Hindi translation was seized from the
premises of the binder before it was published.

In a statement on Saturday, the writers said the police action "raises
grave questions of intellectual freedom". They said the author was well
known for his philosophical and reflective thought on religion.

They said the study on Islam through the Hadis was based on sources held
in the highest esteem by Muslim scholarship. "The resulting picture of
Islam may or may not meet with the approval of all those interested in
the subject, but the extent of approval a work enjoys has never been the
criterion for determining its scholarly merits, not at least in a free
society."

The writers said there is a laudable concern on the part of those in
authority to establish a climate of mutual tolerance between the two
communities. But, they said, "It is doubtful if such a climate can be
built on the foundation of ignorance and suppression of critical
thought."

The statement was signed among others by Prof. Daya Krishna of Jaipur,
Prof. Gopal Krishna of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies,
Delhi, Mr. Dharampal, historian, Madras, Mr. Nirmal Verma, writer,
Delhi, Mr. A.C. Sen, chairman of the Association of Voluntary Agencies
for Rural Development, Ila Dalmia, secretary of Vatsal Nidhi, and Sheen
Kaaf Nizam, an Urdu poet from Jodhpur.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This news item was published in the *Indian Express*, New
Delhi, on 27 December 1987.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
