+++
title = "09 Editor's arrest over Islamic study flayed"

+++
NINE  
Editor's arrest over Islamic study flayed[1](#1)

By A Staff Reporter

NEW DELHI, December 26 - A number of intellectuals and writers have
condemned the arrest of the editor of 'Voice of India', Mr. Sita Ram
Goel, on December 19 for printing the Hindi version of a study -
Understanding Islam through Hadis.

They pointed out, in a statement here today, that the English version of
the study was printed abroad in 1982 and it had been reprinted twice in
India.

The statement said the seizure of the Hindi version from the premises of
the binder even before its distribution raises serious doubts over
intellectual freedom in the country.

Among the 15 intellectuals and writers who have issued the statement are
Mr. Dharampal, historian, Professors Daya Krishna and Gopal Krishna,
Sheen Kaaf Nizam, Urdu poet, Mr. Jagat Ram Sahni, writer, Mr. Pradip
Kumar, publisher, Mr. Rajiv Vohra, sociologist and Mr. Arvind Mohan,
journalist.

The statement pointed out that the book's author, Mr. Ram Swarup, is
well known for his deep philosophical and reflective thought on
religion, informed by a concern for man's religious quest.

Moreover, the study on Islam through Hadis is based on sources held in
high esteem by Muslim scholars. These sources are the Hadis collection
by Muslim (the second most authoritative compilation according to Muslim
tradition), Sirat Rasul Allah by Ibn Ishaq (the first authoritative
biography of the prophet), Tarikhi-i-Tabri, by at-Tabri, and several
other works listed in the bibliography appended to the book, the
statement said.

The statement further said: "The resulting picture of Islam may or may
not meet with the approval of all those interested in the subject, but
the extent of approval a work enjoys has never been the criterion for
determining its scholarly merits, not at least in a free society."

Lauding the government's efforts to establish a climate of mutual
tolerance between communities, the statement, however, expressed doubts
over whether a change could be brought about on the "foundation of
ignorance" and "suppression of critical thought."

Also, the book needs to be translated into all the Indian languages and
distributed throughout the country as it seeks to inform the readers on
the aspects of Islam which ought to be elaborated on, according to the
intellectuals.

The statement added: "The better we understand the major religious and
cultural traditions of India, the better we might be able to pursue the
goal of national integration, Without free discussion on religious
doctrines or traditions we will never be able to promote national
integration.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This news item was published in *The Times of India*, New
Delhi, on 27 December 1987.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
