+++
title = "10 9. Are Indian tribals Hindus?"

+++
**9. Are Indian tribals Hindus?**

**9.1. “Animism”**

Hindu Revivalists, unlike Hindu traditionalists, agree that the
so-called tribals of India are Hindus.  V.D. Savarkar wrote: “Every
person is a Hindu who regards and owns this Bharat Bhumi, this land from
the Indus to the seas, as his Fatherland as well as Holyland, i.e. the
land of the origin of his religion (…) Consequently the so-called
aboriginal or hill tribes also are Hindus: because India is their
Fatherland as well as their Holyland of whatever form of religion or
worship they follow.”^([1](#1))

Abhas Chatterjee, the Brahmin-born revivalist married to a lady from the
Oraon tribe, writes: “This Sanatana Dharma has any number of branches
and offshoots.  Within its fold, we have the Vaidika and the Tantrika,
the Buddhist and the Jain; we have the Shaiva and the Vaishnava, the
Shakta and the Sikh, the Arya Samaj and the Kabirpanth; we have in its
fold the worshippers of Ayappa in Kerala, of *Sarna* in Chotanagpur and
of *Doni-pollo* in Arunachal Pradesh. (…) through all these forms and
variations flows an underlying current of shared spirituality which
makes us all Hindus and gives us an intrinsic sense of
harmony.”^([2](#2))

Before Independence, the census had a category “animist” or “tribal”,
which contained ca. 2.5% of the population, much less than the present
Scheduled Tribe population of nearly 8% (the difference is made up of
tribals who declared themselves or were registered as Hindus or
Christians).  The Constitution and the census in independent India do
not recognize this broad category of “animism” any longer.  Depending on
the context, they classify the non-Christian tribals as Hindus for legal
purposes; or put them under the heading of each tribe’s own “religion”
separately. In tribal areas tribal customary law is recognized and
special protections for tribals (not as a religious but as a
sociological category) exclude non-tribal Hindus along with non-tribal
non-Hindus from ownership or habitation inside the tribal “inner
line”.^([3](#3))

The ambiguity of the tribal position vis-à-vis Hinduism allows for
terminological manipulation.  When Hindus say they feel besieged, this
is laughed off with the argument that they are more than 80% of the
population; which they are not if tribals are counted separately. 
However, when Hindus mention the Muslim right to polygamy as a case of
Muslim privilege, the secularist reply is that polygamy is actually
higher among Hindus; which it is (in absolute though of course not in
relative figures), if tribals are counted as Hindus.  Reports are quoted
which “showed that whereas 5.07 per cent of Muslims in the country were
polygamous, 5,08 per cent of Hindus, too, were polygamous.”^([4](#4)) Of
polygynous marriages contracted in 1961-71, “4.31% of Muslim as compared
to 5.06% of Hindu marriages were found to be
polygynous”.^([5](#5))  This is claimed to show that “Hindus are
slightly more polygamous than Muslims in India” (in absolute though by
far not in relative figures), *quod erat
demonstrandum*.^([6](#6)) However, the same source clarifies that within
the broad Hindu category, “the highest frequency of polygyny was found
among tribals, followed by Buddhists and Jains”, categories which are
classified as legal Hindus but are otherwise claimed to be
non-Hindu.^([7](#7))

So, when convenient, as in this case for polemical purposes, viz. to
increase the incidence of “Hindu” polygamy, tribals (along with
Buddhists and Jains) are counted as Hindus.  Otherwise they are not, and
in that case, Hindu discourse treating tribals as Hindus is decried as
“assimilative communalism” or “boa constrictor”.  This illustrates once
more how religious categorization in India is politicized through and
through.

**9.2. Tribal-Hindu kinship: influence**

Can the question whether tribals are Hindus be decided, or is this a
matter of arbitrary definitions?  A distinction may first of all be made
between:

1\. cultural Hindu *influence* interiorized by the tribals in recent
centuries;

2\. typological or *formal similarities* setting both Hinduism and the
tribal religions apart from the prophetic-monotheist religions;

3\. cultural Hindu-tribal *kinship* since hoary antiquity.

To start with the first point: except for the far North-East, tribals
all over India have been profoundly influenced by literate Hinduism, and
a lot of their religious terminology is borrowed from it, e.g. the
Oraons call their supreme deity *Dharmesh or Bhagwan*, reportedly
replacing the Oraon term *Biri-Belas*, “sun-lord”.^([8](#8a)) The
Santals sometimes call Him *Thakur*, Hindi for “landlord”.^([9](#9)) The
famous Marxist scholar S.K. Chatterjee understood that there had been
not only a profound biological mixing between “Aryans” and
“Aboriginals”, but also an “inevitable commingling of the legends and
traditions of the two races united by one language, a commingling which
has now become well-nigh inextricable”.^([10](#10)) Thus, about the
Coorg tribals, Harold Gould writes: “What is there among the Coorgs that
in not Hindu?  Nothing, because the Coorgs are Hindus.  And they are
Hindus essentially because they adhere to Hindu values.”^([11](#11))

Except perhaps in Nagaland, Sanskritic-Hindu (or in some places
Buddhist, equally “Aryan”) influence on tribal culture is in evidence
throughout India, though in varying degrees.  This, however, is in
itself not a sufficient ground for classifying tribal people as “Hindu”,
anymore than the retention of some Hindu customs among Indian Muslims
would be sufficient to classify them as Hindus.

**9.3. Tribal-Hindu kinship: formal similarity**

The most obvious similarity between Hinduism and every tribal religion
described by observers (both in India and elsewhere) is typological:
regardless of mutual influences or common origins, the fact is that they
share an element of *polytheism*, even if sometimes philosophically
transcended in a concept of a supreme or all-encompassing divine
essence.  Polytheism is a basic pattern of religion which tribal and
Hindu traditions have in common.  This polytheism was duly noted by
European discoverers in all continents, but in the 19th century,
European academics started developing a theory of *Urmonotheismus*, a
primeval monotheism still existing just underneath the surface of many
tribal religions.^([12](#12)) This scheme was also applied to Indian
tribal religions.

According to some Christian authors, tribal religion differs radically
from Hinduism because, in the words of George Soares-Prabhu: “All the
tribals are monotheists and therefore they believe in one
God.”^([13](#13)) Or: “Despite the inferences of the Niyogi Report, the
Aborigines are capable of recognizing the inner harmony between their
beliefs and the Christian faith.  It is their monotheistic faith, as we
have noted, and their belief in reward and punishment for good and evil
deeds, that have prepared them for a, natural assimilation to the
Christian faith.”^([14](#14a)) Or: “Sarna spirituality is marked by a
strong belief in one God.”^([15](#15))

This assertion is completely at variance with almost every first-hand
description of tribal religion in India.  According to the Christian
social scientist Joseph Troisi, the Santals have no less than ten
categories of deities, from ancestral spirits through village deities to
the well-known Puranic Hindu deities and the traditional tribal gods
associated with the elements.^([16](#16)) An NGO worker in Manipur
reports that the Meitei natives worship, among others, the Goddess
Panthoibi, “who connects all events with each other”, the Goddess
Nongthang-Leima, “who mastered thunder and lightning in the chaos which
preceded the world and predicted the first rain”, and the Goddess
Leimaren of “justice and revenge”.^([17](#17))

Another NGO worker writes in support of a struggle of tribals in
Karnataka for the right to stay in their traditional habitat, now part
of the Nagarhole National Park, and quotes one of them as explaining why
they want to stay there: “This is where *our gods* live.  Now we can go
to *them* and ask *them* for support.  If we move, that will become
impossible.”^([18](#18)) Can this honestly be called “monotheism”?

In the face of this well-attested god-pluralism among the tribals, the
thesis of tribal monotheism could be saved by identifying different gods
as one, e.g. the Santal sun-god Sing Bonga and the mountain-god Marang
Buru, all faces of One God.^([19](#19)) It remains difficult, however,
to fuse this Sun God with his polar opposite, the Earth Mother, whom
most tribals including the Santals worship, and whose cult pervades
popular Hinduism as well.^([20](#20)) At any rate, the alleged “unity
behind the diversity” is not exactly un-Hindu.  On the contrary, Hindus
have tried to prove Hindu monotheism with the very same argument of an
“underlying” unity, and with good scriptural authority, viz. the Vedic
verse: “The wise call the One Being by many names.”^([21](#21)) Every
logic which can make the Santals monotheistic would make the Hindus
monotheistic as well.

The typological similarity of tribal religion and (one layer of)
Hinduism can be summed up thus: no matter how different the names and
mythical personae of the Hindu and the tribal gods, both religions are
equally *Pagan*.  Even if the Oraon deity *Biri-belas*, “sun-lord”, is
in no way borrowed from Hinduism’s cult of *Sûrya*, fact remains that
both traditions practise sun-worship, which the Abrahamic religions
prohibit (Athahualpa the Inca was killed by the Spanish because he
remained loyal to the Sun-God).  The Santals worship the sun as their
supreme deity, *Sing-Bonga*, but even if he were their only god, his
worship would still be “idolatry”, worshipping a creature instead of the
Creator.^([22](#22))

Guru Golwalkar locates the formulation of the principle underlying the
cosmic spirituality of Paganism in the Gita: “In the Bhagavad Gita, Sri
Krishna, while denoting the forms in which the spirit is more manifest
than in others (…) closes the series of manifestations with the
declaration: ‘Every such element as is endowed with glory, brilliance
and power, know that to be a manifestation of a Spark of My Divine
Effulgence.’”^([23](#23))

This text unites polytheism and monotheism, and instructs the neophyte
how to select objects of worship for a polytheistic pantheon under the
aegis of the one All-Pervader.^([24](#24)) For, the distinctive trait of
Paganism as opposed to prophetic monotheism is not that Pagans fail to
acknowledge a unique and unifying principle, but that they fail to see a
conflict between this principle of unity and a principle of
multiplicity.  In this respect at least, Hinduism and tribal “animism”
are one.

**9.4. Tribal-Hindu kinship: common roots**

Now for the third possibility of Hindu-tribal similarity: apart from
recent influence (which even exists between Hinduism and Indian
Christianity) and formal similarity (which even exists between Hinduism
and the tribal religions of Africa and America), is there not also an
ancient kinship, which would make tribal and Hindu traditions branches
of a single tree in a historical sense?

Pre-Harappan cave dwellings contain cultic elements which are still
found in Hinduism today, e.g. in a Palaeolithic site in the Siddhi
district of Madhya Pradesh (10,000 to 8,000 BC), a Mother Goddess shrine
was found which contains the same symbols which Shaktic cults use till
today,-squares, circles, swastikas and esp. triangles which are part of
the iconography of Durga even in urban Hinduism.^([25](#25)) A Flemish
expert on tribal culture told me of a similar finding in the Bastar
area; when the painted triangular stone was dug up, the tribal (Gond)
guide at once started to do puja before it.^([26](#26)) But the point is
that the very same cultic object would fit in a Hindu temple in Varanasi
just as well: living Hinduism continues many practices from hoary tribal
antiquity.

Even authors assuming the tribal-separatist viewpoint admit to the
peaceful interaction and intrinsic closeness of Hinduism and the tribal
religion, i.c. of the Santals: “Unlike Christians the Hindus have made
no effort to convert the Santals into Hindus.  This may be accounted for
as the proximal similarity between the two religions.  On the basis of
close observation on the Santals it has also been found that in stray
cases when Hindu girls are married to Santals there is a good deal of
change and in due course she is also following the Santal religion.
(…) The Santals are trying to keep their religion almost unaltered. 
This is also possible because there is hardly any conflict and
contradiction between Hindu and Santal religions.”^([27](#27))

Nonetheless, the *communis opinion* is this: “The culture of the Adivasi
differs strongly from that of most Indians: they are neither Hindus nor
Muslims.  Their gods and ancestral spirits live in the mountains, the
rivers and the trees.  Sacrificial places lie hidden in the forest, not
in a stone temple built for the purpose.”^([28](#28)) If the tribals
worship in the open air, this constitutes a practical though not a
fundamental difference with modern mainstream Hinduism, which is largely
based in temples; but ancient Vedic Hindus also worshipped in the open
air.  As for the worship of ancestors and nature spirits, this
definitely stamps the tribals as non-Muslims and non-Christians, but is
it also non-Hindu?

Guru Golwalkar comments: “These protagonists of separatism argue that
these ‘tribals’ worship things like trees, stones and serpents. 
Therefore they are ‘animists’ and cannot be called ‘Hindus’.  Now this
is something which only an ignoramus who does not know the ABC of
Hinduism will say. (…) Do not the Hindus all over the country worship
the tree?  *Tulasi, bilva, ashwattha* are all sacred to the Hindu. (…)
The worship of Nâg, the cobra, is prevalent throughout our country.
(…) Then, should we term all these devotees and worshippers as
‘animists’ and declare them as non-Hindus?”^([29](#29))

Snake worship, for one, is a major common denominator of Hindu and
tribal culture: “Animal deities have been closely associated with major
Hindu Gods.  The Naga or serpent is an important powerful symbol in the
iconography of both Shiva and Vishnu”.^([30](#30)) On the other hand,
the ancient use of the term *Nâga* (“snake”, but also “naked one”) for
“tribal, forest-dweller” (as in the names of the forest city Nagpur, the
forest area Chhotanagpur and the tribal state Nagaland) indicates that
Hindus anciently did see the tribals as a distinctive cultural entity.

A pamphlet presenting the work of the RSS tribal front, the Vanavasi
Kalyan Ashram (VKS), puts it this way: “Foreigners have propagated that
Forest-Dwellers are not Hindus, that they are ‘Animists’.  In that case,
all Hindus are ‘Animists’.  Trees, rivers, mountains: Hindus offer
worship to them or circumambulate them. in the Vedas, there is
Dawn-goddess, Storm-god, Sky-god, Wind-god and such deities.  If someone
lives among the tribals, he will experience at once that they are good
Hindus.”^([31](#31))

The logo of the Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram shows a tribal with bow and
arrow, which is indeed reminiscent of Rama, Drona and other heroes of
the Vedic Age.  Vedic and Puranic Hinduism started as a form of tribal
animism, and have never repudiated these roots altogether.

**9.5. Hindu and Christian vs. tribal culture**

Against the attempt to put tribal animism and Christianity in one camp
(viz. monotheism) and Hindu polytheism in the other, Hindus have
proposed ways of counting Hindus and animists as one camp (e.g.
polytheism, or native) and Christianity (monotheism c.q. foreign) as the
other.  It may be pointed out that in some respects, a third scheme
applies: Christians and Hindus in one camp, tribal animists in the
other.  Out of love for the tribals, Verrier Elwin, an ex-missionary who
became Jawaharlal Nehru’s adviser on tribal affairs, opposed the
encroachment on the tribal world by Christians and Hindus alike.

It is simply a fact that Hindus and Christians have a lot in common
which separates them jointly from the tribals.  Among other things, both
value sobriety and self-restraint.  So, urban upper-caste Hindus as well
as Christian missionaries were simply appalled when they got to know the
free sexual morality of the tribals, as exemplified by the youth
dormitories, where teenagers of both sexes were lodged together to get
to know the facts of life.^([32](#32)) While upsetting the Christian
notion that tribals are almost-Christians, this cultural gap between
tribal society and “civilization”, both Hindu and Christian, also
emphasizes the separate identity of tribals as compared to the dominant
classes of Hindu society who have interiorized Christian morbidity. 
Indeed, many Hindus would not accept the tribals as good Hindus
precisely for the same reasons why colonial Christians considered
certain native populations as “savages”.

The Pagan character of tribal religion gives it a common basis with
Hinduism and even makes it part of Hinduism if the latter is defined as
“Indian Paganism”.  But this cannot explain away the really existing
cleavage between mainstream Hindu society and tribal society.  The
latter is a lot more “Pagan” in the stereotypical sense, more “natural”
than both Sanskritic Hinduism and Christianity, as exemplified by
Verrier Elwin’s “conversion” to tribal culture coinciding with his
embarking on a life of sexual experimentation and improvisation.  This
is of course why Western neo-Pagans, tired of Christian morality, would
generally prefer tribal culture to the formalized and asceticism-minded
Hinduism of medieval times.  Hinduism has grown away from those elements
in its own history which resemble the wilder aspects of tribal culture.

**9.6. “Adivasi”**

Discussion of the religious status and political rights of the tribals
is rendered more difficult by the term commonly used to designate them:
*âdivâsî*.  Christian missionaries and secularists have popularized the
belief that this is a hoary self-designation of the tribals (unmindful
that this would prove their intimate familiarity with Sanskritic
culture, as the term is a pure Sanskrit coinage), e.g.: “These peoples
are called adivasis, which means ‘first inhabitants’.  Like the American
continent, India has its Indians.”^([33](#33))

Contrary to a widespread belief, this term is not indigenous.  It is not
listed in the 19th-century Sanskrit dictionary of M. Monier-Williams, a
zealous Christian who would gladly have obliged the missionaries if only
he had been aware of the term.  The Sanskrit classics attest the
awareness of a separate category of forest-dwellers, but used
descriptive terms for them, e.g. *âtavika*, from *atavî*, “forest”.

Christian authors feign indignation when such descriptive terms are
preferred.  Thus, A.J. Philip: “In the lexicon of Hindutva, the word
adivasi has disappeared.  The Sangh Parivar prefers to call them
vanvasis (dwellers of forests or jungles). It is just a step away from
calling them junglis (illiterate, uncouth and uncivilised).  Thus the
fall in the status of a people who take pride in calling themselves the
adi (original) people of the land is at once apparent. (.) It is all
part of a grand project of rewriting history which the Parivar and its
affiliates have ventured into.”^([34](#34)) No, the imposition of the
term adivasi during the colonial period was itself an instance of
replacing facts of history with an imaginative theory.

The history-rewriting, in A.J.  Philip’s case, is also in the eye of the
beholder.  While insisting on the use of the colonial-imposed term
adivasi, he manages to give an anti-colonial twist to his story: “The
adivasis, whom the anthropologist call the Fourth World or the
indigenous people, suffered the first lexical assault when they were
brought under the official term Scheduled Tribes”.^([35](#35)) But it
was the British themselves, with their race theories, who had redefined
the tribals as the “indigenous races”, and who had even introduced the
concept of “tribe” as distinct from “caste” (after an initial period
when they had used the term interchangealy, e.g. “the Brahmin tribe”).

The colonial term *aboriginal*, “pre-colonial native”, has been
indigenized in India in the 19th century through its literal translation
*âdivâsî*.  The term *aboriginal* had gained currency in the “New
World”, where it made good sense from a European viewpoint: a white
colonist (or an imported black slave) was a “new inhabitant”, and a
Native American, Native Australian or Maori was an “original
inhabitant”.  This term says one thing about its referent, viz. that he
is not an immigrant, and another about its non-referent, viz. that he is
an immigrant, a coloniser.

The excluded ones, the non-Adivasis, all the urban and advanced
agricultural communities, suddenly found themselves labelled as
immigrants who had colonized India and chased the aboriginals to the
most inaccessible places.  The message of the colonial term Adivasi was
that the urban elites who were waging a struggle for independence, could
not claim to be the rightful owners of the country anymore than the
British could.  Likewise, it served to present Hinduism, the religion
named after India, as a foreign imposition.  The only non-tribals
considered aboriginal were the Untouchables, supposedly the native
dark-skinned proletariat in the Apartheid system imposed by the white
Aryan invaders to preserve their race.

This racial view of history was nothing but a projection of 19th-century
racist colonial perceptions onto ancient Indian history, but it was
well-entrenched and put to good colonial use.  Thus, during the 1935
Parliament debates on the Government of India Act, Sir Winston Churchill
opposed any policy tending towards decolonization on the following
ground: “We have as much right to be in India as anyone there, except
perhaps for the Depressed Classes \[= the SC/ STs\], who are the native
stock.”^([36](#36))

Many NGO activists and other well-intentioned people in the West believe
that their support to separatism and other political movements of the
Indian “Aboriginals” is a bold move against oppressive intruders.  In
fact, most so-called liberation movements in India are gravely tainted
by their origin as instruments of oppression by the latest intruder, the
European coloniser: in order to weaken the national freedom movement,
minorities were sought out or even created to serve as allies of the new
rulers and keep the national movement down.  The Muslim League, the
Dravidian justice Party (forerunner of the Tamil-separatist Dravida
Kazhagam), the Ambedkarite movement, they were all created with British
help and nurtured by the British with a view to weakening the freedom
movement.  Even the Communist Party was helped against nationalist
forces.^([37](#37)) The imaginary division of the Indians in “natives”
and “invaders”, though originally an innocent outgrowth of the
then-fashionable race theories, was soon instrumentalized in the service
of the same strategy of colonial control.

It may be recalled that when Hernan Cortes conquered Mexico, he first
made an alliance with some of the “native” peoples “oppressed” by the
imperial Aztecs, who had indeed “invaded” Mexico from the North a few
centuries earlier.  This way, the destroyer of the native American
polity and culture made his entry as a liberator of the natives from
oppression by intruders.  The designation of the Indian tribals as
“aboriginals” was a part of a similar strategy.  Can we blame Hindus
when they don’t consider this nativist discourse all that innocent?  The
fact that Cortes used true history while the British used at best
speculative history, is relatively immaterial: nurturing and exploiting
a psychology of grievances against the real or imagined “invaders” is
what counted.

Many people use the term “Adivasi” quite innocently, but the term is
political through and through.  Its great achievement is that it has
firmly fixed the division of the Indians in “natives” and “invaders” in
the collective consciousness, on a par with the division in natives or
aboriginals and the immigrant population in America and Australia. 
Thus, an indologist specializing in tribal culture said to me, off-hand:
“The *Âdivâsîs* are the original people of India-well of course, that is
precisely what the word *âdivâsî* means.” The parallel with the American
and Australian situations is driven home, e.g. in the title of a booklet
on India published by the Dutch and Belgian administrations for
development cooperation: “Adivasi, Indianen van India” (Dutch: “India’s
Indians”).^([38](#38)) As if the term were not a deliberate modem
construction but an ancient witness to an ancient history of aboriginal
dispossession by Dravidian and Aryan “invaders”.

Anglicized Hindus, too, have interiorized the parallel White/Amerindian
= Hindu/Adivasi.^([39](#39)) However, no conscious Hindu now accepts the
ideologically weighted term Adivasi, much to the dismay of those who
espouse the ideological agenda implied in the term, viz. the detachment
of the tribals from Hindu society and the delegitimation of Hinduism as
India’s native religion.  Thus, the *Times of India* complains: “In the
Indian context, it is sad to note that, despite the affirmative action
promised by the Constitution for the Scheduled Tribes and despite the
appellation of *adivasi* (original inhabitants) being used for them, the
government still does not accept that tribals are the indigenous peoples
of India.  In fact, it is not without significance that the BJP (…)
prefers to refer patronisingly to tribal peoples as vanvasis (forest
dwellers) rather than *adivasis*.”^([40](#40))

The assumption that the term “forest-dweller” is condescending is simply
not correct from the viewpoint of the forest-dwellers themselves, who
hold their forests and the concomitant life-style in high esteem, just
as the Vedic people did.^([41](#41)) Likewise, Mahatma Gandhi’s
indigenous term for the tribals, Girijan or “hill people”, far from
being a condescending exonym, is actually the self-designation of many
communities in India.  Many Dravidian-speaking tribes have names derived
from *ku*- or *malai*-, meaning “hill, mountain”, e.g. Kurukh, Malto,
and of course the non-tribal Malayali.

Historian and anti-Hindutva activist Gyanendra Pandey writes: “A special
number of the RSS journal *Panchjanya*, devoted to the ‘tribal’ peoples
of India and published in, March 1982, is significantly titled *‘Veer
vanvasi ank’*.  The use of the term *‘vanvasi’* (forest- or
jungle-dwellers) in place of the designation *‘adivasi’*, which had come
to be the most commonly used term among social scientists and political
activists talking about tribal groups in India, is not an
accident Adivasi means original inhabitants, a status that the Hindu
spokespersons of today are loath to accord to the tribal population of
India.”^([42](#42))

Gyanendra Pandey builds on the accomplished fact of the widespread use
of the ideological term Adivasi,-which is “not an accident” either,
witness its “common use” by “political activists”.  In fact, not just
“Hindu spokespersons” but everyone who cultivates the scientific temper
would reject a term which carries the load of an entirely unproven,
politically motivated theory, viz. that the tribals are “the” (i.e. the
only) original inhabitants of India.  Nobody is “loath to accord to the
tribal population the status of original inhabitants”, certainly not the
Hindu nationalists.^([43](#43)) But every objective observer would
reject the effective implication of the term Adivasi, viz. that the
non-tribals are *not* original inhabitants, on a par with the white
colonisers who decimated the Native Americans.

**9.7 International voices on tribal aboriginality**

In this debate, the Indian Government (*any* Indian Government) has
always upheld the oneness of the Indian population, and rejected
divisive concepts like “Aboriginal” as opposed to “Invader”.  The UN
Working Group on Indigenous Populations in Geneva has been looking into
the claim that the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes of India are
the indigenous population of India, for indeed, some tribal spokesmen
have been pushing for recognition by the United Nations as “the original
inhabitants of India”.  Foremost among them was Prof. A.K. Kisku,
secretary-general of the Indian Council of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
(ICITP), which called itself a “non-political, non-communal,
nongovernmental human rights umbrella organization to campaign for the
protection of the *âdivâsîs*-i.e. indigenous population-covering the
entire subcontinent”, and told the world that “with its 60 million
indigenous and tribal people, India has the largest indigenous
population in the world (200 million)”.^([44](#44))

Both the Indian Government and the Hindu nationalist movement
consequently watch any assertion of tribal separateness with some
concern, because the road from cultural to political and territorial
separatism may be a short one; and also because they know that the
outside world tends to sympathize with the demands of “aboriginals”.  Of
course, since states and not communities are the units constituting the
UNO, India can always block UNO steps demanded by tribal spokesmen, but
it could lose at least the intellectual debate, so it presented a solid
argumentation.  On 31 July 1991 (and similarly on several other
occasions) the India delegate at the Working Groups session, Prabhu
Dayal, refuted the claims made on behalf of the tribals by Prof.
Kisku.^([45](#45))

However, when we look into Prof. Kisku’s argumentation, we find that he
is not even trying to prove his crucial point, viz. that the tribals are
indigenous while the rest are not.  The claim is made that “the Tribals
are the autochtonous people of the land”, but no argument is given
except that they “are believed to be the earliest settlers in the Indian
peninsula” and that they “are generally called the adivasis, implying
original inhabitants”.^([46](#46)) He fails to prove that all
non-tribals are non-aboriginals, but uses the term which encapsulates
that theory as proof of the selfsame theory.  All by itself, the
neologism *âdivâsî* constitutes one of the most successful
disinformation campaigns in modern history.

Against Kisku’s claim, Government spokesman Mr. Dayal argued that the
term “indigenous peoples” cannot be equated with Scheduled Tribes and
Scheduled Castes.  He concentrated on showing that today there is no
clear-cut separation between tribal and non-tribal segments of the
population, quoting the eminent sociologist Prof. André Béteille: “In
this country, groups which correspond closely to the anthropologists’
conception of tribes have lived in long association with communities of
an entirely different type.  Except in a few areas, it is very difficult
to come across communities which retain all their pristine tribal
character.  In fact, most such tribal groups show in varying degrees
elements of continuity with the larger society of India (…) In India
hardly any of the tribes exists as a separate society and they have all
been absorbed, in varying degrees, into the wider society of India.  The
on-going process of absorption is not recent but dates back to the most
ancient times”^([47](#47))

Prof. Béteille had found that “ethnically speaking, most of the tribes
in present-day India share their origins with the neighbouring
non-tribal population.  India has been a melting-pot of races and ethnic
groups, and historians and anthropologists find it difficult to arrange
the various distinct cultural, ethnic and linguistic groups in the
chronological sequence of their appearance in the
sub-continent.”^([48](#48))

Concluding his argumentation, Mr. Dayal said: “In case the various
criteria of indigenous populations were to be selectively applied to the
Indian context, at least 300 or 400 million people could come within its
ambit. I would therefore reiterate my government’s view that *tribals in
India do not constitute what is understood by the term ‘indigenous
populations’*.”^([49](#49)) So far, the UN Working Group on Indigenous
Populations has always accepted the Indian Government’s view, which of
course is also the Hindu view.

In my opinion, the issue is clinched by Prof. Béteille in another
article.  He contrasts the category of caste, slightly reinforced and
rigidified under colonial rule but otherwise thoroughly familiar to the
Indian population since millennia, with the very new concept of tribe:
“Every Hindu knew not only that he belonged to a particular caste but
also that others belonged to other castes of whose respective places in
a broader scheme of things he had some idea, whether vague or
stereotyped.  Hardly anything corresponding to this exited in the case
of those we know today as tribes.  The consciousness of the distinct and
separate identity of all the tribes of India taken as a whole is a modem
consciousness, brought into being by the colonial state and confirmed by
its successor after independence.”^([50](#50))

To traditional Hinduism, tribes are simply forest-based castes or
communities (with both “caste” and “tribe” rendering the same Sanskrit
term *jâti*), in closer or more tenuous contact with the Great
Tradition.  There never was a clear cleavage between Hindu castes and
animist tribes, there only were communities geographically and
culturally closer or less close to the Vedic backbone of Hindu
civilization.  Some were less Vedic yet socially integrated, viz. the
low castes, others were less Vedic and socially more isolated, viz. the
castes now labelled “tribes”.

But even the latter never had the consciousness of belonging to a
separate “tribal” type of population. just as the Ahir caste or the
Kayasth caste or the Chamar caste was aware of it distinctive caste
identity, “the Santhal had a sense their own identity as Santhals; the
Garos of theirs as Garos; and the Todas of their as Todas”,-but none was
aware of a collective “tribal” identity, much less of an “aboriginal”
identity.^([51](#51))

Not one of the Indian tribes was entirely untouched by the influence of
the Vedic-Puranic Great Tradition.  This is one of the reasons why the
relationship between Hinduism and any Indian “tribe” is different from
the relationship between Hinduism and tribal cultures in other
continents.  Even the tribal cultures genetically unrelated to Vedic
civilization were dimly integrated in the Hindu world which spanned the
whole of India.

Tribes from the Kafirs of Afghanistan to the Gonds of South-Central
India have taken starring roles in the resistance of the native society
against the Muslim onslaught.  If the Bhil boy Ekalavya of Mahabharata
(I.31-54) fame could seek out the princely martial arts trainer Drona as
his archery teacher, even the terrible treatment he received from Drona
(for reasons unrelated to Ekalavya’s social origins) cannot nullify the
implication that the Bhil tribe habitually interacted with the Vedic
Bharata clan.  Those who use the Eklavya story against Hinduism do not
know or ignore the fact that Eklavya is mentioned twice (II.37.47;
II.44.21) as one of the great kings who was invited and given great
hospitality in Yudhisthara’s Rajasusya Yajna at Indraprastha.  Kautilya
mentions tribal (*atvî*) battalions in Hindu royal armies.^([52](#52))
Rama, of course, relied on his *Vânara* (forest-dweller) allies to fight
Ravana.  The tribals may have lived on the periphery, but it was still
within the horizon of Hindu society.

**9.8. But are they really aboriginal?**

Given the Hindutva priority of uniting all “Hindus” and not offending
the sensibilities of any of the targeted groups, a hard question which
the above controversy ought to raise, is never asked: but *are* the
“Adivasis” really aboriginal?  Given the racial mixing, they would be as
indigenous as anyone, at least biologically (and the same is true for
the speakers of Indo-Aryan), but what about their distinctive
identities, starting with their languages?  Tribal activism and
separatism is strongest in Jharkhand and the North-East, but about the
origins of the tribals predominant in these two areas, leading
anthropologists have a sobering message:

“Whereas the now Dravidian-speaking tribals of Central and South India
can be considered to be descendents of the original inhabitants of
India, who gave up their original languages in favour of Dravidian,
Tibeto-Chinese speaking tribals (Northeast India) and Austro-Asiatic
speaking ones (East India) immigrated into India since ancient
historical times.  Most likely they came in several waves from Southern
China (Tibeto-Chinese speakers) and from Southeast Asia (Austro-Asiatic
speakers) respectively.  Without doubt these immigrating groups met with
ancient Indian populations, which were living already on their migration
routes, and thus one cannot exclude some cultural and also genetic
contacts between immigrants and original inhabitants of India, at least
at some places.”^([53](#53))

The Oraons of Chhotanagpur have a tradition describing their wanderings
from the western coast along the Narmada river to their present habitat
on the Ranchi plateau, where they pushed the Mundari-speaking tribes to
the eastern part of the plateau.^([54](#54)) This fits in with the
theory that the Dravidian language family as a whole entered India from
Baluchistan and further West.^([55](#55)) Likewise, Bastar in Central
India “was probably populated by Kolari-speaking Austro-Asiatic tribes
(…) It is surmised that the Gonds who now live there immigrated from
South India and chased out the said Austro-Asiatic groups.”^([56](#56))

As for the Austro-Asiatic tribes themselves (Ho, Santal, Munda), pushed
out from some areas by Dravidian-speaking Gonds and Oraons, they too
have a history of immigration.  Their languages, along with Nicobarese,
belong to the Austro-Asiatic language family, of which the dominant
members are Khmer and Vietnamese.  Its original heartland was probably
the Bronze age culture of the 3rd millennium BC in Thailand, but it
stretched as far as central China.^([57](#57)) There are
archaeologically attested connections between these cultures, as pointed
out by Prof. H.D. Sankalia: “The Eastern Neolithic Culture of India was
partly received from the Far East.”^([58](#58)) Indeed: “The general
assumption is still that the Munda languages came to India from the east
via Assam and Burma.”^([59](#59)) The most recent findings in both
linguistics and anthropology confirm the East-Asian origin of the Munda
family of tribes.^([60](#60))

André Béteille confirms this: “Taking India as a whole, it would be
absurd to designate as indigenous only the tribal population, leaving
out all the others.  As a matter of historical fact, several of the
contemporary tribes of India moved into the country across its
northeastern frontier long after the areas into which they had moved had
been settled by peasants who are not now designated as tribals.  The
Mizos certainly are not more indigenous to the areas they inhabit than
the Gujaratis are to Guiarat.”^([61](#61))

By all accounts, the Tibeto-Burmese “Adivasis” in the North-East are
among India’s most recent ethnic immigrants, whose presence in India may
not go back more than a thousand years.  Not important in itself, but
the question whether the tribals themselves are truly “original
inhabitants” is the logical outcome of their own (admittedly tutored)
choice to classify India’s inhabitants as “aboriginals” and “invaders”. 
The question may sound sacrilegious to those who champion the Adivasi
label, but it is their own stand that makes it pertinent.  At any rate,
the historical data do not support the division of India’s population in
“aboriginal tribals” and “non-tribal invaders”.  This finding ought to
help bring the over-dramatized question of the tribals’ religious
identity back to its real proportions.

**9.9. Hinduism, a “pre-Aryan” religion**

There is one Hindu Revivalist author who has methodically argued against
the view (implied in the term *âdivâsî*) that the tribals have one
religion, which is indigenous, and non-tribals another, the Vedic
religion, which was imported.  Shrikant Talageri puts it in the context
of the Aryan Invasion Theory, the cornerstone of the division of Indians
into “natives” and “invaders”.^([62](#62)) A discussion of the rightness
or wrongness of this theory (rejected by many Hindu nationalists) would
take us too far here, but Talageri’s point is precisely that even if we
accept the theory, most elements in Hinduism are commonly assumed (by
scholars accepting the theory) to have been borrowed from the natives.

Talageri proposes: “Let us examine whether, *as per the Aryan Invasion
Theory itself*, Hinduism is an ‘Aryan’ religion. (…) Suniti Kumar
Chatterji has listed some of the features of Hinduism, which are
supposed to be of ‘pre-Aryan’ origin (…) As a study of the material
presented therein will show, almost every aspect of Hinduism as we know
it today, certainly every feature central to the religion, is supposed
to be of ‘pre-Aryan’ origin.”^([63](#63)) The criterion applied, not by
Talageri but by established scholars like S.K. Chatterji, whom he
quotes, is mostly whether a motif or practice is attested in the Rigveda
and in related Indo-European traditions, esp. the Avesta, the
Germanic, Celtic and Slavic cultures, pre-Classical Rome and Greece, and
even the reviving Paganism of the Baltic peoples (the Latvian
*Dievturiba* and the Lithuanian *Romuva* religion).^([64](#64)) Anything
not attested in these Indo-European traditions is supposed to be
“pre-Aryan”, or to summarize Talageri’s detailed enumeration:

1\. The entire system of idol-worship, whether of the lingam, of ‘rude
blocks of stone’ with eyes painted on them, or of sculptured images of
stone, metal or wood; including the procedure of worship, viz. treating
the idols as living beings (washing them, feeding them etc.), offering
them flowers and fruits, waving lamps and incense before them,
performing music and dance before them; and the construction of
permanent houses for them, temples with sacred tanks, chariots for
annual processions, pilgrimages etc.

2\. The application of coloured pastes on the idols and on the skin of
the worshipper, including the saffron colour and the forehead-mark
(*tilak*), two of the most basic symbols of Hinduism.

3\. The concept of transmigration of souls.

4\. The enumeration of the days by moon phases (*tithi*), on which the
ritualistic calendar (*Panchâga*) is based.

5\. Zoomorphic aspects of Hinduism: sacredness of animals, worship of
elephant-God Ganesha and monkey-God Hanuman, concept of Lord Vishnu
incarnating in the form of a fish, tortoise, boar, lion; the animal
vehicles of the gods (Shiva’s bull, Vishnu’s eagle, Durga’s lion etc.).

6. Most Gods actually worshipped are considered ‘pre-Aryan’ (certified
Aryan Gods like Indra, corresponding to Zeus/Jupiter/Thor/Perkunas, are
hardly worshipped).^([65](#65))

7\. Many Puranic myths are considered Sanskrit adaptations of
“indigenous” myths.

8\. It is obvious that all the sacred places of India could not have
been imported by the “Aryans”.

9\. All the typically Indian materials used in Hindu rituals have
obviously been employed in emulation of native usage.

Talageri concludes: “After all this, how much remains of Hinduism which
can be classified as ‘Aryan’?  According to the Aryan invasion theory
itself, Hinduism is practically a ‘pre-Aryan’ (…) religion adopted by
the ‘Aryans’.”^([66](#66)) This point is also conceded by the more
enlightened among the Aryan invasion theorists, e.g.: “Hinduism has not
been ‘imported’ by the Aryans”, in the sense that the latter’s religion
differed considerably from what is now known as Hinduism.^([67](#67))

In general outline, this is hard to refute.  But of course, the
established proponents of the Aryan Invasion Theory may be wrong in
their tracing of cultural motifs to Aryan or non-Aryan sources.  Many
religious themes assumed to have been borrowed from the “pre-Aryan
natives” are now recognized by a new generation of Indo-Europeanists as
part of the common “Aryan” heritage.  Thus, Bernard Sergent presents
fresh evidence to equate Vishnu with the Germanic god Vîdharr and Shiva
with the Greek god *Dionysos*.^([68](#68)) Even so, that still leaves a
large part of Hindu lore to be traced to aboriginal sources.

**9.10. Tribal belief in reincarnation**

For an instance of a Hindu doctrine claimed as indigenous, consider the
belief in reincarnation.  Though apparently attested among the ancient
Celts, among the Pythagoreans (who acknowledged Oriental influence) and
in Virgil’s *Aeneis*, it is not in evidence in the Vedas (thought it may
be implied in some episodes or mantras), and is therefore considered a
pre-Aryan import into Hinduism.  Among the Indo-Europeans including the
Vedic Aryans, different beliefs about the afterlife may have co-existed,
but the *communis opinio* is that the Vedic Aryans adopted the belief in
reincarnation from Indian “natives”.  According to anti-Brahmin authors,
the wily Aryan Brahmins then forged this borrowed belief into a weapon
to suppress the natives by means of the caste system.^([69](#69)) It is,
at any rate, widely believed that “the caste system in India has always
been officially justified and legitimized by the doctrine of karma. 
Someone’s birth in a higher or a lower caste or as an outcaste was the
consequence of the law of karma.”^([70](#70))

Fact is that the belief in reincarnation, considered by some as a
defining characteristic of Hinduism, is also found among Indian tribals,
though with philosophical variations and coexisting with other
beliefs.  Thus, Robert Parkin writes that the Munda tribals believe in
reincarnation, but with an “absence of an ethical component”, so that
“it is the manner of one’s death, not the worth of one’s life, that is
the qualification for rebirth”.^([71](#71)) For the Mundas,
“reincarnation is of course an object of desire here, not of
dread”.^([72](#72)) Clearly, then, they did not borrow it from Buddhism
or Puranic Hinduism, which impose a moralistic and negative view of
rebirth on this basic belief.

There is no reason to attribute the belief in reincarnation among
tribals to Brahminical influence. In his survey of reincarnation beliefs
around the world, the Dutch scholar Hans Ten Dam reports that in all
continents, people have believed in reincarnation, e.g. more than a
hundred Black African nations.^([73](#73))  Many of these peoples were
unrelated, and stumbled upon the notion of reincarnation independently,
without needing the pre-Aryan Indians to tell them about it.  As Ram
Swarup argues, the belief in reincarnation “is found among people who
are called ‘primitive’ as well as those who are called ‘civilized’ (…)
among the Eskimos, Australians, Melanesians, the Poso Alfur of Celebes
in Indonesia, among Algonquians, Bantus, (…) the Pythagoreans and the
teachers of Orphic mystery (…) In short, the doctrine has the support of
the spiritual intuition of most mankind, ancient or
modern.”^([74](#74)) 

Conversely, some scholars claim that the notion of karma and of
reincarnation has not been attested among the early Dravidian
populations of India: “Before the coming of the Aryan ideas, the Tamils
did not believe in reincarnation.  Rather, like many archaic peoples,
they had shadowy and inconsistent ideas of what happens to the spirits
of the dead.”^([75](#75)) Till today, *karma* and reincarnation are not
as pervasive in Hindu culture as textbooks suggest, e.g. the late A.K.
Ramanujan testifies: “But when I looked at hundreds of Kannada tales, I
couldn’t find a single tale that used *karma* as a motif or
motive.”^([76](#76)) Among Tamil villagers, *karma* was found to
alternate with *talaividi* (“headwriting”), one’s fate imprinted at
birth, unrelated with past lives and not logically compatible with
*karma*.^([77](#77))

So, both in Hindu and in tribal cultures, we have a variety of opinions
about the afterlife, including several versions of the doctrine of
reincarnation.  Certain ideas are so general that trying to identify
them with ethnic groups is unconvincing when not downright funny.  Thus,
I once heard an Indologist of feminist persuasion argue that Samkhya
philosophy, which divides the universe into a multiplicity of spirits
(*Purusha*, masculine) and a single “nature” or material world
(*Prakriti*, feminine), must have been thought up by a “pre-Aryan”
culture because it betrays a matriarchal polyandrous viewpoint.

Likewise, Heinrich Zimmer, an exponent of this ethnic division of Indian
thought, is described by Frits Staal as “the author of an original but
one-sided description of Indian philosophies-based on an interpretation
not free of racial prejudice: according to Zimmer, there is in Indian
thought an opposition between the monist Vedanta philosophy which stems
from the Vedic Aryans and the realistic dualism of Jainism and Buddhism
which he links with the ‘original’ Dravidian India.”^([78](#78)) Staal
dismisses this as “romantic ideas not verified in reality”.

Within the ethnically fairly homogeneous Greek world, we see a wealth of
different philosophies spring up in just a matter of centuries, from
Anaximander to Zeno; it stands to reason that the much larger Hindu
society also produced different world-views and different religious
practices without having to borrow them from non-Hindu cultures.  Both
in Hindu and in tribal culture, several views of afterlife and
reincarnation coexist, and the two sets partially overlap.  So far, the
distribution of different views of reincarnation in Hindu society and in
tribal-animist society is not such as to indicate a clean religious
cleavage between those two.

**9.11. Do tribals have caste?**

As we have seen, numerous observers take caste division to be a defining
trait of Hinduism.  Shrikant Talageri accepts the historical (i.e.
non-essentialist) entanglement of Hinduism in the caste system: “The
caste system (…) is, in its nastier aspects, the bane of Hinduism and
Indian society.  This system, however, is a social system, and is not
really a central aspect of Hinduism, although vested interests down the
centuries have strived, with great success, to identify it with
Hinduism.”^([79](#79))

Until recently, Hindu upper-caste interests were most insistent on
justifying caste observance as a Hindu religious duty.  But now, the
situation is just the reverse: “It is a feature of Hindu society which
every genuine Hindu and Hindu nationalist organisation (like the
RSS) has sought to wipe out or at least to neutralise; and which every
Leftist and secularist politician and intellectual, and Muslim and
Christian force, has tried to strengthen and perpetuate”.^([80](#80))
Now, every anti-Hindu author tries his utmost best to pin Hinduism down
on the caste system, and conversely, every other religion competing with
Hinduism for prestige and for souls describes itself as anti-caste and
egalitarian.

To maximize the difference between Hindus and tribals, it is routinely
said that “the tribals, unlike the Hindus, have equality and no caste
system”.  This fits in with the trend that Aboriginals all over the
world are redefining their own cultural heritage in terms of the “noble
savage”, the idealized views which Romantic Westerners had projected
onto them.  Thus, the *Gaia Atlas of First Peoples* quotes one “Pat
Dodson, aborigine”, as saying: “In traditional Aboriginal society, no
one person was more important than another-all were parts of a
whole.  Growth and stature were measured by contribution, participation
and accountability.”^([81](#81)) This may, in his case, be the truth,
but the apologetic element in this trend is hard to miss.

Some tribes (especially the most primitive ones, with little functional
differentiation) may have come closer to this egalitarian ideal than
others, but in general, we can question this assertion on several
counts.  Equality is a very modem concept, and we may doubt that there
exists a norm of “equality” even within a tribe, within a clan, within a
family.  Moreover, even without hierarchical ranking there can be a
division in endogamous groups, i.e. castes; or in Indian terms,
endogamous *jâtis* though without *varna* ranks.

The world over, tribal populations observe various kinds of caste
distinctions.  Thus, concerning tribals on the Pacific islands: “In the
Mariami group it was the common belief that only the nobles were endowed
with an immortal soul, and a nobleman who married a girl of the people
was punished with death.  In Polynesia the commoners were looked upon by
the nobility as a different species of beings.  Hence in the higher
ranks the marriage was concluded only with persons of corresponding
positions; and if in Tahiti, a woman of \[rank\] chose an inferior
person as a husband, the children he had by her were
killed.”^([82](#82)) Among the natives of Fiji, too, “a strict
hierarchy, a kind of caste system, regulates all of village
life”.^([83](#83)) So, these Polynesian tribals had endogamous groups in
a hierarchical relation (“nobility” and “commoners”).  The relation
between them was neither more egalitarian nor more flexible than that
between Hindu castes, on the contrary: marriage outside the caste was
not punished with mere expulsion, as happens among Brahmins, but with
death.

For another example, we may turn to Congo, where the Batwa or Pygmees
coexist with the Baoto, who settled in their land about two thousand
years ago: “From this violent clash resulted a modus vivendi which
persists till today.  The division of roles is contained in unwritten
laws.  While the Baoto live in the village centre, the Batwa live in the
periphery (…) The Batwa used to serve as village guardsmen (…) All kinds
of taboos colour the relations between the communities.  Batwa and Baoto
cannot use the same washing-place, Baoto don’t touch food prepared by
Batwa, mixed marriages are absolutely prohibited.  It has nothing to do
with social justice, but these relations certainly are
stable.”^([84](#84)) Unequal ranking, endogamy and untouchability: all
the elements allegedly typical of Hindu society have sprung up in the
heart of tribal Africa without any “Aryan” influence.

Endogamy was once a world-wide practice, and there is no reason to
assume that Indian tribes are an exception.  Yet, people ignore the
caste nature of certain social structures even when describing them,
simply because the idea that the tribals are caste-free egalitarians has
become so entrenched.  Witness the following authentic juxtaposition:
among Indian tribals, “marriages take place strictly within the tribe
and any form of caste system is unknown”, according to Dick
Kooiman.^([85](#85)) What this says is effectively: “the tribe is
strictly endogamous and endogamous groups are unknown”.  Yes, the tribe
knows no subdivisions in endogamous groups, but that is because the
tribe itself is the endogamous unit.

Hindutva authors have done little to correct this view by showing that a
kind of caste consciousness is equally pervasive in tribal and in Hindu
society, probably because of their eagerness to de-emphasize caste as a
defining aspect of Hinduism.  All the same, the job has been done, and
well done, by anthropologists and Christian missionaries.  We quote a
brief sample.  Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf writes about the Khova
tribe in the North-East: “Their social organization is based on a system
of exogamous clans distributed over all the ten villages.  The tribe is
strictly endogamous, and there is no intermarriage with any neighbouring
tribe”.^([86](#86)) Likewise in Central India, the Gonds of Bastar have
rules of endogamy and even observe untouchability (now
waning).^([87](#87))

The Munda tribals not only practise tribal endogamy and commensality,
but also observe a *jâti* division within the tribe, buttressed by
notions of social pollution, a mythological explanation and harsh
punishments.^([88](#88)) A Munda Catholic theologian testifies: “The
tribals of Chhotanagpur are an endogamous tribe.  They usually do not
marry outside the tribal community, because to them the tribe is
sacred.  The way to salvation is the tribe.”^([89](#89)) Among the
Santals, “it is tabooed to marry outside the tribe or inside one’s
clan”^([90](#90)), just as Hindus marry inside their caste and outside
their *gotra*.  More precisely: “To protect their tribal solidarity, the
Santals have very stringent marriage laws. (…) a Santal cannot marry a
non-Santal or a member of his own clan.  The former is considered as a
threat to the tribe’s integrity, while the latter is considered
incestuous.”^([91](#91)) Among the Ho of Chhotanagpur, “the trespasses
which occasion the exclusion from the tribe without chance of appeal,
are essentially those concerning endogamy and exogamy”.^([92](#92))

A missionary notes: “The observance of the taboo \[of marrying outside
the tribe\] is therefore far more fundamental than the offering of
sacrifices to the spirits.  If one seeks in another religion an
alternative means of effectively dealing with them and of venerating
God, this does not affect one’s tribal status in the least.  On the
other hand, renouncing the tribe is normally felt by Sarna people to be
nearly as dreadful as abandoning God himself.”^([93](#93)) In other
words, the tribals display the same combination of doctrinal tolerance
and caste strictness that is deemed typical of Hinduism.  Possibly this
combination exists in mainstream Hinduism as a tradition that dates back
to tribal antiquity.

Christian missionaries have had to accommodate the attachment of tribals
to their caste rules.  In December 1891, Father Constant Lievens allowed
one of his more zealous assistants, Father Walrave, to test the
sincerity of 150 Munda converts and conversion candidates by asking them
to inter-dine with other Christians who did not belong to the group with
which they were allowed by tradition to share a meal.  Only 20 people
agreed to do so; the others walked out, and 7,000 converts in the area
defected.  This test is known among Chhotanagpur Jesuits as “the
Mistake”.  And so, in 1892, Father Haghenbeek wrote that the taboo on
commensality was not strictly a “pagan” practice, but merely an
expression of “national sentiment and pride”, not at all harmful even to
Christians:

“On the contrary, while proclaiming the equality of all men before God,
we now tell them: preserve your race pure, keep your customs, refrain
from eating with Lohars (blacksmiths), Turis (bamboo workers) and other
people of lower rank.  To become good Christians, it (inter-dining) is
not required.”^([94](#94))

Summing up, we find that the notion that the tribals have no caste
distinctions is mistaken.^([95](#95)) The Hindu caste society is not
antagonistic to tribal society, on the contrary, it is nothing but
tribal society at a more advanced and integrated stage, where tribes are
no longer self-contained societies but building-blocks of a much larger
and more complex society.

This is how Brahmins integrated tribes into a larger Hindu society,
according to the Marxist historian D.D. Kosambi: “The tribe as a whole
turned into a new peasant *jâti* caste-group, generally ranked as
Shudras, with as many as possible of the previous institutions
(including endogamy) brought over. (…) The Brahmin often preserved
tribal or local peasant *jâti* customs and primitive lore in some
special if modified form (…) This procedure enabled Indian society to be
formed out of many diverse and even discordant elements, with the
minimum use of violence.”^([96](#96))

What Kosambi says is that the Brahmins did not impose the caste system,
they found it ready-made in its defining features of endogamy and
commensality, and they blessed it.  The Indian caste system is the
continuation in agricultural and urban society of an ancient tribal
institution.  Tribal endogamy was preserved when the tribal
hunter-gatherer lifestyle was surpassed because, as veteran
India-watcher Girilal Jain told me: “In India, nothing ever
dies.”^([97](#97))

**9.12. Temples and “animist shrines”**

There exists a profound continuity between literate Brahmanism and the
illiterate “animism” of the tribal communities which gradually joined
Brahmanic society in the past.  Hinduism has been described, in the
introduction to a pre-independence Census Report (1901), as “animism
more or less transformed by philosophy, or to condense the epigram, as
magic tempered by metaphysics”.^([98](#98)) This echoes what leading
archaeologist S.R. Rao said about the Harappan religion, “ranging from
very elevated philosophical and ethical concepts down to a crude
animism”.^([99](#99))

When convenient, even the secularists readily admit the continuity
between Hinduism and more primitive phases of Indian culture.  Thus, one
editorial asserts about the Hindu festivals of Holi and Diwali: “These
festivals, in fact, are not really defined as Hindu.  They are ancient
events of the solar calendar that predate Hinduism.  The practice of
cremation, too, has come down from time immemorial and is not peculiarly
Hindu.”^([100](#100)) A more sympathetic way to make this same point
would be to admit that Holi, Diwali and the practice of cremation are
very Hindu (of course they are), and that consequently, Hinduism in
India stretches back to “times immemorial” and includes pre-Vedic or
“tribal” strands.

During the Ayodhya crisis, the secularists alleged that Hindus had
demolished “animist shrines” and replaced them with Hindu temples such
as Jagannath Puri This has been countered with reference to just this
type of continuity, admitted in other contexts by the secularists
themselves.  Apart from the fact that “animists” usually didn’t build
shrines but preferred worship in the open air (just like the Vedic
Aryans), mainly in sacred groves, research on the spot is quoted as
revealing a much more positive kind of interaction between “animism” and
Sanskritic Hinduism than violent replacement of one by the other.

Girilal Jain quotes a research volume about Puri: “The archaic
iconography of the cult images on the one hand and their highest Hindu
iconology on the other as well as the existence of former
tribals (*daitas*) and Vedic Brahmins amongst its priests are by no
means an antithesis, but a splendid regional synthesis of the local and
the all-Indian tradition.”^([101](#101)) And he comments: “The
uninterrupted tribal-Hindu continuum finds its lasting manifestation in
the Jagannath cult of Puri.”^([102](#102))

After citing some similar cases, Jain proposes to “clinch the issue”
with a very telling example: “The Lingaraja temple in Bhubaneswar, built
in the eleventh century, has two classes of priests: Brahmins and a
class called Badus who are ranked as Sudras and are said to be of tribal
origin.  Not only are Badus priests of this important temple; they also
remain in the most intimate contact with the deity whose personal
attendants they are.  Only they are allowed to bathe the Lingaraja and
adorn him and at festival time (…) only Badus may carry this movable
image (…) the deity was originally under a mango tree (…) The Badus are
described by the legend as tribals (*sabaras*) who originally inhabited
the place and worshipped the linga under the tree.”^([103](#103))

Linga worship is, of course, a hoary tradition carried from very ancient
cultures into the centre of Hinduism.  It is slightly absurd to accuse
the linga-worshipping Hindus of demolishing the shrines of
linga-worshipping tribals to replace them with temples for linga
worship.

**9.13. Hindu-tribal unity**

Given the Hindu-tribal continuity, Guru Golwalkar proposed that for the
integration of tribals and untouchables, one and the same formula
applies: “They can be given *yajñopavîta* (…) They should be given equal
rights and footings in the matter of religious rights, in temple
worship, in the study of Vedas, and in general, in all our social and
religious affairs.  This is the only right solution for all the problems
of casteism found nowadays in our Hindu society.”^([104](#104))

The RSS affiliate Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram is implementing this programme,
adapting its strategy to the local situations.^([105](#105)) In some
cases, it will work for a full “sanskritization” as envisioned by
Golwalkar.  The schools which RSS-affiliated organizations have founded
in tribal areas are thought of as new Vedic *gurukulas*, much closer to
the original Vedic lifestyle than any urban Hindu school could offer,
combining Sanskrit-centred education with the forest environment in
which rishi Valmiki flourished.  This is sociologist Gérard Heuzé’s
assessment:

“Those cost-free tribal schools, about a hundred in 1990, cater to an
undemanding population, and often the poorest section of it. (…) These
children are made to live like the ‘Vedic ancestors’, to which the
vanavasis are supposed to have remained closer.  It is also in this
framework of mission to the tribals that the most traditional ideals of
Hindu nationalism (power of the sage, study of Sanskrit) are implemented
most seriously.  These RSS schools have remained lacking in influence
and prestige vis-à-vis the Christian mission colleges with their
infinitely larger financial support base.”^([106](#106))

In others situations, the VKA will support a grass-roots tribal reaction
against the Christian missions, for the tribals have developed their own
religious reform movements since more than a century, such as the Bhili
Bhagats, Tana Bhagats, Sapta Hors and Haribaba.  Though often adopting
certain Christian elements, particularly a prophet-centred millennarism,
the contents of their reforms can best be understood by comparison with
the Arya Samaj, e.g. Jatra, the Oraon founder of the so-called Tana
Bhagat movement (ca. 1920), told his followers to abstain from meat and
alcohol, and enlisted his movement in the national freedom
struggle.”^([107](#107)) Birsa Munda, whose Munda rebellion started with
attacks on mission posts in 1899, claimed to have visions after the mode
of the Biblical prophets, but told his flock to give up animal
sacrifice, witchcraft and intoxication and to wear the sacred thread,
all amounting to a kind of self-sanskritization.^([108](#108)) While
such charismatic leaders come and go, the tradition of tribal nativism
continues, and the VKA seeks to channel it towards integration into a
larger Hindu activism.

For an example of a grass-roots movement towards integration in Hinduism
inspired by the VKA: “A small village of Meghalaya, Smit, about 15 km
away from the State capital Shillong, witnessed a unique gathering on
April 20 when about 20,000 Khasi tribals of the State took a pledge to
protect and preserve their traditional Sanatana Dharma. (…) The function
was organised by the ‘Seng Khasi Smit Circle’, a branch of ‘Seng Khasi
Maukhar Organisation’ which has branches in almost every village of
Khasi and Jayantia hills. (…)   
Speaking on the occasion Shri G. L. Niyang of Jayantia hills said that
he was offered many a time to adopt Christianity but he refused because
of inspirations from his Hindu brethren who apprised him of the
greatness of his religion.”^([109](#109))

The two main distinctions breaking the cultural continuum between
tribals and Hindus are these: the former have no taboo on cow-slaughter,
and they have a sexual morality deemed loose by the Hindu middle class. 
As Gérard Heuzé remarks, “the tribals are known as people who drink
alcohol and eat meat, sometimes even beef.  They have, in this
perspective, lowly and ‘impure’ mores which call for
upliftment.”^([110](#110)) G.S. Ghurye has given an account of the
rather vivid and varied sex life of some tribals he knew personally, not
too different from what you see in the concrete jungles of American
cities but quite repellent to middle-class Hindus.^([111](#111))

These are the things which have made the tribal despised in the eyes of
upper-caste Hindus for centuries, but which they may well have in common
with the Vedic Aryans.  It seems that the tribals, in their relative
isolation, have missed the development which changed the robust Vedic
Aryans into the prudish, purity-obsessed Hindus of recent centuries.

As for sexual morality, Hindu society became a lot more prudish in
several waves, the last and most pervasive being the contact with the
Christian West in its Victorian phase.^([112](#112)) By trying to
whitewash the Vedic Aryans from the vices which modern scholarship has
imputed to them (including cow-slaughter) and strait-jacket them into
the fussy norms of modern Hinduism, Hindutva history-rewriters make the
additional mistake of cutting some of their common roots with the
tribals.

**9.14. BJP policies and the tribals**

In a way, the main problem for tribal-Hindu unity is the Hindus
themselves.  Whatever arguments for tribal-Hindu kinship may have been
considered above, most urban BJP-voting Hindu businessmen generally
don’t *feel* one with the tribals, whom they only know from TV
documentaries; they don’t feel concerned.  Therefore, Shrikant Talageri
calls on his fellow Hindus to change their outlook:

“On the Indian front, \[the Hindutva movement\] should spearhead the
revival, rejuvenation and resurgence of Hinduism, which includes not
only religious, spiritual and cultural practices springing from Vedic or
Sanskritic sources, but from *all* other Indian sources independently of
these: the practices of the Andaman islanders and the (pre-Christian)
Nagas are as Hindu in the territorial sense, and *Sanâtana* in the
spiritual sense, as classical Sanskritic Hinduism. (…) A true
*Hindutvavâdî* should feel a pang of pain, and a desire to take positive
action, not only when he hears that the percentage of Hindus in the
Indian population is falling (…), or that Hindus are being discriminated
against in almost every respect, but also when he hears that the
Andamanese races and languages are becoming extinct; that vast tracts of
forests, millions of years old, are being wiped out forever (…); that
innumerable forms of arts and handicrafts, architectural styles, plant
and animal species, musical forms and musical instruments etc. are
becoming extinct.”^([113](#113))

As for practical politics, the BJP emphatically supports a number of
tribal demands, e.g. the creation of smaller states including statehood
for the tribal areas of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh: “We promise to carve
out Uttaranchal, Vananchal, Vidarbha and Chattisgarh and give them full
statehood.  We will further consider setting up a Commission to examine
the formation of smaller States.”^([114](#114)) Shortly after coming to
power, the BJP did create the states of Uttaranchal, Vananchal (but
under the name Jharkhand favoured by the tribal movement for statehood)
and Chattisgarh.  The separation of Vidarbha from Maharashtra was
blocked by the BJP’s alliance partner, the Shiv Sena, but may get its
chance in the future.

However, one important tribal grievance presents more difficulties for
the BJP: conservation of the tribal habitat in places where dams may be
built.  The Sangh Parivar counts many Gandhian proponents of
environment-friendly “soft” development among its
office-bearers.^([115](#115)) Thus, the Tehri Dam is rejected because it
is deemed seismically unsafe and because it encroaches on the natural
purity of the sacred Ganga river.  But there is also, mostly in the BJP,
a strong no-nonsense wing of businessmen, more or less the
old (pro-Western, anti-socialist) Swatantra Party constituency, which
has no patience with such sentimentalism, and refuses to “turn India
into a conservation site”.^([116](#116)) Thus, the VHP president for the
Mumbai region, Ashok Chowgule, owned (until 1998, when he sold it) a
company which furnished cement to the Narmada Dam.

In this case, the BJP’s consolation is that the other parties have no
better deal to offer: under any Government, rising population pressure
is an objective factor limiting the possibilities to conserve tribal
habitats.  Leftists like Arundhati Roy may campaign all they want
against the encroachment on tribal land by developers, the various
Leftist parties have a very similar record in this regard whenever they
have been in power.  The objective necessity of economic development is
only one of the ways in which even historically isolated tribes are
moving closer to the mainstream, losing what distinctively “tribal”
characteristics the British census officers had ascribed to them.  To
the extent that there exists a tribal identity, new social realities
militate against its preservation and cause its irrevocable dissolution
into the broader Hindu society.

**9.15. Conclusion**

Of all the traditions discussed in this book, tribal “animism” is the
only one which cannot be described as an “offshoot” of Hinduism.  Some
tribal traditions may be transformed borrowings from the Sanskritic
tradition, but in most cases they have developed in parallel with and
separate from the Vedic tradition.  In that sense they date back to
antiquity and perhaps even to pre-Vedic times, though at that time-depth
they may still have common roots with the Sanskritic mainstream.

If we go by the historical definition, the question whether tribals are
Hindus is very simple to answer: they are Indians but not
prophetic-monotheists, so they are Indian Pagans or Hindus.  Moreover,
typologically the tribal religions are similar to the Vedic religion. 
They have many elements in common, partly by distant common roots,
partly by the integration of tribal elements in the expanding literate
Sanskritic civilization, and partly by the adoption of elements from the
Vedic-Puranic Great Tradition in the tribal Little Traditions.

A first little problem appears when we consider Savarkar’s definition:
do tribals, who have no ancestral or religious attachment to any place
outside India, really consider “India” as their Fatherland and
Holyland?  Savarkar seems not to have thought the matter through, but
obviously a separatist from Nagaland could say that not India but only
Nagaland is his Fatherland and Holyland.  The ancestors of the Nagas and
of some other tribals never performed the pilgrimage cycle around India,
never employed priests from the all-India Brahmin caste, never learned
the all-India lingua franca, Sanskrit, and never even listened to the
all-India lore of the Hindu epics.  Their Fatherland and Holyland was
effectively confined to their own part of the tribal belt.

Therefore, whereas a case without ifs and buts could be made that “Sikhs
are Hindus” or “Ramakrishnaites are Hindus”, such a straightforward and
simple claim cannot be made regarding the tribals, at least not if we
follow Savarkar’s definition, which breaks down at this point.

If we consider essentialist definitions, we find that tribal cultures
have a lot in common with Hinduism thus defined, including a strong
sense of caste (endogamy, commensality, in some cases even
untouchability) and various doctrines of reincarnation, as well as
similarities in forms of polytheistic worship.  In many cases, cow
slaughter is one element which sets them apart, but only from classical
Hinduism, not from older Vedic and pre-Vedic forms.

From a Christian or Islamic viewpoint, any such differences between
tribal “animism” and Hinduism are purely academic, since by all accounts
both religions belong to the polytheistic and Pagan category.  This does
not nullify the practical distance between many Hindus and many tribals,
a cultural gap which Hindu activists are working hard to bridge.  In
this effort, they are greatly helped by the natural socioeconomic
evolution which is inexorably drawing the tribals into society’s
mainstream and hence into its predominant religion, Hinduism.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindu Rashtra Darshan*. p.77.

[²](#2a)A. Chatterjee: *Hindu Nation*, p.4. *Doni-pollo* is “sun & moon”
as the basic polarity of the cosmos as seen from Arunachal Pradesh,
roughly equivalent to Chinese *yin & yang*.  The term Sarna “refers to a
grove of sal trees where the tribes of Chhotanagpur venerate their God
and their spirits.  It is therefore the name of a sacred grove.  Today
*Sarna* is used to designate the ancestral religion of these tribes for
which there is no specific term”, explains Y. Philip Barjo: “The
religious life of the Sarna tribes”, *Indian Missiological Review*, June
1997, p.42

[³](#3a)Art.244 of the Constitution, and its amendments, vide P.M.
Bakshi: *The Constitution of India*, p.160-161, p.259-277.

[⁴](#4a)Smita Gupta: “The Numbers War”, *Times of India*, 10/12/1995,
referring to a 1974 report, *Status of Women in India*.  The figures
were actually those of the 1961 census: “a 1961 study showed Hindus were
more polygamous (5.8 percent) than Ms (5.73 percent) (mainstream,
27-3-1993, p.5)”, according to A. Bonner: *Democracy in India*, p.91.
Note that claims for the 1990s are based on figures from 1961, just six
years after polygamy had been prohibited by the 1955 Hindu Marriage Act,
i.e. when legally established Hindu polygamous households were still
numerous, unlike in the 1990s.

[⁵](#5a)A.M. Mujahid: *Conversion to Islam*, p.132. 

[⁶](#6a)A.M. Mujahid: *Conversion to Islam*, p.132. 

[⁷](#7a)A.M. Mujahid: *Conversion to Islam*, p.132.

[⁸](#8a)Varghese Palatty Koonathan: “The Religious World-view of the
Oraons”, *Sevartham* 1994, p. 102.  Hindi terminology and even Hindi as
first language is making big inroads in the tribal cultures of
Chhotanagpur; even Christian missionaries, though always accused of
fomenting tribal separatism, are opening Hindi-medium schools, a
development which may lead to the loss of the tribals’ linguistic
identity.

[⁹](#9a)J. Troisi: *Tribal Religion*, p.74.

[¹⁰](#10a)S.K. Chatterjee: *Indo-Aryan and Hindi*(1960), p.56, quoted in
Mahadev Chakravarti: *The concept of Rudra-Shiva through the Ages*,
p.69. The “two races” are supposed to be the “Aryan invaders” and the
“aboriginals”.

[¹¹](#11a)Harold Gould: \*Sacralization of a Social Order\*, p,1,
against the description of certain Coorg rituals as “pre-Hindu” by M.N.
Srinivas: \*Religion and Society among the Coorgs of South India\*. 
Ofcourse, the very notion of “pre-Hindu” is questionable.

[¹²](#12a)E.g. about the attribution of monotheism to the Maori, see
Jane Simpson: “Io as supreme being: intellectual colonization of the
Maori?”, *History of Religions*, August 1997.  She notes that since the
1920s, a vast corpus has been created about “Io” as the supposed
mono-God of the Maori, and that lately, a native scholar and a
missionary have jointly challenged this notion as a projection, a
colonial-age “textual artifact” resulting from missionary influence.

[¹³](#13a)George M. Soares-Prabhu: *Tribal Values in the Bible*, p.99.

[¹⁴](#14a)A. Soares: *Truth Shall Prevail*, p. 267.  The Niyogi
Committee was a fact-finding committee in the tribal belt of
eastern-central India in the 1950s which criticized the missionaries for
disturbing the social life of the tribals with their proselytization. 
Its Report has been republished by Voice of India: *Vindicated by Time*
(1998).

[¹⁵](#15a)Y. Philip Barjo: “The religious life of the Sarna tribes”,
*Indian Missiological Review*, June 1997, p.46.

[¹⁶](#16a)J. Troisi: *Tribal Religion*, p.75-79. The writer consistently
uses the term “Santal pantheon”, which is polytheistic enough.

[¹⁷](#17a)Ruth Waterman: “Fakkeldraagsters in Manipur” (Dutch: “Female
torchbearers in Manipur”), *India Nu* (Utrecht), Jan. 1997.  Far from
being a votary of Hindu nationalism, she advocates anti-Indian
separatism in Manipur and speaks of “annexation by India”, “Indian
occupation” etc.

[¹⁸](#18a)Erik Robbemont: “Nationaal Park, verboden toegang” \[Dutch:
“National Park, No Entry”\], *India Nu* (Utrecht), Jan. 1997; emphasis
added.

[¹⁹](#19a)Thus George M. soares-Prabhu: *Tribal Values in the Bible*,
p.99.

[²⁰](#20a)See Pupul Jayakar: *The Earth Mother*, and Johnson
Vadakumchary: “The Earth Mother and the Indigenous people of India”,
*Dharma*, January 1993.

[²¹](#21a)Rigveda 1:164:46.

[²²](#22a)According to Y. Philip Barjo (“The religious life of the Sarna
tribes, *Indian Missiological Review*, June 1997, p.47), “Sing Bonga’s
purity demands that he be offered sacrifices only of things that are
white.  Hence he is given sacrifices of white goats, white fowls, white
gulainchi flowers, white cloth, sugar, milk etc.” The Indian preference
for white-skinned marriage partners (as attested in the matrimonial
advertisements) is often explained as a hold-over of the “race pride” of
the “white Aryan invaders” or, more historically, of the Turks and
Englishmen, but Sing Bonga’s “aboriginal” preference for white pushes
the phenomenon farther back.

[²³](#23a)M.S. Golwalkar: *Bunch of Thoughts*, p.472. The verse is Gita
10:41.

[²⁴](#24a)“All-pervader”, i.e. *Vishnu*, of whom Krishna is considered
an incarnation.

[²⁵](#25a)Pupul Jayakar: *The Earth Mother*, p.20-22.

[²⁶](#26a)Jan Van Alphen: personal communication, May 1992.  He related
that the report could not be published in India because the
establishment refused to acknowledge the continuity of their own
religion with the despised tribal culture (quite in contrast with the
Hindutva position which affirms the continuity between tribal and Vedic
culture)

[²⁷](#27a)Asok K. Ghosh and P.N. Hansda: “Encounter between Hindus and
Santals”, \*Journal of Dharma\*, April-June 1994, p. 194.

[²⁸](#28a)Dick Kooiman: *India*, p.23.

[²⁹](#29a)M.S. Golwalkar: *Bunch of Thoughts*, p.471-472.

[³⁰](#30a)K.V. Jayaram: “Propitiating the snake”, *Hindustan Times*,
13-1-1990.  It is commonly assumed that the term *nâga*, along with its
cult, was borrowed from the “pre-Indo-European natives”; however,
Bernard Sergent (*Genèse de l’Inde*, p.482, n.607) points out, with
reference to Manfred Mayrhofer, that *nâga* might correspond quite
regularly to Germanic s-nake.  On the other hand, the *worship* of
snakes is definitely rare in Indo-European cultures outside India, hence
probably of non-Indo-European origin.

[³¹](#31a)Prasanna Damodar Sapre: *Hamâre Vanavâsî aur Kalyâna Ashrama*
(Hindi: “Our Forest-Dwellers and the Well-Being Hermitage”), p.25.

[³²](#32a)Vide the influential article by Christoph von
Fürer-Haimendorf: “Youth dormitories and community-house in India”,
*Anthropos*, 1951, p.119-144, referred to e.g. in B. Sergent: Genèse de
l’Inde, p-32.

[³³](#33a)Henk Boon: *India. Mensen, Politiek, Economie, Cultuur.  Novib
series*, The Hague 1997, p.11.

[³⁴](#34a)AJ. Philip: “Hindutva, the lexical way”, *Indian Express*,
8.3.99.

[³⁵](#35a)A.J. Philip: “Hindutva, the lexical way”, *Indian Express*,
8.3.99.

[³⁶](#36a)Reproduced in C.H. Philips ed.: *Select Documents on the
History of India and Pakistan*, part IV, p.315.

[³⁷](#37a)About the justice Party, founded in Madras in 1916 under
British patronage, vide S. Saraswathi: *Minorities in Madras State*, and
especially P. Rajaraman: *The Justice Party*.

[³⁸](#38a)Dick Kooiman: *India* (Novib/NCOS), p.21. Likewise, in the
French geographical and anthropological periodical G6o, ca-1992, the
tribals of Bastar were called *“les Indiens de l’Inde”*, “India’s
Indians”.

[³⁹](#39a)A Bengali professor in the USA told me his story.  When he
left India for the USA, his mother made him promise her that he would
only marry an Indian woman.  He contracted a love marriage with a Native
American, a.k.a. “Indian”, so, in a way, he kept his promise.  But his
family back home asked him: “What?  Did you marry a *Santal*?”,
spontaneously equating the Santal tribals west of Kolkata with the
Native Americans.

[⁴⁰](#40a)“Stepsons of the Soil”, *Times of India* editorial,
20-11-1993.

[⁴¹](#41a)About ancient Hindu culture as largely a silvan culture, see
Thomas Parkhill: *The Forest Setting in Hindu Epics*.

[⁴²](#42a)G. Pandey: “Hindus and others: the Militant Hindu
Construction”, *Economical and Political Weekly*, 28/12/1991, p. 3003.

[⁴³](#43a)Shrikant Talageri (*Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian
Nationalism*) argues for the rather static view of history that all the
present-day language groups in India have covered roughly their present
territory since pre-Harappan days.  In my opinion this is incorrect, but
it shows at any rate that he is not loath to recognize the Trials as
indigenous populations, along with the non-tribals.

[⁴⁴](#44a)In Prof. Kisku: “Urgent Appeal to Adivasis Abroad”, *India*
(bimonthly of Shanti Darshan Belgo-Indian Association), April 1992. 
Kisku was a member of the Lok Sabha in 1966-77 and a Minister in Mrs.
Gandhi’s Cabinet in 1968-74.

[⁴⁵](#45a)It is, at any rate, not at all uncommon to read in Western
media about tribal areas as countries “occupied by India”.  Thus, Wilco
Brinkman, writing of Manipur (“Manipur, een mini-staat”, *India Nu*,
Utrecht, Jan. 1997), speaks of an “Indian invasion” and about rice being
“exported from Manipur to India”, implying that India is a foreign
country, and of “Indian colonial oppression”.

[⁴⁶](#46a)Quoted in *Dalit Voice*, 1-6-1992

[⁴⁷](#47a)Reported in *Dalit Voice*, 16-4-1992.  Remark the falsity of
the report’s title: “André Béteille dupes SC/STs: says they are not
indigenous peoples”.  Prof. Béteille never wrote that the Trials are
non-indigenous, he merely refused to exclude non-tribals from the
“indigenous” category.

[⁴⁸](#48a)*Dalit Voice*, 16-4-1992.  *Dalit Voice* claims that Prof.
Béteille had herewith “taken the ruling class line of argument”.

[⁴⁹](#49a)*Dalit Voice*, 16-4-1992.

[⁵⁰](#50a)André Béteille: “Colonial construction of tribe” (an old
column of his in Times of India), *Chronicle of Our Time*, p. 187.

[⁵¹](#51a)André Béteille: “Colonial construction of tribe”, *Chronicle
of Our Time*, P.189.

[⁵²](#52a)Kautilya: *The Arthashastra* 9:2:13-20, Penguin edition, p.
685.

[⁵³](#53a)H.  Walter et al.: “Investigations on the variability of blood
group polymorphisms among sixteen tribal populations from Orissa, Madhya
Pradesh and Maharashtra, India”, in *Zeitschrift flr Morphologie und
Anthropologie*, Band 79 Heft 1 (1992).

[⁵⁴](#54a)J. Van Troy s.j.: *The Prehistoric Context of the Coming of
the Mundas to the Ranchi Plateau.  A Review*. In *Sevartham* vol. 15,
1990, p.27 ff.

[⁵⁵](#55a)As asserted in the *Encyclopaedia of Tamil Literature*, vol.1,
p.45, and by A.L. Basham in his introduction to Deshpande & Hook: *Aryan
and non-Aryan in South Asia* (1979).  This is supported also by David
McAlpin’s theory (argued in Deshpande & Hook: *op.cit.*) of
“Elamo-Dravidian”, originating in southern Iran.  This theory, as well
as the “evidence” for Western origins of Dravidian constituted by a
Dravidian (Brahui) speech pocket in Baluchistan, is rejected by Bernard
Sergent (*Genèse de l’Inde*, p.45-84), but he offers other indications
for a non-Indian origin of Dravidian, linking it with Uralic and even
some African languages (though, if correct, the-se data could equally
support a scenario of Dravidian expansion from India).

[⁵⁶](#56a)Jan van Alphen: “Adivasi”, *India* (Brussels), May 1993, p.
31.

[⁵⁷](#57a)The Chinese language has a number of Austro-Asiatic
loan-words, probably including the “cyclical” characters, two series (of
10 and of 12) of numerals used for counting hours, compass directions
etc.

[⁵⁸](#58a)Quoted by J. Van Troy: “Coming of the Mundas”, *Sevartham*,
1990, p. 27 ff.

[⁵⁹](#59a)S. Fuchs: “Priests and Magicians in Aboriginal India”, *Studia
Missionalia*, vol.22 (1973), p.219.

[⁶⁰](#60a)For an admirable synthesis of the evidence, see B. Sergent:
*Genèse de l’Inde*, p.85-96.

[⁶¹](#61a)André Béteille: “Colonial construction of tribe”, *Chronicle
of Our Time*, P. 189.

[⁶²](#62a)For a re-examination of the Aryan Invasion Theory from a Hindu
angle, vide N.S. Rajaram & D. Frawley: *Vedic Aryans*; or G. Feuerstein,
D. Frawley & S. Kak: *In Search of the Cradle of Civilization*.

[⁶³](#63a)S. Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*,
p. 34, with reference to S.K. Chatterji’s contribution to R.C. Majumdar,
ed.: *The Vedic Age*, Ch.8; emphasis in the original.

[⁶⁴](#64a)See S.K. Chatterji: *Balts and Aryans* (1968).  Latvia and
Lithuania were christianized as late as the 15th century, and never
completely.  The last Romuva temple was destroyed in ca. 1790, and
elements of the religion survived in the countryside, now to make a
come-back.  The funeral rites for the late Prof. Marija Gimbutas were
according to *Romuva* tradition.  The religion acknowledges its close
ties with Vedic Hinduism, and in the diaspora (as in Chicago, where I
met its regional spokesman Audrius Dudzila), *Romuva* adherents
regularly participate in Hindu festivals.

[⁶⁵](#65a)Brahma, the truly Brahmanic (hence supposedly “Aryan”) member
of the *trimûrti* (i.e. Brahma, half-Aryan Vishnu and reputedly
indigenous Shiva) is worshipped in only one temple, in Pushkar,
Rajasthan, in the original cradle-land of Vedic culture.

[⁶⁶](#66a)S. Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*,
p.38.

[⁶⁷](#67a)Henk Boon: India, Novib series, The Hague 1997, p.13. It is
incidentally, reported there (p.14-15) that the Portuguese word casta,
“guild”, was first applied to the Indian. *jâtis* by Garcia de Orta in
1563. otherwise, the book makes all the conventional claims about caste,
such as this popular howler (p. 17): “For the untouchables and other
backwards, it was very difficult to escape the stranglehold of the caste
system. (…) From the 11th century, however, more opportunities came
about for breaking out of the system, when Islamic peoples (…) streamed
into South Asia.(…) many Hindus converted to Islam, more for reasons of
caste than by force from the authorities.”

[⁶⁸](#68a)B. Sergent: *Genèse de l’Inde*, p.402. Talageri himself
(*Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*, p.205 ff.) tries to
prove the same point regarding the Indo-Aryan vocabulary: that words
usually explained as loans from “aboriginal” languages have a
demonstrable Indo-European etymology, e.g. *ibha*, “elephant”, could be
related to Latin ebur, “ivory”.

[⁶⁹](#69a)E.g. André van Lysebeth: *Tantra, le cults de la féminité*,
introduction. 

[⁷⁰](#70a)J. Verkuyl: *De New Age Beweging*, p.71.

[⁷¹](#71a)Robert Parkin: *The Munda of Central India*, p.222. This view
is also known in Sikhism and Buddhism, see e.g. Harcharan Singh Sobti:
“Bhagat Trilochan: A Study of the Last Wish and the Next Birth”, in K.K.
Mittal: *Karma and Rebirth*, p. 199-207.

[⁷²](#72a)Robert Parkin: *The Munda of Central India*, p.222.

[⁷³](#73a)H.  Ten Dam: *Ring van Licht*, p.45 ff.

[⁷⁴](#74a)Rarn Swarup: *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam*, p.47.

[⁷⁵](#75a)George L. Hart, III: “The Theory of Reincarnation among the
Tamils”, in Wendy Doniger: *Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian
Traditions*, p. 116.

[⁷⁶](#76a)A.K. Ramanujan: “Is there an Indian way of thinking?”, in
McKim Marriott: *India through Hindu Categories*, p.44.

[⁷⁷](#77a)A.K. Ramanujan: “Is there an Indian way of thinking?”, in
McKim Marriott: *India through Hindu Categories*, p.44, with reference
to research by Sheryl Daniel.  The belief in an imprint at birth is all
the more compatible with astrology, which sees the stellar configuration
as the agent of this imprint of fate.  This basic postulate is again
difficult to reconcile with karma, yet astrology is immensely popular
among Hindus.

[⁷⁸](#78a)F. Staal: *Zin en Onzin*, p. 15.

[⁷⁹](#79a)S. Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*,
p.40.

[⁸⁰](#80a)S. Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*,
p.40. There is truth in this statement but there are some exceptions,
e.g. Jawaharlal Nehru, the godfather of secularism, made no compromise
with casteism, then marginally promoted by Socialists like Ram Manohar
Lohia.

[⁸¹](#81a)Julian Burger: *The Gaia Atlas of First Peoples*, p. 50.

[⁸²](#82a)S.V. Ketkar: *History of Caste*, p.29.

[⁸³](#83a)Jan De Mets: “Fiji’s choice”, *Markant* (Antwerp), 13-10-1994.

[⁸⁴](#84a)Erik Raspoet: “Scheutist in Kongo”, *De Morgen*, 20-10-2001.

[⁸⁵](#85a)Dick Kooiman: *India*, p.22.

[⁸⁶](#86a)C. von Fürer-Haimendorf: *Tribes of India*, p. 30.

[⁸⁷](#87a)C. von Fürer-Haimendorf: *Tribes of India*, p.218-219.

[⁸⁸](#88a)Martin Topno: “Pati and Parha: Social Structure of the Munda”,
*Sevartham* 1991 (1978), p.9.

[⁸⁹](#89a)Y. Philip Barjo: “The religious life of the Sarna tribes”,
*Indian Missiological Review*, June 1997, p.43.

[⁹⁰](#90a)J. Troisi: *Tribal Religion*, p.227.

[⁹¹](#91a)J. Troisi: *Tribal Religion*, p. 167.

[⁹²](#92a)Serge Bouez: Réciprocité et hiérarchie.  *L’alliance chez les
Ho et les Santals de l’Inde*, p.76. Bouez quotes the speech of a village
elder giving the rationality behind endogamy: the ancestors will be
angry if a girl marries outside the tribe and thereby deprives them of
her progeny, who would otherwise become part of the ancestors’
constituency of worshippers, feeding them in the hereafter through
sacrifice.

[⁹³](#93a)A. Van Exem: “The Mistake, reviewed after a century”,
*Sevartham* 1991, p.88.

[⁹⁴](#94a)A. Van Exem: “The Mistake”, p.87.

[⁹⁵](#95a)in keeping with the anti-caste trend in society at large, some
modern-educated tribal youngsters now conclude love marriages with
outsiders. In some cases, viz. when Muslims are involved, “these
marriages have often triggered communal tension and violence in
Chhotanagpur plateau”, according to Manoj Prasad: “Stupid Cupid sees not
caste, creed in Bihar”, 23-1-1994.  *Indian Express*, 23-1-1994.

[⁹⁶](#96a)D.D. Kosambi: *Culture and Civilization of Ancient India*, p.
172. 

[⁹⁷](#97a)Interview at Girilal Jain’s house in South Delhi, March 1990.

[⁹⁸](#98a)Quoted with approval by Premchand Roychand: Ethnic *Elements
in Ancient Hinduism*, p. 1.

[⁹⁹](#99a)Quoted in A. Van Lysebeth: *Tantra*, p. 19.

[¹⁰⁰](#100a)Killing with kindness: The VHP’s conversion programme
betrays bad faith”, *Indian Express*, 29-6-1998.

[¹⁰¹](#101a)A. Eschmann, H. Kulke and G.C. Tripathi, eds.: *The Cult of
Jagannath*, p.xv, quoted in G. Jain: *The Hindu Phenomenon*, p.23.

[¹⁰²](#102a)G. Jain: *The Hindu Phenomenon*, p. 23.

[¹⁰³](#103a)G. Jain: *The Hindu Phenomenon*, p. 24, with reference to
Eschmann, Kulke and Tripathi, eds.: *Cult of Jagannath*, p.97.

[¹⁰⁴](#104a)M.S. Golwalkar: *Bunch of Thoughts*, p.479. *Yajñopavîta*:
the sacred thread given during Vedic initiation.

[¹⁰⁵](#105a)*Organiser* regularly reports on Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram
activities, e.g. Prakash Kamath: “Serving vanvasis is our national
duty”, Organiser, 14-12-1997, or Pramod Kumar: “VKA vows to curb
anti-national activities in N-E States”, *Organiser*, 11-1-1998.

[¹⁰⁶](#106a)G. Heuzé: *Où va l’Inde moderne?* p. 141.

[¹⁰⁷](#107a)Vide A. Tirkey: “Evangelization among the Uraons”, *Indian
Missiological Review*, June 1997, esp. p. 30-32.  Tana means “pull out”,
a cry uttered during exorcism.

[¹⁰⁸](#108a)Gérard Heuzé (*Où va l’Inde moderne?* p. 1 33) aptly notes
that the tribal rebellions of the 19th century, such as the 1830 Kol
movement, the 1855 *Santal Hoot* and the 1899 Birsa rebellion, were
incorporated by the Freedom Movement in its vision of a native tradition
of struggle against foreign invaders (embodying “the authentic spirit of
the nation”), though in fact, exploitation by native (Hindu and Muslim)
landlords and money-lenders had also played a role in provoking the
tribals into rebellion.

[¹⁰⁹](#109a)“Khasi Tribals pledge to protect Sanatana Dharma”,
*Organiser* 25-51997.  About the relation with the missions, Niyang
“pointed out that the new generation, especially the school children,
are confounded whether to be a Christian or remain Hindu as the teachers
in their schools want to convert them into Christianity and their family
members decide against it”.

[¹¹⁰](#110a)Gérard Heuzé: *Où va l’Inde moderne?*, p. 140-141.

[¹¹¹](#111a)G.S Ghurye: *The Scheduled Tribes*, p.60 ff.

[¹¹²](#112a)Several bawdy Vedic hymns (e.g. the duet of sage Agastya and
his wife Lopamudra, who implores him to have intercourse with her more
often, Rigveda 1:179; similarly RV 1:126:6-7, a love song fragment by
Svanaya and his wife Romasha; and RV 10:61:5-8; in Ralph Griffith’s
translation, *Hymns of the Rigveda*, p.652-653, these passages are put
in appendix and in Latin rather than English translation because of
their explicit language) and Vatsyayana’s Kama Sutra are evidence enough
that the quasi-Victorian morality codes of modern middle-class Hindus
diverge widely from Vedic and even post-Vedic standards.

[¹¹³](#113a)S. Talageri in S.R. Goel (ed.): *Time for Stock-Taking*,
p.227-228.

[¹¹⁴](#114a)BJP: *Election Manifesto* 1996, p.10. Likewise Balraj
Madhok’s plea for smaller states: “Re-draw India’s Political Map!”,
*India Worldwide*, Dec. 1992.

[¹¹⁵](#115a)Nana Deshmukh’s work concerning indigenous forms of
“development” including such innovations as the “rural university” (see
*Manthan*, April 1997) is a case in point.  Deshmukh has said: “My ideal
is not Raja Ram but Vanvasi Ram” (“Nanaji Deshmukh felicitated for
national service”, Organiser, 9-2-1997).  Vide also Ram Swarup:
*Gandhian Economics*.  India’s leading environmentalist Maneka Gandhi
has been the Environment Minister in successive BJP-dominated
governments.

[¹¹⁶](#116a)Swapan Dasgupta: “Green Terrorism”, Sunday, 5-6-1992.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
