+++
title = "01 1. Significance of Hindu Society"

+++
**1. Significance of Hindu Society**

Hindu society is the only significant society in the world today which
presents a continuity of cultural existence and functioning since times
immemorial.

Most other societies known to human history-East and West, North and
South-have suffered a sudden interruption and undergone a traumatic
transformation due to the invasion and victory of latter-day
ideologies-Christianity, Islam, Communism. The pre-Christian,
pre-Islamic and pre-Communist cultural creations of these societies are
now to be met only in libraries and museums, thanks to the labours of
antiquarian scholars.

Hindu culture can meet the same frightful fate if there were no Hindu
society to sustain it. This is the point which is not always remembered
even by those who take pride in Hindu culture.

There are many Hindus who cherish the great spiritual traditions of
Hinduism and its scriptures like the *Gita* and the *Upanishads* in
which that tradition is enshrined. But they do not cherish with an equal
enthusiasm the Hindu society which has honoured and preserved these
traditions and scriptures down the ages.

Again, there are many Hindus who proclaim with great confidence that
*Sanãtana Dharma* that is Hinduism can never die. This is true in a
sense. There will always be individuals in non-Hindu societies who will
recover the mystique of *Sanãtana Dharma* through their efforts at
self-discovery. But *Sanãtana Dharma* will surely suffer an eclipse and
no more inform mankind at large with its message, if there is no Hindu
society to sustain it.

Lastly, there are many Hindus who are legitimately proud of Hindu art,
architecture, sculpture, music, painting, dance, drama, literature,
linguistics, lexicography, and so on.  But they seldom take into account
the fact that this great wealth of artistic, literary and scientific
heritage, will die if Hindu society which created it is no more there to
preserve, protect and perpetuate it.

But the death of Hindu society is no longer an eventuality which cannot
be envisaged. This great society is now besieged by the same dark and
deadly forces which have overwhelmed and obliterated many ancient
societies. Suffering from a loss of its *elan*, it has become a house
divided within itself. And its beneficiaries no more seem to be
interested in its survival because they have fallen victims to hostile
propaganda. They have developed towards it an attitude of utter
indifference, if not downright contempt. Let no Hindu worth his salt
remain complacent. Hindu society is in mortal danger as never before.

It would be relevant to recall the history of Hindu society in order to
put the record straight. For, there is very little in that record which
invites indifference or contempt, and a good deal which deserves honour
and homage.

A word about misunderstandings first. At one time the dominant school of
Western historians and their Indian disciples, for whom Hindu history
commenced with Alexander’s invasion, presented this history as a series
of successful foreign invasions to which Hindu India invariably
succumbed. They even invented an Aryan invasion of India in the second
millennium BC to round up their cherished image of this country as some
sort of a free for all into which any adventurer could descend and dwell
at will.

The Aligarh school of historians have come out with the thesis that
Hindu society being basically an oppressive and exploitative society
since its very inception, the invaders did not have to mount much of an
effort in order to break whatever resistance it could muster at any
time. The minority of oppressors, we are told, retired into fortified
towns and citadels, and the majority of oppressed masses came out in
support of the invaders who were hailed as liberators.

The Marxist historians, in their turn, have welcomed this Aligarh
approach with open arms. Their materialist interpretation of history
stands vindicated. They have extended the Aligarh thesis to mean that
the invaders were not only liberators on the social and political plane
but also great incentives to forces of production. These foreign
invasions, we are informed, were thus so many steps out of economic
stagnation and towards material and social progress.

It is little use crossing swords with the stalwarts inspired by Mecca
and Moscow. It has been seen again and again that whatever be the facts,
their conclusions remain the same. Their conclusions remain the same
because their motives are the same. The motives are to malign and
misrepresent Hindu history in order to denigrate and destroy Hindu
society. Now many Indians too have joined the game.

Responsible Western historians, however, concede that Hindu history is
much, very much, older than Alexander’s invasion. They also concede that
the theory of an Aryan invasion of India is at best a conjecture for
which there is no positive evidence, literary or archaeological. They
admit further that the account which the Hindus gave of themselves in
the face of foreign invaders has been quite creditable and by no means
dishonourable. And they agree that whenever the Hindus suffered a defeat
it was largely due to their neglect of and consequent inferiority in the
art of warfare rather than any serious defect or deficiency in their
social system or cultural *milieu*.

There was a time, not very long ago, when Hindu culture was a revered
culture throughout the civilized world. Its seers and sages, its mystics
and monks, its scholars and scientists, its missionaries and merchants
took its message to the farthest corners of world-East Africa, Egypt and
Ethiopia; Sumeria, Assyria, Babylonia, Chaldea and Iran; Burma, China,
Japan, Korea and Mongolia; Indochina, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand;
Pacific Islands, West Indies, Mexico, Peru and Columbia; Asia Minor,
Central Asia, Greece and Rome. The history of a hundred cultures and
nations provides evidence of this hoary heritage in their religions and
philosophies, languages and literatures, sciences and technologies,
manners and mores.

True, the Hindus never constructed a strong, centralised state, like
that of ancient Iran and Rome, which could tyrannise over its
constituent units and invade the neighbouring countries. Yet their
society was a strong, steadfast and stupendous creation based on a
highly decentralised yet a cohesive social fabric made of organic units
such as the clan (*kula*), caste (*jãti*), village (*grãma*), town
(*nigam*), metropolis (*nagar*), country (*janapada*) and empire
(*sãmrãjya*). Imperial systems rose and fell. But the infrastructure
survived the test of time and remained vigorous and vibrant till very
recent times.

Greek historians who accompanied and followed Alexander tell us that
before this adventurer led his short-lived raid against the republics on
the Punjab and Sindh, only two other foreign invaders had had the
courage to cast covetous eyes on India. Queen Semiramis of Babylonia in
the 8th Century and Cyrus the Great of Iran in the 6th Century BC
attacked India with vast armies but were defeated at the borders and
made to flee with very few survivors.

Plutarch leaves us in no doubt that Alexander himself had to beat a
hasty retreat from the banks of the river Beas which, baffled by the
brave resistance from a series of small republics, his armies refused to
cross. And his successor in East Asia, Seleucus Nicator, was soon
humbled and not only made to cede conquered Indian territory but also
pay homage to the Indian emperor by a matrimonial alliance.

But the wheel of time turns. The Hindus lost some of their vigour and
vitality and vigilance, and neglected the art of warfare which was
acquiring new dimensions in neighbouring lands. The Scythians, the
Kushanas and the Hunas who stormed in after the disintegration of the
Mauryan and the Gupta empires did succeed in conquering and ruling over
large parts of northern and western India. This spell of foreign rule,
however, was rather short-lived. All these invaders were not only
defeated by the rising tide of Hindu heroism but also absorbed and
integrated into the vast complex of Hindu society and culture.

This triumphal course of Hindu history suffered a severe setback only
with the advent of the Muslim invaders in the middle of the 7th Century
AD. The Hindus were now faced with an adversary who was not only
qualitatively superior in the art of warfare but also armed with an
ideology which was altogether alien and uncompromisingly inimical to the
basic premises of the Hindu *weltanschaung*. The war which the Hindus
had to wage against this new adversary was ceaseless and long-drawn-out.
The armies of the Arab Caliphate which had humbled the Persian and the
Byzantine empires, which had conquered vast territories stretching from
the Hindukush to the Atlantic Ocean, and which had converted to Islam
vast populations *en masse*, could not advance beyond Sindh in spite of
repeated invasions. The Ghaznavids, the Ghoris, the Khaljis, the
Tughlaqs and the Mughals who followed fared much better and succeeded in
establishing imperial dynasties which ruled over large parts of India
for several centuries. But Hindu resistance did not cease for a day. The
Rajputs, the Vijayanagar Empire, the Marathas, the Bundelas, the Jats
and the Sikhs rose in fierce revolt, one after another, till the fabric
of Muslim rule was destroyed and dispersed by the middle of the 18th
Century. And the number of converts which Islam-considering its
political power and intentions-could win during its long spell of seven
centuries was rather small.

This victory of the Hindus over the Islamic hordes could not be
consolidated due to the intervention of the British invader who wielded
not only an unprecedented superiority in the art of warfare but also a
much subtler weapon of diplomacy. The Hindus were enslaved once again.
The British also brought with them, in the form of Christianity, an
ideology which too was altogether alien and intensely inimical to the
basic tenets of the Hindu way of life.

Fortunately for the Hindus, Christianity in the West including Britain
was soon overwhelmed by the rising tide of humanism, rationalism and
universalism inspired by the revival of the Greek heritage.
Christianity, therefore, could not obtain an unbridled sway in the
counsels of the British rulers as Islam was able to do in the courts of
the Muslim kings. It was only under an earlier invader from the West,
the Portuguese, that Christianity was able to harass the Hindus for some
time and in some areas.

The struggle against the British invader was also not as long-drawn-out
as against the Muslim marauders. The rise of liberal democracy in
Britain was a great help to the Hindu freedom fighters. None-the-less,
the battle had to be fought on many fronts, revolutionary and
constitutional, violent the non-violent. It is a point of some pride for
the Hindus that their struggle for freedom inspired similar struggles in
many countries of Asia and Africa, and that the dawn of Indian
independence in 1947 heralded an era of independence for many an
enslaved nation.

A society which has survived invaders who devastated and ultimately
destroyed so many ancient societies, should be rightly regarded as the
wonder of world history. The foreign invasions of India have been
brought into bolder relief by the very fact that Hindu society defeated
and dispersed all of them in the final round. Only that society can
boast of freedom from foreign invasions which has lost its identity,
body and soul, into that of the conqueror. Such a society leaves no
successors who retain a racial or cultural memory, and who can spread
out in national homage a roll of honour for its heroes. With all its
weaknesses, Hindu society has never been such an imbecile society.

In the normal course, the Hindus who had such a glorious history should
have come into their own after 1947 and resumed their career of newer
cultural creations. But the balance-sheet of this saga of struggle and
sacrifice for freedom has not turned out to be favourable to the Hindus.
They have lost to an alienated section of their own race some of the
hallowed lands which were at one time the very cradle of Hindu culture
and civilisation. And they are no longer the honoured citizens even in
their own homeland. A permanent stigma seems to have stuck to the terms
*Hindu* and *Hinduism*. These have now become terms of abuse in the
mouth of that very elite which the Hindu millions have raised to the
pinnacle of power and prestige with their blood, sweat and tears.

How did this happen?

I have come to the conclusion that the Muslim and British invasions of
India, though defeated and dispersed, have yet managed to crystallise
certain *residues*-psychological and intellectual-which a battered Hindu
society is finding it very difficult to digest. These residues are now
in active alliance with powerful international forces, and are being
aided and abetted on a scale which an impoverished Hindu society cannot
match. And, lastly, although at loggerheads amongst themselves, these
residues have forged a *united front* which is holding Hindu society
under siege. The danger is as much from within as from without.

What are these residues of foreign invasions which are holding Hindu
society under siege?

The Muslim invasion of India crystallised one residue which we shall
name as Islamism. The British invasion, on the other hand, gave us two
residues which we have named Christianism and Macaulayism. We shall
analyse their roles in India and their alliances with international
forces, one by one, before we present a picture of the united front they
have forged to fight the Hindus all along the line.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


