+++
title = "13 CHAPTER TWELVE "

+++
**CHAPTER TWELVE**

**MONOTHEISM SPREADS TO ARABIA**

Monotheism had infected the Jews some two millenia before the birth of
Muhammad. Moses had sold them into slavery to Jehovah, a demoniacal
Spirit masquerading as the one and only God.[¹](#1) Many books of the
Bible tell the blood-curdling story of what the Jews did to themselves
and to the others when goaded by this Gangster. The end result was their
own ruination, and their dispersal as slaves and refugees in all
directions. Meanwhile, the disease had spread to West Asia, Europe and
North Africa in the form of Christianity. It had destroyed the
Greco-Roman civilization as well as Germanic paganism, and spread
darkness wherever it went. Now it was getting ready to engulf Arabia
which had survived so far as an island of sanity in the midst of a
surging sea of madness.

The pagan Arabs, however, had remained unaware of the menace advancing
on them from all sides. Abyssinia, their neighbour to the west, had been
a Christian stronghold for long, and had even launched a crusade against
them in recent times. The Byzantine Empire, their neighbour to the
north, had gone Christian early in the fourth century, and was busy
rooting out paganism within its own precincts. The Sassanian Empire of
Persia, their neighbour to the east, was patronizing a Zoroastrianism
which had lost its ancient Aryan genius and imbibed the spirit of
Judaism and Christianity. It had become a monotheistic creed complete
with *the* Prophet, *the* Book, the Last Day, and Heaven and Hell. The
only point it missed and, therefore, lost the race to Judaism and
Christianity, was missionary zeal; it was not yet out to force other
people to its own way of worship.

Each of these neighbours was aspiring to invade and dominate Arabia.
What kept them in check was their mutual rivalry. The peace which Arabia
had enjoyed for long intervals was a byproduct of this balance of power.
Even so, several Arab tribes in North and South Arabia had embraced
Judaism or Christianity. Worse still, both Jews and Christians had
settlements in the very heart of Arabia. The role which these preachy
communities played in the rise of Islam has been highlighted by Muslims
scholars themselves. Shaikh Inayatullah writes:

“In the century before Muhammad Arabia was not wholly abandoned to
paganism. Both Judaism and Christianity claimed a considerable following
among its inhabitants. Almost every calamity that befell the land of
Palestine sent a fresh wave of Jewish refugees into Arabia, sometimes as
far as Yemen. They had probably taken refuge there after the conquest of
Palestine by Titus in AD 70. Jewish colonies flourished in Medina and
several other towns of Hijãz. In the time of the Prophet, three large
Jewish tribes, viz., the NaDîr, Quraizah and Qainuqa‘, dwelt in the
outskirts of Medîna, and the fact that the Prophet made an offensive and
defensive alliance with them for the safety of the town shows that they
were an important factor in the political life of those times. These
colonies had their own teachers and centres of religious study. Judging
by few extant specimens of their poetry, these refugees through contact
with a people nearly akin to themselves, had become fully Arabicized
both in language and sentiment. They, however, remained Jews in the most
vital particular, religion, and it is probable that they exerted a
strong influence over the Arabs in favour of monotheism.

“Another religious factor which was strongly opposed to Arabian paganism
was the Christian faith. How early and from what direction Christianity
entered Arabia is a question which it is difficult to answer with
certainty but there is no doubt that Christianity was widely diffused in
the southern and northern parts of Arabia at the time of the Prophet.
Christianity is said to have been introduced in the valley of Najrãn in
northern Yemen from Syria, and it remained entrenched in spite of the
terrible persecution it suffered at the hands of the Himyarite king, Dhû
Nawãs, who had adopted the Jewish faith… Christianity in the south-west
of Arabia received a fresh stimulus by the invasion of the Christian
Abyssinians, who put an end to the rule of Dhû Nawãs. There were
Christians in Mecca itself, Waraqah ibn Naufal, a cousin of Khadîjah,
the first wife of the Prophet, was one of them. Christianity was also
found among certain tribes of the Euphrates and the Ghassãn who lived on
the borders of Syria. Their conversion was due to their contact with the
Christian population of the Byzantine Empire… The Christians were also
found at Hîrah, a town in the north-east of Arabia, where Arab princes
of the house of Lakhm ruled under the suzerainty of the Persian kings.
These Christians who were called ‘Ibãd or the ‘Servants of the Lord,’
belonged to the Nestorian Church, and contributed to the diffusion of
Christian ideas among the Arabs of the Peninsula.

“By the sixth century, Judaism and Christianity had made considerable
headway in Arabia, and were extending their sphere of influence,
leavening the pagan masses, and thus gradually preparing the way for
Islam.”^([2](#2))

Most of the Jews and Christians settled in Arabia were descendants of
refugees who had fled at one time or the other from persecutions in the
Byzantine and the Persian empires. Arab paganism had provided them not
only protection but also freedom to practise and preach their creeds.
They had, therefore, succeeded in making some converts among the Arabs.
But the fact that they were refugees and that the pagan Arabs were their
protectors, was soon forgotten. It was not long before the Jews and the
Christians started using the security and the freedom for pouring
contempt on Arab paganism. Medina in particular had become a Jewish
stronghold. Gibbon tells us that this city with its wealthy and
vociferous Jewish tribes had become famous all over Arabia as the City
of the Book.[³](#3) It was as sick with monotheism as a harlot with
venereal desease. Small wonder that it became Muhammad’s base of
operations for imposing Islam on the rest of Arabia after he had to
leave Mecca in utter despair. “The course of the following narrative
will show,” observes Margoliouth, “that Muhammad’s mission at Meccah was
a failure, and that it was only at Medinah… that he readily found a
hearing, and that having turned Medinah into an armed camp, he was able
partly by force and partly by bribes to subjugate Meccah, whence he
proceeded quickly to subdue the rest of Arabia.”^([4](#4))

It seems that the pagan Arabs, by and large, were not prone to catch the
infection. They were happy with their healthy paganism but for a few
persons, particularly among their educated elite, who equated religious
superiority with superiority in material wealth, or military power, or
both. Every society has individuals who get alienated from their own
culture simply because that society happens to be poor or powerless. The
pagan Arab society was no exception. Compared to the Abyssinian,
Byzantine and the Persian empires, Arabia was poor in material wealth as
well as military prowess. Some upper class Arabs who travelled to the
neighbouring lands or heard the gorgeous stories from others, were swept
off their feet. They readily accepted the explanation, advanced by
hawkers of monotheism, that the foreign lands were rich and powerful
simply because each of them had a Prophet and a Book. Lenin, Mao
Tse-tung, M.N. Roy, Jawaharlal Nehru and many others all over the world
are excellent examples of the fascination which the power and wealth of
foreign countries exercises over shallow but self-righteous minds; they
start by despising themselves as members of a poor society, and end by
despising their people and culture. Ibn Ishãq provides interesting
evidence about the presence of such self-alienated Arabs in Mecca
itself. He writes:

“One day when the Quraysh assembled on a feast day to venerate and
circumambulate the idol to which they offered sacrifices, this being a
feast which they held annually, four men drew apart secretly and agreed
to keep their counsel in the bonds of friendship. They were (i) Waraqa
bin Nufal; (ii) Ubaydullah b. Jahash; (iii) ‘Uthmãn b. al-Huwayrith; and
(iv) Zayd b. ‘Amr. They were of the opinion that their people had
corrupted the religion of their father Abraham, and that the stone they
went round was of no account; it could neither hear, nor see, nor hurt,
nor help.[⁵](#5) ‘Find for yourselves a religion,’ they said; ‘for by
God you have none.’ So they wont their several ways in the lands,
seeking the Hanîfîya, the religion of Abraham.

“Waraqa attached himself to Christianity and studied its scriptures
until he had thoroughly mastered them. Ubaydullah went on searching
until Islam came; then he migrated with the Muslims to Abyssinia taking
with him his wife who was Muslim, Umm Habîba d. Abû Sufyãn. When he
arrived there he adopted Christianity, parted from Islam, and died a
Christian in Abyssinia.

“‘Uthmãn b. Huwayrith went to the Byzantine emperor and became a
Christian. He was given high office there.

“Zayd b. ‘Amr stayed as he was. He accepted neither Judaism nor
Christianity. He abandoned the religion of his forefathers and abstained
from idols… saying that he worshipped the God of Abraham, and he
publicly rebuked his people for their practices…

“Zayd b. ‘Amr composed the following poem:

> Am I to worship one lord or a thousand?  
> If there are as many as you claim,  
> I renounce al-Lãt and al-‘Uzzã both of them  
> As any strong-minded person would.  
> I will not worship al-‘Uzzã and her two daughters,  
> Nor will I visit the two idols of Banû ‘Amr.  
> I will not worship Hubal though he was our lord  
> In the days when I had little sense…  
> You will see the pious living in gardens,  
> While for the infidels hell fire is burning.  
> Shamed in life, when they die  
> Their breasts will contract in anguish…  
> Beware of putting another beside God  
> For the upright way has become clear.

“Then he went forth seeking the religion of Abraham questioning monks
and Rabbis until he had traversed al-MauSil and the whole of
Mesopotamia; then he went through the whole of Syria until he came to a
monk in the high ground at Balaqã. This man, it is alleged, was
well-versed in Christianity. He asked him about the Hanîfîya, the
religion of Abraham and the monk replied. ‘You are seeking a religion to
which no one today can guide you, but the time of a prophet who will
come forth from your own country which you have just left has drawn
near. He will be sent with the Hanîfîya, the religion of Abraham, so
stick to it, for he is about to be sent now and this is his time.’ Now
Zayd had sampled Judaism and Christianity and was not satisfied with
either of them; so that at these words he went away at once making for
Mecca; but when he was inside the country of Lakhm he was attacked and
killed.

“Waraqa b. Naufal composed this elegy over him.

> You were altogether in the right path Ibn ‘Amr,  
> You have escaped hell’s burning oven  
> By serving the one and only God  
> And abandoning vain idols.”^([6](#6))

References to Hanîfîya, the religion of Abraham, in this story can be
ignored as they obviously reflect wisdom by hindsight. It was not before
Muhammad migrated to Medina and discovered that the Jews were not
prepared to accept him as a prophet, that he invented a religion of
Abraham distinct from both Judaism and Christianity. Till that time he
had been seeking certificates from the People of the Book, the Jews and
the Christians, to the effect that his teachings were in accordance with
what was written in their scriptures. Equally anachronistic in this
story is the prophecy about the advent of Muhammad. Orthodox biographers
of the Prophet have put such prophecies in the mouths of several Jewish
rabbis and Christian monks. They were only trying to be wise after the
event. All that is true in the story of Waraqa etc., is that some Arabs
were turning away from their ancestral religion and to-wards the alien
cult of monotheism. At the same time, some prophets were also appearing
in Arabia and claiming to be in direct communication with God.

Monotheism being a cult of prophets, its appearance in pagan Arabia was
bound to produce some of this species. Prophethood is not at all a
difficult profession if we go by their crop in the Bible. One has only
to manage the requisite amount of self-deception and self-righteousness
and go about shouting from the housetops that one’s people have sunk
into sin. One has also to be ready, if opportunity occurs, to use
violence against one's own people. It was, therefore, only a copybook
exercise for prophets who arose in pagan Arabia. They had only to ape
their prototypes in the stories retailed to them by the Jews and the
Christians.  Muhammad was not the first of these novel Arab characters.

“Prophets indeed had arisen in Arabia before Mohammed: in Yemen among
the Himyarites one Samaifa had imitated the exploits of old Zamolaxis:
had hidden himself for a time and then reappeared, when a hundred
thousand men prostrated themselves before their risen lord. Legends
containing probably some germ of truth recorded how shortly before
Mohammed one Khalid, son of Sinan, had been sent to preach to the tribe
of ‘Abs, and one Hanzalah, son of Safwan, to some other of the
inhabitants of Arabia. In Yemamah, too, one Maslamah had given a sign
that he was sent from God: through the neck of a bottle he introduced an
egg unbroken to the bowl. Since Yemamah supplied Meccah with corn, the
tradition that makes Muhammad a pupil of Maslamah has certainly some
foundation.”^([7](#7))

“According to Ibn Ishãq, Muhammad’s enemies reproached him with having
obtained his wisdom from a man of Yamãma named RaHmãn. Now we have ample
evidence that Musailima, who preached in the name of RaHmãn was himself
called RaHmãn. It is also worthy of note that the prophetic utterances
attributed to Musailima recall the earliest Meccan sûras with their
short rhyming sentences and curious oaths and have no resemblance to
later Medinese sûras. In particular the fact that all the Banû Hanîfa
followed him into battle against the Medinese shortly after the death of
Muhammad shows that he must have been active for a considerable time and
was no imitator of Muhammad… According to Saif’s account he must have
been considerably influenced by Christianity for he speaks of the
kingdom of heaven…”[⁸](#8) Musailima had introduced Salãt, several times
a day. He also maintained a *mu‘azzin* and a *muqîm*.

It seems that these pretentious Arabs were not fully familiar with the
institution of prophethood. The rise of a female prophet, Sajãh, shows
their ignorance of the fact that prophethood in the Judaic and Christian
traditions was strictly a male profession, and women supposed to be the
source of sin, had no right to it.  Sajãh was a woman of Banû Tamîm and
one of the several prophets who sprang up shortly before Muhammad. “On
the mother’s side she was related to Taghilib, a tribe which comprised
many Christians. She was a Christian herself, or at least had learnt
much concerning Christianity from her relatives. Next to nothing is
known concerning the import of her revelations and doctrines; she
delivered her messages from a minbar, in rhymed prose, and was attended
by a *mu’adhdhin* and a *hãjib*. Her name, or one of her names for God,
was ‘the Lord of the clouds’ (*rabb al-Sahãb*).”[⁹](#9) She joined
forces with Musailima when the two of them were attacked by Muslim
armies after the death of Muhammad. Muslim historians love to tell
obscene stories about the marriage and the merry-making of the two
“false prophets”.

So there was nothing novel about Muhammad standing up one fine morning
and proclaiming that he was the prophet sent by Allãh. The pagan Arabs
were already used to such queer characters among their otherwise
level-headed people. They pitied these prophets as victims possessed by
evil spirits and offered the help of their medicine men. Obviously, they
were impressed by no amount of prophetic talk.

It is, however, significant that the Arab prophets other than Muhammad
are not known to have aroused the fierce opposition which Muhammad faced
at Mecca and elsewhere. That was because they did not disparage the Arab
Gods while preaching their monotheism. The pagans Arabs were not
perturbed by prophets so long as the latter left their Gods alone. It
was Muhammad who made them sit up when he spelled out the meaning of
monotheism, namely, the dethronement of Arab Gods and the destruction of
Arab temples. Muhammad will very soon denounce the other Arab prophets
also as impostors and liars because they either did not know the meaning
of monotheism or were wilfully suppressing vital parts of the
doctrine.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) This view of Jehovah was expressed by Marcion of the school of
St. Paul, early in the second century AD. “The Old Testament he rejected
*in toto* since it seemed to him, as it has seemed to many Christians
since, to be talking of quite a different God: monstrous, evil-creating,
bloody, the patron of ruffians like David” (*A History of Christianity*
by Paul Johnson, Penguin Books, 1978, p. 46). This was also the view of
the Gnostics, an early Christian sect. The “God” of the Bible and the
Qur’ãn was seen in this light by Thomas Jafferson, Thomas Paine, and
Swami Dayananda as well.

[²](#2a) Shaikh Inayatullah, op. cit., pp. 134-35. There is no evidence
of leavening of the masses; only some members of the Arab elite were
alienated from their society and culture.

[³](#3a) Edward Gibbon, *The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire*,
Modern Library Edition, New York, Vol. III, p. 97.

[⁴](#4a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 31.

[⁵](#5a) These words vis-a-vis idols are found very frequently in the
Bible and will very soon appear in the Qur’ãn.

[⁶](#6a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., pp. 98-101, 103.

[⁷](#7a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit, pp. 80-81.The phenomena of
“prophets” arising in Arabia was comparable to the crop of “
revolutionaries” arising all over the world in the wake of Lenin’s *coup
d’etat* in Russia in 1917.

[⁸](#8a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. VI, p. 745.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 44.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


