+++
title = "16 CHAPTER FIFTEEN MUHAMMAD AND THE MECCANS"

+++
**CHAPTER FIFTEEN**

**MUHAMMAD AND THE MECCANS**

The Prophet had kept his mission concealed for three years after he
received the first revelations. The Muslim brotherhood had functioned as
a secret society. Ibn Ishãq gives a list of persons who had
joined.^([1](#1)) “The advantage of the darkness for the first few years
was great. The darkness saved it from being crushed at the outset.
Ridicule and contempt could be more easily endured when some hundred
persons were involved, than if the Prophet had been compelled to endure
them by himself. It saved him, too, from the character of the eccentric
sage (such as Waraqa and others had borne), investing him from his first
public appearance with that of the leader of a party; it gave the
Prophet time to secure over a reasonable number of people that influence
which he could exercise to a reasonable degree.”^([2](#2))

People in Mecca had, however, sensed that something was afoot. From the
first, Muslims had been directed by Allãh to offer prayers in
congregation. They could not do it inside the city so long as they were
an underground organisation. “When the apostle’s companions prayed,”
reports Ibn Ishãq, “they went to the glens so that people could not see
them praying, and while Sa‘d b. Abû Waqqãs was with a number of the
prophet’s companions in one of the glens of Mecca, a band of polytheists
came upon them while they were praying and rudely interrupted them. They
blamed them for what they were doing until they came to blows, and it
was on that occasion that Sa‘d smote a polytheist with the jawbone of a
camel and wounded him. That was the first blood to be shed in
Islam.”^([3](#3)) No reprisals from the pagan side are reported.

Some more incidents of a similar king happened and the offenders went
unpunished. The pagans were not organised in an ideologically oriented
group, secret or open, to be able to meet the challenge promptly and
effectively. As it happens in every pluralistic society faced with an
aggressive and determined minority, the Meccan majority showed only
surprise and pain at what was happening. This state of helplessness
displayed by the majority helped the Muslims to acquire contempt for it;
some faint-hearted pagans chose to go over fast to what looked like the
winning side. So the secret society felt sufficiently self-confident to
come out in the open. “People began to accept Islam, both men and women,
in large numbers until the fame of it spread throughout Mecca, and it
began to be talked about. Then God commanded His apostle to declare the
truth of what he had received and make known His commandments to men and
call them to Him. Three years elapsed from the time the apostle
concealed his state until God commanded him to publish his religion,
according to information which has reached me. Then God said, ‘Proclaim
what you have been ordered and turn aside from the
polytheists.”’^([4](#4))

The “religion” proclaimed was very simple-the end of the world is near
at hand; on the Last Day the dead will be raised and judged; those who
had believed in Allãh as the only god and in Muhammad as the last
Prophet will enter paradise for an everlasting life of the rarest
pleasures; those who ascribed partners to Allãh or denied Muhammad’s
prophethood or did both will be thrown into blazing hell-fire and
subjected to ever more terrible torments without end or relief. It was
made quite clear at the very outset that belief in Allãh as the only God
was not enough; it had to he accompanied by the belief that Muhammad was
the only mediator through whom Allãh’s mercy could be sought or
obtained.

There were, of course, some novel ways of worshipping Allãh and leading
a pious life. What startled the Meccans, however, was the polemics which
accompanied the publicity of Islam. “To avow Islam meant to renounce
publicly the national worship, to ridicule, and if possible to break
down idols, and unabashedly to use the new salutation and to celebrate
the new-fangled rites. For it must be remembered that Islam was in its
nature polemical. Its Allah was not satisfied with worship, unless
similar honour was paid to no other name; and his worship also was
intolerant of idols, and of all rites not instituted by himself…
Mohammed and Abu Bakr were planning an attack on the national religion,
that cult which every Meccan proudly remembered had within their memory
been defended by a miracle from the Abyssinian invaders and in their
myths had often thus triumphed before. The gods they worshipped
were, Mohammed and Abu Bakr asserted, no gods. For their worship these
innovators would substitute that of the Jews whose power in South Arabia
had recently been overthrown, and of the Christians with whose defeat
the national spirit of Arabia had just awakened.”^([5](#5))

The pagan response was slow in crystallizing. The first thing which the
pagans did was to lead several delegations to Abû Tãlib, Muhammad’s
uncle and guardian. They told him that his nephew had “cursed our gods,
insulted our religion, mocked our way of life and accused our
forefathers of error”, and requested him to restrain the
revolutionary. Abû Tãlib was conciliatory and tried to persuade Muhammad
to go slow. “Do not put on me a burden greater than I can bear”, he said
to his nephew. But the Prophet “continued on his way, publishing God’s
religion and calling men therein.”^([6](#6)) His uncle was in no
position to stop him.  “Perhaps Abu Talib and his numerous family could
not afford to abandon their wealthy relative; and, indeed, had Mohammed
not had some power over his uncle, it is unlikely that the latter would
have submitted to the inconvenience which his nephew’s mission brought
on him.”^([7](#7))

Meanwhile, Islam was having an impact on Meccan society which was even
more painful for a people wedded to the solidarity of family and clan.
Every family from which a member or members had converted to the new
creed was under severe strain. Sons were not only becoming rude to their
parents but also pouring contempt on the elders’ way of life and
worship. Brothers were becoming estranged. Marriages in which one of the
partners had converted, were breaking up fast. As al-Walîd b.
al-Mughîra, a man of standing in Mecca, observed, Muhammad looked like
“a sorcerer who has brought a message by which he separates a man from
his father, or from his brother, or from his wife, or from his
family.”^([8](#8))

“The view prevalent at Meccah concerning Mohammad appears to have been
that he was mad-under the influence of a Jinn, one of the beings who
were supposed to speak through poets and sorcerers. That this charge
stung Mohammed to the quick may be inferred from the virulence with
which he rejects it, and the invective with which he attacks the
‘bastard’ who had uttered it. He charges the author of the outrage with
being unable to write and with being over head and ears in debt and
threatens to brand him on his ‘proboscis.’”^([9](#9)) Allãh thundered on
his prophet’s behalf: “You are not a mad man… And you will see and they
will see, which of you is the demented. Therefore obey not you the
rejecters, who would have you compromise, that they may compromise:
Neither obey you each feeble oath-monger, detractor, spreader abroad of
slanders, hinderer, of the good, an aggressor, malefactor, greedy
therewithal, intrusive. We shall brand him on the nose.”^([10](#10))

This loss of temper on Allãh’s part, however, served only to confirm the
Meccans in their suspicion. Another incident gave strength to it. One
day some Meccans were assembled in the precincts of the Ka‘ba when
Muhammad also happened to come by. The Meccans made some remarks within
his hearing. Muhammad hit back, “By him who holds my life in His hand, I
bring you slaughter.”^([11](#11)) The Meccans were stunned. They
concluded that something had happened to Muhammad who had been known
earlier as a man of even temper. Muhammad had claimed that an angel came
to him often with Allãh’s revelations. The Meccans became sure that he
was being visited by some malevolent Spirit.

The Meccans sent ‘Utba b. Rabî‘a, one of their chiefs, to Muhammad.
Among other offers made by ‘Utba to Muhammad, one was that of providing
medical relief. ‘Utba said, “If this ghost which comes to you, which you
see, is such that you cannot get rid of him, we will find a physician
for you, and exhaust our means in getting you cured, for often a spirit
gets possession of a man until he can be cured of it.”^([12](#12)) The
Prophet remained calm, explained his mission to ‘Utba, and recited some
Qur’ãn. ‘Utba came back convinced that Muhammad was quite sane and
advised the Meccans to leave him alone. “If (other) Arabs kill him,
others will have rid you of him,” he said.^([13](#13)) The Meccans,
however, did not agree with him. They decided to launch an offensive
against the Prophet. Their patience had come to an end.

The questions which the Meccans posed and the observations they made are
scattered over many chapters of Qur’ãn. We have collected and sorted
them out with reference to subject and logical sequence. “The objections
recorded and ostensibly answered in the Koran appear to have been
directed against every part and feature of the new system; against
Mohammed personally, against his notion of prophecy, against his style,
his statements, his doctrines. It is impossible to suggest any
chronological scheme for them.”^([14](#14))

The manner in which the debate is recorded in the Qur’ãn is somewhat
strange. The Meccans must have said what they said, to Muhammad and his
Muslims directly, or among themselves. But the answers come invariably
from Allãh in the form of revelations. It appears as if Allãh thought it
hazardous to depend upon the credibility or the capacity of his prophet
to meet the challenge. “The debate with which the earlier years were
filled was conducted in a variety of ways. Occasionally the Prophet
himself condescended to enter the arena, and confront his antagonists:
he was indeed a powerful preacher and ‘when he talked of the Day of
Judgment his cheeks blazed, and his voice rose, and his manner was
fiery’; apparently, however, he was not a ready debater, and was worsted
when he tried the plan. Moreover, his temper in debate was not easily
controlled, and he was apt to give violent and insulting answers to
questioners.  He therefore received divine instruction not to take part
in open debate, to evade the question and if questioned by the
unbelievers, retire.”^([15](#15))

Cynics may say that the Prophet was using Allãh as an alibi. Whatever be
the truth, Allãh’s intervention helped in preserving some very
significant pagan statements, as we shall see. The biographers of the
Prophet do indicate that a debate took place during his mission at
Mecca. But their reports on the subject are one-sided, apart from being
sketchy.

The style in which the pagan questions are posed and Allãh’s answers
stated in the Qur’ãn is stereotyped. The points the Meccans made are
preceded by the phrase, “They say”, and Allãh’s rejoinders by the
phrase, “Say”. Allãh looks like a prompter guiding from the wings an
actor on the stage. Quite often, the debate is reported as having taken
place between some earlier prophet and his people. It is obvious,
however, that the participants meant are Muhammad and his pagan
contemporaries, “More often then the controversy was conducted as it is…
in election times, when different speakers address different meetings.
The points are recorded and reported by members of the audience to the
antagonists; who then proceed if they deem it worth while, in some
manner to reply.”^([16](#16))

To start with, the Meccans felt amused that a man like Muhammad, who was
distinguished neither by birth nor breeding, should strut around
proclaiming himself a prophet. Muhammad’s followers also came from
classes and occupations which were not very respectable according to
Meccan standards. Allãh reports: “When they see you (O Muhammad) they
treat you as a jest saying: Is he (the man) whom Allãh has sent as a
messenger?  He would have led us far away from our gods if we had not
been staunch to them… Has he invented a lie concerning Allãh or is there
some madness in him? …Shall we forsake our gods for a mad poet? …Or one
of the gods has possessed you in an evil way… Shall we put faith in you
when the lowest (people) follow you? …We see you but mortal (man) like
us, and we see not that any save the most abject among us follow you,
without reflection. We behold in you no merit above us-nay, we deem you
liars… We are surely better than this fellow who can hardly make (his
meaning) clear… We do not understand much of what you say, and we see
you weak among us… We are more (than you) in wealth, and in children…
Why are not angels sent down unto us, and why do we not see our Lord?
…If you cease not, you will soon be the outcast.”^([17](#17))

Allãh keeps mum about his Prophet’s birth and breeding. About the
Prophet’s followers he says that their past is not relevant after they
have come to the true faith. He assures the Meccans that Muhammad is
neither mad, nor a poet, nor possessed. He laments that the Meccans
think too highly of themselves and are proud and scornful. He assures
Muhammad that the time is fast approaching when it will be found out who
is really mad, and that the disbelievers shall stand humbled.

Muhammad’s and his followers’ low birth and lack of breeding may sound a
merit in our own times when an inverted snobbery, which prizes them
above everything else, has been made fashionable by Marxism and allied
ideologies; one has to hide one’s high birth and breeding these days in
order to pass muster. To the Meccans of the seventh century as to their
contemporary societies, however, Muhammad’s bio-data disqualified him,
at least as a messenger from Allãh. Biographers of the prophet would not
have taken the pains they took, and invented fables in order to invest
Muhammad with a distinguished pedigree, had not his background been seen
by them as a distinct disadvantage to his claims and career. Margoliouth
has cited several early Muslim sources to conclude that Muhammad’s
grandfather, ‘Abd al-MuTTalib, was a manumitted slave who made his
living by means which were not considered honourable in Mecca at that
time, namely, lending money and providing water and food to the pilgrims
for a consideration.^([18](#18)) In any case, there is no escape from
the evidence provided by the Qur’ãn that Muhammad himself felt deeply
hurt by the jibes hurled at him by the Meccans and sought consolation
from Allãh. It appears that he himself shared the standards or
prejudices of his age.

Another point which provided amusement to the Meccans was the Prophet’s
incapacity to perform miracles. He had himself invited the trouble by
producing revelations in which the preceding prophets, particularly
Moses and Jesus, had exhibited supernatural powers. Allãh reports: “They
say: This is only a mortal like you who would make himself superior to
you… He is only a man in whom there is a madness. So watch him for a
while… This is only a mortal like you who eats whereof you eat, and
drinks of what you drink… If you were to obey a mortal like yourselves,
you surely will be losers… What ails the messenger of Allãh that he eats
and walks in the markets? …You are but mortals like us who would fain
turn us away from what our fathers used to worship… shall mere mortals
guide us? …You are but a mortal man like us. RaHmãn has naught revealed
to you but a lie… Is this other than a mortal man? Will you then succumb
to magic when you see it? …So bring some token if you are of the
truthful… If only some portent were sent down upon him from his Lord …
If only he would bring us a miracle from the Lord… Why are no portents
sent down upon him? …Why then have armlets of gold not been set upon
him, or angles sent along with him? …We shall not put faith in you till
you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us, or you have a
garden of date-palms and grapes and cause rivers to gush forth therein
abundantly, or you cause the heavens to fall peacemeal as you have
pretended, or bring Allãh and the angels as warrant, or you have a house
of gold, or you ascend into heaven, and even then we will put no faith
in your ascension till you bring down a book that we can read… Or why is
not treasure thrown down unto him or why has he not a paradise from
whence to eat? …You are following but a man bewitched…”^([19](#19))

Allãh assures the Meccans: “Your comrade errs not, nor is deceived…
Surely he beheld him (the angel) on the horizon. Nor is he avid of the
unseen…” He commands the Prophet: “Say: You are a warner only… Say: I am
naught save a mortal messenger… Portents are with Allãh and I am a
warner only… Allãh is able to send down a portent.  But most of them
known not…” He reminds Muhammed that the Meccans are not likely to
believe even if a miracle is shown to them. “The hour drew nigh and the
moon was rent in twain. And if they behold a portent, they turn away and
say: Prolonged illusion.”^([20](#20)) According to some commentators on
the Qur’ãn, this revelation refers to an actual miracle performed by the
Prophet. One night the moon had split into two and Mount Hara was seen
standing between the two parts. But the Meccans dismissed it as an
illusion. Other commentators, however, say that this refers to a future
event when the Last Day will be near at hand.

The Meccan stood firm by their gods; their faith in the gods was not at
all shaken by Muhammad’s attacks. Allãh reports: “When it was said unto
them, There is no God save Allãh, they were scornful, and said: Shall we
forsake our gods for a mad poet?… And they marvel that a warner from
among themselves has come.  They say: This is a wizard, a charlatan.
Makes he the gods One God? This is an astounding thing… The chiefs among
them go about exhorting: Go and be staunch by your gods. This is a thing
designed (against) you. We have not heard this earlier in our religion.
This is naught but an invention. Has a Reminder been revealed unto him
alone among us?… Why not Allãh speak to us, or some sign come to us?…
Had Allãh willed we would not have ascribed (unto him) partners, neither
our forefathers… Had Allãh willed we would not have worshipped aught
beside Him, we and our forefathers, nor forbidden aught commanded from
Him… We worship them only that they may bring us near unto Allãh… He has
invented a lie about Allãh…”^([21](#21))

Some of their observations were addressed to Muhammad, though reported
by Allãh: “Enough for us is that wherein we found our forefathers. Have
you come to us that we serve Allãh alone and foresake what our fathers
worshipped? Do you ask us not to worship what our forefathers
worshipped? We are in grave doubt concerning that to which you call us…
Does your way of prayer command you that we should forsake that which
our forefathers worshipped ?… We found our forefathers following a
religion, and we are guided by their footprints. In what you bring we
are disbelievers… O Wizard! Entreat your Lord by the pact he has made
with you, so that we may walk aright…”^([22](#22))

The Meccans were in no mood to accept the name which Muhammad wanted to
foist on Allãh: “When they see you, they but choose you out of mockery:
Is this (the man) who makes mockery of our gods?  And they would deny
all mention of the RaHmãn… And when they are asked to adore RaHmãn, they
say: What is RaHmãn?  Are we to adore whatever you bid us? And it
increases aversion in them… And when the son of Mary is quoted as an
example, behold! the folk laugh out, and say: Are our gods better, or is
he?… They call our revelations false with strong denial… And when the
Qur’ãn is recited unto them, they do not prostrate
themselves.”^([23](#23))

But, as Muhammad persisted in reviling their gods, the Meccans decided
to hit back. They met him and said: “Muhammad, you will either stop
cursing our gods, or we will curse your Allãh.” They had understood
finally that the Allãh whose will Muhammad was revealing was not the
Allãh they worshipped. Allãh of the Qur’ãn felt concerned at this new
turn and revealed, “Had Allãh willed, they would not have been
idolatrous. We have not set you as a keeper over them, nor are you
responsible for them. Revile not those unto whom they pray beside Allah
lest they wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance.”^([24](#24)) Ibn
Ishãq observes: “I have been told that the apostle refrained from
cursing their gods, and began to call them to Allãh.”^([25](#25))

The Meccans, however, were not at all impressed by the revelations
produced by the Prophet; they did not accept his claim that he received
them from some higher source. They thought that he was inventing them
himself. Allãh reports: “They say: This is naught else than the speech
of a mortal man… This is naught else than an invented lie… Nay, say
they, (these are but) muddled dreams, he has but invented it; nay, he is
but a poet… And when our revelations are recited unto them, they say: We
have heard. If we wish we can speak the like of this. This is naught but
fables of the men of old…”^([26](#26))

Muhammad threw a challenge to the Meccans. Allãh prompted him: “Say:
Then bring a sûrah like unto it, and call (for help) all you can besides
Allãh if you are truthful.”^([27](#27)) The challenge was accepted by
al-NaDr b. Hãrith, a Meccan chief, who said: “I can tell a better story
than he… In what respect is Muhammad a better
story-teller?”^([28](#28)) He told several stories in verses which were
like verses of the Qur’ãn. Muhammad felt outraged and never forgave
al-NaDr. “The effect of the criticism must have been very damaging; for
when the Prophet at the battle of Badr got the man into his power, he
executed him at once while he allowed the others to be
ransomed.”^([29](#29))  Ibn Ishãq confirms that when the apostle was at
al-Safrã’ on his way back from Badr. “al-NaDr was killed by
‘Alî…”^([30](#30)) But while the Prophet was still in Mecca, Allãh
thought it wise to pacify the pagans. He revealed: “It is not a poet’s
speech… nor diviner’s speech. And if he had invented false sayings, we
assuredly had taken him by the right hand, and severed his life-artery,
and not one of you could have held us off from him.”^([31](#31))

The more knowledgeable among the Meccans suspected that Muhammad was
only repeating what he had learnt from the People of the Book, Jews and
Christians. Allãh reports: “They say: And we know well that only a man
teaches him… This is naught but a lie that he has invented and other
folk have helped him so that they produced a slander and a lie… Fables
of men of old which he has written down so that they are dictated to him
morn and evening… One taught (by others), a mad man…”^([32](#32))

There were several stories current in Mecca regarding the particular
person or persons who coached Muhammad in biblical lore which, they
said, was all that came out in the Qur’ãn. “One account says it was
Jabar, a Greek servant to Amer Ebn al Hadrami, who could read and write
well; another, that they were Jabar and Yesar, two slaves who followed
the trade of sword cutlers at Mecca, and used to read the pentateuch and
gospel and had often Mohammed as their auditor, when he passed that
way. Another tells us it was Aîsh, or Yãsîh, a domestic of al Haweiteb
Ebn Abd al ‘Uzzã, who was a man of some learning, and had embraced
Mohammedanism. Another supposes it was Kais, a Christian, whose house
Muhammad frequented; another, that it was Addãs, a servant of Otba Ebn
Rabia…”^([33](#33))

Having seen the People of the Book from close quarters, the Meccans
found it difficult to believe that divine knowledge had been sent to the
Jews and the Christians long ago, and that they themselves were deprived
of it till the advent of Muhammad. Allãh proceeds: “They say: The
Scripture was revealed only to two sets of people before us, and we in
sooth were not aware of what they read… If the Scripture had been
revealed unto us, we surely would have been better guided than are they…
Two magics which support each other… In both we are disbelievers… If it
had been any good they would not have been before us in attaining it…
This is an ancient lie.”^([34](#34))

It had also been noticed that Muhammad produced revelations according to
his convenience in the debate. Allãh complained: “And when we put a
revelation in place of (another), they say: You are but inventing… Why
is not the Qur’ãn revealed unto him all at one.”^([35](#35)) Allãh had
himself revealed that the Qur’ãn was being read out from a “well guarded
tablet” preserved in the highest heaven. Why was it then being doled out
in bits and pieces? The Meccans suspected that the Prophet was inventing
verses as occasion demanded.

The incident which confirmed their suspicion was that of the so-called
Satanic Verses. Tabarî has recorded: “When the apostle saw that his
people turned their backs on him and he was pained by their estrangement
from what he brought them from God he longed that there should come to
him from God a message that would reconcile his people to him… Then God
sent down, ‘Have ye thought of Al-Lãt and al-‘Uzzã and Manãt the third,
the other, these are the exalted Gharãnîq whose intercession is
approved.’” The Meccans felt happy and thought that the strife was over,
now that Muhammad had endorsed their Goddesses. But Muhammad had to face
his own followers who felt betrayed. The verses were withdrawn soon
after and replaced by another revelation. “So God annulled what Satan
had suggested and God established His verses.”^([36](#36))

So the Meccans turned down the Qur’ãn totally and finally. Allãh
reports: “Their chieftains said: We surely see you in foolishness and we
deem you of the liars… It is all one to us whether you preach or are not
of those who preach… Our hearts are protected from that unto which you
(Muhammad) call us, and in our ears there is deafness, and between us
and you there is a veil… They say (to their people): Heed not this
Qur’ãn, and drown the hearing of it.”^([37](#37))

Having reaffirmed their Gods and rejected Muhammad’s prophethood as well
as revelations, the Meccans made fun of the Last Day (*Yaumu’l Ãkhir*)
which is described by Allah variously as Day of Resurrection (*Yaumu’l
Qiyamah*), Day of Separation (*Yaumu’l FaSl*), Day of Reckoning
(*Yaumu’l Hisãb*), Day of Awakening (*Yaumu’l Ba’l*), Day of Judgment
(*Yaumu’l Dîn*), Day of Encompassing (*Yaumu’l MuHit*) or simply as The
Hour (As-Sa’ah).^([38](#38)) “For Muhammad, a revivalist preacher
seeking to strike terror in his hearers, the doctrines of resurrection
and of the judgment were of the first importance, and the Qur’ãn, in
consequence, is full of references to them.”^([39](#39)) on this day,
the dead are to be raised, judged, and sent to eternal heaven if they
were believers, and to an eternal hell if they were unbelievers. The
pagan Arabs, on the other hand, believed in survival of the human
personality after death. In the absence of positive evidence it is
difficult to give details of their doctrine. But if we go by what the
Sabaeans believed, they stood for transmigration of
souls.^([40](#40)) So “the notion of the reconstruction of the decayed
body seemed to them in the highest degree absurd, and Mohammed’s promise
of heavenly spouses occasioned mirth.”^([41](#41))

Allãh reports: “They say: Shall we show you a man who will tell you
(that) when you have become dispersed in death, with the most complete
dispersal, still even then, you will be created anew. Has he invented a
lie concerning Allãh or is there in him a madness?… This is a strange
thing: When we are dead and have become dust like our forefathers, shall
we verily be brought back?  We were promised this forsooth, we and our
forefathers. This is naught but fables of the men of old. Bring back our
fathers if you speak the truth… When we are lost in the earth, how can
we then be recreated?… Shall we really be restored to our first state:
Even after we are crumbled bones?  Then that will be a vain
proceeding… There is naught but our life of this world; we die and we
live, and naught destroys us save Time… We deem it but a conjecture, and
are by no means convinced… And they swear by Allãh their most binding
oaths (that) Allãh will not raise him who dies…”^([42](#42))

Allãh’s rejoinder is also recorded in the Qur’ãn: “We know what the
earth takes, and with us is a recording Book… Thinks man we shall not
assemble his bones. We are able to restore his very finger… Surely it
will need but one Shout, and they will be awakened… Those of old and
those of later times, will all be brought together to the tryst of an
appointed day. Then you the deniers, you will eat of a tree called
Zaqqum, and will fill your bellies therewith and thereon you will drink
of boiling water, drinking as the camel drinks. This will be their
welcome on the Day of Judgment…”^([43](#43))

The Meccans, however, were not cowed down by these threats. They
challenged Muhammad to hurry up and bring down the doom upon them. Allãh
reports: “They say: You have disputed with us and multiplied disputation
with us. Now bring down upon us that wherewith you threaten us, if you
are truthful… O Allãh! if this be indeed the truth from you, rain down
stones on us or bring us some painful doom… Our Lord! Hasten us for our
fate before the Day of Reckoning… They ask you of the Hour: When will it
come to port?… When will the promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?
When is the Day of Judgment?… They say: The hour will never come to
us…”^([44](#44)) The Meccans threw this challenge again and again if the
Qur’ãn is to be believed.

Muhammad had to wriggle out of the situation. Allãh reports: “Say:
Knowledge thereof is with my Lord. He alone will manifest it at the
proper time… It comes not to you save unawares… But Allãh will not
punish them while you (Muhammad) are with them… For every nation there
is an appointed time… It is (only) then when it has befallen that you
will believe… And it is in the Scriptures of the men of old. Is it not a
portent for them that the doctors of the Children of Israel know it?
…You are but a warner sent unto them… So withdraw from them and await
(the event)…”^([45](#45))

“Thus then the years of the debate rolled on; in which parties increased
in vehemence and antagonism, and in which the successful polemics of
the Meccans on the new religion were met by ridicule and refutation of
the religious notions current among the pagans. As has been said, the
Meccan side is known only from the statements of the adversary, whose
acquaintance with the Meccan religion may not have been very
deep…”^([46](#46))

The poet Abû Qays b. al-Aslat whose pseudonym was Sayfî summed up the
pagan position as follows:

> Lord of mankind, serious things have happened.  
> The difficult and the simple are involved.  
> Lord of mankind, if we have erred  
> Guide us to the good path.  
> Were it not for our Lord we should be Jews  
> And the religion of Jews is not convenient.  
> Were it not for our Lord we should be, Christians  
> Along with the monks on Mount Jalîl.  
> But when we were created we were created  
> Hanîfs; our religion is from all generations.^([47](#47))

It may be noted that the Lord of the pagans is the Lord of mankind, and
not the Lord of Muslims alone.

Muhammad’s mission at Mecca had failed. Commenting on the last phase of
the Meccan Sûras, F. Buhl says: “It is the weakest part of the Qur’ãn,
in which Muhammad’s imagination became exhausted, and he was content
with tiresome repetitions of his earlier ideas and especially with the
tales of the prophets. The form becomes discursive, and more prosaic…
The passages belonging to it show clearly that Muhammad would have
become intellectually bankrupt if the migration to Medina had not
aroused him to a new effort…”^([48](#48))

This is not the place to go into what the Prophet did after migration to
Medina; the story has been documented in detail by the biographers of
the Prophet-surprise raids on trade caravans and tribal settlements; the
use of plunder thus obtained for recruiting an ever-growing army of
desperados; assassinations of opponents ordered, and blessed when
successful; expropriation, expulsion and massacre of Jews who had lived
for long in Medina; attack on and enslavement of Jews settled in Khybar;
sale of women and children, captured in raids, for buying horses and
arms; conquest of Mecca and the rest of Arabia by show as well as use of
overwhelming force; and winning over to his fold, by means of bribes,
the tricksters and the treacherous in every Arab tribe. He organised no
less than eighty-six expeditions, twenty-six of which he led himself. He
was getting ready to invade neighbouring lands when he died all of a
sudden. What interests us in the present context are the revelations he
produced vis-a-vis those who worship Gods other than his Allãh.

Believers were prohibited from contracting marriage relations with the
idolaters;^([49](#49)) they were forbidden to pray for the idolaters,
even if the latter were their parents or kinsmen of the first
degree.^([50](#50)) Immediately after the conquest of Mecca, the Ka‘ba
which had been a pagan temple for ages past was placed out of bounds for
the pagans; it was converted into a place of Muslim worship as we shall
see. Allãh revised the history of Arabia in order to justify the
usurpation. He revealed, “Say: Allãh speaks truth… The first sanctuary
appointed for mankind was that at Becca… And (remember) when we prepared
for Abraham the place of the (holy) House saying, Ascribe you nothing as
partners unto Me, and purify my house for those who make the round
(thereof) and those who stand and those who bow and make
prostrations… It is not for the idolaters to tend Allãh’s sanctuaries,
bearing witness against themselves of disbelief… The idolaters only are
unclean. So let them not near the Place of Inviolable worship after this
year…”^([51](#51))

A permanent *jihãd* (holy war) was pronounced on the idolaters: “Those
who believe do battle for the cause of Allãh; and those who disbelieve
do battle for the cause of idols. So fight the minions of the devil…
Slay the idolaters wherever you find them, and take them (captive) and
besiege them, and prepare for them each ambush…”^([52](#52))

Going back to the debate at Mecca, it is obvious that in those days
Allãh was keeping a diary of all that happened in the pagan metropolis
between the Muslims on the one hand and the pagans on the other. It is
difficult to believe that he recorded only that which the pagans said
and ignored altogether that which they did to the Muslims. If this
inference is correct, certain conclusions follow.

The bulk of the Qur’ãn covers the Meccan period in the life of the
Prophet. We do not find in any of the chapters even the hint of any
physical method used by the Meccans towards Muhammad or his Muslims. The
only violence we come across is in the language of Allãh who frets and
fumes and threatens the Meccans with dire consequences, all too
frequently and for no other reason than that the Meccans refuse to
accept what is written in the scriptures of the Jews and the Christians,
and stick to their own ancient religion.  What credence, then, can be
placed in the stories, sold by the biographers of Muhammad, that while
the Prophet argued his case with patience and in a reasoned manner, his
opponents did not know how to meet the challenge and resorted to
physical methods? We find no evidence for these stories in the only
contemporary source available to us, namely, the Qur’ãn.

On the contrary, the biographers provide several broad hints of violence
threatened or committed by the zealots of Islam in the streets of Mecca.
For instance, when ‘Umar became a Muslim, he went to the Ka‘ba and
proclaimed to his fellow citizens, “There is no god but Allah, and
Muhammad is the apostle of Allah!  Whoever of you moves, I shall cut off
his head with my bright scimitar, and shall send him to the Mansion of
destruction.”^([53](#53)) Margoliouth observes: “The persons whose
accession to Islam was most welcomed were men of physical strength, and
much actual fighting must have taken place at Meccah before the Flight;
else the readiness with which the Moslems after the Flight could produce
from their number tried champions would be inexplicable. A tried
champion must have been tried somewhere…”^([54](#54)) We do not expect
Allãh to find place for these Muslim doings in his diary. We also know
his defence for slurring over the misdeeds of his minions. It is the
same as that of every Marxist historian-Comrade! I am a partisan. I have
no use for bloody bourgois objectivity.” All that we are saying is that
we cannot help suspecting the stories which say that the Muslims were on
the receiving end. They look very much like the products of Islamic
martyrology.

Martyrs have been the stock-in-trade of prophetic creeds down the ages.
Long before the prophet of Islam was born, the annalists of Judaism and
Christianity had perfected the art of making the agressor look like the
victim of aggression, and vice versa. The Bible was the master-piece
produced by this art. The biographers of the Prophet had only to borrow
the art and practise it in the new context. The art continued to
flourish in Christian and Muslim countries till the eighteenth century
when it was rejected in the modern West and a new discipline of
history-writing emerged. It was, however, revived in Soviet Russia under
Stalin and had a fresh lease of life. Now Russia has also rejected it
with repugnance. The only land in which it is being practised at present
and on some scale is India. The Stalinist historians who were placed in
positions of power in the regime of Jawaharlal Nehru and his Minister of
“Education”, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, have been practising this art with
considerable self-confidence. They are of course nowhere near the
masters of yester years.  It is seldom that apes acquire the looks of
those they imitate. But they do create confusion till they are
identified and exposed.

Another conclusion follows from Allãh’s silence over any mundane motives
on the part of the Meccans when they stand up for their Gods. Allãh
accused them of ignorance, obstinacy, temptations from Satan and the
rest, but never of greed for the rich revenues brought in by pilgrims to
the Ka‘ba. It needs an investigation as to when and by whom this base
motive was attributed to the Meccans for explaining their devotion to
their religion. Allãh for sure had no part in spreading the canard.
Whatever its origin, this much is certain that it must have acquired
respectability with the spread of Marxism. By now it has become the most
fashionable way of explaining the quarrel between Muhammad and his
kinsmen. Marxists as well non-Marxists mouth it with equal conviction.
Nearer home, the same mind has spread a similar canard about the
Brahmins. We are told that the Brahmins proclaim and practise their
“puerile priestcraft” not because they believe in any part of it but
because it brings them mundane privileges and material profits. Those
who have studied the history of Brahmins and are familiar with the
depths of their spiritual traditions, and therefore dismiss the lies
spread about them by Christian missionaries and Marxist mullahs, can
very well judge the worth of the canard spread about the Meccans.

The motives of the converts to Islam were, however, not in doubt from
the very first. “Of any moralising or demoralising effect which
Mohammed’s teaching had upon his followers, we cannot speak with
precision. When he was at the head of the robber community it is
probable that the demoralising influence began to be felt; it was then
that men who had never broken an oath learnt that they might evade their
obligations, and that men to whom the blood of their clansmen had been
as their own began to shed it with impunity in the cause of God; and
that lying and treachery in the cause of Islam received divine approval,
hesitation to perjure oneself in that cause being reprehended as a
weakness. It was then, too, that Moslems became distinguished by the
obscenity of their language. It was then, too, that the coveting of
goods and wives (possessed by Unbelievers) was avowed without
discouragement from the Prophet… On the other hand, there is no evidence
that the Moslems were either in personal or altruistic morality better
than the pagans…”^([55](#55))

The war which Allãh of the Qur’ãn had declared on pagan Gods was aimed
at ensuring a moral holiday for his followers. The ancient religion of
Arabia which centred round those Gods had established certain moral
standards and social conventions which kept the beast in man under
restraint. The destruction of temples where the Gods were worshipped
gave a clear signal that the beast had been unleashed.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., pp. 116-17.

[²](#2a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 112.

[³](#3a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 118.

[⁴](#4a) Ibid., p. 117. Allãh’s command can be read in Qur’ãn, 15.8-9,
94.

[⁵](#5a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 118-19.

[⁶](#6a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit, p. 119.

[⁷](#7a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 123. It may be mentioned that
Muhammad was married to a rich woman, Khadîjah, and controlled her
considerable wealth which he used for supporting his uncle’s family as
well as in the service of the mission to which his wife also subscribed.

[⁸](#8a) Ibn Ishãq, op.  cit, p. 121.

[⁹](#9a) D.S. Margoliouth, p. cit., p. 121.

[¹⁰](#10a) Qur’ãn, 68.2, 5-6, 8-13.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 131.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., p. 132.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p. 133.

[¹⁴](#14a) D.S. Margoliouth, op., cit., p. 130.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., p. 127. Allãhs’ instruction to the Prophet can be read
in Qur’ãn 6.67.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid., pp. 127-28.

[¹⁷](#17a) “Qur’ãn 25.41-42. 34.8; 37.36; 11.54; 26.111; 11.27; 43.52;
11.91; 34.35; 25.21; 26.167.

[¹⁸](#18a) D. S. Margoliouth, op. cit., pp. 41-49.

[¹⁹](#19a) Qur’ãn. 23.24,25,33,34; 2S.6; 14.10; 64.60; 36.15; 21.3;
26.154; 13.7; 20.133; 29.50-, 43.53; 17.90-93; 25.8. The Meccans (36.15)
have a fling at RaHmãn, the name which the Prophet gave to Allãh quite
frequently. They hated this name.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., 53.2; 81.23-24; 29.50; 13.7; 54.1-2.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., 37.35-36; 38.4-8; 2.183; 6.149; 39.3; 42.24.

[²²](#22a) Ibid., 5.104; 7.70; 11.62; 11.87; 43.22,24,49.

[²³](#23a) Ibid., 21.36; 25.60; 43.57-58; 78.28; 84.21.

[²⁴](#24a) Ibid., 6.108-109.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibn Ishãq, op, cit., p. 162.

[²⁶](#26a) Qur’ãn,74.25; 34.43 (also 11.13,35;32.3;34.43;46.8; 52.33);
21.5; 8.3l.,

[²⁷](#27a) Ibid., 10.38.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 136.  See also p. 163.

[²⁹](#29a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 135.

[³⁰](#30a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 308.

[³¹](#31a) Qur’ãn, 69, 41-42. 44-47.

[³²](#32a) Ibid., 16.103; 25.4-5; 44.14. The Meccan allegation goes to
show that Muhammad was not an illiterate as is asserted even in the
Qur’ãn (29.46,49).

[³³](#33a) George Sale, *The Koran or Alcoran of Mohammed*, London
(n.d). p. 233, footnote 1.

[³⁴](#34a) Qur’ãn, 6.157-58; 28.48; 46.11.

[³⁵](#35a) Ibid., 16.101; 25.32;

[³⁶](#36a) Insert in Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 165-66. Allah’s replacement
of the “Satanic Verses” can be read in Qur’ãn. 53.19-17.

[³⁷](#37a) Qur’ãn, 7.66; 26.136; 41.5. 46.26.

[³⁸](#38a) Ibid., 2.79; 77.14; 40.28; 30.56; 1.3; 11.85.

[³⁹](#39a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. IV, p.1018.

[⁴⁰](#40a) *Encyclopaedia Americana*, New York, 19252, Vol. XXIV, p. 77.

[⁴¹](#41a) D. S. Margoliouth, op, cit. p. 138.

[⁴²](#42a) Qur’ãn, 34.7-8; 50.2-3; 27.67-68; 44.36; 45.32; 32.10;
79.10-12, 45 24, 32; 16.38. The reference to the earlier promise points
to the Jews who had been proclaiming for a long time that the
forefathers of the Arabs will be raised again and judged.

[⁴³](#43a) Ibid., 50.4; 75.3-4; 79.13-14; 56.49-57.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Ibid., 11.22; 8.32; 48.16; 7.187; 10.48; 32.28; 51.13; 34.3.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Ibid., 7.187.8.33:10.49,51; 26.96-87; 79.45.

[⁴⁶](#46a) D. S. Margoliouth. op. cit., p. 141.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 201.

[⁴⁸](#48a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Volume IV, p. 1075.

[⁴⁹](#49a) Qur’ãn. 2.221.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Ibid., 9.113-14.

[⁵¹](#51a) Ibid., 3.95-96; 22.26; 9.17,28. “Mecca” was also pronounced
as “Becca” in olden times.

[⁵²](#52a) Ibid., 4.76, 9.5.

[⁵³](#53a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa, or Garden of Purity* by Muhammad bin
Khavendshah bin Mahmud translated into English by E. Rehatsek, first
published 1893, Delhi Reprint 1982, Vol. I, pt. II, p. 183.

[⁵⁴](#54a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 161.

[⁵⁵](#55a) D. S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 149.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


