+++
title = "17 CHAPTER SIXTEEN THE PROPHET DESTROYS PAGAN TEMPLES"

+++
**CHAPTER SIXTEEN**

**THE PROPHET DESTROYS PAGAN TEMPLES**

Judaism and Christianity had equipped the Prophet of Islam with an
exclusive god and a sectarian scripture which declared war on pagan Gods
and their places of worship. The Jews and Christians in Arabia,
descended from immigrants or native converts, also provided practical
demonstration of how to proceed vis-a-vis pagan temples, whenever and
wherever these two sects acquired political power, howsoever shortlived.

We do not know what the Christianized Arabs on the borders of the
Byzantine Empire did to pagan places of worship; the sources are silent
on the subject. It is a safe bet that they must have followed in the
footsteps of their mentors in the Empire. Some information, however, is
available on what happened in Yemen, the southern province of Arabia.
Some years before the birth of Muhammad, Tubba‘, the Himayrite king of
Yemen, had converted to Judaism under the influence of two rabbis from
Yathrib (Medina). He used state-power for converting his people to the
new creed. “Now Ri’ãm,” reports Ibn Ishãq, “was one of the temples which
they venerated and where they offered sacrifices and received oracles
when they were polytheists. The two rabbis told Tubba‘ that it was
merely a shayTãn which deceived them in this way and they asked to be
allowed to deal with it. When the king agreed they commanded a black dog
to come out of it and killed it-at least this is what the Yamanites say.
Then they destroyed the temple and I am told that its ruins to this day
show traces of the blood that was poured over it.”^([1](#1)) The blood
must have been that of the pagans who courted death in defence of the
temple.

Around the same lime, some nobles of Najran, another principality in
Yemen, were converted to Christianity by a missionary named Faymiyûn.
“At this time,” reports Ibn Ishãq, “the people of Najrãn followed the
religion of the Arabs worshipping a great palm-tree. Every year they had
a festival when they hung on the tree any fine garment they could find
and women’s jewels. Then they sallied out and devoted the day to it.”
Faymiyûn reported to the nobles that the palm-tree “could neither help
nor hurt” and that “if he were to curse the tree in the name of God, He
would destroy it, for He was God Alone without companion.” The nobles
agreed. Faymiyûn “invoked God against the tree and God sent a wind
against it which tore it from its roots and cast it on the ground.” The
miracle helped the people of Najran to adopt the “law of Îsã b. Maryam”
in which Faymiyûn “instructed them.”^([2](#2)) In plain language the
story says that political power was used for forcing the people into the
Christian fold and destroying their places of worship. Churches rose on
the sites of sacred groves and pagan temples.

The Judaic regime in the neighbourhood of Najran, however, was
militarily more powerful. As already related, the Himayrite king Dhû
Nuwãs marched on Najran, slaughtered thousands of Christians, and forced
the rest into the fold of Judaism. It is not recorded what this hero of
Judaism did to the Christian churches which had come up. But one can be
sure that they were demolished or converted into synagogues.

In turn, the victory of Judaism was short-lived. The Christian king of
Abyssinia sent an army which overthrew the Judaic regime in Yemen and
imposed Christianity on the whole province. Abraha, the Abyssinian
governor, demolished the synagogues and erected churches on their
sites. He built a grand cathedral at San‘ã’, the seat of his government,
and informed his king that “I have erected a house and built a church so
as to put an end to the circumambulation of the Ka’bah by pilgrims and
visitors.”^([3](#3)) He was looking forward to destroying the pagan
temple in Mecca.

The excuse for Christian egression was provided by an Arab from Mecca
who “went forth until he came to the cathedral and defiled it” during
the night. Abraha made enquiries. He “learned that the outrage had been
committed by an Arab who came from the temple in Mecca where the Arabs
went on pilgrimage, and that he had done this in anger at his threat to
divert the Arabs’ pilgrimage to the cathedral, showing thereby that it
was unworthy of reverence.” He felt “enraged and swore that he would go
to the temple and destroy it.”^([4](#4)) A Christian army equipped with
elephants marched on Mecca and encamped in the outskirts of the city
which the Arabs were in no position to defend against a formidable foe.
But an epidemic or some other disaster forced the invaders to beat a
retreat.

The Arabs in Yemen had meanwhile invited help from Persia. “The films of
Judaism and Christianity,” writes Margoliouth, “torn off the face of
South Arabia, paganism it seems was restored: not indeed at Najran,
where Christianity, remained, as in an island; but the rulers were
pagans, and in league with the worst enemy of the Cross. Meanwhile the
matters about which the sects were at variance were evoking interest in
minds that had been alien from them.”^([5](#5))

Muhammad was born in the year in which the Christian invasion of Mecca
took place. The pagan Arabs celebrated for long what they regarded as a
victory of their Gods over the Christian godling. Years later, after he
had floated the myth of Abraham as the latest builder of the Ka‘ba,
Muhammad will pronounce that the defeat of the Christian army was
brought about by the God of Abraham. But that was a big bluff prompted
by the Jewish refusal to accept him as a prophet. “The connection of the
Abraham-myth with the Ka’bah,” observes Margoliouth, “appears to have
been the result of later speculation, and to have been fully developed
only when a political need for it arose.”^([6](#6)) It was a case of
ideological usurpation of the place before physical misappropriation
occured.

It is difficult to say at what stage of his life Muhammad became a
convinced monotheist. The evidence available suggests that his evolution
towards this creed was a slow process. Dealing with the years after his
marriage to Khadîjah and before he became a prophet, Margoliouth cites
old Islamic sources and concludes that Muhammad was a polytheist for
quite some time. “The names of some of the children show that their
parents when they named them were idolaters. Nor is there anything to
indicate that Mohammed was at this time of a monothestic or religious
turn of mind. He with Khadijah performed some domestic rite in honour of
one of the goddesses each night before retiring. At the wedding of his
cousin, Abu Lahab’s daughter, he is represented as clamouring for sport…
He confessed to having at one time sacrified a grey sheep to
Al-‘Uzza-and probably did so more than once… A story which may be true
shows us Mohammed with his stepson inviting the Meccan monotheist Zaid,
son of ‘Amr, to eat with them-of meat offered to idols: the old man
refused…”^([7](#7))

Islamic hagiography, however, tells us that the Prophet was an
uncompromising monotheist and a determined iconoclast from the moment he
was conceived in the womb of his mother.  “It is related that on the
morning of conception the idols in all the inhabited quarters of the
earth were overturned…”^([8](#8)) Mightier events took place on the
night of his birth. A lake dried up, a river overflowed and the palace
of the Persian monarch “so trembled that fourteen of its pinnacles fell
to the ground.” More significantly “news arrived from Estakhan that the
fire of the chief temple of Persia, which had burned for a thousand
years, had become extinguished.”^([9](#9)) Nearer home, the Pagans in
Mecca witnessed a scene which left them distressed. “Another event of
the night of the nativity took place when the Qoraish were holding a
festival in honour of one of their idols, in whose temple they had at
that time assembled, and were engaged in eating and drinking. They
found, however, that their god had fallen to the ground, and set him up
again; but as he was, a short time afterwards, again found prostrate on
his face, the idolaters were much dismayed and erected him again. When
they had done so the third time, a voice was heard from the cavity of
the idol saying:

> All the regions of the earth, in the east and west,  
> Respond to the nativity, whom its light strikes;  
> And idolatry decreases, and the hearts of all  
> The kings of the earth tremble with fear.”^([10](#10))

As a baby, Muhammad was suckled by a desert woman, Halîma. One day she
came to Mecca to see the ‘Ukãz fair, carrying Muhammad with her. An
astrologer saw the baby and shouted, “Come here, O people of Hudayl,
come here, O Arabs.” People gathered round him, Halîma among them. He
pointed towards the baby and said, “He will slaughter people of your
religion and smash your idols.” Halîma took fright and ran away with the
baby.^([11](#11))

Muhammad was more than three years old when Halîma took him to Mecca
with the intention of returning him to his family. But the child got
lost when they arrived in the city. Halîma was searching frantically for
him when she met an old man who heard her story and wanted to help. “The
foolish man,” says the biographer, “went to Hobal, and after praising
him as is the fashion of idolaters, he continued: ‘This woman of the
Bani Sa‘ad says that she lost Muhammad the son of A’bd-ul-Muttalib;
restore him to her if it so pleaseth thee’… As soon as that misguided
individual had pronounced these words Hobal fell prostrate on his face,
and from the cavity of his statute the words were heard: ‘What have I to
do with Muhammad who will be the cause of our destruction?… Tell the
idolaters that he is the great sacrifice; that is to say, he will kill
all, except those who will be so fortunate as to follow
him.’”^([12](#12))

Muhammad was a young boy when he was invited by his uncles and aunts to
join a celebration in honour of Buãna, a God to whom the Quraysh were
much devoted. He was reluctant but yielded under pressure from the
family. But when he came back, he was terribly frightened and looked
depressed. His aunts asked what had happened to him. He said, “Whenever
I went near an idol, I saw a man, white and tall, calling out to me, ‘O
Muhammad! get back, do not touch it.’”^([13](#13)) He never joined a
pagan celebration again.

Some time later, his people were sacrificing to Buãna. A voice came out
of the idol’s belly, “A strange thing has happened. We are being burnt
in fire. Abeyance of *wahy* (revelation) has come to an end. A prophet
has taken birth in Mecca. His name is Ahmad. He will migrate to
Yathrib.”^([14](#14))

His uncle, Abû Tãlib, had taken Muhammad with a caravan going to Syria.
The caravan halted near a monastery at Bostra where Bahira, a Christian
monk, felt drawn towards Muhamad and made enquiries about him from the
other Arabs. “When the people had finished eating,” reports Ibn Ishãq,
“and gone away Bahira got up and said to him, ‘Boy, I ask you by al-Lãt
and al-‘Uzza to answer my questions.’ Now Bahira said this only because
he had heard his people swearing by these gods. They allege that the
apostle of God said to him, ‘Do not ask me by al-Lãt and al-‘Uzzã, for
by Allah nothing is more hateful for me than these two
gods’”^([15](#15))

A similar event is reported to have happened in his youth when he was
employed by Khadîjah and travelled to Egypt with her merchandise. The
caravan came across another Christian monk named NasTTur who also fell
for Mohammad. “NasTTur… descended from the roof of his hermitage, and
said to the apostle of Allah: ‘I adjure thee by Lãt and U’zza to tell me
what thy name is.’ His holy and prophetic lordship replied: ‘May thy
mother be childless!  Begone from me; for the Arabs have not uttered any
words more disagreeable to me than thine.’”^([16](#16)) At a latter
stage in the same journey Muhammad had a dispute with a Jew on account
of some business transaction. The Jew said; “I adjure you by Lãt and
U’zza.” Muhammad replied: “Whenever I pass by Lãt and U’zza, I turn away
my face from them.”^([17](#17))

Now, it is well-known that hagiography everywhere projects future events
into the past. We have quoted from the hagiography of the Prophet not to
decry it but to make the point that Islamic lore has always looked at
Muhammad as a born iconoclast. This was not necessary because only his
practices as a prophet provide the pious precedents. But hagiography
hates to leave any loopholes, even if it has to invent events.

Hagiography yields place to history as we move into the period of
Muhammad’s prophethood. While initiating ‘Alî b. Abû Tãlib into Islam,
Muhammad said: “I call you to God, the One without associate, to worship
him and to disavow al-Lãt and al-‘Uzza.” ‘Alî was surprised as he had
never heard such a thing before, and offered to consult his father, Abû
Tãlib. But Muhammad told him, “If you do not accept Islam, then conceal
the matter.” Next morning, ‘Alî came and requested Muhammad to initiate
him. He had made up his mind after a night’s reflection. Muhammad said
to him, “Bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone without
associate, and disavow al-Lãt and al-‘Uzzã.” ‘Alî became a Muslim but
“concealed his Islam and did not let it be seen.”^([18](#18)) Islam at
this time was a secret society.

Ibn Hanbal cites another tradition from ‘Ali about what the Prophet
attempted while Islam was being kept concealed. ‘Alî said: “I and the
Prophet walked till we came to the Ka‘ba. Then the Prophet of Allãh said
to me, ‘Sit down.’ Then he stood on my shoulders and I arose. But when
he saw that I could not support him, he came down, sat down and said,
‘Stand on my shoulders.’ Then I climbed on his shoulders and he stood up
and it seemed to me as if I could have touched the sky, had I wished.
Then I climbed on the roof of the Ka‘ba on which there was an image of
copper and iron. Then I began to loosen it at its right and left side,
in front and behind until it was in my power. Then the Prophet of Allãh
called to me: ‘Throw it down.’ Then I threw it down so that it broke
into pieces like a bottle. I then climbed down from the Ka‘ba and
hurried away with the Prophet, till we hid ourselves in the houses for
fear some one might meet us.”^([19](#19)) Shi‘ah theologians have
transferred this adventure to the time when the Prophet reached Ka‘ba
after the conquest of Mecca.^([20](#20)) But that is no more than a
sectarian exercise. The language of the tradition connects the event to
the time when Islam was still a secret society. Moreover, ‘Alî is shown
as a boy rather than a stalwart which he had become by the time Mecca
was conquered.

Another incident relates to the time after Islam had come out into the
open. It was reported to Hamzah, the Prophet’s uncle, that Abû’l Hakãm,
a Meccan chief whom the Muslims called Abû Jãhl, had insulted Muhammad.
Hamzah was still a pagan and, therefore, cared for kinship ties. He went
to Muhammad who was sitting in the precincts of the Ka‘ba, and said,
“Thy uncle hast come to take vengeance on thy enemy.” Muhammad asked him
to leave alone the man “who has no uncle, neither father nor mother, no
man of business, nor wazir,” meaning himself. “But Hamzah swore by Lãt
and U’zza saying, ‘I have come only to aid and protect thee.’” The
Prophet felt annoyed at his uncle’s mention of the pagan Goddesses, and
said, “I swear by that God who has sent me in truth, that if thou
fightest long enough against infidels to be drowned in their blood, thou
will only be removed further and further from the Lord of unity, until
thou sayest, ‘I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and I
testify that Muhammad is the apostle of Allah.’”^([21](#21))

On the whole, however, the situation in Mecca was unfavourable to the
Prophet. The pagans were in a strong position and he could not touch
their idols or places of worship, howsoever keen he might have been to
desecrate or destroy them. His attempt to invite another Abyssinian
invasion of Mecca for taking over the Ka‘ba and turning it into a place
of monotheistic worship, was also a failure. The Christian king was very
kind to the Muslims whom Muhammad had sent to his court. His domestic
situation, however, did not permit a foreign adventure. The Prophet’s
attempt to raise Tã’if against Mecca also ended in failure. He found
himself utterly helpless against the pagan stronghold. He could only
curse the idolaters and invoke Allãh’s wrath against them.

It was in Medina that his followers started doing something concrete
vis-a-vis the idols, after they had entered into a pact with him at
al-‘Aqaba for moving his headquarters to their city. Ibn Ishãq reports,
“When they came to Medina they openly professed Islam there. Now some of
the shykhs still kept to their old idolatry, among whom was ‘Amr b.
al-Jamûh… whose son Mu‘ãdh had been present at al-‘Aqaba and done homage
to the apostle there. ‘Amr was one of the tribal nobles and leaders and
had set up in his house a wooden idol called Manãt as the nobles used to
do, making it a god to reverence and keeping it clean.  When the young
men of B. Salama… and his own son Mu‘ãdh adopted Islam with the other
men who had been at al-‘Aqaba they used to creep in at night to this
idol of ‘Amr’s and carry it away and throw it on its face into a
cesspit. When the morning came ‘Amr cried, ‘Woe to you! Who has been at
our gods this night?’ Then he went in search of the idol and when he
found it he washed it and cleaned it and perfumed it saying, ‘By God, if
I knew who had done this I would treat him shamefully.’ When night came
and he was fast asleep they did the same again and he restored the idol
in the morning… This happened several times…”^([22](#22))

‘Alî found a Muslim stealing idols in the night and getting them burnt,
when he stayed for a few days in Qubã’ after the Prophet had migrated
from Mecca. Ibn Ishãq proceeds, “He used to say that in Qubã’ there was
an unmarried Muslim woman and he noticed that a man used to come to her
in the middle of the night and knock on her door; she would come out and
he would give her something. He felt very suspicious of him and asked
her what was the meaning of this nightly performance as she was a Muslim
woman without a husband. She told him that he was Sahl b. Hunayf b.
Wãhib who knew that she was all alone and he used to break up the idols
of his tribe at night and bring her the pieces to use as
fuel…”^([23](#23))

The Prophet had also stayed at Qubã’ in the course of his flight from
Mecca. This was a place three miles outside Medina. A mosque was built
here during the Prophet’s stay. It was the first mosque in the history
of Islam. The details of die site on which it was built are not
available in the sources. But we are told something about the second and
the major mosque built by the Prophet in Medina, soon after his arrival
in that city. The site was a garden which he purchased. According to a
tradition from Anas b. Mãlik, “There were graves of the idolaters,
dilapidated buildings and date trees \[in the garden\]. The Prophet gave
the order and the graves of the idolaters were dug out, the dilapidated
buildings levelled \[with the ground\], and the date trees cut
down.”^([24](#24)) Most probably the site was a sacred grove and the
building that stood there were places of pagan worship, neglected or
abandoned due to the rising tide of monotheism in Medina. This much at
least is certain that the Prophet showed contempt for the graves of the
idolaters. Cutting down of date trees was also a sacrilege according to
pagan ethics. In days to come, Muslims will show veneration for graves
in which their own brothers in faith are buried.

The available sources provide no evidence of the Prophet or his
followers in Medina desecrating or destroying any pagan shrines or
breaking idols, during the many expeditions they mounted on tribal
settlements, far and near. It is unlikely that the biographers of the
Prophet or other Muslim annalists suppressed the facts on this score,
for acts of iconoclasm were a matter of pride for them and an essential
element in their glorification of Islam. Most probably the Muslims did
not get proper opportunities for this, their favourite pastime, because
most of the expeditions were surprise raids aimed at plunder. It is also
probable that the Prophet did not want to show his hand before the right
time and thus provoke more than normal resistance to his acts of
aggression. Or, perhaps, it was the Prophet's strategy to break the
morale of the pagans by slaughter and rapine before he moved on to their
places of worship. Whatever the reason, all available evidence suggests
that the Prophet was busy throughout this period in amassing booty and
ransom for financing his military machine.

The Muslim army that finally moved on Mecca in the year AH 8 (AD 630)
was a formidable force by Arabian standards of that time. Abbas b.
Mirdãs al-Sulamî, the Muslim, poet sang:

> With us on the day Muhammad entered Mecca  
> Were a thousand marked men-the valley flowed with them.  
> They had helped the apostle and been present at his battles,  
> Their marks on the day of battle being to the fore.  
> In a strait place their feet were firm.  
> They split the enemies’ heads like colocynths.  
> Their hooves had travelled Najd beforehand  
> Till at last black Hijãz became subject to them.  
> God gave him the mastery of it.  
> The judgment of the sword and victorious fortune subdued it to
> us…^([25](#25))

Small wonder that Mecca surrendered without a fight. The pagan leader,
Abû Sufyãn, had developed cold feet as soon as he saw the marshalled
ranks, and gone over to Islam. Very soon, he will be breaking the idols
for which he had fought for long. “Abû Sufyãn recited the following
verses in which he excused himself for what had gone before:

> By the life when I carried a banner  
> To give al-Lãt’s cavalry the victory over Muhammad  
> I was like the one going astray in the darkness of the night,  
> But now I am led on the right track…^([26](#26))

The conquest of Mecca by Muhammad was the most significant event in the
history of Islam. The success of the enterprise settled the character of
Islam for all time to come. The lessons drawn from the success
constitute the core of Islamic theology as taught ever since in the
sprawling seminaries. The principal lessons are two. The first is that
Muslims should continue resorting to violence on any and every pretext
till they triumph; setbacks are temporary. The second lesson is that
Islam should refuse to coexist or compromise with every other religion
and culture, and use the first favourable opportunity to wipe out the
others completely so that it alone may prevail. Our present context is
concerned with the second lesson.  
 

**The Temple of Ka‘ba**

Soon after entering Mecca, the Prophet went to the Ka‘ba, took its key
from ‘Uthmãn B. Tãlha, and entered it. Ibn Ishãq records, “There he
found a dove made of wood. He broke it in his hands and threw it
away.” Next he turned to the idols which were housed in and around the
temple. They were 360 in number. “The apostle was standing by them with
a stick in his hand, saying, ‘The truth has come and falsehood has
passed away. Verily, falsehood is bound to pass away’ (Sûra.
17.82).^([27](#27)) Then he pointed at them with his stick and they
collapsed on their backs one after the other. When the apostle prayed
the noon prayer on the day of the conquest he ordered that all the idols
which were round the Ka‘ba should be collected and burned with fire and
broken up.  FaDãla b. al-Mulãwwih al-Laythî said commemorating the day
of the conquest:

> Had you seen Muhammad and his troops  
> The day the idols were smashed when he entered,  
> You would have seen God’s light become manifest  
> And darkness covering the face of idolatry.”^([28](#28))

“Biographical works are filled with the accounts of this proceeding, and
that three hundred and sixty idols, the greatest whereof was Hobal, had
been erected by the idolaters around the Ka‘bah. In some copies we read
that Eblis had fixed the bases of all these idols underground with lead,
but that nevertheless when the apostle of Allah touched them with the
lance or stick he had in his hands, and uttered the words: ‘Truth had
come, and falsehood has departed’, the idols fell on their faces at the
mere touch of the staff… There is a tradition ascribed to A’bdullah B.
A’bbas that whenever his lordship pointed on that day to the face of an
idol, the same immediately fell on its back, and whenever he pointed to
the back it fell on its face.”^([29](#29)) The Islamic lore has thus
turned into a miracle what was actually a show of brute physical force.
“Muhammad when he entered Mekka as victor is stated to have struck them
in the eyes with his bow before he had them dragged down and destroyed
by fire.”^([30](#30)) The burning of the idols gave rise to another
story in Islamic lore. “Upon the conquest of Mecca the Prophet cut open
some of these idols with his sword and black smoke is said to have
issued forth from them, a sign of the psychic influence which had made
these idols their dwelling place.”^([31](#31)) One wonders what else
except smoke could have come out when objects made of stone and wood
were burnt.  It is the privilege of Islamic lore to invest smoke with
psychic power.

Hubal, the principal idol in the Ka‘ba. “was pulled down and used as a
doorstep when the Prophet conquered Mecca and purified the
Ka’bah.”^([32](#32)) This particular practice of the Prophet set up a
pious precedent which was followed extensively when Islamic iconoclasm
arrived in India. Many Hindu idols ended at the doorsteps of the
principal mosques not only in Muslim capitals within India such as
Ghazni, Kabul, Lahore, Multan, Nagore, Ajmer, Delhi, Jaunpur, Gaur,
Daulatabad, Mandu, Ahmadabad, Gulbarga, Bidar, Bijapur,
Ahmadnagar, Golkunda, Dhaka and Murshidabad, but also in far off places
like Baghdad, Mecca and Medina, “The other stones which were worshipped
as idols were actually used as cornerstones of the Ka‘ba and as such we
must consider also the Maqãm Ibrahîm.”^([33](#33)) This too was a pious
precedent which was followed extensively in India. A large number of
mosques and other Muslim monuments in India have Hindu idols or their
pieces embedded in their masonry.

There was only one idol which the Prophet not only spared but also
consecrated with his kiss so that every Muslim who performs Hajj is
expected to do the same. This was the black stone now described
pompously as al-Hajar al-ASwad. The Muslims present on the occasion felt
puzzled by the Prophet’s partiality for this particular stone. They were
informed that the black stone had descended directly from heaven.
According to a well-known tradition (*hadîth*) from Ibn ‘Abbãs, the
Prophet told his people, “By Allãh, Allãh will lift it up on the Last
Day. It will have two eyes with which it will see. It will have a tongue
with which it will speak and stand witness for that man who had kissed
it earnestly.”^([34](#34)) Other people’s idols are stones, while one’s
own stone is God’s spokesman!  Many of his followers must have remained
unimpressed by the mysterious pronouncement. A few years later, Caliph
‘Umar (AD 632-44), while kissing the black stone, is reported to have
said, “I know that you are a stone which can neither help nor hurt. I
would not have kissed you, had I not witnessed the Prophet of Allãh
kissing you.”^([35](#35))

Idols were not the only “abominations” which the Prophet had to take
care of in the Ka‘ba. Ibn Ishãq and other biographers of the Prophet
report that the “Quraysh had put pictures in the Ka‘ba including two of
Jesus son of Mary and Mary… The apostle ordered that the pictures would
be erased except those of Jesus and Mary.”^([36](#36)) According to a
tradition, as ‘Umar began to wash out the pictures with the water of the
well known as Zamzam, “Muhammad placed his hand on the pictures of Jesus
and Mary and said, ‘Wash out all except what is below my hands.’ He then
withdrew his hand.”^([37](#37)) There is no reason to doubt that the
walls of the Ka‘ba carried paintings. Pagans have always been as fond of
presenting their pantheon and mythology through colour as through
carving. But it is an invention that the paintings included those of
Jesus and Mary. The pagans who had maintained the Ka‘ba and decorated
its walls with paintings were not only not enamoured of the Christian
god and his mother, they actually entertained abhorrence for them. Allãh
himself says in the Qur’ãn that the disbelievers show disrespect for
Îsã. Referring to ‘Umar’s act of effacing the paintings, Margoliouth
observes, “Whom or what they represented we know only on Mohammed’s
authority, which we are not inclined to trust…”^([38](#38))

Scholars have made several speculations regarding the Prophet’s attitude
to the Ka‘ba. Basing themselves on legends found in the biographies of
the Prophet, some say that he had reverence for the national sanctuary
but regretted its misuse by the pagans. Some others say that when he
changed the Qibla from the Temple in Jerusalem to the Ka‘ba in Mecca, he
did so in order to conciliate Arab national sentiment. “We do not know
the personal feelings of the youthful Muhammad towards the Ka‘ba and the
Meccan cult, but they were presumably of a conventional nature. What the
biography of the Prophet tells us about his Meccan period in this
respect can lay no claim to historical value. The Meccan revelations
tell us nothing about these relations during the important period in the
life of the Prophet. In any case, he felt no enthusiam for the Meccan
sanctuary.”^([39](#39))

In fact, there is a tradition that he wanted to destroy the Ka‘ba.
‘Ã’isha has reported him as saying to her that “if your people had not
renounced ignorance promptly and become Musalmans, I would have
demolished the Ka‘ba and rebuilt it with two doors.”^([40](#40)) The
tradition seems to be authentic because it inspired demolition and
rebuilding of the Ka‘ba on two subsequent occasions. “When A’bdullah Bin
Zobeir heard this tradition he destroyed the building of the Qoraish
whilst he held sway, and rebuilt the Ka‘bah according to the intentions
of his lordship the last of the prophets. When, however, Hajjãj Bin
Yusuf undertook by order of A’bd-ul-Malik Merwãn \[AD 685-705\] a
campaign against A’bdullah Bin Zobeir and vanquished him, he destroyed
the edifice built by the latter at the command of the same Khalifah and
re-erected it as the Qoraish had built it during the lifetime of his
holy and prophetic lordship. When Harûn-ur-Rashid became Khalifah he
desired to annihilate the edifice of Merwzãn, and to rebuild the Ka‘bah
according to the model of A’bdullah Bin Zobeir. On this subject he
consulted the Imãm Mãlek, but the latter replied: ‘O commander of the
faithful, let the Ka‘bah alone, let it not become the sport of kings.’
Accordingly Harûn renounced his intention.”^([41](#41))

What was this “building of the Qoreish” which Ibn Zubayr demolished and
Hajjãj restored?  This much is clear from Muslim accounts that it was a
pagan temple housing the idols of many Gods. These accounts, however,
insist that in the ancient past it was a place of monotheistic worship
consecrated by Abraham. There is only one Muslim account which preserves
a pagan tradition. “According to al-Mas‘ûdî (Murûdj, iv, 47), certain
people have regarded the Ka‘ba as a temple devoted to the sun, the moon
and the five planets. The 360 idols placed round the Ka‘ba also point in
the same direction. It can therefore hardly be denied that traces exist
of an astral symbolism…”^([42](#42)) That the Ka‘ba was a centre of
sun-worship is also confirmed by whatever memories of the pre-Islamic
Hajj survive in Muslim accounts. “As soon as the sun was visible, the
*ifãDa* to Minã used to begin in pre-Islamic times. Muhammad therefore
ordained that this should begin before sunrise; here again we have the
attempt to destroy a solar rite. In ancient times they are said to have
sung during the *ifãDa, ashrîq thabîr kaimã nughîr*. The explanation of
these words is uncertain; it is sometimes translated: ‘Enter into light
of morning, Thabir, so that we may hasten.’”^([43](#43))

It is pointed out by apologists of Islam that the Prophet did not
convert the pagan temple into a mosque and that he only “restored” it to
what it used to be in Abraham’s time. We known that the Abraham story
about the Ka‘ba is a fabrication floated after the Prophet had left
Mecca and quarrelled with the Jews of Medina. And there was no specific
architectural design for a mosque developed during the lifetime of the
Prophet; any structure, in any shape could serve the purpose. For the
rest, everything that needs be done for depriving a place of its pagan
character and converting it into a place of Islamic worship, was done by
the Prophet. The conversion of the temple at Mecca into a mosque was
complete when Bilãl stood on the roof of the Ka‘ba and recited azãn.  
 

**Idols in Mecca**

In Mecca proper, Isãf and Nã’ila were the only other important idols
outside the Ka‘ba. They were the deities of as-Safa and al-Marwah. “On
that occasion the lord of apostleship ordered A’li… to break to pieces
Asãf and Nãylah… When these two idols were broken a rude black woman
issued from one of them, when his holy and prophetic lordship said:
‘This is Nãylah. But she will never any more be worshipped in your
country.’”^([44](#44))

At the same time, “The proclaimer authorised by the apostle of Allãh
went throughout Mecca calling upon all those who believe in Allãh and
the Last Day to leave no idol unbroken in their homes.”^([45](#45))

Having “purified” Mecca, the Prophet sent “expeditions to those idols
which were in the neighbourhood and had them destroyed; these included
al-‘Uzzã, Manãt, Suwã‘, Buãna and Dhu’l-Kaffayn.”^([46](#46))  
 

**The Temple of al-‘Uzzã**

“Then the apostle sent Khãlid to al-‘Uzzã which was in Nakhla. It was a
temple which the tribe of Quraysh and Kinãna and all MuDar used to
venerate. Its guardians were B. Shaybãn of B. Sulaym, allies of B.
Hãshim. When the Sulamî guardian heard of Khãlid’s coming he hung his
sword on her, climbed the mountain on which she stood, and said:

> O ‘Uzzã, make an annihilating attack of Khãlid,  
> Throw aside your veil and gird up your train.  
> O ‘Uzzã, if you do not kill this man Kãlid  
> Then bear a swift punishment or become a Christian.

When Khãlid arrived he destroyed her and returned to the
apostle.”^([47](#47)) It is significant that the pagan priest saw no
difference between becoming a Muslim and becoming a Christian.

The rest of the story is told in other sources. “He \[the Prophet\]
asked him \[Khãlid\], ‘Did you see anything?’ Khãlid replied, ‘Nothing.’
He \[the Prophet\] said, ‘Go again, and smash her to pieces.’ Khãlid
went back, demolished the building in which the idol was housed, and
started smashing the idol itself. The \[pagan\] priest raised a cry, ‘O
‘Uzzã, manifest your might.’ All of a sudden a nude and dishevelled
black woman came out of that idol. Khãlid cut her down with his sword
and took possession of the jewels and ornaments she wore. He reported
the proceedings to the Prophet who observed. ‘That was ‘Uzzã. She will
be worshipped no more.”^([48](#48)) There is a tradition that when the
expedition was sent to Nakhla for the destruction of al-‘Uzzã, the
Prophet instructed Khãlîd, “In whatever settlement you do not hear the
azãn or see no mosque, slaughter the people of that
place.”^([49](#49))  
 

**The Temple of Suwã‘**

“The apostle of Allãh sent ‘Amr b. al-‘Ãs towards \[the temple of\]
Suwã‘, the idol of HuDayl, in order to destroy it. When ‘Amr arrived
there, the priest \[of the temple\] asked him, ‘What do you want?’ ‘Amr
replied, ‘The apostle of Allãh has commanded me to destroy this idol.’
He \[the priest\] said, ‘You cannot overpower him.’ ‘Amr asked, ‘Why?’
He \[the priest\] said, ‘He is well-protected.’ ‘Amr said. ‘You
subscribe to falsehood even now?  May you perish!  Does he hear or see?’
‘Amr approached the idol and smashed it. Then he ordered his companions
to demolish the house which contained \[the temple’s\] treasure. That
house yielded nothing.”^([50](#50))  
 

**The Temple of Al-Manãt**

“The expedition to Manãt was sent under Sa‘d b. Zayd al-Ashahlî in the
Ramzãn Of AH 8… It was the idol of Ghassãn, Aws and Khazraj in
al-Mushallal… Sa‘d started with twenty cavalrymen and reached there at a
time when the priest was in attendance. The priest asked them, ‘What do
you want?’ They said, ‘Destruction of Manãt.’ The priest exclaimed,
‘You, and want to do this!’ Sa‘d approached the idol. A black and nude
and dishevelled woman came out and advanced towards him, cursing and
beating her breast. The priest said, ‘O Manãt, manifest your might.’
Sa‘d started hitting her, and she was cut down. He had asked his
companions to take care of the idol in the meanwhile. They smashed it.
But the treasury yielded nothing,”^([51](#51)) Other sources attribute
the destruction of the sanctuary of Manãt in Qudayd to ‘Alî bin Abû
Tãlib, still others to Abû Sufyãn.^([52](#52)) One wonders whether more
than one temple of Manãt was destroyed.  
 

**The Sacred Tree**

Soon after the occupation of Mecca, the Prophet had to face a formidable
alliance of pagan tribes that had assembled in the valley of Hunayn
between Mecca and Tã’if. Ibn Ishãq records a tradition from Hãrith b.
Mãlik: “We went forth with the apostle to the Hunayn fresh from
paganism. The heathen Quraysh and other Arabs had a great green tree
Dhãtu Anwãt to which they used to come every year and hang their weapons
on it and sacrifice beside it and devote themselves to it for a day.” As
the newly converted pagans saw that tree, they said to the Prophet,
“Make us a tree to hang things on such as they have.” The Prophet chided
them, comparing them to the people of Moses who wanted the latter to
“make us a god even as they have gods.”^([53](#53)) It is not recorded
whether the sacred tree was cut down at that time.  Perhaps the Prophet
was in a hurry. But it is a safe bet that it was marked for destruction.

The army of Islam suffered a severe setback in the first round of the
Battle of Hunayn. The newly converted pagans were overjoyed. Abû Sufyãn,
when he saw the Muslims in headlong flight, observed, “They will not
stop till they reach the seashore.” A pagan who had been granted respite
from conversion for a specified period asked, “Has not sorcery \[Islam\]
come to an end today?”^([54](#54))

The Prophet himself was in great danger. The situation was saved by lack
of tactical skill on the pagan side. They failed to pursue the
demoralised Muslim army, and were defeated by the counter-attack which
followed after the Muslims managed to regroup. The remnants of their
defeated allies took refuge in the fortified town of Tã’if. A Muslim
poetess sang:

> Allah’s cavalry has beaten Al-Lãt’s cavalry,  
> And Allah best deserves to hold fast.^([55](#55))

Al-Lãt was the chief Goddess of the allied pagan tribes, and had a
renowned sanctuary in Tã’if. So the army of Islam advanced towards this
town.  
 

**Temple of Dhu’l Kaffayn**

On the way the Prophet detached Tufayl b. ‘Amr al-Dausî and sent him to
destroy the temple of Dhu’l Kaffayn. It was maintained by his own tribe
of Daus. He was to rejoin the main army after accomplishing the
assignment. “He moved fast towards his people, and destroyed Dhu’l
Kaffayn. As he set fire to the idol, starting from its face, he said:

> O Dhu’l Kaffayn! we are not of those that obey you,  
> Our birth goes back much prior to your own.  
> See, I have stuffed your heart with fire.

Four hundred men from his tribe followed him when he went back to the
Prophet.”^([56](#56))

The army of Islam was full of confidence when it arrived outside Tã’if.
The court poet of the Prophet, Ka‘b b. Mãlik sang:

> Al-Lãt and Al-‘Uzzã and Wudd are forgotten,  
> And we plunder them of their necklaces and earings.

And Shaddãd b. ‘ÃriD al-Jushamî said:

> Don’t help A’-Lãt for God is about to destroy her  
> How can one who cannot help herself he helped?^([57](#57))

But the boast proved empty and al-Lãt survived on this occasion. Tã’if
proved a hard nut to crack. “When he found the gates closed and
determined resistance offered, he endeavoured to frighten the Thakafites
by a wholesale destruction of their property. This was how he had dealt
with the Banu Nadir. But the Thakafites were no Jews.”^([58](#58)) The
siege had to be raised, though newly acquired heavy war-engines were
employed for battering the city walls.  
 

**Temples Around Tã’if**

The only satisfaction the Prophet could derive was from what he got done
in the environs. He “ordered his glorious companions to fell the
date-trees and to destroy the vineyards of the neighbourhood,” which
acts were considered serious crimes according to the ethics of pagan
warfare. The Prophet had learnt the art of total war from the Judaic and
Christian scriptures. He also indulged in his most favourite pastime.
“It is related in some biographies that while the siege of Tãyf was
being carried on, his holy and prophetic lordship appointed A’li
Murtadza with a number of glorious companions to make excursions into
the country, and to destroy every idol they could find… Thereon A’li,
the Commander of the Faithful… destroyed all the idols of the Bani
Hoãzãn and Bani Thaqyf which were in that region. The apostle was
waiting for his return near the gate of the fort of Tãyf, and as soon as
the prince of saints had terminated his business, he joined the august
camp, was received by the seal of prophets with the exclamation of the
Takbyr…”^([59](#59)) No count of temples destroyed is available in the
sources. They must have been many. Islamic invaders of India followed
the example whenever they besieged a town.  
 

**The Mosque of Opposition**

“The apostle,” reports of Ibn Ishãq, “went on until he stopped in Dhû
Awãn a town an hour’s light journey from Medina. The owners of the
mosque of opposition had come to the apostle as he was preparing for
Tabûk saying, ‘We have built a mosque for the sick and needy and for
nights of bad weather, and we should like you to come to us and pray for
us there.’ He said that he was on the point of travelling, and was
preoccupied, or words to that effect, and that when he came back he
would come to them and pray for them in it.

“When he stopped in Dhû Awãn news of the mosque came to him, and he
summoned Mãlik b. al-Dukhshum… and Ma‘n b. ‘Adîy… and told them to go to
the mosque of those evil men and destroy and burn it. They went quickly
to B. Sãlim b. ‘Auf who were Mãlik’s clan, and Mãlik said to Ma‘n, ‘Wait
for me until I can bring fire from my people.’ So he went in and took a
palm-branch and lighted it, and then the two of them ran into the mosque
where its people were and burned and destroyed it and the people ran
away from it.”^([60](#60))

The sources offer no evidence that this mosque was built on land
acquired illegitimately, as some apologists of Islam like Ashgar Ali
Engineer have been saying in the context of the Rãmajanmabhûmi
controversy. The only point which emerges is that it was built by
Muslims who did not see eye to eye with Muhammad. Margoliouth observes:
“Of the rights and wrongs of this affair nothing decided will ever be
known: the revelation in which it is mentioned,^([61](#61)) and which
contains a variety of oracles delivered in connection with the
expedition to Tabuk, is in a tone of bitterness and vexation such as
disappointment and opposition are likely to engender in a man of
Mohammed’s temperament. The people of Medinah and their new Bedouin
allies are charged with harbouring Hypocrites: and it also appears that
the Koran was beginning to give rise to criticism from which the Prophet
had suffered at Meccah. When a new revelation comes down, people at
Medinah ask each other sarcastically whether their faith had been
increased. Knots of people are found talking and laughing: inspite of
the most earnest denials, the Prophet is of the opinion that the Koran
has provided the materials for their amusement… Mere is also one verse
in the tirade suggesting that some of the malcontents disliked the plan
of living on plunder which was now characteristic of Islam, and wished a
more honest system inaugurated…”^([62](#62))

Obviously, the mosque of opposition was built by people who were
monotheists like Muhammad but who did not believe that the doctrine
enjoined bloodshed and rapine which had become the Muslims’ daily
practice. Small wonder that Allãh of the Qur’ãn who sanctioned mass
slaughter and endless accumulation of plunder by the faithful, did not
approve of such “toothless” monotheism. So he moaned, “Is he who founded
his building upon duty to Allãh and his good pleasure better; or he who
founded his building on the brink of a crumbling, overhanging precipice
so that it toppled with him into the fire of hell?”^([63](#63))  
 

**Invitations to Islam**

The occupation of Mecca had sky-rocketled the prestige of the Prophet.
“In deciding their attitude to Islam,” writes Ibn Ishãq, “the Arabs were
only waiting to see what happened to the clan of Quraysh and the
apostle. For Quraysh were the leaders and guides of men, the people of
the sacred temple, and the pure stock of Ishmael son of Abraham; and the
leading Arabs did not contest this. It was Quraysh who had declared war
on the apostle and opposed him; and when Mecca was occupied and Quraysh
became subject to him and he subdued it to Islam, and the Arabs knew
that they could not fight the apostle or display enmity towards him they
entered into God’s religion ‘in batches’ as God said,^([64](#64)) coming
to him from all directions.”^([65](#65)) Muhammad’s war-machine was
sending waves of terror towards all tribes, which was a very effective
message. There was a debate afoot everywhere whether to fight for the
ancient religion and tribal honour, or submit to Muhammad and become
Muslim. The Prophet’s intelligence network kept him informed of what was
happening where. He was swift in exploiting the psychological crisis to
his own advantage.

The groundwork had been done during the preceding two years. Ibn Sa‘d
provides a list of tribal chiefs to whom the Prophet had sent
invitations to Islam, starting soon after the Treaty of Hudaybiya with
the Meccans in the year AH 6.[⁶⁶](#66) The letters containing his
messages were carried by special couriers selected from among his
companions. The message varied according to the status and strength of
the tribe concerned. Unfortunately, Ibn Sa‘d has lumped together the
invitations without regard for chronological sequence. This much,
however, can be inferred that their tone became sharper as the author of
the messages marched from one victory to another, the acme being reached
in the conquest of Mecca and the Battle of Hunayn.

At first Muhammad wrote his letters beginning with *basmak al-Laham*, “I
begin in the name of Allãh,” after the custom of the Quraysh. A special
revelation came and he was commanded to begin with *bismallãh*, “In the
name of Allãh.” Another revelation amended the formula to *bismallãh
al-RaHmãn al-RaHîm*, “In the name of Allãh, the Compassionate, the
Merciful.” Finally, it was revealed to him that he should begin with
*bismallãh al-RaHîm al-WaHîd*, “In the name of Allãh, the Compassionate,
the One.”^([67](#67))

The general tenor of the messages sent was the same-dissociate from the
idolaters which meant an order to destroy pagan temples and break idols;
bear witness that Allãh is one without partners and Muhammad is his
messenger; establish prayers which meant an order to build mosques; pay
*zakãt* and other taxes to the central treasury at Medina; send to the
Prophet one-fifth of the plunder obtained from raids on the polytheists;
and keep the highways free from disturbance so that Muslim delegations
can travel unmolested for converting people and collecting taxes. In
exchange, the tribes were assured that they could keep their lands,
their cattle, their wells, their gardens, their houses and such of their
special customs as did not come in conflict with Islam. Defiance, they
were warned, will entail slaughter of their men, capture of their women
and children, and laying waste of their country. And punitive
expeditions were sent to those tribal settlements which molested the
Prophet’s messengers or otherwise refused to abide by his
dictates.^([68](#68)) The fear was abroad that “the Prophet of Allãh may
send a military force.”^([69](#69)) When Banî Tamîm refused to pay
*zakãt*, they were attacked, and eleven of their women and thirty of
their children were captured and dragged to Medina.”^([70](#70))  
 

**The Year of Deputations**

“When the apostle had gained possession of Mecca,” reports Ibn Ishãq,
“and had finished with Tabûk, and Thaqîf had surrendered and paid
homage, deputations from the Arabs came to him from all
directions.”^([71](#71)) Ibn Sa‘d lists as many as seventy-one
deputations which waited on Muhammad in Medina, the last one being on
behalf of the wolves.”^([72](#72)) It seems that the beasts also had
taken fright and were prepared to become Muslims or the beasts felt that
they, too, could confess the faith without suffering inconvenience.

Strangely enough, a deputation came to Muhammad from Tã’if soon after he
had suffered a repulse outside that city. It seems that the morale of
the people in this town has collapsed as they saw what was happening all
around. The deputation met Muhammad even before he had reached Medina.
It was led by ‘Urwa b. Mas‘ûd al-Thaqafî who was one of the leaders of
resistance when Tã’if was besieged by the army of Islam. ‘Urwa requested
Muhammad to make him a Muslim so that he could go back and invite his
people to the true faith. He was baptised and sent back. But “when he
went up to an upper room and showed his religion to them they shot
arrows at him from all directions, and one hit him and killed
him.”^([73](#73))

The debate in Tã’if, however, did not come to an end. One of their
chiefs said, “We are in an impasse. You have seen how the affair of this
man has progressed. All the Arabs have accepted Islam and you lack the
power to fight them, so look to your ease… So after conferring together
they dicided to send a man to the apostle as they had sent
‘Urwa…”^([74](#74)) The man approached for the job refused to go alone.
Finally a deputation consisting of six chiefs reached Medina and met the
Prophet.  
 

**The Temple of Al-Lãt**

“Among the things they asked the apostle,” reports Ibn Ishãq, “was that
they should be allowed to retain their idol Al-Lãt undestroyed for three
years. The apostle refused, and they continued to ask him for a year or
two, and he refused; finally they asked for a month after their return
home, but he refused to agree to any set time. All that they wanted as
they were trying to show was to be safe from their fanatics and women
and children by leaving her, and they did not want to frighten their
people by destroying her until they had accepted Islam.

The apostle refused this… They had also asked that he would excuse them
from prayer and they should not have to break their idols with their own
hands. The apostle said: ‘We excuse you from breaking your idols with
your own hands, but as for prayer there is no good in a religion which
has no prayers.’ They said that they would perform them though it was
demeaning…

“When they had accomplished their task and had set out to return to
their country the apostle sent with then Abû Sufyãn and al-Mughîra to
destroy their idol. They travelled with the deputation and when they
neared al-Tã’if, al-Mughîra wanted to send on Abû Sufyãn in advance. The
latter refused and told him to go to his people while he stayed in the
property of Dhû’l-Haram.^([75](#75)) When al-Mughîra entered he went up
to the idol and struck it with a pick-axe. His people the B. Mu‘attib
stood in front of him fearing that he would be shot or killed as ‘Urwa
had been. The women of Thaqîf came out with their heads uncovered
bewailing her and saying:

> O weep for our protector  
> Poltroons would neglect her  
> Whose swords need a corrector.

Abû Sufyãn, as al-Mughîra smote her with the axe, said, ‘Alas for you,
alas!’ When al-Mughîra had destroyed her and taken what was on her and
her jewels he sent for Abû Sufyãn when her jewellery and gold and beads
had been collected.

“Now Abû MulayH b. ‘Urwa and Qãrib b. al-Aswad had come to the apostle
before the Thaqîf deputation when ‘Urwa was killed, desiring to separate
themselves from Thaqîf and to have nothing to do with them… ‘Urwa asked
the apostle to settle a debt his father had incurred from the property
of the idol. The apostle agreed and Qãrib b. al-Aswad asked for the same
privilege for his father… The apostle said, ‘But al-Aswad died a
polytheist.’ He answered, ‘But you will be doing a favour to a Muslim a
near relation,’ meaning himself… The apostle ordered Abû Sufyãn to
satisfy the debts of ‘Urwa and al-Aswad from the property of the
idol…”^([76](#76))

‘Urwa and al-Aswad show the stuff of which voluntary converts to Islam
were made. Most of them were questionable characters.  
 

**Temples of B. Sa‘d B. Bakr**

They sent their chief, Dimãm b. Tha‘laba, to the Prophet. Dimãm asked
some questions and ended by becoming a Muslim. He went back to his
people and said, “How evil are al-Lãt and al-‘Uzzã!” His people rebuked
him, “Heavens above, Dimãm, beware of leprosy and elephantiasis and
madness!” He replied, “Woe to you, they can neither hurt nor heal. God
has sent an apostle and sent down to him a book, so seek deliverance
thereby from your present state..."^([77](#77)) He then destroyed the
idols “It was not yet evening that day that all men and women became
Muslamans. They built mosques and recited *azãns* so that people came to
prayers.”^([78](#78))  
 

**The Temple of B. Sulaym**

Seven hundred people from B. Sulaym had waited on the Prophet while he
was in Qudayd on his way to Mecca, which he occupied soon after. They
went to him again after the conquest of Mecca, Battle of Hunayn and the
siege of Tã’if. Their leader Ghãdî b. ‘Abû al-‘Uzzã was the keeper of
their temple. The Prophet bestowed upon him the estate of Rehãtã which
had a spring in it. He came back and composed the following couplets
about the idol he had worshipped earlier:

> How can that be, God, on whom  
> The foxes came and stated?  
> He is abominable without a doubt,  
> He on whom the foxes staled.

He attacked the idol and smashed it to pieces. When he waited upon the
Prophet with this report, he was asked, “What is your name?” He said,
“Ghãdî ‘Abd al-‘Uzzã.” The Prophet said, “You are Rãshid b. ‘Abd  
Raba.”^([79](#79)) People whose names referred to pagan Gods were always
given new names by the Prophet-names which referred to the god of
Islam.  
 

**The Christian Church of Yamãma**

A deputation of nineteen men from B. Hanîfa came to Medina. They were
given rich food and instructed in Islam by the Prophet. Each of them was
given five ounces of silver as a gift. When they got ready to go back,
the Prophet gave them a vessel of water with which he had performed his
ablutions. He said, “When you return to your country, destroy the
church, wash the site with water, and build a mosque on it.” They did
accordingly. The priest in charge of the church ran away. His days were
over.”^([80](#80))  
 

**The Temples of Fils and RuDã’ in Tayy**

“The Prophet sent ‘Alî b. Abî Tãlib towards the temple of Fils belonging
to the tribe of Tayy, with an order to destroy it… He went with two
hundred horsemen…”^([81](#81))

“‘Alî inflicted atrocities on them and took prisoners from among them.
He obtained two swords from the temple; one of them was named Rasûb, the
other Makhzam. It was well-known that these swords had been brought as
an offering to the temple by Hãrith b. Abî Thamar. Among the prisoners
was a sister of ‘Adi b. Hãtim…”^([82](#82)) Hãtim Tayy, the father of
the girl, was a pagan chief renowned for his liberality. Islamic lore at
present tells many stories about him without revealing that he was a
pagan. The temple of Fils which was destroyed was on Mount Aja‘. Another
deity of Tayy was RuDã’.^([83](#83)) His temple, too, met the same
fate.  
 

**The Temple of ‘Amm Anas**

A deputation consisting of ten men came to Medina from Khaulan in the
year AH 10. They informed the Prophet that they were Muslims. The
Prophet asked, “What about your idol of ‘Amm Anas?” They replied, “That
is in a bad shape. We have exchanged him for Allãh whom you have
brought. When we go back, we shall destroy him.” They were instructed in
Islam and entertained lavishly. After a few days, the Prophet ordered
that each of them be given twelve and a half ounces of silver as reward.
They went back and destroyed the idol of ‘Amm Anas “even before they
untied their luggage.”^([84](#84))  
 

**The Temple of ‘Uzra**

A deputation of twelve men from B. ‘Uzra came to Medina and said to the
Prophet, “We are worried about our people.” The Prophet instructed them
in Islam and gave them gifts. He was told that the idol of ‘Uzra had
spoken and confirmed his prophethood. He observed, “This seems to be a
believing jinn.”^([85](#85)) Idols, too, it seems, could become
believers. It is not recorded whether the idol was kept or removed.  
 

**The Temple of Al-Jahîna**

‘Amr b. Marrah al-Jahnî relates, “We had an idol which we used to
honour. I was its keeper. When I heard of the Prophet, I destroyed it.
Then I went to Medina and became a Muslim. I composed the following
verse:

> I bear witness that Allãh is true,  
> I am the first to renounce stone idols.”^([86](#86))

  
**The Temple of Farrãz**

Dbab, a man from the tribe of Sa‘d al-Ashîra attacked the idol named
Farrãz and smashed it to pieces. He went with a deputation to the
Prophet and said:

> I became a follower of the Prophet  
> When he brought (good) instructions.  
> I consigned Farrãz to a status of dishonour,  
> I attacked him and left him in a state  
> As if he never existed; this is the time of revolutions.^([87](#87))

  
**The Temple of Dhu’l-KhalaSa**

Jarîr b. ‘Abd-allãh al-Bahlî came to Medina with one hundred and fifty
men. All of them professed Islam. The Prophet asked Jarîr about those
whom he had left behind. Jarîr replied, “O apostle of Allãh!  Allãh has
made Islam dominant among them. *Azãn* prevails from mosques and
courtyards. They have destroyed the idols they used to worship.” The
Prophet asked, “What happened to the idol of Dhu’l KhalaSa?” He was
told, “He is as before. Allãh willing, we will be rid of him.” The
Prophet sent them back. Jarîr returned before long and reported, “I have
destroyed the idols and taken whatever it wore. I set fire to it and
reduced it to such a state that whoever had honoured him will now hate
him. No one stopped us from doing this.”^([88](#88))

“It is reported that after the burning and destruction of the
idol-temple the inhabitants of Dhu’l-Khalasa attained the nobility of
Islam. The treasury belonging to that temple contained much property and
perfumes, all of which was brought to Medinah. When his holy and
prophetic lordship heard what had taken place, and that the idol-temple
had been demolished, he rejoiced greatly, inviting a benediction on
Jaryr and his tribe…”^([89](#89))

“Some of the idols were made use of for other purposes, as for example
the idol of Dhu’l-KhalaSa, a white piece of marble in which a crown was
carved and which was worshipped at Tabãla, a place on the road from
Mekka to Yaman, was in the time of Ibn al-Kalbî (about AH 200) used as a
stepping-stone under the mosque at Tabãla…”^([90](#90))  
 

**The Temple of RuDã’**

It was the temple of B. Rabî‘a, a branch of B. Tamîm. Al-Mustaughir b.
Rabî‘a, a man of the same tribe, destroyed it.  He sang:

> I smashed RuDã’ so completely that  
> I left it a black ruin in a hollow.^([91](#91))

Surveying the scene in the year of deputations, Margoliouth sums up,
“The iconoclasm which had raged at Medinah at the time of the Prophet’s
arrival spread far and wide, now it had been clearly proved that the old
gods were incapable of defending themselves or of even taking revenge on
those who broke them. Facts which had remained unheeded for generations
suddenly began to suggest important inferences: one man observed that
his god suffered himself to be desecrated by beasts, and declined
henceforward to worship a deity on whom the foxes staled. The persons
who hurry to place their incense on the altar of success are familiar
figures in all ages: and many a comedy was enacted at these
visits…”^([92](#92))  
 

**Conclusion**

Thus the practices of the Prophet or his Sunnah vis-a-vis idols and
idol-temples was added to prescriptions of the Qur’ãn in this respect,
and the Islamic theology of iconoclasm stood completed. Ever since,
iconoclasm has been a prominent as well a permanent part of the theology
of Islam.

Allãh had denounced the idols and their worship as abominable. His
prophet got the idols broken or burnt, and their temples destroyed.

The Prophet added a few nuances on his own. He got the sites and
materials of pagan temples used in the construction of mosques that
replaced them. In many cases, idols were placed on the footsteps of the
mosques so that the faithful could trample upon them while entering and
coming out of Allãh’s abodes. These acts, too, became pious precedents
and were followed by Islamic invaders wherever they came across idols.  
 

**The Place of Sunnah in Islam**

People who have not studied the theology of Islam as expounded in
orthodox treatises, believe that Islam stands for obedience to the
commandments of Allãh as revealed in the Qur’ãn. They do not know that
Allãh is no more than mere window-dressing and that for all practical
purposes the Prophet rules the roost.

Muhammad had made Allãh into his private preserve when he proclaimed
that no one except him knew the will of Allãh first-hand, and that he
alone will intercede on the Day of Judgment for deciding who will enter
paradise and who will sink into hell. Going further, he made Allãh
helplessly dependent on the Muslim *millat* when he prayed on the eve of
the battle of Badr, “O God, if this band perishes today, Thou will be
worshipped no more.”^([93](#93)) This became a refrain in every Muslim
prayer offered on the eve of every battle fought in the history of Islam
against the infidels. Allãma Iqbal was not innovating when he addressed
Allãh in his *Shikwah* and asked, “Did anyone before us bother about
you?” *Shikwah* or complaint is a long poem written by the “great poet
of Islam” in the first decade of this century, and expresses the anguish
of Islam vis-a-vis the rise of Christians in the West and Hindus in
India.

Muslims have a popular saying in Persian language, *“bã Khudã dîwãnã
bãsh wa bã Muhammad hoshiyãr,”* that is, one may become wild about Allãh
but one should beware when it comes to Muhammad. Khudã is the Persian
word for Allãh. Islam is, therefore, spelled out more correctly when it
is called Muhammadanism. For, it is not Allãh but Muhammad who sits at
the heart of Islam and controls its head as well.

The process of deifying the life-style of the Prophet had started in his
own life-time. Margoliouth observes, “He inherited the devotion and
adulation which had hitherto been bestowed on the idols; and though he
never permitted the word worship to be used of the ceremonies of which
he was the object, he ere long became hedged in with a state which
differed little form that which surrounded a god…”^([94](#94)) The
concept of the Sunnah, that is, the practices of the Prophet, had also
developed towards the end of his days.^([95](#95))

The rightly-guided Caliphs who followed the Prophet regarded the Sunnah
as a sure key to success. Quirks of history, which gave many victories
to the Muslim arms in the first century AH, convinced the theologians of
Islam that the Sunnah was divine in its inspiration. They became busy in
collecting and collating every detail of the Prophet’s practices, from
the act of coughing to that of waging holy wars and administrating what
had become his exclusive kingdom. The Sunnah was soon placed on par with
the Qur’ãn. “In the Qur’an,” they propounded, “Allah speaks through
Muhammad; in the *Sunnah*, He acts through him. Thus Muhammad’s life is
a visible expression of Allãh’s utterances in the Qur’ãn. God provides
the divine principle, Muhammad the living pattem.”^([96](#96))

While the ulamã expounded the Sunnah to the sultãns, it was the sûfîs
who practised it most meticulously. The very first sûfî illustrated what
the Sunnah stood for. Farîdu’d-Dîn Attãr gives the story of Uwaysh Qarnî
who lived in the days of the Prophet but had never met or seen him.
‘Umar and ‘Alî were on a visit to Kufa when they learnt that Qarnî lived
in the valley of ‘Urfa, grazing cattle and eating dry bread. They went
to see him. “The honourable Uwaysh said, ‘You are Companions of the
Prophet. Could you tell me which one of his sacred teeth was martyred in
the battle of Uhud? Why have you not broken all your teeth out of
reverence for the Prophet?’ This said, he opened his mouth and showed
that all his teeth were gone. He explained, ‘When I learnt that a tooth
of the Prophet had been martyred, I broke one of mine. Then I thought
that perhaps some other tooth of his had been martyred. So I broke all
my teeth, one after another. It is only after that that I felt at
peace’. Having heard him the two Companions got awestruck, and felt
convinced that this was the correct conduct…”^([97](#97))

The Sunnah has been the prison-house in which the world of Islam has
lived ever since. Every pious Muslim aspires to do things exactly as the
Prophet did. Aping the Prophet in the matter of destroying other peoples
places of worship, and building mosques with their materials is no
exception. A Muslim who *can* do this pious deed but *does not* do it,
disobeys the Prophet.

There are very few historical mosques, particularly Jãma‘ Masjids, in
the world of Islam which do not stand on sites occupied earlier by other
people’s places of worship. Many Christian churches yielded place to
mosques all over West Asia, North Africa, Spain and South-eastern
Europe, even though Christians were People of the Book whose places of
worship were to be protected once they agreed to become *zimmîs*.
Fire-temples of the Zoroastrians suffered the same fate all over what
constituted the empire of Iran on the eve of the Muslim conquest. The
greatest havoc, however, was wrought in the vast cradle of Hindu culture
where hundreds of thousands of Buddhist Brahmanical, Jain and other
Hindu temples disappeared or yielded place to mosques and other Muslim
monuments.

Today there are no Hindu temples in the Central Asian republics of
Russia, Sinkiang province of China, Makran and Seistan provinces of
Iran, and the whole of Afghanistan, all of which were honeycombed with
them before the advent of Islam. Whatever Hindu temples had come up
during the Sikh and British rule in what are now known as Pakistan and
Bangladesh, are fast disappearing. The same has been happening in the
valley of Kashmir.

The Archaeological Survey of India, which included Pakistan and
Bangladesh till 1947, has identified many mosques and other Muslim
monuments which stand on the sites of Hindu temples and/or have temple
materials embedded in their masonry. Many inscriptions in Arabic and
Persian bear testimony that Hindu temples were destroyed for
constructing mosques. Local traditions can point out many more mosques
which have replaced Hindu temples. Cartloads of Hindu idols are known to
have been brought and placed on the steps of the Jãmi‘ Masjids in
several cities which were Muslim capitals at one time. Some of those
idols may still be buried under the stairs of the same mosques. In
short, the study of Islamic iconoclasm in this country, not to speak of
the whole cradle of Hindu culture, has yet to make a meaningful start.

What we have proved beyond doubt is that destroying other people’s
places of worship and converting them into Muslim monuments is not only
sanctioned but also prescribed by the tenents of Islam, the same way as
reciting the *kalima*, doing *namãz*, paying *zakãt*, keeping *rozah*,
and going on *hajj*. Anyone who says that Islam does not permit this
practice is either ignorant of the creed, or has been deceived by
Islamic apologetics developed in recent time. If a Muslim scholar or
politician makes this statement, he is talking tongue-in-cheek, and
stands exposed as a knave.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit, pp. 10- 11. The pagan Gods are supposed to
be dead matter in the lore of the prophetic creeds. But, as we have seen
and shall see, these Gods not only speak but also produce live beings,
animal as well as human, whenever they are threatened with destruction.

[²](#2a) Ibid., pp. 15-16.

[³](#3a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., p. 33.

[⁴](#4a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 22.

[⁵](#5a) D.S. Margoliouth. op. cit., p. 37.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 104.

[⁷](#7a) Ibid., pp. 69-70.

[⁸](#8a) *The Rauzal-us-Safa*, op. cit., P. 85.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., pp. 89-90.

[¹⁰](#10a) Ibid., p. 92.

[¹¹](#11a) Translated from ‘Alãma Abdullãh al-Ahmdî’s Urdu version of
*Tabqãt-i-ibn Sa‘d*, Part I: *Akhbãr an-Nabî*, Karachi, (n.d.), p. 233.

[¹²](#12a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., Vol. I, pt. II, p. 115.

[¹³](#13a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit., pp. 245-46.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., p. 250. Idols can speak when it concerns prophets.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 80.

[¹⁶](#16a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., p. 127.

[¹⁷](#17a) Ibid., p. 128.

[¹⁸](#18a) Insert from Ibn Khallikãn in Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 115.

[¹⁹](#19a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 562.

[²⁰](#20a) See *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit, Vol. II, pt. II, pp.
599-600. Also Saiyid Safdar Hosain. *The Early History of Islam*,
Lucknow 1933, Delhi Reprint 1985, Vol. I, pp. 193-94.

[²¹](#21a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*. op. cit., p. 179.

[²²](#22a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., pp. 207.

[²³](#23a) Ibid., pp. 227-28.

[²⁴](#24a) Translated from the Urdu version of *SaHîh Bukhãrî Sharîf*,
New Delhi, 1984, Vol. I, p. 240. See also the Urdu version of *Sunn
Nasãî Sharîf*, New Delhi, 1986, Vol. I, p. 240, and *Tãrîkh-i-Tabarî*,
Vol. I, *Sîrat an-Nabî*, Karachi (n.d), p. 145.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibn Hishãm’s notes in Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 775. “Marked
men” means men carrying military colours or standards signifying various
formations.

[²⁶](#26a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 546.

[²⁷](#27a) The verse was cited whenever Muslim invaders destroyed Hindu
temples.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., op. cit., p. 552.

[²⁹](#29a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., Vol. II, pt. II, p. 599.

[³⁰](#30a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 147.

[³¹](#31a) Cyril Glasse op. cit., p. 179.

[³²](#32a) Ibid., p. 160.

[³³](#33a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*. op. cit., Vol. VII, pp.
147-48.

[³⁴](#34a) Translated from the Urdu version of *Mishkãt Sharîf*, Delhi
(n.d.), Vol. I, P. 572.

[³⁵](#35a) Ibid., p. 574.

[³⁶](#36a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 552.

[³⁷](#37a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 587.

[³⁸](#38a) Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 387.

[³⁹](#39a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*. Vol. IV, p. 587

[⁴⁰](#40a) Translated from the Urdu version of *Jãmi‘ Tirmizi*, New
Delhi, 1983, Vol. I, p. 330.

[⁴¹](#41a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., Vol. I, pt. II, p. 133.

[⁴²](#42a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 591.

[⁴³](#43a) Ibid., Vol., III, p. 200. We shag deal with this subject
further in Appendix 2.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *The Rauzat us-Safa*, op. cit., Vol. II, pt. II, P. 599.

[⁴⁵](#45a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit., p. 478. See also Martin Ling,
*Muhammad*, Rochester, (Vermont, USA), 1983, p. 301.

[⁴⁶](#46a) Ibid.

[⁴⁷](#47a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 565.

[⁴⁸](#48a) *Tãrîkh-i-Tabarî*, op. cit., pp. 404-05.

[⁴⁹](#49a) *Tabãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit, p. 488.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Ibid., p. 85.

[⁵¹](#51a) Ibid., pp. 485-86.

[⁵²](#52a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 231-32.

[⁵³](#53a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., pp. 568-69.

[⁵⁴](#54a) *Tãrîkh-i-Tabarî*, op. cit., p. 413.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 572.

[⁵⁶](#56a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit., p. 496.

[⁵⁷](#57a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit. p. 588.

[⁵⁸](#58a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 404.

[⁵⁹](#59a) *The Rauzal-us-Safa*, op. cit, Vol. II, pt. II, pp. 630-31.
Takbîr is the Muslim war-cry, *Allãhu Akbar*.

[⁶⁰](#60a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 609.

[⁶¹](#61a) Qur’ãn, Sûra 9. This is the last Sûra of Qur’ãn, speaking
chronologically. It shows the frustration of Muhammad at the failure of
his mission. Allãh says that most people who had converted to Islam were
hypocrites, that is, pagans at heart.

[⁶²](#62a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., pp. 424-45.

[⁶³](#63a) Qur’ãn, 9.109.

[⁶⁴](#64a) Ibid., Sûra 110.

[⁶⁵](#65a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit, p. 628. Reference to Abraham and Ishmeal
may be ignored as concoctions.

[⁶⁶](#66a) *Tabãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op.cit, Part II, pp. 29-64.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Ibid., p. 35.

[⁶⁸](#68a) Ibid., p. 53.

[⁶⁹](#69a) Ibid., p. 62.

[⁷⁰](#70a) Ibid., p. 67.

[⁷¹](#71a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 627.

[⁷²](#72a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 64-136.

[⁷³](#73a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit, p. 614.

[⁷⁴](#74a) Ibid., 615.

[⁷⁵](#75a) Al-Mughîra belonged to Tã’if and was an earlier convert.

[⁷⁶](#76a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., pp. 615-17.

[⁷⁷](#77a) Ibid., p. 635.

[⁷⁸](#78a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn-Sa‘d*, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 73.

[⁷⁹](#79a) Ibid., p. 81.

[⁸⁰](#80a) Ibid., p. 90-91.

[⁸¹](#81a) Ibid., p. 97.

[⁸²](#82a) *Tãrîkh-i-Tabarî*, op. cit., p. 445.

[⁸³](#83a) *First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 624.

[⁸⁴](#84a) *Tabqãt-i-Ibn Sa‘d*, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 100.

[⁸⁵](#85a) Ibid., p. 107.

[⁸⁶](#86a) Ibid., p. 109.

[⁸⁷](#87a) Ibid., p. 118.

[⁸⁸](#88a) Ibid., pp. 123-24.

[⁸⁹](#89a) *The Rauzat-us-Safa*, op. cit., Vol.  II, pt. II, pp. 677-79.

[⁹⁰](#90a) *First Encyclopaedia Islam*, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 147.

[⁹¹](#91a) Ibn Ishãq, op. cit., p. 39.

[⁹²](#92a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., pp. 431-32.

[⁹³](#93a) *Sîrat Rasûl Allãh*, op. cit., p. 300.

[⁹⁴](#94a) D.S. Margoliouth, op. cit., p. 216.

[⁹⁵](#95a) *Sirat Rasûl Allãh*, op. cit., p. 645-46.

[⁹⁶](#96a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam through Hadis: Religious
Faith or Fanaticism?*, Voice of India, New Delhi, Second Reprint, 1987,
p. vii.

[⁹⁷](#97a) Shaykh Farîdu’d-Dîn Attãr, *Tadhkirãt al-Awliyã‘* translated
into Urdu by Maulãna Zubayr Afzal Usmãnî, Delhi n.d., p. 16.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


