+++
title = "02 CHAPTER III         JIZYAH IN INDIA"

+++
CHAPTER III  
JIZYAH IN INDIA

Arab inroads upon the North-West frontiers of India, upon Sindh, or/and
upon Baluchistan began as early as the time of 'Umar, the second Caliph,
and continued in the caliphate of 'Uthmân, 'Alî, Mu'âwiyyah, and later
on as well. Under Hajjâj bin Yûsuf's orders, MuHammad bin Qâism, a
nineteen year old Arab, conquered Sindh in 712 A.D. and imposed Jizyah
on the Hindus and Buddhists unwilling to embrace Islam, excepting,
however, BrâhmaNa-s and ascetics. For the purpose the Jizyah assessees
were divided into three classes, the highest class being liable to pay
48 dirhams of silver (24 silver rupees) per head, the middle class 24
dirhams, and the lowest class 12 dirhams. MuHammad bin Qâsim made it
clear to the Hindus and Buddhists: 'Those among you who become
Mussalmans and come within the fold of Islam shall have their tribute
remitted, but those who are still inclined to be of their own faith,
must put up with injuries (*gazand*) and tribute (*jizia*) to retain the
religion of their fathers and grandfathers.'[1](#1)

Upon this, some took to flight 'in order to maintain the faith of their
ancestors' and 'their horses, domestics, and other property were taken
away from them.'[2](#2)

MuHammad bin Qâsim took a census of the merchants and artisans and
levied a Jizyah of 12 dirhams of silver on each of them, 'as they had
already lost their property by plunder.'[3](#3)

When defeated by Subuktagîn, Jaipâl offered Jizyah and Kharâj to
him.[4](#4)

During the twelve centuries intervening between the invasion of MuHammad
bin Qasim and the death of Aurangzeb, Jizyah remained in force in the
India of those days with varying degrees of emphasis but with brief
intervals, as we shall see in the sequal.

'Ulamâ' advised SulTân Iltutmish as well as certain other SulTâns not to
levy Jizyah on idol-worshipping Hindus but give them an ultimatum of
choosing between the alternatives of Islam and death. In view, however,
of the overwhelming majority of the Hindus, the Sultans dared not do so
and rested satisfied with Jizyah.

QâDî Mughîth ad-Dîn told SulTân 'Alâ'u 'd-Dîn Khaljî: 'If the
Jizyah-collector ask a Hindu for silver, the latter should offer gold in
all humility. If the collector wishes to spit into his mouth, the latter
should open his mouth without demur, so as to enable the former to spit
into it.'[5](#5) Alâ'u 'd-Din is notorious for having pauperized the
Hindus to the utmost limit, but it is not known if he acted upon the
QâDîs advice.

Like everywhere else, in India, too, a large number of non-Muslims chose
Islam for fear of Jizyah. Fîroz Shâh Tughluq promulgated an ordinance
imposing Jizyah on the Hindus including the BrâhamaNa-s and exempting
them therefrom on conversion. He writes that as a result of the
ordinance 'the Hindus thronged in clusters after clusters and groups
after groups and were glorified by the glory of Islam. And likewise to
this day of ours, they come from far and wide, embrace Islam, and Jizyah
is off from them.' (*fawj fawj wa jamâ'at jamâ'at Hunûd âmadand wa ba
sharf-i Islâm musharraf shudand. Wa hamchunîn ilâ yawmi-nâ hâdhâ az
aTrâf mî âyand, wa îmân mî ârand, wa jizyah az Ishân dûr mî
shawad.*)[6](#6)

The BrâhamaNa-s went on hunger-strike and threatened immolation, on the
ground that they were never assessed to Jizyah in the past. The SulTân
was adamant and told them that he cared a whit even if they all
immolated themselves. At long last, other castes took upon themselves to
pay for them and the matter came to an end.[7](#7)

Akbar was the first emperor to abolish Jizyah with one stroke of pen,
along with all its associations and implications, including the
distinction of Muslim and *Dhimmî* into the bargain. His son and
grandson followed his example in regard to Jizyah, generally speaking,
but reimposed upon the Hindus all the other restrictions and
disabilities suffered by them before.

In 1679, Aurangzeb reintroduced Jizyah at the usual rates of 48 dirhams
on the rich, 24 on the middle class, and 12 on the poor, the rich being
those earning ten thousand dirhams or more a year, the middle those
earning over two hundred, and the poor those earning less. Following the
tradition, he also stipulated that the *Dhimmî* should carry the Jizyah
with his own hand and should come on foot. He should pay it standing,
while the Jizyah-collector is sitting. The *Dhimmî*-s hand should be
below that of the collector, who should snatch away the Jizyah from the
former's hands with the remark, 'Pay the Jizyah, O *Dhimmî*!'.[8](#8)

The emperor turned a deaf ear to the Hindus who gathered together by the
hundreds of thousands at Delhi and piteously cried for withdrawal of
Jizyah. Next day, he ordered elephants to be driven through the mass of
men and trample them down, and many did get trampled down. They
continued to gather in large numbers for some days more, but to no
effect.

Along letter of remonstrance was addressed to the emperor against the
reimposition of Jizyah. Its authorship is ascribed to four different
persons. 'The Royal Asiatic Society Ms 71, ascribes the authorship to
Shivaji, A.S.B.Ms 56, to Shambhuji (sic), Orme's Fragments, 252, to
Jaswant Singh, and Tod I, 323, to Rana Raj Singh of Udaipur.'[9](#9)
This, too, failed to have any effect.

From the letter it appears that 'the Emperor of India, envying the bowls
of beggars, takes Jizya from Brahmans, Jain monks, Yogis, *Sannyâsî*-s,
*Bairâgî*-s, paupers, beggars, ruined wretches, and the
famished.'[10](#10) In the 37th year of Aurangzeb's reign, however, a
parwânâh was issued exempting some of the Christian priests of Agra from
Jizyah.[11](#11) Again, once finding the people of Hyderabad incapable
of paying Jizyah, the emperor granted them exemption for one
year.[12](#12)

In spite of ordinances from Delhi for or against the imposition of
Jizyah, independent and quasi-independent rulers and governors of
certain regions continued to have their own way. So, even after the
lifting of Jizyah by Akbar, Jizyah continued to be in force in Bijapur.
We shall see that the SulTâns of Kashmir were independent enough to
strike their own lines in this regard. It is also found that the SulTâns
had a hard nut to crack so far as goes the question of collection of
Jizyah. Their Jizyah-collectors were often driven away by the local
Hindu chiefs and landlords. Even Aurangzeb laments that he is finding it
difficult to realize Jizyah.

Another invidious tax that the Hindus had to pay under Aurangzeb's
dispensation was duty on commercial goods at double the rate charged
from the Muslims.

Aurangzeb's granting his servents, civil and military, exemption from
Jizyah meant little in practice. He was out to debar Hindus from
government service, and had to relent at times only when compelled by
political exigencies and paucity of suitable Muslim talent.[13](#13)

Another factor, conscription in the hour of military urgency, is made
much of as a liability upon the Muslims and not upon non-Muslims and as
a consequent vindication of the latter's liability for Jizyah. In India,
at least, this principle was followed more in its breach than in its
observance. In such an empire as India, large standing armies had to be
maintained and manned by Muslims and non-Muslims alike, often more by
the latter than by the former, who were few and far between as compared
with the Hindus.

In Kashmir, Sikandar Butshikan (1389-1413) imposed Jizyah on the Hindus
for the first time. Prior to him, right from Shâh Mîr (1339) down to
QuTub ad-Dîn (1389), Kashmir knew no Jizyah. Jizyah was finally lifted
there in 1586, during the regime of Yûsuf Shâh, when Akbar annexed
Kashmir to his empire; though its realization had been suspended by
Yûsuf Shâh for seven years prior to it, i.e. from 1578 till the date of
Kashmir's annexation to the Mughal empire. However, between Sikandar
Butshikan and Yûsuf Shâh comes the golden age of Kashmir, inaugurated by
SulTân Zayn al-'Âbidîn (1419-1470), who first reduced the rate of Jizyah
and then abolished it outright. Jizyah was reimposed by Daulat Chak, the
prime minister of SulTân Islâm Shâh (1538-39), upon the BrâhmâNa-s, who
happened to be the only Hindus living in the then Kashmir.

The rate of Jizyah levied by Sikandar Butshikan was two *pala*-s (about
1 *tolâ* and 6 *mâshâ*-s) of silver a year. Zayn al-'Âbidîn first
reduced it to one *mâshâ* (and that, too, was seldom realized) and then
finally abolished it. But Daulat Chak realized 40 pala-s annually from
each male BrâhmaNa when he was invested with the sacred thread
(*yajñopavîta*).

For Jizyah, Jonarâja uses the terms '*durdaNDa*' (the ignoble
tax/penalty)[14](#14) and *turuSka-daNDa* (the Turk/Muslim-imposed
tax/penalty).[15](#15) For imposition of Jizyah, he uses the expression
daNDa-sthiti.[16](#16)

Jizyah has played an enormous role in the spread of Islam in India as
everywhere else. Amîr Khusrau appears to be right when he says that, had
Hanafite law (which alone of the four schools of Muslim law allows to
polytheists the concession of survival on payment of Jizyah) not
prevailed in India, the Hindus would have vanished root and branch:

*Ba-dhimmah gar na bûdi rukhSat-i shar'  
Na mâNdi nâm-i Hindû zi 'Sl tâ far'*[17](#17)

Literally translated, 'Did the Dhimmî-s not enjoy the concession of the
Sharî'ah, all trace of the Hindus would vanish root and branch.'

A unique feature of the situation in Kashmir was that Sikandar Butshikan
levied even Zakât on the Hindus, along with Jizyah. Yûsuf Shah exempted
only boatmen (*mallâH*-s) from Zakât.[18](#18)

We cannot resist the temptation of concluding this chapter with an
unusual assessment of the Indian situation today by maintaining that the
so-called majority community is still paying something as good or as bad
in effect as Jizyah, viz. that part of the taxes paid by the majority
which is used exclusively in the interests of the so-called minorities.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) 'Alî Kûfi, *The Chachnâmah*, tr. from the Persian by Kalichbeg
Fredunbeg, reprint, Delhi, 1979, p.165

[2](#2a) loc.cit.

[3](#3a) loc.cit.

[4](#4a) MuHammad Qâsim Firishtah, *Târîkh*, Urdu tr. by Abdul Ha'i
Khwaja, Deoband, 1983, 1, p. 90

[5](#5a) *Diyâ' ad-Dîn Baranî, Tarîkh-i Firozshâhi, Sayyid Athar Abbas
Rizwi*, selected Hindi tr., in his *Khaljî-Kalîna Bhârata, Aligarh*,
1955, p. 70.

[6](#6a) Firoz Shah Tughluq, *FuthûHât-i Firozshâhî*, ed. by Shaikh
Abdur Rashid, Aligarh, 1954, pp. 16-17.

[7](#7a) Shams Sirâj 'Afif, *Târîkh-i Fîrozshâhî, in Khaljî-Kâlîna
Bhârata*, pp. 150-151.

[8](#8a) Mirzâ MuHammad Hasan alias 'Alî MuHammad Khân Bahâdur *Mir'
at-i AHmadî*, ed. by Sayyid Nawab Ali, Gackwad's Oriental Series, No.
XXXIII, Baroda, 1928, I, pp. 296-297.

[9](#9a) Zahiruddin Faruki, *Aurangzeb and His Times*, reprint, Delhi,
1980, p. 158.

[10](#10a) Hafeez Malik, *Moslem Nationalism in India and Pakistan*,
Washington, 1963, p. 295.

[11](#11a) Faruki, p. 157.

[12](#12a) Ibid., p. 154.

[13](#13a) Mohammad Yasin, *A Social History of Islamic India*, Lucknow,
1958, pp. 44-49.

[14](#14a) Jonarâja, *RâjataraNgiNî*, ed, with Hindi tr. by Raghunatha
Singh, Varanasi, 2028 Vikramî, stanza 606.

[15](#15a) Ibid., p. 609.

[16](#16a) Ibid., p. 653.

[17](#17a) Amîr Khusrau, *Mathnawiyy-i Dawal Rânî KhiDir Khân* (also
known as *'Âshîqah, 'Ashiqiyyah, 'Ishqiyah, Sâhîah-i 'Ishq*), ed. by
Rashid Ahmad Ansari, Alioarh, 1917, p. 46.

[18](#18a) Jonarâja, tr.'s note on stanza 818, p. 462 based on certain
Mss.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
