+++
title = "01  1         THE SWORD OF TIPU SULTAN Making darkness by closing one's eyes "

+++
1  
THE SWORD OF TIPU SULTAN  
Making darkness by closing one's eyes

V.M. KORATH  
Former Editor of *Mathrubhoomi*

Historical novels are usually an admixture of historical facts and
imagination. As such they are not expected to truthfully portray all the
historical events. However, authors of historical novels have the moral
responsibility to present historical facts without blatant distortions.

Mr. Bhagwan Gidwani, the author of the controversial novel, *The Sword
of Tipu Sultan*, does not seem to be bound by any such ethical
obligations; he does not have any qualms even to deliberately falsify
historical facts. Therefore, a tele-serial based on such a novel also
cannot be otherwise.

Mounting opposition to this controversial serial also stems from this
basic reason.

  
PSUEDO-RESEARCH

Mr. Gidwani claims that his novel is the result of thirteen years of
historical research. He asserts that he has studied and scrutinized all
the historical documents available from various sources in India and
abroad. Then, why did not this researcher make any effort to visit
Kerala, particularly Malabar region, the main area of Tipu Sultan's
cruel military operations for a decade, or to scrutinize the historical
evidence available from Malabar regarding the atrocities committed by
Tipu Sultan, or to study the ruins of temples destroyed in Malabar
during that period?

  
AUTHOR'S CREDIBILITY

When a serious author is collecting historical data for writing a
historical novel on Tipu Sultan, does he not have ail obligation or
responsibility to at least visit the Malabar region, the main area of
the operations of Tipu Sultan, and try to understand the significance of
his activities there? The mere fact that Mr. Gidwani did not bother to
do so, is itself sufficient reason for suspecting the credibility and
credentials of the author.

  
IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF HIS FATHER

The major part of Tipu Sultan's rule was spent in conducting military
operations for subjugating Malabar. Wars of territorial conquest waged
in Malabar by Hyder Ali Khan, with the assistance of Ali Raja of Arackal
and his Mappila followers of Cannanore, were intended more for spreading
the Islamic faith by killing and forcible conversion of Hindus coupled
with widespread destruction of Hindu temples, than for expanding his
kingdom.

Hyder Ali Khan had expressed his satisfaction for these cruel
achievements. A broad picture of atrocities committed against the Hindu
population of Malabar by the army of Hyder Ali Khan along with the local
Mappilas can be had from the diary notings of a Muslim officer of the
Mysore army as edited and published by the then surviving son of Tipu
Sultan, Prince Ghulam Muhammed (Cited in *Malabar Manual*, William
Logan).

Before his efforts to conquer the entire Malabar region could succeed,
Hyder Ali Khan died in December, 1782. Tipu Sultan who succeeded his
father, considered it his primary duty to continue this unfinished
*jîhâd* started by Hyder Ali Khan. However, the Islamic fanaticism of
Tipu Sultan was much worse than that of his father. His war-cry of
*jîhâd* was "Sword" (death) or "Cap" (forcible conversion). This makes
very clear the character of Tipu Sultan's military operations started in
1783. The intensity and nature of sufferings which the Hindu population
had to bear during the nightmarish days of Padayottakkalam (military
regime) were vividly described in many historical records preserved in
the royal houses of Zamorin and Kottayam (Pazhassi), Palghat Fort and
East India Company's office. There is no apparent reason to disbelieve
them. It is absurd and against reason to describe all this evidence as
being forged for the purpose of creating enmity between Hindus and
Muslims (as presumed by Dr. C.K. Kareem and others).

During the cruel days of Islamic operations from 1783 to 1791, thousands
of Nairs besides about 30,000 Brahmins had fled Malabar, leaving behind
their entire wealth, and sought refuge in Travancore State (according to
the commission of enquiry appointed by the British soon after Tipu
Sultan's death).

This report was prepared exclusively for the information of the British
authorities and not for writing a book, or for discrediting or defaming
Tipu Sultan. Therefore, according to the learned historian, Dr. M.
Gangadharan, there is no point in disbelieving the validity of this
report (*Mathrubhoomi Weekly*, January, 14-20, 1990): "Besides, there is
enough evidence that a few members of Zamorin family and many Nairs were
forcibly circumcised and converted into Muhammadan faith as well as
compelled to eat beef."

So far as the history of Malabar region is concerned, the most
dependable book for basic historical facts is definitely the *Malabar
Manual* written by William Logan. Serving in various administrative
positions including that of a Collector for 20 years upto 1886, he had
gone through and extensively researched a variety of documents for
preparing his well-acclaimed book. The present edition has been
scrutinized, edited and published by the reputed Muslim historian, Dr.
C.K. Kareem, with the support of Cochin and Kerala universities.
Therefore, the authenticity of its contents cannot be doubted.

There are plenty of references in the *Malabar Manual* about the cruel
military operations and Islamic atrocities of Tipu Sultan in
Malabar-forcible mass circumcision and conversion, large-scale killings,
looting and destruction of hundreds of Hindu temples, and other
barbarities.

If one accepts even a small portion of the Islamic atrocities described
in this monumental work of history, then Tipu Sultan can be depicted
only as a fanatic Muslim bigot. The historical works of Col. Wilks
(*Historical Sketches*), K.P. Padmanabha Menon and Sardar K.M. Panicker
(Kerala History), Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai (research articles) and
others, also do not project Tipu Sultan in any better light. One of the
leading Congressman of pre-independence days, K. Madhava Nair, observes
on page 14 of his famous book, *Malabar Kalapam* (Mappila outrage):

"The communal Mappila outrage of 1921 in Malabar could be easily traced
to the forcible mass conversion and related Islamic atrocities of Tipu
Sultan during his cruel military regime from 1783 to 1792. It is
doubtful whether the Hindus of Kerala had ever suffered so much
devastation and atrocities since the reclamation of Kerala by the
mythological Lord Parasurama in a previous Era. Many thousands of Hindus
were forcibly converted into Muhammadan faith."

Since the same Congressman admitted that Tipu had not discriminated
between Hindus and Muslims in Mysore and administered his country well,
his observations about Kerala could be accepted as impartial comments.

In 1789, Tipu Sultan marched to Kozhikode with an army of 60,000,
destroyed the fort, and razed the town to the ground. Gunddart says in
his *Kerala Pazhama* that it is just not possible to describe the cruel
atrocities perpetrated by the barbarian Tipu Sultan in Kozhikode.

William Logan gives in his *Malabar Manual* a long list of temples
destroyed by Tipu Sultan and his army.

Elankulam Kunjan Pillai has recorded the situation in Malabar as
follows:

"Kozhikode was then a centre of Brahmins. There were around 7000
Namboodiri houses of which more than 2000 houses were destroyed by Tipu
Sultan in Kozhikode alone. Sultan did not spare even children and women.
Menfolk escaped to forests and neighbouring principalities. Mappilas
increased many fold (due to forcible conversion).

"During the military regime of Tipu Sultan, Hindus were forcibly
circumcised and converted to Muhammadan faith. As a result the number of
Nairs and Brahmins declined substantially."

Atrocities committed in Malabar during the days of Tipu Sultan's cruel
military regime have been described in great detail in the famous works
of many reputed authors-*Travancore State Manual* of T.K. Velu Pillai
and *Kerala Sahitya Charitam* of Ulloor Parameshwara Iyer.

Is it not absurd to condemn what all these respected authors have
written about the atrocities of Tipu Sultan and label it as a deliberate
attempt to defame him? All the historical documents of that period
clearly indicate that Tipu Sultan's attack on Malabar had some purpose
other than simple territorial conquest. That purpose was to Islamicise
the whole of Malabar by forcibly converting all the Hindus there.

  
THIS WAS AN ISLAMIC WAR

Even if we concede, for the sake of argument, that all those who call
Tipu Sultan a fanatic Muslim are pro-British and all the historical data
is meant only to create hatred between Muslims and Hindus, the letters
written by Tipu Sultan himself help us to understand his real character.
Some of these letters, obtained from India Office Library, London, were
published in *Bhasha Poshini* magazine of Chingam 1099 (corresponding to
August, 1923) by Sardar K.M. Panicker.

  
The letter dated March 22, 1788, to Kantancheri Abdul Kadir, and the
letter dated December 14, 1788 to his army commander in Kozhikode, do
not require further explanation about Tipu's real intentions in Malabar.

Still, if some people want to describe Tipu Sultan as an apostle of
peace and religious tolerance, let us leave them alone - those
large-hearted admirers of Tipu! However, there is quite a large number
of people who are not that large-hearted, especially the descendants of
those Hindus who were killed by the sword of the bloodthirsty Tipu while
resisting forcible conversion and humiliation.

  
TIPU'S RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE-A POLITICAL GIMMICK

Tipu had committed a variety of atrocities on the Hindus in Malabar -
barbarous mass-killing, wholesale forcible circumcision and conversion,
and widespread destruction and plunder of Hindu temples. Being fully
aware of this background, if Tipu is projected as a lover of Hindu
religion and traditions and not as an intolerant Muslim fanatic, by
citing some "new evidences' obtained by certain motivated historians and
apologists of Islam such as the alleged land-grants to a few Hindu
temples and Sringeri Mutt and protection of Sree Ranganatha Swami temple
near the palace, then at the most they could be treated only as
scandalous exceptions. Even this was part of a political strategy.
Writing in *Mathrubhoomi Weekly* (January 14-20, 1990), Dr. M.
Gangadharan says. "In the socio-religious-political conditions
prevailing in Mysore of Tipu's days, such things could not be avoided.
The financial assistance to Sringeri Mutt meant for conducting religious
rites to ward off evil spirits, was clearly specified in the letter sent
by Tipu Sultan. As such, these cannot be accepted as evidence of Tipu's
respect for Hindu religion."

  
SAME SITUATION IN MYSORE ALSO

The orchestrated propaganda that Tipu Sultan was tolerant and
fair-minded towards the Hindus in Mysore is also without any foundation,
as explained in history of Mysore written by Lewis Rice as well as M.M.
Gopalrao. According to Lewis Rice, during the rule of Tipu Sultan, only
two Hindu temples inside the Sreerangapatanam Fort were having daily
*pujas* while the assets of all other temples were confiscated. Even in
administrative matters,

Muslim bias was blatantly evident, especially in the matter of taxation
policy. "Muslims were exempted from all taxes. Even those who were
converted to Islamic faith were also allowed the same concessions," says
Gopal Rao. In the case of employment, Hindus were eliminated to the
maximum extent possible. During the entire period of 16 years of Tipu
Sultan's rule, the only Hindu who had occupied any important official
position was Purnaiyya.

  
NIGHTMARISH DAYS OF PADAYOTTAM (MILITARY REGIME)

However, Tipu and his Padayottam were a nightmare, especially for the
Hindus of Malabar, whatever may be the arguments provided by Gidwani or
the secularist historians who have specialized in proving a wolf to be a
goat. There is no point in making it dark by closing one's eyes.

Under these circumstances, a TV serial glorifying Tipu Sultan as a
magnanimous person can only remind the Hindus of Malabar about the
nightmare experienced by their forefathers during the cruel military
regime of Tipu Sultan. That can, in turn, shatter the prevailing
communal harmony and peace in Kerala.

Opposition to the proposed TV serial on Tipu Sultan is not inspired by
religious sentiments alone. It is also not against anybody's freedom to
make a tele-serial based on a novel. It is the people's objection and
anger against the Government's attempts to project a historical
personality by suppressing, distorting and falsifying authentic
historical evidence about his life and deeds. The official media like
television and radio networks have certain basic obligations towards the
public. Not to misguide the people, especially by falsification and
distortion of recorded history, is the most important obligation.
Therefore, projection of a tele-serial based on Gidwani's scandalous
novel is outside the broad framework of basic guidelines and objectives.
That should not be allowed.

*Kesari* (Malayalam Weekly), February 25, 1990

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
