+++
title = "01 Foreword"

+++
**Foreword**

The present book is my last contribution to the literature on what is
known in India as “communalism”, meaning the conflict between the
different religions, principally Hinduism and Islam.  Some of the
authors whose works were published by Voice of India, notably Prof.
Harsh Narain and Sri Suhas Majumdar, had only started speaking out on
the communal question in the very last years of their lives.  We must be
grateful to them that they were willing to sacrifice their years of
well-earned rest to a diagnosis of this unpleasant problem. I am very
fortunate in having discovered the problem at an earlier stage of life
and being offered a forum where I could contribute to the research into
and reflection on its causes.  In terms of my own potential, I feel I
have exhausted the topic and I now intend to move on (or return) to more
fundamental subjects of philosophy and religion.

My first book in this sphere of interest was *Ram Janmabhoomi vs. Babri
Masjid: A Case Study in HinduMuslim Conflict* (1990).  I now find it a
somewhat clumsy attempt to understand the Ayodhya controversy, but at
the time it served a good purpose, viz. to break the false impression
that the world of scholarship including Western Indologists was united
in certifying that the Hindu claim to the disputed site in Ayodhya was
historically unfounded. in the subsequent years, evidence has been
piling up in favour of the Hindu claim.  Coming full circle, I have
included in this book a compilation of papers on various aspects of the
Ayodhya debate written by me between 1995 and 2002.  Its main focus is
the argumentation and view of Hindu-Muslim history offered by the
anti-temple party.

My thanks are due to Yamini Liu, Gopi Maliwal, Krishan Bhatnagar and
friends, Satinder Trehan, Tushar Ravuri and Vishal Agarwal, and to the
Voice of India publishers.

Antwerp, 25 January 2002                                              KE

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI Books]()   [Back to
Home]()**
