+++
title = "10          Fomenting Reaction"

+++
TEN  
Fomenting Reaction[1](#1)

Arun Shourie

Ram Swarup, now in his seventies, is a scholar of the first rank. In the
1950s when our intellectuals were singing paeans to Marxism, and to Mao
in particular, he wrote critiques of communism and of the actual - that
is, dismal performance of communist governments. He showed that the
"sacrifices" which the people were being compelled to make had nothing
to do with building a new society in which at some future date they
would be the heirs to milk and honey. On the contrary, the "sacrifices"
were nothing but the results of terrorism, pure and simple - of State
terrorism, to use the expression our progressives use for all
governments save governments which have used terror most brutally and
most extensively. And that this terror was being deployed for one reason
alone: to ensure total dominance, and that in perpetuity, for the
narrowest of oligarchies. He showed that the claims to efficiency and
productivity, to equitable distribution and to high morale which were
being made by these governments, and ever more so by their apologists
and propagandists in countries such as India were wholly unsustainable,
that in fact they were fabrications.

Today, anyone reading those critiques would characterise them as
prophetic. But thirty years ago so noxious was the intellectual climate
in India that all he got was abuse, and ostracisation.

His work on Hinduism and on Islam and Christianity has been equally
scholarly. And what is more pertinent to the point I want to urge, it
has been equally prophetic. No one has ever refuted him on facts, but
many have sought to smear him and his writing. They have thereby
transmuted the work from mere scholarship into warning.

**A ban**

I mention all this because of one of those announcements - this one by
the Delhi Administration - which we do not notice but which in the end
stoke reaction. Newspapers carried a little paragraph a fortnight ago
that his book *Hadis ke madhyam se Islam ka adhyayan* had been banned,
and all its copies forfeited, on the ground that it "deliberately and
maliciously" outrages "the religious feelings of the Muslims by
insulting their religion and their religious beliefs."

The forfeiture is exactly the sort of thing which had landed us where we
are: where intellectual inquiry is shut out; where our traditions are
not examined, and reassessed; and where as a consequence there is no
dialogue. It is exactly the sort of thing too which foments reaction.

**Facts**

What has been banned now is the Hindi translation of the book.

The original in English, *Understanding Islam through Hadis*, was
published in the United States in 1982. The "Hadis" are "traditions",
that is accounts of the life of the Prophet. There are six canonical
collections of these traditions - those of Imam Bukhari and Imam Muslim
are the most revered.

These devout and scrupulous divines went to great lengths to collect and
verify accounts of what the Prophet had said and done. The volumes -
nine of Bukhari, four of Muslim - cover the entire gamut of life. Along
with what was revealed in the Quran, these compilations have been
fundamental guides throughout the ages for all Muslims: the Prophet
having been the ideal personage, his conduct has been the ideal to
follow and emulate; and these compilations have been taken as the most
authentic accounts of that conduct.

Ram Swarup's book is based wholly on what is set out in Imam Muslim's
compilation. The scheme itself of the book follows that compilation.
Paragraph after paragraph ends with noting the number of the *hadis*
from *Sahih-Muslim* of which it is a summary. Imam Muslim's account of
an incident or an expression is put in context where necessary by
material derived from other sources.

But these too are wholly the orthodox sources revered by Muslims the
world over: the *Sirat Rasul Allah* by Ibn Ishaq (the first
authoritative biography of the Prophet), the *Tarikhi-i-Tabri*, the
works of Waqidi etc.

Not one incident, not one remark or rule on the matter at hand is
derived from anything other than these revered and orthodox sources.

Now, as I noted, the original was published in 1982 in the US.

The Indian publisher procured the plates etc. from the United States and
reprinted it in India in 1983.

It went into a second reprint soon.

In 1987 the text was translated into Hindi. The translation was sent to
the binder in December 1987.

A Muslim gentleman, who said he lived next door to the binder and
therefore got to know of the book, sent a protest to the Delhi
Administration.

The publisher, binder etc. were arrested, and then released on bail.

The book was referred by the Delhi Administration to the Screening
Committee. The Committee examined the book, found it to be wholly and
entirely based on orthodox and revered sources. It noted too that no
action had been taken on the English version of the book which had been
in circulation by then for five years, and, as no consequence had
followed upon its circulation, the Committee decided that no prosecution
was warranted.

The police was so informed, and formal orders to this effect were issued
by the Delhi Administration on 5 September 1988.

Even so, in deference to pressure from the same lobbies on, and
therefore a request from the police the case was, as the file notes,
"kept pending for further assessment of the situation by the police."

On 4 January 1990, the Deputy Secretary, Home (General), of the Delhi
Administration wrote to the police a second time. "â€¦I am directed to
say," said the Deputy Secretary, "that the case was re-examined by this
Administration and after considering all the aspects and legal points,
the action/decision conveyed to you *vide* this Administration's letter
of even number dated 5 September, 1988 (by which the police had been
told that no action should be taken against the Hindi translation of the
book) may be treated as final."

But the publisher, printer, binder were still out only on bail, and the
case was coming up periodically in the court.

Eventually on 28 September 1990 the magistrate passed his final order.
He noted that he had given the complainant - the gentleman whose missive
had led to the arrest of the publisher etc. - several opportunities to
make good his complaint. That inspite of these, the complainant had not
done so. That under the relevant section of the Penal Code the case
could be taken cognizance of only if prior permission had been given for
prosecution by the relevant government. That the government had, not
once but twice, reviewed the book and had concluded that no action was
warranted.

He therefore discharged the matter.

That was as late as 28 September 1990: seven years after the original
book was published; two years after the Screening Committee cleared it.

But lo and behold, just two months later on 27 November 1990, the Delhi
Administration declares that contrary to what it had itself twice
decreed the book is not only objectionable, it is deliberately and
maliciously so.

**The law**

The relevant sections of the Penal Code state and host of judgements by
the Supreme Court affirm that:

> The impugned publication must be read as a whole, that expressions,
> metaphors, sentences, paragraphs must not be tom out to establish the
> charges;
>
> That upon the publication being taken as a whole, the test must be
> what the ordinary man with ordinary common sense, prudence and
> understanding will deduce from the publication, not the constructions
> that some abnormal or hypersensitive man may put on it;
>
> That the publication must constitute "an aggravated form of insult to
> religion," and the author must have "deliberately and maliciously" set
> out to outrage the religious feelings of others.

The rationale for such principles (the law and judgements are summarised
in "Is reform incitement?" In my *Religion in Politics*, pp. 433-462) is
obvious: were we to depart from them all reform would be punishable as
all reform is bound to offend those who are habituated to age-old
prejudices and practices.

Nor can the law and order bogey be invoked to stifle free speech. The
Supreme Court has held that under Article 19 (2) free speech can be
restricted for "public order" - and that it has said connotes not a mere
breach of the peace, not a mere "law and order problem", but "disorder
of a grave nature". Moreover, the danger of this widespread disorder
must not be remote, conjectural or farfetched, it must be recognisable
and specific. And it must be shown to arise directly from what is said,
written, or exhibited.

True, there may be threats by 'X' and 'Y' groups that they will take to
the streets unless the publication is banned. But, the Supreme Court has
held, and that too just last year, it is the function of the State to
safeguard the liberties our Constitution guarantees against such threats
and consequences. "Freedom of expression which is legitimate and
constitutionally protected," it declared last year, "cannot be held to
ransom by an intolerant group or people." To curtail it in the face of
threats of demonstrations and processions or threats of violence "would
amount," the Court said, "to the negation of the rule of law and
surrender to blackmail and intimidation.

**And in practice**

> That is the law. And in practice?  
>
> 1\. Some busybody shoots off a letter;  
>
> 2\. A nervous and illiterate administration stomps on the scholar and
> his work;  
>
> 3\. If there is a ruckus or the apprehension of it from the other side
> also, it bans some other publication too, as the Delhi Administration
> has done in the current case, declaring that *that* one is liable to
> injure the feelings of the other group;  
>
> 4\. The fundamentalists use the ban to prove to their ignorant
> followers that the religion is indeed under attack, and that but for
> them it would go under.
>
> The sequence had but one result. It stokes reaction.

"Secularists" are unnerved by the reaction Advani's rath has evoked
among Hindus. But it is not the *rath* which evoked it. The "victories"
in having Shah Bano reversed, in having Rushdie banned - "victories"
which were loudly applauded by the "secularists"; the success in
convincing political parties - which maps and lists - that Muslims would
decide their fate in hundreds of constituencies; to say nothing of the
"victories" of the violence in Punjab and Kashmir - the reaction is the
cumulative result of these distortions in our polity.

if these had not been there, the temple would never have become an
issue. And if they persist, the temple will just be a prelude.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This syndicated article was written on 8 November, 1990. It was
published in more than a score of newspapers and periodicals all over
India, in English as well as language translations.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
