+++
title = "75 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: *Address by Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah at Lahore Session
of Muslim League, March, 1940* (Islamabad: Directorate of Films and
Publishing, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of
Pakistan, Islamabad, 1983), pp. 5-23. Paragraph numbers in double
brackets have been added by FWP for classroom use, and punctuation
slightly clarified in a few places. All editorial emendations in square
brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Presidential address by Muhammad Ali Jinnah to the Muslim League  
Lahore, 1940

  

Ladies and Gentlemen:

\[\[1\]\] We are meeting today in our session after fifteen months. The
last session of the All-India Muslim League took place at Patna in
December 1938. Since then many developments have taken place. I shall
first shortly tell you what the All-India Muslim League had to face
after the Patna session of 1938. You remember that one of the tasks,
which was imposed on us and which is far from completed yet, was to
organise Muslim Leagues all over India. We have made enormous progress
during the last fifteen months in this direction. I am glad to inform
you that we have established provincial leagues in every province. The
next point is that in every bye-election to the Legislative Assemblies
we had to fight with powerful opponents. I congratulate the Mussalmans
for having shown enormous grit and spirit throughout our trials. There
was not a single bye-election in which our opponents won against Muslim
League candidates. In the last election to the U.P. Council, that is the
Upper Chamber, the Muslim League's success was cent per cent. I do not
want to weary you with details of what we have been able to do in the
way of forging ahead in the direction of organising the Muslim League.
But I may tell you that it is going up by leaps and bounds.

\[\[2\]\] Next, you may remember that we appointed a committee of ladies
at the Patna session. It is of very great importance to us, because I
believe that it is absolutely essential for us to give every opportunity
to our women to participate in our struggle of life and death. Women can
do a great deal within their homes, even under purdah. We appointed this
committee with a view to enable them to participate in the work of the
League. The objects of this central committee were: (1) to organise
provincial and district women's sub-committees under the provincial and
district Muslim Leagues: (2) to enlist a larger number of women to the
membership of the Muslim League: (3) to carryon an intensive propaganda
amongst Muslim women throughout India in order to create in them a sense
of a greater political consciousness -- because if political
consciousness is awakened amongst our women, remember your children will
not have much to worry about: (4) to advise and guide them in all such
matters as mainly rest on them for the uplift of Muslim society. This
central committee, I am glad to say, started its work seriously and
earnestly. It has done a great deal of useful work. I have no doubt that
when we come to deal with their report of work done we shall really feel
grateful to them for all the services that they have rendered to the
Muslm League.

\[\[3\]\] We had many diffkulties to face from January 1939 right up to
the declaration of war. We had to face the Vidya Mandir in Nagpur. We
had to face the Wardha Scheme all over India. We had to face
ill-treatment and oppression to Muslims in the Congress-governed
provinces. We had to face the treatment meted out to Muslims in some of
the Indian States such as Jaipur and Bhavnagar. We had to face a vital
issue that arose in that littlc state of Rajkot. Rajkot was the acid
test made by the Congress which would have affected one-third of India.
Thus the Muslim League had all along to face various issues from January
1939 up to the time of the declaration of war. Before the war was
declared the grratcst danger to the Muslims of India was the possible
inauguration of the federal scheme in the central Government. We know
what machinations were going on. But the Muslim League was stoutly
resisting them in every direction. We felt that we could never accept
the dangerous scheme of the central federal Government embodied in the
Government of India Act, 1935. I am sure that we have made no small
contribution towards persuading the British Government to abandon the
scheme of central federal government. In creating that \[state of\] mind
in the British Government, the Muslim League, I have no doubt, played no
small part. You know that the British people are very obdurate people.
They are also very conservative; and although they are very clever, they
are slow in understanding. After the war was declared, the Viceroy
naturally wanted help from the Muslim League. It was only then that he
realised that the Muslim League was a power. For it will be remembered
that up to the time of the declaration of war, the Viceroy never thought
of me but of Gandhi and Gandhi alone. I have been the leader of an
important party in the Legislature for a considerable time, larger than
the one I have the honour to lead at present, the present Muslim League
Party in the Central Legislature. Yet the Viceroy never thought of me.
Therefore, when I got this invitation from the Viceroy along with Mr.
Gandhi, I wondered within myself why I was so suddenly promoted, and
then I concluded that the answer was the 'All-India Muslim League' whose
President I happen to be. I believe that was the worst shock that the
Congress High Command received, because it challenged their sole
authority to speak on behalf of India. And it is quite clear from the
attitude of Mr. Gandhi and the High Command that they have not yet
recovered from that shock. My point is that I want you to realise the
value, the importance, the significance of organising ourselves. I will
not say anything more on the subject.

\[\[4\]\] But a great deal yet remains to be done. I am sure from what I
can see and hear that the Muslim India is now conscious, is now awake,
and the Muslim League has by now grown into such a strong institution
that it cannot be destroyed by anybody, whoever he may happen to be. Men
may come and men may go, but the League will live for ever.

\[\[5\]\] Now, coming to the period after the declaration of war, our
position was that we were between the devil and the deep sea. But I do
not think that the devil or the deep sea is going to get away with it.
Anyhow our position is this. We stand unequivocally for the freedom of
India. But it must be freedom of all India and not freedom of one
section or, worse still, of the Congress caucus -- and slavery of
Mussalmans and other minorities.

\[\[6\]\] Situated in India as we are, we naturally have our past
experiences and particularly the experiences of the past 2 1/2 years of
provincial constitution in the Congress-governed provinces. We have
learnt many lessons. We are now, therefore, very apprehensive and can
trust nobody. I think it is a wise rule for every one not to trust
anybody too much. Sometimes we are led to trust people, but when we find
in actual experience that our trust has been betrayed, surely that ought
to be sufficient lesson for any man not to continue his trust in those
who have betrayed him. Ladies and gentlemen, we never thought that the
Congress High Command would have acted in the manner in which they
actually did in the Congress-governed provinces. I never dreamt that
they would ever come down so low as that. I never could believe that
there would be a gentleman's agreement between the Congress and the
Government to such an extent that although we cried \[ourselves\]
hoarse, week in and week out, the Governors were supine and the
Governor-General was helpless. We reminded them of their special
responsibilities to us and to other minorities, and the solemn pledges
they had given to us. But all that had become a dead letter.
Fortunately, Providence came to our help, and that gentleman's,
agreement was broken to pieces\~and the Congress, thank Heaven, went out
of office. I think they are regretting their resignations very much.
Their bluff was called off \[=was called\]. So far so good. I therefore
appeal to you, in all \[the\] seriousness that I can command, to
organise yourselves in such a way that you may depend upon none except
your own inherent strength. That is your only safeguard, and the best
safeguard. Depend upon yourselves. That does not mean that we should
have ill-will or malice towards others. In order to safeguard your
rights and interests you must create that strength in yourselves
\[such\] that you may be able to defend yourselves, That is all that I
want to urge.

\[\[7\]\] Now, what is our position with regard to \[a\] future
constitution? It is that as soon as circumstances permit, or immediately
after the war at the latest, the whole problem of India's future
constitution must be examined *de novo* and the Act of 1935 must go once
for all. We do not believe in asking the British Government to make
declarations. These declarations are really of no use. You cannot
possibly succeed in getting the British Government out of this country
by asking them to make declarations. However, the Congress asked the
Viceroy to make a declaration. The Viceroy said, 'I have made the
declaration'. The Congress said, 'No, no. We want another kind of
declaration. You must declare now and at once that India is free and
independent with the right to frame its own constitution by a
Constituent Assemhly to be elected on the basis of adult franchise or as
low a franchise as possihle. This Assembly will of course satisfy the
minorities' legitimate mterests." Mr. Gandhi says that if the minorities
are not satisfied then he is willing that some tribunal of the highest
character and most impartial should decide the dispute. Now, apart from
the impracticable character of this proposal and quite apart from the
fact that it is historically and constitutionally absurd to ask \[a\]
ruling power to abdicate in favour of a Constituent Assembly. Apart from
all that, suppose we do not agree as to the franchise according to which
the Central Assembly is to be elected, or suppose the the solid body of
Muslim representatives do not agree with the non-Muslim majority in the
Constituent Assembly, what will happen? It is said that we have no right
to disagree with regard to anything that this Assemhly may do in framing
a national constitution of this huge sub-continent except those matters
which may be germane to the safeguards for the minorities. So we are
given the privilege to disagree only with regard to what may be called
strictly safe-guards of the rights and interests of minorities. We are
also given the privilege to send our own representatives by separate
electorates. Now, this proposal is based on the assumption that as soon
as this constitution comes into operation the British hand will
disappear. Otherwise there will be no meaning in it. Of course, Mr.
Gandhi says that the constitution will decide whether the British will
disappear, and if so to what extent. In other words, his proposal comes
to this: First, give me the declaration that we are a free and
independent nation, then I will decide what I should give you back. Does
Mr. Gandhi really want the complete independence of India when he talks
like this? But whether the British disappear or not, it follows that
extensive powers must be transferred to the people. In the event of
there being a disagreement between the majority of the Constituent
Assembly and the Mussalmans, in the first instance, who will appoint the
tribunal? And suppose an agreed tribunal is possible and the award is
made and the decision given, who will, may I know, be there to see that
this award is implemented or carried out in accordance with the terms of
that award? And who will see that it is honoured in practice, because,
we are told, the British will have parted with their power mainly or
completely? Then what will be the sanction behind the award which will
enforce it? We come back to the same answer, the Hindu majority would do
it; and will it be with the help of the British bayonet or the Gandhi's
"Ahinsa"? Can we trust them any more? Besides, ladies and gentlemen, can
you imagine that a question of this character, of social contract upon
which the future constitution of India would be based, affecting 90
million of Mussalmans, can be decided by means of a judicial tribunal?
Still, that is the proposal of the Congress.

\[\[8\]\] Before I deal with what Mr. Gandhi said a few days ago I shall
deal with the pronouncements of some of the other Congress leaders --
each one speaking with a different voice. Mr. Rajagopalacharya, the
ex-Prime Minister of Madras, says that the only panacea for Hindu-Muslim
unity is the joint electorates. That is his prescription as one of the
great doctors of the Congress organisation. (*Laughter.*) Babu Rajendra
Prasad, on the other hand, only a few days ago said, "Oh, what more do
the Mussalmans want?" I will read to you his words. Referring to the
minority question, he says: "If Britain would concede our right of
self-determination, surely all these differences would disappear." How
will our differences disappear? He does not explain or enlighten us
about it.

> "But so long as Britain remains and holds power, the differences would
> continue to exist. The Congress has made it clear that the future
> constitution would be framed not by the Congress alone but by
> representatives of all political parties and religious groups. The
> Congress has gone further and declared that the minorities can have
> their representatives elected for this purpose by separate
> electorates, though the Congress regards separate electorates as an
> evil. It will be representative of all the peoples of this country,
> irrespective of their religion and political affiliations, who will be
> deciding the future constitution of India, and not this or that party.
> What better guarantees can the minorities have?"

So according to Babu Rajendra Prasad, the moment we enter the Assembly
we shall shed all our political affiliations, and religions, and
everything else. This is what Babu Rajendra Prasad said as late as 18th
March, 1940.

\[\[9\]\] And this is now what Mr. Gandhi said on the 20th of March,
1940. He says: "To me, Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Harijans, are all
alike. I cannot be frivolous" -- but I think he is frivolous -- "I
cannot be frivolous when I talk of Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah. He is my
brother." The only difference is this that brother Gandhi has three
votes and I have only one vote. (*Laughter.*) "I would be happy indeed
if he could keep me in his pocket." I do not know really what to say of
this latest offer of his. "There was a time when I could say that there
was no Muslim whose confidence I did not enjoy. It is my misfortune that
it is not so today." Why has he lost the confidence of the Muslims
today? May I ask, ladies and gentlemen? "I do not read all that appears
in the Urdu Press, but perhaps I get a lot of abuse there. I am not
sorry for it. I still believe that without Hindu­Muslim settlement there
can be no Swaraj." Mr. Gandhi has been saying this now for the last 20
years. "You will perhaps ask in that case why do I talk of a fight. I do
so because it is to be a fight for a Constituent Assembly."

\[\[10\] He is fighting the British. But may I point out to Mr. Gandhi
and the Congress that you are fighting for a Constituent Assembly which
the Muslims say they cannot accept; which, the Muslims say, means three
to one; about which the Mussalmans say that they will never be able, in
that way by the counting of head, to come to any agreenwnt which will be
real agreement from the hearts, which will enable us to work as friends;
and therefore this idea of a Constituent Assembly is objectionable,
apart from other objections. But he is fighting for the Constituent
Assembly, not fighting the Mussalmans at all! He says, "I do so because
it is to be a fight for a Constituent Assembly. If Muslims who come to
the Constituent Assembly" -- mark the words, "who come to the
Constituent Assembly through Muslim votes" -- he is first forcing us to
come to that Assembly, and then says -- "declare that there is nothing
common between Hindus and Muslims, then alone I would give up all hope,
but even then I would agree with them because they read the Quran and I
have also studied something of that holy Book." (*Laughter.*)

\[\[11\]\] So he wants the Constituent Assembly for the purpose of
ascertaining the views of the Mussalmans; and if they do not agree then
he will give up all hopes, but even then he will agree with us.
(*Laughter.*) Well, I ask you. ladies and gentlemen, is this the way to
show any real genuine desire, if there existed any, to come to a
settlement with the Mussalmans? (*Voices of no, no.*) Why does not Mr.
Gandhi agree, and.I have suggested to him more than once and I repeat it
again from this platform, why does not Mr. Gandhi honestly now
acknowledge that the Congress is a Hindu Congress, that he does not
represent anybody except the solid body of Hindu people? Why should not
Mr. Gandhi be proud to say. "I am a Hindu. Congress has solid Hindu
backing"? I am not ashamed of saying that I am a Mussalman. (*Hear, hear
and applause.*) I am right and I hope and I think even a blind man must
have been convinced by now that the Muslim League has the solid backing
of the Mussalmans of India (*Hear, hear.*) Why then all this camouflage?
Why all these machinations? Why all these methods to coerce the British
to overthrow the Mussalmans? Why this declaration of non-cooperation?
Why this threat of civil disobedience? And why fight for a Constituent
Assembly for the sake of ascertaining whether the Mussalmans agree or
they do not agree? (*Hear, hear.*) Why not come as a Hindu leader
proudly representing your people, and let me meet you proudly
representing the Mussalmans? (*Hear, hear and applause.*) This all that
I have to say so far as the Congress is concerned.

\[\[12\]\] So far as the British Government is concerned, our
negotiations are not concluded yet, as you know. We had asked for
assurances on several points. At any rate, we have made some advance
with regard to one point and that is this. You remember our demand was
that the entire problem of \[the\] future constitution of India should
be examined *de novo*, apart from the Government of India Act of 1935.
To that the Viceroy's reply, with the authority of His Majesty's
Government, was -- I had better quote that -- I will not put it in my
own words: This is the reply that was sent to us on the 23rd of
December. "My answer to your first question is that the declaration I
made with the approval of His Majesty's Government on October the 13th
last does not exclude -- Mark the words -- "does not exclude
examination of any part either of the Act of 1935 or of the policy and
plans on which it is based." (*Hear, hear.*)

\[\[13\]\] As regards other matters, we are still negotiating and the
most important points are: (1) that no declaration should be made by His
Majesty's Government with regard to the future constitution of India
without our approval and consent (*Hear, hear, and applause*) and that
no settlement of any question should be made with any party behind our
back (*Hear, hear*) unless our approval and consent is given to it.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, whether the British Government in their
wisdom agree to give us that assurance or not, but. I trust that they
will still see that it is a fair and just demand when we say that we
cannot leave the future fate and the destiny of 90 million of people in
the hands of any other judge. --We and we alone wish to be the final
arbiter. Surely that is a just demand. We do not want that the British
Government should thrust upon the Mussalmans a constitution which they
do not approve of and to which they do not agree. Therefore the British
Government will be well advised to give that assurance and give the
Mussalmans complete peace and confidence in this matter and win their
friendship. But whether they do that or not, after all, as I told you
before, we must depend on our own inherent strength; and I make it plain
from this platform, that if any declaration is made, if any interim
settlement is made without our approval and without our consent, the
Mussalmans of India will resist it. (*Hear, hear and applause.*) And no
mistake should be made on that score.

\[\[14\]\] Then the next point was with regard to Palestine. We are told
that endeavours, earnest endeavours, are being made to meet the
reasonable, national demands, of the Arabs. Well, we cannot be satisfied
by earnest endeavours, sincere endeavours, best endeavours.
(*Laughter.*) We want that the British Government should in fact and
actually meet the demands of the Arabs in Palestine. (*Hear, hear.*)

\[\[15\]\] Then the next point was with regard to the sending of the
troops. Here there is some misunderstanding. But anyhow we have made our
position clear that we never intended, and in fact language does not
justify it if there is any misapprehension or apprehension, that the
Indian troops should not be used to the fullest in the defence of our
own country. What we wanted the British Government to give us assurance
of was that Indian troops should not be sent against any Muslim country
or any Muslim power. (*Hear, hear.*) Let us hope that we may yet be able
to get the British Government to clarify the position further.

\[\[16\]\] This, then, is the position with regard to the British
Government. The last meeting of the Working Committee had asked the
Viceroy to reconsider his letter of the 23rd of December, having regard
to what has been explained to him in pursuance of the resolution of the
Working Committee dated the 3rd of February; and we are informed that
the matter is receiving his careful consideration. Ladies and Gentlemen,
that is where we stand after the War and up to the 3rd of February.

\[\[17\]\] As far as our internal position is concerned, we have also
been examining it, and you know. there are several schemes which have
been sent by various well-informed constitutionalists and others who
take interest with \[=are interested in the\] problem of India's future
Constitution; and we have also appointed a sub­committee to examine the
details of the schemes that have come in so far. But one thing is quite
clear: it has always been taken for granted mistakenly that the
Mussalmans are a minority, and of course we have got used to it for such
a long time that these settled notions sometimes are very difficult to
remove. The Mussalmans are not a minority. The Mussalmans are a nation
by any definition. The British and particularly the Congress proceed on
the hasis, "Well, you are a minority after all, what do you want!" "What
else do the minorities want?" just as Babu Rajendra Prasad said. But
surely the Mussalmans are not a minority. We find that even according to
the British map of India we occupy large parts of this country where the
Mussalmans are in a majority, such as Bengal, Punjab, N.W.F.P., Sind,
and Baluchistan.

\[\[18\]\] Now the question is, what is the solution of this prohlem
between the Hindus and the Mussalmans? We have been considering, and as
I have already said, a committee has been appointed to consider the
various proposals. But whatever the final scheme of constitution, I will
present to you my views, and I will just read to you in confirmation of
what I am going to put before you, a letter from Lala Lajpat Rai to Mr.
C. R. Das. It was written, I believe, about 12 or 15 years ago, and that
letter has been produced in a book recently published by one Indra
Prakash, and that is how this letter has come to light. This is what
Lala Lajpat Rai, a very astute politician and a staunch Hindu
Mahasabite, said. But before I read his letter it is plain from \[it\]
that you cannot get away from being a Hindu if you are a Hindu.
(*Laughter.*) The word 'nationalist' has now become the play of
conjurers in politics. This is what he says:

> "There is one point more which has been troubling me very much of late
> and one \[about\] which I want you to think carefully and that is the
> question of Hindu-Muhammadan unity. I have devoted most of my time
> during the last six months to the study of Muslim history and Muslim
> law and I am inclined to think it is neither possible nor practicable.
> Assuming and admitting the sincerity of Mohammadan leaders in the
> non-cooperation movement I think their religion provides an effective
> bar to anything of the kind.
>
> "You remember the conversation I reported to you in Calcutta which I
> had with Hakim Ajmal Khan and Dr. Kitchlew. There is no finer
> Muhammadan in Hindustan than Hakim Ajmal Khan, but can any Muslim
> leader over-ride the Quran? I can only hope that my reading of Islamic
> law is incorrect.

I think his reading is quite incorrect.

> "And nothing would relieve me more than to be convinced that it is so.
> But if it is right then it comes to this, that although we can unite
> against the British we cannot do so to rule Hindustan on British
> lines. We cannot do so to rule Hindustan on democratic lines."

  
\[\[19\]\] Ladies and gentlemen, when Lala Lajpat Rai said that we
cannot rule this country on democratic lines it was all right; but when
I had the temerity to speak the same truth about eighteen months ago,
there was a shower of attacks and criticism. But Lala Lajpat Rai said
fifteen years ago that we cannot do so -- viz., rule Hindustan on
democratic lines. What is the remedy? The remedy, according to Congress,
is to keep us in the minority and under the majority rule. Lala Lajpat
Rai proceeds further:

> "What is then the remedy? I am not afraid of the seven crores \[=70
> million\] of Mussalmans. But I think the seven crores in Hindustan
> plus the armed hordes of Afghanistan, Central Asia, Arabia,
> Mesopotamia and Turkey, will be irresistible." (*Laughter.*)
>
> "I do honestly and sincerely believe in the necessity or desirability
> of Hindu-Muslim unity. I am also fully prepared to trust the Muslim
> leaders. But what about the injunctions of the Koran and Hadis? The
> leaders cannot over-ride them. Are we then doomed? I hope not. I hope
> your learned mind and wise head will find some way out of this
> difficulty."

  
\[\[20\]\] Now, ladies and gentlemen, that is merely a letter written by
one great Hindu leader to another great Hindu leader fifteen years ago.
Now, I should like to put before you my views on the subject as it
strikes me, taking everything into consideration at the present moment.
The British Govemment and Parliament, and more so the British nation,
have been for many decades past brought up and nurtured with settled
notions about India's future, based on developments in their own country
which has built up the British constitution, functioning now through the
Houses of Parliament and the system of \[the\] cabinet. Their concept of
party government functioning on political planes has become the ideal
with them as the best form. of government for every country, and the
one-sided and powerful propaganda, which naturally appeals to the
British, has led them into a serious blunder, in producing a
constitution envisaged in the Government of India Act of 1935. We find
that the most leading statesmen of Great Britain, saturated with these
notions, have in their pronouncements seriously asserted and expressed a
hope that the passage of time will harmonise the inconsistent elements
in India.

\[\[21\]\] A leading journal like the *London Times*, commenting on the
Government of India Act of 1935, wrote that "Undoubtedly the difference
between the Hindus and Muslims is not of religion in the strict sense of
the word but also of law and culture, that they may be said indeed to
represent two entirely distinct and separate civilisations. However, in
the course of time the. superstitions will die out and India will be
moulded into a single nation." (So according to the *London Times* the
only difficulties are superstitions). These fundamental and deep-rooted
differences, spiritual, economic, cultural, social, and political havc
been euphemised as mere "superstitions." But surely it is a flagrant
disregard of the past history of the sub-continent of India, as well as
the fundamental Islamic conception of society vis-a-vis that of
Hinduism, to characterise them as mere "superstitions." Notwithstanding
\[a\] thousand years of close contact, nationalities which are as
divergent today as ever, cannot at any time be expected to transform
themselves into onc nation merely by means of subjecting them to a
democratic constitution and holding them forcibly togdher by unnatural
and artificial methods of British Parliamentary statutes. What the
unitary government of India for one hundred fifty years had failcd to
achieve cannot be realiscd by the imposition of a central federal
government. It is inconceivable that the fiat or the writ of a
government so constituted can ever command a willing and loyal obedience
throughout the sub-continent by various nationalities, except by means
of armed force behind it.

\[\[22\]\] The problem in India is not of an inter-communal character,
but manifestly of an international one, and it must be treated as such.
So long as this basic and fundamental truth is not realised, any
constitution that may be built will result in disaster and will prove
destructive and harmful not only to the Mussalmans, but to the British
and Hindus also. If the British Government are really in earnest and
sincere to secure \[the\] peace and happiness of the people of this
sub-continent, the only course open to us all is to allow the major
nations separate homelands by dividing India into "autonomous national
states." There is no reason why these states should be antagonistic to
each other. On the other hand, the rivalry, and the natural desire and
efforts on the part of one to dominate the social order and establish
political supremacy over the other in the government of the country,
will disappear. It will lead more towards natural goodwill by
international pacts between them, and they can live in complete harmony
with their neighbours. This will lead further to a friendly settlement
all the more easily with regard to minorities, by reciprocal
arrangements and adjustments between Muslim India and Hindu India, which
will far more adequately and effectively safeguard the rights and
interests of Muslim and various other minorities.

\[\[23\]\] It is extremely difficult to appreciate why our Hindu friends
fail to understand the real nature of Islam and Hinduism. They are not
religions in the strict sense of the word, but are, in fact, different
and distinct social orders; and it is a dream that the Hindus and
Muslims can ever evolve a common nationality; and this misconception of
one Indian nation has gone far beyond the limits and is the cause of
more of our troubles and will lead India to destruction if we fail to
revise our notions in time. The Hindus and Muslims belong to two
different religious philosophies, social customs, and literature\[s\].
They neither intermarry nor interdine together, and indeed they belong
to two different civilisations which are based mainly on conflicting
ideas and conceptions. Their aspects \[=perspectives?\] on life, and of
life, are different. It is quite clear that Hindus and Mussalmans derive
their inspiration from different sources of history. They have different
epics, their heroes are different, and different episode\[s\]. Very
often the hero of one is a foe of the other, and likewise their
victories and defeats overlap. To yoke together two such nations under a
single state, one as a numerical minority and the other as a majority,
must lead to growing discontent, and final. destruction of any fabric
that may be so built up for the government of such a state.

\[\[24\]\] History has presented to us many examples, such as the Union
of Great Britain and Ireland, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. History has
also shown to us many geographical tracts, much smaller than the
sub-continent of India, which otherwise might have been called one
country, but which have been divided into as many states as there are
nations inhabiting them. \[The\] Balkan Peninsula comprises as many as
seven or eight sovereign states. Likewise, the Portuguese and the
Spanish stand divided in the Iberian Peninsula. Whereas under the plea
of unity of India and one nation which does not exist, it is sought to
pursue here the line of one central government, when we know that the
history of the last twelve hundred years has failed to achieve unity and
has witnessed, during these ages, India always divided into Hindu India
and Muslim India. The present artificial unity of India dates back only
to the British conquest and is maintained by the British bayonet, but
the termination of the British regime, which is implicit in the recent
declaration of His Majesty's Government, will be the herald of the
entire break-up, with worse disaster than has ever taken place during
the last one thousand years under the Muslims. Surely that is not the
legacy which Britain would bequeath to India after one hundred fifty
years of her rule, nor would Hindu and Muslim India risk such a sure
catastrophe.

\[\[25\]\] Muslim India cannot accept any constitution which must
necessarily result in a Hindu majority government. Hindus and Muslims
brought together under a democratic system forced upon the minorities
can only mean Hindu Raj. Democracy of the kind with which the Congress
High Command is enamoured would mean the complete destruction of what is
most precious in Islam. We have had ample experience of the working of
the provincial constitutions during the last two and a half years, and
any repetItion of such a government must lead to civil war and \[the\]
raising of private armies, as recommended by Mr. Gandhi to \[the\]
Hindus of Sukkur when he said that they must defend themselves violently
or non-violently, blow for blow, and if they could not they must
emigrate.

\[\[26\]\] Mussalmans are not a minority as it is commonly known and
understood. One has only got to look round. Even today, according to the
British map of India, out of eleven provinces, four provinces where the
Muslims dominate more or less, are functioning notwithstanding the
decision of the Hindu Congress High Command to non-cooperate and prepare
for civil disobedience. Mussalmans are a nation according to any
defmition of a nation, and they must have their homelands, their
territory, and their state. We wish to live in peace and harmony with
our neighbours as a free and independent people. We wish our people to
develop to the fullest our spiritual, cultural, economic, social, and
political life, in a way that we think best and in consonance with our
own ideals and according to the genius of our people. Honesty demands
\[that we find\], and \[the\] vital interest\[s\] of millions of our
people impose a sacred duty upon us to find, an honourable and peaceful
solution, which would be just and fair to all. But at the same time we
cannot be moved or diverted from our purpose and objective by threats or
intimidations. We must be prepared to face all difficulties and
consequences, make all the sacrifices that may be required of us, to
achieve the goal we have set in front of us.

\[\[27\]\] Ladies and gentlemen, that is the task before us. I fear I
have gone beyond my time limit. There are many things that I should like
to tell you, but I have already published a little pamphlet containing
most of thc things that I have said and I have been saying, and I think
you can easily get that publication both in English and in Urdu from the
League Office. It might give you a clearer idea of our aims. It contains
very important resolutions of the Muslim League and various other
statements. Anyhow, I have placed before you the task that lies ahead of
us. Do you realise how big and stupendous it is? Do you realise that you
cannot get freedom or independence by mere arguments? I should appeal to
the intelligentsia. The intelligentsia in all countries in the world
have been the pioneers of any movements for freedom. What does the
Muslim intelligentsia propose to do? I may tell you that unless you get
this into your blood, unless you are prepared to take off your coats and
are willing to sacrifice all that you can and work selflessly,
earnestly, and sincerely for your people, you will never realise your
aim. Friends, I therefore want you to make up your mind definitely ,and
then think of devices and organise your people, strengthen your
organisation, and consolidate the Mussalmans all over India. I think
that the masses are wide awake. They only want your guidance and your
lead. Come forward as servants of Islam. organise the people
economically, socially, educationally, and politically, and I am sure
that you will be a power that will be accepted by everybody.
(*Cheers.*)  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on M. A. Jinnah](islam_articles.html#jinnah) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --
