+++
title = "61 PART IV PAKISTAN AND THE MALAISE"

+++
-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) --

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PART IV

PAKISTAN AND THE MALAISE

  

[TABLE]

CHAPTER X

SOCIAL STAGNATION  


I  
\[Muslim Society is even more full of social evils than Hindu Society
is\]

 The social evils which characterize the Hindu Society, have been
well known. The publication of **Mother India** by Miss Mayo gave these
evils the widest publicity. But while **Mother India** served the
purpose of exposing the evils and calling their authors at the bar of
the world to answer for their sins, it created the unfortunate
impression throughout the world that while the Hindus were grovelling in
the mud of these social evils and were conservative, the Muslims in
India were free from them, and as compared to the Hindus, were a
progressive people. That such an impression should prevail, is
surprising to those who know the Muslim Society in India at close
quarters.

 One may well ask if there is any social evil which is found among
the Hindus and is not found among the Muslims.

 Take child-marriage. The Secretary of the Anti-Child-marriage
Committee, constituted by the All-India Women's Conference, published a
bulletin which gives the extent of the evil of child-marriage in the
different communities in the country. The figures, which were taken from
the Census Report of 1931, are as follows :—  


|                                                                            |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [MARRIED FEMALES AGED 0-15 PER 1000 FEMALES OF THAT AGE](tables/410a.html) |

 Can the position among the Musalmans so far as child-marriage goes,
be considered better than the position among the Hindus?

 Take the position of women. It is insisted by Muslims that the legal
rights given to Muslim women ensure them a greater measure of
independence than allowed to other Eastern women—for example, Hindu
women—and are in excess of the rights given to women in some Western
countries. Reliance is placed on some of the provisions of the Muslim
Law.

 Firstly, it is said the Muslim Law does not fix any age for
marriage, and recognizes the right of a girl to marry any time. Further,
except where the marriage is celebrated by the father or the
grandfather, a Muslim girl, if given in marriage in childhood, has the
power to repudiate her marriage on attaining puberty.

 Secondly, it is held out that marriage among the Musalmans is a
contract. Being a contract, the husband has a right to divorce his wife,
and the Muslim Law has provided ample safeguards for the wife which, if
availed of, would place the Muslim wife on the same footing as the
husband in the matter of divorce. For it is claimed that the wife under
the Muslim Law can, at the time of the marriage, or even thereafter in
some cases, enter into a contract by which she may under certain
circumstances obtain a divorce.

 Thirdly, the Mahomedan Law requires that a wife can claim from her
husband, by way of consideration for the surrender of her person, a sum
of money or other property—known as her "dower." The dower may be fixed
even after marriage, and if no amount is fixed, the wife is entitled to
proper dower. The amount of dower is usually split into two parts, one
is called "prompt," which is payable on demand, and the other
"deferred," which is payable on dissolution of marriage by death or
divorce. Her claim for dower will be treated as a debt against the
husband's estate. She has complete dominion over her dower, which is
intended to give her economic independence. She can remit it, or she can
appropriate the income of it as she pleases.

 Granting all these provisions of law in her favour, the Muslim woman
is the most helpless person in the world. To quote an Egyptian Muslim
leader :—

> "Islam has set its seal of inferiority upon her, and given the
> sanction of religion to social customs which have deprived her of the
> full opportunity for self-expression and development of personality."

 No Muslim girl has the courage to repudiate her marriage, although
it may be open to her on the ground that she was a child and that it was
brought about by persons other than her parents. No Muslim wife will
think it proper to have a clause entered into her marriage contract
reserving her the right to divorce. In that event, her fate is "once
married, always married." She cannot escape the marriage tie, however
irksome it may be. While she cannot repudiate the marriage, the husband
can always do it, without having to show any cause. Utter the word
"Tallak" and observe continence for three weeks, and the woman is cast
away. The only restraint on his caprice is the obligation to pay dower.
If the dower has already been remitted, his right to divorce is a matter
of his sweet will.

 This latitude in the matter of divorce destroys that sense of
security which is so fundamental for a full, free and happy life for a
woman. This insecurity of life to which a Muslim woman is exposed, is
greatly augmented by the right of polygamy and concubinage, which the
Muslim Law gives to the husband.

 Mahomedan Law allows a Muslim to marry four wives at a time. It is
not unoften said that this is an improvement over the Hindu Law, which
places no restriction on the number of wives a Hindu can have at any
given time. But it is forgotten that in addition to the four legal
wives, the Muslim Law permits a Mahomedan to cohabit with his female
slaves. In the case of female slaves nothing is said as to the number.
They are allowed to him without any restriction whatever and without any
obligation to marry them.

 No words can adequately express the great and many evils of polygamy
and concubinage, and especially as a source of misery to a Muslim woman.
It is true that because polygamy and concubinage are sanctioned, one
must not suppose they are indulged in by the generality of Muslims;
still the fact remains that they are privileges which are easy for a
Muslim to abuse to the misery and unhappiness of his wife. Mr. John J.
Pool, no enemy of Islam, observes**[/1/](#n01)**:—

> "This latitude in the mailer of divorce is very greatly taken
> advantage of by some Mohamedans. Slohart, commenting on this subject
> in his book, **Islam, and its Founder**, says: 'Some Mohamodans make a
> habit of continually changing their wives. We read of young men who
> have had twenty and thirty wives, a new one every three months: and
> thus it comes about that women are liable to be indefinitely
> transferred from one man to another, obliged to accept a husband and a
> home whenever they can find one, or in case of destitution, to which
> divorce may have driven them, to resort to other more degrading means
> of living. Thus while keeping the strict letter of the law, and
> possessing only one or certainly not more than four wives,
> unscrupulous characters may yet by divorce obtain in a lifetime as
> many wives as they please.
>
> "In another way also a Mohammedan may really have more than four
> wives, and yet keep within the law. This is by means of living with
> concubines, which the Koran expressly permits. In that *sura* which
> allows four wives, the words are added, 'of the slaves which ye shall
> have acquired.' Then in the 70th *sura*, it is revealed that it is no
> sin to live with slaves. The very words are: 'The slaves which their
> right hands possess, as to them they shall be blameless.' At the
> present day, as in days past, in multitudes of Mohamedan homes, slaves
> are found; as Muir says, in his **Life of Mahomet** 'so long as this
> unlimited permission of living with their female slaves continues, it
> cannot be expected that there will be any hearty attempt to put a stop
> to slavery in Mohamedan countries.' Thus the Koran, in this matter of
> slavery, is the enemy of the mankind. And women, as usual, are the
> greater sufferers.'

 Take the caste system. Islam speaks of brotherhood. Everybody infers
that Islam must be free from slavery and caste. Regarding slavery
nothing needs to be said. It stands abolished now by law. But while it
existed, much of its support was derived from Islam and Islamic
countries.**[/2/](#n02)** While the prescriptions by the Prophet
regarding the just and humane treatment of slaves contained in the Koran
are praiseworthy, there is nothing whatever in Islam that lends support
to the abolition of this curse. As Sir W. Muir has well
said**[/3/](#n03)**:—

> ". . .rather, while lightening, lie riveted the fetter. . . .There is
> no obligation on a Muslim to release his slaves. . . ."

 But if slavery has gone, caste among Musalmans has remained. As an
illustration one may take the conditions prevalent among the Bengal
Muslims. The Superintendent of the Census for 1901 for the Province of
Bengal records the following interesting facts regarding the Muslims of
Bengal :—

> "The conventional division of the Mahomedans into four tribes— Sheikh,
> Saiad, Moghul and Pathan—has very little application to this Province
> (Bengal). The Mahomedans themselves recognize two main social
> divisions, (1) Ashraf or Sharaf and (2) Ajlaf. Ashraf means 'noble'
> and includes all undoubted descendants of foreigners and converts from
> high caste Hindus. All other Mahomedans including the occupational
> groups and all converts of lower ranks, are known by the contemptuous
> terms, 'Ajlaf ,' 'wretches' or 'mean people': they are also called
> Kamina or Itar, 'base' or Rasil, a corruption of Rizal, 'worthless.'
> In some places a third class, called Arzal or 'lowest of all,' is
> added. With them no other Mahomedan would associate, and they are
> forbidden to enter the mosque to use the public burial ground.
>
> "Within these groups there are castes with social precedence of
> exactly the same nature as one finds among the Hindus.
>
> I. *Ashraf* or better class Mahomedans.
>
> > \(1\) Saiads.  
> > (2) Sheikhs.  
> > (3) Pathans.  
> > (4) Moghul.  
> > (5) Mallik.  
> > (6) Mirza.
>
> II\. *Ajlaf* or lower class Mahomedans.
>
> > \(1\) Cultivating Sheikhs, and others who were originally Hindus but
> > who do not belong to any functional group, and have not gained
> > admittance to the Ashraf Community, e.g. Pirali and Thakrai.  
> > (2) Darzi, Jolaha, Fakir, and Rangrez.  
> > (3) Barhi, Bhalhiara, Chik, Churihar, Dai, Dhawa, Dhunia, Gaddi,
> > Kalal, Kasai, Kula Kunjara, Laheri, Mahifarosh, Mallah, Naliya,
> > Nikari.  
> > (4) Abdal, Bako, Bediya, Bhal, Chamba, Dafali, Dhobi, Hajjam, Mucho,
> > Nagarchi, Nal,Panwaria, Madaria, Tunlia.
>
> III\. *Arzal* or degraded class.
>
> > Bhanar, Halalkhor, Hijra, Kasbi, Lalbegi, Maugta, Mehtar."

 The Census Superintendent mentions another feature of the Muslim
social system, namely, the prevalence of the "panchayat system." He
states :—

> "The authority of the panchayat extends to social as well as trade
> matters and. . .marriage with people of' other communities is one of
> the offences of which the governing body takes cognizance. The result
> is that these groups are often as strictly endogamous as Hindu castes.
> The prohibition on inter-marriage extends to higher as well as to
> lower castes, and a Dhuma, for example, may marry no one but a Dhuma.
> If this rule is transgressed, the offender is at once hauled up before
> the panchayat and ejected ignominiously from his community. A member
> of one such group cannot ordinarily gain admission to another, and he
> retains the designation of the community in which he was born even if
> he abandons its distinctive occupation and takes to other means of
> livelihood. . . .thousands of Jolahas are butchers, yet they are still
> known as Jolahas."

 Similar facts from other Provinces of India could be gathered from
their respective Census Reports, and those who are curious may refer to
them. But the facts for Bengal are enough to show that the Mahomedans
observe not only caste but also untouchability.

 There can thus be no manner of doubt that the Muslim Society in
India is afflicted by the same social evils as afflict the Hindu
Society. Indeed, the Muslims have all the social evils of the Hindus and
something more. That something more is the compulsory system of *purdah*
for Muslim women.

 As a consequence of the *purdah* system, a segregation of the Muslim
women is brought about. The ladies are not expected to visit the outer
rooms, verandahs, or gardens; their quarters are in the back-yard. All
of them, young and old, are confined in the same room. No male servant
can work in their presence. A woman is allowed to see only her sons,
brothers, father, uncles, and husband, or any other near relation who
may be admitted to a position of trust. She cannot go even to the mosque
to pray, and must wear *burka* (veil) whenever she has to go out. These
*burka* women walking in the streets is one of the most hideous sights
one can witness in India. Such seclusion cannot but have its
deteriorating effects upon the physical constitution of Muslim women.
They are usually victims to anaemia, tuberculosis, and pyorrhoea. Their
bodies are deformed, with their backs bent, bones protruded, hands and
feet crooked. Ribs, joints and nearly all their bones ache. Heart
palpitation is very often present in them. The result of this pelvic
deformity is untimely death at the time of delivery. *Purdah* deprives
Muslim women of mental and moral nourishment. Being deprived of healthy
social life, the process of moral degeneration must and does set in.
Being completely secluded from the outer world, they engage their minds
in petty family quarrels, with the result that they become narrow and
restricted in their outlook.

 They lag behind their sisters from other communities, cannot take
part in any outdoor activity and are weighed down by a slavish mentality
and an inferiority complex. They have no desire for knowledge, because
they are taught not to be interested in anything outside the four walls
of the house. Purdah women in particular become helpless, timid, and
unfit for any fight in life. Considering the large number of purdah
women among Muslims in India, one can easily understand the vastness and
seriousness of the problem of purdah.**[/4/](#n04)**\]

 The physical and intellectual effects of *purdah* are nothing as
compared with its effects on morals. The origin of *purdah* lies of
course in the deep-rooted suspicion of sexual appetites in both sexe,s
and the purpose is to check them by segregating the sexes. But far from
achieving the purpose, *purdah* has adversely affected the morals of
Muslim men. Owing to *purdah*, a Muslim has no contact with any woman
outside those who belong to his own household. Even with them his
contact extends only to occasional conversation. For a male there is no
company of, and no commingling with, the females, except those who are
children or aged. This isolation of the males from females is sure to
produce bad effects on the morals of men. It requires no psychoanalyst
to say that a social system which cuts off all contact between the two
sexes produces an unhealthy tendency towards sexual excesses and
unnatural and other morbid habits and ways.

 The evil consequences of *purdah* are not confined to the Muslim
community only. It is responsible for the social segregation of Hindus
from Muslims which is the bane of public life in India. This argument
may appear far-fetched, and one is inclined to attribute this
segregation to the unsociability of the Hindus rather than to *purdah*
among the Muslims. But the Hindus are right when they say that it is not
possible to establish social contact between Hindus and Muslims, because
such contact can only mean contact between women from one side and men
from the other.**[/5/](#n05)**

 Not that *purdah* and the evils consequent thereon are not to be
found among certain sections of the Hindus in certain parts of the
country. But the point of distinction is that among the Muslims,
*purdah* has a religious sanctity which it has not with the Hindus.
*Purdah* has deeper roots among the Muslims than it has among the
Hindus, and can only be removed by facing the inevitable conflict
between religious injunctions and social needs. The problem of *purdah*
is a real problem with the Muslims—apart from its origin—which it is not
with the Hindus. Of any attempt by the Muslims to do away with it, there
is no evidence.

 There is thus a stagnation not only in the social life but also in
the political life of the Muslim community of India. The Muslims have no
interest in politics as such. Their predominant interest is religion.
This can be easily seen by the terms and conditions that a Muslim
constituency makes for its support to a candidate fighting for a seat.
The Muslim constituency does not care to examine the programme of the
candidate. All that the constituency wants from the candidate is that he
should agree to replace the old lamps of the masjid by supplying new
ones at his cost, to provide a new carpet for the masjid because the old
one is torn, or to repair the masjid because it has become dilapidated.
In some places a Muslim constituency is quite satisfied if the candidate
agrees to give a sumptuous feast, and in other\[s\] if he agrees to buy
votes for so much apiece. With the Muslims, election is a mere matter of
money, and is very seldom a matter of \[a\] social programme of general
improvement. Muslim politics takes no note of purely secular categories
of life, namely, the differences between rich and poor, capital and
labour, landlord and tenant, priest and layman, reason and superstition.
Muslim politics is essentially clerical and recognizes only one
difference, namely, that existing between Hindus and Muslims. None of
the secular categories of life have any place in the politics of the
Muslim community; and if they do find a place—and they must, because
they are irrepressible—they are subordinated to one and the only
governing principle of the Muslim political universe, namely, religion.

II  
\[Why there is no organized movement of social reform among Indian
Muslims\]

 The existence of these evils among the Muslims is distressing
enough. But far more distressing is the fact that there is no organized
movement of social reform among the Musalmans of India on a scale
sufficient to bring about their eradication. The Hindus have their
social evils. But there is this relieving feature about them—namely,
that some of them are conscious of their existence, and a few of them
are actively agitating for their removal. The Muslims, on the other
hand, do not realize that they are evils, and consequently do not
agitate for their removal. Indeed, they oppose any change in their
existing practices. It is noteworthy that the Muslims opposed the
Child-Marriage Bill brought in the Central Assembly in 1930, whereby the
age for marriage of a girl was raised to 14 and of a boy to 18, on the
ground that it was opposed to the Muslim canon law. Not only did they
oppose the bill at every stage, but that when it became law they started
a campaign of Civil Disobedience against that Act. Fortunately the Civil
Disobedience campaign of the Muslims against the Act did not swell and
was submerged in the Congress Civil Disobedience campaign which
synchronized with it. But the campaign only proves how strongly the
Muslims are opposed to social reform.

 The question may be asked, why are the Muslims opposed to social
reform?

 The usual answer given is that the Muslims all over the world are an
unprogressive people. This view no doubt accords with the facts of
history. After the first spurts of their activity, the scale of which
was undoubtedly stupendous, leading to the foundations of vast
empires—the Muslims suddenly fell into a strange condition of torpor,
from which they never seem to have become awake. The cause assigned for
this torpor by those who have made a study of their condition, is said
to be the fundamental assumption made by all Muslims that Islam is a
world religion, suitable for all people, for all times and for all
conditions. It has been contended that :—

> "The Musalman, remaining faithful to his religion, has not progressed;
> he has remained stationary in a world of swiftly moving modern forces.
> It is, indeed, one of the salient features of Islam that it
> immobilizes in their native barbarism, the races whom it enslaves. It
> is fixed in a crystallization, inert and impenetrable. It is
> unchangeable; and political, social or economic changes have no
> repercussion upon it.
>
> "Having been taught that outside Islam there can be no safety; outside
> its law no truth and outside its spiritual message there is no
> happiness, the Muslim has become incapable of conceiving any other
> condition than his own, any other mode of thought than the Islamic
> thought. He firmly believes that he has arrived at an unequalled pitch
> of perfection; that he is the sole possessor of true faith, of the
> true doctrine, the true wisdom; that he alone is in possession of the
> truth—no relative truth subject to revision, but absolute truth.
>
> "The religious law of the Muslims has had the effect of imparting to
> the very diverse individuals of whom the world is composed, a unity of
> thought, of feeling, of ideas, of judgement."

 It is urged that this uniformity is deadening and is not merely
imparted to the Muslims, but is imposed upon them by a spirit of
intolerance which is unknown anywhere outside the Muslim world for its
severity and its violence and which is directed towards the suppression
of all rational thinking which is in conflict with the teachings of
Islam. As Renan observes**[/6/](#n06)**:—

> "Islam is a close union of the spiritual and the temporal; it is the
> reign of a dogma, it is the heaviest chain that humanity has ever
> borne. . . .Islam has its beauties as a religion; . . . .But to the
> human reason Islamism has only been injurious. The minds that it has
> shut from the light were, no doubt, already closed in their own
> internal limits; but it has persecuted free thought, I shall not say
> more violently than other religions, but more effectually. It has made
> of the countries that it has conquered a closed field to the rational
> culture of the mind. What is, in fact essentially distinctive of the
> Musalman is his hatred of science, his persuasion that research is
> useless, frivolous, almost impious—the natural sciences, because they
> are attempts at rivalry with God; the historical sciences, because
> they apply to times anterior to Islam, they may revive ancient
> heresies. . . ."

 Renan concludes by saying:—

> "Islam, in treating science as an enemy, is only consistent, but it is
> a dangerous thing to be consistent. To its own misfortune Islam has
> been successful. By slaying science it has slain itself; and is
> condemned in the world to a complete inferiority."

 This answer, though obvious, cannot be the true answer. If it were
the true answer, how are we to account for the stir and ferment that is
going on in all Muslim countries outside India, where the spirit of
inquiry, the spirit of change and the desire to reform are noticeable in
every walk of life? Indeed, the social reforms which have taken place in
Turkey have been of the most revolutionary character. If Islam has not
come in the way of the Muslims of these countries, why should it come in
the way of the Muslims of India? There must be some special reason for
the social and political stagnation of the Muslim community in India.

 What can that special reason be? It seems to me that the reason for
the absence of the spirit of change in the Indian Musalman is to be
sought in the peculiar position he occupies in India. He is placed in a
social environment which is predominantly Hindu. That Hindu environment
is always silently but surely encroaching upon him. He feels that it is
de-musalmanizing him. As a protection against this gradual weaning away,
he is led to insist on preserving everything that is Islamic without
caring to examine whether it is helpful or harmful to his society.
Secondly, the Muslims in India are placed in a political environment
which is also predominantly Hindu. He feels that he will be suppressed
and that political suppression will make the Muslims a depressed class.
It is this consciousness that he has to save himself from being
submerged by the Hindus socially and-politically, which to my mind is
the primary cause why the Indian Muslims as compared with their fellows
outside are backward in the matter of social reform. Their energies are
directed to maintaining a constant struggle against the Hindus for seats
and posts, in which there is no time, no thought and no room for
questions relating to social reform. And if there is any, it is all
overweighed and suppressed by the desire, generated by pressure of
communal tension, to close the ranks and offer a united front to the
menace of the Hindus and Hinduism by maintaining their socio-religious
unity at any cost.

 The same is the explanation of the political stagnation in the
Muslim community of India. Muslim politicians do not recognize secular
categories of life as the basis of their politics because to them it
means the weakening of the community in its fight against the Hindus.
The poor Muslims will not join the poor Hindus to get justice from the
rich. Muslim tenants will not join Hindu tenants to prevent the tyranny
of the landlord. Muslim labourers will not join Hindu labourers in the
fight of labour against capital. Why ? The answer is simple. The poor
Muslim sees that if he joins in the fight of the poor against the rich,
he may be fighting against a rich Muslim. The Muslim tenant feels that
if he joins in the campaign against the landlord, he may have to fight
against a Muslim landlord. A Muslim labourer feels that if he joins in
the onslaught of labour against capital, he will be injuring a Muslim
mill-owner. He is conscious that any injury to a rich Muslim, to a
Muslim landlord or to a Muslim mill-owner, is a disservice to the Muslim
community, for it is thereby weakened in its struggle against the Hindu
community.

 How Muslim politics has become perverted is shown by the attitude of
the Muslim leaders to the political reforms in the Indian States. The
Muslims and their leaders carried on a great agitation for the
introduction of representative government in the Hindu State of Kashmir.
The same Muslims and their leaders are deadly opposed to the
introduction of representative governments in other Muslim States. The
reason for this strange attitude is quite simple. In all matters, the
determining question with the Muslims is how it will affect the Muslims
vis-a-vis the Hindus. If representative government can help the Muslims,
they will demand it, and fight for it. In the State of Kashmir the ruler
is a Hindu, but the majority of the subjects are Muslims. The Muslims
fought for representative government in Kashmir, because representative
government in Kashmir meant the transfer of power from a Hindu king to
the Muslim masses. In other Muslim States, the ruler is a Muslim but the
majority of his subjects are Hindus. In such States representative
government means the transfer of power from a Muslim ruler to the Hindu
masses, and that is why the Muslims support the introduction of
representative government in one case and oppose it in the other. The
dominating consideration with the Muslims is not democracy. The
dominating consideration is how democracy with majority rule will affect
the Muslims in their struggle against the Hindus. Will it strengthen
them, or will it weaken them? If democracy weakens them, they will not
have democracy. They will prefer the rotten state to continue in the
Muslim States, rather than weaken the Muslim ruler in his hold upon his
Hindu subjects.

 The political and social stagnation in the Muslim community can be
explained by one and only one reason. The Muslims think that the Hindus
and Muslims must perpetually struggle; the Hindus to establish their
dominance over the Muslims, and the Muslims to establish their
historical position as the ruling community—that in this struggle the
strong will win, and to ensure strength they must suppress or put in
cold storage everything which causes dissension in their ranks.

 If the Muslims in other countries have undertaken the task of
reforming their society and the Muslims of India have refused to do so,
it is because the former are free from communal and political clashes
with rival communities, while the latter are not.

III  
\[The Hindus emphasize nationalist politics and ignore the need for
social reform\]

 It is not that this blind spirit of conservatism which does not
recognize the need of repair to the social structure has taken hold of
the Muslims only. It has taken hold of the Hindus also. The Hindus at
one time did recognize that without social efficiency no permanent
progress in other fields of activity was possible; that owing to the
mischief wrought by evil customs, Hindu Society was not in a state of
efficiency; and that ceaseless efforts must be made to eradicate these
evils. It was due to the recognition of this fact that the birth of the
National Congress was accompanied by the foundation of the Social
Conference. While the Congress was concerned with defining the weak
points in the political organisation of the country, the Social
Conference was engaged in removing the weak points in the social
organisation of the Hindu Society. For some time, the Congress and the
Conference worked as two wings of one common body, and held their annual
sessions in the same pandal. But soon the two wings developed into two
parties, a Political Reform Party and a Social Reform Party, between
whom raged fierce controversy. The Political Reform Party supported the
National Congress, and the Social Reform Party supported the Social
Conference. The two bodies became two hostile camps. The point at issue
was whether social reform should precede political reform. For a decade
the forces were evenly balanced, and the battle was fought without
victory to either side. It was, however, evident that the fortunes of
the Social Conference were ebbing fast. The gentlemen who presided over
the sessions of the Social Conference lamented that the majority of the
educated Hindus were for political advancement and indifferent to social
reform, and that while the number of those who attended the Congress was
very large and the number who did not attend but who sympathized with it
even larger, the number of those who attended the Social Conference was
very much smaller. This indifference, this thinning of its ranks, was
soon followed by active hostility from the politicians, like the late
Mr. Tilak. In course of time, the party in favour of political reform
won and the Social Conference vanished and was forgotten.**[/7/](#n07)**
With it also vanished from the Hindu Society the urge for social reform.
Under the leadership of Mr. Gandhi, the Hindu Society, if it did not
become a political mad-house, certainly became mad after politics.
Non-co-operation, Civil Disobedience, and the cry for Swaraj took the
place which social reform once had in the minds of the Hindus. In the
din and dust of political agitation, the Hindus do not even know that
there are any evils to be remedied. Those who are conscious of it, do
not believe that social reform is as important as political reform, and
when forced to admit its importance argue that there can be no social
reform unless political power is first achieved. They are so eager to
possess political power that they are impatient even of propaganda in
favour of social reform, as it means so much time and energy deducted
from political propaganda. A correspondent of Mr. Gandhi put the point
of view of the Nationalists very appropriately, if bluntly, when he
wrote**[/8/](#n08)** to Mr. Gandhi, saying:—

> "Don't 'you think that it is impossible to achieve any great reform
> without winning political power? The present economic structure has
> got to be tackled. No reconstruction is possible without political
> reconstruction and I am afraid all this talk of polished and
> unpolished rice, balanced diet and so on and so forth is mere
> moonshine."

 The Social Reform Party, led by Ranade, died, leaving the field to
the Congress. There has grown up among the Hindus another party which is
also a rival to the Congress. It is the Hindu Maha Sabha. One would
expect from its name that it was a body for bringing about the reform of
Hindu Society. But it is not. Its rivalry with the Congress has nothing
to do with the issue of social reform vs. political reform. Its quarrel
with the Congress has its origin in the pro-Muslim policy of the
Congress. It is organized for the protection of Hindu rights against
Muslim encroachment. Its plan is to organize the Hindus for offering a
united front to the Muslims. As a body organized to protect Hindu rights
it is all the time engaged in keeping an eye on political movements, on
seats and posts. It cannot spare any thought for social reform. As a
body keen on bringing about a united front of all Hindus, it cannot
afford to create dissensions among its elements, which would be the case
if it undertook to bring about social reforms. For the sake of the
consolidation of the Hindu rank and file, the Hindu Maha Sabha is ready
to suffer all social evils to remain as they are. For the sake of
consolidation of the Hindus, it is prepared to welcome the Federation as
devised by the Act of 1935, in spite of its many iniquities and defects.
For the same purpose, the Hindu Maha Sabha favours the retention of the
Indian States, with their administration as it is. 'Hands off the Hindu
States' has been the battle-cry of its President. This attitude is
stranger than that of the Muslims. Representative government in Hindu
States cannot do harm to the Hindus. Why then should the President of
the Hindu Maha Sabha oppose it? Probably because it helps the Muslims,
whom he cannot tolerate.

IV  
\[In a "communal malaise," both groups ignore the urgent claims of
social justice\]

 To what length this concern for the conservation of their forces can
lead the Hindus and the Musalmans cannot be better illustrated than by
the debates on the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act VIII of 1939 in
the Central Assembly. Before 1939, the law was that apostasy of a male
or a female married under the Muslim law *ipso facto* dissolved the
marriage, with the result that if a married Muslim woman changed her
religion, she was free to marry a person professing her new religion.
This was the rule of law enforced by the courts, throughout India at any
rate, for the last 60 years.**[/9/](#n09)**

 This law was annulled by Act VIII of 1939, section 4 of which reads
as follows:—

> "The renunciation of Islam by a married Muslim woman or her conversion
> to a faith other than Islam shall not by itself operate to dissolve
> her marriage:
>
> Provided that after such renunciation or conversion the woman shall be
> entitled to obtain a decree for the dissolution of marriage on any of
> the grounds mentioned in section 2:
>
> Provided further that the provision of this section shall not apply to
> a woman converted to Islam from some other faith who re-embraces her
> former faith."

 According to this Act, the marriage of a married Muslim woman is not
dissolved by reason of her conversion to another religion. All that she
gets is a right of divorce. It is very intriguing to find that section 2
does not refer to conversion or apostasy as a ground for divorce. The
effect of the law is that a married Muslim woman has no liberty of
conscience and is tied for ever to her husband, whose religious faith
may be quite abhorrent to her.

 The grounds urged in support of this change are well worth
attention. The mover of the Bill, Quazi Kazmi, M.L.A., adopted a very
ingenious line of argument in support of the change. In his
speech**[/10/](#n10)** on the motion to refer the Bill he said:—

> "Apostasy was considered by Islam, as by any other religion, as a
> great crime, almost amounting to a crime against the State. It is not
> novel for the religion of Islam to have that provision. If we look up
> the older Acts of any nation, we will find that similar provision also
> exists in other Codes as well. For the male a severer punishment was
> awarded, that of death, and for females, only the punishment of
> imprisonment was awarded. This main provision was that because it was
> a sin, it was a crime, it was to be punished, and the woman was to be
> deprived of her status as wife. It was not only this status that she
> lost, but she lost all her status in society; she was deprived of her
> properly and civil rights as well. But we find that as early as 1850
> an Act was passed here, called the Caste Disabilities Removal Act of
> 1850, Act XXI of 1850. . . .
>
> ". . . .by this Act, the forfeiture of civil rights that could be
> imposed on a woman on her apostasy has been taken away. She can no
> longer be subjected to any forfeiture of properly or her right of
> inheritance or anything of the kind. The only question is that the
> Legislature has come to her help, it has given her a certain amount of
> liberty of thought, some kind of liberty of religion to adopt any
> faith she likes, and has removed the forfeiture clause from which she
> could suffer, and which was a restraint upon her changing the faith.
> The question is how far we are entitled after that to continue placing
> the restriction on her status as a wife. Her status as a wife is of
> some importance in society. She belongs to some family, she has got
> children, she has got other connections too. If she has got a liberal
> mind, she may not like to continue the same old religion. If she
> changes her religion, why should we, according to our modern ideas,
> inflict upon her a further penalty that she will cease to be the wife
> of her husband. I submit, in these days when we are advocating freedom
> of thought and freedom of religion, when we are advocating
> inter-marriages between different communities, it would be
> inconsistent for us to support a provision that a mere change of faith
> or change of religion would entail forfeiture of her rights as the
> wife of her husband. So, from a modern point of view, I have got no
> hesitation in saying that we cannot, in any way, support the contrary
> proposition that apostasy must be allowed to finish her relationship
> with her husband. But that is only one part of the argument.
>
> "Section 32 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936, is to the
> effect that a married woman may sue for divorce on the grounds 'that
> the defendant has ceased to be a Parsi. . . .'
>
> "There are two things apparent from this. The first is, that it is a
> ground for dissolution, not from any religious idea or religious
> sentiment, because, if two years have passed after the conversion and
> if plaintiff does not object, then either the male or female has no
> right to sue for dissolution of marriage. The second thing is, that it
> is the plaintiff who has got the complaint that the other party has
> changed the religion, who has got the right of getting the marriage
> dissolved. . . .In addition to this Act, as regards other communities
> we can have an idea of the effect of conversion on marriage tie from
> the Native Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, Act XXI of 1886. . .
> .It applies to all the communities of India, and this legislation
> recognises the fact that mere conversion of an Indian to Christianity
> would not dissolve the marriage but he will have the right of going to
> a law court and saying that the other party., who is not converted,
> must perform the marital duties in respect of him. . . .then they are
> given a year's time and the judge directs that they shall have an
> interview with each other in the presence of certain other persons to
> induce them to resume their conjugal relationship, and if they do not
> agree, then on the ground of desecration the marriage is dissolved.
> The marriage is dissolved no doubt, but not on the ground of change of
> faith. . . .So, every community in India has got this accepted
> principle that conversion to another religion cannot amount to a
> dissolution of marriage."

Syed Gulam Bikh Nairang, another Muslim member of the Assembly and a
protagonist of the Bill, was brutally frank. In support of the principle
of the Bill he said**[/11/](#n11)**:—

> "For a very long lime the courts in British India have held without
> reservation and qualification that under all circumstances apostasy
> automatically and immediately puts an end to the married slate without
> any judicial proceedings, any decree of court, or any other ceremony.
> That has been the position which was taken up by the Courts. Now,
> there are three distinct views of Hanafi jurists on the point. One
> view which is attributed to the Bokhara jurists was adopted and even
> that not in its entirely but in what I may call a mutilated and maimed
> condition. What that Bokhara view is has been already stated by Mr.
> Kazmi and some other speakers. The Bokhara jurists say that marriage
> is dissolved by apostasy. In fact, I should be more accurate in
> saying—1 have got authority for that—that it is, according to the
> Bokhara view, not dissolved but suspended. The marriage is suspended
> but the wife is then kept in custody or confinement till she repents
> and embraces Islam again, and then she is induced to marry the
> husband, whose marriage was only suspended and not put an end to or
> cancelled. The second view is that on apostasy a married Muslim woman
> ceases to be the wife of her husband but becomes his bond-woman. One
> view, which is a sort of corollary to this view, is that she is not
> necessarily the bond-woman of her ex-husband but she becomes the
> bond-woman of the entire Muslim community and anybody can employ her
> as a bond-woman. The third view, that of the Ulema of Samarkand and
> Balkh, is that the marriage lie is not affected by such apostasy and
> that the woman still continues to be the wife of the husband. These
> are the three views. A portion of the first view, the Bokhara view,
> was taken hold of by the Courts and rulings after rulings were based
> on that portion.
>
> "This House is well aware that it is not only in this solitary
> instance that judicial error is sought to be corrected by legislation,
> but in many other cases, too, there have been judicial errors or
> conflicts of judicial opinion or uncertainties and vagueness of law.
> Errors of judicial view are being constantly corrected by legislation.
> In this particular matter there has been an error after error and a
> tragedy of errors. To show me those rulings is begging the question.
> Surely, it should be realized that it is no answer to my Bill that
> because the High Courts have decided against me, I have no business to
> come to this House and ask it to legislate this way or that way."

 Having regard to the profundity of the change, the arguments urged
in support of it were indeed very insubstantial. Mr. Kazmi failed to
realize that if there was a difference between the divorce law relating
to Parsis, Christians and Muslims, once it is established that the
conversion is genuine, the Muslim law was in advance of the Parsi and
the Christian law, and instead of making the Muslim law retrograde, the
proper thing ought to have been to make the Parsi and the Christian law
progress. Mr. Nairang did not stop to inquire that, if there were
different schools of thought among the Muslim jurists, whether it was
not more in consonance with justice to adopt the more enlightened view
which recognized the freedom of the Muslim woman and not to replace it
by the barbaric one which made her a bonds-woman.

 Be that as it may, the legal arguments had nothing to do with the
real motive underlying the change. The real motive was to put a stop to
the illicit conversion of women to alien faiths, followed by immediate
and hurried marriages with someone professing the faith she happened to
have joined, with a view to locking her in the new community and
preventing her from going back to the community to which she originally
belonged. The conversion of Muslim woman to Hinduism and of Hindu woman
to Islam, looked at from a social and political point of view, cannot
but be fraught with tremendous consequences. It means a disturbance in
the numerical balance between the two communities. As the disturbance
was being brought about by the abduction of women, it could not be
overlooked. For woman is at once the seed-bed of, and the hothouse for,
nationalism in a degree that man can never be.**[/12/](#n12)** These
conversions of women and their subsequent marriages were there-fore
regarded, and rightly, as a series of depredations practised by Hindus
against Muslims and by Muslims against Hindus, with a view to bringing
about a change in their relative numerical strength. This abominable
practice of woman-lifting had become as common as cattle-lifting, and
with its obvious danger to communal balance, efforts had to be made to
stop it. That this was the real reason behind this legislation can be
seen from the two provisions to section 4 of the Act. In proviso I the
Hindus concede to the Musalmans that if they convert a woman who was
originally a Muslim she will remain bound to her former Muslim husband
notwithstanding her conversion. By proviso 2 the Muslims concede to the
Hindus that if they convert a Hindu married woman and she is married to
a Musalman, her marriage will be deemed to be dissolved if she renounces
Islam and she will be free to return to her Hindu fold. Thus what
underlies the change in law is the desire to keep the numerical balance
and it is for this purpose that the rights of women were sacrificed.

 There are two other features of this malaise which have not been
sufficiently noted.

 One such feature is the jealousy with which one of them looks upon
any reform by the other in its social system. If the effect of such
reform is to give it increase of strength for resistance, it at once
creates hostility.

 Swami Shradhanand relates a very curious incident which well
illustrates this attitude. Writing in the **Liberator[/13/](#n13)** his
recollections, he refers to this incident. He says :—

> "Mr. Ranade was there. . .to guide the Social Conference to which the
> title of 'National' was for the first and last time given. It was from
> the beginning a Hindu Conference in all walks of life. The only
> Mahomedan delegate who joined the National Social Conference was a
> Mufti Saheb of Barreily. Well! The conference began when the
> resolution in favour of remarriage of child-widows was moved by a
> Hindu delegate and by me. Sanatanist Pandits opposed it. Then the
> Mufti asked permission to speak. The late Baijnath told Mufti Saheb
> that as the resolution concerned the Hindus only, he need not speak.
> At this the Mufti flared up.
>
> "There was no loophole left for the President and Mufti Saheb was
> allowed to have his say. Mufti Saheb's argument was that as Hindu
> **Shastras** did not allow remarriage, it was a sin to press for it.
> Again, when the resolution about the reconversion of those who had
> become Christians and Musalmans came up. Mufti Saheb urged that when a
> man abandoned the Hindu religion he ought not to be allowed to come
> back."

 Another illustration would be the attitude of the Muslims towards
the problem of the Untouchables. The Muslims have always been looking at
the Depressed Classes with a sense of longing, and much of the jealousy
between Hindus and Muslims arises out of the fear of the latter that the
former might become stronger by assimilating the Depressed Classes. In
1909 the Muslims took the bold step of suggesting that the Depressed
Classes should not be enrolled in the census as Hindus. In 1923 Mr.
Mahomed Ali in his address as the President of the Congress went much
beyond the position taken by the Muslims in 1909. He said:—

> "The quarrels about ALAMS and PIPAL trees and musical processions are
> truly childish; but there is one question which can easily furnish a
> ground for complaint of unfriendly action if communal activities are
> not amicably adjusted. It is the question of the conversion of the
> Suppressed Classes, if Hindu society does not speedily absorb them.
> The Christian missionary is already busy and no one quarrels with him.
> But the moment some Muslim Missionary Society is organized for the
> same purpose there is every likelihood of an outcry in the Hindu
> press. It has been suggested to me by an influential and wealthy
> gentleman who is able to organize a Missionary Society on a large
> scale for the conversion of the Suppressed Classes, that it should be
> possible to reach a settlement with leading Hindu gentlemen and divide
> the country into separate areas where Hindu and Muslim missionaries
> could respectively work, each community preparing for each year, or
> longer unit of lime if necessary, an estimate of the numbers it is
> prepared to absorb or convert. These estimates would, of course, be
> based on the number of workers and funds each had to spare, and tested
> by the actual figures of the previous period. In this way each
> community would be free to do the work of absorption and conversion,
> or rather, of reform without chances of collision with one another. I
> cannot say in what light my Hindu brethren will lake it and I place
> this suggestion tentatively in all frankness and sincerity before
> them. All that I say for myself is that I have seen the condition of
> the 'Kali Praja' in the Baroda Slate and of the Gonds in the Central
> Provinces and I frankly confess it is a reproach to us all. If the
> Hindus will not absorb them into their own society, others will and
> must, and then the orthodox Hindu too will cease to treat them as
> untouchables. Conversion seems to transmute them by a strong alchemy.
> But does this not place a premium upon conversion?"

 The other feature is the "preparations" which the Muslims and Hindus
are making against each other without abatement. It is like a race in
armaments between two hostile nations. If the Hindus have the Benares
University, the Musalmans must have the Aligarh University. If the
Hindus start Shudhi movement, the Muslims must launch the Tablig
movement. If the Hindus start Sangathan, the Muslims must meet it by
Tanjim. If the Hindus have the R. S. S. S.,**[/14/](#n14)** the Muslims
must reply by organizing the Khaksars.**[/15/](#n15)** This race in
social armament and equipment is run with the determination and
apprehension characteristic of nations which are on the war path. The
Muslims fear that the Hindus are subjugating them. The Hindus feel that
the Muslims are engaged in reconquering them. Both appear to be
preparing for war and each is watching the "preparations" of the other.

 Such a state of things cannot but be ominous. It is a vicious
circle. If the Hindus make themselves stronger, the Musalmans feel
menaced. The Muslims endeavour to increase their forces to meet the
menace, and the Hindus then do the same to equalize the position. As the
preparations proceed, so does the suspicion, the secrecy, and the
plotting. The possibilities of peaceful adjustment are poisoned at the
source, and \[it is\] precisely because everyone is fearing and
preparing for it that "war" between the two tends to become inevitable.
But in the situation in which they find themselves, for the Hindus and
the Muslims not to attend to anything, except to prepare themselves to
meet the challenge of each other, is quite natural. It is a struggle for
existence and the issue that counts is survival, and not the quality or
the plane of survival.

 Two things must be said to have emerged from this discussion. One is
that the Hindus and the Muslims regard each other as a menace. The
second is that to meet this menace, both have suspended the cause of
removing the social evils with which they are infested. Is this a
desirable state of things? If it is not, how then can it be ended?

 No one can say that to have the problems of social reform put aside
is a desirable state of things. Wherever there are social evils, the
health of the body politic requires that they shall be removed before
they become the symbols of suffering and injustice. For it is the social
and economic evils which everywhere are the parent of revolution or
decay. Whether social reform should precede political reform or
political reform should precede social reform may be a matter of
controversy. But there can be no two opinions on the question that the
sole object of political power is the use to which it can be put in the
cause of social and economic reform. The whole struggle for political
power would be a barren and bootless effort if it was not justified by
the feeling that, because of the want of political power, urgent and
crying social evils are eating into the vitals of society and are
destroying it. But suppose the Hindus and the Muslims somehow come into
possession of political power, what hope is there that they will use it
for purposes of social reform? There is hardly any hope in that behalf.
So long as the Hindus and the Muslims regard each other as a menace,
their attention will be engrossed in preparations for meeting the
menace. The exigencies of a common front by Musalmans against Hindus and
by Hindus against Musalmans generate—and is bound to generate—a
conspiracy of silence over social evils. Neither the Muslims nor the
Hindus will attend to them even though the evils may be running sores
and requiring immediate attention, for the simple reason that they
regard every measure of social reform as bound to create dissension and
division and thereby weaken the ranks when they ought to be closed to
meet the menace of the other community. It is obvious that so long as
one community looks upon the other as a menace, there will be no social
progress, and the spirit of conservatism will continue to dominate the
thoughts and actions of both.

 How long will this menace last? It is sure to last as long as the
Hindus and Muslims are required to live as members of one country under
the mantle of a single constitution. For it is the fear of the single
constitution with the possibility of the shifting of the balance—for
nothing can keep the balance at the point originally fixed by the
constitution—which makes the Hindus a menace to the Muslims and the
Muslims a menace to the Hindus. If this is so, Pakistan is the obvious
remedy. It certainly removes the chief condition which makes for the
menace. Pakistan liberates both the Hindus and the Muslims from the fear
of enslavement of and encroachment against each other. It removes, by
providing a separate constitution for each, Pakistan and Hindustan, the
very basis which leads to this perpetual struggle for keeping a balance
of power in the day-to-day life, and frees them to take in hand those
vital matters of urgent social importance which they are now forced to
put aside in cold storage, and improve the lives of their people, which
after all is the main object of this fight for Swaraj.

 Without some such arrangement, the Hindus and the Muslims will act
and react as though they were two nations, one fearing to be conquered
by the other. Preparations for aggression will always have precedence
over social reform, so that the social stagnation which has set in must
continue. This is quite natural, and no one need be surprised at it.
For, as Bernard Shaw pointed out:—

> "A conquered nation is like a man with cancer; he can think of nothing
> else. . . .A healthy nation is as unconscious of' its nationality as a
> healthy man of his bones. But if you break a nation's nationality it
> will think of nothing else but getting it set again. It will listen to
> no reformer, to no philosopher, to no preacher until the demand of the
> nationalist is granted. It will attend to no business, however vital,
> except the business of unification and liberation."

Unless there is unification of the Muslims who wish to separate from the
Hindus, and unless there is liberation of each from the fear of
domination by the other, there can be no doubt that this malaise of
social stagnation will not be set right.  


======================

**[/1/](#m01)** **Studies in Mahomedanism**, pp. 34-35.

**[/2/](#m02)** Ibid., Chapter XXXIX.

**[/3/](#m03)** **The Koran, its Composition and Teaching**, p. 58.

**[/4/](#m04)** For the position of Muslim women, see **Our Cause**,
edited by Shyam Kumar Nehru.

**[/5/](#m05)** It is interesting to note the argument which the
Europeans who are accused by Indians for not admitting them to their
clubs use to defend themselves. They say, "We bring our women to the
clubs. If you agree to bring your women to the club, you can be
admitted. We can't expose our women to your company if you deny us the
company of your women. Be ready to go fifty-fifty, then ask for entry in
our clubs."

**[/6/](#m06)** **Nationality and other Essays**.

**[/7/](#m07)** For a more detailed statement, see my tract on
**Annihilation of Caste**.

**[/8/](#m08)** **Harijan**--11th January 1936.

**[/9/](#m09)** The earliest reported decision was that given by the
High Court of the North-West Province in 1870 in the case of *Zabardast
Khan vs. His wife*.

**[/10/](#m10)** **Legislative Assembly Debates**, 1938, Vol. V. pp.
1098-1101.

**[/11/](#m11)** **Legislative Assembly Debates**, 1938, Vol. V pp.
1953-55.

**[/12/](#m12)** The part played by woman in sustaining nationalism has
not been sufficiently noticed. See the observations of Renan on this
point in his **Essay on Nationality**.

**[/13/](#m13)** 26th April 1926.

**[/14/](#m14)** Short for the Rashtriya Swayam Sevaka Sangh which is a
Hindu volunteer corps.

**[/15/](#m15)** Khaksar is a Muslim volunteer corps.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Table of contents](index.html#contents) -- [Dr. Ambedkar's
work](../../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#ambedkar) --
[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html#index) -- [Map
index](../../00maplinks/index.html#index) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
