+++
title = "00 FROM THE COVER OF \"NEGATIONISM IN INDIA - CONCEALING THE RECORD OF ISLAM\""

+++
## FROM THE COVER OF "NEGATIONISM IN INDIA - CONCEALING THE RECORD OF ISLAM"

Negationism usually means the denial of the Nazi genocide of the Jews
and Gypsies in World War 2. Less well-known is that India has its own
brand of negationism. A section of the Indian intelligentsia is still
trying to erase from the Hindus' memory the history of their persecution
by the swordsmen of Islam. The number of victims of this persecution
surpasses that of the Nazi crimes. The Islamic campaign to wipe out
Paganism could not be equally thorough, but it has continued for
centuries without any moral doubts arising in the minds of the
persecutors and their chroniclers. The Islamic reports on the massacres
of Hindus, destruction of Hindu temples, the abduction of Hindu women
and forced conversions, invariably express great glee and pride. They
leave no doubt that the destruction of Paganism by every means, was
considered the God-ordained duty of the Moslem community. Yet, today
many Indian historians, journalists and politicians, deny that there
ever was a Hindu-Moslem conflict. They shamelessly rewrite history and
conjure up *centuries of Hindu-Moslem amity*; now a growing section of
the public in India and the West only knows their negationist version of
history. It is not a pleasant task to rudely shake people out of their
delusions, especially if these have been wilfully created; but this
essay does just that.

This essay was started as an expanded translation of a Dutch-language
book review of Sitaram Goel's *Hindu Temples: What Happened To Them*,
which could not be published in its original form due to pro-Islamic
pressure; and of an article on Islamic negationism published in the
Septemeber 1992 issue of the Flemish monthly *Nucleus*.

The author:

Koenraad Elst (Leuven, 1959) grew up in the Catholic community in
Belgium. He was active for some years in what is known as the New Age
movement, before studying at the famed Catholic University of Leuven
(KUL). He graduated in Chinese Studies, Indo-Iranian Studies and
Philosophy. He took courses in Indian philosophy at the Benares Hindu
University (BHU) and interviewed many Indian leaders and thinkers during
his stay in India between 1988 and 1992. He has published in Dutch about
language policy issues, contemporary politics, history of science and
Oriental Philosophies; in English about the Ayodhya Issue, and about the
General Religio-political Situation in India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
