+++
title = "05 CHAPTER THREE - EXPOSING AND REFUTING NEGATIONISM"

+++
## CHAPTER THREE - EXPOSING AND REFUTING NEGATIONISM

Negationism and history-distortion require a large-scale effort and a
very strong grip on the media of information and education. As soon as
the grip loosens, at least the most blatant of the negationist
concoctions are bound to be exposed, and its propounders lose all
credibility. In 1988, the schools in the Soviet Union decided to suspend
the history exams because *"the history books are full of lies anyway"*.
The great lies and distortions of Soviet historiography are now items in
the gallery of ridicule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.1 ENTER VOICE OF INDIA

Just like the Russians have thrown Soviet historiography into the
dustbin, Indian negationism will also be thrown out in the near future.
The newly published second volume of *"Hindu temples, what happened to
them"*, by the Indian historian Sitaram Goes (1921), is a mortal blow in
the face of negationism. And there are more reasons for calling the book
a milestone.

The author is, together with his friend, the linguist and philosopher
Ram Swarup (1920), the leading light of the intellectual rearmament of
the battered and despondent Hindu society. Born in 1921 in a poor family
(though belonging to the merchang Agrawal caste) in Haryana, he took an
M.A. in history in Delhi University, winning prizes and scholarships
along the way. In his youth he was a Gandhian activist, organizing
inter-caste dinners and participating in the Freedom Movement. In the
forties, when the Gandhians themselves were drifting to the Left and
adopting socialist rhetoric, he decided to opt for the original rather
than the imitation, and joined the Communist Party. Within a few years,
he left the Party in disgust, and participated in Ram Swarup's
anti-communist organization in Calcutta, then as now the centre of
Indian communism.

In the fifties he published a number of books exposing the lies that
formed the backbone of communist propaganda. For instance, in *"Whom
shall we believe?"*, he compared the economic figures in official
Russian and Chinese publications with the propaganda put out by the
Communist Party of India and its fellow-travellers, and demonstrated the
utterly deceitful nature of whatever creditibility communism had
acquired. As the cover of his newest publication proudly proclaims,
*"the numerous studies published by the movement in the fifties exist in
cold print in many libraries and can be consulted for finding out how
the movement anticipated by many years the recent revelations about
communist regimes"*.

An aspect of history yet to be studied is how such anti- communist
movements in the Third World were not at all helped (in spite of all
allegations of CIA innvolvement) but rather opposed by Western interest
groups whose understanding of communist ideology and strategy, and of
many other political issues, was just too limited and blunt. The
critique of communism formulated by these Indian thinkers was often
intellectually superior to most of what has been produced by European
and American anti-communists in the Cold War period.

Shortly before the Chinese invasion (1962), which pin- pricked the
balloon of prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru's vainglorious brainchildren,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Indian-Chinese friendship as an axis of
Asian stability, Sitaram Goel published a critique of Nehru's policy of
friendship with communism, *"In Defence of Comrade Krishna Menon"*. In
it, he debunked the current fashion of attributing India's
communist-leaning forein policy to minister Krishna Menon, and
demonstrated that Nehru himself had been a consistent communist
sympathizer ever since his visit to the Soviet Ubnion in 1927. Nehru had
stuck to his communist syumpathies even when the communists insulted him
as prime minister with their unbridled swearology: he used to lick the
boot that kicked him. Nehru's absolute refusal to support the Tibetans
even at the diplomatic level when they were overrun by the Chinese army,
cannot just be attributed to circumstances or the influence of
collaborators: his hand-over of Tibet to communist China was quite
consistent with his own political convictions.

Eventhough Sitaram Goel's stand was vindicated by the Chinese invasion,
the book about Nehru cost him his job in a state-affliated company. He
went into business himself and set up a company of book import and
export. In its margin,, he later started the non-profit publishing house
Voice of India. Its aim is to defend Hinduism by placing before the
public correct information aboutthe situation of Hindu culture and
society, and about the nature, motives and strategies of its enemies.

For, as the title of his book *"Hindu society under siege"* (1981)
indicates, Hindu society has been suffering a sustained attack from
Islam since the 7th century, from Christianity since the 15th century,
and this century also from Marxism. The avowed objective of each of
these three world-conquering movements, with their massive resources, is
the replacement of Hinduism by their own ideology, or in effect: the
destruction of Hinduism. This concern is not at all paranoid (as
spokesmen of these aggressors would say), even if the conversion squads
are remarkably unsuccessful in India. Consider the situation in Africa:
in 1900, 50% of all Africans practised Pagan religions; today, Christian
and Islamic missionaries have reduced this number to less than 10%. That
is the kind of threat Hinduism is up against. So far, the biggest
success of these aggressors is at the level of thought: many Hindus have
interiorized the depreciation of Hindu culture and society which their
enemies have been feeding them from the relative power positions which
they have had in the past or are enjoying today. Standing up to the
challenge thrown by these mortal enemies, Voice of India works for the
intellectual mobilization of Hindu society.

The importance of Sitaram Goel's and Ram Swarup's work can hardly be
over-estimated. There is no doubt that future textbooks on comparative
religion as well as those on Indian political and intellectual history
will devote crucial chapters to their analysis. Ther are the first to
give a first-hand *Pagan* reply to the versions of history and *"science
of religion"* imposed by the monotheist world- conquerors, both at the
level of historical fact (e.g. Sitaram Goel's *"History of
Hindu-Christian Encounters"*) and of fundamental doctrine (e.g. Ram
Swarup's *"Hinduism vis-a-vis Christianity and Islam"*), both in terms
of the specific Hindu experience (e.g. Sitaram Goel's *"Hindu Society
under Siege"*) and of a more generalized theory of religion free from
prophetic-monotheistic bias (e.g. Ram Swarup's *"The Word as Revelation:
Names of Gods"*, a ground-breaking statement of *Pagan* doctrine).

Their long-term intellectual importance is that they have contributed
immensely to breaking the spell of all kinds of monotheist prejudices
and misrepresentations of Paganism in general, Hinduism in particular.
They have done so in an explicit manner, addressing the polemical
positions taken by the world-conquerors squarely, not merely eulogizing
the qualities of Upanishadic thought and other Hindu achievements (as
too many Hindu revivalists do).

Voice of India's shorter-term political importance consists in its
breaking through the weak apologetic taken by the established Hindu
movement. This movement, including the Bharatiya Janata Party which won
24% of the vote in the 1991 elections, wastes quite a bit of its energy
on proving its *secular* credentials and its harmlessness for Muslims
and other minorities, unsuccessfully trying to acquire a new *secular*
identity and meanwhile undermining its natural Hindu identity. It is
still playing by the rules imposed by the Marxist-Muslim alliance. Voice
of India changes the rules by debunking the premises of secularist
disocurse (very explicitly in Sitaram Goel's *"Perversion of India's
Political Parlance"*) and exposing the imperialist designs which are
currently stealing a march behind the smokescreen of secularism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.2 INTELLECTUAL DEFENCE OF HINDUISM

Faced with the attack from the world-conquerors, Hindus has so far
failed to put up an intelligent defence. This should already be clear
from the extremely negative image of the Hindu revivalist movement which
the English-language press has created, and against which this movement
itself has been quite helpless. The organizations claiming to work for
the welfare and defence of Hindu society, have not managed to give an
intellectual dimension to their work, and have neglected the field of
ideological development and of broadcasting their viewpoints through the
media.

There is an India-wide Hindu organization, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak
Sangh (RSS, *"National Volunteer Corps"*), which is devoted to
character-building the physical training, to cultural activities, and to
giving an organizational backbone to Hindu society. The erstwhile Jan
Sangh and now the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) are political parties
affiliated with this RSS movement. The degree to which Hinduism is on
the defensive can be inferred from the fact that these militant Hindu
organizations do not even dare to call themselves Hindus, but go hiding
behind neutral terms like *"national"* and *"Indian"*.

The basic political idology of the RSS is called integral humanism,
developed by Deendayal Upadhaya (d. 1967) on the basis of ancient Hindu
social philosophy. The term means that the world should be organized in
such a way that each of the four goals (purusharthas) of human life is
given its due: Hindu tradition enumerates these as kama (erotics,
pleasure), artha (gain, success), dharma (duty, world order), moksha
(spiritual liberation). It is a humanism in the sense that human values,
not divine revelation, form a basis of its programme (those who say that
the BJP aims at creating a *"Hindu theocratic state"*, merely display
their ignorance). As an integralist Hindu alternative to the
reductionist ideologies (socialism,, liberalism, nationalism), integral
humanism deserves comparison with Christian-democracy in Europe. In
spite of all the swearwords hurled at the RSS/BJP, their ideology is
quite unexceptionable. In fact, after the fall of Marxism, the renewed
excess of nationalism, and the obvious limitations of liberalism beyond
the economic sphers, it is clear that humanity now needs an ideology
which can only be some kind of *"integral humanism"*.

While the ideological starting-point of these Hindu movements is
perfectly acceptable, it is striking that there is no think-tank to
develop this seed into a successful practical analysis of concrete
political problems. Whereas Marxist have published numerous analyses
about every social, political and cultural topic, the intellectual
output of the RSS movement is minimal. Most of its pamphlets and
manifestoes contain a lot of puffed-up patriotism and wailing over the
Partition of the Hindu motherland, but little penetrating analysis that
could be the basis for imaginative policies and a realistic strategy.

The intellectual failure of the Hindu movement is most striking in its
dealing with the one great sore in medieval as well contemporary Hindu
history: the Muslim problem. You hear so much about the Hindu-Muslim
conflict, that you would expect to find a great deal of intellectual
effort in analyzing the nature of this problem as a prerequisite to any
workable solution. In fact, there is no such analysis by any leader of
the organized Hindu movement, except in a very concise and elementary
form, e.g. by prof. Balraj Madhok (erstwhile Jan Sangh leader who fell
out with the party precisely because, apart from personal conflicts, he
opposed its increasing opportunism and lack of Hindu consciousness).
They all complain a lot that Muslim have destroyed temples and split the
Motherland, that Muslims start riots, that Hindus are persecuted in
Muslim states, but not one of them dares to ask why believers in Islam
exhibit this unpleasant behaviour.

Most Hindu leaders expressly refuse to search Islamic doctrine for a
reason for the observed fact of Muslim fanaticism. RSS leader Guru
Golwalkar once said: *"Islam is a great religion. Mohammed was a great
prophet. But the Muslims are big fools."* This is not logical, for the
one thing that unites the (otherwise diverse) community of Muslims is
their common belief in Islam: if any wrong is attributed to *"the
Muslims"* as such, it must be situated in their common belief system.

In the Ayodhya dispute, time and again the BJP leaders have appealed to
the Muslims to relinquish all claims to the supposed birthplace of the
Hindu god Rama, arguing that destroying temples is against the tenets of
Islam, and that the Quran prohibits the use of a mosque built on
disputed land. In fact, whatever Islam decrees against building mosques
on disputed property, can only concern disputes within the Muslim
community (or its temporary allies under a treaty). It is perfectly
lawful, and established by the Prophet through his own example, to
destroy Pagan establishments and replace them with mosques. But the BJP
leaders dream of dealing with a tolerant Islam, and they appeal to the
Muslims to remember the tolerance taught by Mohammed as much as by any
other prophet. Perhaps this is the typically Hindu attitude which
generously tries to see the best in every one; perhaps it is ignorance
or cowardice or wilful self-deception; perhaps it is the psychological
effect of centuries of terror, which make it hard for Hindus to even
criticize their terrorizer. At any rate, the tolerant Islam of which the
BJP leaders speak, does not exist.

Therefore, Sitaram Goel is rather critical of the current Ayodhya
movement. In the foreword to the newly published second volume of his
book *"Hindu Temples, What Happened to Them"*, he writes: *"The movement
for the restoration of Hindu temples has got bogged down around the Rama
Janmabhoomi at Ayodhya. The more important question, viz. why Hindu
temples met the fate they did at the hands of Islamic invaders, has not
been even whispered. Hindu leaders have endorsed the Muslim
propagandists in proclaiming that Islam does not permit the construction
of mosques at sites occupied earlier by other people's places of
worship... The Islam of which Hindu leaders are talking exists neither
in the Quran nor in the Sunnah of the Prophet. It is hoped that this
volume will help in clearing the confusion. No movement which shuns or
shies away from truth is likely to succeed. Strategies based on self-
deception stand defeated at the very start."*

Somewhat surprisingly, the established Hindu organizations show very
little interest in Voice of India's work. Apparently they are mentally
too slack to see the importance of fostering a developed Hindu viewpoint
among their own activists. They prefer to invest in lots of physical
locomotion, and to voice the prevalent self-pity concerning the
injustice at the hands of the Muslims and the secularist state. What
they should do instead, is to change the conceptual framework of Indian
politics, and to re- educate their cadres and the public and free them
from the mental grip of the perverted political parlance imposed by the
Muslim-Marxist combine. That will do a lot more for overthrowing
secularist depotism and India's vassalage to Islamic imperialism, than
all the rathyatras and padyatras and kar sevas combined.

The ideological helplessness of political Hindus comes out immediately
when you question them about Mahatma Gandhi. The assessment of Gandhia's
significance for Hindu society, and the fact of his murder by a Hindu,
are embarassing topics with which Hindu-baiters are having a lot of fun.
Invariably, they call the RSS (with its *"family"* of affiliated
organizations including the BJP) the *"murderers of the Mahatma"*. As
Craig Baxter (in his 1971 book Jana Sangh) has remarked, this allegation
is in definace of the judicial verdict in the Mahatma murder trial.
Nonetheless, Baxter notices that Gandhi's murder has been *"a millstone
around the neck"* of the political Hindu movement and especially the
RSS. It is true that the RSS had professed a very negative opinion of
the Mahatma's failed policy of *"Hindu-Muslim unity"*, which opinion was
also Nathuram Godse's motive for the murder.

According to Balraj Madhok, the murder was *"a very un- Hindu act"*
which saved the Mahatma from *"the dustbin of history"* to which he was
heading after the creation of Pakistan crowned the victory of Islamic
separatism over Gandhi's Hindu vision of trans-sectarian unity. There is
truth in prof. Madhok's assessment, but only if we limit Gandhi's
politics to his quest of *"Hindu-Muslim unity"*. Voice of India is the
only think-tank which has produced a straightforward, sincere and
satisfactory analysis of Mahatma Gandhi's life and death from the Hindu
viewpoint without reducing Gandhi's significance to his stand on a
single issue.

As authentic Gandhians Ram Swarup (author of Gandhian economics) and
Sitaram Goel can address the issue with an undisurbed conscience. They
are aware of Gandhi's unconditional commitment to the well-being of
Hindu society, and they have put Gandhi's defeat in the struggle against
Partition in a proper perspective. The chapter on Mahatma Gandhi in
Sitaram Goel's Perversion of India's Political Parlance should be
required reading for anyone who tries to understand India's *"communal
problem"*. It is a powerful rebuttal both to Nathuram Godse's
justification for the murder of the Mahatma, and to the numerous
attempts to use the Mahatma as a secularist argument against the Hindu
cause. Very briefly this is what it says.

First of all the Islamic and Communist lobbies who currently invoke the
Mahatma's name to blacken Hinduism, had no use for the Mahatma while he
was alive. They attacked him in the crassest language, thwarted his
policies and opposed him tooth and nail. On this issue as on many
others, the secularist front displays the ugliest dishonesty. It was the
Hindus who revered him, and if the Islamic-Communist combine consider
the use of the Mshatma's name profitable, it is because the public
mainly consists of Hindus who still revere or at least respect him.

The Mahatma's first and foremost loyalty was towards Hindu society. If
he criticized it, it was for its own upliftment, to force it out of its
inertia, rejuvenate and re-awaken it. He was a proud and combative
Hindu.

The Mahatma's defence of Hinduism against the claim and allegations
levelled by Christianity and by colonialism was very clear and
unwavering. So was his opposition to the seeds of separatism which
hostile forces tried to sow within Hindu society, via the Tamils, the
Harijans, the Sikhs. In the Freedom struggle it was his strategy that
managed to involve the masses. Unlike the Hindu Mahasabha, which
championed religion but thought and worked in strictly political terms
(borrowed from Western secular nationalism) the Mahatma understood that
the Hindu masses could only be won over by a deeply religious appeal.
The ethical dimension of politics which he emphasized, regained for
Hinduism a good name throughout the world, and is still highly relevant
(see Arun Shouie's book *"Individuals Institutions Processes"* for some
practical lessons). Therefore, it is nothing short of morbid to remember
the Mahatma only as the leader who failed to stop Islamic separatism, as
Nathuram Godse did, and as a minority within the Hindu movement still
does.

On the other hand, *"it must be admitted that the failure which the
Mahatma met vis-a-vis the Muslims was truly of startling proportions"*.
It is a fact that his policy towards Muslims had always been one of
appeasement at the cost of Hindu society. But nothing had helped and
with every concession the Muslims continued to grow more hostile:
*"There must be something very hard in the heart of Islam that even a
man of an oceanic goodwill like Mahatma Gandhi failed to move it"*.

The failure to prevent Partition can only be attributed to the Mahatma
for the period (and to the extent) that he dictated Congress policy. The
political course which had led to Partition, had been started before his
arrival on the Indian scene. And when he was at the helm, most Congress
leaders had equally approved of decisions which we can now recognize as
steps on the road to Partition. For instance, the 1916 Lucknow Pact
between Congress and the Muslim League, which legitimized the privileges
(separate electorates, one-third representation in the Central Assembly)
that the League had obtained from the British, was signed by Lokamanya
Tilak, an unquestionably staunch Hindu. The involvement in the khilafat
movement, that giant boost for Muslim separatism, was accepted not only
by the Nehrus, whose support for Islamic causes was always a foregone
conclusion, but also by such Hindu stalwarts as Lala Lajpat Rai, Bipin
Chandra Pal, and Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya.

It is true that the Mahatma has made a number of sentimental and flatly
untrue statements about Islam, such as: *"Islam is a noble faith."* He
denied that the Quran preached intolerance, even when his multireligious
prayer- sessions must have given him ample opportunity to inform himself
of the numerous Quranic injunctions to, and expressions of, intolerance
and hatred. But this stubborn blindness before the grim facts about
Islam, which accords the aura of an avatar to Mohammed, the sancity of a
Scripture to the Quran, etc. have been practised for a long time before
the rise of the Mahatma, and are still being practised by a great many
Hindus, including sadhus, intellectuals and politicians. Hinduism has
always seen Islam through the eyes of its own spirituality, and
projected its own qualities onto this radically different ideology.

The Mahatma had at least acknowledged the typical behaviour pattern of
Islam (*"In my experience the average Muslim is a bully, the average
Hindu a coward"*), so he was not a negationist. But he failed to trace
Islamic fanaticism to its source, viz. the Quran and the example of the
Prophet. Instead, he invented good-natured but fatally flawed
explanations (*"Islam is still a very young religion"*), which ignored
or denied the special character of Islam. The habit of explaining away
the unpleasant facts about the Islam problem is still very much alive,
even in circles dubbed as *Hindu communalist* and *anti-Muslim*.

The failure of the Mahatma before Islamic aggression was the failure of
Hindu society. Sitaram Goel strongly rejects Nathuram Godse's allegation
that the Mahatma was the chief culprit for the Partition: *"It is highly
doubtful if Hindu society would have been able to prevent Partition even
if there had been no Mahatma Gandhi. On the other hand, there is ample
evidence that Hindu society would have failed in any case."*

Gandhi has propounded the following views which are in stark contrast
with those of the Nehruvian establishment :

-   India is one nation. It is not, as self-glorifying Britons and
    Nehruvians thought, *"a nation in the making"*. It has a common
    culture called Sanatana Dharma (*"eternal value system"*, Hindusim),
    and the adherence to this common heritage tranwscends the borders
    between language areas and other divisions which elsewhere would
    define a nation.
-   Hinduism is in no way inferior to other religions and ideologies. On
    the contrary: *"Whatever of substance is contained in any other
    religion is always to be found in Hinduism, and what is not
    contained in it is insubstantial or unnecessary."*
-   Political achievements like independence, national unity and social
    transformation can only be based on a religious and cultural
    awakening of Hindu society.

These are viewpoints which the political Hindu movement shares, and it
should emphasize that secularism's claims on the Mahatma are entirely
false. In the Indian context of sycophancy, it is important to have
revered personalities on your side, and to quote their infallible
statements. So, in the struggle for the Mahatma's heritage, the
Nehruvian traitors to his message of Hindu self-confidence have invested
a lot in misrepresenting the Mahatma as a *secularist*. But if Hindu
society calls their bluff and honestly examines his work, it will expose
the stark opposition between Gandhi and Nehru, between patriots and
fellow-travellers, between practitioners of Hindu tolerance and
bootlickers of Islamic imperialism. Hindus should claim the Mahatma back
from those who call themselves Gandhians, but who kill the Mahatma a
second time by emulating those very Hindu-baiters (e.g. the
missionaries) who saw in the Mahatma their most dangerous opponent.

Sitaram Goel's conslusion puts the Mahatma in the centre of the Hindu
revival: *"The one lesson we learn from the Freedom movement as a whole
is that a religious and cultural awakening in Hindu society has to
precede political awakening. The language of Indian nationalism has to
be the language of Sanatana Dharma before it can challenge and defeat
the various languages of imperialism. The more clearly Hindu society
sees the universal truths of Hindu spirituality and culture, the more
readily will it reject political ideologies masquerading as religion or
promising a paradise on this earth. Mahatma Gandhi stands squarely with
Maharshi Dayanand, Bankim Chandra, Swami Vivekananda, Lokamanya Tilak
and Sri Aurobindo in developing the language of Indian nationalism. His
mistake about Islam does not diminish the lustre of that language which
he spoke with full faith and confidence. On the contrary, his mistake
carries a message of its own."*

The message present in the Mahatma's failure vis-a-vis Islam, is that
Hindu society will only develop in peace and in dignity if it removes
Islam. No amount of goodwill is capable of changing Islamic theology and
its inherent policical ambition of world conquest. But this is a
conclusion from which the Hindu organizations are still shying away. it
is quite unthinkable that one of their leaders would say: *"Islam is a
hostile and destructive ideology. We will not make any concession to it,
and we work for its dissolution."* Imagine the shrieks and howls in the
secularists media in case of such a clear rejection of Islam's
pretences, and you will understand why Hindu leaders shy away from it.
But let then pause and think: is not braving the pandemonium of
secularist indignation preferable to (self-) censoring the truth about
Hindu society's mortal enemy?

The European humanists (deists as well as atheists) who attacked the
power position of Christianity, were very clear about their objective:
Ecrasez l'Infame! (*"crush the infamous one"* i.e. the Church). Many
liberal and socialist parties were very outspoken in their rejection of
the Christian religion, the *opium of the masses* (note that they were
hardly aware that religion could be something better than the irrational
belief systems of prophetic monotheism). Till today, the Communists are
very unambiguous about their condemnation of all religion as an
obscurantist superstition, and about their determination to ultimately
liberate the people from the straglehold of religion (unlike Hindu
critics of Islam, the Communists understand *removing a religion* as a
physical elimination of at least its ordained members, as they have
amply proven on Buddhists in Mongolia,, Cambodia, etc. Even when anti-
Christian socialists or liberals have entered coalitions with
Christian-democrats, they never made it an occasion to renounce their
fundamental rejection of Christianity. Even when Communists set up joint
fronts *for peace* or *against imperialism* along with Christian *useful
idiots* (to use Lenin's term) they did not change their official line.
So the Hindu movement would not do anything extraordinary if it states
clearly that it rejects and condemns Islam as a mistaken belief system
and a destructive ideology.

The RSS-BJP have been trying to be Muslim-friendly, and they are proud
to tell you that they have some Muslims in their own ranks, even in
leading positions. This makes it difficult for them to criticize Islam.
A Muslim communalist leader has said that the presence of Muslims in any
organization is always useful, as it effectively disarms that
organization in the struggle against Islam. Even the most Hindu-friendly
Muslims in the BJP is still a Trojan horse, not because he chooses to
assume that role, but because his surroundings immediately change their
language and behaviour one they meet a Muslim. It seems that no Hindu
(especially with any political ambition in the Nehruvian fremework)
dares to criticize Islam in the presence of Muslims.

This is not to say that a Hindu-minded political party should refuse
Muslims as members. On the contrary, it should definitely continue to
prove that the Islamic establishment has no monopoly on the common
Muslims' loyalty, and that many Alis and Fatimas refuse to be held on a
leash by the Bukharis and Shahabuddins. However, it shouldnot compromise
on its Hindu perspective, and it should acknowledge that Islam is
presently Hindu society's worst enemy. Perhaps it can use a more
diplomatic language in passing judgement on Islam, but there should be
no compromise about contents. After the ambiguity about the Hindu
movement's opinion of Islam has been cleared, Muslim- born Indians
should be attracted not with re-assuring eulogies to the *noble faith of
Islam*, but with a positive and non-sectarian programme of Integral
Humanism, embodying the best of Hindu social philosophy without
hammering too much on name-tags like *Hindu*. In the Gandhian
perspective which Voice of India has been actualizing, Sanatana Dharma
is not a banner, but a practical way of realizing the intrinsic goals of
individual and society. Its central virtue is satya, truthfulness.

For Voice of India, as for Mahatma Gandhi, truth is as much an
instrument as a goal: *"In this fight for men's minds, out only weapon
is Truth. Truth must be told, as much about Hindu society and culture as
about the alien ideoligies which have been on the war-path since the
days of foreign domination over the Hindu homeland."* Political leaders
who claim the confidence of Hindu society would do well to take some
inspiration from this, and to rethink their ambiguous attitude regarding
Islam. Not facing the truth about Islam was a costly mistake in Gandhi's
time. With Islam's increasing strength and self-confidence, it may prove
to be a deadly mistake in the near future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.3 WHAT HAPPENED TO THE HINDU TEMPLES ?

In all the lands it conquered, Islam has replaced indigenous places of
worship mosques. In Iran, there are no ancient Zoroastrian or Manichean
shrines left. In Central Asia, there are no Buddhist temples left.
Similarly, in India (except the far South where Islam hardly penetrated)
there are practically no Hindu temples that have survived the Muslim
period. But there are thousands of mosques built on the foundations of
Hindu temples, often with the debris of those very temples. These
archaeological remains are mute witnesses to the long and repetitive
story of Islamic iconoclasm.

The first volume of the *"Hindu Temples"* book subtitted *"A Preliminary
Survey"*, was published in the spring of 1990 and played an important
role in the political debate over the controversial Rama tempel in
Ayodhya. It contains a competently presented list of about 2000 mosques
in India that have forcibly replaced Hindu temples. This list is not
complete, and does not concern Pakistan and other countries where
temples have been violently replaced with mosques. Moreover, the number
of temples of which material has been used in these 2000 mosques far
exceeds 2000. For the single Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque in Delhi, as an
inscription at the entrance proudly proclaims 27 Hindu temples had been
destroyed. These 2000 are only the tip of an iceberg.

This first volume also contains a list of over 200 temples destroyed in
Bandgladesh in November 1989 under pretext of protest against the
Shilanyas (laying of the first stone) ceremony of the prospective Rama
temple in Ayodhya. Muslims have raised a hue and cry over the demolition
of the Babri Masjid (which they had not used since decades), but few
outsiders seem to realize that destruction of the religious places of
minorities is a routine affair in Islamic states.

The book also contains articles by Ram Swarup, Jay Dubashi, Prof. Harsh
Narain, and the famous journalist Arun Shourie. Ram Swarup, like editor
Sitaram Goel, traces the facts of Islamic intolerance and iconoclasm to
the exclusivist theology of the Quran and the Sunnah (tradition). He
also deals with the role of Marxism is recent negationist efforts:
*"Marxists have taken to rewriting Indian history on a large scale and
it has meant its systematic falsification... The Marxists' contempt for
India, particularly the India of religion, culture and philosophy, is
deep and theoretically fortified. It exceeds the contempt ever shown by
the most die-hard imperialists... Marx ruled out self-rule for India
altogether and in this matter gave her no choice... Marxism idealizes
old imperialisms and prepares a people for a new one. Its moving power
is deep-rooted self-alienation and its greatest ally is cultural and
spiritual illiteracy... No true history of India is possible without
countering their philosophy, ideas and influence."*

Jay Dubashi, an economist affiliated with the Bharatiya Janata Party,
links the laying of the first stone for the planned Ram Janmabhoomi
temple in Ayodhya with the tearing down of the Berlin Wall, which
happened on the very same day: *"While a temple was going up in Ayodhya,
a Communist temple was being demolished 5,000 miles away in Europe...
The two events...mark the end of the post-Nehru era and the beginning of
a truly national era in India on the one hand, and the...beginning of a
truly democratic era in Europe on the other. History has rejected Nehru
in India and also overthrown Communism in Europe."* Reductionist systems
which see man only as producer or consumer of material goods, are out.
The mental horizon clears up and prepares for the era of an integral
humanism continuous with the age-old spiritual vision of Sanatana
Dharma.

Harsh Narain, a historian who has taught at both Aligarh Muslim
University and Benaras Hindu University, presents four pieces of
testimony for the local tradition that the Babri Masjid had replaced a
Rama Temple, all written in the 19th century by local Muslims outside
the sphere of British influence. One of these testimonies narrowly
escaped oblivion: it was part of a manuscript that was recently
published as a book by a Muslim foundation, which decided to omit the
chapter containing the inconvenient testimony. Fortunately, a descendant
of the author had the controversial chapter published separately.

A similar story is told in greater detail by Arun Shourie (sacked in
1990 as Indian Express editor after exposing V.P.Singh's deal with
secularists like imam Bukhari) about yet another piece of Muslim
testimony for the pre-existence of a Rama temple at the Babri Masjid
site. A book mentioning this tradition had been published in tempore non
suspecto, but recently efforts had been made to get back all the copies
from places where unbelievers might get access to it.

None of the negationist historians, and none of the so- called
secularists at large, has spent one word of comment on these attempts to
tamper with the historical Ayodhya record. They condone anything that
may weaken the Hindu case in the Ayodhya debate. Whatever the mistakes
committed by the Hindu Ayodhya movement on the ground, at the
intellectual level it is a struggle for truth and honesty, against
attempts (some petty, some high-handed) to falsify history. On the other
hand, the stand taken by leading negationist historians in this debate
wil be studied in the future as a classic in latter-day Marxist history
falsification.

In November 1990 there had been proposals in the national parliament and
in the state parliament of Uttar Pradesh to ban this first volume of
*"Hindu Temples: What Happened to Them"*. This step was not taken,
possibly because negationists thought the ban would be counter
productive by drawing attention to the list of disputable mosques. None
of the negationist historians has come forward with a reply or with the
announcement that a mistake has been discovered in Mr. Goel's list of
monuments of Islamic fanaticism. Manini Chatterjee, reviewer for The
Telegraph, could do no more than calling it a *"very bad book"*. Very
bad for the negationists, indeed.

The second volume of Sitaram Goel's book, subtitled *"The Islamic
Evidence"*, and published in May 1991, takes us a lot farther in its
revelations of the grim facts of the Islamic campaign to destroy
Hinduism. It also contains some head-on attacks on negationism. By way
of introduction, it deals in great detail with the controversies over
Krishna's birthplace temple in Mathura and the Rudramahalaya temple
complex in Sidhpur, both forcibly replaced with Islamic structures and
exposed the negationists' machinations to distort or conceal the facts.
The chapter From the Horse's Mouth gives 174 pages full of quotations
from Muslim documents that describe and glofify the destruction of Hindu
temples very explicitly. It is only an anthology, and the already very
impressive material collected in this chapter is again only the tip of
an iceberg.

If this book gets the publicity it deserves, negationist historians will
find it difficult to show their faces in public. They stand exposed, and
only their control over the media can save their reputation by censoring
this critique of their career-long efforts at history falsification.

In appendix, the book contains a questionnaire for the negationist
historians concerning their second front: allegations that Hinduism has
demolished or stolen many Buddhist and *"Animist"* shrines. As we have
seen in [ch.2.7.](ch2.htm#ch2.7), the negationists go on spreading the
story that the Hindu had persecuted and destroyed Buddhism. Now, Sitaram
Goel challenges the negationist historians to come forward and present,
among other things:

-   a list of Hindu temples that have forcibly replaced Buddhist (or
    Jain or *animist*) temples;
-   a list of epigraphs recording such temple destructions;
-   a list of literary sources decribing these temple destructions;
-   a list of injunctions to, and glorifications of, the destruction of
    non-Hindu temples in Hindu scriptures;
-   a list of known historical Buddhist (Jain, *animist*) temples which
    are now missing due to Hindu iconoclasm.

Of course, the negationist historians have not reacted so far. Perhaps
the reply has already been given implicitly in their earlier
publications? As we have seen in ch.2.7., the negationist books and
articles in which this allegation against Hinduism is made, try but fail
to give the answers to Mr. Goel's questions, viz. the evidence required
to substantiate the allegation. It may be hard to believe for followers
of iconoclastic religions and ideologies, but non- fanatical religions
do exist, and some of them have co- existed for millennia with only
marginal moments of friction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.4 FACE TO FACE WITH MOHAMMED'S MODEL BEHAVIOUR

The most important part of the second volume is the 145- page chapter
about the Islamic theology of iconoclasm (i.e. the destruction of what
other people consider sacred objects or buildings). Here, the spotlight
is moved from India to Arabia. The Islamic destructions in India were
nothing but a long-drawn-out reply of Prophet Mohammed's own exemplary
practice, which in turn is only an application of Quranic injunctions.

One of the great founding-moments of Islam was the capturing of the
Kaaba, the sanctuary in Mecca. With their own hands, Mohammed and his
son-in-law Ali smashed to pieces all 360 idols. After that, Mohammed
sent patrols to all the population centres of Arabia to smash the idols
and to destroy or convert the temples (mostly polytheist but also
including a Christian church). Since the Quran and the Prophet's model
behaviour count as normative, we must recotgnize that the desecration
and destruction of other people's sanctuaries is an intrinsic component
of Islam, not a later accidental outgrowth.

The Dome on the Rock and the Al Aqsa mosque have also been built on a
sacred place stolen from others: the Jewish Temple Mount. True, under
Byzantine rule the Jews could not rebuild their Temple, but still the
site remained most sacred to them. Nonetheless (or rather, precisely for
the reason), Mohammed's successors took it from them, in order to affirm
Mohammed's claim to being the final fulfilment of the Abrahamic
prophetic tradition. Similarly the cathedral of Damascus, of Cordova
(both cathedrals had themselves replaced Pagan temples) and of many
other places were taken from the Christians, as would also happen 8
centuries later to the Aya Sophia of constantinople. The take-over of
these Jewish and Christian places of worshop should moreover be seen
against the background of the relative tolerance which these two
communities still enjoyed under Islamic rule: if this tolerance could
not prevent the take-over of important places of worship, how much less
chance did an Pagan temple have.

In parenthesis, we should draw attention to the flimsy rationalizations
which Islam has produced to justify the occupation of the most sacred
places of other religions. In the Ayodhya conflict, the Muslim side has
often said that the Hindus must first produce proof that Rama was indeed
born on the spot which Hindus claim as his birthsite. If historical
proof is the prerequisite brfore a sacred site can be recognized and
accorded respect, then Muslims will have to give up both the Kaaba and
the Temple Mount. Of the Kaaba, which Mohammed took from the Arab
Pagans, they claim that it was build by Adam and rebuilt by Abraham
(facts suppressed in the Old Testament by a Jewish conspiracy to distort
God's word), and later stolen by the Pagans. Of the Temple Mount, which
they took from the Jews in order to affirm Mohammed's status as the
*seal* of the lineage of Jewish prophets, they claim that it was
Mohammed's landing- site in his night journey through heaven on a winged
horse. These ridiculous claims can hardly be considered as historically
proven.

Sitaram Goel analyzes the relation between the Prophet and the
unbelievers. As a Hindu, i.e. as a Pagan, he is especially interested in
the viewpoint of the Arab polytheists. That is one thing which makes
this book a milestone in the science of religion. Until now, the study
of Islam has been either a part of Christian apologetics, which
applauded Mohammed's destruction of idolatry even while denouncing his
claims of prophethood as imposture; or it was part of the recent effort
to create a *"better understanding"* of Islam, which in effect tends to
mean the apriori suppression of all criticism of Mohammed as being mere
*prejudice*. Here, a Pagan stands up to reconstruct the Pagan viewpoint.

That it is a Hindu who should direct our attention to the viewpoint of
the Arab Pagans, is normal. Hinduism is almost the only *polytheist*
culture to survive till today, and the attitude of the Muslims towards
Arab and Indian Pagans was essentially the same. In pre-Islamic days,
there were not only intense trade contacts between Indian and Arab
Pagans, but also a kind of pilgrimage exchange. The Hindus visiting
Arabia payed their respects to the Arab sanctuaries, and considered the
black stone in the Kaaba as a shivalingam, a *phallus of Shiva* (as
Western orientalists translate it). The Arabs, in turn, went to pray in
the Somnath temple in Gujrat. The Muslims believed that the idols of the
Pagan goddesses Al-Lat and Manat (of Satanic Verses fame) had been
transferred to Somnath, and this is one reason why Mahmud Ghaznavi and
other Muslims risked their lives in conducting raids deep into Hindu
territory in order to destroy the Somnath temple.

Within the framework of the current *unprejudiced* approach to Islam,
multiculturalist do-gooders copy all the Islamic accusations against the
Pagans, a party which isn't there anymore to give its own version of the
facts. They say that Paganism no longer satisfied the Arabs, so that
they welcomed Islam; that the Prophet identified with the poor and was
welcomed by them as a liberator from the oppressive Pagan elite; that
the Muslims were the victims of persecution by Pagan fanatics, so that
their fight against the Pagans was merely defensive; that the position
of women in Islam *"may not be ideal, but at least a great step forwards
compared to the pre-Islamic period"*; that the Pagans only opposed
Mohammed because they feared for their unrighteous power positions and
for the dishonest income from the superstitious pilgrimage to the Kaaba
idols. Similar things hve been said by the negationists about the advent
of Islam in India, demonstrably wrongly.

In numerous European works on Islam, the Islamic negative judgement on
the Arab Pagans is adopted lock, stock and barrel. Only Mohammed's
relation with Jews and Christians comes in for a bit of polite
criticism. Of course, if on some occasions Mohammed was tolerant towards
Jews and Christians, it was because he had borrowed from them the
monotheism which he wanted to impose on his own people, and because he
had expected them to recognize him, in due course, as a Prophet of their
own tradition. For the Pagans there was no mercy at all (except in one
promising moment of weakness, the socalled Satanic Verses in which he
accorded a measure of respect to three Pagan goddesses). Those who like
to fight against intercultural prejudices and misconceptions, should
accord posthumous restoration of honour to the destroyed culture of the
Arab Pagans, whose own testimony has been obliterated though it can be
glimpsed indirectly through some passages in Islamic Scripture. Serious
historiography would start by noticing that the Islamic reports on the
Pagans are the highly coloured version of their mortal enemy.

The Islamic statements about the unbelievers, in the original Hadis as
well as (in fact, even more strongly) in modern apologetics, serve a
similar purpose as the anti- Semitic Nazi film The dirty Jew Suss, or
the forged Protocols of the Elders of Zion. They serve to justify the
annihilation of a religion and the subjection of a nation (Mohammed
conceived of his community as a nation). While the core of the Islamic
version of islam's early history is of course historical,, there is no
doubt that,, on top of the highly partisan viewpoint expressed in the
Quran,, a lot of motivated distortion has crept in during the two
centuries between the facts and the edition of the Hadis.

For instance, the contention made in the Hadith that the Muslims in
Mecca (before Mohammed set up his state in Medina) were subjected to
persecution, is not borne out by the more reliable information in the
Quran (finalized a few years after Mohammed's death). The Quran gives a
lot of details about the Pagans' reaction to Mohammed's performance,
what questions and arguments they confronted him with; but persecution
does not figure in it. Any hints at confrontation date from the time
when Mohammed, already established as the leader of Medina, had launched
his caravan raids and finally his open warfare against the Meccans and
other unbelievers.

Even the Islamic traditions leave us in no doubt as to who ws the
aggressor. in Ibn Ishaq's orthodox biography of Mohammed, we read that
the first blood in Islamic history flowed when a Meccan happened to
witness the prayer-session of the new sect, laughed, and got beaten up
(the very act of laughing is still frowned upon in Islamic theology).
One fine day, Mohammed announced to the Meccans in the Kaaba: *"By the
One Who holds my life in His hand, I bring you slaughter."* Without
provocation, he and his comrades used to disturb the Pagan festivals and
insult the Meccan religion.

The Pagans were definitely not intolerant: they allowed Christians and
Jews to live amongst them, in spite of the persecutions by Jewish and
Christian leaders only a few decades earlier. It was Mohammed who
rejected any *"live and let live"* agreement, most explicitly when this
proposal was made to him around his uncle Abu Talib's deathbed. The
simpletons who claim that the Quranic verse: *"To you your religion, to
me my religion"* (Q.109:6), is a statement of tolerance, should know
that this is literally the proposal made to him around Abu Talib's
deathbed by the Arab Pagans, and that he turned it down, demanding that
they embrace Islam, nothing less. The Quranic verse simply means: I will
have nothing to do with you, there is no compromise possible between
your religion and mine. The Indian *secularists* who have dreamed up the
notion of *composite culture* uniting Islamic and native Indian
elements, should remember that according to every Muslim who stands by
the Quran, such synthesis of Islamic and non-Islamic elements is
impermissible and a watered-down act of apostasy.

Mohammed did not tolerate the Meccans' rejection of his claim to
prophethood, and threatened all non-believers in his claim with
hellfire. If the civilized and tolerant Meccans didn't tolerate his
intolerant rantings forever, it is quite understandable; but still their
patience was a lot bigger than Islamic apologetics wants us to believe.
It is only logical for a religion which preaches war, to develop a cult
of martyrdom (unknown in Buddhism and Taoism, among others); the Hadis
traditionists have blamed the whole conflict on the destroyed Pagan
society of Mecca, and attributed a touch of heroic martyrology to the
early Muslims. But the fact that it is the Pagan and not the Muslim
version which has been obliterated, is a strong clue to who was
aggressor and who was victim.

Sitaram Goel is one of the first historians to keep the proper distance
from the partisan Muslim version. He summarizes what we may know
objectively about the Pagan culture and the complexities of its
religion, through inscriptions, pre-Islamic literary documents (Greek,
Roman, Mesopotamian), and indirectly through Islamic scripture. They had
a pantheon comparable to that of the ancient Greeks or Hindus, embodying
metaphysical, cosmological and ethical notions. On this basis Mr. Goel
rejects the now-classical description of the Arab-Pagans as *"quarelling
rabble addicted to idol-worship"*, and concludes: *"It is nothing short
of slanderous to say that pre-Islamic Arabs were barbarians devoid of
religion and culture, unless we mean by religion and culture what the
Muslim theologians mean."*

The Arab Pagans have only made the mistake of being defeated, but *"the
fact that they failed to understand the ways of Mohammed and could not
match his mailed fist in the final round, should not be held against
them. It was neither the first nor the last time that a democratic
society succumbed in the face of determined gangsterism. We know how
Lenin, Hitler and Mao Tse-tung succeeded in our own times."*

A modern myth spread by Islamic apologists and especially by Western
friends of Islam, is that the Meccans did not really care for their
religion, and only opposed Mohammed because of financial calculations
concerning the revenue of the annual pilgrimage to the Kaaba. For
instance, in the introduction to Prof. J.H. Kramers's Dutch translation
of the Quran, we read: *"In Mohammed's time the religious aspect of the
Haji festival had been lost, it had become a big market, more fit for
doing business than for devotion to the gods... The Arab religion was a
primitive polytheism, poor in real religiosity..."*

However, it is a fact that the Meccans' revenue increased immensely
after the Kaaba had been transformed into an Islamic place of
pilgrimage, anf after the entry into the Muslim fold gave them the right
to share in the booty of raids and conquests: they gained enormously by
converting, at least politically and materially. More pertient for the
historian is the fact that the Islamic sources themselves don't bother
about attributing such materialistic motives to the Meccans, and merely
hold it against them that they are idolaters and refuse to recognize
Mohammed's prophethood. At most, accusations of *injustice* and
*hoarding riches* are added to blacken them, but the object of the
Islamic campaign against them is not to change their socio-economic life
(although this would inevitably be influenced by the endless inflow of
booty and later by the imperial size and structure of the Islamic
state), but to change the religion.

The crude allegation of materialistic motives can be turned around
against Mohammed, on firmer grounds. The Meccans were traders, and maybe
some were even usurers, as modern apologetics claims. But Mohammed was
worse: he organized 80 raids on peaceful caravans, and led 26 of them in
person. He had Allah reveal that booty from raids on Pagans and conquest
of Pagan lands was lawful (Q.8.69), and that one-fifth of the booth
(including slaves) was the Prophet's own. If no fighting had occurred,
all of the booty belonged to *Allah and His Prophet*.

In the classic of Marxist negationism, Communalism in Modern India,
Prof. Bipan Chandra describes how *"Hindu communalists"* spread the
*myth* of the inherently intolerant character of Islam, and quotes as
prime example the Hindu Mahasabha leader Swatantryaveer Savarker, who
wrote in 1923: *"Religion is a mighty motive force. So is rapine. But
where religion in goaded on by rapine and rapine serves as a handmaid to
religion, the propelling force that is generated by these together is
only equalled by the profundity of human misery and devastation they
leave behind them in their march. Heaven and Hell making a common case -
such were the forces, overwhelmingly furious, that took India by
surprise the day that Mahmud Ghaznavi crossed the Indus and invaded
her."* Of course, Bipan Chandra doesn't even attempt to argue against
the contents of this statement, he takes it as axioma that such views
are nothing but inventions of a communalist *false consciousness*.

Whatever we may think of Savarkar's poolitical views, his brief analysis
of the nature and impact of islam is impeccable. It is not only borne
out by the career of Islam in India, but also in detail, by the Quran
and Hadith. They have no room for doubt about Mohammed's own
unhesitating initiative in linking religion with rapine.

To justify his share of the booty, Mohammed decreed that his own
revenue, both from booty and from the charity tax (zakat) which all
Muslims had to pay, was to be used for charity. Here we have another
item from the apologist's tool kit: the notion that Mohammed brought the
practice of charity to the selfish and greedy Pagans. In fact, the zakat
was originally a Pagan practice on an individual basis, which was
nationalized by Mohammed's Islamic state. As for its caritative
purposes: the Hadith collections tell us more about the Islamic revenue
being used to buy arms and horses, for new and bigger raids, than aboout
charity in the usual sense. In fact, the Quranic decree (9.60) that this
income be used *in the service of Allah* and *"for winning over the
hearts \[to Islam\]"*, means in plain language: for the Holy War, and as
a material incentive for loyalty to Islam. So, all the resources which
became available to the Muslim state through whatever means, were to be
used to strengthen and expand this state; charity to keep the poor happy
was one element in this policy, but really a minor one. The end
justified the means, and war coffers of Medina as well as the enthusiasm
of the Islamic soldiers were replenished with a constant infolow of
booty. Those who perforce want to reduce the conflict between Pagans and
Muslims to case of crude greed, had better thrown the stone in
Mohammed's direction.

The real reason why the Meccans rejected Mohammed's *prophecies*, can be
inferred very clearly from the Quran. It was not for any materialistic
reason, because at that time especially after the creation of the first
Islamic state in Medina, joining Mohammed was the short road to wealth
and slave-ownership. The real reasons, which the Meccans themselves
formulated in discussion with Mohammed, were the following.

Firstly, they were attached to their ancestral religion. This is not
stupid obscurantism, but a very sensible consequence of the basic
premise that religion is concerned with eternal truths. Give me that
old-time religion: it was good for my ancestors, it is good enough for
me. The Meccans felt a sincere disgust when Mohammed consigned their
ancestors, including his own mother to the fire of hell because of their
having lived in the pre-Mohammedan *"era of ignorance"* (jahiliya). The
split of history into hell-bound people who had not been followers of
Mohammed, and heaven- bound Mohammedans, was just too puerile (and
egocentric on Mohammed's part) to be taken serious by a grown-up human
beings.

Secondly, the Meccans made a clear diagnosis of someone who hears voices
and thinks he is God's own spokesman. A number of times of Quran
dictates what Mohammed has to answer when the Pagans say he is
*possessed*. In modern terminology, the Pagans thought he was mentally
deranged. That is not a *prejudice* from medieval polemics Islam, but
the perception of numerous contemporary eye-witnesses. Moreover, the
orthodox biography and the traditions also give some involuntary
indications for a neuro-mental disorder: as a child Mohammed had been
thrown on the ground general times (*by God*), to the worry of his
guardians; when receiving *revelations* he became all chilly and foamed
at the mouth; his first revelations frightened him intensely and he
himself wondered whether he was becoming crazy (the soothing impact of
habit and of his compassionate wife Khadija re-assured him). The
Meccans' inference that Mohammed was merely hallucinating, whether
correct or not, was at any rate not far-fetched, nor necessarily
dishonest.

When the most authentic sources keep on saying that the Meccans opposed
Mohammed because they didn't believe him and because they refused to
give up their time-tested religion for the railings of *a mad poet*, it
is methodologically quite indefensible to ignore this and to replace it
with the gratuitous contention that they defended their religion only
out of false materialistic motives. Imagine being in the same situation
as the Meccans: someone walks into your house uninvitedly and telly you
that he has a private telephone line with God that he is the last one to
enjoy this privilege, that he cn intercede for you on Judgement Day,
that you have to smash to pieces what you cherish most, and that you
will burn forever in hell if you don't believe him. Would you need any
base motives to show him the door?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.5 THE NATURE OF ISLAM

While Mohammed enthusiastically assumed his role of God's spokesman
because of a peculiar psychological condition, the theology which he
espoused and which was developed in detail by later generations of
Muslims clerics, was largely a continuation of the older monotheism of
the Jews and Christians. From them, Mohammed had picked up a number of
Bible stories and theological notions including prophethood. A large
part of the Old Testament is devoted to the struggle against polytheism
and idolatry. Moses ordered the sternest measures against these
alternatives to his own cult of Yahweh, and successive prophets would
employ the foulest language and sometimes the most treacherous means to
annihilate god-pluralism.

In advanced Christian apologetics, the struggle between the One God and
the many gods is portrayed as a struggle between the proper religious
veneration of the Divine and the false religious treatment of
non-religious objects like money, status, enjoyment, power and other
worldly things. But that is not at all what the prophets' fierce and
sometimes bloody struggle against idol-worship was about. The two
contenders were not ethically different, and among the Ten Commandments,
only the first and second (no other gods, no images of sentient beings)
were a point of difference between Pagans and monotheists. They were not
the violent vs. the peaceful, or the lewd vs. the chaste (in the
prophets' tirades, *fornication* means idolatry) or the good vs. the
bad, or the religious vs. the irreligious. The Pagans had a culture, a
code of ethics, a religion complete with rituals, festivals mystical
practices and doctrines; at best, the monotheists had the same things,
but under the aegis of a different God, the jealous and vindictive
Yahweh/Allah. What Moses could not tolerate about the Golden Calf, was
not that it was made of gold (as modern moralistic Christians think),
for it was only natural that people wanted to sacrifice some of their
riches to glorify what they consider most sacred, viz. the god they
worship. The Horned god worshipped by the Pagans in Moses' following was
not intolerable because his statue was made of god, but because he was
an alternative to Yahweh.

In his chapter on the doctrine of iconoclasm, Sitaram Goel traces this
doctrine to its Old Testament sources, and lists all the instances of
verbal and physical violence against *idolatry*. This story might make
defenders of Islam say: *"See whatever you say about Islam, Judaism and
Christianity aren't any better."* That is true if you consider an
earlier stage of the Jewish and Christian religions. But it is a hopeful
sign that these two religions have come a long way since the
arch-fanatic Moses. The Jews have not had a state for many centuries,
and they have developed a social outlook of *live and let live*. They
never had a doctrine of world conquest anyway, and had limited their
ambition to the *Promised Land*. In present- day Israel, the Jewish
authorities respect and protect the religious rights and pilgrimage
places of Christians, Muslims and Bahais. Judaism is one religion that
has actually grown, matured over the centuries. For Christianity, the
days of persecuting Pagans and heretics are not that far behind us yet
and more civilized forms of fanaticism are still there. But at least the
principle of religious freedom has been conceded by the Second Vatican
Council, and the effort to enter a *dialogue* with other religions is
not entirely an eyewash.

The last few centureies, a strong humanization has taken place within
Chrisitianity. For instance, after condoning the institution of slavery
of about 18 centuries, Christian have abolished slavery in their
domains. The motive was not outside pressure alone, but also ethical
considertions developed by Christial clerics ant thinkers since the
Renaissance. As the case of William Wilberforce shows, abolition of
slavery could even go hand with Christian fanaticism. By contrast
Islamic countries have only abolished slavery under pressure from
Western culture. Even after that, slavery has continued to be practised
occasionally in countries like Sudan and Mauretania.

The Islamic doctrine of slavery was closely linked with its doctrine of
the inescapable struggle between believers and unbelievers: a Pagan
could not own a Muslim slave, but a Muslim could of course own a Pagan
slave, and Pagans were routinely sold into slavery if they had the
misfortune of being captured by Muslims. Wherefrom the European folklore
character of Saint Nicolas' associate, the Moor *Black Pete*, who puts
naughty children in his bag to carry them off and beat them with his
rod. And wherefrom the Afrikaans (South African) word kaffer, *negro*,
originally *black slave*, from Arabic kafir, *Pagan*. In contemporary
Islamic apologetics for African and Black American consumption, Islam is
portrayed as anti-slavery. That is yet another instance of negationism.

Another example of the difference between Islam and Christianity is the
fact that among the Christian missionaries who accompanied the
Conquistadores in the New World, there were some who expressed pity and
regret when they described the sad plight of the native Americans. There
were some who tried to save the natives' lives and freedom (though not
their religion). In the numerous chronicles of the Muslim conquests and
rule in India, there are to my knowldege no such considerations. At
least a germ of a universal ethics and a universal human fellow-feeling,
transcending the frontiers between religious communities, was present in
Christianity, even if for a very long time it was obscured by
monotheistic and ecclesiastic exclusivism (*"outside the Church no
slavation"*). In Islam, this glimpse of universalism is confined to a
few of the early heterodox Sufis, who were considered heretics by
authoritative guardians of Islam. At any rate, their works are only read
by a few intellectual amateurs, but the official doctrines are hammered
into children's minds in Islamic schools the world over. An occasional
tolerant Muslim does not have the power to overrule and abrogate the
Quran. Not one Islamic school in the world teaches that Allah's
declarations of war on the unbelievers stand abrogated. The cleavage of
humanity into Muslims and non-Muslims is so fundamental of Islamic
doctrine, that it is very hard to even imagine the transformation of
Islam into a tolerant religion.

Christianity has a broader basis than just the Moses line of intolerant
monotheism, it has incorporated elements from Pagan sources such as
Greek philosophy, and so it can disown some parts of its history without
having to disown its very identity and dissolve itself. Judaism has
developed a pluralist culture of debate and interpretation, embodied in
the Talmud, which makes it temperamentally averse to the fanaticism
characteristic of the world- conquering religions. But Islam is bound up
very closely with the text of the Quran and the personality of Mohammed.
It cannot disown these without dissolving itself. Islam is by its own
description a *"seamless garment"*: pull out one thread and the whole
fabric comes apart. Since fanaticism and persecution of non-Muslims are
an intrinsic and strongly emphasized teaching of the Quran, there is no
hope of witnessing the emergence of a genuinely tolerant Islam.

Sitaram Goel's sharp criticism of Islam can in no way be explained as an
expression of anti-Arab racism (which would be the standard reply to
such criticism in Europe). First of all, equating Islam criticism with
anti-Arab racism is a typically eurocentric allegation, because outside
Europe the opposition between Muslim and non-Muslim seldom has a racial
dimension. Moreover, Islam (and more generally monothieism) had been a
foreign and eccentric fad to the Arabs, and was forcibly imposed on them
by Mohammed. As Sitaram Goel explains, the Arabs were the first to be
robbed of their culture by Islam. Like the Persians, Egyptians and many
others after them, they were robbed of their history, which was
condemned as an age of darkness and replaced by a fake ancestry
involving Ismael and Abraham.

Even the large-scale crimes against humanity which the Arabs were to
commit during the Islamic Blitzkrieg under Mohammed and his immediate
successors, should not be held against the Arabs, but against Islam:
*"Nor should the image of what the Arabs became after they were forced
into the fold of Islam be confused with what they were before... For it
was Islam which brutalized the Arabs and turned them into bloodthirsty
bandits who spread fire and sword, far and wide. In the majority of
mankind, the baser drives of human nature are never far from the
threshold. Islam brought them to the fore in the case of the majority of
Arabs."* Criticizing Islam is not an attack on nations or individuals,
but it is an ideological critique, as well as a psychological critique
of what is called prophethood. Instead of accusing *"the Muslims"* of
the numerous crimes which their community has undeniably committed, this
critique absolves many Muslim- born individuals of this guilt, by
placing it squarely where it belongs: in the doctrine of Islam as the
ideological motivation for these acts of fanaticism.

In Europe there is no Voltaire anymore who would dare to give one of his
works the title *"Mahomet ou le fanatisme*" (*"Mohammed or fanaticism"*,
a play criticizing religious fanaticism, showing Mohammed murdering one
of his critics). Even the Rushdie affair has not sent European
intellectuals searching Islamic Scripture and informing the public that
Mohammed himself had ordered the murder of poets who had criticized him,
thus setting the example for Khomeini's *"death sentence"* on Rushdie.
There is no Schopenhauer anymore who dares to speak openly of the
contrast between the humane philosophies of South and East Asia and the
barbaric fanaticism taught and practised by Mohammed.

European intelectuals observe a taboo on criticism of Islam. I am sure
this is only temporary, but at least it is definitely the case today.
This criticism of Islam, making use of all the methodological process
which the science of history has made in the West, must now apparently
be done in India. A powerful lead in this endeavour has been given by
Sitaram Goel.

After debunking the pious claims which Islamic apologists, Indian
*"secularists"* and Western *"multiculturalists"* (who do not realize
that Islam has systematically destroyed pluralist cultures and is the
very antithesis of multicultural co-existence) are making for Islam,
intellectuals should prepare for the next important task: helping the
Muslim masses on their way into a humanist world culture, i.e. out of
the mental and social shackles of Islam. We have to educate the Muslim
masses on their way into a humanist world culture, i.e. out of the
mental and social shackles of Islam. We have to educate the Muslim
masses, and frankly make them aware of the choice they have: staying in
or opting out of a religion of backwardness and fanaticism. We should
not have the field of information about Islam to the obscurantist
mullahs and the negationist history-falsifiers. This is more than a
propaganda task, because it involves understanding the universal values
which common Muslims identify with Islam, and preserving them while
eliminating the distinctive exclusivism and fanaticism of Islam.

Islam is not an inborn quality of a community of people, which has to be
accepted as an unchangeable element which we have to learn to live with.
The Muslims are just human beings, descendants of people who were mostly
converted to Islam under pressure (ranging from material incentives to a
*choice* at swordpoint), and there is no reason to believe that they are
immune to the influence of rational thought and humanist culture. But
straightforward criticism of Islam is likely to infuriate the Islamic
clerics and many common Muslims. A lot of intelligence will be needed to
dissolve the mental grip of Islam in a gentle way.

The easy part is to be honest with ourselves, and stop these attempts to
paint Islam in rosy colours. It is the duty of all those who come in
contact with negationism, to expose this intellectual crime. We need not
pin people down on the appalling record of the religion they were born
into, and we may forgive everything, but wrongdoings can only be
forgiven once they are recognized as such. Therefore, there is no virtue
in concealing and denying the crimes against humanity which Islam has
committed systematically in India and elsewhere. For social harmony, it
is far better to face the truth.

Of course, ultimately it is for the Muslims themselves to see the
shortcomings of their religion, and revise it suitably so that it
permits them to live at peace with non- Muslims. No critique of Islam
from the outside can be a substituite for a critique from within the
Muslim fold. But so long as Muslims are held down by despotic
theocracies or frightened by fierce fundamentalism, and cannot speak
freely, people from the outside have to speak freely, people from the
outside have to speak for them. The history of how Christian theocracy
and Communist totalitarianism got shaken in the long run, shows the way.
In both cases, it was a critique from the outside which proved a
powerful catalytic agent. Voices of reason and humanism have a way of
penetrating the thickest theological walls and the strongest iron
curtains.

In this context, Hindus are in a unique position. They have been victims
of Islamic imperialism and intolerance for more than thirteen centuries.
They know it in their bones what Islam has done to their ancient
homeland, their society, their culture, and what it has so far stood
for. They have only to stop complaining about the Muslim behaviour
pattern, and trace that pattern to its source in the Islamic scripture:
then they will acquire an initiative which they have never had in their
long encounter with Islam. Once they educate themselves about the true
character of Islam, they will be in a position to educate their Muslim
countrymen, on most of whom Islam sits rather lightly. It need not be a
compaign for Shuddhi, it has to be only a battle for liberating Muslims
from the stranglehold of a closed creed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
