+++
title = "02 CHILDBIRTH, CHRISTENING, WIFE BEATING"

+++




*This chapter begins with the grim subject of infant death. It was an everyday occurrence in Russian villages at the time Semyonova was writing. Nearly half of Russian babies failed to survive to age five, an infant mortality rate among the highest ever recorded anywhere. Most of these deaths were caused by diarrhea and respiratory illnesses, but the lying-over deaths that Semyonova reports here also made an important contribution. These were deaths caused by mothers who, presumably in their sleep, rolled over on and smothered the babies they had placed in bed with them during the night for convenience in breastfeeding. In Europe generally at the time of rising fertility in the eighteenth century, these lying-over deaths became epidemic, so much so that it is difficult to believe that they were wholly accidental. Although Semyonova seems to say here that the deaths were accidental, at another point in her notes she asserts that some babies were purposely killed in this way \(see below, p.* 98*\). At this time, Russian villages were experiencing very high fertility, and youthful clumsiness alone seems an inadequate explanation of why more than half the mothers were lying over their infants*.1 *More likely, the women were asserting control, with the limited means at their command, over a chaotic and dangerous population growth. We will see other examples of their efforts at control later*.

*The third and fourth paragraphs of the chapter contain a description \(found among Semyonova’s notes\) of an actual couple, Vasilii and Akulina, on whom the composite picture that follows of “Ivan’s” parents, Stepan and Akulina, is based. \(I use the name “Stepan” throughout, however.\)*2 *It is interesting to see how closely the composite fit the real case, and also to observe the more natural feeling Semyonova has for the actual Akulina. Farther on, I include another paragraph from Semyonova’s field notes about the calling of the midwife, again to show its role in the building of the composite picture. In both representations, emphasis on the intervention of the birthing mother’s natal family at a time of personal crisis underlines the continuing deep affective bonds among these women, in contrast to the practical, and sometimes exploitative, relationship of the husband’s family to the young wife*.





Young people at the time of marriage frequently are not fully mature in their physical development. There is a saying that “the young start developing from the time of the wedding,” i.e., they are still maturing after their wedding. As a consequence, the first two to three children are born weak and usually do not survive. Sometimes this is also a result of the total lack of experience on the part of the young mother in caring for a baby. Moreover, young mothers very often smother their children accidentally in their sleep. The mother sometimes places her infant between herself and her husband to give the baby her breast, goes to sleep, rolls over on the baby, and smothers it. A good half of the women have overlain at least one child in this way—they do it most often in their young years when they sleep soundly. For overlying a child, the priest imposes a penance.

When Akulina married Stepan and joined his family, Stepan’s parents were still fairly young, the father forty and the mother forty-two years of age. Stepan also had a brother who was around sixteen, a thirteen-year-old sister, and another brother two years old.

\[Here begins the description of the actual couple.\]

At first, Stepan and Akulina were rather shy toward one another. Stepan’s mother bossed Akulina around. The first child, a weak, emaciated girl, was born a year and a half after the wedding. The young mother did not know how to care for her, and the baby girl died after a few weeks. After her death, Akulina was still in the process of growing up and filling out. Soon she became fairly rosy-cheeked and plump. A year after the death of her first child, she gave birth to a second, and two years after that a third one arrived. Both were boys. The second one died from diarrhea by the time his mother became pregnant again, this time with a third son \(Ivan\). This third son was born right in the middle of the summer field-work season.

The family of Stepan and Akulina looked forward to the first child. Stepan’s father even joked that “my daughter-in-law is going to provide me with a grandson.” But when a girl was born, the grandparents stopped thinking about her as soon as she was baptized. They did not even express any sorrow about her death. The young father, too, did not feel much regret over it. When the second child was expected, no one said anything about it. But they all were happy when they saw that a boy was born. In contrast, when the second boy came along, the father paid almost no attention to it, and when the third child \(Ivan\) was expected, even Akulina herself was distressed. “There’s just going to be too many kids,” she complained. She lost weight, because at the time she was still nursing her second son. Dark spots appeared on her face, and she aged so rapidly that no one would have guessed that she was only twenty-two years old. It was with a feeling of relief that she buried her second son, who died of diarrhea at the time of the St. Peter’s fast in June.3

\[The composite picture resumes.\]

\[The attitudes of parents toward the birth of children vary according to sex and birth order.\] The first child is awaited with a certain degree of excitement. Sometimes the husband will tease his wife: “You just might bring *me* a son, mother.” She might reply: “Whomever God wills, I might even have the good sense to bear a daughter for myself.” \(A daughter is a help to her mother, a nursemaid to the children.\) The husband’s mother announces to the neighbors with satisfaction that “our young one is certainly putting on weight.” They all discuss whom to ask to be godparents. The father, naturally, expects a son. There is even a saying: “A son is for the father, a daughter for the mother.” A mother is not much concerned about the sex of her first child. A father will, however, behave with complete indifference toward a daughter, as well as toward a second and third son. Mothers usually begin to feel burdened by the third child. A father may express his satisfaction with the birth of his first son, reporting to his neighbors: “My Aniutka after all brought me a son.” Or when inviting someone to be godfather: “My wife did not let me down; she delivered a son.” Yet in the family they say \[more crudely\]: “Our gal dropped a boy.”4 A mother, when cuddling and kissing the child, may be told by those present to “rejoice in your first-born\!” A mother commonly uses pet words in addressing her child, such as “my little sonny \(or girlie\), my beauty, my golden darling, my berry, my dear little baby.”

If the first child is a girl, the feeling in the family is mostly one of disappointment. One of the women might remark: “Oh well, at least she can be a nursemaid.” By the following day, no one gives a thought to the baby girl. The friends and acquaintances of a man whose first-born is a girl, and in general the other men in the village, have the right to beat the young father when he appears at work. “Why did you have a daughter?” they say. They often thrash him soundly, and he has to keep quiet about it, for this is a well-established custom.

If a woman happens to give birth often, members of the family naturally respond disapprovingly. They do not hesitate to make crude remarks in this regard: “Ugh, you fertile thing, you surround yourself with children like a rabbit. Better that your puppies died off. Here you are with a litter every year; look here, the bitch has a litter again,” and the like. These remarks often come from a woman’s mother-in-law.5

During pregnancy, a woman continues to be responsible for all her usual chores, both in the household and in the field—including binding the sheaves, weeding, threshing, gathering in the hemp, planting and digging potatoes—right up to the onset of labor. Women frequently give birth while performing a domestic chore, such as kneading bread, or even when they are at work in the field; others do so riding in a bumpy wagon as they are hurrying home after being prompted by the first pangs of the approaching birth. Some women, when they feel labor pains, run toward home “like a newborn lamb,” as it is said. When the pains increase, they lie down on the ground, and then they run again when the pains subside, yelling at the top of their lungs, “like a helpless trembling lamb.”

At the onset of labor pains, the midwife sometimes tries to drag the laboring mother into the stove and steam her there in order to speed up the childbirth.6 It is the job of the mother-in-law to fetch the midwife. She tries to haggle a bit with the midwife about the usual fee. The customary payment for the delivery of a baby, or “receiving,” as the peasants say, would be a loaf of rye bread, plus another bread made of sifted flour and called “pirog,” a cotton shawl worth twenty kopecks, and ten kopecks in cash. If the midwife living nearby does not want to agree to such an unprofitable arrangement, the mother-in-law will go to another village or to the far end of her own village to summon another midwife, a woman from her own kin who charges a smaller fee. Frequently, at this time, the young, inexperienced mother is left in pain completely unattended. It is a good thing for her if her mother or sister lives in the vicinity. They can step in and will not begrudge the midwife her usual fee in kind. And so the midwife appears. When summoning the midwife, women usually avoid direct reference to the birth, so that no one except the midwife will know that the labor pains have begun. This secrecy is believed to make things easier for the laboring mother. So they say something like: “What’s this, old woman, you promised to look at my cow and you aren’t coming?”7

\[Here begins the description of the real Akulina.\]

On the eve of the birth of Akulina’s third son, Ivan, Akulina had been weeding a field of millet. After returning to the field the following morning, she felt the initial labor pains. At first she thought that the work had given her a severe backache. Her mother-in-law went to get a village midwife \(*babka*\). The women she approached were reluctant to come, however, because the stinginess of Akulina’s mother-in-law was well known. They haggled over the price. The mother-in-law wanted to pay them only “a pie,” which meant wheat bread made from sifted flour. \(A midwife is normally offered one loaf of rye bread, one loaf of wheat bread, a cotton kerchief, and ten kopecks.\) The women did not agree, and Akulina’s mother-in-law said she would go to another village instead. During this time, Akulina lay without any assistance. Finally, Akulina’s own mother intervened and promised to give a midwife wheat bread. The midwife arrived at the home not long before Akulina gave birth.

\[The composite picture resumes.\]

\[At the home of the birthing mother,\] the midwife prays for a timely birth. She fills her mouth with water and then empties it onto her hands, which she soaps if there is soap in the house. She inspects or, as they say, “witnesses” the laboring mother. If the birth is progressing slowly, the mother is led around the table three times. Or the midwife calls in the husband and makes him pass three times between the legs of the standing woman. If this does not help, and especially if the labor drags on more than twenty-four hours, they hold a mass in the church and open the Tsar’s gates in the iconostasis.8 To speed up the birth, the woman grasps a rafter in the hut \(which is called “hanging by the beam”\). If the rafters are too high up, then two woven bands are attached to them, and the birthing mother holds on to these. By the time of the delivery, the bands have stretched out far enough to allow the woman to kneel on the floor. Sometimes she has to hang so long from the beams that her arms hurt for two weeks after the birth. But it also happens that the baby is born just as the mother is being hung from the beams.

When the baby is not coming out “the right way,” i.e., it is coming out feet first or crooked, the midwife drops the mother down a makeshift slide. One end of a wide board is placed against the wall and fastened down at an angle. With the help of the husband, the midwife places the woman on her back, head down, near the top of the board. Then the husband and the midwife let go of her, and she slides quickly headfirst while the husband and the midwife see to it that she does not fall sideways. This rapid motion and some additional shaking are thought to straighten out the child, so that on the second try it can come out properly, i.e., headfirst. When the child is born, the midwife ties off its umbilical cord with flax or thread. If the placenta does not come out for a long time, the mother’s braids are shoved into her mouth \(if the braids are too short, fingers are used\) so that she will choke and thus supposedly facilitate the rapid expulsion of the placenta.9 When the placenta is out, the midwife bathes the newborn and washes the mother. Occasionally she will use this opportunity to “straighten out” the head of the newborn, working it with her hands to give it a rounded shape. If the nose seems too flat, it, too, will be corrected.

If the baby is born barely alive, the practice is to blow three times on the top of its head, between its shoulder blades, and on the soles of its feet. Other steps include slapping the baby on its rear end and administering artificial respiration as if to a drowned man.

In rich families, the midwife sometimes stays on for three or four days after the birth, eating at their table. The baby of poor peasants, however, is left entirely to its mother’s care from the first day.

Mothers who are concerned about neatness put straw into the cradle and change it every day or two. More often, though, the baby is placed into a dirty cradle lined with its mother’s soiled old skirt: “He can just as well lie on the skirt, no better than anybody else. Others didn’t seem to die; they survived.” When the mother does not have enough milk or when the child is left alone, it is given a rag pacifier \[known as a *soska*\]. The mother, sister, or grandmother chews on potatoes, rye bread, or bagels, spits them out into a thin rag, ties it up with a thread, and the *soska* is ready. Sometimes the same rag pacifier is used over and over again without washing and acquires a repulsive, sour odor.



Young mother holds her newborn swaddled in the Russian manner. Sapozhok district of Riazan province. Courtesy of the Riazan Museum.

By the third or fourth day after delivery, mothers get up and return to their household chores, sometimes even to the hard work, such as kneading dough and putting it into the oven. Occasionally, even on the day after the birth the new mother must light the stove herself. In such conditions, it takes a long time for the woman to recover, and the child is consequently neglected; it is left alone in a dirty cradle wearing a soaking-wet diaper, crying its heart out in hunger pains, and its navel swells and hurts \(which the women refer to as “hernia”\). The new mother naturally gets along the whole time on ordinary peasant food. Sometimes she expresses a desire to eat fresh cucumbers or apples, and the family may occasionally satisfy this whim. It should be noted that on such occasions the neighbors may turn out to be quite helpful and share with the mother some of their cucumbers or apples if she does not have a supply of her own. There was one case in which a mother in the village of Muraevnia \(about a mile from the estate where this writer lived\) died after eating too many of the cucumbers brought over by a neighbor on the second day after the birth.

A baby is usually baptized on the second or, less often, the third day after it is born. The names most often given are, for males, Ivan, Vasilii, Mikhail, and Aleksei, and for females, Maria, Anna, Avdotia, Akulina, and Tatiana. For the most part, the priest gives names at his own discretion. The priest is, however, more apt to ask a wealthy family than a poor one what name they want for their child. For a baptism the priest receives fifty kopecks, plus some rye bread. The rye bread comes from the mother, and the money is given by the godfather. The godmother gives the mother the cloth in which the child is wrapped after being dipped in the baptismal font, as well as about 1.5 yards of inexpensive cotton print and a blouse for the baby.

The christening ceremony, which usually occurs after a mass, is customarily followed by a “christening dinner” for the godparents. People like to go to the christening of a child from a rich family but are less interested in attending a christening in a poor family, because “the refreshments are meager.” At the christening dinner, the parents serve vodka \(the amount varies in accordance with their means\), cucumbers with kvass, kasha, and a “pirog.” In addition to these things, a rich family may offer cabbage soup, noodles, pancakes, and even chicken. At the dinner, the new father is served oversalted kasha and told: “This kasha will be as salty for you as it was salty for the mother to bring you a son \(or daughter\).”10

The christening normally takes place about eleven o’clock in the morning or twelve noon. After the ceremony, the parents \[or grandparents\] of the newborn invite the godparents to their house for the christening dinner, as well as the parents of the new mother, her sisters, and sometimes her brother. Vodka is served immediately. The average peasant provides, depending on the harvest, from one bottle up to five pints \[a *chetvert’*\] of vodka and even more, if he is the type that does not pass up an occasion to get drunk and, at the same time, happens to have extra money to spend on liquor. The hosts offer drinks first to the godparents, and only after that to the rest of the guests. When offering drinks, the hosts say, “Here’s to the godchild\!” The godparents reply, “Here’s to the grandchild\!” if the hosts are the grandparents of the baby, and “Here’s to the son\!” if the hosts are the parents of the newborn. Good wishes \[in reference to the child’s future\] are not expressed.11 Only the midwife, who stays with the hosts because her duties include helping with the christening dinner and picking up afterwards, may say to the godparents when she is serving the kasha: “Scoop up some kasha with your spoons and \[come up with something\] for your godchild.” Guests place copper money and small silver coins on a plate as gifts for the new mother. Normally, only the godparents give money, though sometimes the maternal grandfather, in a fit of generosity, will also place a coin on the plate.

The midwife, while she is serving bread and cake, also places her saucer on the table; the guests fill it with a few two-kopeck silver pieces, and on rare occasions someone will drop in a five-kopeck piece. The guests stay at the table for two or three hours talking about their affairs, the harvesting, the crops, and the sowing, or they gossip about the neighbors. When the vodka is plentiful, everyone gets drunk. But songs are not sung, as this is not appropriate at a christening dinner. The new mother is also in attendance, but, because the christening usually takes place the day after the delivery, she stays removed from the crowd, resting on a bench in the back of the room. The newborn wails. The guests joke around. When the baby makes too much noise, they say \[to the mother\]: “Hey, you little cow, where did you hide your teats?” The sisters of the new mother sometimes leave the table and go over to the mother to redo the baby’s swaddling clothes. When the guests leave, the father of the newborn, the grandparents, and the midwife show them to the door, bowing all the while.

When the midwife, having completed her responsibilities, leaves the house, the family gives her “a send-off.” The new mother brings her a wash basin filled with water and with hops soaking in it. First the midwife washes her hands, and then the new mother washes hers and while doing so drops into the water ten kopecks as payment for the midwife. This ablution is performed “so as to alleviate the condition of the new mother.” The ritual is also known as “silverplating the midwife.” After this, the midwife is treated to vodka, receives the amount of bread and cake that is due her, and takes her leave.

The midwife’s assistance is sometimes sought in treating a sick baby. Most often she is called on to treat “hernia”12 and recurrent crying. For the treatment of hernia, the midwife mixes horse dung, strained through a cloth, with mother’s milk and administers this potion to the infant. Crying is the result of the “evil eye,” and the midwife exorcises it in three sessions—two at dusk, and one at dawn. For this she goes out into a field with the baby, faces the sun, and bowing to it says: “God bless us. The sunset, summer lightning, fair maid, evening, morning, day, night, midday, midnight, hour, minute\! Take the crying from Ivan and give him sleep and health. Amen.” The incantation is repeated three times. In return for this ceremony or for the treatment, the midwife receives payment in bread or grain. Diarrhea in children is treated with sacramental wine bought at the church for five kopecks and given to the sick child in drops.

Formerly, in the period of serfdom, mothers returned to the field three days after they gave birth, but the interval is now usually five to seven days. When the mother returns to field work, she either takes the child with her, or, if the field is not far from the house and she can run back to feed the baby, she leaves it with her older daughter or with an old woman. If the mother takes the baby into the field, she either places it, wrapped in rags, on a boundary strip, where a brother or sister five to seven years old will watch it, or, if she brings the cradle in the wagon, she places the baby in the cradle attached to the raised shaft of the wagon. Up to the age of one year, children are given something to chew on: the mother, the grandmother, or a sister chews a potato or a piece of bread and then transfers this “cud” with her fingers to the mouth of the child.

More often than not, the hard work that follows childbirth results in some degree of prolapse of the uterus. Sometimes such a fallen uterus can be very severe, but mild cases, in the opinion of the midwife, are nothing to be concerned about. Prolapsed uterus is not exceptional even among very young women, who experience it as a result of excessive work. The condition is treated with “kinderbalsam,” known as “lifting drops.” The midwife repairs the stomach by applying a clay pot to it. She places the woman on her back, rubs grease all over her stomach, and flips a pot over on it while quickly lighting a piece of yarn under the pot. This \[vacuum\] causes the stomach to be drawn into the pot. The smaller the pot, the better. The uterus is believed to be restored to its proper position, and the pain stopped, as a result of this treatment \(called “applying the pot,” or “fixing the stomach”\). Payment for this operation is again made in bread, a little flour, or groats. Another method is for the midwife to “steam” the new mother’s abdomen by waving hot birch twigs just above it, and then to use her hands to push up on it several times so as to force the uterus into place.



Women gathering straw for storage in the large barn \(*gumno*\) at the rear. Photo by P. N. Semyonov from *Rossiia. Polnoe geograficheskoe opisanie*, vol. 2, p. 216.

The midwife employs still another method to “fix the stomach”: she soaps her hands, forces the uterus into place, then pushes a peeled potato into the vagina and binds the lower abdomen tightly with a kerchief. A woman might go for a whole month to the midwife and have the operation repeated until she gets relief. Another manner of treating a prolapsed uterus is also in use. The midwife, with the help of the woman’s husband, places the patient’s head down and shakes her by the legs several times so as to “lift the stomach.” After this the abdomen is bound. According to the midwives, all women experience this type of “stomach problem” at one time or another. One midwife claimed that some women develop extremely severe forms of fallen uterus because of their husbands’ excessive drinking. “The fellow, when drunk, may lie on top of his wife all night long and not let her out from under him. The poor thing, she hurts and wants to cry from pain, but if she does, he will just beat her black and blue. She has no choice but to obey him, although after lying under a heavy, drunken man, her uterus is so badly displaced that she can neither stand nor sit.” Many women told me that they suffered in this way, and despite this they are able to get pregnant and bear children.

\[The last observations raise the question of violence of Russian men against their women.\] As to the character and frequency of wife beating, it can be said that Stepan rarely beat Akulina when he was sober. But when he was drunk, he did so often and with whatever he could find. Observers note that drunks usually beat their wives when the women reproach them. A wife might, for example, accuse her drunken husband of “nuzzling the bottle again” or remark that “the stray dog has gorged himself again.” The men will beat their wives out of jealousy. They beat them with sticks, oven prongs, boots, buckets, and whatever else is handy—or just slug or kick them. They drag them by their braids down the front steps so that their heads make a thumpity-thump noise. Not only the wife is beaten, but sometimes even the old father. In one village, a young fellow killed his father with a wagon shaft, beating him so hard that the father died from the blows. In the village of Muraevnia, there was a case of a drunken husband who killed his wife for infidelity. He rolled her braids around his hand and beat her head on the front steps, on the benches, and on the wall until she lapsed into a coma. She died a day later, never having regained consciousness.

If when beating his wife a husband breaks or damages one of the objects with which he has been meting out the punishment, he naturally is much more sorry about the loss of this tool than he is about his battered wife. The woman, too, grieves more over a broken oven fork than over her swollen side.

A young husband who finds out that his bride has not been chaste sometimes beats her cruelly on his wedding night, and this may serve as only a prelude to beatings that stretch out over the course of several months. The peasants consider it a man’s duty to beat his wife if she, as they say, “brings home” another man’s baby in the absence of her husband, something that occurs most often in the case of soldiers’ wives.13 If the husband is weak or sickly, unfit for work, then he usually catches it from the stronger party, his wife, who also reproaches him with words such as, “You good-for-nothing deadhead, I have to pull your weight.”

A drunken husband sometimes beats his wife when she refuses to carry out some order of his, for example, to pull off his boots or put him to bed. She also catches it if she refuses to sleep with him. In a word, she is punished for any failure to fulfill her husband’s wishes. I knew one peasant man who, when he was drunk, loved to abuse his wife in the following way: “Down, woman\! On your knees\! Put your head on the threshold. I am finally going to have my way and kill you\!” The woman had to put her head down on the threshold without complaining, while he brandished an ax above her. This usually set the little children to crying and screaming. Then he would say: “If it were not for the children, you’d be dead by now,” and he would let her go. If she did not obey him, he beat her cruelly, sometimes with a flail about the head. This is called “to wise up a wife” or “to heap scorn on a wife.”

Another husband, when he was drunk, would get a few girls intoxicated and force them to sing a dance tune outside the window of his hut, while inside he forced his wife, under threat of a beating, to dance with him.





1. Sweden had particularly high rates of over-lying in the eighteenth century, and the priests there seemed to realize that women were limiting the population in this way—even if the rather obtuse historian of the practice refused to accept the priests’ insight. A. Thompson, *Barnkvävningen* \(Uppsala, 1960\).

2. At another point in her notes, Semyonova refers to Ivan’s parents as Stepan and Lukeria \(see pages 119-20 of the published research program in *Zapiski RGO*\). It is not clear which of these four names, if any, belonged to the couple on which the composite picture was built.

3. These two paragraphs can be found on p. 135 of the published text.

4. The verb used here, *rasprastalas’*, refers to births by animals.

5. Again, we see Semyonova’s representation of the mother-in-law as having less an affective bond than a controlling and disciplining relationship with the daughters-in-law residing in her home and over whom she exercises authority. This is such a cliché in accounts of peasant life that one wonders if Semyonova is drawing as much on the stereotype as on her own observations, but it is true that the female labor hierarchy of the household was similar to that of an artisan shop, in which the mother-in-law acted as the master and the younger women as workers and apprentices.

6. Yes, *into* the stove. The large Russian stove, which takes up from a quarter to a third of the main room of the house, often has a deep side opening large enough to accommodate a human body.

7. When I was doing ethnographic field work in 1990, interviewing peasant women in Leningrad, Novgorod, and Moscow provinces, I found this belief still very much alive among women of central Russian villages who gave birth in the 1930s and 1940s.

8. The iconostasis or icon wall is a principal element in the architecture of Eastern Orthodox churches, a high wall or screen in front of the altar on which are mounted tiers of icons in a specific hierarchy. In the center of the iconostasis is a double door leading to the altar known variously as the “Tsar’s gates,” the “holy gates,” or the “majestic gates.”

9. According to a doctor in rural practice, women usually gave birth with their hair undone, an observation that fits with the notion Russian villagers had that doors, gates, trunk tops, and the like should be opened in order to ease and speed the birth process. K. I. Shidlovskii, “K kharakteristike russkoi narodnoi meditsiny,” *Meditsinskii vestnik*, no. 3 \(1884\), 39.

10. This custom, known to anthropologists as “couvade,” binds the father to the birth process and the child by causing him to sense some of its unpleasantness.

11. Semyonova does not explain this laconic remark, perhaps because the reasons were obvious at the time. The great uncertainty of the survival of small children constrained projections about their future. And in the thinking of villagers, to anticipate a child’s survival was likely to hasten its end.

12. A rupture of the umbilicus.

13. Peasant men who were unlucky enough to be drafted into the military had to serve for many years, leaving behind their wives and families. These husbandless women, fairly or unfairly, acquired as a group the reputation of “loose women.” We will read more about them later in this study. For additional information, see Elise Kimerling, “Soldiers’ Children, 1719–1856: A Study of Social Engineering in Imperial Russia,” *Forschungen zur osteuropäischen Geschichte*, vol. 30 \(Berlin, 1982\), 74








