+++
title = "05 IVAN PREPARES FOR MARRIAGE"

+++





*Another realm in which women played a central role was the arrangement of marriages. In theory, the timing of marriage, the choice of partners, and the content of the ceremony and accompanying celebrations were almost entirely in the hands of women. This amounted to power over the establishment of kinship bonds, an altogether critical function in peasant society, one on which the survival of the family could ultimately depend. Semyonova states this view of things at the start of this chapter, but the stories she tells later show young men proposing to women; the role of the women of the young man’s household is not presented. At the end of the chapter, I have inserted unpublished descriptions of four actual marriages taken from Semyonova’s field notes. While women clearly played a directing role in the last two cases, their influence in the first two instances is less obviously determining*.

*Semyonova dwells on the age of marriage partners and suggests that Russian ideas about the appropriate age difference between them may reflect a mechanism of natural selection. These comments should be seen in the context of the powerful influence of Darwinian thought at the time Semyonova was growing up and writing. Scholars now understand such behavior as a product of an interaction of economy and culture. In this connection, it is interesting to note that Russian practices shared one key element with the rather unusual patterns of northwestern Europe \(where people tended to marry late, the age gaps between bride and groom were small, and many people never married\) and had other elements in common with the customs of southern Europe and much of Asia \(where people married early, grooms were significantly older than brides, and nearly everyone married\). In peasant Russia, marriage occurred early and was virtually universal, but as in western Europe, Russian couples were very close in age; often the bride was older than her groom*.





When the time comes for the young man Ivan to consider marrying, discussion of the matter in the family amounts to calculating the possible benefits. A man must get married if he is to become a genuine *muzhik*, which is to say a fully responsible adult male or *zhitel’* \(literally, resident\). The groom’s parents see his future wife as labor power that they are eager to obtain.

It is usually the women, not the men, who first broach the subject of marriage. The men’s role is merely to assent to what the women agree on. A married daughter might say to her mother: “It’s time, Mother, that you got someone to relieve you in the house,” or “at the hearth.” “So it is,” replies the mother, “but Grishka is involved with Dunka Vinokurova, that good-for-nothing, and her father would be happy to coax Grishka into being his son-in-law before we know it. I am afraid even to mention the subject to Grishka. He has eyes for no one but Dunka.” A “good-for-nothing” is a young woman who spins poorly, weaves badly, and is no good at field work. Some young women are “bad-tempered” and “stubborn,” others are “cunning,” and a third type is “promiscuous,” “tarts.” Still others are “sickly.” “She’s a good girl but is sick all the time. She never has any color in her face. And her eyes are always watery.”

A young woman should be “intelligent, healthy, handy, reserved, and ready to do any kind of work.” It happens, however, that fifteen to twenty-five rubles1 given by the woman’s father will make up for the lack of health, intelligence, or good behavior. The parents of the groom fall for this “compensation” all too readily. The grooms themselves never get to see this type of cash dowry. One man was indignant about the wife of his brother. “We married him off, all right, but his wife is worthless—she can’t spin or sew. You know as well as I do why our brother married: for a shirt and a pair of pants.”

The notion of beauty is very elementary. Local women are certainly pretty, tall and, at the age of fifteen or sixteen, well formed, even though after that age their figures become misshapen from hard work. The earlier a woman marries, the sooner she takes on a withered and emaciated appearance. The most common type here are dark-complexioned women with proportional features, dark gray eyes, which are strikingly beautiful in some cases, dark eyebrows, and dark hair; there are virtually no true blonds. More often you find brunettes with dark eyes.

What we would regard as the most beautiful women are not considered as such by the peasants. In the choice of a bride or a girlfriend, peasant taste does not correspond to ours. We prefer straight, clean lines and features, while a peasant is all for a plump, heavy-set girl or woman. Pallid faces are very unpopular, as is a “solemn” expression: the peasants regard these as signs of sullenness, unsociability, or stupidity. A woman’s face should be open and cheerful. Black eyebrows will win many a heart. A man should have curly hair and, again, black eyebrows. Height is an important asset for both sexes. “Full-bodied girl, robust, black brows, rosy-cheeked, radiant eyes”—all these are compliments for a woman. Red-haired people are disliked, probably because of some \[magical\] characteristics ascribed to them in past times, traits that would have had purportedly harmful effects on one’s household. My inquiries have led me to the conclusion that redheads are still regarded secretly as perfidious and evil.



Peasant women from Riazan province, selected for appearance and dress typical of the region. Photo by I. P. Semyonov from *Rossiia. Polnoe geograficheskoe opisanie*, vol. 2, p. 188.

Incidentally, the choice of a mate is frequently more a matter of circumstance \(*sluchainost’*\) than of taste, for which there sometimes is no allowance at all; some of the men are remarkably undemanding in this regard. Men who have lived in town are no more demanding than those who stay at home. Frequently the opposite is the case. To say that all peasants are undiscriminating would not be true, yet really choosy young men are quite rare. A “good-looking eligible woman” \(“good-looking” according to primitive peasant tastes, of course\) has more suitors than a plain one, but a man who gets turned down by a beautiful woman is not at all embarrassed to marry the most homely one. As for the groom’s parents, they are solely concerned about the bride’s ability and willingness to work, although in recent years the cash dowry has taken on increasing importance in the choice the in-laws must make.

The peasants believe that it is best for a couple to be of the same age. Young women are very reluctant to marry men a few years older than they are. Why this is, God only knows. It could have to do with fears of the men being closer to death, for brides who are four or five years younger than their grooms have complained that “he is going to die before I do.” Probably this is just one cause. The attitude may also go back to some ancient tradition which prescribes that spouses be of the same age. It could be that in the distant past, a form of natural selection was involved. In any event, to this day brides in our area are mortally offended by the prospect of having to marry a man six or eight years older. They weep and wail when forced by their parents to marry a man so much older, and their girlfriends make fun of them for having to do so. Yet men of eighteen to twenty have no misgivings about marrying women two or even four years older than they. I can recall two weddings last fall \(the only two weddings that took place in our township, as it happened\) when eighteen- and twenty-year-old men married women of twenty and twenty-six respectively. In fact, wives are often older than their husbands. This year eight weddings took place in our village of twenty-five to thirty households; in one of these the groom was eighteen years old and the bride twenty-four, in another the groom was twenty and the bride twenty-five. Wives in four other couples I know in the same village are from two to seven years older than their husbands. As for the age gap in older couples, it is simply lost in the sands of time. These notions \[about the age of brides\] belong to young men and women who have not lived in town; young “Ivans” who have been drawn into the orbit of town life and manners may view these age gaps differently.2

In relations between young people, the earlier peasant notion that a gift has to be reciprocated has not been completely abandoned, and the whole business is not yet reduced to a question of money, as in the case of payments for sex. Some semblance of love remains. A girl will sew a shirt for the boy she loves if he asks her to; a boy will be pleased to see his girlfriend wearing a kerchief or a ring that he has given her. In general, a boy expresses his love for a girl in gifts, kind words, and kisses. But once a woman becomes a wife, even right after the wedding, her husband treats her as his personal property and sees no reason to caress her and kiss her, let alone give her a gift. It is good enough if a young husband refrains from beating his wife or allowing his family at the very beginning to pile too much work on her.

The manner in which a young man makes a marriage proposal varies according to the circumstances. After a series of meetings at country dances, parties, and games, when a young man finally gets to be alone with the young woman he likes, he asks: “Will you marry me?” More often than not the girl first exclaims: “Where on earth did you get such an idea\!” giggling and covering her face with a kerchief or turning away from the boy. She may inform her wooer that arrangements are under way to marry her to someone else, or she could make some other excuse or delaying tactic.

“Don’t beat around the bush,” her sweetheart presses her. “Tell me straight: will you marry me or not? If so, I will send a matchmaker for you.”

Eventually, if she likes the fellow, the girl will reply very softly: “I will.”

“That’s the way\! I do like you, Annushka, and to you alone will I propose, to no one but you.” This may be followed by a kiss, which Annushka will surely try to avoid. This exchange takes place in a corner of the yard, behind a barn, or in the hayricks. Before they depart, the couple agree on the time the boy will send a matchmaker for his betrothed.

If the two are already having relations, the procedure is slightly different. After a sexual encounter somewhere under a haystack or in the ricks, the boy will say: “Well, Matryona, I guess I will officially propose to you. I think my family will be happy to have you. You’re a fine gal, all right\!”

Matryona will reply: “It surely would be nice to go to the altar. And it would be a sin not to. I didn’t spare myself for you, although it’s not easy. You talked me into this by promising to marry me…. Now if I get pregnant, what am I going to do? I might as well tie a stone around my neck and throw myself into the river\!” By now, her eyes will be brimming with tears.

The boy: “Now, now, don’t cry. Do you think I am rejecting you? I am going to talk with my father and mother and then send the matchmaker for you.”

Matryona: “Well, Vania, I am looking forward to it.”

\[What Semyonova calls “coaxing” or a kind of sexual bargaining is another aspect of the courting relationship, which is illustrated by this next report.\]

In a recess under a hayloft, a couple is seated. The boy attempts to embrace the girl.

Matryona: “Stop it\! Don’t touch me; leave me alone or I’ll scream\!”

Ivan: “Silly, I won’t hurt you …,” and in agitation he takes hold of the girl’s dress. “Matryonushka, let’s have fun, honey, I beg you\! \(Ever more agitated\) Just wait and see what a shawl I am going to buy you\! And I’ll propose to you, too. I’m not fit to live if I don’t marry you\!”

Matryona, making an attempt to recover her hem, almost cries: “Look here, now, let me go, stop it, don’t sin\!”

Ivan: “How can it be a sin if we are going to be married?” Eventually he manages to embrace the girl.

Matryona, resignedly: “This is scary\!”

\[Here follow descriptions of actual marriages.\]3

This fall we had four weddings in the village. A twenty-six-year-old woman by the name of Zinaida was married off to a twenty-two-year-old fellow in a neighboring village.4 Zinaida’s family is not wealthy. She has an aging father, sixty-four years old, a mother, and a sister seventeen years of age. Their farming operation is middling; the livestock consist of one horse, a pig, a piglet, and three sheep. The father is still strong and without great effort manages to farm his land allotment of about seven acres. Zinaida herself has long been known in these parts as a splendid worker. “She can do the work of three men,” the people say. She is quite a handsome woman, tall, plump, with reddish hair, gray eyes, the kind of pug nose that is favored here, and a large mouth. In the winter she turns very pale, but in the summer her face is covered with freckles. You could say that she remained unmarried to good account, “building up her strength.” Zinaida also has a good personality; she is cheerful, works without complaining, and is not a mischief-maker—“she has no duplicity about her whatever.” Some rumors went around about her having had relations with one young fellow, and as a result of that and the fact that her father valued her as a worker, she remained unmarried until age twenty-six. Her “beau” is from an average family. He has a mother, two young sisters, and three brothers. His name is Yakov Danilin, and he is an attractive young man. Both the bride and the groom look very happy, and people remark that “they are truly very satisfied with one another.” In a year or so, the couple will move from the young man’s home to the home of Zinaida’s father. Yakov and his brothers are going to divide the family property among themselves, and Yakov will then move over to become heir to the household of his father-in-law, Nikita Openkin.5

The next two young people to get married are from well-to-do families. The younger son of Adrian Ushakov, “Iliushka,” age nineteen, is marrying a woman of approximately the same age from a neighboring village. Iliushka is tall, sensible, and generally a spirited lad. His young wife is a tall, fair-skinned blond who is a “seamstress,” that is to say she has worked for several years in cottage industry, embroidery in particular, which is a specialty of the village of Muraevnia among peasants with small land allotments. She dresses “chic,” as they say here, wearing a wool sarafan trimmed in silk and a black silk blouse with a lace bodice; her head is covered by a colorful cashmere shawl, and she adorns herself with silver earrings, finger rings, and so forth. Of course, you would never see a woman like this doing field work. But Adrian’s two other sons \(who still live at home\) are already married to robust, simple peasant women, good workers, and for this reason the parents did not seek out the kind of woman who could “take charge.” Iliushka himself picked out his bride, and eventually he will go off with her to Moscow. This couple, too, look very satisfied with their match.

The third wedding saw an old woman, Tatiana Voronina, give away her granddaughter “Alyonka.” Tatiana is sixty-six years old and the wife of Kharlan Seleznyov. Although his last name is Seleznyov, his wife is referred to as Tatiana Voronina after her father, who was nicknamed “Vorona,” that is, “crow.” Everyone says Kharlan Seleznyov, but only rarely does anyone say Tatiana Seleznyova; everyone calls her Voronina. Perhaps it is thanks to her unmistakable individuality that people find it hard to refer to her by her husband’s name. Tatiana is a tough old lady with straight features and extremely animated and sly gray eyes. Her face is pale and wrinkled, but she holds her head erect, and her movements are quick, not those of an elderly person. Her “Kharlan” is a homely old fellow, hunched over, but still boasting completely black hair. His voice is weak, and his facial features are nondescript. He is attached to her, and she runs the entire household. Tatiana is both a folk healer and a village midwife. She is the mother of six sons and three daughters. Four of her sons are married, and one of these has already moved out and established his own household because of his wife’s inability to get along with other people. All three daughters have, as they say, “been distributed,” that is, given away in matrimony; one son had to go off to the army, and the youngest boy, her “heir,” Fediushka, is only fourteen.

Her granddaughter Alyonka is eighteen years of age. Tatiana sought out for her in a neighboring village a thirty-year-old man who had just returned from St. Petersburg, where he spent three years working in a weapons factory. He earned a good wage there, and rumor has it that he was able to put three hundred rubles in the bank. He came home at the insistence of his parents, who wanted him to get married, and when he took an immediate liking to Alyonka Voronina,6 Tatiana was quick to take advantage of the circumstance. Alyonka’s mother was a docile woman completely under the thumb of her mother-in-law, and although she felt terrible about having to part with her only daughter, she was incapable of putting up a fight against Tatiana; she merely went into fainting spells when she had to give her parental blessing to Alyonka, and she passed out completely when her daughter left for the church. Alyonka herself felt awful about having to marry an “old man,” a person not of her age group. The entire week prior to the wedding she was not herself; she wore herself to a frazzle with grief, wailing lamentations, but she, too, did not dare to thwart her grandmother’s will \(her father played a rather unconcerned and passive role in all this\). For some time after the engagement, Alyonka kept her “young man”7 at a distance, pushed him away, even told him he could “go to hell” and said she “had no need of him.” He tried to entice her with promises of taking her to “Piter”8 and buying her fancy outfits and the like. “To hell with your ‘Piter’ and your fine outfits, for all I care. I don’t need them,” she would respond.

I saw the couple on the day after the wedding. The young, tall, ruddy girl with her not especially intelligent face made an effort to “hold her mug” away from her husband, but it was clear that talk of St. Petersburg and “fancy outfits” was finally having some effect, and that Alyonka was outgrowing the traditional village notions about the “disgrace” attached to marrying an older man. A week later, the pair visited me in the company of the grandmother, and you should have seen the courtesy with which the “young man” \(not for nothing had he lived in St. Petersburg\) handed his “grandmother” her overcoat and helped her into it. “There, you see what honor I have attained,” the old woman joked with self-satisfaction. And Alyonka had become far less distant to her husband. “What a woman Grandma Tania is\!” \[she remarked\].

How much such a woman can mean for a peasant family\! “She built her entire house,” people say, and in her time gave birth to twelve children, nine of which survived. When the children were young, she went out begging to get enough to feed them; later she became a folk healer and midwife—and at one time she even ran an “underground tavern” \[selling bootleg liquor\]. There was nothing she would not do in order to see that her children survived and got on their feet. “Grandma Tania is never wrong,” they all say. The only person I felt sorry for in the whole business was Alyonka’s mother.

At the fourth wedding, Tikhon Marsakov was to give away his son Grishka. Tikhon was a quiet, hardworking old man of average means, a widower. In actuality, Grishka was being married off not by him but by his married sister and sister-in-law. Grishka is a tall, hearty fellow, but childish and not good-looking. He has already finished his military service. They found him a young woman in a neighboring village, an orphan of about twenty years of age who to our way of thinking is extraordinarily attractive. Grishka at first had no objection to her, and the engagement took place in the usual manner. This happened in September. After the engagement, however, another young woman began “pushing herself upon” Grishka, a forward and unattractive woman from his own village. She convinced her father and mother that it was time for her to get married, that it was a good harvest year, and that she liked Grishka. So they set out to “foist” her on Grishka. And it turned out that Grishka liked her, God only knows why \(perhaps they had “fallen in love” during the fall parties\). Whatever the case may have been, a week before the planned wedding, Grishka began to reject his betrothed. And then the whole family started in on him—his father, brothers, and sisters-in-law: “You can’t back out of this now after the engagement and everything has been agreed upon; we aren’t in a position to pay the penalties for this,” and so on and so forth. On the eve of the wedding, Grishka broke all the dishes in his father’s house, saying, “Just as I don’t want these dishes, I don’t want my bride-to-be.” The noise and screaming were deafening, and the women squealed and took cover under the benches, but they nevertheless insisted on having their way and … \[the manuscript breaks off at this point, but it seems that Grishka was going to have to bow to the will of his family after all. It would have been remarkable had he been able to stand up to their collective opposition.\]





1. The equivalent of a half-year’s earnings for many peasants.

2. This paragraph was woven together from comments widely separated in the published text \(from pages 53-54 and 72\). See additional examples of this reaction to age differences in the descriptions of actual marriages below.

3. Taken from an unpublished typescript in Semyonova’s archive. AGO, f. 109, op. 1, d. 170, ch. 4, 11. 1-4.

4. This age arrangement does not fit with any of the marriages Semyonova mentioned earlier in this chapter. But keep in mind that she collected material over a four-year period, and this report may have been made in another year.

5. Here we see a common Russian practice in families that do not produce surviving male offspring to take over the parents’ farming operation. A daughter is married to a young man who cannot count on inheriting much from his own family, and the son-in-law \(known in this case as *priemysh*\) is brought into his bride’s home as the prospective household head.

6. If this transcription in the archival file is accurate, it reveals the power of the Voronin name to eclipse the legal family name of Seleznyov right down to the third generation.

7. Here is an untranslatable play on the Russian word *molodoi*, which can mean both “young” and “bridegroom.” “Young man” seems best to catch the irony, which was clearly intended.

8. St. Petersburg.








