+++
title = "10 COURT CASES AND POLITICAL STRUCTURE"

+++




*One consequence of the village’s increasing interaction with the urban society and the national government was a greater use by the peasants of the courts. Semyonova records a number of typical court cases she observed; she regards the more frequent use of courts by peasants as destructive of community life. Suits were deployed as weapons against persons one disliked or from whom one could expect to gain some monetary advantage. Peasants, of course, were hardly alone in using the courts in this way. The end of serfdom and the accompanying abolition of the legal authority of the serf owner meant that peasants had to find new methods for settling their disputes. The results may have been a messier, more litigious village life, but it was a school in modern institution building as well. Semyonova also remarks on punishments and the peasants’ attitudes toward corporal as opposed to monetary penalties. Here we see an example of the continuing power of patriarchal authority in the family and how it affected dependent males as well as females*.

*Questions of crime and punishment lead to considerations of the political system and government officials and their place in peasant life. Semyonova had something to say about this, too. She notes the influence in village and township governance of kinship networks and bribery, both of which she views with a jaundiced eye. But she does not give enough consideration to the reasons for the existence of these practices; so long as peasants understood authority in personal terms, these practices were no doubt essential to the functioning of local government*.

*Semyonova’s description of the peasants’ attitudes toward the township supervisor and the land captain make clear that they did understand authority as personal. They preferred that the person in charge be strong and consistent. Although some peasants resented the manipulation of that authority by others through family connections or bribery, they did not seem to regard this as a flaw in the system. It was perhaps a weakness of a particular man or men, who, if unjust, should be replaced. A system in which power was divided among offices, and in which the occupant of an office was limited to a certain narrow set of decisions, would not have gained the approval of the peasants. They would have had to bribe several people instead of just one in order to get something done or avoid having something unpleasant done to them. Authority, in their view, had to be undivided and personal, like the authority of God or of the tsar, in whom they often placed their hopes for acquisition of the land or the abolition of taxes*.

*The final story in this chapter reveals that, in addition to the usual complaints about abuses of the community order such as bribery and kin influence, challenges to authority had also begun to reach Semyonova’s villages in another, more ominous form: the ideas of urban, middle-class revolutionaries. These ideas had been vigorously proselytized by the revolutionary populists in the 1870s but, according to Semyonova, in those days had not produced a single incident of importance. Now, she feared, a new era had arrived, and she tells of the destruction caused by a peasant farm worker with socialist views around the year 1900. She concludes with a pessimistic remark about the ability of educated people to convert the villagers to a new work ethic, one that would convince them to maximize their earnings and save for the future. But then she wonders whether the people would not justifiably ridicule such advice \(as well she might, in view of all the obstacles to economic success she has already described*\).





Cases heard at the township court and resolved on the same day:

1. A peasant sued a brick mason \(a specialist in building ovens\) for not completing the work by the deadline set in the contract, even though he had already received payment for the job. The jury ruled that the brick mason had to pay the plaintiff for breach of contract. A local landlord, commenting on the case, noted that the plaintiff would not have won if the former way of life and peasant ignorance in legal matters had not recently changed. In earlier days, he would have lost because the bricklayer was also a farmer, and his failure to complete the work on time was a result of the extraordinarily difficult harvest conditions of this year. Had he finished the bricklaying job on time, he might well have lost his own crops, a circumstance that would have provided a basis for acquittal.

2. The younger of two sisters-in-law sued the older one for calling her a slut. This is how it happened. The younger woman had returned with her husband from Novocherkassk, and a short time later her husband and his brother arranged a division of the family property. The younger brother and his wife were unhappy with the amount of land they received, and the women have been quarreling endlessly ever since.

The judge proposed that the two try to make peace. But the younger sister-in-law replied: “I’m not going to make up with her under any circumstances\! She called me a tart\! This is unheard of\! I live with my own husband\! I lived six years in Novocherkassk and never heard anything like that from anyone, and then here she goes smarting off\!”



Peasants gathered in the street of a village in Tambov province. Photo by S. I. Gerasimova from *Rossiia. Polnoe geograficheskoe opisanie*, vol. 2, p. 175.

The older woman came back: “And why did you call my daughter names first?”

The younger: “She’s lying. I never said anything bad to her daughter\!”

The older: “Just tell me, why did you call her names? She’s a young girl, but even so, I didn’t say anything to you about your name calling then. And here you are a grown woman. A few dirty words aren’t going to do you any harm. It’s not something you take to court…. When she got home, everything was waiting for her, full room and board, and what does she say to me?—my fair-minded judges—she says, ‘You’re completely rotten from lying on the stove.’” And on and on it went.

The upshot was that the jury sentenced the older woman to three days in jail. As she was leaving, she said: “Well, Christ Jesus had to suffer, and so will I.” To the amusement of everyone, the younger sister-in-law responded: “What’s a mere three days\! I would’ve locked up this martyr for Christ in a dungeon for three years.”

3. A woman sued a man for an “estate,” a plot of cultivated land. Twelve years ago her late husband exchanged plots with another man from the same village. At that time, the other man had just separated from his family and had still not received his portion of the family property from the village assembly. He paid the woman’s husband thirty rubles for a barn that stood on the lot. The agreement they drew up stipulated that although the plot became the property of the new owner, the former owner retained the right to make use of the willows growing on the land until such time as he received from the assembly the plot that originally would have become the property of the new owner. When the woman’s husband died, soon after signing the agreement, his partner in the deal had already left for Moscow, taking a copy of the agreement with him. Thus, the widow knew nothing about the exchange. One year after her husband’s death, she married a man in another village. When she left, she took her only daughter with her and sold the house. Two years later the new owner of the land returned from Moscow, showed the widow the agreement that he had signed with her late husband, and settled on his new property. Knowing that she could at any time claim from the village assembly the plot due to her according to the agreement, the widow did not bother to file a claim for the time being and continued to live with her new husband. Eleven years after the exchange agreement, the new owner cut down all the willows on the plot and sold them. Then the woman, pursuant to the terms of the agreement that accorded her late husband \(and upon his death his daughter, for whom the woman was guardian\) use of the willows on the plot, filed a suit against the new owner in the township court. The man expected to prevail because of the passage of more than ten years since the signing of the agreement, but the court ruled that he had to pay the woman the cost of the willows he had sold.

4. Another case against a peasant who cut down willow trees on his neighbor’s land.

5. Litigation between peasants and a landowner. Three peasants undertook \(on the basis of joint responsibility\) to harvest millet on two desiatinas \(5.4 acres\) of land for a merchant landowner. While harvesting, one of the peasants quarreled with the merchant and hurled some foul language his way. When the time came to pay up, the merchant deducted fifteen rubles from the crew. The peasants filed a complaint in the township court to reclaim the ten rubles due the two peasants who had not quarreled with the merchant. The merchant failed to appear in court, and the hearing was postponed. It was continued three times for the same reason, and the peasants were angry. “We live far away and have dragged ourselves here for a third time just to find that he hasn’t appeared again.” The merchant did not come to court because, as a member of the middle class, he was not subject to the jurisdiction of the township court. Unfamiliar with law, the peasants did not know that the case should have been taken not to the township court but to the land captain’s court.

There was the following case \[in our village\]. Two brothers \[and their families\] lived together \[and shared their property\]. Then the younger of the two moved to Moscow with his wife. Nothing was heard from him for twenty years, nor did he send any money to his elder brother for household needs. \(I should note in this regard that money orders sent home by peasants working elsewhere usually arrive at the office of the township supervisor. The supervisor may arbitrarily retain the money orders to cover taxes owed by peasants, and not even notify the addressees about the arrival of the money. Sometimes he simply pockets the money for himself. In these circumstances, it is difficult to find out whether or not a peasant sent money to his family.\) The elder brother kept working on the farm, and after running it for twenty years, he naturally believed the entire property, the house and the land, were his. Then, out of the blue, the younger brother showed up and made threats, demanding not only his share of the land but some of the movable property as well. When his demands were met, he threw a party for the villagers, treating them to vodka, to make sure that they would ratify the property settlement; the village \(*mir*\) had the right to veto the property division. Then he made himself comfortable “with full room and board,” as they say. Obviously, his behavior caused a strong reaction on the part of his brother and his family.

Situations like this are commonly a cause for litigation. In most instances, the argument is over land. But peasants also litigate with landlords over wages, or, more accurately, landlords sue peasants at the land captain’s court. Not knowing much about the law, peasants frequently end up suing people who are in the right from the standpoint of the law. Peasants like to go to court, especially when they see an opportunity to gain something from the other party, or to cause someone a lot of trouble for having insulted them. Pointless lawsuits have lately become a bane of peasant life.

## Legal Penalties

The common use of corporal punishment, public beatings with birch switches or willow rods, is dying out. Even so, not long ago a woman from a remote village was able to have her husband flogged at the township office for his refusal to live with her. We also continue to see cases of sons being flogged for insulting their parents. These disobedient children \(who may be as much as twenty years of age\) are taken without trial to the township office for their punishment. In response to a complaint by the parents, the township supervisor summons the son and turns him over to the office guard for flogging. The culprit is stripped from the waist down, placed on the floor in the township office, and beaten with willow rods. Admission to the spectacle is open to all residents of the village.

Peasants resent fines more than beatings or jailing. They view money payments as the harshest punishment and may even revenge themselves with arson. They are much more willing to be locked up, provided it does not occur during the field-work season. If a jail sentence should fall during the time of field work, a peasant may sometimes succeed in persuading the township supervisor to postpone the punishment until the fall. If so, a male relative has to agree to stand surety for the convicted peasant. Vodka naturally plays a major role in such a settlement. “Treat the supervisor and he’ll go easy on you,” as they say. Women are incarcerated the same as men, and this includes pregnant women and even breast-feeding mothers, who go to jail with their babies in their arms.

When peasants fail to pay their taxes, the township council sends them to jail in another village, ten to twenty miles away, while peasants of the latter village are jailed in the former. Of course, this practice has to be approved by the government land captain.

## Local Governance

Peasants tend to think of their village assembly as unjust. “Look how very difficult it is to live in this community. Whoever has the most relatives is right. People will vote for a relative, and then it’s hard for those without kin. That is why a peasant without such allies is reluctant to take business to the village assembly. Why bother when they will just vote you down anyhow? And then there’s the vodka. With some vodka and money, any judge can be persuaded to declare the guilty party to be in the right.”

The person having the greatest sway over the destiny of the village is not the land captain \(*zemskii nachal’nik*\) but the township supervisor. This is both good and bad. On the one hand, the supervisor is useful to the central government, for he is himself a peasant and knows the inner workings of peasant life that are ultimately beyond the ken of the land captain. On the other hand, the very fact of this special position and his own approach to it as a source of personal enrichment result in much evil.

A supervisor receives a salary of six hundred rubles a year, and therefore is usually able to rent or even own much more land than any other peasant in the village. Naturally, his own interests take priority in any decisions he makes. He also controls the village assembly, taking bribes and locating guzzlers who can be paid off to support him with their votes. These guzzlers can be found in any village. The peasants call them “howlers and gullets.” They are “gullets” in the sense that they have large throats for howling and for drinking. These stooges carry even more weight in determining a peasant’s fate at the assembly than do his relatives. Behind these stooges is hidden the township supervisor, who, in turn, often represents the interests of a large landowner from the merchant class with capital amounting to a hundred thousand rubles. The supervisor is a frequent guest at the merchant’s table, and for a monetary con ideration sees to his patron’s interests. He may, for example, press the peasants harder for taxes so that they will be forced to accept low-paying jobs from the merchant. Not long ago one of the supervisors arranged a really remarkable deal for a merchant; he got a peasant community to turn over to the merchant, in exchange for land elsewhere, nearly one hundred acres next to the Purlovo railway station, a site with marvelous possibilities of development, and the merchant had to throw in a mere two thousand rubles extra.

Because of his ability to pay off his stooges, a township supervisor enjoys a secure tenure, and at the end of this three-year term he is reelected. After the election, the peasants who voted against him are likely to suffer when tax-paying time comes. Tax collection normally begins in September, but since the tax applies to the current year, the supervisor can easily demand payment from a peasant one or two months earlier \[just when the farmer is busiest and has the least possibility to pay\].

In regard to the village assembly, it should be pointed out that peasants do not bother with formal vote counts when they decide on routine matters. They discuss an issue, negotiate back and forth, and then settle on a common position. “Everyone agrees,” they announce, and if two or three persons object, no one pays much attention. But in serious matters such as the transfer of land to the merchant mentioned earlier, the supervisor takes a count of the votes, or rather asks the village elder to take it, so as not to be accused of dishonesty. Moreover, in such matters the margin can be very narrow, amounting to only a few votes one way or the other.

The township supervisor is not the only one who accepts bribes. Other officials take them as well; you do not have to look far to find examples. The ordinary peasants, who are oppressed and mistreated and under the thumb of these local representatives of authority, respond as you would expect. After all, they find themselves caught in a vicious circle. In these conditions, who can rise above the general level of misery and set an example for other villagers? The township supervisor is often also the head of the township court. \[How then can one appeal his arbitrary decisions even if one had a mind to do so?\]

A strong hand on the part of the township supervisor, even the use of corporal punishment, earns the respect of the peasants, provided it is applied consistently. “Our supervisor is really fierce,” they will say. “Always greets you with: ‘What do ya want, you rascal?’ Honest to God, he says that to everyone\!” Capricious anger, however, is scorned by peasants. For example, our land captain, basically a “good guy,” has fits of rage that alternate with utter weakness. He administers justice when he is drunk and sometimes even deals out blows, but peasants show very little respect for him; they scoff at him.

## Socialist Ideas Come to the Village

Aksiuta was a small, dark-eyed orphan girl who had “seen it all.” When she was about sixteen, she hired on with a landlord doing general housework—tending the samovar, washing floors, and the like. A year later she announced to the landlord that she wanted to settle up because she had decided to marry a boy of nineteen, who was also an orphan and lived with his uncle. Mikhalek, as the boy was called, had lived in Moscow when he was younger, and then was taken in by his uncle, for whom he worked in exchange for his room and board. Mikhalek was unruly, even somewhat peculiar, and no one had a good word to say about him. The landlord asked Aksiuta why she wanted to marry such a loafer and offered to find her a better match. Aksiuta replied that she could not change her mind, what with her being an orphan, not even having a brother, and said that Mikhalek’s uncle would take her into his house. It was clear that she had her mind made up.

Inquiries revealed that some distant relatives of Aksiuta had already tried to prevent the marriage, but to no avail. It also came out that Aksiuta and Mikhalek had long been having intimate relations and had pledged faithfulness to each other. They had even eaten earth to confirm their union. Aksiuta announced that she would marry Mikhalek or no one, preferring otherwise to remain forever single. It turned out that Mikhalek’s uncle had encouraged their relationship with the intention of acquiring a free laborer for his household while his own children were growing up. Later he could at any time dismiss the couple.

The wedding took place, a typically poor orphan wedding. The couple lived at the uncle’s house for a year, and then Mikhalek found a job working for a landlord. Aksiuta had suffered a miscarriage, very probably self-inflicted, since Mikhalek’s uncle would not have let them stay with a baby.

On the landlord’s estate where Mikhalek worked, a number of mysterious incidents occurred over the past summer. Several horses and cows died for no apparent reason. The veterinarian could not detect any infections in the animals, but when the hides were removed, the carcasses displayed a black spot at the base of the skull, like a hemorrhage. Besides this, the threshing machine broke on two occasions, the result of iron rods having been intentionally placed in the shocks of grain. Rumors started to circulate among the women who did the threshing that they could next expect to find a box of matches in a shock and then a coupling bolt. It was impossible to get the women to tell who was making these threats. The landlord had not the slightest idea why someone was trying to intimidate him, as he had had no problems with the peasants.

The landlord paid no attention to Mikhalek until the day he decided to have the young man help him with the work in the garden. They worked together and conversed as a landlord and his hired worker might, but in the course of that ordinary conversation, Mikhalek burst out in a barrage of bitter accusations against “capitalists” \[*sic*\], rich landowners and rich peasants. “We are homeless and landless, while these rich people plant ornamental gardens and drink tea all day long.” \(Peasants regard merely decorative gardens, those that bear no fruit, as a foolish and wicked idea, while tea drinking is of course a nice pastime.\) Though taken aback at the time, the landlord had many other affairs to attend to and for a time forgot about the incident.

Then, late in the year, during the festival of the village’s patron saint \(or “feedstival,” as the peasants quip\), it happened. The harvest had been good, and every last person in the village was drunk. On the third night of the festivities, a barn belonging to a rich village storekeeper caught fire. When the villagers descended on the spot, they found Mikhalek next to the barn and seized him. Meanwhile, the flames reached another barn, and the whole village was in danger of catching fire. No water was available because everything was covered with ice. The peasants \(whose stored grain was at stake\) all at once fell upon Mikhalek, beat him with whatever they could lay their hands on, and threw him into the fire. He would have burned alive had he not been rescued by the very owner of the barn that he had set on fire. You think the storekeeper was being magnanimous? Not a bit. He was simply afraid that if Mikhalek died in the fire, an investigation would necessarily follow, and the peasants would shift the blame for Mikhalek’s death to him, *the victimized wealthy peasant* \[italics are Semyonova’s\]. Although the fire did not spread very far, a few people lost all their grain, and the next day when the constable arrived to investigate, a number of peasants testified that Mikhalek had bragged to them about placing an iron rod in the landlord’s threshing machine, about killing several cows belonging to the same landlord, and the like. In other words, as long as only a landlord was being harmed, the peasants who knew what was going on kept quiet and protected “one of their own,” even sympathizing with Mikhalek. But the moment they lost their hard-earned possessions, they sang a different tune.

Aksiuta, it turned out, had been helping her husband all along. “He’s weird and loutish, but he never beats his wife,” or so I heard it said about Mikhalek.

Mikhalek had never had any real disputes with either the wealthy storekeeper or the landlord. He was evidently influenced by some kind of “revolutionary idea.” Until this protest emerged, Mikhalek and Aksiuta, both remarkable people with abilities well above those of the average peasant, had quietly borne the burdens of orphanhood and poverty—in fact, it was these circumstances that bound them closely together. It is quite likely that Mikhalek picked up his revolutionary “rhetoric” when he lived in Moscow; that came through pretty clearly in his conversation with the landlord. However unreasonable and rash his actions, they are indicative of the growing hatred of the poor toward the rich and toward large landowners.

Peasants have not acquired the habit of intensive labor, they are deprived of the light of knowledge, and they suffer an oppressive poverty. The problem seems to be that whatever goal a peasant entertains, be it merely the acquisition of a pint of vodka or a pair of galoshes, it is beyond his reach, no matter how hard he works. Another thought that bothers me is how can we, the targets of the people’s hatred, alter their goals, open new horizons to them, implant the notion of intensive labor as a source of well-being? They would not believe us and would simply laugh at us, perhaps justifiably.

What is important is that animosity and hatred are on the rise within the peasant population and already, though still rarely, can produce the likes of Mikhalek, who acted on the convictions he came to through his suffering. All the propaganda disseminated by the radical men and women of the 1870s \(*semidesiatniki*\) who went out and worked among the people, hardly succeeded in producing a single such arsonist. 






