+++
title = "00 Preface"

+++
Preface

My first article, "The Spirit of Muslim Government in India", was
published in the Annual Bulletin of the Nagpur University Historical
Society, No. 2, October 1947. It was revised and published under the
title *Muslim State in India* by Vichar Prakashan, Allahabad, in 1950 in
the form of a small book. Chapters on Muslim administration and
government are also included in my *History of the Khaljis* (1950),
*Twilight of the Sultanate* (1963), *Studies in Medieval Indian History*
(1966), *Early Muslims in India* (1984), and *The Legacy of Muslim Rule
in India* (1992).

Now fifty years after my first brochure on the subject, I present before
the scholars my latest book entitled *The Theory and Practice of Muslim
State in India*. Its raison desire is that in my earlier endeavours, no
attempt had been made to trace the relationship between the injunctions
contained in Islamic religious literature and the attitudes and actions
of Muslim kings and conquerors. Ordinarily, historians writing on
medieval Indian history refer to Muslim chronicles and histories as
their only source materials. The study of Islamic scriptural literature
like the Quran, the Hadis, the Biographies of the Prophet and the
Shariat is ignored in historical studies as it is considered to belong
to the domain of religion rather than to that of history. However, the
study of this literature reveals that Muslim invaders and rulers were
not cruel or fanatical by themselves as such, but they became so by
pursuing the malevolent ideology as projected in the Quran and the Hadis
against the non-Muslims. That is why the study of the 'moral and
spiritual' literature of Islam becomes so important for the study of its
history also.

Muslim invaders and rulers of India belonged to different races and
different countries. There were Arabs, Turks, Uzbegs, Pathans, Africans,
Persians and what are called the Mughals. They belonged to different
sects like the Shias, Sunnis, Wahabis, etc. Their rule extended for
about a thousand years from the eighth to the eighteenth century in
various parts of the country. Their chronicles are written in different
languages like Arabic, Persian and Turki. But their behaviour follows a
uniform pattern. Even those rulers and nobles who had converted to Islam
from Hinduism, behaved with their erstwhile co-religionists like any
Afghan or Turk or Mughal. They considered their bloody acts against
Hindus or non-Muslims as acts of righteousness. The source of this
uniformity of action is the Quran, the Hadis and the Sunnah which they
quote with pride. That is why the theory part of the Muslim state in
India assumes so much importance. These scriptures do not belong only to
the past. They are in operation even now. Hate words like jihad, Kafir,
and Mushrik are as current today as when they were first used about
fourteen hundred years ago. Pious Muslims in long robes and pious
Muslims in European dress (western dress does not make one modem in
thought), in all places and at all times seek or provoke jihad with an
appeal to the Quran. Regular wars (Arab-Israel, Iraq-Iran, Afghanistan),
terrorist activities (India, Algeria, Egypt, even America), and communal
riots (India) are all called and fought in the spirit of jihad. Such is
the important place given to violence in Islam that when there are no
non-Muslims to fight, the Muslims call one another Kafir and fight
jihad. Consequently, all over the world Jihadic terrorism seems to be a
major Muslim activity even today, whether it is carried on in Muslim or
non-Muslim majority countries.

Hence the importance of both the theory and practice in the study of
Muslim state in India. The theory part is traced to the Quran, the Hadis
and the Sunnah or the Biographies of the Prophet; the Practice part to
the principal activities of Muslim rulers in India as narrated by their
chroniclers. The Quran of course is all important in Islam. But no less
important is the Hadis. One is complementary to the other. The
Biographies of the Prophet are equally important.

In the Urdu preface (*ibtidaia*) of Sahih Muslim's translation by
Maulana Wahid-uz-Zaman, Bashir Ahmad Naumani says that there are six
authentic collections of Hadis - Bukhari, Muslim, Nasai, Abu Daud,
Tirmizi and Ibn Majah. Urdu translations of these, together with the
original text in Arabic, have been published by Aitqad Publishing House,
Delhi. Mr. Sita Ram Goel was good enough to lend them to me for study.
He also made available to me the Holy Quran's Urdu and Hindi
translations with Arabic text published from Rampur. Thus I have been
able to consult the most authentic translations of Islamic scriptures
done by Muslims themselves and not by Western scholars who are sometimes
accused of interpreting Muslim scriptures with a bias. And I do not
speak myself, but let the Muslims speak, giving extensive quotations
from their classical authors.

The most accepted biography of Prophet Muhammad is by Ibn Ishaq. Its
English translation has gone through many reprints in Pakistan alone.
*The Life of Mahomet* written by William Muir and *Mohammed and the Rise
of Islam* by D.S. Margoliouth are equally authentic. These are based on
primary source materials including Hadis and I find that the accusation
of these authors being prejudiced is not correct.

So far as evaluation of medieval Muslim chronicles is concerned, it has
been done by me earlier in most of my books. There is no need to repeat
what has been written about them earlier. Also the present study covers
only the overall polity of medieval India; it does not deal with the
provincial or regional Muslim States like Bengal, Malwa, Gujarat, the
Bahmani kingdom or Kashmir. However, wherever Muslim rule prevailed, the
basic principles of governance were the same. In short, 'Muslim State in
India' represents the theory and practice of all states in India ruled
by Muslims.

This book has three parts. Part I deals with the Muslim state in
medieval India, its obligations, its income and expenditure, its jihad,
its justice in historical perspectives. Part II is entitled Politics,
for Muslim state in India has not ceased to exist even in modern times
and Indian Muslims on account of Islamic laws and separate identity
almost form a separate state within the Indian State. Part III is a
Reposte on reviews of some of my books, carrying reiteration of some of
my statements which have been challenged only with a motive to
challenge.

K.S. Lal

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
