+++
title = "04  III         Obligations of the State"

+++
III  
Obligations of the State

According to Ruben Levy, "the functions which the lawyers and theorists
lay down for the Caliphate, the duties of the ruler in Islam are four" -
(1) Judgement (or justice), (2) Taxation, (3) Friday service and (4)
Jihad.[1](#1) We shall take up Jihad first.

3.1. ISLAMIC WAR OR JIHAD

War against non-Muslims is called Jihad in Islamic scriptures. The first
Jihads were fought in Arabia against the Pagans, Jews and Christians.
Later on they were fought wherever Muslims went to spread their
religion. Jihad is fought to serve Allah. According to a Pakistani army
scholar, Brigadier S.K. Malik,[2](#2) "the fountain-head of the Quranic
dimensions of war lies in the fact that war is waged for the cause of
Allah... To those who fight for this noblest heavenly cause, the Book
promises handsome heavenly assistance. The index of fighting for Allah's
cause is Man's total submission to his Will. Those who fail to submit
themselves fully and completely to the Will of God run the risk of
incurring heavenly wrath... Fighting involves risk of life and property
that must be accepted willingly and cheerfully."[3](#3) Said the Book,
"Not equal are believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt, and
those who strive and fight in the cause of Allah with their goods and
their persons. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and
fight with their goods and persons than those who sit (at home)." "The
central theme behind the causes of wars, as spelt out by the Holy Quran,
was the cause of Allah... in the pursuit of this cause, the Muslims were
first granted the *permission* to fight but were later *commanded* to
fight in the way of God as a matter of religious obligation and
duty."[4](#4)

Inspiring terror into the hearts of the enemy was a part of the tactics
of Jihad. Talking of Badr, Almighty Allah addressed the Prophet thus: 'I
am with you: give firmness to the Believers: I will instil terror into
the hearts of the Unbelievers."[5](#5) In the battle of Uhud, Allah
identified the causes of the Muslim defeat, provided divine guidance,
and held out a promise: "Soon shall we cast terror into the hearts of
the Unbelievers."[6](#6) The Quran referred to the treachery of Banu
Quraiza, "Allah did take them down from their stronghold and cast terror
into their hearts, (so that) some ye slew, and some ye made prisoners.
And he made you heirs to their lands, their houses, and their
goods..."[7](#7) "Terror struck in the hearts of the enemies is not only
a means, it is the end in itself. It can be instilled only if the
opponent's faith is destroyed. Psychological dislocation is temporary;
spiritual dislocation is permanent... To instil terror into the hearts
of the enemy it is essential, in the ultimate analysis, to dislocate his
faith."[8](#8) This is exactly what the Muslim invaders and rulers tried
to do in India.

The Holy Quran spelt out the divine war against Paganism when it
commanded the Muslims to take recourse to fighting. "And fight them on,"
ruled the Book, "until there is no more tumult or oppression, and there
prevails justice and faith in Allah." Similar instructions were repeated
after the battle of Badr, about a year later. "And fight them on," the
Holy Quran directed on that occasion, "until there is no more tumult or
oppression, and there prevails justice and faith in Allah altogether and
everywhere."[9](#9)

Three ideas are central in the above postulation. There have been wars
but the wars fought by the Muslims are in the service of Allah. This
gives Islamic belligerency divine sanction, and terrorism becomes a
divine command. The second idea put forward is that Paganism is tumult
and oppression while Islam is justice and faith in Allah. This is what
the Muslims are taught to believe. And thirdly participation in this
divine war is a must; there is reward for the participants and
punishment for non-participants. Jihad in a word is total war.

*Jihad is for ever*

"The origins of Jihad lie in the desire for the expansion of Arab power
and the spread of the Islamic religion first in Arabia and later on in
the whole world. Muhammad knew that his people could not rule the world
until they were welded into an effective fighting force against the
unbelievers for taking over their countries, personal possessions and
women, and subjugating them to the Arabian hegemony... Since Jihad is
against the unbelievers, the Prophet created unlimited opportunities for
holy wars by declaring other religions false and ungodly."[10](#10) Thus
Jihad is Allah's command to the Muslims to destroy the non-Muslims. It
is not at all necessary that the non-Muslims should have wronged the
Muslims; their true crime is that they do not believe in Islam. The aim
of Jihad is to make them believe in Islam through the power of the
sword.

*The Dictionary of Islam* defines Jihad as "a religious war with those
who are unbelievers in the mission of Muhammad. It is an incumbent
religious duty, established in the Quran and the traditions as a divine
institution and enjoined specially for the purpose of advancing
Islam..."[11](#11) The Quran says in *Surah* (Chapter) 2 *ayat*
(injunction) 193, "Fight against them (the *mushriks*) until idolatry is
no more, and Allah's religion reigns supreme." The command is repeated
in *Surah* 8 *ayat* 39. In *Surah* 69 *ayats* 30-37 it is ordained: "Lay
hold of him and bind him. Burn him in the fire of hell." And again:
"When you meet the unbelievers in the battlefield strike off their heads
and when you have laid them low, bind your captives firmly" (47:14-15).
"Cast terror into the hearts of the infidels. Strike off their heads,
maim them in every limb"(8:12).[12](#12) And "Fight and slay the pagans
wherever you find them, and seize them, beleaguer them and lie in wait
for them in every stratagem till they respect and establish regular
prayers and practise regular charity" (11:8). Such commands,
exhortations and injunctions are repeatedly mentioned in Islamic
scriptures - the Quran and Hadis. The main medium through which these
injunctions were to be carried out was the holy Jihad. The Jihad or holy
war is a multi-dimensional concept. When it comes to Jihad, no two
Muslims can disagree on this basic concept. It means fighting for the
sake of Allah, for furthering the cause of Islam, for converting people
to the 'true faith', for killing them if they resist, for seizing their
property and their women and children, and for destroying their temples.
Iconoclasm and razing other people's temples is central to Islam; it
derives its justification from the Prophet's Sunnah or practice.
Muhammad had himself destroyed Pagan temples in Arabia and so set an
example for his followers. Without Jihad there is no Islam. Jihad is a
religious duty of every Muslim.

It is remarkable that all the injunctions about Jihad, a war against
non-Muslims for all time, occur in the al-Madinah *Surahs*. These were
revealed after Muhammad had established himself as a paramount ruler,
and was in a position to dictate terms to enemies. Verses revealed in
Mecca (609-622 CE) begin as a hesitant call to arms for the defence of
"mosques, churches and synagogues", and end by being transformed in
Madinah into a violent call for all round destruction of non-Muslims.
There is nothing surprising about it. One important fact regarding Quran
is that each revelation is suited to the exigencies of the Prophet's
policy or passion.

That being so, there are rules laid down for carrying on Jihad. These
rules are given more elaborately in the Hadis. Muslim theologians make
no distinction between the Quran (the Holy Book) and the Hadis
(Traditions). Both are works of revelation and inspiration, the one
supplementing the other. The leaders of Jihad were told to offer their
enemies, that is those who disbelieved in Allah, three options: 1.
Invite them to accept Islam; if they do so, then invite them to migrate
from their lands to the land of Muhajirs (Madinah in the early days of
Muhammad, Darul Islam in later days). If they refuse to migrate, tell
them that they will be subjected to the commands of Allah like other
Muslims, but they will not get any share in rewards or spoils of war.
But if they participate in Jihad they would be entitled to their share.
2. If they do not accept Islam, demand from them the Jizyah. If they
accept to pay the Jizyah, do not rob or kill them because as Zimmis,
they should be left unharmed. 3. But if they refuse to pay the Jiziyah
tax, then seek Allah's help and fight them.[13](#13)

Fair enough. But patience for such negotiations and agreements was not
quite feasible in the midst of war with prospects of gainful plunder.
One should have normally invited the infidels to embrace Islam before
attacking them, but if the Musalmans did attack them before offering
them Islam and slay them, even women and children, and take possession
of their property, no punishment, expiation or atonement was due on the
part of such Muslims. For, according to the Prophet "war is stratagem",
"war is deceit".[14](#14) Inspired Mujahids did deeds of valour, of
horror and of terror. Muslim chroniclers have written about such
achievements of the heroes of Islam with zeal and glee. The Mujahids
were encouraged to embark on Jihad because they were promised handsome
rewards in this world as in the world to come. That is how Jihad and
prayer became equal in beneficence. That is why a Jihadist sought
*shahadat* (martyrdom).[15](#15) In this world, the property and
possessions of the infidel killed by a Musalman became the reward of the
latter - wife, children, animals, wealth. "The man who kills the
infidel, even the one who kills a wounded infidel, shall have the right
to retain what he had taken from the man he killed - that booty will not
be subject to the one-fifth deduction customary for booty in general. He
shall also of course get in addition his share of the general
Spoils."[16](#16)

*Paradise as Reward of Jihad*

In the next world is Paradise for the Mujahid. Whether he survives in
battle against an infidel, or is wounded or is slain, Paradise is
ensured for him after his death. The spiritual merits of participating
in Jihad are equal to all other religious duties like keeping fasts,
standing in prayer constantly and obeying Allah's commands in
Quran.[17](#17) Jihad for the spread of Islam is the most meritorious
gateway to Paradise. "Paradise is under the shadow of the swords," the
Prophet told his followers.[18](#18) The Paradise in the Quran provided
"Rest and passive enjoyment; verdant gardens watered by murmuring
rivulets, wherein the believers... repose (quaffing) aromatic wine such
as the Arabs loved from goblets placed before them or handed round in
silver cups resplendent as glass by beautiful youths... 'Verily! for the
pious is a blissful abode; Gardens and Vineyards, and damsels with
swelling bosoms, of an equal age, and a full cup...' These damsels of
paradise are introduced as *'lovely large-eyed girls resembling pearls
hidden in their shells, a reward for that which the faithfull have
wrought... 'Verily! we have created them (the houries) of a rare
creation; We have made them virgins, fascinating, of an equal
age'*."[19](#19) In Paradise the souls of the Mujahids will roam about.
at will like the free birds who have their nests in brightly lighted
chandeliers. They will be wedded to houries and live in gardens with
golden pillars studded with precious stones. There will be seventy
thousand golden gates at each of which a beauty (hourie) will await
their arrival.[20](#20) And all their sins will be forgiven."[21](#21)
"A man came to Allah's Apostle," the Hadis records, "and said, 'Instruct
me to such a deed as equals Jihad (in reward).' He replied, 'I do not
find such a deed.'"[22](#22) in consequence of such rewards there was a
keen desire on the part of the Mujahids "to fight in the way of Allah
and be killed, to fight and again and be killed, and to fight again and
be killed."[23](#23) It is significant that a detailed description of
Paradise attainable through Jihad is repeated and restated at the end of
*Sunan ibn Majah*.[24](#24) Muslim students in Madrsas are instructed in
the Quran and Hadis from an early age. Books of Hadis are read and
re-read by devout Muslims. The closing pages of a book always leave a
lasting impression on the reader's mind. The description of Jihad and
Paradise at the close of the collections of Hadis inspires the Muslim to
an everlasting zeal for Jihad and for entering the tempting Paradise.

However, in spite of the clear injunctions in the Quran and the Hadis,
T.P. Hughes writes that "the mystics speak of two Jihads: Jihadul Akbar
or 'the greater warfare', which is against one's own lusts; and al
Jihadul Asghar, or, the lesser warfare, against infidels."[25](#25)
There is no Jihad of the former type mentioned in the Quran or Hadis.
There is also no defensive Jihad. As M. Mujeeb says, "The *Hidayah* is
quite explicit about the legality of *Jihad* (holy war) against infidels
even when they have not taken the offensive."[26](#26) As Hughes himself
quotes from Burhanuddin Ali's *Hidayah*, to the latter Jihad or "war is
permanently established until the day of judgement".[27](#27)

The above discussion shows that the difference between ordinary and
Islamic war lies in the latter's essence of malevolence and savagery.
The encouragement to loot and obtain booty in this world and the promise
of Paradise in the next packs the Jihadists with cruel zeal to plunder
and kill no end. Jihad's brutalization of war is writ large on the pages
of medieval history. The Turks and Pathans were mainly Hindus and
Buddhists before they were converted to Islam. Their record of war and
atrocities before they became Muslims is normal. But once they went over
to the new faith they were brutalized, and what the Arab armies did in
Syria, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, North Africa, Spain and Sindh, bears close
resemblance to what the Turks and Pathans did in India. Not only
outsiders but even those Hindu rulers or zamindars who became Muslim
(e.g. in Afghanistan, Kashmir or Gujarat) became hardhearted and
brutalized and treated their erstwhile co-religionists with the same
fanaticism as was practised by foreign invaders or resident Muslim
rulers. Their zeal was also kept alive by works written in India on the
merits of Jihad. From Fakhr-i-Mudabbir's *Adab-ul-Harb* and Ziyauddin
Barani's *Fatwa-i-Jahandari* to Aurangzeb's *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, all are
works on Muslim politics. Aurangzeb's *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* truly mentions
that the noblest occupation for Muslims is Jihad. This meant that
military service provided the best career for a Muslim, and it was the
business of the kings and commanders to declare every war a Jihad. The
practice of the military profession was made identical with the
fulfilment of a religious duty.[28](#28)

*Jihad in India*

The sanguine psychology produced by Jihad is evident in the behaviour of
some of the greatest names in Indian Muslim history. Muhammad bin Sakifi
had been sent to invade Sindh by al-Hajjaj. Hajjaj had earlier been
appointed Governor of Mecca by Caliph Abdul Malik in 73 H (692 CE) where
he built the holy Kaba.[29](#29) It was a pious performance; his other
great achievement was, as he claimed, that he had killed 100,000 men
with his own sword.[30](#30) The ambition and boast of killing one lakh
or a hundred thousand human beings was shared by many Muslim Caliphs,
invaders and rulers. Khalid bin Walid was known as "the Sword of Allah,"
Abul Abbas, the first Caliph of the Abbasid line was renowned as "The
blood pourer" and Alauddin Husain was called "*jahan soz* (world
burner)".[31](#31) He carried fire and sword through the kingdom of
Ghazni (1151 CE). Such titles had a pride of place in the history of
Islam.

In India Muhammad bin Qasim killed by thousands, but Mahmud of Ghazni
surely killed by lakhs.[32](#32) and took pride in the fact. This
becomes clear from just two instances. In his attack on Thanesar, "the
blood of the infidels flowed so copiously that the stream was
discoloured, and people were unable to drink it". Similarly, in the
slaughter of Sirsawa near Saharanpur, "the Musalmans paid no regard to
the booty till they had satiated themselves with the slaughter of the
infidels."[33](#33) The temper of a people armed against mankind was
surely influenced by the licence of rapine, murder and revenge as
recommended by their creed. The story is told of how once Mahmud of
Ghazni went on cutting down victim after victim with his sword. In the
process his fingers got jammed on the sword-hilt. His grip had to be
relaxed by douching his hand in hot water. Like Hajjaj, Mahmud was a
scholar of Quran.

*Jihad under Turks*

The chroniclers of the early Turkish rulers of India take pride in
affirming that Qutbuddin Aibak was a killer of lakhs of infidels. Leave
aside enthusiastic killers like Alauddin Khalji and Muhammad bin
Tughlaq, even the "kind-hearted" Firoz Tughlaq killed more than a lakh
Bengalis when he invaded their country. Timur Lang or Tamerlane says he
killed a hundred thousand infidel prisoners of war in Delhi.[34](#34) He
built victory pillars from severed heads at many places. These were acts
of sultans. The nobles were not lagging behind. One Shaikh Daud Kambu is
said to have killed 20,000 with his dagger.[35](#35) The Bahmani sultans
of Gulbarga and Bidar considered it meritorious to kill a hundred
thousand Hindu men, women and children every year.[36](#36) These wars
were fought in the true spirit of Jihad - the total annihilation or
conversion of the non-Muslims. It was in this spirit that some ulema
requested Sultan Iltutmish (1210-1236) to confront the Hindus with a
choice between Islam and death. He advised them patience as dictated by
the compulsions of the situation. Iltutmish fought against Nasiruddin
Qubacha and Tajuddin Yaldoz. But his wars against them are not called
Jihad. Jihad was against non-Muslims. Hence the insistence of the ulema
on this religious duty. In a hundred years time Muslim ambition paved
the way for confident optimism. During the reigns of Nasiruddin Mahmud
and Ghiyasuddin Balban (1246-86) extensive campaigns in southern Uttar
Pradesh, Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand as well as Gwalior, Narwar,
Chanderi and Malwa were undertaken. In Katehar and Mewat there were
systematic massacres of Rajputs and Mewatis in the true spirit of Jihad.
While the numbers of the enslaved boosted Muslim demography, massacres
were ordered on selective basis - only of Hindus.[37](#37) Similar
scenes were witnessed during Alauddin Khalji's invasion of Gujarat in
1299, where massacres by his generals in Anhilwara, Cambay, Asavalli,
Vanmanthali and Somnath earned him, according to *Rasmala*, the
sobriquet of *Khuni*. Also in Chittor, where Alauddin ordered a massacre
of 30,000 Hindus. The comment of Amir Khusrau on this genocide (keeping
in mind the population of the period) is significant. "Praise be to
God"!, writes he in his *Khazain-ul-Futuh* (completed in 1311 CE) "that
he (the sultan) so ordered the massacre of all the chiefs of Hindustan
out of the pale of Islam, by his infidel-smiting sword, that if in this
time it should by chance happen that a schismatic should claim his
right, the pure Sunnis would swear in the name of this Khalifa of God,
that heterodoxy has no right."[38](#38) Shorn of its verbosity his
comment on the horrible massacre only points to the fact that except for
Sunni Muslims no other people could be permitted to live in India. Four
years later he wrote in his *Ashiqa* - "Happy Hindustan, the splendour
of Religion, where the Law finds perfect honour and security. The whole
country, by means of the sword of our holy warriors, has become like a
forest denuded of its thorns by fire... Islam is triumphant, idolatry is
subdued. Had not the *Shariat* Law granted exemption from death by the
payment of poll-tax, the very name of Hind, root and branch, would have
been extinguished."[39](#39) Ziyauddin Barani, a contemporary of Amir
Khusrau, writes in a similar spirit. He quoted the disposition of Qazi
Mughisuddin before Alauddin that the Hindus were the greatest among the
enemies of God and the religion of the Prophet[40](#40) and so needed to
be eliminated. It is in a similar vein that he advocates an all-out
Jihad against the Hindus in his *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*.[41](#41) So
whether it was a sufi of the stature of Amir Khusrau about whose liberal
credentials every secularist swears, or it was an orthodox Maulana like
Ziyauddin Barani, the position of the Hindu idolaters in the Islamic law
was given by them fairly correctly.[42](#42) They deserved to be
exterminated through Jihad. If the sultans conceded to the Hindus the
status of Zimmis, it was because of the compulsion of the Indian
situation.

That is how wars against Hindus were no ordinary wars, casualties no
common casualties, and massacres were massacres of extermination. This
thirst for extermination was also whetted by the resistance of "the
enemies of God" with their determination for survival. The rite of
Jauhar killed the women, the tradition of not deserting the field of
battle made Rajputs and others die fighting in large numbers. When Malwa
was attacked (1305), its Raja is said to have possessed 40,000 horse and
100,000 foot.[43](#43) After the battle, "so far as human eye could see,
the ground was muddy with blood". Many cities of Malwa like Mandu,
Ujjain, Dharanagri and Chanderi were captured after great resistance.
The capitulation of Sevana and Jalor in Rajasthan (1308, 1311) were
accompanied by massacres after years of prolonged warfare. In Alauddin's
wars in the South, similar killings took place, especially in
Dwarsamudra and Tamil Nadu.[44](#44) His successor Mubarak Khalji once
again sacked Gujarat and Devagiri.

Under Muhammad Tughlaq, wars and rebellions knew no end. His expeditions
to Bengal, Sindh and the Deccan, as well as ruthless suppression of
twenty-two rebellions, meant only depopulation in the thirteenth and
first half of the fourteenth century.[45](#45) For one thing, in spite
of constant efforts no addition of territory could be made by Turkish
rulers from 1210 to 1296; for another the Turkish rulers were more
ruthless in war and less merciful in peace. Hence the extirpating
massacres of Balban, and the repeated attacks by others on regions
already devastated but not completely subdued. Bengal was attacked by
Bakhtiyar, by Balban, by Alauddin, and by all the three Tughlaqs -
Ghiyas, Muhammad and Firoz. Malwa and Gujarat were repeatedly attacked
and sacked. Almost every Muslim ruler invaded Rantambhor until it was
subjugated by Alauddin Khalji (1301, again temporarily). Gwalior,
Katehar and Avadh regions were also repeatedly attacked. Rajputana,
Sindh and Punjab (also because of the Mongol invasions), knew no peace.
in the first decade of the fourteenth century Turkish invaders
penetrated into the South, carrying death and destruction. Later on
Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms also came to grips with each other.
Mulla Daud of Bidar vividly describes the war between Muhammad Shah
Bahmani and the Vijayanagar King in 1366 in which "Farishtah computes
the victims on the Hindu side alone as numbering no less than half a
million."[46](#46) Muhammad also devastated the Karnatak region with
vengeance.[47](#47)

*Jihad under Mughals*

The Mughals came with new weapons and new strategy of war, but their
religious ideology of Jihad and zeal remained as of old. This is borne
out by the difference in Babur's attitude and actions in his two wars,
one against the Muslim Ibrahim Lodi and the other against the Hindu Rana
Sanga. Babur's war against Ibrahim Lodi was only a war, against Rana
Sangram Singh it was Jihad. After the defeat of the Lodi Sultan in the
First Battle of Panipat in April 1526, according to Ahmad Yadgar, Babur
praised the slain King, and his corpse was given a decent burial at the
command of the victor.[48](#48) On the other hand, the story of the
Battle of Khanwa against Rana Sanga in March 1527 has been described in
the royal memoirs in an entirely different idiom. In it Rana Sanga is
repeatedly called a pagan (Kafir) with studied contempt. His nobles and
soldiers are similarly abused repeatedly. On account of Sanga's large
army and reputation for bravery, Babur renounced wine as a measure of
seeking God's grace. And how? - cups and flagons were "dashed in pieces,
as God willing! soon will be dashed the gods of the idolaters."[49](#49)
The whole narrative of Babur as well as Shaikh Zain's Fateh Nama is
laced with quotations from the Quran for wishing victory against the
infidels, for "adequate thanks cannot be rendered for a benefit than
which none is greater in the world and nothing is more blessed in the
world to come, to wit, victory over most powerful infidels and dominion
over wealthiest heretics, *'these are the unbelievers, the wicked'*."
All the Hindu chiefs killed in battle *"trod the road to Hell from this
house of clay to the pit of perdition"*. When they were engaged in
battle, they were *"made to descend into Hell, the house of perdition.
They shall be thrown to burn therein, and an unhappy dwelling shall it
be*."[50](#50) In Babur's memoirs his narrative of Jihad is laced with
quotations from the Quran in dozens which shows that he was, like Mahmud
Ghaznavi, a scholar of Quran and Hadis and no simple secular warrior.

After the victory over Rana Sanga, Babur took the title of Ghazi or
victor in holy war. As trophy of victory "an order was given to set up a
pillar of pagan heads."[51](#51) Similar tower of pagan heads was piled
up after the success at Chanderi against Medini Rai. "We made general
massacre of pagans in it. A pillar of pagan heads was ordered set up on
a hill northwest of Chanderi (and) converted what for many years had
been a mansion of hostility, into a mansion of Islam."[52](#52) Such
language is used, such towers of heads of the slain are piled up, only
in the case of Hindus. Similar ideas and actions are not found in
Babur's description of wars against the Muslims in India. The language
betrays the psychology developed by the ideology of Jihad contained in
Islamic scriptures. The ideology is not of universal brotherhood. Its
brotherhood is confined to Muslims only.

Even in emperor Akbar's 'secular' reign the religious spirit of Jihad
was not lost. Abdul Qadir Badaoni who was then one of Akbar's court
chaplains or imams, states that he sought an interview with the emperor
when the royal troops were marching against Rana Pratap in 1576, begging
leave of absence for "the privilege of joining the campaign to soak his
Islamic beard in Hindu infidel blood". Akbar was so pleased at the
expression of allegiance to his person and to the Islamic idea of Jihad
that he bestowed a handful of gold coins on Badaoni as a token of his
pleasure.[53](#53) It may be recalled that as an adolescent, Akbar had
earned the title of Ghazi by beheading the defenseless infidel Himu.
Under Akbar and Jahangir "five or six hundred thousand human beings were
killed," says emperor Jahangir.[54](#54) The figures given by these
killers and their chroniclers may be a few thousand less or a few
thousand more, but what bred this ambition of cutting down human beings
without compunction was the Muslim theory, practice and spirit of Jihad,
as spelled out in Muslim scriptures and rules of administration. Under
Aurangzeb every chronicler avers that wars against infidels were fought
in the spirit of Jihad. In short, Jihad was never given up in India from
the time of Muhammad bin Qasim to that of Aurangzeb and beyond, so long
as Muslim rule lasted.

We may close this discussion on the theory and practice of Jihad by
pointing out that the prophet of Islam was a very practical man. He
advocated Jihad or aggressive wars against non-Muslims till eternity
because he did not visualize a world without Kafirs and people of other
faiths. But he could not be sure of success always. Muhammad himself
sometimes got Muslim prisoners of war released by giving in exchange
beautiful slave girls to the strong adversary at Medina.[55](#55)
Therefore, in many ahadis he recommended that if infidels harass the
Muslims, and offer them peace in return for property the Imam must not
accede thereto as far as possible, as this would be a degradation of the
Muslim honour. But if destruction is apprehended, purchasing peace with
property is lawful, because it is a duty to repel destruction in every
possible way.[56](#56) Muslims also repelled destruction *in this wise*
in Hindustan from the time of Iltutmish to that of Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb,
ever keen on Jihad as stressed in his *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, used to
surrender forts to the Marathas when destruction stared him in the face,
Rajputs too used to recover their forts and properties from Muslim
rulers throughout the medieval period. But Jihad was a religious duty
for Muslims till eternity for the annihilation of non-Muslims. It was
carried out in India to the best of the competence and strength of
Muslim invaders and rulers throughout the medieval period.

3.2. JUSTICE

*The Daily Mail*, London, published a series of articles on India
between April 1933 and April 1934 by many eminent British
administrators. These articles were later published in the form of a
pamphlet which cost one penny. The articles are full of imperialist love
for India - a love also shared by the earlier Muslim imperialist power.
Islam has all the ingredients of imperialism found anywhere in the world
in any age. In one of the aforesaid articles Rothermere asserts that
"The plain fact is that India is as indispensable to Britain as Britain
is to India" in the same vein as today it is claimed that India is as
indispensable to Muslims as Muslims are to India. In another article Sir
Michael O'Dwyer, formerly Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab, wrote: "The
essentials of a good government in every country are: (1) External and
internal security, (2) Impartial justice (3) Progressive and efficient
administration and (4) Light taxation."[57](#57) According to Ruben
Levy, as noted earlier, "the duties of the ruler in Islam are (also)
four" - judgement or justice, Taxation, Friday service and Jihad. We
have already dealt with Jihad which also took care of external and more
so of internal security. We shall take up the study of taxation later
on. Here we shall concentrate on justice and Friday service under Muslim
rule.

*Justice by the King*

In Islam, justice has to be done in accordance with the Quran. If
solution is not found in the Quran it should be done as per the Sunnah.
If Sunnah also fails to provide an answer, then it should be done
according to ijtihad (or individual judgement).[58](#58) But justice
must be done. Justice - Islamic justice - has a very important place in
a Muslim state.

"Justice is the balance in which the actions of people, good or bad, are
weighed," says Ziya Barani.[59](#59) "According to the ancient political
ideal... the sovereign is the fountain of justice and it is his duty to
try cases personally in open court."[60](#60) Like their Hindu
counterparts, past and contemporary, Muslim kings in India like
Iltutmish, Balban, Alauddin Khalji and Muhammad Tughlaq, followed this
ideal and personally administered justice in open court. So did the
Mughals. While the emperors attended to ordinary cases every day in open
*darbar*, they had fixed one day in the week specially for cases
requiring evidence of witnesses and their cross-examination. Akbar's day
of administering justice was Thursday, Jahangir's Tuesday, Shahjahan's
Wednesday and Aurangzeb's also Wednesday. Besides kings, the princes,
commanders of armies, and other high officers of the state also decided
cases, expert opinion on law being provided by judicial officials
possessing knowledge of the Shariat.

The law courts under Muslim rule were located in administrative units of
the empire, in Parganas, Sarkars, Subahs and the capital of the empire.
The *adalat* of the Pargana Qazi was the lowest court under the Mughals.
Appeals were preferred to higher courts, to the Qazi-i-Subah and the
emperor. The emperor's court was the highest court in the empire. He
tried both civil and military cases. He also sat as the final court of
appeal within the empire. In deciding -cases, he had the assistance of a
Mufti or Mir Adl. There was a hierarchical cadre of officials like
Qazi-ul-Quzzat or Lord Chief Justice, Qazis, Naib Qazis, Mir Adls and
Muftis who expounded the law and gave opinion on complicated cases. The
emperor's court was quite popular with the people who obtained redress
from his impartiality.

*Judiciary of Muslim State*

But the emperor was not a Qazi or Mufti. Besides, he could not decide
all the hundreds of cases that came up for hearing. These cases were
dealt with by the judiciary. The chief court of the empire was located
in the capital and was presided over by the Qazi-ul-Quzzat, or the Chief
justice of the realm. He was appointed by the emperor. He had the power
to try original civil and military cases. He heard appeals from and
supervised the working of provincial courts. He was assisted in his work
by Qazis, Muftis, Muhtasibs. The Muhtasib was the chief custodian of
public morals. It was his duty to see that there was no infringement of
Islamic law in the public as well as private lives of the people. He
used to enquire into the conduct of the people and so instilled a sense
of fear in them. The office of the Muhtasib was instituted by Caliph
al-Mahdi (775-785) to see that the religious and moral precepts of Islam
were observed and that the offenders were detected and punished.
Muhtasib was like the Christian Inquisitor without the latter's licence
of cruelty and torture. The office of Muhtasib was an integral part of
the administrative set up of the Muslim state. There were Muhtasibs
during the Sultanate period and in the Mughal empire. They were there in
the capital as well as the headquarters of the provinces and their
subdivisions.

*Islamic Justice*

Justice has one meaning for the ruler, another for the ruled. What was
impartial justice for the British was imperialist oppression for the
Indians. What was impartial justice for the Muslims was the imposition
of the Islamic Shariat on the Hindus because Muslim law was full of
discrimination against non-Muslims. Muslim law on crime and punishment
is complicated and cruel. Where imprisonment of a month or two would be
considered sufficient, say for pilferage or theft, in Islam it is
visited with cutting of hands and feet. A Hadd (pl. Hudud) comprises
punishments that are prescribed in the Quran and the Hadis. These
include stoning to death for adultery; one hundred lashes for
fornication,[61](#61) and eighty lashes for drinking wine. When a woman
is to be stoned a chest deep hole is dug for her, so that her nakedness
is not exposed and the modesty of the watching multitude is not
offended. No such hole need be dug for a man. The stoning is begun by
the witnesses followed by the Imam or Qazi, and then by the
participating believers. Cutting off the right hand is prescribed for
theft,[62](#62) and cutting off feet and hands for highway robbery. In
the cases of murder the right of revenge (*qisas*) belongs to the
victim's heir. But the heir can forgo this right of death for murder and
accept blood-price in exchange. For the death of a woman, Jew or
Christian, only half of the blood-price is due. "As slaves and
unbelievers are inferior in status to Muslims they are not entitled to
qisas according to most Muslim *faqihs* (jurists)."[63](#63) In all such
cases, a woman's testimony (*shahadah*) has half the weight of a man's.

It is a very great crime to apostatize from Islam (*irtidad*) and its
punishment is death. The Quran gives the broad outline of these
punishments, all Hadis collections provide many details of the same.
Both Quran and Hadis are specific about punishment of death for giving
up islam.[64](#64) One can accept Islam freely; one can be forcibly
converted or could be captured in war and made a Muslim, but once
converted, one cannot abjure Islam. Once a group of men apostatized from
Islam. Ali burnt them to death. Eight men of the tribe of Ukl became
Muslims. They went to Madinah, but away from the control of the Prophet,
they turned away from Islam. The Prophet sent twenty Ansars after them.
They were captured and brought back. The Holy Prophet "got their hands
cut off and their feet, and put out their eyes, and threw them on the
stony ground until they died". Another *hadis* adds that "while on the
stony ground they were asking for water, but they were not given
water."[65](#65) The rules are so strict that if a Muslim does not deny
Islam, if he adheres to all injunctions but denies one single principle,
he becomes Kafir and deserves to be killed.[66](#66) There was no
effective law to hinder the infliction of many other forms of cruel
punishment according to the caprice of the local official. For example,
killing a man by making a snake bite him became a common Muslim
punishment in India.[67](#67)

Men have been punished in war and peace in all countries through the
ages. But severe flogging, mutilation of limbs, amputation of hands and
feet and noses and ears, putting out eyes by piercing them with red hot
iron, nailing of hands and feet, flaying alive, hamstringing and
decapitating were Islamic specializations. Add to this pouring molten
lead into the throat, crushing the bones with mallets, burning the body
with fire, driving nails into the hands, feet and bosom, cutting the
sinews, sawing men asunder - these and many similar tortures were
common. With this background, with this ideology, with this set of
punishments, justice in medieval India under Muslim rule could only be
barbarous in nature, content and cruelty. There were cruel kings and
kind kings, there were corrupt Qazis and honest Qazis, but so long as
punishments remained barbaric, there was little hope for the accused or
the victim. In Islamic conception the state belongs to God. Hence a
violation of public right becomes an offence against God. As a result
punishment for injury done to God's authority has to be visited
according to the rules laid down by God and his Prophet as contained in
the Quran and Hadis.

In India in the Sultanate period such punishments continued to be
awarded as the chronicles of Barani and Afif show. Under Alauddin Khalji
and Muhammad bin Tughlaq punishments became more severe. Cutting of
hands and feet was sanctioned by the Shariat. Alauddin added to it
slicing off flesh from the haunches of the defaulting
shopkeepers.[68](#68) Since "God Almighty himself in the Quran commanded
the complete degradation of the non-Muslim (*yan yad yaham
saghrun*),[69](#69) slaying, plundering and imprisoning of the Hindus
became routine. For a handful of *tankahs*, revenue officials were
clamped in jails for many years receiving blows and kicks,[70](#70)
while the Hindus in general had no gold or silver left in their houses.
Muhammad Tughlaq confined Shaikhzada Jami in an iron cage leading to his
death.[71](#71) Under him punishments laid down by the Shariat were
scrupulously awarded. The mother of prince Masud was ordered by the
Sultan to be stoned to death for adultery, the verdict having been
pronounced by Qazi Kamaluddin. Ibn Battutah relates that on one occasion
he himself as Qazi gave eighty stripes to one Razi of Multan for making
himself drunk and stealing five hundred *dinars*. He also says that
during Muhammad Tughlaq's reign people used to admit uncommitted crimes
and courted death to escape torture. When the royal order was issued for
the execution of any person, he was executed at the gate of the palace
where his corpse remained for three days.[72](#72) The Diwan-i-Siyasat
worked vigorously and every day hundreds of culprits were brought for
punishments.[73](#73) Sultan Firoz Tughlaq writes in his *Fatuhat* that
he appeased by means of gifts the heirs of those who had been deprived
of a limb, nose, eye, hand or foot in the time of his late lord and
patron Sultan Muhammad Shah. Firoz Tughlaq is known for his
kind-heartedness but, according to Shams Siraj Afif, he killed one lakh
80 thousand Bengalis in war. Towers of skulls of the killed were
erected. The chronicler adds, "Firoz Shah was near the mound of skulls
with all magnificence; and glory and was inspecting the counting of the
heads.

In India, in course of time and under the influence of Hindu environment
the violence of punishments was mitigated to a great extent. Under
Akbar, "the compassionate heart of His Majesty finds no pleasure in
cruelties or in causing sorrow to others; he is ever sparing of the
lives of his subjects, wishing to bestow happiness upon all..."[75](#75)
So that, by the time of Akbar and Jahangir, "No person was to suffer,
for any offence, the loss of nose or ear. If the crime were theft, the
offender was to be scourged with thorns, or deterred... by an
attestation on the Koran."[76](#76) In his Tuzuk, emperor Jahangir
asserts that "I forbade the cutting of the nose or ears of any person,
and... made a vow... that I would not blemish any one by this
punishment."[77](#77) This statement, however, inadvertently shows that
mutilation of this type was quite prevalent before him. Perhaps the
digressions from the letter of the law prompted Aurangzeb to restate
once more and clearly, the basic canons of Islamic law in his
*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, completed in 1670."[78](#78) Aurangzeb also issued
a farman to the Diwan of Gujarat in June 1672 giving a gist of his penal
code. in theory and practice mutilation and decapitation was continued
under Aurangzeb, but there was greater emphasis on repentance, and
flogging was more often resorted to. But that was also to give time to
the accused to see the merits of the 'bright religion' and become its
adherent. Those who did not show subservience were meted out cruel
punishments. In northern India, Gurdwara Sisgunj in Chandni Chowk,
Delhi, stands witness to Aurangzeb's idea of punishment to non-Muslims.
Here the Sikh Guru Tegh Bahadur was called upon to embrace Islam, and on
his refusal was tortured for five days and then "beheaded on a warrant
from the emperor" (December 1675). In South India when the Maratha King
Sambhaji and his minister Kavikalash were taken prisoner, "that very
night his (Sambhaji's) eyes were blinded and the next day the tongue of
Kavikalash was cut out. After a fortnight's torture their limbs were
hacked one by one and their flesh thrown to the dogs" (March 1689).

*Fate of the Mutilated*

What was the fate of those who were mutilated? It would be euphemistic
to say that they lived a miserable life. One case gives a glimpse of the
plight of such people. Pietro Della Valle was in western India in
1623-24. In Cambay, where "the people are most part Gentiles", he saw "a
famous Hospital of Birds" and another of animals like goats, sheep, and
calves. "Among the beasts there was also a thief, who having been taken
in theft had both his hands cut off. But the compassionate Gentiles that
he might perish miserably now (that) he was no longer able to get his
living, took him into his place, and kept him among the poor beasts, not
suffering him to want anything."[79](#79) So, the victims of Muslim
justice could live like beasts after they had been mutilated. But many
managed to survive. They probably got their food from the free kitchens
run by the government.

There was probably another avenue of relief, perhaps rather than
probably. Mutilation, blinding and beheading were common punishments as
laid down by the Shariat. It stands to reason that some sort of remedy
would have been sought to be applied in the case of persons who had lost
a limb or the eyes. In India, the land of Charak, Shushrut and
Dhanwantari, medicine and surgery had been in a developed state from
ancient times. The art and science of surgery was widely practised even
by some expert barbers, as for example, for doing circumcision of little
Muslim boys and newly converted adults. Allama Abul Fazl and emperor
Jahangir both write, but under the caption of magic and sorcery, whereby
a man would be cut up in many pieces and then made to appear unhurt.
Jadunath Sarkar in a footnote in the *Ain-i-Akbari* recounts the
testimony of Ibn Battutah, Edward Melton, and many others about how
dismembered limbs were joined together to form the living man once
again.[80](#80) Jahangir's *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi* describes such a case
of revival of a man.[81](#81)

In emperor Jahangir's *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, surgical operations by
Bengalis, Portuguese and others are described at length along with the
description of alchemy and magic.[82](#82) But there may have been some
remedy available to cure, to some extent at least, the disabilities of
the mutilated. Jahangir talks of his expert, excellent and loyal
physicians but they were not surgeons.[83](#83) However, his own son
Khusrau, who had been blinded had his eyes partially restored.[84](#84)
Similarly, slit noses could be repaired to look almost like the original
through plastic surgery.[85](#85) Niccolao Manucci gives a detailed
description of such an operation of rhinoplasty during the
Bijapur-Mughal war under Aurangzeb, when the Deccanis used to cut off
noses of Mughal soldiers and send them bleeding to the Mughal
camp.[86](#86) But there is no case cited of one who had lost his hand
or leg being restored to normal health in medieval India.

*Jails*

One thing not mentioned in Islamic scriptures is imprisonment of people.
The Quran and Hadis do not speak of jails. The Hadis in particular speak
only of beheading or mutilation. In India there were jails under Muslim
rule. But these were few. The number of prisoners was not large, for the
usual punishments were mutilation and death. In the fourteenth century
"for (a default in collection of) five hundred or one thousand
*tankahs*" revenue officials were clamped in jail for many years under
Alauddin Khalji. Besides government officials, bootleggers and other
criminals were fettered and thrown into underground jails, built
specially for them. In these monstrous holes many offenders died, or
survived with completely shattered health."[87](#87) Amir Khurd, the
author of *Siyar-ul-Awliya*, describes the horrible conditions
prevailing in such prisons. He says that once his father Saiyyad Kamal
was imprisoned by Sultan Muhammad Tughlaq in Bhaksi jail near Devagiri.
It was reported about that place, says he, that no prisoner used to come
out alive from it as it was full of rats and snakes.[88](#88) The state
hardly made any arrangements for "reformation" of the prisons, and the
prisoners suffered of oppressions of local authorities."[89](#89) By the
sixteenth-seventeenth century there were jails in many Mughal forts. The
jail in the Gwalior Fort was meant, besides others, for royal prisoners
ever since the Sultanate period. The other prisons of note were
Ranthambhor, Rohtas, Bhakkar, Junnair, Biana and Lahore. Gwalior was the
most prominent fort and next to it in importance was Ranthambhor.
Jahangir released "not less than seven thousand individuals, some of
whom had been in confinement for forty years," in the fort of
Gwalior.[90](#90) Similarly, he set free many prisoners, except
murderers and rebels, from the fort of Ranthambhor on two
occasions.[91](#91)

*Punishment for the Poor*

The stern justice, the dire punishments, as happens in autocracies, were
meant for the poor while the rich and influential remained untouched;
the rich who could "put a few coins in the hands of the Qazi," got scot
free. This was specially so, say, in the case of wine-drinking. Wine is
prohibited in Islam, but in practice only for the poor.

Many Muslims cannot forgo the pleasure of drinking wine in this world
when it is promised to them in the next. The description of Paradise in
the Quran specifically mentions free flow of wine (*kasir-ut sharab* and
*utuf-ul-yeham*) as one of its blissful contents (*Surah* 38 *ayat* 51,
also 37: 45-46). Prophet Muhammad in one verse of the Quran praises
wines of different colours (*sharab-i-mukhtalif alwana*) as signs of
God's grace to mankind and cure of many diseases (Quran 16:69). Nasai
devotes many *ahadis* to the discussion of drinking in Islam. According
to him Muslims drank wine of wheat and barley. They were advised by the
Prophet to dilute strong wine with water and not to get
intoxicated.[92](#92) According to Bukhari many Muslims drank wine on
the day of *ghazwah*.[93](#93) However, as the early companions of the
Prophet got drunk, Muhammad was obliged to show some disapproval. He
found that drinking led to gambling, quarrelling and stealing and, worse
still, to neglecting the namaz. Consequently, he forbade it outright
(Quran 2:216; 5:90-92). Wine-drinking became punishable by eighty
lashes, and according to some traditions drinking of wine is punishable
by death.[94](#94)

In medieval India Muslim ruling classes drank freely, at the same time
punishing poor helpless Muslims for the "crime". For example, while
Alauddin Khalji had prohibited wine-drinking, his own son Qutbuddin
Mubarak drank hard and so drank his nobles. All Mughal emperors from
Babur to Shahjahan drank hard, Jahangir drank the hardest. But since
wine is prohibited in Islam, it was a matter of routine for rulers to
put a stop to drinking by common people. Even orthodox sultans like
Firoz Tughlaq and Sikandar Lodi drank secretly "to keep in good
health".[95](#95) Most of the Mughal nobles drank openly and "all
princes drank in secret."[96](#96)

In such a scenario, the responsibility of punishing the guilty fell on
the Qazis or Muslim judges. Judges of medieval India were, generally
speaking, not held in high esteem in high circles. Some lacked
erudition, others integrity. Maulana Shamsuddin Turk, a theologian
hailing from Egypt in the fourteenth century, complained "that ill-fated
wiseacres of black faces sat in the mosques with abominable books and
made money by cheating both the accuser and the accused…"[97](#97) At
home they were accused of being bereft of dignity and being altogether
worthless.[98](#98) The sultans even used to punish the Qazis quite
often. European travellers visiting India during the Mughal period like
William Finch, Edward Terry and Francois Bernier are also critical of
medieval judicial officers. They are criticised either for ignorance of
law or cruelty or corruption.[99](#99)

The Qazis could be easily bribed. Qazi Abdul Wahab, the Chief Qazi of
Aurangzeb's reign, had amassed a fortune of 33 lakhs of rupees besides
much jewellery during the sixteen years he held office.[100](#100) But
the Qazi alone did not administer justice. The will of the king and his
substitutes (subedars, nobles) "is the law".[101](#101) For example,
Shahjahan, like Sher Shah Suri, insisted on his police officers to any
how produce the thief, else they themselves would be punished. Naturally
a 'culprit' was produced if not the real thief. One good thing in the
system was that the trial by the king, his officers and Qazis was quick,
but executions were also as quick as the trials. All this was due to the
fact that the quality of courts left much to be desired, as, "the
judicial department stands in marked contrast in organisation, in
status, and dignity to other departments of the central government which
were highly organised and equipped with efficient men."[102](#102)

However, in a society where slavery existed, where the Muslims were
taught to "obey God, the Prophet and those in authority over you," and
Hindu attitude of fatalism among the lowly generated slavish respect for
all those who administered justice - kings, officers, qazis - the
punishments, howsoever barbarous, were taken in their stride.

3.3. FRIDAY SERVICE

In every religion prayers have a place of importance. In Islam their
place is much more important as they are said as many as five times
during the day. In Islam, the liturgical mosque service is known as
*Salat*. *Salat* is Arabic: its equivalent in Persian and Urdu is namaz.
The following are the times of prayer: (i) *Fajr ki namaz,
Salat-ul-fajr*, or morning prayer, is said from 5 a.m. to sunrise. (ii)
*Zuhur ki namaz, Salat-uz-zuhr*, or midday prayer, between 1 and 3 p.m.
(iii) *Asr ki namaz, Salat-ul-asr*, or afternoon prayer, from 4 to 4.30
P.m., or till sunset. (iv) *Maghrib ki namaz, Salat-ul-maghrib*, or
sunset prayer, at 6 p.m. (v) *Isha ki namaz, Salat-ul-Isha*, or prayer
when night has closed, at bed time, between 8 p.m. and midnight. These
five times of prayer are obligatory(*farz*). Besides these are others
known as 'traditional' (*sunnat*) and supererogatory(*nafl*) which are
observed by more religious and devout persons.[103](#103)

"The daily prayers are not necessarily congregational. They may be
offered up by the worshippers singly or in companies, in the mosque, at
home, or by the way. But at mid-day of Friday, the service took a more
public form, at which the believers as a body, unless detained by
sufficient cause, were expected to attend. The usual prayers were on
this occasion followed by an address or sermon pronounced by Mohammad.
This weekly oration was usefully adapted to the circumstances of the day
and feelings of the audience. It allowed full scope for the prophet's
eloquence... and helped rivet the claims of Islam."[104](#104)

Friday, the day chosen for the congregational prayer, had a special
significance. According to many *ahadis* Friday is the best day on which
the sun rises, the day on which Adam was taken into Paradise and turned
out of it. On Friday his sins were pardoned. He died on Friday. It will
be the day of Resurrection (*Qiamat*). The Prophet made his first entry
into Madinah on that day, and he appointed it as the day of public
worship. A Muslim saying namaz on Friday has his supplication granted by
Allah.[105](#105) According to a conservative interpretation, "Friday
was not indeed to be a Sabbath; for that institution he (the Prophet)
had no desire to imitate, but it was to correspond with the sacred
week-day of the other communities, and since the Christians had seized
the day after the Saturday, he had no choice but to take the day before
it."[106](#106) The origins of Friday service may be traced to the early
problems of Islam. in the beginning, Muslims were few. They were advised
to remain together, in groups, in company, and in prayer to have a
feeling of the strength of unity. It was decided to call them all to
pray together in congregation.[107](#107)

*The Azan*

In the absence of a time-knowing device, like the clock, the worshippers
used to assemble for prayer at different times resulting in much
confusion. It was felt necessary to call the congregational prayer at
one appointed time. How could this be done? It was suggested that a flag
should be raised on a high place. People will see it, inform one another
and assemble for prayer. But the Hazrat did not approve of it. It was
then suggested that the Jewish trumpet or the Christian hammer may be
employed for calling the people to prayer. This too was not appreciated.
The Prophet did not want any similarity with Jewish or Christian
practice. Besides, in every masjid, there would have been need to keep a
horn for blowing. Umar saw in a dream the principle of azan or "call to
prayer". It was also revealed to Abdullah bin Zaid. The Prophet asked
his black slave Bilal to summon the worshippers to prayer. Bilal had a
loud voice. He called from some eminence, such as the roof of a barn. It
was in the second year of *hijr* that this practice became regular in
Madinah and began to be regarded as an institution of Islam.

Once this institution was established, no exceptions were made. Those
who heard the call were ordered to come to join the congregation on pain
of having their houses burned down, no excuse being
permitted.[108](#108) A blind old man living far from the congregational
mosque asked the Prophet for permission to absent himself as he was
blind and old - he could not see and could hardly walk. The Prophet
asked him if he could hear the azan. On being told he could, he was
denied permission for absenting himself from the
congregation.[109](#109) The *ahadis* declare that namaz said in
congregation is twenty-five times superior to namaz said alone at home.
Muhammad was very strict about attendance in congregational
prayer.[110](#110) It was obligatory for every Muslim, with the
exception of four - ghulam, woman, boy and the sick.[111](#111) Muhammad
was very particular about Muslims staying together and eating together
like brothers.[112](#112) He exhorted them to pray together lest the
Mushriks should harm them.[113](#113) It became incumbent on one momin
to protect the life and property of another momin. If a non-Muslim harms
a Muslim, the whole community should join together to save the latter
from harm.[114](#114) "Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah; and those who
are with him are strong against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst
each other."[115](#115) The unity among Muslims for which the community
is famous, was thus established from the very birth of the creed.

*Friday Namaz a must*

The Friday Congregation service posed some problems which, however, were
satisfactorily solved. Abu Daud tells how order for bathing on Friday
was issued. Early Muslims were poor. They used to wear blankets (of
camel wool). They had to do lot of physical labour and sweated
profusely. The masjid (in Madinah) was small with low ceiling. Once in
summer season, the bad smell of perspiration reached the Rasul. He
observed that when such a day arrives (i.e., Friday) take bath, use oil
and perfume you have. In course of time Allah made them rich (through
Jihad). They began to wear other clothes besides the blanket. Their
burden was also lightened (as they began to take work from slaves and
slave-girls) and mosques also became spacious. The odour which
inconvenienced one another was gone. That is how bath became customary
on Friday. Bath is considered good but not "obligatory".[116](#116) But
it is obligatory that the service should be performed in Arabic and that
the clothes and body of the worshipper should be clean.[117](#117)

The Prophet was a strict disciplinarian, and a watch was kept on the
Faithful about the observance of namaz. One who neglected namaz for
three Fridays without reason, was marked out by Allah.[118](#118) Even
children were to say namaz. For boys it began at the age of seven, at 10
they were to be beaten up if they avoided it.[119](#119) When there was
Jihad, namaz was to be said in parts and by rotation.[120](#120) It was
inculcated in the minds of the Musalmans that the difference between a
Musalman and a Kafir is that of namaz. There is a vow of namaz among the
Muslims. One who renounced it did *kufr*, did *shirk*.[121](#121) So far
as the congregational prayer was concerned, attendance was compulsory.
Compulsion inculcated a sense of awe and raised the number of devotees.
People "could refuse this invitation or call at their peril, spiritual
and physical. As his followers became more powerful, the peril became
increasingly more physical."[122](#122)

As the strength of the worshippers increased it was felt necessary to
manage the crowd by making them stand in rows of straight files. First a
long stick was used to see that the *jamaat* stood in linear array.
Later on a line was drawn for the same purpose.[123](#123) Men and boys
stood in front rows, women in the last.[124](#124) Men stood as close to
one another as possible lest Shaitan should pass between them or Allah
sow discord among them.[125](#125) No one was allowed to pass in front
of the congregation during prayer. If one did, the order was to fight
him. In the days of the Prophet, a man once happened to pass on a donkey
in front of the namaz. His feet were cut off.[126](#126) The namaz
during the early period was performed in privacy. Afterwards it was
employed as a sort of military drill. "Whatever may be its origin, it is
evidently a military exercise, intended to train soldiers (*mujahidin*)
for endurance…"[127](#127) In the early years of Islam the main features
of the Friday service were prayer in congregation with worshippers
standing in straight linear rows. Attendance was compulsory and military
discipline was maintained. The sermon was like the order of the day; it
comprised advice, reprimand and directions on the religious and
political obligations for the faithful. A sense of awe pervaded raising
the number of worshippers. The occupation of Makkah (8 H/630 CE) had
skyrocketed the prestige of Muhammad. It was the Quraish who had
declared war on the Prophet and opposed him. When Makkah was occupied,
the Quraish became his subjects. Since they could no longer display
enmity towards him they entered into God's religion, coming to him from
all directions.[128](#128)

*Congregational Prayer and Iconoclasm*

The tradition of Friday congregational prayer was followed wherever the
Muslims went. In India in the early eighth century, Muhammed bin Qasim
established many mosques in towns he took in Sindh, like Debal, Alor,
Nirun and Multan and propagated the Islamic faith. Besides, there were
some mosques in Gujarat and on Malabar coast where there were
settlements of Muslim merchants. The Quwwat-ul-Islam Masjid was the
first congregational mosque built in Delhi after the conquest of
Hindustan by the Muslims. it was built, as per Arabian tradition and
command, from the materials obtained from the places of idols. In this
case the Mosque was built from the debris of 27 Hindu and Jain temples
as per an inscription found carved on it. It had been ordained in the
Hadis to construct mosques at places where idols were, and the tradition
was scrupulously followed in Arabia. At Taif, for example, a masjid was
built where there were idols of Mushriks.[129](#129) It is related in
some Biographies of Muhammad that while the siege of Taif was being
carried on, some companions were ordered to destroy every idol they
could find. "Thereupon Ali, the Commander of the Faithful... destroyed
all the idols of the Bani Hoazan and Bani Thaqyf which were in that
region."[130](#130) No count of temples is available in the sources.
They must have been many. Similar was the fate of other temples. There
were 360 idols at Kaba. They were all destroyed. Hubal, the principal
idol in the Kaba, was pulled down and used as a doorstep when the
Prophet conquered Makkah. Having purified Makkah, the Prophet sent
expeditions to those idols which were around and had them destroyed.
These included al-Uzza, al-Manat, Suwa, Buana and Zulkaffan.[131](#131)
When Islam arrived in India, both the practices were religiously
followed - building mosques at the sites and with the debris of Hindu
temples and using idols as steps leading into the mosque. Just as it was
commanded to fight the non-Muslims till they recited the
*Kalima*,[132](#132) it was also commanded to "make your Masjids as tall
and magnificent as Jews and Christians make their synagogues and
churches."[133](#133) The Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque in Delhi was erected in
this very spirit - as symbol of unity and strength of Islam as other
mosques had been built earlier by the invader Mahmud of Ghazni at many
places. The congregational mosques in particular also stood as a
challenge and an invitation to the people to convert to the new creed.

For example, at Kalinjar in 1202, "The temples were converted into
mosques," writes Hasan Nizami, "and the voices of the summoners to
prayer ascended to the highest heavens, and the very name of idolatry
was annihilated."[134](#134) Call to prayer five times a day with a loud
voice carried an invitation and a message - join us, or else. This
helped in the conversion of people to Islam.

Mosques came up in large numbers in towns and cities and even in
villages as the Muslim rule spread. in any place the main mosque was
known as the Jama Masjid or Friday Congregational Mosque. The
Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque in Delhi, the symbol of strength of the newly
established Islamic state in India, served as the congregational mosque.
It was extended by Sultans Iltutmish and Allaudin Khalji. Alauddin
nearly doubled the size of this Masjid and built a magnificent gate to
its entrance known as the Alai Darwaza. This indicates swift rise in
Muslim population in the proximity of the mosque. As per tradition
*madrasas* were located in the Friday mosques. Alauddin's *madrasa* or
college lies immediately to the southwest of the Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque.
He constructed many other mosques as well as some masjids in his newly
built city of Siri.

Of the mosques of Alauddin Khalji constructed outside the capital,
mention may be made of the masjid at Mathura[135](#135) and the tomb of
Shaikh Farid (built C 1300), which was probably a converted Hindu or
Jain temple. There is another masjid built about the same time in
Bharuch. it is also a converted Jain temple. In 1300 Alp Khan,
brother-in-law of Alauddin and governor of Gujarat, constructed the
Adinah mosque at Patan. It was built of white marble, and it is related
"that it was once an idol temple converted into a mosque". The Adinah
mosque no longer exists. After the conquest of Chittor in 1303, Alladin
"constructed a congregational mosque. There was a temple lying in
ruins."[136](#136) In Biana there is the Ukha mosque belonging to the
Khalji period. Many mosques were built during Alauddin's invasion of the
South. Farishtah claims that a mosque was built as far away as at
Rameshwaram and called Masid-i-Alai and that it was in existence when
Farishtah lived.[137](#137) The above examples clearly show that as per
the dictates of the Quran and the injunctions of the Hadis and the
Sunnah, mosques in India too were built on the sites of the idol temples
and with the materials obtained from razing the shrines. Muhammad bin
Tughlaq built the Begumpuri Masjid at Jahanpanah. It is an imposing
mosque of great size. Firoz's Kali Masjid or Kalan Masjid built by
Khan-i-Jahan II in 789 H/1387 CE., stands intact till today near the
Turkman Gate of old Delhi.[138](#138)

*Congregational Prayer in India*

Five times a day namaz was performed by all Muslim kings, nobles and
others. From the early days of Islam in Arabia there was insistence on
compulsory namaz for all Muslims. Sultans Iltutmish and Balban said it
and presided at Friday prayers. In his *wasaya* (precepts) Balban
exhorted both his sons, princes Muhammad and Bughra Khan, that a king
should not neglect the worship of God and five-time prayers should be
offered punctually and in congregation. In his turn Bughra Khan told his
son Kaiqubad that namaz and roza are very important. One who does not
observe namaz is no Muslim; to kill him is justified.[139](#139) All
this refers to converted Indians who swelled the Muslim numbers since
the days of Muhammad bin Qasim.[140](#140) They were nominally converted
as, for example, Barwaris whose leader Nasiruddin Khusrau Shah created
*fitna* during and after the reign of Qutbuddin Mubarak Shah (1320 CE).
It appears that they did not care to observe five-time namaz and were
dubbed as low born. Muhammad Tughlaq kept a strict watch on their
attending the Friday prayers. According to Ibn Battutah: "His standing
orders were to the effect that prayers must be recited in
congregations... even the menials - those who held the animals of the
staff - were punished when they missed the prayers. The sultan issued
orders that the people (newly converted) should learn the principles of
ablution and prayers as well as the fundamentals of Islam, and they were
interrogated on these... In the course of a single day he once killed
nine persons for neglecting that (prayers)."[141](#141) As for Muhammad
Tughlaq himself "the mottos and emblems of Islam are preserved by him,
and he lays great stress on the performance of (the obligatory five
prayers of the day)."[142](#142) All Muslim sultans and officers
participated in Friday service, although this obvious fact may not have
been mentioned by chroniclers about each and every member of the ruling
class.

Some innovations were introduced by Firoz Shah in the Friday Service.
The Sultan 'invented' the *Tas wa Gharial* or the Big Bell or Clock. It
was fixed at the top of the Kushak-i-Firozabad and people were amazed to
see it. When the bell was struck people came to know about the time of
day and night. It guided the *namaziz* about the *zuhr* and 'asr prayers
and the *roza-dars* about the time of *iftar* and *sehri*. In a way it
was against the dictates of Islam in which any Jewish or Christian
practice was taboo, and striking the bell or gong for calling the people
to prayer was Christian. Still, the azan as usual was continued to call
people for prayer and the *Tas wa Ghatial* had many other uses also -
Afif recounts seven benefits of the contraption.[143](#143)

After the Friday services, Firoz Shah used to repair to his palace where
parties of musicians, athletes, wrestlers and story-tellers assembled in
groups from the four parts of the city. Their number used to swell about
two or three thousand. The king listened to music and witnessed the
performance of the dancers. He watched the wrestling feats of the
pugilists and listened to anecdotes of the story-tellers. He passed his
time in these entertainments till the time of the asr prayer. Then
performers were handsomely rewarded. Every one present received some
award, including the children present on the occasion.[144](#144) Shams
Siraj Afif writes about mosques of Firoz Shah Tughlaq thus: "From the
*qasba* of Inderpat (present Indraprastha Estate) to the Kushak-i-Shikar
(present Delhi University area), five kos apart all the land was
occupied... There were eight Public Mosques and one private mosque...
The Public Mosques were each large enough to accommodate 10,000
suppliants."[145](#145) This also shows how Muslim population had grown
in the capital city in the course of a hundred and fifty years.

Needless to repeat that mosques, and in particular Friday mosques,
continued to be built throughout the medieval period throughout the
country. When Muslim provincial dynasties came up, mosques of large size
and built with local materials came up in Sindh, Kashmir, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Malwa, Jaunpur and the Deccan kingdoms in Karnataka and
Andhra Pradesh. In the Sultanate of Delhi, Sikandar Lodi was by far the
greatest builder in the fifteenth century. A devout Musalman, he is said
to have built mosques throughout his kingdom,[146](#146) like in Lahore,
Karnal, Hansi and Makanpur (district Kanpur), besides many others in
Delhi and Agra.[147](#147) His notable structures in Delhi are the Moth
ki Masjid and the mosque attached to the Bara Gumbad. The Lodi rulers,
indeed all Afghan ruling elite, observed the five-time namaz and
presided over Friday service.

*Protest against Iconoclasm*

Mughal kings, queens, princes and princesses, all built congregational
mosques in many important places in the country. Most of these were
constructed at the sites of old Hindu temples. Muslim rulers made it a
point to construct large congregational mosques and idgahs after
destroying magnificent Hindu temples found in places held specially holy
by the Hindus. The smaller temples were replaced by ordinary mosques.
Consequently we shall also confine our examples to a few well-known
temples which were razed or turned into mosques. Somnath, a very famous
temple on the west coast, was sacked by Mahmud of Ghazni and several
other Muslim kings. Babur built the Babri Masjid at Ayodhya on the
temple site of the birthplace of Lord Ram (Ramjanambhumi). In the reign
of Akbar, a mosque was built in 975 H/1567-68 CE at Jaunpur. It merits
mention because the details of the undertaking show how the owner was
dispossessed of his property and how the officer completing the task was
rewarded. The mosque was built by Nawab Mohsin Khan. The materials for
the mosque were "taken from those of the temple of Lachman Das, Diwan of
Khan-i-Zaman Ali Quli Khan... Akbar made over all the property of the
Diwan to Nawab Mohsin Khan," for "thanks that by guidance of the
Everlasting and Living (Allah), this house of infidelity became the
niche of prayer (i.e. Mosque). As a reward for that the generous Lord,
constructed an abode for its builder in paradise."[148](#148) Akbar took
great interest in conserving, repairing and adding to the Dargah of
Muinuddin Chishti at Ajmer which is also built on a Dev
temple.[149](#149)

Jahangir was not wanting in the performance of his duty in this regard
while Shahjahan was quite zealous. Of course the puritanical Aurangzeb
chose the most renowned sites of Hindu worship to construct
congregational mosques Ayodhya, Mathura and Banaras. Saqi Mustaad Khan,
the author of *Maasir-i-Alamgiri* writes: "His majesty, eager to
establish Islam, issued orders to the governors of all the provinces
(imperial *farman* dated April 9, 1669) to demolish the schools and
temples of the infidels and put down with the utmost urgency the
teaching and the public practice of the religion of these misbelievers."
Soon after "it was reported that, according to the Emperor's command his
officers had demolished the temple of Vishwanath at Kashi". "The reviver
of the faith of the prophet, issued orders for the demolition of the
temple situated at Mathura, famous as the Dera of Kesho Rai. In a short
time by the great exertions of his officers the destruction of this
strong foundation of infidelity was accomplished, and on its site a
lofty mosque was built at the expenditure of a large sum." "Praised be
the august God of the faith of Islam that... such a wonderful and
seemingly impossible work was successfully accomplished. On seeing the
strength of the emperor's faith... the proud Rajas were stifled... the
idols, large and small... were brought to Agra, and buried under the
mosque of the Begum Sahib (Jahanara Begum), in order to be continually
trodden upon. The name of Mathura was changed to Islamabad."[150](#150)

Friday service is an article of faith with Muslims. It has three
components - congregational namaz, sermon by the imam and, under Muslim
rule, an ever rising number of *namazis*. Congregational mosques could
be built without destroying Hindu temples. But in Islam, breaking the
shrines of the people of other faiths is advocated by Hadis and Sunnah.
Provocative acts of iconoclasm were therefore freely indulged in India
without any regard to the feelings of the non-Muslims. Muslim
chroniclers have written dozens of accounts about how Hindu temples and
monasteries were razed to the ground and how images of Hindu gods and
goddesses were destroyed or desecrated. Commandments of Allah (Quran)
and precedents set by the Prophet (Sunnah) are frequently cited by them
in support of what the Muslim warriors did both in times of war and of
peace. But they do not mention Hindu response to such malevolent acts.
Hindu Rajas were not stifled; Hindu resistance never slackened. They did
react for years, for decades and for centuries, as best as they could,
under the circumstances. We shall confine our notice to the only four
renowned temples - Somnath, Ayodhya, Banaras, and Mathura - held
specially sacred by the Hindus. The bitter memories of their destruction
still linger in the Hindu mind.

Somnath was sacked by Mahmud of Ghazni in 1026 in the reign of Bhim Deva
(1022-64 CE). It was rebuilt by Raja Kumarpala (1143-74). Gujarat was
again invaded by a general of Alauddin Khalji in 1299, and the temple
sacked again. The wealth of the temple was seized, its idol broken and
carried to Delhi on bullock carts where it was thrown at the steps of
the Congregational Mosque to be trampled under the feet of the faithful.
After the destruction of the temple by Ulugh Khan in 1299, Chudasena,
the Raja of Junagarh (1270-1333), again restored the edifice. In the
middle of the nineteenth century it stood in a mutilated form, but "the
whole of the buildings are most elaborately carved and ornamented with
figures single and in groups of various dimensions."[151](#151) This
shows that it had a chequered history of destruction and restoration
from the eleventh to the nineteenth century. After about a thousand
years of its first destruction, it has been rebuilt for the seventh time
as a magnificent temple dedicated to Lord Somnath in the middle of this
twentieth century.

In 1528-29 Mir Baqi, a Mughal official, by Babur's orders destroyed the
temple at Ayodhya commemorating Lord Rama's birthplace, built a mosque
in its place as attested to by an inscription on it.[152](#152) But the
Hindus continued to struggle to reclaim it and worship there. Aurangzeb
destroyed it once again when, writes Niccolao Manucci, "all of them
(temples at Hardwar and Ayodhya) are thronged with worshippers, even
those that are destroyed are still venerated by the Hindus and visited
by the offering of alms."[153](#153) Finally Hindus, working on the
principle that "revenge is a kind of wild justice," have destroyed the
Babri structure on December 6, 1992 and are striving to build the
Ramjanambhumi temple at its original site.[154](#154)

The desecration and conversion of the temple of Bir Singh Bundela at
Mathura built at a cost of thirty-three lakh rupees sent a wave of
consternation in the contemporary Hindu mind. The idol was removed by
its priests and taken to Rajasthan. Maharana Raj Singh of Mewar
installed it in a tiny village of Sihar on 10 March 1672.[155](#155)
Sihar has now grown into an important town, which named after the deity,
is now known at Nathdwara. At Banaras the temple of Bisheshwar was built
by Rani Ahilya Bai of Indore near the place of the one converted into a
mosque by Aurangzeb. Maharana Ranjit Singh of Punjab mounted a gold
plate on its shikhara. Marathas, Sikhs, Bundelas and Jats joined the
crusade against the Mughals. Like Somnath and Ayodhya, Hindus want ' to
get back the temple sites of Banaras and Mathura also. It is a struggle
in contemporary Indian politics and therefore we shall stop
here.[156](#156)

In the capital of the empire, generally the emperor used to lead the
Friday prayer as was done by Akbar in March 1579. Citing the authority
of Faizi Sarhindi, Sri Ram Sharma says that while playing the role of
the imam, Akbar was only following in the footsteps of his
predecessors.[157](#157) So also did his successors. Elsewhere in the
empire governors, military commanders, qazis and other high officers led
the Friday prayers in congregational mosques. Akbar's famous Mahzarnama
or the infallibility Decree was issued in such a congregational assembly
between August and September 1579. His policy of *Sulehkul* too would
have found a mention in the Friday *Khutbas*. Similarly, Aurangzeb's
reversal of this policy would have found a reflection in the Friday
sermons. That is how one Friday when he went to public prayer in the
Jama Masjid of Delhi, a vast multitude of Hindus thronged the road from
the palace to the mosque, with the object of seeking relief (from the
Jiziyah). The protest was crushed, but the emperor also got perturbed
and stopped going to lead the Friday prayer at the congregation mosque.
He prayed in the small mosque of marble inside the Red Fort called Moti
(Pearl) Masjid, built for his private service. However, as said earlier,
little is known about Friday sermons in the medieval period. But if the
Friday sermons in present times reflect the trend, it can be surmised
that in the medieval period also references would have been made to
day-to-day political and religious problem. It has been found that these
sermons result in working up the feelings of the namazis, and
sabre-rattling and street riots generally take place on Fridays after
the afternoon prayer.

*Friday Service and Growth of Muslim Population*

As said earlier, Friday service added to the number of worshippers
because of many reasons. The rise in the number of Muslims in medieval
India has been dealt with by us in a separate monograph.[158](#158) We
have seen how in the reign of Firoz Tughlaq two congregational mosques
in Delhi could accommodate 10,000 worshippers each. Such was the rapid
growth of Muslim population during Muslim rule. A pronounced feature of
Muslim chroniclers is a description of how the Hindus were converted by
force, how Hindu temples and monasteries were razed or converted into
Muslim places of prayer. Very often the unlettered Hindu worshippers
continued their prayers at these very spots. But now they prayed as
Muslims at places that were so sacred to them but which had been
converted into mosques. Today the descendants of these converts insist
on their separate and different identity. As I have said
elsewhere,[159](#159) no community, however newly born, however weakly
constituted it may be, exists without a moral power which animates and
directs it. After the passing of a few generations, Indian Muslims have
forgotten the circumstances of their conversion, and developed a sense
of oneness amongst themselves. With time, they began to insist on being
considered a distinct and separate entity in Indian society. On the
other hand, the Hindus were so well organized in their social and
religious life,[160](#160) that a few conversions had not even made a
dent in their social organization, and gradually they would have tended
to become indifferent towards those who had become Muslamans. As the
influence of the parent society on them declined and the influence of
Muslim regime and religion increased, the Indian Muslims began to look
more and more to Muslim ruling and privileged classes abroad for
guidance, help and protection and in return gave them their unflinching
cooperation. Much more important than the recession of Hindu moorings
and the ascension of Muslim beliefs and culture in their life and
thought, is the fact that these Muslims are governed by a new set of
laws - the Shariat. They pray in a different fashion now, in
congregation and several times a day. They marry amongst themselves. The
magic word 'Islam' gives them a unity of thought, interest and action.
Of the three components associated with congregational prayer, two still
adversely contribute to the political scene in India the problem of
minorities and the unforgettable vandalism of Muslim iconoclasm.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Ruben Levy, op. cit., p. 293.

[2](#2a) Malik, The Quranic Concept of War, p. 44.

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 43 quoting from Quran, Nisaa: 95.

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 20.

[5](#5a) Anfal: 12.

[6](#6a) Al-Imran: 151.

[7](#7a) Ahzab: 26-27.

[8](#8a) Malik op. cit., pp. 59-60. The Quranic quotations are given by
Malik.

[9](#9a) Ibid., pp. .27-28 quoting from the Quran, Baqara:193; Anfal:39.
Consequently "each country has its own account of horrors (of forced
conversions and persecutions). in the eighth century we had massacres in
Sindh. In the ninth century there were the massacres of Spanish
Christians in and around Seville. In the tenth, the persecutions of
non-Muslims under the Caliph al-Hakim are well known. In the eleventh,
the Jews of Granada and Fez met their fate... Mahmud destroyed the
Hindus and their temples during the same period. In the twelfth, the
Almohads of North Africa spread terror wherever they went. In the
thirteenth, the Christians of Damascus were killed or sold into slavery
and their churches burned to the ground..." The blood-soaked story goes
on and on. Ibn Warraq, pp. 233-237.

[10](#10a) Anwar Shaikh, Islam, pp. 42, 49, 51.

[11](#11a) T.P. Hughes, p. 243.

[12](#12a) "The Holy Quran issued instructions to the Muslims about the
selection of their objectives, 'Smite ye above their necks', it said,
'and smite all their finger tips off them' (Anfal: 12). The most
sensitive parts lie above the neck. An effective strike against these
parts can finish off the opponent completely. At Badr, however, most of
the Koraish warriors were wearing armour. The Holy Quran counselled the
Muslims to smite the finger tips off such opponents... our effort should
be to choose those targets which when struck, will deprive him of his
ability to use his weapons..." S.K. Malik, The Quranic Concept of War,
pp. 64-65.

[13](#13a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, pp. 188-89, hadis 636.

[14](#14a) Sahih Muslim, hadis 4311. This definition of war is found in
all Hadis collections, e.g., Mishkat, vol. II, p. 61.

[15](#15a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 429, hadis 1605.

[16](#16a) Arun Shourie, The World of Fatwas, p. 576, quoting
Sahih-ul-Bukhari, vol. IV, p. 41 and Sunan Abu Daud, vol. II, pp.
756-58. But this hadis is found in all collections, e.g. ibn Majah, vol.
II, p. 171, hadis 562; p. 183, ahadis 613-615.

[17](#17a) Sahih Muslim, hadis 4636.

[18](#18a) Ibid., hadis 4314.

[19](#19a) Quran, cited in Muir, Life of Mahomet, pp. 74-75; Hughes,
Dictionary of Islam, p. 449.

[20](#20a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 602 hadis 2142 has it that a Mujahid
will get 72 women, seventy of whom belonging to Kafirs in Hell will be
transferred for the Muslims in Paradise. Which means that "all
ahl-i-jannat will be masters of the women of Kafirs". This in part
explains the determination of Muslims to fight and kill Kafirs - to
possess their women.

[21](#21a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 169, hadis 556; pp. 174-75, ahadis
576-78; Quran 61:10-13.

[22](#22a) Sahih-ul-Bukhari, vol. IV, p. 36.

[23](#23a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, pp., 161-62, hadis 529; p. 175, ahadis
577-78. Mishkat, vol. II, p. 32.

[24](#24a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, pp. 596-602, ahadis 2126-2142.

[25](#25a) Dictionary of Islam, pp. 243-248, esp. p. 243.

[26](#26a) The Indian Muslims, p. 68, also p. 71.

[27](#27a) For jihad also see K.S. Lal, The Legacy of Muslim Rule in
India, pp. 85-86; Arun Shourie, The World of Fatwas, pp. 573-82; Suhas
Majumdar, Jihad, New Delhi, 1994, pp. 12, 16, 63.

[28](#28a) Fatawa-i-Alamgiri, Matba al-Kubra, Egypt, 1310 H., vol. V,
pp. 34648, quoted in Mujeeb, The Indian Muslims, p. 71.

[29](#29a) S.R. Chowdhry, Al Hajjaj ibn Yusuf, Delhi University Press,
1976, p. 35.

[30](#30a) Ibid., p. 145.

[31](#31a) Ruben Levy, The Baghdad Chronicle, Cambridge, 1929, p. 14.

[32](#32a) K.S. Lal, Early Muslims in India, pp. 16-22, 30-33; and
Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India, pp. 212-17.

[33](#33a) Utbi, Tarikh-i-Yamini, E.D. vol. II, pp. 40-41, 49-50.

[34](#34a) "Tamerlane systematically destroyed the Christians, and as a
result the Nestorians and Jocobites of Mesopotamia have never recovered.
At Sivas, 4,000 Christians were buried alive; at Tus there were 10,000
victims. Historians estimate the number of dead at Saray to be 100,000;
at Baghdad 90,000; at Isfahan 70,000." Ibn Warraq, p. 235.

[35](#35a) E.D. vol. IV, p. 547 n.

[36](#36a) Farishtah, vol. I, p. 295; Robert Sewell, A Forgotten Empire,
pp. 30-31, 38.

[37](#37a) Amir Khusrau, Miftah-ul-Futuh, Aligarh text, 1954, p. 22;
Lal, Khaljis, p. 250 and footnote.

[38](#38a) Amir Khusrau, Khazain-ul-Futuh, trs., in E.D. vol. III, p.
77.

[39](#39a) Amir Khusrau, Ashiqa, Aligarh, 1917, p. 46.

[40](#40a) Barani, pp. 216-17, also pp. 41-42, 44, 72-75.

[41](#41a) Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari, pp. 46-48, also Introduction, p.
v.

[42](#42a) Encyclopaedia of Islam, I, p. 958. Abu Yusuf,
Kitab-ul-Kharaj, cited in Tripathi, Some Aspects of Muslim
Administration, p. 340.

[43](#43a) Lal, Khaljis, p. 113.

[44](#44a) Ibid., pp. 252-53.

[45](#45a) Mahdi Husain, Tughluq Dynasty, Calcutta, 1963, pp. 195-257.

[46](#46a) Robert Sewell, A Forgotten Empire, pp. 30-31.

[47](#47a) Farishtah, I, p. 295. Also Sewell, p. 38.

[48](#48a) Babur Nama, pp. 474-75 and n. Ahmad Yadgar,
Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana, pp. 98ff. and trs. in E.D. vol. V, p. 30;
K.S. Lal, Twilight, pp. 224-225.

[49](#49a) Babur Nama, pp. 554-55.

[50](#50a) Ibid., pp. 550-573. These pages in particular are full of
quotations from the Quran.

[51](#51a) Ibid., pp. 574, 576.

[52](#52a) Ibid., pp. 483-84, 596.

[53](#53a) Badaoni, Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh, vol. II, p. 383; Smith, Akbar
the Great Mogul, p. 108.

[54](#54a) Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi, trs. Price, pp. 225-226.

[55](#55a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 185, hadis 624; p. 585, ahadis
2092-2095. Also Sunan Abu Daud, vol. II, p. 364.

[56](#56a) Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, p. 248; Hitti, The Arabs, pp.
23-26.

[57](#57a) I am obliged to my friend Dr. S.P. Bhatnagar, A-98 Ashok
Vihar, Phase II, Delhi, for lending me a typed copy of the pamphlet.

[58](#58a) Jama-i-Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 497.

[59](#59a) Barani, Fatawa-i-Jahandari, p. 16.

[60](#60a) Jadunath Sarkar, The Mughal Administration, p. 106.

[61](#61a) Quran, 24:2-5; Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, pp. 322-23, 337.

[62](#62a) Quran, 5:38-39; Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 117, also p.
104.

[63](#63a) Ram Swarup, op. cit., p. 87, 93, 96. Quran 2:282.

[64](#64a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 101.

[65](#65a) Sahih Muslim, ahadis 4130, 4132; Ram Swarup, op. cit., p. 89.

[66](#66a) Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, p. 576 and note.

[67](#67a) Manucci, vol. IV, p. 422.

[68](#68a) Barani, p. 318.

[69](#69a) Sale's Quran, p. 152.

[70](#70a) Barani, pp. 289, 382.

[71](#71a) Yahiya, Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi, reproduced in Badaoni,
Ranking, vol. I, pp. 318-19.

[72](#72a) Ibn Battutah, Def. and Sang., vol. III, p. 440, cited in
Ishwari Prasad, Quraunab Turks, p. 273. Also trs. by Mahdi Husain, pp.
57, 85, 103-104.

[73](#73a) Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi, E.D. vol. III, p. 385.

[74](#74a) For references see Ishwari Prasad, Qaraunah Turks, pp.
270-74, esp. p. 273. Also Afif, p. 121.

[75](#75a) Ain., vol. I, p. 164.

[76](#76a) Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi, trans. Price, p. 12.

[77](#77a) Tuzuk, vol. I, p. 9.

[78](#78a) For details about Fatawa-i-Alamgiri see K.S. Lal, Muslim
Slave System in Medieval India, pp. 139-42, 149. Also Ali Muhammad Khan,
Mirat-i-Ahmadi, English trs. M.F. Lokhandwala, Gaekwad Oriental Series,
Baroda, 1965, pp., 248-52. Also Jadunath Sarkar, Mughal Administration,
pp. 109-115.

[79](#79a) Travels of Pietro Della Valle in India, vol. I, pp. 66, 70.

[80](#80a) Ain., vol. III, pp. 132-33 and note.

[81](#81a) It is related by his own brother. A medical person with ten
other Franks "sent for a large bowl and knife... actually severed head
from the body, both the head and his blood being received in the bowl.
When the bleeding had ceased they took away the bowl of blood, which
they immediately poured into a pot of boiling oil brought for the
purpose, stirring the whole together with a ladle until both blood and
oil became completely amalgamated. Will it be believed, that after this
they took the head and again fixing it exactly to the body, they
continued to rub the adjoining parts with the mixture of blood and oil
until the whole had been applied... At the expiry of three days from
this," they sent for his brother who to his surprise "beheld my brother
restored to perfect health... the instant he perceived me he drew his
sword, and made a furious cut at me... The Portuguese physician was
ordered to send for me, and applying some styptic to the wound it
quickly healed." Jahangir thought that this could be effected by alchemy
"known to be extensively practised among the Franks... (and) jugglers
from Bengal". Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi, trs. David Price as Memoirs of the
Emperor Jahangueir, pp. 182-190.

[82](#82a) Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi, pp. 166-96.

[83](#83a) Tuzuk, vol. I, pp. 123-24.

[84](#84a) Ibid., p. 174 and note.

[85](#85a) Nasai records a case in the days of the Prophet. Hazrat
Arfaja bin Sa'd lost his nose in the battle of Kalab. He began to wear a
nose of sliver. It started emitting bad odour. The Prophet ordered him
to get a nose of gold. In this probably no surgery was involved. Sunan
Nasai Sharif, vol. III, pp. 456-57, hadis 5166.

[86](#86a) "The surgeons belonging to the country cut the skin of the
forehead above the eyebrows, and made it fall down over the wounds on
the nose. Then, giving it a twist so that the live flesh might meet the
other live surface, by healing applications they fashioned for them
other imperfect noses. There is left above, between the eyebrows, a
small hole, caused by the twist given to the skin to bring the two live
surfaces together. In a short time the wounds heal up, some obstacle
being placed beneath to allow of respiration. I saw many persons with
such noses, and they were not so disfigured as they would have been
without any nose at all, but they bore between their eyebrows the mark
of the incision." Manucci, vol. II, p. 301. Such restorations were done
in Kangra also.

[87](#87a) Barani, pp. 289, 382.

[88](#88a) Lal, Khaljis, pp. 164, 176, 188.

[89](#89a) Ibn Hasan, The Central Structure of the Mughal Empire, p.
336.

[90](#90a) Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi, p. 17.

[91](#91a) Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri, vol. I, p. 345; vol. II, pp. 59-60.

[92](#92a) Nasai, vol. III, pp. 606\~626, ahadis 5676ff. Also Sahih
Muslim, vol. I, Part I, pp. 99.

[93](#93a) Sahih Bukhari, vol. II, p. 67, hadis 80.

[94](#94a) Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 545.

[95](#95a) Ishwari Prasad, Medieval India, p. 293; Tarikh-i-Daudi, p.
37, trs. in E.D. vol. IV, p. 446.

[96](#96a) Manucci, vol. II, p. 393.

[97](#97a) Barani, p. 299.

[98](#98a) Ibid., pp. 251-52.

[99](#99a) For example Bernier, Travels, pp. 235-36; Finch in Purchas,
vol. iv, pp. 72-73.

[100](#100a) Jadunath Sarkar, Mughal Administration, p. 98.

[101](#101a) Terry, in Purchas, vol. IX, p. 47.

[102](#102a) Ibn Hasan, op. cit., p. 339.

[103](#103a) Jafar Sharif, Qanun-i-Islam, trs. Herklots, p. 111.

[104](#104a) William Muir, The Life of Mahomet, p. 188.

[105](#105a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, pp. 220-21; Sunan Abu Daud, vol.
I, pp. 212-13, and 397-424; Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 209; The Quran, Sale, p.
450n; Hughes, p. 131.

[106](#106a) Margoliouth, Mohammed, p. 248. Also Sunan ibn Majah, vol.
II, p. 313, hadis 1131.

[107](#107a) Ibid., p. 222; Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, pp. 212-13; Sunan
ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 225, hadis 772. Also vol. I, p. 213.

[108](#108a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 243, hadis 837, 81; Sunan Abu
Daud, vol. I, p. 234; Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 123.

[109](#109a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 243, hadis 838.

[110](#110a) Ibid., p. 242, ahadis 832-35.

[111](#111a) Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, pp. 404-405.

[112](#112a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 295, hadis 1040; p. 304,
ahadis 1075-76.

[113](#113a) Ibid., vol. II, p. 205, hadis 772.

[114](#114a) Ibid., vol. II, pp. 468-69, ahadis 1733-37. Also Sunan Abu
Daud, vol. II, pp. 526-27, hadis 1296.

[115](#115a) S.K. Malik, The Quranic Concept of War, p. 70 quoting
Fath:29.

[116](#116a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 313, hadis 1135; Sunan Abn
Daud, vol. I, pp. 161-65; Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 212.

[117](#117a) Hughes, p. 465.

[118](#118a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 323, ahadis 1174-75; Tirmizi,
vol. I, p. 213.

[119](#119a) Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, p. 211; Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 184.

[120](#120a) Ibid.; pp. 462-63. All portions of the prayer are
translated and accompanying exercises sketched in Hughes, Dictionary of
Islam, pp. 465-69.

[121](#121a) Sunan ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 311, ahadis, 1126-1128.

[122](#122a) Ram Swarup, Introduction to the Reprint of William Muir's
The Life of Mahomet, p. 9.

[123](#123a) Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, p. 278.

[124](#124a) Tirmizi, vol. I, p. 125.

[125](#125a) Ibid., vol. I, p. 126.

[126](#126a) Ibid., pp. 277-78, 281-82; Sunan ibn Majah, vol. II, p.
282, hadis 1002. Similar cases of 'pollution' of namaz are mentioned on
pp. 281-286 of Sunan Abu Daud, vol. I, p. 284.

[127](#127a) Jafar Sharif, Qanun-i-Islam, trs. Herklots, p. 205, note
quoting Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vol. VIII, p. 875. Also
Margoliouth, p. 103.

[128](#128a) Gillaume, The Life of Muhammad, being a translation of Ibn
Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah, CUP, Eighth Impression, Karachi, 1987, p.
628.

[129](#129a) Abu Daud, vol. I, pp. 198-200; Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 230,
hadis 789.

[130](#130a) Sita Ram Goel, Hindu Temples: What happened to them, 1991,
vol. II, p. 416, citing the Rauzat-us-Safa.

[131](#131a) Ibid., p. 412.

[132](#132a) Ibn Majah, vol. II, pp. 465-67, ahadis 1724-26.

[133](#133a) Ibid., pp. 229-30, hadis 787.

[134](#134a) Taj-ul-Maasir, E.D. vol. II, p. 231; Farishtah, vol. I, p.
62.

[135](#135a) Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica, 1938, pp. 59-61.

[136](#136a) Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement, 1959-60,
p. 73.

[137](#137a) Lal, Khaljis, Appendix B, pp. 350-53, also pp. 332-333.

[138](#138a) Mahdi Husain, The Tughlaq Dynasty, p. 617.

[139](#139a) Barani, pp. 69-79; Bughra Khan to son, pp. 154-55; Wasaya
also trs. in Nizami, op. cit., pp. 98-103.

[140](#140a) Chachnama, E.D. vol. I, p. 207.

[141](#141a) Ibn Battutah, p. 83.

[142](#142a) Ibid., p. 56.

[143](#143a) Afif, pp. 254-60.

[144](#144a) Ibid., pp. 367-69.

[145](#145a) Ibid., p. 135.

[146](#146a) Tabqat-i-Akbari, vol. I, p. 336; Makhzan-i-Afghani, fol.
76a. For detailed references see Lal, Twilight, pp. 232-33.

[147](#147a) Archaeological Survey Report, No. XVII, p. 105.

[148](#148a) Epigraphia Indica - Arabic and Persian Supplement, 1969, p.
69 and footnote 2.

[149](#149a) P.M. Currie, The Shrine and Cult of Muin-al-din Chishti, p.
105.

[150](#150a) Maasir-i-Alamgiri, English translation by Jadunath Sarkar,
Calcutta, 1947, pp. 51-52, 55, 60. Also J. Sarkar, History of Aurangzib,
vol. III, Calcutta, 1972, pp. 194-95.

[151](#151a) Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1843, p. 73. See
Lal, Khaljis, for copious footnotes and references on the history and
many other aspects of the life at Somnath.

[152](#152a) Babur Nama, p. 656 and footnote.

[153](#153a) Manucci, vol,. III, pp. 244-45.

[154](#154a) Since the events leading to the destruction of the Babri
structure are recent, a number of articles and books have lately
appeared and are still appearing on the subject. One of the best books
on this topic is Koenraad Elst's Ram Janmabboomi vs. Babri Masjid, Voice
of India, New Delhi, 1990.

[155](#155a) Gauri Shankar Ojha, Udaipur ka Itihasa, vol. I, p. 35.

[156](#156a) Sita Ram Goel has given a list of Mosques, Idgahs, Dargahs
and Mazars built by Muslims on the sites of Hindu shrines and with the
materials obtained from them in his two books titled Hindu Temples: What
happened to them, vol. I, 1990, pp. 88-191 and vol. II, pp. 104-290.

[157](#157a) Sharma, op. cit., p. 34.

[158](#158a) Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India, published by
Research Publications in Social Sciences, Delhi and Jaipur, 1973.

[159](#159a) Indian Muslims: Who are they, New Delhi, 1990, reprint
1993.

[160](#160a) Murray Titus, Islam in India and Pakistan, Calcutta, 1959,
p. g.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books.html)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
