+++
title = "143 What Path to Salvation?"

+++
## Intro
Speech delivered by Dr. Ambedkar to the Bombay Presidency Mahar
Conference, 31st May 1936, Bombay.  
Translated from the Marathi by Vasant W. Moon. The typescript of the
translation, with handwritten emendations, was presented by the
translator to Eleanor Zelliot on 25 January 1988, and has been
contributed by her for this website.

Edited by Frances W. Pritchett. Editing has consisted of breaking up
very long paragraphs, correcting typographical errors, and making small
adjustments in punctuation and in English grammar and usage. All
material enclosed in parentheses has been provided by the translator.
All material enclosed in square brackets has been added by the editor.  





## 1 Ladies and Gentlemen,

You must have come to know by now that this Conference has been
purposefully called upon to brood over the declaration of Conversion
which I made recently. The subject of conversion is very dear to me.
According to me, the whole of your future depends upon this subject. I
have no hesitation in saying that you have clearly understood the
gravity of this problem. Had it not been so, you would not have
assembled here in such large numbers. I am very happy to see this
(gathering).

Since the time of the declaration of Conversion, our men have
conducted several meetings at various places and expressed their views
and opinions, which I hope must have reached you. But we have had no
opportunity so far to gather, and to discuss and decide the problem of
conversion at one place. I was much more concerned for such an
opportunity. You will all agree that planning is very necessary for
making the movement of Conversion a success. Conversion is not a
children's game. It is not a subject of entertainment. It deals with
how to make man's life successful. Just as a boatman has to make all
necessary preparation before he starts on a voyage, so also we have to
make such preparation. Without preparation, it will be impossible to
reach the other shore.

But just as the boatman does not collect luggage unless he gets an
idea of the number of passengers boarding the boat, so also is the
case with me. Unless I get an idea as to how many persons are willing
to leave the Hindu fold, I cannot start preparation for conversion.
When I expressed to some workers of Bombay that I would not be able to
judge the public opinion unless we meet at a conference, they
shouldered the responsibility of this conference voluntarily, without
putting up any excuse about expenses and labour. What pains they had
to take, has already been described by our revered leader and the
President of the Reception Committee, Shri Rawji Dagduji Dolas, in his
speech. I am extremely indebted to the Reception Committee of the
Conference for arranging the meeting, after making such strenuous
efforts.

Some people may raise an objection as to why the conference is called
\[with the participation\] only of the Mahars. If the declaration of
Conversion is meant for all the Untouchables, why has a meeting of all
the Untouchables not been convened? Before starting the discussion on
the issues before the conference, I feel it obligatory to reply to
these questions. There are various reasons for convening a conference
of the Mahars alone.

Firstly, neither any safeguards nor any social rights are to be
demanded from the Hindus through this conference. The only question
before this conference is, what should be done for the betterment of
our life? How to carve out the path for our future life? This question
can be solved, and needs to be solved, by the respective castes
separately, discussing it through their respective conferences. This
is one of the reasons why I have not called a conference of all the
Untouchables.

There is another reason for convening a conference of Mahars only.
About ten months have passed since the declaration of Conversion was
made. During this period, sufficient efforts have been made to awaken
the public conscience. I felt that this was the proper time to judge
the public opinion. In my opinion, the holding of meetings of each
caste separately is the simplest way to judge the opinion. In order to
materialize \[=give substance to\] the problem of conversion, it is
very necessary to judge the public opinion. And I believe the public
opinion judged through the meetings of each caste separately will be
more representative and reliable than the opinion arrived at through a
common meeting of all the Untouchable castes. In order to avert this
situation, and to ensure the \[knowledge of\] public opinion, this
meeting of Mahars alone has been called.

Although the other communities are not included, they will not be at a
loss. If they do not intend to convert, they have no reason to regret
their not being included in this conference. If at all they wish to
leave their religion, nothing can come in their way simply because
they have not participated in this conference. The other communities,
like the Mahars, are free to hold meetings and express their public
opinion. I would advise them to hold such meetings, and whatever help
is needed from me shall be extended to them to the best of my
capacity.

This much is enough as introduction. Now I turn to the main subject.
For a common man, this subject of conversion is important as well as
difficult to understand. It is equally difficult to grasp the subject.
It is not an easy task to satisfy the common man on the subject of
conversion. I realise that unless you are all satisfied, it is
difficult to bring the idea of conversion into reality. I shall
therefore try my level best to explain the subject as simply as
possible.  


## 2 The Material Aspect of Conversion

There are two aspects of conversion: social as well as religious,
material as well as spiritual. Whatever may be the aspect or line of
thinking, it is necessary to understand at the beginning the nature of
Untouchability and how it is practised. Without this understanding,
you will not be able to realise the real meaning underlying my
declaration of Conversion. In order to have a clear understanding of
the problem of Untouchability and its practice in real life, I would
want you to recall the stories of atrocities perpetrated against you.

The instances of beating by the caste Hindus for the simple reason
that you have claimed the right to enroll your children in the
Government school, or the right to draw water from the public well, or
the right to take out a marriage procession with the groom on
horseback, are very common. You all know such instances, as they
happen right before your eyes. But there are several other causes for
which atrocities are committed on the Untouchables by the caste
Hindus--causes which, if they are revealed, the foreigners will be
surprised to hear.

The Untouchables are beaten for putting on clothes of superior
quality. They are whipped because they used utensils made of metal
like copper, etc. Their houses are burnt for having purchased land for
cultivation. They are beaten for putting on the sacred thread on their
body. They are beaten for refusing to carry away dead animals and eat
the carrion, or for walking through the village road with socks and
shoes on, or for not bowing down before a caste Hindu, or for taking
water in a copper pot while going out in the field to ease
\[=defecate\]. Recently, an instance has been noticed where the
Untouchables were beaten for serving chapatis at a dinner party.

You must have heard of, and some of you must also have experienced,
such types of atrocities. Where beating is not possible, you must be
aware as to how the weapon of boycott is used against you. You all
know how the caste Hindus have made your daily life unbearable by
prohibiting you from labour, by disallowing your cattle from grazing
through the jungle \[=uncultivated land\], and by prohibiting your men
from entering into the village. But perhaps very few of you have
realised as to why all this happens! What is at the root of their
tyranny? To me, it is very necessary for us to understand it.  


## 3 This is a Matter of Class Struggle

The instances cited above have nothing to do with the virtues or vices
of an individual. This is not a feud between two rival men. The
problem of Untouchability is a matter of class struggle. It is a
struggle between caste Hindus and the Untouchables. This is not a
matter of doing injustice against one man. This is a matter of
injustice being done by one class against another. This class struggle
has its relation with the social status. This struggle indicates how
one class should keep its relations with the other class. From the
instances given above, one thing is clear. This struggle starts as
soon as you start claiming equal treatment with others. Had it not
been so, there would have been no struggle for a simple reason like
serving chapatis, wearing superior-quality clothes, putting on the
sacred thread, fetching water in a metal pot, seating the bridegroom
on horseback, etc. In all these cases, you lose your money.

Why then do the caste Hindus get irritated? The reason for their anger
is very simple. Your behavior with them on a par insults them. Your
status is low. You are impure, you must remain at the lowest rung;
then alone they will allow you to live happily. The moment you cross
your level, the struggle starts. The above instances also prove one
more fact. Untouchability is not a timely \[=transient\] or temporary
feature. It is a permanent one. To put it straight \[=plainly\], it
can be said that the struggle between the Hindus and the Untouchables
is a permanent phenomenon. It is eternal, because the religion which
has given you the lowest level in the society is itself eternal,
according to the belief of the high-caste people. No change according
to times and circumstances is possible. You are the lowest of the
rungs today. You shall remain the lowest forever. This means the
struggle between Hindus and Untouchables will continue forever. How
you will survive through this struggle, is a main question. And unless
you think it over, there is no escape.

Those who desire to behave in obedience to the wishes of the Hindus,
those who wish to be their slaves, need not think over this problem.
But those who wish to live a life with self-respect and equality, will
have to think it over. How should we survive through this struggle?
For me, it is not difficult to answer this question. Those who have
assembled here will have to agree that in any struggle, one who holds
strength becomes the victor. One who has no strength need not expect
success. This has been proved by experience, and I do not need to cite
examples to prove it.  


## 4 Gain the Strength

The question that follows, which you must consider, is whether you
have enough strength to survive through this struggle. Three types of
strength are known to man: (1) manpower; (2) finance; and (3) mental
strength. Which of these do you think that you possess?

So far as manpower is concerned, it is clear that you are in a
minority. In Bombay Presidency, Untouchables are only one-eighth of
the total population. And that too, an unorganised \[one-eighth\]. The
castes among them do not allow them to organise. They are not even
compact. They are scattered through the villages. Under these
circumstances, this small population is of no use to the Untouchables
at their crucial hours.

Financial strength is also just the same. It is an undisputed fact
that you have a little bit of manpower; but finances you have none.You
have no trade, no business, no service, no land. The piece of bread
thrown by the higher castes is your means of livelihood. You have no
food, no clothes. What financial strength can you have? You have no
capacity to get redress from the law courts. Thousands of Untouchables
tolerate insult, tyranny, and oppression at the hands of Hindus
without a sigh of complaint, because they have no capacity to bear the
expenses of the courts.

As regards mental strength, the condition is still worse. The
tolerance of insults and tyranny without grudge and complaint has
killed the sense of retort and revolt. Confidence, vigour, and
ambition have completely vanished from you. All of you have become
helpless, unenergetic, and pale. Everywhere there is an atmosphere of
defeatism and pessimism. Even the slight idea that you can do
something, cannot peep \[=penetrate\] into your minds.  


## 5 Why this Oppression Against You?

If whatever I have described above is correct, then you will have to
agree with the conclusion that follows. The conclusion is: if you
depend upon your own strength, you will never be able to face the
tyranny of the Hindus. I have no doubt that you are oppressed because
you have no strength. It is not that you alone are in a minority. The
Muslims are equally small in number. Like Mahar-Mangs, they too have
few houses in the village. But no one dares to trouble the Muslims,
while you are always a victim of tyranny. Why is this so? Though there
are two houses of Muslims in the village, nobody dares to harm them,
while the whole village practises tyranny against you though you have
about ten houses. Why does this happen? This is a very pertinent
question, and you will have to find a suitable answer for this.

In my opinion, there is only one answer to this question. The Hindus
realise that the strength of the whole of the Muslim population in
India stands behind those two houses of Muslims living in the village;
and therefore they do not dare to touch them. These two houses also
enjoy a free and fearless life because they are aware that if any
Hindu commits aggression against them, the whole Muslim community from
Punjab to Madras will rush down to protect them at any cost.

On the contrary \[=by contrast\], Hindus are sure that no one will
come to your rescue, nobody will help you, no financial help will
reach you, nor will the officers help you in any eventuality. The
Tehsildar and police belong to the caste Hindus, and in cases of
disputes between the Hindus and the Untouchables, they are more
faithful to their caste than towards their duty. The Hindus practise
injustice and tyranny against you only because you are helpless.

From the above discussion, two facts are very clear. Firstly, you
cannot face the tyranny without strength. And secondly, you do not
possess enough strength to face the tyranny. With these two
conclusions, a third one automatically follows. That is, the strength
required to face the tyranny needs to be secured from outside. How you
will be able to secure this strength, is really an important question.
And you will have to think this over with an unbiased mind.  


## 6 Strength Needs to be Brought from Outside

Casteism and religious fanaticism, as I see it, has had a very
peculiar effect on the minds and morality of the people of this
country. In this country, nobody feels pain at poverty and suffering.
And if at all anybody is moved, he does not try to eradicate it.
People \[give\] help in poverty, sorrows, and suffering, only to those
who belong to their caste or religion. Though this sense of morality
is perverted, it cannot be forgotten that it is prevalent in this
country. In the village, the Untouchables suffer at the hands of
Hindus.

It is not that there are no men of other religions, and that they do
not realise the oppression of Untouchables as unjust. Knowing full
well that the oppression of the Untouchables by the Hindus is most
unjustified, they do not rush to the rescue of the Untouchables. If
you ask them why do they not help you, they would say, "What business
do we have to interfere? Had you been the members of our religion, we
would have helped you."

From this you will understand one thing: that unless you establish
close relations with some other society, unless you join some other
religion, you cannot get the strength from outside. It clearly means,
you must leave your present religion and assimilate yourselves with
some other society. Without that, you cannot gain the strength of that
society. So long as you do not have strength, you and your future
generations will have to lead a life in the same pitiable condition.  


## 7 The Spiritual Aspect of Conversion

Until now, we have discussed how conversion is necessary for material
gains. Now I propose to put forth my thoughts as to how this
conversion is equally necessary for spiritual well-being. What is
religion? Why is it necessary? Let us first try to understand. Several
people have tried to define religion. But amongst all of these
definitions, only one is most meaningful and agreeable to all. "That
which knits the people together is religion." This is the true
definition of religion. This is not my definition. Mr. Tilak, the
foremost leader of the Sanatani Hindus himself, is the author of this
definition. So nobody can accuse me of having interpolated
\[=invented\] the definition of religion.

However, I have not accepted it \[merely\] for argument's sake. I
accept it (as a principle). Religion means the rules imposed for the
maintenance of society. Mine is also the same concept of religion.
Although this definition logically appears to be correct, it does not
disclose or clarify the nature of the rules which maintain the
society. The question still remains as to what should be the nature of
the rules which govern society. This question is more important than
that of definition. Because the question of which religion is
necessary for a man, does not depend on its definition but on the
motive and nature of the rules that bind and govern the society. What
should be the real nature of religion? While deciding this question,
another question follows. What should be the relation between a man
and the society?

The modern social philosophers have proposed three answers to this
question. Some have proposed that the ultimate goal of the society is
to achieve happiness for the individual. Some say the society exists
for the development of man's inherent qualities and energies, and to
help him develop his self. However, some put up \[=maintain\] that the
chief object of the social organisation is not the development or
happiness of the individual, but to create an ideal society.

The concept of the Hindu religion is, however, much different from all
these concepts. There is no place for an individual in Hindu society.
The Hindu religion is constituted on the class concept. The Hindu
religion does not teach as to how an individual should behave with
another individual.

A religion which does not recognize the individual is not acceptable
to me personally. Although society is necessary for the individual,
social welfare cannot be the ultimate goal of religion. To me,
individual welfare and progress is the real aim of religion. Although
the individual is a part of the society, his relation with the society
is not like that of the body and its organs, or that of the cart and
its wheels.  


## 8 Society and the Individual

Unlike a drop of water which submerges its existence with the ocean in
which it is dropped, man does not lose his identity in the society in
which he lives. The man's life is independent. He is born not for the
service of the society, but for the development of his self. For this
reason alone, one man cannot make another a slave, in the developed
countries. A religion in which the individual has no importance is not
acceptable to me. Likewise, Hinduism does not recognise the importance
of an individual, and hence it cannot be acceptable to me.

So also, I do not accept a religion in which one class alone has a
right to gain knowledge; another has only a right to use arms; the
third one, to trade; and the fourth, only to serve. Everyone needs
knowledge. Everybody needs arms. Everyone wants money. The religion
which forgets this, and with a view to educate a few persons keeps the
rest in the dark, is not a religion but a strategy to keep the people
in mental slavery. A religion which permits some to bear the arms and
prohibits the rest, is not a religion but a plan to keep the latter in
perpetual slavery. A religion which opens the path of acquiring
property for some, and compels others to depend on these few even for
the daily necessities of life, is not a religion, but an utter
selfishness.

This is what is called the Chaturvarnya of Hinduism. I have clearly
stated my views about it. It is for you now to think whether this
Hinduism is beneficial to you. The basic idea underlying a religion is
to create an atmosphere for the spiritual development of an
individual. If this is agreed upon, it is clear that you cannot
develop yourself at all in Hinduism.

Three factors are required for the uplift of an individual. They are:
Sympathy, Equality, and Liberty. Can you say by experience that any of
these factors exist for you in Hinduism?  


## 9 Is there any Sympathy for you in Hinduism?

So far as sympathy is concerned, it is nil. Wherever you go, nobody
looks at you sympathetically. You all have good \[=ample\] experience
of it. Not only this, but the Hindus have no sense of bortherhood
towards you. You are treated by them worse than foreigners. If one
looks at the relations of the neighbouring Hindus and the Untouchables
of the village, no one can say that they are brothers. They can rather
be called two opposite armies in warring camps.

The Hindus have not the slightest affinity towards you, as they have
towards Muslims. They consider Muslims closer than you. Hindus and
Muslims are helpful to each other in local boards, in legislative
councils, and in business. But is there a single instance of such
sympathetic consideration shown towards you by the caste Hindus? On
the contrary: they always cultivate hatred against you in their minds.
What dreadful effects this hatred has produced, can be heard from
those who have had occasion to go to the court for justice or to the
police for help.

Does any one of you believe that the court will do justice, and the
police will act rightly? And if not, what is the reason for \[their\]
cultivating such a sense of hatred? In my opinion, there is only one
reason: you do not believe that the Hindus will rightly use their
authority, because they lack sympathy towards you. And if it is so,
what is the use of living in the midst of such hatred?  


## 10 Is there Equality for You in Hinduism?

In fact, this question should not be asked. Such a living example of
inequality will not be found anywhere in the world. Nowhere in the
history of mankind can be seen inequality more intense than
Untouchability. On account of \[this\] superiority-inferiority
complex, one may not offer his daughter to another in marriage, or one
may not dine with others. Such examples of inequality are not
uncommon. But is there a system anywhere existing, except in Hindu
religion and Hindu society, where a man is treated \[as\] so low as
\[for others\] not to touch him? Can anybody believe that there exists
an animal called man by whose touch the water is polluted, and the god
becomes unworthy for worship?

Is there any difference between the treatment given to an Untouchable
and to a leper? Though the people have nausea in their minds for a
leper, they have at least sympathy for him. But people have nausea as
well as hatred against you. Your condition is worse than \[that of\] a
leper. Even today, if anyone hears words from the mouth of a Mahar at
the time of breaking the fast, he will not touch the food. Such a
filth is attached to your body and your words. Some people say that
Untouchability is a stigma on Hindu religion. This statement, however,
does not convey any sense at all. Nobody believes that the Hindu
religion is dirty. The majority of the Hindus, however, believe that
you are dirty, you are polluted.

How have you been brought to this condition? I think you have been
forced to this condition because you continued to be Hindus. Those of
you who have become Muslims are treated by the Hindus neither as
Untouchables nor even as unequals. The same is the case with those who
became Christians. An instance recently happened at Travancore \[that
is\] worth mentioning. The Untouchables called Thiya in that region
are prohibited from walking on the streets. A few days ago, some of
these Untouchables embraced the Sikh religion. All of a sudden, the
ban prohibiting them from walking on the street was withdrawn. What
does all this show? It proves that if there is any reason for your
being treated as Untouchables and unequals, it is your relation with
the Hindu religion.

In such a state of inequality and injustice, some Hindus try to soothe
the Untouchables. They say, "Get educated yourselves, be clean, and
then we will touch you, we will treat you on par." In fact, we all
know by experience that the conditino of an educated, moneyed, and
clean Mahar is as bad as that of an uneducated, poor, and dirty one.
Leave aside for the time being this aspect, and consider: if one is
not respected because he is uneducated, poor, and not a well-dressed
person, what should a common Mahar do? How can he secure equality, who
cannot gain education, achieve property, or dress highly?

The principle of equality as taught in Christianity and Islam has no
concern whatsoever with knowledge, wealth, or dress, as outward
aspects. Both these religions consider a sense of humanity as the mean
feature of religion. They preach that the sense of humanity should be
respected by all; and none should disrespect others, none should treat
others as unequals. These teachings are completely wanting in the
Hindu religion. What is the use of such a religion, in which man's
sense of humanity has no value? And what is the good in clinging to
it?

In reply to this, some Hindus cite the **Upanishads**, and proudly say
that the God is all-pervading, according to the principle enunciated
in the **Upanishads**. It may be pointed out here that the religion
and science are two different things. It is necessary to consider
whether a particular theory is a principle of science, or a teaching
of religion. That the God is all-pervading is the principle of science
\[=philosophy\] and not of religion. Religion has a direct relation
with the behaviour of a man. The principle of the God being
omnipresent is not the teaching of religion, it is a principle of
science \[=philosophy\]. This statement is supported by the fact that
the Hindus do not act according to the above principle. On the
contrary: if Hindus insist on this very point, and say that the
principle of God being omnipresent is not a principle of philosophy
but is a basic principle of this religion, I would simply say that
nowhere in the world such meanness would be found as exists among
Hindus. The Hindus can be ranked among those cruel people whose
utterances and acts are two poles asunder \[=poles apart\]. They have
\[as in the proverb\] "Ram on their tongue, and a knife under their
armpit." They speak like saints and act as butchers.

Do not keep company with those who believe that the God is
omnipresent, but treat men worse than animals. They are hypocrites. Do
not keep contact with those who feed ants with sugar, but kill men by
prohibiting them to drink water. Are you aware what effects their
company has produced upon you? You have ceased to be respected. You
have no status at all. To say that the Hindus alone do not pay you any
respect is only a half-truth. Not only the Hindus, but the Muslims and
the Christians too, consider you the lowliest of the lowly. In fact,
the teachings of Islam and Christianity do not create the sense of
high and low. Then why do the followers of these two religions treat
you as low? Because the Hindus consider you as the lowest of the low,
the Muslims and Christians also consider you likewise. They fear that
if they treat you on par, the Hindus will treat them also as low. Thus
we are not low in the eyes of the Hindus alone. We are the lowest in
the whole of India, because of the treatment given \[us\] by the
Hindus. If you have to get rid of this shameful condition, if you have
to cleanse this filth and make use of this precious life, there is
only one way--and that is to throw away the shackles of the Hindu
religion and the Hindu society in which you are groaning.  


## 11 Have you had any Freedom in the Hindu Religion?

Some people might say that you have had a freedom of trade guaranteed
by law, like any other citizen of the country. You are also said to
have got the personal liberty like others. You will have to think
deeply over such statements--whether they really carry any meaning.
What is the good in saying, "You have freedom of trade," to a person
who is deprived of any business by virtue of his birth, by the
society? What is the truth in consoling with the words, "You are at
liberty to enjoy your property, nobody else will touch your money," to
a person to whom all the doors of means of livelihood and acquiring
property are closed? To tell a person who is treated as unfit for
entry into any service due to the defilement attached to him by birth,
and working under whom is most contemptuous \[=contemptible\] for
others, that he has a right to serve, is making a fun of him.

The law may guarantee various rights. But those alone can be called
real rights, which are permitted by the society to be exercised by
you. The law guarantees to the Untouchables the right to wear decent
clothes. But if the Hindus do not allow them to put on these clothes,
what is the use of this right? The law guarantees to the Untouchables
the right to fetch water in metal pots, the right to use metal
utensils, the right to put tiles on their houses; but if the Hindu
society does not allow them to exercise these rights, what is the use
of such rights? Various instances of such types can be cited. In
short, that which is permitted by the society to be exercised can
alone be called a right. A right which is guaranteed by law but is
opposed by the society is of no use at all.

The Untouchables are in need of social liberty, more than that which
is guaranteed by law. So long as you do not achieve social liberty,
whatever freedom is provided by law to you is of no avail. Some
persons might advise you that you have physical freedom. Of course,
you can go anywhere, can speak anything you wish, subject to the
restrictions imposed by law. But what is the use of such freedom? Man
has a body as well as a mind. He needs physical as well as mental
freedom. Mere physical freedom is of no use. Freedom of the mind is of
prime importance. Really speaking, what is meant to a man by physical
freedom? It means he is free to act according to his own free will. A
prisoner is unchained and is set free. What is the principle
underlying this? The principle is, he should be free to act according
to his free will, and he should be able to make the maximum use of the
abilities he possesses. But what is the use of such freedom of a man
whose mind is not free? The freedom of mind is the real freedom.

A person whose mind is not free, though he is not in chains, is a
slave. One whose mind is not free, though he is not in jail, is a
prisoner. One whose mind is not free, though he is alive, is dead.
Freedom of mind is the proof of one's existence. What is the proof,
then, to judge that the flame of mental freedom is not extinguished
from a person? To whom can we say that his mind is free? I call him
free who with consciousness awake, realises his rights,
responsibilities, and duties; he who is not a slave of circumstances,
and is always bent upon changing them in his favour, I call him free.
One who is not a slave of usage, customs, and traditions, or of the
teachings because they are brought down from the ancestors; one whose
flame of reason is not extinguished--I call him a free man.

He who has not surrendered himself, who does not act on the teachings
of others blindly; who does not keep faith on anything unless \[it has
been\] examined critically in the light of the cause and effect
theory; who is always prepared to protect his rights; who is not
afraid of public criticism; who has enough intellect and self-respect
so as not to become a doll in the hands of others--I call such a man a
free man. He who does not lead his life under the direction of others,
who carves out his own aim of life according to his own reason, and
decides himself as to how and in what way the life should be led--I
call him a free man. In short, a man who is the master of his own
\[life\], him alone I consider a free man.

In the light of the above observations, are you free? Have you any
freedom to carve out your own life and your aim? In my opinion, not
only you have no freedom, but you are worse than slaves. Your slavery
has no parallel. In the Hindu religion, one can\[not\] have freedom of
speech. A Hindu must surrender his freedom of speech. He must act
according to the **Vedas**. If the **Vedas** do not support the
actions, instructions must be sought from the **Smritis**, and if the
**Smritis** fail to provide any such instructions, he must follow in
the footsteps of the great men. He is not supposed to reason. Hence,
so long as you are in the Hindu religion, you cannot expect to have
freedom of thought.

Some people might argue that the Hindu religion did not force you
alone into mental slavery, but has snatched away the freedom of mind
of all other communities. It is quite true that all the Hindus are
living under a state of mental slavery. But from this nobody should
conclude that the sufferings of all are alike. Everyone in the Hindu
religion is not equally affected by the adverse effects this mental
slavery has produced. This mental slavery is in no way detrimental to
the material happiness of the caste Hindus. Though the caste Hindus
are slaves of the above-mentioned trio--viz., **Vedas**, **Smritis**,
and the dictates of great men--they are given a high position in the
HIndu social system. They are empowered to rule over others. It is an
undisputed fact that the whole Hindu religion is the creation of the
high-caste Hindus for the welfare and prosperity of the high-castes.

Society, which they call religion, has assigned you the role of the
slave. So that you may not be able to escape from this slavery, every
arrangement is made in the structure of the society. And that is why
you are more in need of breaking the bondage of the mental slavery of
this religion than is any other community. Hinduism has marred your
progress from all sides. It has sacked \[=devastated\] your mental
freedom and made you slaves. In the outer world also, it has doomed
you to the condition of a slave. If you want to be free, you must
change your religion.  


## 12 Untouchables' Organisation and Conversion

The present movement of the Untouchables has been very severely
criticised. It has been said that there are several castes among the
Untouchables, and every caste practices untouchability. Mahars and
Mangs do not dine together. Both these castes do not touch the
scavengers, and practice untouchability against them. It is therefore
asked what right these people have to expect from others the
non-observance of the practice of untouchability, when they themselves
practice casteism and untouchability amongst themselves. The
untouchables are generally advised to abolish castes and
untouchability from amongst them, and then come \[to the caste
Hindus\] for redress.

There is a little truth in this argument. But the allegations made in
this against the Untouchables are absolutely false. It cannot be
denied that the castes included in the \[category of\] Untouchables
practice untouchability. But equally, it is false to say that they are
in any way responsible for this crime. Casteism and untouchability
originated not from the Untouchables, but from the high-caste Hindus.
And if this is true, the responsibility for this age-old tradition
falls on the caste Hindus and not on the Untouchables. While
practicing untouchability and casteism, the Untouchables merely follow
the lesson taught by the caste Hindus. If this lesson is not true, the
burden of its being untruthful falls on those who taught it, and not
on those who learnt it.

Though this reply may appear to be correct, it does not satisfy me.
Though we are not responsible for the causes due to which castes and
untouchability have taken root among us, it will be insane not to
fight them but to allow them to continue as they are. Though we are
not responsible for the introduction of untouchability and castes
among us, we are surely responsible for their annihilation. And I am
glad that all of us have realised this responsibility.

I am sure there is no leader among the Mahars who advocates the
practice of casteism. If comparison is to be made, it will have to be
made among the leaders. Compare the educated class of the Mahar
community with that of the Brahmins, and one will have to admit that
the educated Mahars are more eager to abolish castes. This can well be
proved by facts also. Not only the educated class of Mahars, but even
the uneducated and illiterate Mahars, are the protagonists
\[=advocates\] of the abolition of castes. This also can be proved.
Today, there is not a single person in the Mahar community who is
opposed to the inter-caste dining among the Mahars and the Mangs. I
feel greatly satisfied that you have realised the necessity of the
abolition of castes--for which I extend my heartiest congratulations.

But have you ever thought as to how the efforts toward the abolition
of castes can be made successful? Castes cannot be abolished by
inter-caste dinners or stray instances of inter-caste marriages. Caste
is a state of mind. It is a disease of the mind. The teachings of the
Hindu religion are the root cause of this disease. We practise
casteism, we observe untouchability, because we are asked to do it by
the Hindu religion in which we live. A bitter thing can be made sweet.
The taste of anything can be changed. But poison cannot be made Amrit
\[=nectar\]. To talk of annihilating castes is like talking of
changing poison into Amrit. In short, so long as we remain in a
religion which teaches man to treat man as a leper, the sense of
discrimination on account of caste, which is deeply rooted in our
minds, cannot go. For annihilating castes and untouchability from
among the Untouchables, change of religion is the only antidote.  


## 13 The Distinction between "Change in Name" and "Change in
Religion"

So far, I have placed before you the points in favourof conversion. I
hope this has been good food for your thoughts. Those who consider
this discussion very difficult and complicated--I propose to put up
\[=provide\] simple thoughts in simple language for them.

What is there in conversion which can be called novel? Really
speaking, what sort of social relations do you have with the caste
Hindus at present? You are as separate from the Hindus as Muslims and
Christians are. The same is \[true of\] their relation with you. Your
society, and that of the Hindus, are two distinct groups. By \[our
choosing\] conversion, nobody can say or feel that one society has
been split up. You will remain separate from the Hindus, as you are
today. Nothing new will happen on account of this conversion. If this
is true, then why should some people be afraid of conversion? I, at
least, do not find any reason for such fear.

Secondly, though, you undoubtedly have understood the importance of a
change of name. If anybody from among you is asked about his caste, he
tells it as Chokhamela, Harijan, or Walmiki, but does not say that he
is a Mahar. Nobody can change a name unless certain conditions demand
it. There is a very simple reason for such a change of name. An
unknown \[=unknowing\] person cannot distinguish between a touchable
and an Untouchable. And so long as a Hindu does not come to know the
caste of a person, he cannot have born in him the hatred of that
person for being an Untouchable. The caste Hindus and Untouchables
behave in very friendly ways during journeys, so long as they are
unaware of their castes. They exchange betels, bidis, cigarettes,
fruits, etc. But as soon as the Hindu comes to know that the person
with whom he is talking is an Untouchable, a sense of hatred
germinates in his mind. He thinks that he is deceived. He gets angry,
and ultimately this temporary friendship ends in abuses and quarrels.

Such experiences are not new to you. Why does all this happen? The
names that depict your caste are considered so filthy that even their
utterance is enough to create a vomiting sensation in the heart of
Hindus. Thus by calling oneself a Chokhamela instead of a Mahar, you
try to deceive the people. But you know, people are not deceived.
Whether you call yourself a Chokhamela or a Harijan, people understand
what you are. By your actions, you have proved the necessity of a
change of name. Then what objection should there be to a change of
religion? Changing a religion is like changing a name.

A change of religion, followed by a change of name, will be more
beneficial to you. To call oneself a Muslim, a Christian, a Buddhist,
or a Sikh, is not merely a change of religion, but is also a change of
name. That is a real change of name. This new name will have no filth
attached to it. It is an overall change. No one will search for the
origin of it. The change of name as Chokhamela or Harijan has no
meaning at all. In this case, all the hatred, contempt, etc., attached
to the original name passes to the new name. So long as you remain in
the Hindu religion, you will have to change the name. \[To seek
change\] by calling oneself a Hindu is not enough. Nobody recognises
that there is a man called a Hindu. So also, calling oneself a Mahar
will not serve the purpose. As soon as you utter this name, you will
not be allowed to come near. So I ask you, why should you not change
your name permanently by changing your religion, instead of changing
to one name today and another tomorrow, and thus remaining in the
state of a pendulum?  


## 14 The Role of Opponents

Since the beginning of this movement of conversion, various people
raised various objections to it. Let us now examine the truth, if any,
in such objections. Some Hindus, pretending to be religious preachers,
advise you, saying, "Religion is not a thing that can be consumed.
Religion cannot be changed as we change our coat daily. You wish to
leave this Hindu religion and embrace another one. Then do you think
that your ancestors who clung to this religion for so long a period
were fools?" Some wise men have raised this question.

I do not find any substance in this objection. A congenital idiot
alone can say that one should stick to his religion because it is
ancestral. No sane man will accept such a proposition. Those who
advocate such an argument seem not to have read history at all. The
ancient Aryan religion was called Vedic religion. It has three
distinct characteristics: beef eating, drinking, and merry-making was
the religion of the day. Thousands of people followed it in India, and
even now some people dream of going back to it. If the ancient
religion alone is to be adhered to, then why did the people of India
leave it and accept Buddhism? Why did they divorce \[themselves\] from
the Vedic religion?

It cannot be denied that our ancestors lived in the ancient religion,
but I cannot say that they remained there voluntarily. The
Chaturvarnya system prevailed in this country for a pretty long time.
In this system, the Brahmins were permitted to learn, the Kshatriyas
to fight, the Vaishyas to earn property, and the Shudras to serve.
This way of life was the rule of the day. In those days, the Shudras
had no learning, no property, and no food and clothing. Your ancestors
were thus forced to live in penniless and armless \[=disarmed\]
conditions. Under these circumstances, no man with common sense can
say that they accepted that religion voluntarily. Here it is also
necessary to consider whether it was possible for your ancestors to
revolt against this religion. Had it been possible for them to revolt,
and had they still not acted upon \[the possibility\], only then can
we say that they had accepted this religion voluntarily.

But if we try to look into the then-prevalent conditions, it will be
clear that our ancestors were forced to live in that religion. Thus
this Hindu religion is not the religion of our ancestors, but it was a
slavery forced upon them. Our ancestors had no means to fight this
slavery, and hence they could not revolt. They were compelled to live
in this religion. Nobody can blame them for this helplessness. Rather,
anyone will pity them. But now nobody can force any type of slavery
upon the present generation. We have all sorts of freedom. If the
present generation do not avail \[themselves\] of such freedom and
free themselves, one will have to call them, most regretfully, the
most mean, slavish, and dependent people who ever lived on earth.  


## 15 \[The\] Difference between Man and Animal

Only a fool can say that one should cling to one's own religion only
because it is ancestral. No sane person can accept such an argument.
"You should live in the same circumstances in which you are living at
present" may be worthy advice for the animals, but it can never be for
man. The difference between an animal and a man is that the man can
make progress, while the animal cannot. No progress can be made
without change. Conversion is a sort of change. And if no progress can
be made without change, i.e. conversion, obviously conversion becomes
essential. The ancestral religion cannot be a hindrance in the path of
a progressive man.

There is still one more argument against conversion. They say,
"Conversion is a sort of escapism. Today a number of Hindus are bent
upon improving the Hindu religion. Untouchability and caste can be
eradicated with the help of these Hindu reformers. It is therefore not
proper to change the religion at this juncture." Whatever opinion
anybody may possess about the Hindu social reformers, I personally
have a nausea for them. I have no regard for them. I have had very
bitter experience of them. That those people, who live in their own
caste, die in their own caste, marry in their own caste, should befool
the people with false slogans, saying, "We will break the caste!", is
really surprising. And if the Untouchables do not believe them, they
get annoyed with them! Is it not astonishing?

When I hear the slogans shouted by these Hindu social reformers, I
recollect the efforts made by the American white people for the
emancipation of the American Negroes. Years ago, the condition of the
Negroes in America was just the same as that of Untouchables in India.
The difference between the two was that the slavery of Negroes had the
sanction of the law; while that of your \[people\], by religion. So,
some reformers were trying for abolition of the slavery of the
Negroes. But can those white reformers be compared with their
counterparts, the Hindu social reformers in India? The American white
reformers fought battles in war with their kith and kin for the
emancipation of the Negroes. They killed thousands of whites who
defended the slavery of the Negro people, and also sacrificed their
own blood for this cause.

When we read these chapters through the pages of history, the social
reformers in India cut a very sorry figure before them. These
so-called benefactors of the Untouchables of India called "reformers"
need to be asked the following questions: Are you prepared to fight a
civil war with your Hindu brethren, like the whites in America who
fought with their white brothers for the cause of the coloured people?
And if not, why these proclamations of reforms?

Now let us take the example of Mahatma Gandhi, the greatest of the
Hindus who claim to fight for the cause of the Untouchables. To what
extent can he go? Mahatma Gandhi, who pilots the non-violent agitation
against the British Government, is not prepared to hurt the feelings
of the Hindus, the oppressors of the Untouchables. He is not willing
to launch a peaceful Satyagraha against them. He is not even prepared
to take legal action against the Hindus. What is the good of such
Hindu reformers for us? I don't see any.  


## 16 Does the Fault Lie with the Untouchables Alone?

Some Hindus attend the meetings of the Untouchables and rebuke the
caste Hindus. Some will advise the Untouchables from their stage,
preaching, "Brothers, live clean, educate yourselves, stand on your
own feet, etc. etc." Really speaking, if anybody is to be blamed for
the stigma of Untouchability, it is the caste Hindus alone. It is the
caste Hindu class which commits this wrong. Yet no one will try to
gather these caste Hindus and preach to them. Those who preach to the
Untouchables to continue their agitation with the help of the Hindus
and by remaining in the Hindu fold--I would like to remind them of a
couple of illustrations from history.

I remember to have read a conversation between an American and an
English soldier during the last World War. I find it most appropriate
at this juncture. How long the war should be continued, was the
subject of discussion. In reply to a question, the Englishman said
with great pride, "We shall fight the war till the last Frenchman
dies." When the Hindu social reformers proclaim that they shall fight
to the last for the cause of the Untouchables, it means that they
propose to fight till the last Untouchable dies. This is the meaning,
as I understand it, of their proclamation. One who fights for a cause
at the cost of the lives of others cannot be expected to win the
battle.

If we are to die in our struggle for freedom, what is the use of
fighting at the wrong place? To reform the Hindu society is neither
our aim nor our field of action. Our aim is to gain freedom. We have
nothing to do with anything else. If we can gain our freedom by
conversion, why should we shoulder the responsibility for the reform
of the Hindu religion? And why should we sacrifice our strength and
property for that? No one should misunderstand the object of our
movement as being Hindu social reform. The object of our movement is
to achieve social freedom for the Untouchables. It is equally true
that this freedom cannot be secured without conversion.

I do accept that the Untouchables need equality as well. And to secure
equality is also one of their objectives. But nobody can say that this
equality can be achieved only by remaining as Hindus and not
otherwise. There are two ways of achieving equality. One, by remaining
in the Hindu fold. Mere removal of the sense of being a touchable or
an Untouchable will not serve the purpose: equality can be achieved
only when inter-caste dinners and marriages take place. This means
that the Chaturvarna must be abolished, and the Brahminic religion
must be uprooted. Is it possible? And if not, will it be wise to
expect equality of treatment by remaining in the Hindu religion? And
can you be successful in your efforts to bring equality? Of course
not. The path of conversion is far simpler than this. Hindu society
gives treatment of equality to Muslims and Christians. Obviously,
social equality is easily achieved by conversion. If this is true,
then why should you not adopt this simple path of conversion?

According to me, this conversion of religion will bring happiness to
both--the Untouchables as well as the Hindus. So long as you remain
Hindus, you will have to struggle for social intercourse, for food and
water, and for inter-caste marriages. And so long as this quarrel
continues, relations between you and the Hindus will be strained, and
you will be their perpetual enemies. By conversion, the roots of all
the quarrels will vanish. Then you will have no right to claim temple
entry in the Hindu temples, much less the need for the same. There
will be no reason for you to struggle for the social rights--e.g.,
inter-caste dinners, inter-caste marriages, etc. Once these quarrels
cease to exist, mutual love and affection will automatically develop.

Look at the present relations between the Hindus on the one hand, and
the Christians and Muslims on the other. The Hindus do not allow the
Muslims and the Christians to enter their temples, just as they do not
allow you. They also have no inter-caste marriages or inter-dining
with them. Irrespective of this, the affinity and love which these
people have with the caste Hindus, is not extended to you by the
Hindus. The reason for this differential or step-motherly treatment
with you is that you have to struggle with the Hindus for social and
religious rights, unlike the Christians and the Muslims--only because
you live as Hindus.

Secondly, although these religions have no social rights in the Hindu
society, that is to say, although they have no inter-dining and
inter-marriage with the Hindus, the Hindus treat them on a par. Thus
by conversion, if equality of treatment can be achieved and an
affinity between Hindus and Untouchables can be brought about, then
why should the Untouchables not adopt this simple and happy path for
securing equality? Looking at the problem from this angle, it will be
seen that this path of conversion is the only right path of freedom,
which ultimately leads to equality. It is neither cowardice nor
escapism. It is the wise step.

One more argument is put forth against Conversion. Some Hindus argue,
"Conversion is worthless if you do it out of frustration with the
caste system. Wherever you may go, you will face caste. Muslims have
their own castes. If you become Christians, there are also castes."
This is what these Hindus plead. Unfortunately, it has to be admitted
that the Caste system has crept into other religions also in this
country. But the burden of nurturing this great sin lies with the
Hindus alone. This disease originally started from the Hindus, and
thereafter infected others. Although the castes exist among Muslims
and Christians alike, it will be meanness \[=meaningless?\] to liken
it with that of the Hindus.

There is a great distinction between the caste system of the Hindus
and that of the Muslims and Christians. Firstly, it must be noted that
though castes exist among Christians and Muslims, it is not the chief
characteristic of their body social. If one asks, "Who are you?" and
someone says, "I am a Hindu," one is not satisfied with this reply. He
is further asked, "What is your caste?" And unless this is replied to,
no one can have the idea of his social status. From this it is evident
how caste has prime importance in the Hindu religion, and how minor it
is in Christianity and among the Muslims.

There is one more difference between the caste system of the Hindus
and that of the Muslims and Christians. The caste system among the
Hindus has the foundation of religion. The castes in other religions
have no sanction of their religion. If Hindus proclaim \[that they
intend\] to disband the caste system, their religion will come in the
way. On the other hand, if the Muslims and Christians start movements
for abolishing the caste system in their religion, their religion will
not obstruct. Hindus cannot destroy their castes without destroying
their religion. Muslims and Christians need not destroy their religion
for eradication of the castes. Rather, their religion will support
such movements to a great extent.

Even if for the sake of argument it is admitted that castes exist
everywhere, it cannot be concluded that one should remain in the Hindu
fold. If the caste system is useless, then the logical conclusion is
that one should accept a kind of society in which the caste system has
no serious adverse effect upon the person, or wherein the castes can
be abolished early and easily, in a simple manner.

Some of the Hindus say, "What can be done by conversion alone? First
improve your financial and educational status." Some of our people are
confused and puzzled by such questions. I therefore feel it necessary
to discuss it here. Firstly, the question is, who is going to improve
your financial and educational conditions? You yourself, or those who
argue as above? I do not think that those who advise you will be able
to do anything but showing their lip-sympathy. Nor do I find any
efforts toward this direction from their side. On the contrary: every
Hindu tries to improve the economic status of his own caste. His
outlook is limited to his own caste alone. Brahmins are engaged in
establishing maternity homes for Brahmin women, providing scholarships
to Brahmin pupils, and securing jobs for the unemployed Brahmin
personnel. Saraswats (one of the castes amongst the Brahmins) are also
doing the same.

Everybody is for himself, and those who have no benefactor are at the
mercy of God. This is the present-day condition of the society. If you
yourself have to rise, if no one else is to come to your aid--if this
be the situation, what is the purpose in listening to the advice of
the Hindus? There is no other motive in such advice but to misguide
you and kill \[=waste\] your time. If you are to improve yourselves,
then that \[misguiding and time-wasting effect\] is what they mean, so
nobody need pay attention to their gossip. Although this may seem
enough, I do not propose to leave this point here. I propose to refute
this argument.  


## 17 What can be Achieved by Conversion Alone?

I am simply surprised by the question which some Hindus ask, as to
what can be achieved by conversion alone. Most of the present-day
Sikhs, Muslims, and Christians in India were formerly Hindus, the
majority of them being from the Shudras and Untouchables. Do these
critics mean to say that those who left the Hindu fold and embraced
Sikhism or Christianity, have made no progress at all? And if this is
not true, and if it is admitted that conversion has brought a distinct
improvement in their condition, then to say that the Untouchables will
not be benefited by conversion carries no meaning.

This statement that "nothing can be achieved by conversion" has
another implied meaning, and that is that "religion is bogus and
useless; there is neither gain nor loss from religion." If this be the
case, then why do the advocates of this argument insist upon the
Untouchables' remaining in the Hindu religion? I do not understand. If
they do not find any meaning in religion, why should they
unnecessarily argue for and against conversion?

Those Hindus who ask as to what can be achieved by conversion alone,
can be accosted with the similar question: i.e., what can be achieved
by self-government alone? If financial and educational progress is the
condition precedent \[=prerequisite\] for freedom, what is the good of
self-government? And if the country is to be benefited by
self-government alone, the Untouchables are also bound to be benefited
by conversion.

After giving deep thought to the problem, everybody will have to admit
that conversion is as necessary to the Untouchables as self-government
is to India. The ultimate object of both is the same. There is not the
slightest difference in their ultimate goal. This ultimate aim is to
attain freedom. And if the freedom is necessary for the life of
mankind, conversion of the Untouchables, which brings them complete
freedom, cannot be called worthless by any stretch of the
imagination.  


## 18 Progress or Conversion--What First?

I think it necessary here to discuss the question as to what should be
initiated first, whether economic progress or conversion. I do not
agree with the view that economic progress should precede. This issue
whether religious conversion or economic progress should precede is as
dry as that which dealt with political reform versus social reform.
Several methods are required to be applied for the development and
progress of the society. Each of these methods has its own
significance. No definite seriatum \[=sequence\] can be applied for
the application of these methods.

If however anybody insists on such a seriatum with regard to
conversion and economic reform, I will place the former as the first.
I fail to understand how can you achieve economic progress so long as
you have the stigma of being an Untouchable. If any one of you opens a
shop, as soon as it is known that the shopkeeper is an Untouchable,
nobody will purchase articles from you. If any one of you applies for
a job, and it is disclosed that the applicant is an Untouchable, he
will not get the job. If anyone intends to sell his land, and one of
you proposes to purchase it, once it has been known that the purchaser
is an Untouchable, nobody will sell the land. Whatever methods you may
adopt for your own economic progress, your efforts will be frustrated
due to untouchability. Untouchability is a permanent handicap on your
path of progress. And unless you remove it, your path cannot be safe.
Without conversion, this hurdle cannot be removed.

Some of your young ones are after education, and they are collecting
money for this purpose from whatever source they find proper. Due to
this temptation of money, some are inclined to remain Untouchables and
make their progress \[as such\]. To these youngsters, I wish to ask
one question. After the completion of your education, if you do not
get a job suited to your qualifications, what will you do? What is the
reason that most of our educated persons are unemployed today? To me,
the chief cause for this unemployment is untouchability. Your calibre
has no scope due to your untouchability. Because of untouchability,
you have been ousted from the military services. You are not employed
in the police department on account of your untouchability. Due to
untouchability, you cannot secure even the post of a peon. You are not
promoted to the higher rank only because you are an Untouchable.

Untouchability is a curse. You have been completely ruined and all
your virtues have turned into dust. Under these circumstances, what
more qualifications can you add? And even if you add them, what is the
use? So, if you sincerely desire that your qualifications should be
valued, that your education should be of some use to you, you must
throw away the shackles of untouchability, which means that you must
change your religion.  


## 19 Doubts about Conversion

So far, the arguments put forth by the critics have been discussed.
Now I propose to clarify the doubts expressed by the sympathisers of
conversion. In the first place, it has reached my ears that some of
the Mahars are worried as to what will be the fate of their Watan
(hereditary rights of a village servant). The high-caste Hindus are
also reported to have threatened the Mahars that they will be deprived
of their services as village servants, if they leave the Hindu
religion.

All of you are aware that I am least worried if the Mahar Watan is
abolished. During the last ten years, I have been advocating that if
there is anything that dooms the fate of Mahars, it is the Mahar Watan
alone. And the day on which you will be freed from these chains of
Mahar-ness \[Maharki\], I think your path of liberation will be open
to you.

However, for those who need this Mahar Watan, I can assure them that
their Watan will not come in trouble \[=be endangered\] by their
conversion. In this regard, the Act of 1850 can be referred to. Under
the provisions of this Act, no rights of a person or his successors
with respect to his property are affected by virtue of his conversion.
As for those who feel this reference of law to be insufficient, their
attention is drawn to the circumstances prevalent in Nagar District. A
number of persons from the Mahar community in this District have
become Christians. At some places, we find that in one family, some
are Christians while others still remain as Mahars. However, the Watan
rights of these converted Christians have not been vanquished
\[=removed\]. This may be confirmed from the Mahars of Nagar. So no
one should fear that their Watan will come in peril by conversion.

A second doubt is about political rights. Some people express
\[concern\] as to what will happen to our political safeguards if we
convert. Nobody can say that I do not realise the importance of the
political safeguards the Untouchables have achieved. Nobody else has
taken so much pains and has made so much effort for securing political
rights for the Untouchables as I have done. But I feel it is not
proper to depend solely on political rights. These political
safeguards are not granted on the condition that they shall be
everlasting. They are bound to be ended sometime. According to the
Communal Award of the British Government, our political safeguards
were limited for twenty years. Although no such limitation has been
fixed by the Poona Pact, nobody can say they are everlasting.

Those who depend upon these political safeguards must think about what
will happen after these safeguards are withdrawn. On the day on which
our political rights cease to exist, we will have to depend upon our
social strength. I have already told you that this social strength is
wanting in us. So also I have proved in the beginning, that this
strength cannot be achieved without conversion. No one should think
only of the present. To forget what is eternally beneficial, and to be
lured by temporary gains, is bound to lead to suffering. Under these
circumstances, one must think what is permanently beneficial. In my
opinion, conversion is the only remedy, for eternal bliss. Nobody
should hesitate, even if political rights are required to be
sacrificed for this purpose.

Conversion brings no harm to political safeguards. I do not understand
why political safeguards should at all come in trouble \[=be
endangered\] by conversion. Wherever you may go, your political rights
and safeguards will accompany you. I have no doubt about it. If you
become Muslims, you will get political rights as Muslims. If you
become Christians, you will get your political rights as Christians.
If you become Sikhs, you will have your political safeguards as Sikhs.
Political rights are based on population. The political safeguards of
any society \[=group\] will increase with the increase of its
population.

Nobody should misunderstand \[=wrongly think\] that if we leave the
Hindu society, all the fifteen seats allotted to us will go back to
Hindus. If we become Muslims, our fifteen seats will be added to the
seats reserved for Muslims. Likewise, if we become Christians, our
seats will be added to the seats reserved for Christians. In short,
our political rights will accompany us. So nobody should be afraid of
it.

On the other hand, if we remain Hindus and do not convert, \[think
about\] whether our rights will be safe. This you must think carefully
about. Suppose the Hindus have passed a law whereby untouchability is
prohibited and its practice is made punishable. Then they ask you, "We
have abolished untouchability by law. Now you are no longer
Untouchables. At the most, you are simply poor and backward. But other
castes are equally backward. We have not provided any political
safeguards for these backward communities. Then why should you be
given such political safeguards?" What will be your reply to these
questions?

The reply of the Muslims and the Christians will be very simple. They
will say, "We are not granted political safeguards and rights because
we are poor, illiterate, or backward, but because our religion is
different, our society is different, and so on. And so long as our
religion is different from yours, we must get our share in the
political rights." This will be their appropriate reply. As long as
you are Hindus, you cannot take this stand--that you are entitled to
political safeguards because your society, your religion, is
altogether different. You will be able to take this stand on the day
on which you liberate yourselves from the serfdom of Hindu society.
And unless you stand on such a sound footing and claim political
safeguards, your political rights and safeguards cannot be considered
to be permanent and free from danger.

Looking from this perspective, conversion becomes a means for
strengthening political safeguards, rather than becoming a hindrance.
If you remain Hindus, you are sure to lose your political safeguards.
If you want to save them, leave this religion. Political safeguards
will be permanent only through conversion.  


## 20 Conclusion

I have decided for myself. My conversion is sure as anything. My
conversion is not for any material gain. There is nothing which I
cannot achieve by remaining an Untouchable. My conversion is purely
out of my spiritual attitude. The Hindu religion does not appeal to my
conscience. It does not appeal to my self-respect. However, your
conversion will be both for material as well as for spiritual gains.
Some persons mock and laugh at the idea of conversion for material
gain. I do not feel hesitant in calling such persons stupid.

The religion which preaches what will happen to your soul after death
may be useful for the rich. They may entertain themselves in such
religion at their own leisure (by dreaming the future of their soul
after death). It is quite natural that those who have enjoyed all
sorts of pleasures in their lifetime may consider such religion as a
real religion, which promises to them these pleasures even after
death.

But what of those who by remaining in a particular religion have been
reduced to the state of dust, who have been denied the basic
necessities of life such as food and clothing, who have not been
treated even as human beings, and have since \[=thus\] completely lost
the sense of being human? Are these people not supposed to think of
religion from a material point of view? Are they expected to look at
the sky and merely pray? What good is this superfluous Vedanta of the
easy-going, self-satisfied, rich people, to the poor ones?  


## 21 Religion is for Man

I tell you all very specifically, religion is for man and not man for
religion. For getting human treatment, convert yourselves. Convert for
getting organised. Convert for becoming strong. Convert for securing
equality. Convert for getting liberty. Convert so that your domestic
life should be happy.

Why do you remain in a religion which does not treat you as human
beings? Why do you remain in a religion which prohibits you from
entering temples? Why do you remain in a religion which prohibits you
from securing drinking water from the public well? Why do you remain
in a religion which comes in your way for getting a job? Why do you
remain in a religion which insults you at every step?

A religion in which man's human behaviour with man is prohibited, is
not religion, but a display of force. A religion which does not
recognise a man as man, is not a religion but a disease. A religion in
which the touch of animals is permitted, but the touch of human beings
is prohibited, is not a religion but a mockery. A religion which
precludes some classes from education, forbids them to accumulate
wealth and to bear arms, is not a religion but a mockery of human
beings. A religion that compels the ignorant to be ignorant, and the
poor to be poor, is not a religion but a punishment.

I have tried here, with the best of my knowledge, to analyse and
explain all the probable problems arising out of conversion. This
discourse might have become a lengthy one, but I had decided to be
elaborate from the beginning. It was imperative for me to discuss and
reply to the points raised by the opponents of conversion. Nobody
should leave the Hindu religion unless he fully realises the utility
of this declaration. So as to clear up all doubts, I had to discuss
this problem so much in detail.

How far you will agree with my views, I cannot say. But I hope you
will give deep thought to them. To speak that which pleases the
audience and earn goodwill, may be a convenient principle for the man
in the street. But it does not befit the leader. I consider him a
leader who, without fear or favour, tells the people what is good and
what is bad for them. It is my duty to tell you what is good for you,
even if you don't like it. I must do my duty. And now I have done it.
It is now for you to decide and discharge your responsibility.

I have deliberately divided this problem of conversion into two parts.
Whether to leave the Hindu religion or to remain in it is the first
part of the problem. If the Hindu religion is to be abandoned, what
other religion should be adopted, or whether a new religion should be
established--this is the second part of the problem. Today, I wish to
know your decision on the first part. Unless the first aspect is
decided, it is futile to discuss or prepare for the latter. Therefore
you must decide the first point. You will have no other opportunity.
Whatever decision you will arrive at in this conference, it will be of
the utmost use for me, to chalk out my future programme.

If you decide against conversion, this question will be closed
forever. Then whatever is to be done for myself, I will do. If at all
you decide in favour of conversion, then you will have to promise me
organised and en-masse conversion. If the decision is taken in favour
of conversion, and the people start embracing any religion they like
individually, I will not dabble in your conversion. I wish you all to
join me. Whatever religion we may accept, I am prepared to put all my
sincere efforts and labour for the welfare of our people in that
religion.

You should not, however, be led away by emotion, and follow me only
because I say so. You should consent only if it appeals to your
reason. I will not at all feel \[angry?\] if you decide not to join
me. Rather, I will feel relieved of the responsibility. This is
therefore a crucial occasion. You must bear in mind that your today's
decision will carve out a path for posterity, for future generations.
But if you decide to remain slaves, your future generations will also
be slaves. Hence yours is the most difficult task.  


## 22 Be Thy Own Light

What message should I give you on this occasion? While I thought over
it, I recollected the message given by the Lord Bhagwan Buddha to his
Bhikkhu Sangh \[=Congregation of Monks\] just before his
Mahaparinirvan \[=death\], and which has been quoted in
"Mahaparinibban Sutta." Once the Bhagwan, after having recovered from
an illness, was resting on a seat under a tree. His disciple the
Venerable Anand approached the Buddha and, having saluted, sat beside
him. Then he said to the Buddha, "I have seen the Lord in his illness
as well as in his happiness. But from the beginning of the present
illness, my body has become heavy like lead. My mind is not in peace.
I can't concentrate on the Dhamma. However, I feel consolation and
satisfaction that the Lord will not attain the Parinibban until he
gives a message to the Sangh."

Then the Lord replied thus: "Ananda! What does the Sangh expect from
me? Ananda, I have preached the Dhamma with an open heart, without
concealing anything. The Tathagata \[=Buddha\] has not kept anything
concealed, as some other teachers do. So Ananda, what more can I tell
to the Bhikkhu Sangh? So Ananda, be self-illuminating like the lamp.
Don't be dependent for light, like the Earth. Don't be a satellite. Be
a light unto thyself. Believe in Self. Don't be dependent on Others.
Be truthful. Always take refuge in the Truth, and do not surrender to
anybody!"

I also take your leave in the words of the Buddha. "Be your own guide.
Take refuge in reason. Do not listen to the advice of others. Do not
succumb to others. Be truthful. Take refuge in truth. Never surrender
to anybody!" If you keep in mind this message of Lord Buddha at this
juncture, I am sure your decision will not be wrong.  


|     |
|-----|
|    |

-- [fwp's main page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7) --
