+++
title = "13 GOBLIN"

+++



  


  


  


  


I FIRST SAW GOBLIN when he was just a few hours old in 1964. I wrote, at the time: “...Melissa, looking down, stared long at the tiny face. Never had we imagined such a funny twisted-up little face. It was comical in its ugliness, with large ears, small, rather pursed lips, and skin incredibly wrinkled and bluish black rather than pink. His eyes were screwed tight shut against the fading light of the sun and he looked like some wizened gnome or hobgoblin.”

Seventeen years later Goblin became the undisputed alpha male of his community. It was no easy victory that Goblin won as, for six stormy years, he challenged males older and, for the most part, considerably larger than himself. He risked much to acquire success, against odds that often seemed weighted heavily against him. His story is now an important part of Gombe’s recorded history.

In retrospect I can see that, from an early age, Goblin showed many of the qualities that ensure eventual high dominance status in chimpanzee society. He was always determined to get his own way, he hated to be dominated, he was intelligent and courageous, and he could not tolerate disputes among his subordinates. The incident described at the end of the previous chapter, when Goblin first rescued, then disciplined Freud, is a typical example of his desire for social control.

In addition to these personality traits, a key factor in Goblin’s early success was his extraordinary relationship with Figan, both before and during his time as alpha male. This had begun when Goblin was but a child. Without doubt it was Figan’s presence, Figan’s support, that gave Goblin the confidence to start challenging the other males at an unusually early age.

Like all highly motivated adolescent males, Goblin began to challenge the females of his community early and vigorously. In this endeavour Figan played little part, for these swaggering displays are seldom performed in the presence of adult males. Melissa sometimes helped her son on those not infrequent occasions when he fell victim to the retaliatory fury of one of the higher-ranking, tougher females. But she was not always around and Goblin frequently had to stand alone. As his displays became ever more vigorous and his confidence grew, he tackled the more senior females, and many were the times that he was chased off, often by two females who had formed a temporary alliance. Those incidents often ended in fights which, initially, Goblin usually lost. But even if he fled screaming he would be ready to tackle the same females all over again when next he encountered them. He never gave up.

It was during this period of his life that Goblin began to challenge me more and more often. From infancy onward Goblin, like Flint, had shown a tendency to “pester” humans. When he was about four years old we realized that he was going to become a real nuisance. He would approach me, or one of the other students, and seize hold of our wrists. And there he would hang, gripping ever more tightly if we tried to shake him off. Note-taking became increasingly difficult when he was around. Eventually we hit upon the idea of arming ourselves with tins of grease—used engine oil, margarine, anything. When he approached us we quickly smeared our wrists and hands. And, because he hated to get his hands greasy, he soon learned to leave us alone. But as he moved through adolescence he began to pester humans in a different way—or, rather, he pestered *me\!*

Chimpanzees can very clearly differentiate between human males and females. They are, by and large, far more respectful of men, particularly large men with deep, resonant voices. They take liberties with women. And I think Goblin seriously felt that it was necessary to dominate me along with the other females in his life. The fact that I was of a different species did not seem to worry him. And so I went through a trying few years, never quite knowing when Goblin might charge out of the undergrowth, run up behind me, and slap me or even stamp on my back. There were times when I was quite black and blue. This irritating—and sometimes painful—behaviour eased off after a while. I never reciprocated and so I suppose he reckoned that he had subdued me and I was no longer worth bothering about. Indeed, by the time he was twelve years old he was directing far less aggressive energy towards the female chimpanzees as well. As he had already physically attacked and thoroughly defeated most of them it would have been a waste of effort. He continued to challenge the remaining three—Passion, Fifi and Gigi. All three occasionally attacked him but Goblin took these setbacks in his stride: there would be another opportunity soon enough. When he was just thirteen years old he successfully conquered Gigi, the toughest of them all.

Now he was free to turn his attention to the lowest-ranking of the senior males, Humphrey. Poor Humphrey, fallen king, challenged by a youngster barely in his teens\! At first when Goblin displayed towards him, Humphrey ignored him, or waved an arm in irritable threat. But Goblin persisted. At some point Humphrey must have realized that this was no ordinary thirteen-year-old show of valour: it signified the beginning of the end. Then Humphrey’s irritation gave place to nervous tension and he began to respond in kind to Goblin’s boisterous challenges.

This power struggle between Humphrey and Goblin clearly put Figan in an awkward position. His loyalties were divided between Humphrey, now established as his “best friend,” and young Goblin with whom, for so long, he had enjoyed a peaceful, almost paternal relationship. When he was present during one of their disputes, Figan typically compromised by displaying between the two, and this usually terminated the incident.

The first real conflicts we saw between Goblin and Humphrey took place at the end of i977. Once, as Humphrey displayed towards him, Goblin whipped the older male with a sapling still rooted to the ground. Humphrey charged on and past him and Goblin started to feed. But not Humphrey. He sat glaring at the young male for another thirty minutes, as though brooding. And then he displayed at Goblin again. This time the two males stood upright and hit out at one another, hair bristling. Humphrey started to scream, while Goblin remained quite silent. In the end it was Humphrey who lost his nerve and, still screaming, left Goblin master of the field.

The second incident resulted in an even more clear-cut victory for Goblin. Humphrey had just mated a pink female and was peacefully grooming her, when Goblin approached, hair and penis erect, clearly desirous of copulating in his turn. Humphrey at once charged furiously towards his young rival. But Goblin, far from being intimidated, held his ground. The two skirmished up in the branches, and Humphrey, weighing about a hundred pounds compared to Goblin’s seventy-five or so, was actually knocked from the tree. He ran off screaming and Goblin, after watching for a moment, returned to the female and calmly mated her.

And so Goblin entered the hierarchy of the adult males when he was only thirteen years old—at least two years earlier than other males whose progress we have charted. Humphrey ranked below him; five males ranked higher. In a variety of ways it was clear that he was leaving adolescence behind. He spent more time grooming with the other adult males, and sometimes they groomed him in return. He frequently joined in the charging displays that occurred when, for instance, his group arrived at a new food source, or when two groups met. He often mated pink females in full view of adult males, rather than having to lure them to some private spot. After making a kill, he was usually able to retain a reasonable portion, instead of losing it all to his elders. And he began to take patrolling duties seriously.

All this time Goblin maintained his close relationship with Figan. When the alpha displayed, then Goblin, if he was there, would join in, following hot on his hero’s heels, often imitating his actions. When Figan performed one of his devastating early morning or late evening arboreal displays, startling his screaming subordinates from their beds, Goblin sometimes charged through the branches and swayed vegetation too.

The following year Goblin’s progress was nothing short of spectacular. Systematically he began to challenge the senior males—first the low-ranking, easy-going Jomeo, then Jomeo’s kid brother, Sherry, then Satan and finally even Evered. Only Figan was exempt. Indeed, it was his relationship with Figan that enabled him to challenge these older and more experienced males: he almost never did so unless Figan was nearby, and Figan, if he was there, almost always charged up in support of his young follower. Once, for example, Goblin and Evered began to fight each other when they were in a tree. Evered fought back and the two hung, hitting and kicking at each other, then fell to the ground. Goblin, clearly losing this particular fight, began to scream, at which point Figan charged up and Evered ran off.

Another incident took place when Figan was not around. It began when Goblin tried to move ahead of Satan when the group was travelling. This could not be tolerated and the much larger and heavier Satan attacked the younger male. Goblin ran off screaming, but an hour later, when Figan joined the group, Goblin at once began to threaten Satan, uttering waa-barks and displaying towards him. And Satan, no doubt anticipating the displeasure of his alpha should he retaliate, climbed hastily into a tree and sat there, whimpering softly to himself, as Goblin charged about below.

Soon after his fourteenth birthday Goblin, on a *one to one* basis, could intimidate all of the senior males—except, of course, Figan. And then came the day when, for the first time, Goblin was seen to challenge the brothers Jomeo and Sherry when they were *together.* Thrice he displayed past them as they groomed, going a little closer each time. And then, during a fourth challenge he actually hit Jomeo. Enraged, the brothers, each of whom weighed more than Goblin, chased after him. But though he ran off then, he did not give up. Four months later, almost exactly on Goblin’s fifteenth birthday, there was a dramatic conflict. Jomeo and Sherry were grooming, and at first they ignored Goblin when he began displaying towards them—or at least they pretended to ignore him. But when he got really close they uttered fierce waa-barks and waved their arms. The situation grew increasingly tense, and when adult female Miff arrived on the scene she was immediately and violently attacked, first by Sherry and then Jomeo. In this way the brothers tried to vent some of their frustrated aggression.

Goblin made the most of this distraction. No sooner had Jomeo taken over the pounding of poor Miff than Goblin charged Sherry and attacked him fiercely. Quickly Jomeo left Miff and rushed over—but he helped his brother with vocal threats only. Goblin and Sherry fought on, rolling over and over, now with Goblin uppermost, now Sherry. They battled in silence until Goblin bit deeply into Sherry’s neck and then, with loud screams, Sherry pulled away and ran off. Jomeo followed him, also screaming. And Goblin gave chase. For twenty yards or more he pursued them as they fled, then stopped and sat, gazing after them, his eyes hard and bright, his sides heaving. There were patches of saliva and fear-dung all over him. It was truly an amazing victory—and a decisive one. From then on, Goblin was able to dominate the brothers even when they were together.

It was in the following month that we saw the first sign of change in Goblin’s relationship with his erstwhile hero. For some time we had been expecting Goblin to turn on Figan. Indeed, I am still puzzled as to why Figan, so socially adroit in all other ways, had not been able to predict the inevitable outcome of his sponsorship of Goblin. The first sign of disloyalty was recorded one peaceful afternoon when, instead of hurrying over to greet the newly arrived Figan, Goblin ignored him. After that, he ignored him more and more often and Figan, obviously sensing the implicit challenge, became increasingly tense and nervous. One day when Goblin suddenly appeared, Figan actually gave small cries of fear and ran, seeking reassurance, to embrace Evered. It became increasingly commonplace to see Figan, grinning in fear, running to seek help from one or other of the senior males. And from then on events slowly moved to their inevitable and foregone conclusion.

During the dry season of 1979 Figan somehow hurt the fingers of his right hand. He limped when he walked. Just as Figan himself had quickly seized on any sign of weakness in a superior, so did Goblin now. He began to challenge Figan in earnest, displaying towards him again and again, sometimes hitting him as he ran by. If one of the senior males was around, Figan always rushed to him for support. In this he was successful, and a strong feeling of unity grew between the five older males: they banded together, supporting the old order of things in the face of the young upstart. Thus Figan had four potential allies while Goblin, having alienated his only long-time supporter, stood on his own. He relied simply on the devastating effect of repeated vigorous and energetic displays.

Quite clearly, Goblin had profited from his close association with Figan—he had picked up a number of useful “tips for dominance.” He had learned, for example, the psychological advan tage gained by startling the other males from their sleep with a vigorous arboreal display above their nests early in the morning. And the value of surprise—hiding in the undergrowth when he heard a group approaching, then suddenly charging out. Both techniques gave results that must have been eminently satisfying to the ambitious young male. But it was clear that, for all his bravado, this was a stressful time for him. Again and again when confronted by pairs of senior males, Goblin revealed his tension by suddenly displaying towards females or youngsters apropos, apparently, of nothing. Once again I became a frequent scapegoat on such occasions. I remember once when Derek and I watched him as he tried to intimidate Satan and Evered, who were grooming. Again and again, seven times in all, Goblin charged past them, dragging branches and hurling rocks. Each time he went within a few yards of where they sat: they did not even look. Goblin became increasingly frustrated and after charging past the two males for the eighth time he carried on towards Derek and me. He avoided Derek, who was sitting beside me on the ground, then veered to give me a hearty shove with both hands and a double thump, thump with his feet before displaying away and then sitting, glowering at the world in general.

At the end of September we saw the first serious fight between Figan and Goblin. Goblin won, most decisively, kicking Figan from the tree into which he had fled. Figan fell some thirty feet to the ground and ran off screaming. A week later, after Goblin had displayed at and around him five times, Figan again took refuge in a tree. Never shall I forget that day when I sat and watched Figan, once the most powerful of Gombe’s alphas, becoming more and more agitated and unhappy as the minutes went by. He moved restlessly, he scratched. Once, very cautiously, he began to climb down towards the ground, but Goblin, hair bristling, gazed up so ferociously that Figan, with squeaks of fear, retreated. I was vividly reminded of similar incidents when Figan subjected Evered to the same humiliation. On this occasion I had an interesting insight into Goblin’s mood. Eventually he moved away from Figan’s tree and joined Melissa who was sitting in the bushes nearby. He stretched out on the ground and she began to groom him. And then, almost imperceptibly, he reached for his mother’s hand and began to play, gently, with her fingers. There he lay, relaxed and peaceful, idly tickling with Melissa. And when Figan, with utmost caution, crept down the tree and away, Goblin, though he followed the older male with his eyes, continued to play.

Quite clearly Figan could no longer be described as an alpha male. But neither could Goblin because, although he could boss each of the other males if he met them individually, for the most part he was still unable to control the situation when two or more of them were together. For a fifteen-year-old, Goblin’s position was remarkable—but for this remarkable individual it was simply not good enough. It was clear that he would not rest until he had made it to the top and to this end he devoted himself tirelessly, displaying in the vicinity of the senior males at almost every opportunity.

Then, in mid-November, came the Great Attack, which, for almost a year, put Figan back on top. It started during a meat-eating session when tension often runs high and aggressive incidents frequently break out. Goblin, who had had no meat, displayed at Figan, who had. Figan, surrounded by potential allies, stood his ground. There was a dramatic fight as, for over a minute, the two males battled in a silence broken only by the sound of gnashing teeth. Suddenly, as though in response to some unheard clarion call, all the other adult males present—Evered, Satan, Jomeo and Humphrey—joined the fray, fighting under Figan’s banner. With the odds at five to one, Goblin started to scream and struggled to escape. When finally he managed to pull free he fled, with Figan in hot pursuit and the other males charg ing back and forth, highly roused and screaming. Goblin was very badly wounded during the fight, sustaining a deep gash in his thigh which was still bleeding heavily an hour later.

After that, Figan regained some of his former confidence while Goblin, in his turn, was uneasy in the older male’s presence. One month after the Great Attack, Figan had the satisfaction of seeing Goblin rush screaming from his displays. Better still, when Goblin took refuge up a tree Figan kept him there, tense and unhappy, for over twenty minutes while he sat calmly below. The tables had been turned. The other senior males, having gained in confidence as a result of the Great Attack, now supported each other even more enthusiastically against Goblin. Lesser males would have given up the struggle after a setback as serious as this. But Goblin, desperately unhappy with his present position, was made of sterner stuff.

Once his wounds were healed, Goblin, although for a while he avoided direct confrontations with Figan, once more began to challenge the other senior males. It was not long before the repeated displays, the constant disruption of social harmony again began to tell on them. Gradually, during the ten months following the Great Attack, Goblin regained his former position until, as before, he could dominate each of them when they were on their own. And then he set to work on the reinstated alpha. Poor Figan—his recently regained confidence, shaky at the best of times, wavered and broke. His best friend Humphrey had disappeared, perhaps a victim of the Kalande males. And, although Figan had then sought friendship with both Jomeo and Evered, and although they spent a good deal of time with him, he had no one whom he could really trust. When Goblin was around, Figan’s appeals for help from the three remaining senior males became ever more desperate.

Within a few months Goblin had, once again, utterly intimidated the hero of his youth. Soon after this Figan himself disappeared. Perhaps he too fell victim to intercommunity aggres sion. Or perhaps he died, alone, of some disease. We shall never know. I grieved for his passing for I had known him for many years and long admired his intelligence and persistence.

With Figan gone, Goblin’s disruptive displays became increasingly violent. And in response the senior males would sit close together and groom one another with almost frenzied concentration. The harder Goblin tried to disrupt their grooming, the more they groomed. And the more intently they groomed, the more reassurance they got from each other, and the longer they could ignore, or pretend to ignore, his tempestuous behaviour. Goblin became increasingly frustrated. For one thing it is much harder to threaten a rival if he will not flee or even meet your gaze. For another, his rivals were displaying overt signs of friendship and that was hard for Goblin to swallow. At all costs he must break up these grooming sessions.

But the older males, their eyes only a few inches from small patches of fur, were able to maintain a pretence of disinterest for over fifteen minutes. Again and again he displayed towards and past them. In between, panting, he sat and glared. Eventually, he passed the threshold of caution and became brave enough to actually attack one of the groomers.

These incidents were amazing to watch. One day, for example, Goblin suddenly arrived in the group that I had been following all morning, which included Satan and Jomeo. As soon as he appeared, the two seniors, as usual, approached and began to groom each other. Goblin stood, his hair bristling, and stared at them, but they paid no heed. After a few minutes he started one of his displays. The two senior males continued to groom, their concentration seeming almost fanatical. The females and youngsters screamed in a satisfying way and shot up trees. But Goblin was not interested in intimidating *them,* only his rivals. He paused, then displayed again, passing a little closer to the two males. They continued to groom, even more frenziedly. And so it went on. Goblin displayed vigorously seven times until he had worked himself into a state of utter fury. Then, during an eighth display he attacked Satan, leaping into the tree above and stamping down onto the older male’s head. Now the groomers were forced to respond. Screaming loudly they charged Goblin, waving their arms in rage. And despite the fact that his adversaries weighed 108 pounds and 103 pounds respectively, the eighty-pound Goblin stood his ground and tackled them both. For just over a minute they grappled and hit at each other—then, to my utter amazement, Satan and Jomeo fled while Goblin chased after them, hurling rocks. And then, as though to emphasize his statement, Goblin attacked Satan again. After that, as though the tension was altogether too much for him, Goblin left the group altogether.

On one occasion a similar confrontation, but this time with Satan and Evered, ended with no clear-cut victory for anyone. Goblin left the other two and, again, went off on his own. This time Hilali followed him. An hour later he encountered Fifi and immediately subjected her to a violent attack. Then, for good measure, he beat up Freud and Frodo as well. To the accompaniment of screams and waa-barks he displayed away and continued his solitary pursuits. Forty-five minutes after leaving Fifi, Goblin bumped into another female and she, too, was attacked fiercely and—at least so far as she was concerned—for no reason at all. In fact we can imagine Goblin still seething as he stumped through the forest, spoiling to vent his frustrated fury, really directed against Satan and Evered, on anyone he met.

There were many occasions when, during tense interactions between the senior males, Goblin would suddenly charge and attack some innocent bystander. Such scapegoats were usually adolescent males or females—including, of course, me. When anticipating one of Goblin’s onslaughts I always stood up and held firmly onto a tree. Then, when Goblin pounded on me I was less likely to be pushed over—I have never much fancied the idea of a chimp pounding on my prostrate body. Usually Goblin would simply pound a few times on my back in passing. Three times his attacks were worse. Once he pulled me from my tree, deliberately pushed me to the ground, then kicked me. Another time he started to pull me after him down a slope and I was terrified of losing my footing and falling on top of him. Heaven knows what the consequences would have been. The third incident was, I think, the worst. It started with his usual tactics as he seized the little tree that I was clutching, leapt up and pounded my back hard with his feet. But then he swung round, leapt up facing me, and kicked my chest. As he did so his wide open mouth with its four gleaming and rapier sharp canines, was barely three inches from my face. Occasionally Goblin would pound on one of the field staff also, and I think we all, human and chimpanzee alike, hoped most fervently that he would resolve his dominance position to his complete and utter satisfaction as quickly as possible\!

It was at about this time that Goblin began, quite systematically, to terrorize Jomeo. Even though it was already clear that Jomeo was highly submissive to the younger male, Goblin lost no opportunity to charge and attack him—during reunions or other periods of social excitement. Indeed, Goblin persecuted him so fiercely that for a while Jomeo, unless he was with one of the other senior males, would leave the group he was with whenever he heard Goblin’s distinctive pant-hoots nearby. And then, having reduced the Gombe heavyweight to a state of abject inferiority, Goblin began overtures of friendship. Suddenly he was grooming him more than he groomed any other male, sharing food with him, reassuring him in time of stress. The two became frequent travelling and feeding companions. In other words, they became friends—and Goblin, for the first time since turning on Figan five years earlier, had an ally. Not a very strong one, perhaps, but at least when he was with Jomeo, Goblin had a chance to relax and enjoy male companionship.

About a year after Figan’s death the other males finally seemed to give up. Worn down by Goblin’s repeated challenges, they let him have his way. And so, at seventeen years of age, Goblin became the undisputed alpha, able to control almost any social situation. Although he continued to display often, his performances were less violent and led less frequently to attack. At long last, things became more peaceful for the other members of his community.

Looking back over this fascinating story it is clear that, whether genetic or acquired, Goblin, like Mike, Goliath, and Figan before him, showed, in super-abundance, courage and persistence—the will to get to the top and to stay there despite setbacks. Can we point to any aspects of Melissa’s early care that might have contributed to the development of these characteristics? She was an attentive and supportive mother, yet in no way over-indulgent. When Goblin got into difficulties during his early attempts to walk and climb, his mother usually left him to get himself out of trouble, even when he whimpered—unless he was really stuck in which case she quickly retrieved him. She was not restrictive but not overly permissive either. She was not a punitive mother, and was not always able to command instant obedience—Goblin learned early on that, if he went on trying, he could sometimes get his own way. Yet he was not spoilt—when it came to things that really mattered to her, such as weaning, Melissa imposed her will on her son. All in all she was, quite clearly, a good mother with respect to her child-raising techniques. And, to the extent that Goblin’s behaviour was inherited, since she contributed fifty per cent of his genes, she was undoubtedly a good mother in this respect as well.


