+++
title = "16 GIGI"

+++



  


  


  


  


GIGI, UNLIKE MELISSA, will leave no descendants. Yet it would be difficult to overstate the extent to which this large sterile female has influenced the lives of the Kasekela chimpanzees, particularly the males. Since 1965 when she became sexually mature she has produced a new pink swelling, more or less regularly, every thirty days or so. Thus for more than twenty years she has been almost continually available to the Kasekela males for the gratification of their sexual desires. During that time her over-worked sex skin has swelled and shrivelled no less than two hundred and fifty times. By contrast, Fifi swelled only thirty times during the twenty-year period following *her* first pinkness. As a result of this repeated and unnatural stretching Gigi’s swelling today is huge when compared with those of other Gombe females.

Right from the start Gigi radiated sex appeal. Time and again she has been the nucleus of large and excited sexual gatherings, surrounded by most of the males of her community. And once the adult males have gathered together, drawn by the magnetic presence of a sexually popular female, they are far more likely to move out to peripheral areas of their territory to patrol the boundaries. Thus Gigi’s magnificent swelling has, time and again, served as a banner to rally the Kasekela males, encourag ing them to perform valiant deeds in the protection and expansion of their territory.

In one respect Gigi’s sexual popularity is hard to understand, since she often pulls away from her male partners before the completion of the sexual act. And she has been doing this for twenty-odd years. I assume that the males find such behaviour irritating, as well as frustrating, but it has never seemed to dampen their ardour. There are times, too, when Gigi is extremely reluctant to comply with the sexual demands of a male and on these occasions her suitors are often remarkably patient. I remember once when Figan was trying to mate with her. Gigi, who was reclining on the ground, her provocative swelling very much in evidence, totally ignored her suitor’s vigorous shaking of branches. After a few moments Figan, his hair \(among other things\) fully erect, stood upright and swayed branches wildly above her recumbent form. Gigi, barely glancing at him, rolled over and lay on her back, staring at the canopy above. Nonplussed, Figan sat down for a moment, occasionally shaking a small branch in a jerky, irritated sort of way as, presumably, he wondered what to do next. Gradually his branching got more violent, his hair \(if it were possible\) bristled even more, and there was a wild gleam in his eye that, I thought, boded ill for Gigi if she continued to ignore him much longer. Apparently Gigi got the same message, for she suddenly rose, approached Figan and crouch-presented before him. But no sooner had he begun to copulate than she pulled away, screaming, and rushed off.

She then lay down again about ten yards from Figan, who stayed where she had left him. Presently he lay down too, and all was quiet for an hour. Then he approached Gigi again—and once more she utterly ignored his courtship. Not until he repeated his wild, branch-shaking swagger around her did she finally get up and crouch for him—but yet again she almost immediately pulled away and ran off. This time, tight-lipped and scowling, Figan followed and his courtship was a clear-cut threat. She responded quickly, but the outcome was the same. Except that Figan, thoroughly stimulated, finally completed the sexual act—into the air.

There can be no other Kasekela female who has been led off on so many consortships as Gigi. Time and again she has followed different males, usually reluctantly, to the various peripheral parts of the home range that they preferred. She has been, over the past twenty years, on forty-three such excursions that we know of: the figure is probably higher. In terms of evolutionary biology the males were “wasting their time” since no measure of reproductive success for either partner could possibly result. However, the males did not know this, so they competed for her favours in all good faith. Moreover, there is little doubt in my mind that even if they *had* understood they would still have voted overwhelmingly in favour of the continued presence of Gigi in their midst.

In one other way Gigi has served the males of her community: she has helped the infants and juveniles to learn the ins and outs of the sexual act. Male chimpanzees are sexually very precocious. From the time they can totter, they show great interest in pink swellings, and they “mate” pink females zealously throughout their childhood. Of course this is just practice—a male is unlikely to be able to father a child until he is between thirteen and fifteen years of age. But it sometimes seems that Gigi prefers the small sexual advances of infant and juvenile suitors to the more vigorous demands of the adult males. Often she crouches accommodatingly as soon as one of these youngsters starts to court her—approaching with his tiny erection and imperiously shaking a little twig. Indeed, she sometimes actively solicits the sexual attentions of youngsters. Once, for example, she suddenly went over to where Prof and Wilkie were playing a boisterous game, seized Prof by his elbow, pulled him from his playmate, and then, still maintaining her grip, crouched before him. Only when he complied with her wishes did she release him.

At other times she ignores these youngsters completely, however much they persist—and in such matters infants can be surprisingly single-minded for periods of half an hour or more. I remember one long journey when Gigi, fully swollen, was followed by three petulant juvenile suitors. Each of them was quietly whimpering to himself as he followed behind that tempting pink bottom. Each of them approached and shook branches every time she stopped. And each of them was utterly ignored by Gigi.

In 1976 Gigi, for some reason, began to cycle less regularly and, at the same time, became for a while much less popular with the adult males. This may have been due to some hormonal upheaval—they responded to her much as though she was a female showing cycles during pregnancy. And then, one day almost two years later, I happened to be with her when she passed a strange blob of bloody, jelly-like tissue. I preserved it \(in whisky, which was the only spirit I had at the time\) and sent it to a reproductive biologist. He identified it as a uterine cast such as may, occasionally, be shed \(painfully\) by human females. What this meant, in Gigi’s case, is not known, but afterwards she became slightly more popular with the males—provided there was not too much competition from other females.

With the passing of the years Gigi has become increasingly irritable and unpredictable in her sexual interactions with the younger males. She still, for the most part, responds to their courtship overtures, but often she turns and hits or even attacks them once they start to mate her. There was one occasion when she turned on Prof as he copulated with her in a tree and pushed him so hard that he fell to the rocky ground some twenty feet below. After sitting motionless for a few moments, Prof threw a violent tantrum—to which no one, certainly not Gigi, paid the slightest attention. Incidents of this sort have become ever more frequent and it is scarcely surprising that the young males are less eager than before to mate with this irascible female. What makes it so puzzling is that Gigi seems as keen as ever to *initiate* the sexual act. Again and again she will approach a youthful suitor and solicit copulation. If he avoids her, as is often the case, she usually follows him and tries again. Once, for example, Gigi, fully pink, joined infant Beethoven and his sister, Harmony, as they fed in a tree. Gigi immediately climbed towards Beethoven, but he avoided her. After a few moments she approached once more, but he jumped into another tree. She followed him through that tree and into a third. Then she stopped and began to feed and I thought she had given up. Not a bit of it. After ten minutes or so she climbed over to him yet again, and yet again he avoided her. Gigi pursued a short way, then began to feed once more—until the siblings climbed down and started a grooming session. Gigi followed them at once and hurried after Beethoven when he tried to hide on the far side of his sister. When he then climbed rapidly up a tall tree she sat below, occasionally gazing up at him—wistfully one presumes—for the next thirty minutes. The moment he climbed down she once again approached and crouched, offering him her swelling. And this time her persistence was rewarded—one hour and twenty-five minutes after her first solicitation. That was one time when Gigi neither hit nor threatened her partner\!

It is not only infants who are sometimes intimidated by Gigi. Even adolescents are often nervous. For Gigi has become a strong and aggressive female, quite capable of putting most adolescent males firmly in their places. Although it is a fact that male chimpanzees attack more often than females do, this does not mean that there is not an aggressive streak in females. Indeed, many adolescent females go through a highly belligerent phase. But that is before they give birth. Once a female is faced with the task of nurturing a small infant, it ill behoves her to go around swaggering and fighting—she would be putting her precious baby at risk. Thus, most females become less overtly aggressive when they reach maturity.

For Gigi, however, the situation was different, for no infant arrived to temper her naturally assertive, dominant personality. In many ways she now behaves like a male. She has a vigorous charging display, and she displays often. She stands up to threats that most females would avoid and so frequently becomes involved in fights. She represents the ultimate challenge to young males who are desperately trying to dominate the community females. She sometimes accompanies the males on their boundary patrols, not only when she is fully pink but even when she is quite flat. And whereas other females \(who only go when they are pink\) typically trail along in the wake of the males, Gigi often plays an active role in patrolling activities. She has joined the males in the destruction of the nests of strangers, and in the attacks on females from neighbouring communities. She even took part in some of the brutal assaults during the war with the Kahama chimpanzees.

Gigi has an outstanding hunting record. She takes part in more hunts than other females and has a greater success in capturing prey. She is even able to maintain possession of a kill in the face of vigorous efforts by adult males to steal it. There was, for example, the time when she captured a juvenile colobus monkey, and hung on to the carcass like grim death despite three violent attacks by Satan and one by Sherry. During these struggles she fell to the ground three times, locked in combat with Satan, yet managed to escape and, still clutching her prey, rushed up another tree. When Sherry then seized her kill in both hands and pulled as hard as he could, she continued to maintain her grip, even when Satan displayed vigorously around and over both of them. Eventually Sherry managed to tear off the rump and hind legs. Then Gigi was finally able to eat in peace because Satan, rather than continue to try for a share of her meat, opted to follow Sherry and take some of his\!

I think the males truly respect this tough and dauntless fe male, who has been such an integral member of their society for so long. And so, despite her idiosyncratic sexual behaviours, Gigi enjoys relaxed relationships with them and is a favourite grooming partner. Like the males she spends much time in noisy excited social gatherings, whereas most females, unless they are pink, prefer a more peaceful existence, choosing to spend days at a time with family members only and joining the larger groups merely for periodic spells of stimulation. Gigi, again like the males, spends a good deal of time in absolute solitude, whereas other females, after they have had their first baby \(provided it lives\) never experience real solitude again. For the rest of their lives they are always with one or more of their offspring. Having been a mother myself, I know full well that even a small baby can provide a sense of real companionship.

And so Gigi, in many ways, stands alone. For, despite her many male-like characteristics she is not a male: she has never been, and she never will be, fully integrated into the camaraderie of male society. Nor can she find companionship and comfort, as other females do, within a family. Of course she was part of a family once, but that was long ago. Even when I first knew her, when she was about eight years old, her only relative appeared to be the young male Willy Wally. And he moved away to the south with the Kahama males when the community divided.

With no infant of her own, no opportunity to create, for herself, that special group of close friends, a family unit, Gigi has instead cultivated a number of special relationships with a succession of infants. She became attracted to each of them when the infant was about one and a half years old—the age at which their mothers gave them relative freedom to interact with individuals outside the family circle. When she was with the family, and when the mother permitted it, Gigi would groom, play with or carry her current favourite. She helped to protect the infants too—she was particularly zealous in breaking up play sessions with older youngsters when they began to get too rough. In effect she assumed the role, for one infant after another, of the traditional maiden aunt.

Those were relatively transient relationships, for as the youngsters, at around two and a half years, became increasingly boisterous and self-willed, Gigi lost interest. But more recently she developed some relationships of a more enduring nature—not only with two infants, brother and sister, but also with their mother, Patti. Gigi and Patti spent a fair amount of time together even before Patti gave birth, and afterwards, because of certain inadequacies in Patti’s maternal skills, Gigi, for the first time ever, was able to make a really significant contribution to the raising of a child.

Patti immigrated into the Kasekela community in the early seventies, so we knew nothing of her early life. In 1977 her first pregnancy ended in mystery: either the baby was stillborn, or it died during the first few days of its life. At that time Passion and Pom were still hunting newborn infants and Patti’s may well have been one of their victims. About a year later she gave birth to an apparently healthy male infant who died as a result of maternal incompetence, for Patti had absolutely no idea how to look after a baby. She did support him with one hand during travel, but sometimes it was his rump that she pressed to her belly so that his head bump, bump, bumped along the ground. Once she trailed him after her by one leg. Sometimes, as she sat feeding, she reached forward for a fruit in such a way that he was crushed between her thigh and belly and made strange high-pitched noises of distress. It was hardly surprising that the baby was dead before the week was out.

A year later Patti gave birth again, to another male whom we named Tapit. Although she was a better mother this time around \(which was hardly difficult\!\) I believe that her infant owed his survival as much to his own tenacity and toughness of spirit as to Patti’s care. There were so many times when it seemed that she simply didn’t know how to deal with him. Often, for example, she failed to cradle him properly, and then, as she sat grooming or feeding, he would fall back onto the ground. She would let him lie there until he whimpered, whereupon she would quickly gather him up. Once she leapt from one tree to another with Tapit held back to front, his head facing her rear. He screamed loudly during this performance, and when she reached her destination she seemed concerned and sat cradling him—but he was still upside-down, with his feet under her chin and his head in her groin. During his early months incidents of this sort were quite commonplace and Tapit was often to be heard screaming as his mother travelled through the trees.

Because he was cradled so inappropriately, Tapit often had difficulty in reaching Patti’s nipples. And in this, most basic of his needs, Patti seemed quite unable to help. As he nuzzled frantically in the wrong place he would whimper, then scream, and though she often looked down at him and watched him intently she almost never adjusted his position to make things easy for him. Even when he finally located a nipple and began to nurse, it was ten to one that a sudden movement of hers would jerk the hard-won reward from his mouth.

By the time he was six months old he was easily able to locate his mother’s breasts. But now he was confronted with a new difficulty. One day I followed them to a shady spot in the forest. Patti stretched out to rest and soon Tapit began to suckle. For a few moments all was well—and then Patti began to laugh. I watched in amazement as, chuckling ever louder, she pulled him from her nipple and tickled him, making gentle nibbling movements on his head and face. But Tapit wanted milk, not play. Eventually, whimpering, he succeeded in fighting his way back to the nipple—only to be pulled away again by his still-laughing mother. For some further minutes he tried to get his own way but then gave up, at least for a while. When he suckled next, about an hour later, Patti didn’t even try to interrupt, but she showed the same strange play response to suckling on a number of subsequent occasions. Once he struggled for over seven minutes, whimpering all the time, while his mother tickled him and chuckled. Why she behaved in this extraordinary fashion is hard to understand. It is a ploy used by a few mothers during the peak of weaning—they play vigorously with their infants to distract them when they want to suckle or ride during travel. But that is not until the youngsters are about four years old. Parti was obviously confused. Or perhaps it was just that his lips on her nipples tickled, and triggered a play response.

Patti allowed Tapit to move away from her when he was a mere four months old—as soon as he could totter. From this time on, she often left him to his own devices while she groomed or fed nearby. Sometimes, as he tried to climb towards her up a steep slope or follow her from one branch to another, he would begin to whimper, but she would usually ignore him completely. Often she did no more than glance in his direction, even if he fell a short distance and screamed. She showed the same indifference to his social development. Most mothers are careful to prevent their infants, during the first few months, from making contact with other adults. Not so Patti. When Tapit was only five months old, he climbed onto Satan during a grooming session. Tapit seemed confused and whimpered, but Patti paid no attention. Still whimpering, Tapit clambered across Satan, and soon began to scream. Only then did Patti retrieve him. Another time he tottered away from Patti and climbed a short way up a small sapling. Then he moved over to Gremlin, whimpering. Quickly she embraced him, but he pulled away and stumbled, crying louder, to Gigi. But she had not yet forged a bond with Tapit, and she ignored him. Finally, as he cried louder and louder, Patti, with a slight whimper herself, went over and gathered him up.

When Tapit was nine months old he was subjected to another of his mother’s peculiar idiosyncrasies. Again, I was astounded when I saw it for the first time. He was playing in the low branches of a tree near Patti while she fished for termites. When she was ready to leave she stood upright and, instead of putting her hand around his body and gathering him into her embrace in the normal manner, she merely seized one of his ankles and pulled. This, of course, made things very difficult for Tapit. As she continued to tug he clung ever more tightly to his branch, and soon began to scream. Her only response was to pull harder until he was forced to let go—upon which she clamped him to her belly upside-down. This happened again and again during the next couple of months.

By the time Tapit was one year old Patti occasionally wandered off, leaving her son behind. Once, for example, she gradually meandered further and further away from him as she foraged on the sweet yellow fruits of the *budyankende* bushes that cover great tracts of the lower mountain slopes in early summer. She paid no attention to his soft whimpers as he struggled to follow. After a while she was almost out of sight and only when he screamed really loudly did she glance round, then return to gather him up. Four months later she left him on the ground, where he was playing quietly by himself, and climbed a tree to feed. After five minutes Tapit tried to follow his mother, but the climb was too difficult and he began to whimper. Patti did not respond. Even when his cries got louder his mother only looked down at him. Finally Tapit threw a full-blown tantrum, screaming at the top of his voice, hurling himself about on the ground and tearing at his hair. Only then did Patti, somewhat reluctantly, pause in her feeding long enough to retrieve him.

This most unmaternal behaviour meant that, as time went on, mother and child occasionally became separated. Once I met Patti travelling with a group of males: there was no sign of Tapit. When they stopped to feed, Patti fed with them, quite calmly. It was only after fifty minutes that she suddenly seemed to “remember” that there should be an infant with her\! She stopped feeding, looked all around, began to whimper, then ran back the way she had come, crying loudly. I couldn’t keep up with her—but later in the day she was seen again, safely reunited with Tapit. Another time when I was following Melissa and her family, we heard the frantic crying of a lost child. At once Gremlin hurried off in the direction of the sounds, and found and embraced the infant—Tapit, of course. She stayed with him, sometimes carrying him, until he found his mother.

When Tapit was just over a year old Gigi began to make overtures of friendship to him. I well remember the first time I saw this. Tapit, as usual, was stumbling along some ten yards behind his mother. It was late in the day when most infants get tired, and even those much older than Tapit typically insist on riding. Presently Tapit began to whimper. Patti, as usual, ignored her son, but Gigi, who had been with them all afternoon, at once went back to him, crouched, and reached her hand towards him, inviting him to climb on her back. He backed away, confused, and lay on his back, crying louder. Gigi moved away at first, but when Tapit got up, still whimpering, she again crouched beside him. And this time Tapit leapt onto her back and she carried him to Patti.

That was the start of the close relationship between them that was to play such a crucial role in Tapit’s early development. Gigi, whenever she was not pink, now began to travel with Patti very often, and she lavished any amount of frustrated maternal affection on Tapit. She carried him during travel, groomed him and played with him; she was very protective of him, too. Once an adolescent male baboon, at whom Tapit had been displaying with the bristling, bouncing exuberance of infancy, suddenly lost patience, grabbed him and rolled him on the ground, then dragged him a short distance. Tapit, only just over a year old, was not surprisingly terrified and began to scream. Patti glanced over, but it was Gigi who sprang into action, raced over and gathered Tapit to her breast. Brave in the presence of his protector, Tapit pulled away from her and again bounced and stamped towards the baboon, hair bristling, while Gigi watched benignly. Then there was the time when Gigi seized Tapit and rushed up a tree just in time to avoid a charge by Goblin. And once, when Satan attacked Patti, causing Tapit, who had been riding on her back, to scream, Gigi actually displayed and kicked out at Satan.

In fact Gigi behaved very much like an elder sister and she and Tapit could often be seen together, sometimes as far as thirty yards from where his mother fed or rested. Once I sat with them during the midday heat while Tapit slept in Gigi’s lap for over half an hour, while his mother fed in a tree some distance away. Patti, for her part, seemed delighted with this babysitting arrangement. She showed even less concern for her son when Gigi was around. Once, for example, Tapit went off with Gigi for about a hundred yards while Patti remained grooming with some of the adult males. Her son was quite out of sight, yet even when her group startled and rushed up trees in alarm, Patti seemed totally unconcerned as to Tapit’s well-being. Some thirty minutes later he appeared, riding on Gigi’s broad back.

During Tapit’s third year Patti’s treatment of him became, in some ways, even more cavalier than before. During travel he was frequently forced to try to navigate some extremely difficult arboreal routes as he struggled to follow his mother. Even when he screamed she seldom returned to help him. There were many times when he could not cross a gap from one tree to another, despite his most desperate efforts. Then, whimpering and crying the while, he had to climb to the ground and scamper, screaming, to the tree where Patti was calmly feeding. Although youngsters of four and even five years old habitually ride on their mothers’ backs in order to cross the fast-running streams, Patti several times left Tapit on the far bank, forcing him to make his own way over the water via overhanging vegetation, crying loudly. But if Gigi was there to carry or reassure him, all was well. Indeed, she remained a frequent companion, playmate and protectress throughout the rest of his infancy.

There can be no doubt but that Gigi made a tremendous difference to the quality of Tapit’s life, bringing him, as she did, concern and reassurance, care and affection. His upbringing was extraordinary and, by the time he was five years old and weaned he was, as might be expected, a remarkable young chimp. He was amazingly independent and self-willed, and yet liable to be thrown into sudden frenzies of anxiety if things went wrong. And then, just before Patti gave birth to her next infant, Tapit died of some unknown disease. How ironic that, having somehow struggled through his perilous infancy, having survived despite his mother, he should leave the world when he was on the very verge of independence.

But Tapit’s life was not in vain, for he taught Patti a great deal about maternal behaviour. To my delight she was a wonderful mother to her next infant, daughter Tita, and showed none of the curiously inappropriate behaviour that had characterized her early interactions with Tapit. And so Tapit’s tenacity for life will benefit the younger siblings he never met and strengthen Patti’s line in future generations of Gombe’s chimpanzees.

Gigi began auntying Tita long before she was one year old, presumably because, by then, Patti accepted the big female almost as part of the family. And because of this early start, the relationship between Gigi and Tita was, in some ways, even closer than that between Gigi and Tapit. The bond between the two adult females was growing gradually stronger, too. Indeed, Gigi sometimes became quite upset if she accidentally lost contact with Patti during travelling or feeding.

One day, for example, Gigi climbed to feed about fifteen yards away from Patti and Tita. Some forty minutes later she climbed down and wandered over to the tree where Patti and Tita should have been. But they were not there—they had left a few minutes earlier, moving silently away through the undergrowth. Gigi stared, looked all round, then began to cry and whimper like a child who had lost her mother. After a few moments she uttered a series of pant-hoots ending in a very loud shout that, at least to my ears, had an exasperated overtone: “Where on earth have you got to?” A few moments later Patti and her daughter appeared, and the two females groomed for a while. Then Gigi reached towards Tita, gestured to the infant to climb aboard, and set off. Patti had no option but to follow\!

I remember vividly another day I spent with the three. After the heat of midday Patti climbed to feed, but Gigi stretched out on the ground and Tita stayed with Gigi. She bounced about, on and around the big female, then began to hit her with a leafy twig. With a play-face, Gigi took one end and they had a tug of war. Then Gigi began to tickle Tita, who responded at once, biting into Gigi’s very ticklish neck. Soon both of them were laughing loudly. After ten minutes, Tita had had enough and she climbed to play by herself, swinging in the vines. It was very peaceful. There were a few rustles from the tree where Patti fed and the shrilling of the cicada chorus. Gigi closed her eyes and slept. Suddenly the quiet of the late afternoon was broken as a fight broke out among a nearby troop of baboons. Tita, startled, began to scream and, quick as a flash, Gigi leaped to her feet, rushed up the tree, and gathered Tita to her breast. She carried the infant to the ground and began to groom her until Tita, her eyes closing, relaxed utterly. Then when Patti had finished feeding, the three moved on, Tita riding, carefree and confident, on Aunt Gigi’s strong back.


