+++
title = "05 CHAPTER 5         The Ashram Movement in the Mission"

+++
CHAPTER 5  
The Ashram Movement in the Mission

As in the case of the "pioneers of indigenous Christianity," historians
of the mission have been rummaging through the record in search of some
Christian institutions of the past which can be presented now as
"pioneers of the Ashram Movement". The pride of place in this context
goes, of course, to the "ashram" of Robert De Nobili and his successors
at Madurai. We have already dealt with it in detail. Then there is a
long gap till we come to the short-lived ashram which Brahmabandhab set
up on the Narmada in the closing years of the nineteenth century.
Finally, from 1921 onwards we are presented with some mission stations
which styled themselves as ashrams, or are named so now, simply because
the inmates wore *khâdî* and ate vegetarian food. The credit for placing
the Ashram Movement squarely on the map of the mission goes to P.
Chenchiah and company who included a chapter on it in their main thesis,
*Rethinking Christianity in India*, presented to the IMC conference in
1938. It was followed with a full-fledged 326-page treatise, *Ashrams:
Past and Present*, published in 1941.

All Christian historians concur that the need for Christian ashrams was
felt when the spread of the gospel became more and more difficult due to
the rising tide of resurgent Hinduism. They also agree that the first
cues came from ashrams founded by some leaders of the Indian
Renaissance-the Bharat Ashram founded by Keshab Chandra Sen in 1872 at
Belgharia near Calcutta, the Ramakrishna ashrams which functioned as
bases of the Ramakrishna Mission since 1897, the Shantiniketan Ashram
founded by Rabindranath Tagore at Bolepur in 1901, and the Satyagraha
Ashram which Mahatma Gandhi started at Sabarmati after his return from
South Africa in 1915. The names of Ramana Ashram at Tiruvannamalai and
Sri Aurobindo Ashram at Pondicherry are added to the list by some
historians. The fashion since Chenchiah's thesis of 1941 has been to
hark back to the Brahmanical ashrams and Buddhist and Jain monasteries,
in ancient and medieval times, as providing inspiration for Christian
ashrams.

After Brahmabandhab, K.T. Paul, General Secretary of the National
Missionary Society (NMS) founded in 1905, was the first to propose
formation of Christian ashrams in a meetings of the NMS at New Delhi in
1912. The ashrams were expected "to attract the most spiritual Christian
youths" and provide them with "evangelical equipment to meet the best
exponents of the non-Christian religions on their own grounds".[1](#1)
But the idea did not take shape till 1921. The NMS was an organisation
outside the mission proper controlled by foreign missionaries.

The Christian poet from Maharashtra, N.V. Tilak, founded an institution
at Satara in 1917 and named it God's Darbar. He had "a vision of Christ
founding *Swaraj* in man's heart". Jesus was hailed as the *guru*. The
inmates of the Darbar were baptised and unbaptised disciples of Tilak.
He sometimes preferred to describe his creation as an ashram. "But it is
recorded that some missionaries misunderstood and opposed Tilak's
attitude and style." In any case, the "ashram" collapsed and disappeared
when Tilak died two years later. In 1920, G.S. Doraiswamy wrote in the
*Harvest Field*, a mission journal, that a series of ashrams should be
set up by the mission. They were to be "theological institutions-for
thinking, training, study, research and writing". The proposal was not
welcomed. "In the next two monthly numbers of the journal, foreign
missionaries criticised Mr. Doraiswamy's hopes and suggestions from the
point of view of economics and theology."[2](#2) The mission was not
sure that native Christians were capable of managing missionary
institutions or competent for expounding theological themes.

A foreign missionary had to come forward before the idea of Christian
ashrams could find favour with the Mission. That was Dr. E. Forrester
Paton of the Scottish Mission. He joined the NMS and roped in a native
Christian, Dr. S. Jesudasen of the same organisation, to start in 1921
the Christakula (Family of Christ) Ashram at Tirupattur in the Madras
Presidency. It was patterned on Gandhian lines. The inmates were clad in
*khâdî*, ate vegetarian food and remained celibate. "Because both the
founders were medical doctors, the major social service activity of the
ashram was medical care. But village evangelism was a high priority with
the ashram and education and agriculture development were systematically
offered." The ashram did make some experiments in Tamil-style church
architecture and Tamil Christian hymns. But for the rest, it was a
normal mission station and so it has remained till today. In later
years, it was given "grants by European funding agencies for health,
agriculture and tribal development".[3](#3)

Similar Christian ashrams sprang up in different parts of the country in
the years following 1921. We shall take up only one more, the Christa
Seva Sangha, to show what they have been doing. The Sangha was also
founded by a foreign missionary, J.C. Winslow of the British Society for
Propagation of the Gospel. He had consulted Dr. Paton before the Sangha
was launched at Miri in Ahmadnagar District of Maharashtra on June 11,
1922, the feast day of St. Barnabas. Bishop Palmer in whose diocese Miri
was located came and gave his blessings at the time of inauguration.
Soon after, the inmates became known for wearing *khâdî*, performing
*sandhyâs* in Marathi and Sanskrit, and singing bhajans to the
accompaniment of Indian musical instruments. "Most of our time,"
reported Fr. Winslow in 1947, "was spent in evangelistic work in the
Ahmadnagar villages. Outstanding among our experiences which will always
live in our memory was the work at Karanji, a village some twenty miles
east of Ahmadnagar... We had a wonderful reception from the people of
Karanji itself and soon after, from those of four of the surroundings
villages as well. Almost the whole of the Mahar population of these
villages were received, at their earnest request, first as catechumens
and then as Christians; and Karanji has now become a base of work for
extending right out into the Nizam's Dominions."[4](#4)

Fr. Winslow visited England in 1926 and reported the results achieved to
influential people in mission circles "with the result that in 1927 and
1928 the Sangha was reinforced by four priests and three laymen (two of
whom were afterwards ordained) from England". Dame Monica Wills, a pious
and rich lady, gave him "the munificent gift of £1000 with which we were
able to purchase a piece of land near Bhamburda station just outside
Poona and in the early months of 1928 to build at last our Ashram and
permanent headquarters".[5](#5)

More money came. In 1931, the Sangha purchased "a large field adjoining
the river at Aundh, four miles to the north of Poona, as a site for
establishing a village Ashram from which work might be carried on among
villages similar to that of the early days of the C.S.S. and
supplementing the work in Poona".[6](#6) By 1934, the Sangha had so much
money and manpower that it was bifurcated into two. The new
establishment at Aundh retained the old name. The set-up at Poona was
rechristened as the Christa Prema Seva Sangha and handed over to another
British missionary, W.Q. Lash. He was to become the Bishop of Bombay in
1947.

In subsequent years, the Christa Prema Seva Sangha became more prominent
than its parent body. It built a hostel for college students-Hindu,
Muslim and Christian-who could spend their holidays there in
inter-religious dialogues.[7](#7) It became affiliated to the Society of
St. Francis in England and provided hospitality to all sorts of
missionary organisations, national and international, for holding
conferences. It took over the *C.S.S. Review*, which was first started
in 1931, and turned it into *The Ashram Review*. Before long, Poona
became the clearing house for the Ashram Movement of the mission. "The
Poona Ashram has been revived in recent years," writes Dr. Philipos
Thomas, "as an ecumenical Ashram in which Roman Catholics and
Protestants work together... Inter-Ashram Conferences are held every
year and their reports, messages and prayer circulars are sent to every
Ashram. This is one way of strengthening the fellowship between
Ashrams."[8](#8)

A Christian painter at Poona plied his brush and made Jesus a native son
of India. His paintings provided frontpieces for *The Ashram Review*.
Hindus could now see Mary, the mother of Jesus, dressed in *sârî* and
wearing an elaborate Hindu coiffeur, in scenes such as her own
childhood, Nativity of Jesus, Mother of India, Our Lady of India,
Annunciation, etc. Hindus could now see Jesus in a Hindu setting,
blessing the fishes held up in a plate by a Brahmin boy, meeting and
talking to a Hindu woman at Samaria, sitting in *padmâsana* while his
feet are anointed by Mary Magdalene dressed as a Hindu damsel, being
attended by two Hindu women at Bethany, getting tied to a Hindu-style
pillar and scourged by two whip-wielding Hindus, being crucified while
two Hindu women stand by the cross with mournful faces, being taken down
from the cross by four Hindu women, and so on. The evening at Golgotha
became crowded with Hindu men and women. St. Thomas stood attired as a
Hindu sannyasin with two similarly dressed Hindu disciples kneeling at
his feet. The design for Indian Christian statuary showed Jesus hanging
on a cross while a *rishi*-like figure, riding a GaruDa-like bird, sat
on its top and two Hindu women stood on both sides, one praying with
folded hands and the other offering incense. Hindus now had no reason to
reject Jesus as a Jewish rabbi who lived and died in a distant land; he
was very much of a Hindu *avatâra*. Hindus could only wonder at how a
historical person who appeared at a particular place and time could be
transplanted elsewhere and in another period with such perfect ease. The
mission is never tired of saying that Jesus is not a mythological figure
like Rama, Krishna and the Buddha of the Mahayana school. Christian
theology provides an explanation. Had not Tertullian, the famous Church
Father, said long ago that it is true because it is absurd, and that it
happened because it was impossible?

The Ashram Movement had gained some momentum by the time the
International Missionary Council met at Tambaram in 1938. It was given a
firm footing in the mission strategy by S. Jesudasen of the Christukula
Ashram in a chapter on Ashrams which he contributed to the joint thesis
presented by his group. He prefaced his essay by announcing that "Rishis
gave us ashrams and the ashrams gave us rishis in return".[9](#9) What
he meant by a *rishi* was spelled out in a subsequent section. "The
first missionaries (especially Roman Catholic missionaries)," he wrote,
"were men who saw nothing but evil in Hinduism and looked upon Hindus as
people who were debased and corrupt. Thus wrote Francis Xavier, one of
the saintliest of R.C. missionaries, to his chief Loyola in one of his
letter: 'The whole race of Hindus is barbarous and will listen to
nothing that does not suit its barbarous customs. Regarding the
knowledge of what is Godlike and virtuous it cares but little.' Since
his time there have been others, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, who
have in a measure shared with Francis Xavier the same attitude towards
the religion and people of this land. A change in attitude towards the
religion and people of this land came about 1606 when Robert de Nobili
and other Jesuits of a high intellectual order, ability, culture and
sacrifice Indianised themselves and their methods of Christian work
until later they incurred papal condemnation... That this attempt at
identification with people was a success is proved at least to me by the
history of my own family. My ancestor's conversion to Christianity from
Hinduism was brought about by one of these early Jesuits in AD
1690."[10](#10)

We have seen what Robert De Nobili and his successors were doing at
Madurai. It is difficult to believe that Dr. Jesudasen did not know the
full story. Just because his ancestor was a victim of Jesuit wiles, it
does not follow that the Madurai missionaries were not downright crooks,
and that what they practised was not a despicable fraud. Holding them up
as men of "high intellectual order, ability, culture and sacrifice"
reveals the depths to which missionary moral standards can
descend.[11](#11) Invoking Robert De Nobili as the first inspiration for
Christian ashrams tells us the truth about the Ashram Movement, namely,
that it is being promoted in order to practise the same fraud.

Coming back to *rishis*, it is true that they founded and lived in
ashrams. But to say that ashrams produced rishis is ridiculous. There is
no evidence that Hindus ever accepted a man known as a *rishi* simply
because he lived in an ashram. The *rishis* known to Hindu religious
tradition were first and foremost the living embodiments of a vast
spiritual vision evolved and perfected by Sanatana Dharma. The total
absence of that vision in Christianity is a guarantee that Christian
ashrams will always remain sterile so far as rishis are concerned. At
their best the Christian ashrams can produce only hypocrites, at their
worst only scheming scoundrels. In fact, the preposterous attempt to
produce *rishis* by the mechanical process of aping Hindu sannyasins
proves beyond doubt that Christianity is a vulgar ideology of gross
materialism disguised in religious verbiage.

This truth about the nature of Christianity, which has no metaphysics,
was confessed by P. Chenchiah's group in their next book. "The Hindu,"
they said, "sees only the commonplace Christianity in us. He does not
find anything in Christianity corresponding to the deeper levels of
Hindu spiritual experience... Hindu religious experience, mapped out in
Yoga, takes men from height to height. Similar heights in Christianity,
the Christian himself has not explored. There are certain valued
experiences of the Hindu in the pilgrimage of the soul to God. Of
parallel experiences in Christianity he is not aware."[12](#12)

A review of this book in *The Ashram Review* confirmed that Christianity
not only does not have this wealth of spiritual experience but also does
not care for it. The reviewer who remained unnamed drew a line between
"the ideal of a stoic or rishi who seeks union with the attributeless
Brahman" and the ideal of the Christian "who seeks union with God
revealed in Christ Jesus." He cited an established Christian tradition
and warned Christians against the experiences cherished by P. Chenchiah
and company. "It is indeed just this note of the cross," he wrote, "that
one misses in the book. The ideal Christian Ashrams will attract
'Christians anxious to scale higher levels of Christian experience'-and
here the 'higher levels' seems to be 'powers and illumination', 'to see
visions'- although from St. Paul onwards, mindful of the lesson of
Transfiguration, the great Christian saints and mystics have unanimously
taught that such experiences may be given but not sought, rather feared
than clung to, and that the true union with God is at the far deeper
level, in the steadfast union of the will with His will."[13](#13) The
reviewer was being polite. Christian missionaries, ever since their
advent in India, had been dismissing Hindu spiritual experience as
delusion inspired by the Devil. In fact, the very word "experience" has
been foreign to Christian parlance. Christianity has always aimed at
inculcating or imposing blind beliefs, the blinder the belief the
better.

The reviewer, however, was looking backwards. In days to come, the
mission was going to use the word "experience" with great abandon. The
theologians and experts on Indigenisation were getting ready to hold one
"spiritual workshop" after another on the subject of "inferiority". Fr.
Henri Le Saux who became Swami Abhishiktananda one fine morning in 1950
simply by putting on the ochre robe of a Hindu sannyasin, will very soon
start talking and writing ecstatically about "Christian experience". It
is a different matter that till to-day the mission has not been able to
spell out what this "Christian experience" means. The *rishis* were
never so dumb. Hindus have inherited a large literature in which
spiritual experience has been described in detail, in prose and poetry,
by means of similies and metaphors. Their *rishis* have continued adding
to it till recent times.

This is not the occasion for probing into what the "steadfast union of
the will with His will" has meant in human history, particularly to the
heathens, in terms of death and destruction. Here we are dealing with
the Ashram Movement in the mission. By 1945 there were a score of
Christian ashrams spread over the country. The mission had promoted them
"as places of experimentation in the working out of the Gospel in the
background of Indian thought, bringing about all that is valuable in
that heritage under the power of Christ".[14](#14) But the mission was
far from satisfied with their performance in the one field which it
regarded as the most important. "Many of our Christian ashrams,"
observed S.V. Parekh, "are noted for their life of piety and devotion.
Some are noted for their medical and social work, while others, are
keenly interested in educational work, but it is a sad comment to make
that there are hardly any with the exception of a few that are out for
evangelism. If I am not mistaken this is one of the reasons why the
Church has fought shy of the ashrams. Let the Christian ashrams accept
this challenge and throw out a challenge to the youth to rally round the
banner of evangelism."[15](#15) The cat was out of the bag - the
Christian ashrams were expected to produce converts like the rest of the
mission stations. The talk about producing *rishis* was so much hogwash.

The Ashram Movement, however, kept forging ahead under the impetus for
Indigenisation about which the mission became somewhat frantic soon
after India attained independence. The Catholic Church had been hostile
to ashrams which it regarded as an attempt to infuse Hinduism into
Christianity. We have seen how it dealt with Brahmabandhab when he tried
to create an ashram in 1899. His Sindhi disciple, Rewachand who styled
himself as Swami Animananda, made another attempt by starting a Catholic
Ashram in 1940 near the Catholic Seminary at Ranchi. "Most of the
Belgian Jesuits in Ranchi," writes Dr. Taylor, "Whom I talked with in
March 1977 and who lived across the street from the Seminary did not
know that Animananda had ever lived in Ranchi." But the Catholic Church
became reconciled to the institutional innovation when it caught the
fever for Indigenisation. Speaking of the same Belgian Jesuits in 1977,
Dr. Taylor adds in a footnote: "But they were very proud of their
colleague. Fr. E. De Meulder who had put up gross and petty signs
calling the Hazaribagh Church compound an ashram and who now claims that
a discussion club he once founded in Ranchi was actually called ashram.
Part of the problem with the name 'ashram' these days is that too many
irresponsible churchmen are willing and eager to apply it to anything
and every-thing."[16](#16)

The Jesuit father, Henry Heras, the foremost Catholic expert on
Indigenisation "contemplated an all-embracing Christian sannyasa in his
project of *Saccidananda Prema Sangha*".[17](#17) Fr. Jules Monchanin,
the French missionary, gave the project a practical shape in 1950 when
he, along with another French missionary, Fr. Henri Le Saux, founded the
Saccidananda Ashram at Tannirpalli in the Tiruchirapalli district of
Madras Presidency. "They had clad themselves in Kavi robes, the
traditional sign of the great renunciation in the land of India. Round
their necks they wore the Benedictine cross and engraved in its centre
the *pranava*, symbol of God the Ineffable and of the Eternal word
springing from His Silence, a solemn affirmation that the Christ
revealed in history is the very *Brahman* itself, the object of all the
contemplations of the Rishis. They had taken new names. His own,
*Parama-Arubi-Anandam*, bore witness to his special devotion to the
Praclete, the Supreme (*Parama*), Formless (*a-rubi*). They called their
solitude the *Shanti Vanam*, the wood of peace. Its formal name was
*Saccidananda Ashram*."[18](#18) Fr. Henri Le Saux took the name Swami
Abhishikteshwarananda, Bliss of the Lord of the Anointed Ones, that is,
Jesus Christ. His friends and followers found the full name too
difficult to pronounce. So he cut it short to Abhishiktananda. People
who were fond of him shortened the name still further and simply called
him Abhishikta.

In a small book authored jointly by the two Catholic "swamis" and
published in 1951, they stated their aims and methods. The Bishop of
Trichinapoly (now Tiruchirapalli) wrote a Foreword. "The present
venture," said the Bishop, "is but an attempt to reconstruct the ideals
of the first missionaries like De Nobili or of their recent prototypes
like Father Vincent Lebbe of China."[19](#19) The first missionaries
were following the example of St. Paul by "becoming all things to all
men that they might save all".[20](#20) The new swamis had the full
support of the Catholic Church in their "approach which will in the long
run help in assimilation of the ancient Indian culture and in its
Christianisation".[21](#21) The Bishop hoped that the new venture will
be welcomed "by those who have at heart the speedy 'illumination' of
this large subcontinent of India, which for all its glorious religious
past and its natural, and even violent, sympathy for spiritual values,
is still far away from Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the
Life".[22](#22)

"But somehow," writes Dr. Taylor, "the ashram did not really work like
an ashram. Some came to visit them but nobody joined them... Monchanin
died, much respected in the West and, finally Abhishiktananda wandered
off to the Himalayas and became the most exciting Indian spiritual
theologian of his generation. Then Dom Bede Griffiths came to
Shantivanam to make a new foundation. Dom Bede had been in India for
many years at the so-called ashram in Kurisumala where he must have
observed how to do and how not to do things. Anyway, it seems to me that
Shantivanam is now thriving."[23](#23)

So are many other Christian ashrams in India.[24](#24) They are
attracting the attention of what Dr. Taylor describes as "a new breed of
missionary statesmen-cum-funders and a group I shall call the
'Continental Christian Funding Organisation'".[25](#25) They are no more
than normal mission stations hiding behind a false facade. The only
additional function they perform is to prevent bewildered people from
the West from wandering into Hindu ashrams and coming under the
influence of Hindu *gurus*. "We know very well, of course," said Henri
Le Saux in 1964, "that the word ashram has been terribly devalorised by
Christians. In some so-called Christian ashrams, such essential
conditions of Hindu sadhana as abstinence from meat and liquor are
completely neglected if not deliberately trodden upon. Elsewhere ashrams
are simply guest-house and in the States it is even spoken of 'weekend
ashrams'."[26](#26) What else did he expect from fake swamis?

It is useless to tell the missionaries that Hindu *sâdhanâ* has nothing
to do with buying a piece of land, building some stylised houses on it,
exhibiting pretentious signboards, putting on a particular type of
dress, and performing certain rituals in a particular way. Hindu
*sâdhanâ* has been and remains a far deeper and difficult undertaking.
It means being busy with one's own self rather than with saving others.
It means clearing the dirt and dross within one's own self rather than
calling on others to swear by a totem trotted out as the only saviour.
It has no place for abominable superstitions like the atoning death of a
so-called chirst. Above all, it is not consistent with
double-talk-harbouring one motive in the heart and mouthing another. A
counterfeit must remain a counterfeit, howsoever loudly and lavishly
advertised. It is a sacrilege that those who are out to cheat and
deceive should use the word "*sâdhanâ*" for their evil exercise.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Richard W. Taylor, 'Christian Ashrams as a Style of Mission in
India', *International Review of Missions*, July 1979, p. 283.

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 284

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 285

[4](#4a) *The Ashramn Review*, July 1947, p.5. Mahars are a community of
depressed class Hindus in Maharastra.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 6

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 7

[7](#7a) What the dialogues were intended for is reported in *The Ashram
Review* of October 1948: "Just now there are two other Hindu friends
staying in the Ashram, who have expressed their intention of becoming
Christians; one of them has been a Hindu pilgrim for many years" (p.
31).

[8](#8a) *Indian Church History Review*, December 1977, p. 220

[9](#9a) *Rethinking Christianity in India*, p. 197

[10](#10a) Ibid.

[11](#11a) Full facts about De Nobili's frauds and forgeries have been
known since long.

[12](#12a) P. Chenchiah et al, *Ashrama: Past and Present*, Madras, 194
1, p. 267

[13](#13a) *The Ashram Review*, January, 1942, p. 29

[14](#14a) Ibid., April 1945, p. 21

[15](#15a) Ibid., July 1955, p. 17

[16](#16a) Richard W. Taylor. *op. cit.*, p. 286

[17](#17a) *Swami Parama Arubi Anandam: A Memorial*, Saccidananda
Ashram, 1959, p. 79

[18](#18a) Ibid., pp. 16-17

[19](#19a) *A Benedictine Ashram*. Douglas (England), 1961. p. 1

[20](#20a) Ibid., P. 5

[21](#21a) Ibid., p. 6

[22](#22a) Ibid., p. 7

[23](#23a) Richard, W. Taylor, *op. cit.* pp. 286-287

[24](#24a) A List of Christian ashrams at present is given in Appendix
1.

[25](#25a) Richard W. Taylor, *op. cit.*, p. 292

[26](#26a) A Bendictine *Ashram*, p. 2

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
