+++
title = "17 CHAPTER 14         The Third Dialogue"

+++
CHAPTER 14  
The Third Dialogue

This dialogue developed around a letter which K.V. Ramakrishna Rao wrote
to the *Indian Express* in protest against Christian missionaries
masquerading as Hindu sannyasins.

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 13 FEBRUARY 1989

Crucifying the 'Om'

Sir,-Nowadays, we find several Christian missionaries putting up ashrams
at various places in India donning ochre robes, building temple-like
churches, reciting Sanskrit slokas and practising other Hindu rites in
the guise of 'inculturation' - synthesis of Hinduism and Christianity.

In Tamil Nadu, one Fr. Bede Griffiths runs the "Sachidananda Ashram,"
Shantivanam at Tannirpalli near Kulitalai in Trichy district. There one
finds a temple-like church with *vimana* and *disaratchakas*. Inside,
Hindu poojas are performed and Hindu scriptures recited. He has even
super-imposed the sacred word 'OM' on a cross.

The National Catechetical and Liturgical Centre (NCLC), Bangalore-5, has
published "An order of the Mass for India," which gives the manner in
which the traditional Hindu "*pooja vidhanas*" like *arati, jala suddhi,
sthala suddhi, janalokha suddhi* and *purna suddhi* are to be carried
out. Typical Sanskrit slokas to be recited between the rites are also
given.

Everybody knows that 'OM' has been a sacred word and symbol for Hindus
since time immemorial and its sacredness has been revealed in the Vedas,
Upanishads and Ithihasas, before the advent of Christ and Christianity.
The Hindu believes what Lord Krishna has said in the Bhagvad Gita 3102
years before Christ: "Of all words, I am the syllable OM" (Gita X-25),
"I am the pranava OM in the Vedas" (VH-8)." The three words 'OM, Tat and
Sat' are mentioned in the scriptures to indicate Brahman (XVH-23).

The NCLC has gone to the extent of asserting that Vatican has given
divine sanction to the use of OM and Hindu rituals, rites and scripture
in their eucharist and mass. But the Vatican-II document about dialogue
with Hinduism exposes their motivated plan, as it has clearly mentioned
that it should be declared that they (the truths contained in Hindu
scriptures) actually show the way, truth and life of Christ. People
(Hindus) look for the perfection of religious life only in Christ. In
Him alone has God revealed everything.

Fr. Bede Griffiths' counterpart at Sangmner, Ahmedabad, one Fr. Hans
Staffner, has also clearly opened his mind unwittingly in this regard,
"Inculturation in India means that a Hindu is able to become a follower
of Christ without ceasing to be a Hindu both socially and culturally."
(P.72, "Jesus Christ and the Hindu Community: Is a synthesis of Hinduism
and Christianity possible?", Gujarat Sahitya Prakash, Anand).

So their pretension does not hold water anymore.

But one wonders what authority the Vatican or the Pope has to accord
approval or give permission to misuse or abuse Hindu symbolism and
spiritualism.

Would they dare to conduct this type of experiment with Islam by
building mosque-type churches, nailing the crescent on the cross, and
reciting verses from the Quran so as to reach Jehovah through Islam?
Would Fr. Bede Griffiths or Fr. Hans Staffner dare to start an
experiment to synthesize Islam and Christianity?

This is nothing but blatant misuse or abuse of spiritualistic symbolism,
when the christians themselves are ideologically against symbolism,
idol-worship and ritualism. So, unless religious identity and purity are
maintained in a country like India, the spirit of spiritualism cannot be
nurtured.

K.V. RAMAKRISHNA RAO  
10, Venkatachala Iyer'St.,  
West Mambalam, Madras - 33

 

NOT PUBLISHED BY THE INDIAN EXPRESS  

9, Dr. Ramaswamy Street,  
Vijayalakshmipuram,  
Madras - 600053

14.02.89

Unethical Methods

Dear Sir,

This refers to Shri K.V. Ramakrishna Rao's letter (I.E. dated 13.2.89)
on 'Crucifying the OM'

The dirty tricks played by the Missionaries are not new. It is a way of
life for the Mission since its inception.

Shri Gibbon in his book, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, has
observed that "The conquest of Crescent was purer than that of the
Cross", for the Roman Catholic Church, in its zeal to win converts to
its fold, adopted the pre-christian modes of worship and other social
system of the people among whom they spread their new religion.

In India, the activities of the missionaries are not different. Their
unethical tactics are buoyant especially in tribal belts. During 1985,
'Janasatta' exposed Father Joseph Pareekatil of Catholic Church of
Parasahi, Madhya Pradesh. Later he was arrested. The charges include,
inter-alia, destroying of a Hindu-shrine and creating a 31 feet high
concrete Cross on that spot; deceptively disguising as a Hindu Holyman
and worshipping in a Hindu manner.

The incident is not just isolated one but is indeed only the tip of an
iceberg and a lot remains to be exposed.

Some readers may have felt that using of OM by Christian missionaries
should be welcomed as it implies that Christianity accepts the greatness
of OM and it is indeed a glory for Hinduism. But we must remember that
OM is being used to mislead the masses and not to sanctify it. Even if
the intention is to accept OM, the missionary should propagate the
relevance and reverence of the PRANAVA in the West first, starting from
Rome.

The use or misuse of Hindu symbols has been tacitly approved and abetted
by Rome. Rome should remain Rome and should not become a Babylon, as
envisaged by Martin Luther.

Finally, it is the fundamental right of every Indian citizen to profess
and propagate any religion. But the constitution does not guarantee any
right to the christian missionaries to use unethical means for
conversion of the illiterate masses. The Government should put a check
on these illicit activities, lest the problem may snowball into a
trouble of a great magnitude.

Yours faithfully,  
N. Padmanabhan  
N. Srinivasan

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 16 FEBRUARY 1989

The Pranava and the Cross

Sir,-The caption, contents and conclusion of Mr. K.V. Ramakrishna Rao's
protest (IE, Feb.13) against some Christians using in their worship
Hindu symbols, language and rituals betrays a perverse misunderstanding
alien to the perennial freshness of living religions.

Mr. Rao's dragging in of Islam in this context is both irrelevant and
recklessly mischievous.

Like Swami Vivekananda, Gandhiji, Ramana Maharshi and the Paramacharya
of Kanchi, earnest Christian leaders like Dom Bede Griffiths and Swami
Abhishiktananda are trying to make all believers in Higher Power to
understand, experience and practise their mother-religions better and
more fruitfully. In this endeavour Christians here try to communicate
the eternal message of Jesus through symbols and modes of worship
familiar to Indians. Why blame them for using the local language?

Why quarrel over differences or exchanges in the material, size or shape
of lamps, or over the forms and functions of instruments in an
orchestra? Why not rejoice in the greater brightness and the richer
music? Harmony is not synthesis.

Why should Christians object to a staunch Hindu meditating on the Holy
Cross as a diagram of the human life divine, holding firmly together our
inherent moksha or freedom, our *paraspara* Godward growth, and
*dharama* responsibility, the paraspara obligation to our fellow
creatures?

It is too late to attempt converting *sanatana* into *puratana* dharma
or the New Testament to the Old.

K. Swaminathan  
Dharmalayam  
246 TTK Road  
Alwarpet  
Madras - 18.

 

Sir,-Mr. Ramakrishna Rao has quoted profusely from the Bhagavad Gita.
But what about the crucial (!) verse in it which says that in whatever
way a devotee of Krishna (i.e., God) approaches Him, he will be welcome?
If that is so, why should not a devotee approach Krishna through and as
Christ?

If we Hindus profess universal tolerance and grow red in the face when
it comes to actual practice, are we not hypocrites?

P.S. SUNDARAM  
1, Kamalabai St.,  
Madras - 17

 

Sir, - Mr. Ramakrishna Rao has perhaps not visited the Adi Parasakthi"
temple of Melmaruvathur. There you are provided with the symbols of Holy
Cross and that of a Star and Crescent even near the main shrine and the
preaching of "three-in-one" is carried on under the auspices of "Samaya
Manadu" frequently when a few Muslims and Christians preach "Samayam"
also.

I do not think any of the Hindu heads would have given sanction for
allowing such mixtures into our temples.

M.S. SOUNDARARAJAN  
34, Devadoss Reddy St.,  
Vedachala Nagar,  
Chengalpattu - 603 001

 

Sir-Mr. Ramakrishna Rao has expressed a genuine apprehension about the
future of Hinduism. But the Pranava "OM" is not the monopoly of any
individual - not even of all the *Hindus*. It belongs to *all* mankind.

If "OM" is "Brahman" and "Brahman" is "Om", then nobody can crucify or
destroy "OM" because "Brahman" is indestructible

If there is no efficacy in "Om", then there is no worry as to who does
what to it. The greatness of Hinduism, the Vedas and the Upanishads is
their universality and Catholicity.

V.T. VASUDEVAN  
118, G.S.T. Road,  
Chengalpattu.

 

Sir,-Mr. Ramakrishna Rao's objections to Christians inducting orthodox
Hindu symbols and their sacred rites and traditions into Christian
worship, church architecture, Christian literature, lyrics, sermons
etc., are quite valid, and this obnoxious tendency on the part of
certain sections of Christians calls for severe condemnation by the
followers of Christ.

Hinduism and Christianity are not comparable and can't be subjected to
the mockery of so-called "synthesis or fusion."

The "Church of South India" in Madras and the South, is in the forefront
of such a venture. This reckless trend on the part of some sections, is
not crucifying "Om" but Christ Himself upside down!

Christ said that his followers should worship in "spirit and truth."
Those who are phoney and bereft of "spirit and truth" in their own
religion resort to cheap gimmicks of importing from other faiths.

They belong to "Trisanku Swargam" and not to the Biblical paradise!

V.D. SPURGEON  
44, Medawakkam Tank Road,  
Madras- 10.

 

NOT PUBLISHED BY THE INDIAN EXPRESS

11, Hanumar Koil Street  
West Mambalam  
Madras 600033

February 17, 1989

Ends and Means

Dear Sir

This refers to Shri K. Swaminathan's letter on usage of Hindu symbols by
the Missionaries. (IE dt. 16.12.89).

When the Missionaries started preaching Christianity in Africa, they
caused some confusion with their colour scheme of 'White' Jesus and
'Black' Devil. There was a real spurt in conversions when some genius
changed the colour scheme declaring Jesus Black and Devil White.

There is nothing wrong in speaking in the local language, says
Swaminathan. Missionaries also do not bother about the means. So does
Mao - 'Why worry about the colour of the cat, so long as it catches the
mice.'

But the people of Africa have a different story to tells: 'When the
priests came to Africa, we had all the land and they had the Bible. They
gave each of us a Bible and we prayed together. When we opened our eyes,
we had Bible in our hands and they had all our lands.'

It is indeed worthless to talk about the utterings of Mahatma Gandhi on
the importance of ends as well as means.

Yours faithfully,  
M.N. Ganesan

 

Room No. 11  
Soukath Mansion,  
4 Pillayar Koil st. (II Land),  
Triplicane,  
Madras - 600 005

18.02.89

Cheating the Illiterate

Dear Sir

This refers to Shri K. Swaminathan's letter (I.E. dt. 16.02.89) on using
of Hindu symbols, especially the Pranava by the Christian Missionaries.

Philosophy, Mythology and Ritual are the three parts of a religion.
Every thought in the mind has a form as its counterpart. This is called
Nama-Rupa viz. Name and Form.

Ritual (Karma) is in fact concretised philosophy. As a common man could
not comprehend the essence of the abstract philosophy, it is indeed
impossible to dispense with the symbolic method of putting things before
us.

Every religion has symbols of its own and it is obvious that certain
symbols are associated with certain ideas in our mind.

According to Swami Vivekananda (Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda,
Volume 1, Page 74), "The association of particular temples, rituals and
other concrete forms with particular religions has a tendency to bring
into the minds of the followers of those religions, the thought for
which those concrete things stand as symbols; and it is not wise to
ignore rituals and symbols altogether. The study and practise of these
things form naturally a part of Karma Yoga."

Therefore it is obvious that a common man can very easily be deceived by
the usage of Hindu symbols and rituals by the Christian Missionary.

It is said 'Do not hate the sinner; hate the sin'. I do not want to cast
aspersions on the Christian Missionary. But the cheating of illiterate
masses is clearly unethical, illegal and should be stopped forthwith.

Yours faithfully  
R. Muralidharan

 

25, Sarojini Street, T. Nagar,  
Madras - 600 017

27.2.99

Highly Outrageous

Sir,

This has reference to K. Swaminathan's letter with the caption "The
Pranava and the Cross" (I.E., Feb. 16), wherein he has written, "Like
Swami Vivekananda, Gandhiji, Ramana Maharshi and Paramacharya of Kanchi,
earnest Christian leaders like Dom Bede Griffiths and Swami
Abhishiktananda are trying to make all believers in Higher Power to
understand, experience and practice their mother-religions better and
more fruitfully."

It is highly outrageous and objectionable to compare the above Hindu
leaders and religious heads with the Christian missionary
experimentalists like Bede Griffiths or Hans Staffner. The writer brings
in another Christian missionary Fr. le Saux, the so-called
Abhishiktananda without any reference. In any case, Swami Vivekananda,
Gandhiji, Ramana Maharshi and Paramacharya of Kanchi never resorted to
such experimentation of "cocktail religion" or "Masala or Kichidi
religion" by mixing religious symbols, donning the dress of Father or
Mullah, building church-like or mosque-like temples, fabricating Bible-
or Quran- like Hindu slokas, or asserting that Rama or Krishna or Shiva
is the only God and by accepting Him alone one can get salvation!

I quote some of the utterances of Fr. Bede Griffiths from his book
'Return to the Centre' published by Collins, U.K., 1976:

"While Krishna is primarily a legendary character belonging to the world
of myth (with all the deep meaning the word implies), Buddha comes
before us as an historical person" (p.83).

"Though there may have been a historical Krishna - in fact, there were
probably two or three - he has become a 'mythical' person, that is, a
person in whom the symbolic character overshadows the historical"
(p.84).

"Yet again we must remember that Krishna belongs to the world of myth,
that is, to archetypal world beyond time and history... By contrast
Jesus does belong to the world of history. He was crucified under
Pontius Pilate" (p.85).

"What is more, he (Krishna) is morally ambivalent. He is a symbol of the
highest divinity, yet as a man he is shown to be a trickster, a deceiver
who brings disaster on his people and is finally ignominiously slain"
(p.76).

"He is the symbol of the purest love but this is in terms of gross
sexuality. It is the same with Siva. He is the God of love, of infinite
beauty and grace, whose nature is being, knowledge and bliss, the
Father, the Saviour, the Friend. Yet his symbol is the lingam and like
Krishna has many wives" (p. 76-77).

"It is said that Krishna came on earth to enjoy himself" (p.84).

But, what about Christ?

"The love of God was revealed in Christ not in poetry but in history. It
was shown not in ectasy but in self-giving for others, in surrender of
his life on the cross... not in play but in agony of blood and sweat,
not in joy but in suffering" (p.85).

"The man Jesus is a human being as real as Socrates and Confucius, yet
the divine mystery is present in his very humanity, making him one with
God" (p.77).

The person who is following the path of Sannyasi, or trying to follow
the path of Sanyasi, while comparing religions and Gods, would not have
given this type of blasphemous remarks about God of another religion as
against his own God, when his very aim should be to tell the greatness
of all Gods. None of the above Hindu leaders or religious heads ever
commented like this. A true God believer cannot even think such things
about any God.

His objection to the mention of Islam in this context clearly shows his
utter ignorance about the cited Vatican II document dated 28th October,
1965 which includes Islam in its inculturation programme. This document
was supported by 2221 and opposed by 88 and this is a clear indication
that even at Vatican level there was protest. But inspite of protest,
because of the vested interests it was passed.

As Fr. Bede Griffiths in another book, 'Christ in India' (published by
Asian Trading Corporation, Bangalore - 560 025) and Han Staffner in his
'Jesus Christ and the Hindu Community', have clearly expressed their
views and methods to make Hindus to accept Christ, to spread
Christianity in India and to hasten for church growth in India,
anybody's secular or universalist interpretation of their mundane
activities cannot be accepted.

Yours faithfully  
S. Venkatachalam

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 1 MARCH 1989

No 'divine sanctions'

Sir,-In his letter "Crucifying the "Om" (I.E. Feb. 13) Mr. K.V.
Ramakrishna Rao has stated that the National Catechetical and Liturgical
Centre, Bangalore, have gone to the extent of asserting that Vatican has
given divine sanction to the use of OM and Hindu rituals, rites and
scripture in their eucharist and mass.

His Eminence Cardinal Rubin (Rome 12,8.1980) of the Sacred Congregation
for Oriental Rites had informed the Hierarchs of the Syro-Malabar Church
that "Not-withstanding the attempt made in various quarters to offer an
accommodated Christian interpretation, it (OM) remains so strongly
qualified in a Hindu sense, is charged with meaning so unmistakably
Hindu, that it simply cannot be used in Christian worship... OM is an
essential, integral part of Hindu worship." Further OM is not one of the
12 points permitted by the Holy See.

Besides neither the Vatican, nor the Catholic Bishops's Conference of
India, nor the local Archbishop of Bangalore have ever given their
approval for "An Order of the Mass for India".

S. SANTIAGO[1](#1)

No. 52, 13th Trust Cross St,  
Mandavellipakkam,  
Madras - 600 028.

 

Sir,-If the message of Jesus was exclusive, it would be impossible to
borrow a symbol of another "message" without compromising on the
exclusiveness of the former. In our effort to respect and tolerate other
faiths, it is not necessary to aim at homogeneity - that would be
syncretistic.

JOSEPH THOMAS  
(Asst. Pastor)  
St. Andrew's Church,  
Egmore, Madras-8.

 

Sir-The traditional Catholics have been constantly raising their voice
against these methods of 'inculturation' but there has been no response
from the Church. I hope protests from our Hindu brethren will make it
realise that this is a blatant intrusion into the territory of other
faiths.

At the National Biblical Catechetical and Liturgical Centre at
Bangalore, the grills in the prayer hall had figures of Siva, Brahma and
Vishnu. Objections raised by the Catholics were ignored and the images
were ultimately removed only when a Hindu organisation went to court.

A. SELVARAJ CARVALHO  
D 113 A, Sangeetha Colony,  
Madras - 78

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 9 MARCH 1989

Real Inculturation

Sir,-It is no exaggeration to aver that the Roman Catholics in Tamil
Nadu are quite secular in their religious observances, especially during
the performance of marriage in the Church and the community functions
that follow at home. The entire fabric of the socio-religious and
cultural background of a Catholic Tamil is quite akin to that of his
Hindu brethren.

This is real inculturation. The worship of our Lady of Health at
Veilankkanni Church is a typical example of inculturation par
excellence.

Thus the time-honoured Tamil Catholic socio-religious observances have
profound relevance to the meaning of Articles 37 and 38 of the
Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy enunciated in Vatican Council-II
documents. They are as follows:

[TABLE]

Any other innovations and aberrations of the neo-modernists like Fr.
Bede Griffiths and the Directorate of National Catechetical and
Liturgical Centre at Bangalore and the Management of Aikya Alayam at
Madras do not have any sanction under the Vatican Council-II documents
or from Rome. If Salman Rushdie, the infamous storywriter could be
universally condemned to death for his "Satanic Verses", why not these
abetters of ear-heresy perceptions in the Roman Catholic faith be
atleast excommunicated by Rome?

FRANCIS S. MORAIS   
11, Gengaiamman Koil St.,  
Choolaimedu,  
Madras - 94

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 15 MARCH 1989

Crucifying the Buddha

Sir,-Apropos of the letter of Mr. K.V. Ramakrishna Rao (I.E. Feb.13) and
Mr. Francis S. Morais (I.E. March 9) regarding the aberrations and
innovations that have crept into the postconciliar (after Vatican
Council II) Church in India, especially in Tamil Nadu, mention should be
made of the Buddhist Zen-meditation that has come to stay in Dhyana
Ashram, 13, Mada Church Road, Madras-28, an abode of the Jesuit Priests
where Catholic religious seminars, conferences and retreats are being
conducted periodically in which both the clergy, including the
cloistered nuns and the Catholic laity participate. Zen meditation
teacher Fr. Amasamy S.J. is the principal exponent of this pseudo
meditation imported from Japan.

A Zen meditation hall has been erected in the "Ashram". A Buddha idol
adorns the centre of the hall and a Crucifix is placed in another corner
of the hall.

Zen meditation was inaugurated a year ago by the Vicar General of
Madras-Mylapore Arch-Diocese, while two Buddhist monks from Japan
conducted the ceremony.

Fr. Amasamy S.J. by his adventurism has crucified Buddhism in the Jesuit
Ashram in Madras.

JUDE ANTONY ANANTH  
7, Dr. Gopalamenon Street,  
Kodambakkam,  
Madras - 24

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 23 MARCH 1989

'Inculturation'

Sir,-The subject of inculturation in the Catholic Church has come up
several times in these columns recently. As my name has been mentioned
more than once in this connection, perhaps I may be allowed to clarify
the issue.

The basis of inculturation was laid by the second Vatican Council in its
'Declaration on Non-Christian religions, where it was said that "the
Church rejects nothing which is true and holy" in other religions and
Catholics are exhorted to "recognise, preserve and promote the spiritual
and moral values of other religions as well as their cultural and social
values".

It was in response to this call that the National Centre was set up by
the Bishops of India in Bangalore to aid the process of inculturation.
At the same time many ashrams dedicated to the ideal of living a
Christian life in the context of the ashram tradition in India were
started. All these ashrams, contrary to what has been suggested, have
the full support of the bishops and the religious orders to which they
belong.

There are many different religions in India, and many different sects in
Hinduism, each with their own distinctive ritual and doctrine, yet
sharing a common cultural tradition.

It is hoped that by sharing in this common cultural tradition the
Christian churches also may be able to enter the mainstream of Indian
life, bearing their own distinctive witness to the truth, and working
together with other religious communities for the good of country as a
whole. It is an urgent need that the different religions of the world
should learn to co-operate with one another and not be a source of
division and conflict, as is so often the case. This seems to be the
only way forward for humanity to-day.

BEDE GRIFFITHS  
Saccidananda Ashram,  
Shanthivanam,  
Tannirpalli (Po).  
Kulithalai, Tiruchi - 639 107

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 27 MARCH 1989

Freedom more than communion

Sir,-It is strange that Dom Bede Griffiths does not see the incongruity
of foreigners like him preaching inculturation to the Church in India
(I.E., March 23).

Christian Gospel must incarnate in Indian soil. This spontaneous process
is helped best by the Indian Christian community under the leadership of
Indian bishops and the priests working under the bishops.

Dom Griffiths' observation on Christian churches in India entering the
mainstream of India's life is nothing but an attempt to shift the blame
for the foreignness of the churches in India from foreign missionaries
and foreign missionary societies to the Indian Christian community.

The Catholic Church in India is still dominated by the personnel of
foreign-based missionary societies like the Jesuits, the Salesians, the
Fransiscans and so on, under the pretext of the Church in India being
'young'. It is this that presents the Church in India as the long arm of
western Christianity.

No doubt most of the members of these societies (referred to as
'religious') are now Indians. But as members of foreign-based societies
they claim exemption from the jurisdiction of the bishops in India. The
new code of Canon Law of 1983 has abolished this claim for autonomy
technically called "clerical exemption", for doctrinal reasons. But the
societies still persist in the claim for autonomy and run a parallel
church, relying on the theology that would have done credit to the age
of colonisation.

In the discussion on the relation between the Catholic Bishops'
Conference of Religious, India (CRI) in Goa in 1986. Archbishop Casimir,
himself a Jesuit, said that the religious "value independence and
freedom more than communion with bishops".

But as early as 1926, Pope Pius XI, in his encyclical *Rerum Ecclesiae*
emphatically pleaded for replacing foreign missionary societies by new
indigenous societies "such as may answer better the genius and character
of the natives and be more in keeping with the needs and spirit of the
country".

So long as this sound theology remains suppressed, there is no point in
talking of inculturation.

R. RUBIN  
12, Third Main Road,  
Seethamma Colony,  
Alwarpet, Madras - 18.

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 28 MARCH 1989

Pollution of Hinduism

Sir,-I was surprised to read Bede Griffiths' claim that "All these
ashrams... have the *full support* of the bishops and the religious
orders to which they belong" (I.E, March. 23) because he has not denied
that any of the activities pointed out by me and other readers in these
columns are not carried on!

Does he mean that the soared bishops and the religious orders to which
they belong have *approved and accorded them permission* to pollute
Hinduism under the guise of inculturation?

Then what about Cardinal Rubin's say on OM (Rome 12-8-80)?

He arrogantly writes that the church rejects nothing that is *true and
holy* in other religions and that Catholics are exhorted to "recognise,
preserve and promote the spiritual and moral values of other religions
as well as their cultural and social values".

Do they think Hindus are not capable of recognising, preserving and
promoting their spiritual and moral values?

It is enlightening to read Bede Griffiths' books, *Return to the Centre*
and *Christ in India*. In the former, he glorifies Christ against Hindu
Gods, Siva and Krishna, treating them in bad taste, on par with E.V.R.
In the latter like Hans Staffner, he expresses his views and outlines
methods to make Hindus accept Christ, to spread Christianity in India
and to hasten Church growth.

If believers of Gods abuse Gods, seekers of Gods destroy Gods, faithful
followers of one religion question the faith of others and, against all
moral and ethical codes and universal principles, conduct
pseudo-spiritual and psychological-religious warfare against one
religion, then these activities are not "inculturation" but
"outculturation", as religion and culture are inseparable for Hindus.

Theocentric and theocratic eclectics are as dangerous as nuclear
warheads. The concept "My God is your God, but your God is no God", does
not foster understanding and cooperation. The concept should be changed
to "Your God is my God and my God is your God" and accepted by people of
all religions.

This is the only way for humanity today. Super God rivalry, religious
superiority, theocratic world domination and neo-spiritual globalism
cannot make "believers" live in peaceful co-existence.

K.V. RAMAKRISHNA RAO  
10, Venkatachala Iyer St.,  
West Mambalam,  
Madras - 33

Sir,-With reference to Fr. Bede Griffiths' letter "Inculturation", the
attention of interested readers is directed to the book *Catholic
Ashrams: Adopting and Adapting Hindu Dharma*, published by Voice of
India, 2/18 Ansari Road, New Delhi- 110002 (Rs. 40), which contains a
comprehensive over-view of the Church's inculturation (indigenisation)
programme in India and a lively debate on the issue between myself and
Fr. Bede Griffiths.

The Pope in Rome and his priests in India have no right or authority
whatsoever to meddle with Hinduism, appropriate its sacred customs,
titles, dress, symbols and rituals, and put them to uses that are at
least unethical and at most highly offensive to devout Hindus. By
indulging in these questionable experiments and devious Hinduized
proselytization tactics, Christians demean their own religion and
exploit Hindu tolerance to the limit.

Gordon Thomas and Max Morgan-Witts write in their book *Pontiff*: "(The
Chinese Catholics) are a product of centuries of relationship between
China and the Church. It began when the Jesuits walked into Peking in
the 16th century. They were warmly received. Then, in a momentous
blunder, Rome rejected the Jesuits' idea of integrating Chinese and
Catholic culture. Had this been allowed. China might well have become a
Catholic country."

Inculturation is the means by which the Church seeks to correct this
"momentous blunder" in India. If this is not true and conversion of
Hindus to Christianity is not the objective of inculturation, why aren't
recognised and qualified Hindu Dharmacharyas consulted by Church
authorities before they permit their missionaries to embark on reckless
religious and cultural adventures.

It is very doubtful if the ochre-clad priests who employ a bastardized
Om-and-Cross symbol in their missionary work, as do Fr. Bede Griffiths
and his comrades throughout the country, have ever considered that God
Ganesh is known to every Hindu as Pranavaswarup - and all the sophistry
in Rome and Bangalore cannot explain away this fact.

SWAMI DEVANANDA SARASWATI  
RCC (Avadi) Post  
Madras - 109

 

NOT PUBLISHED BY THE INDIAN EXPRESS

25 Sarojini St.,  
T.- Nagar,  
Madras-600 017

28.3.89

Provocation

Sir-This has reference to Swami Devananda Saraswat's letter with the
caption "Pollution of Hinduism" (I.E., March 20)

He is correct in saying that the object of inculturation is to convert
Hindus to Christianity.

A simple reading of Fr. Bede Griffiths's books such as "Return to the
Centre" published by Collins (UK, 1976) and "Christ in India" (published
by Asian Trading Corporation, Bangalore) will reveal that inculturation
is another method to make Hindus, particularly illiterate Hindus, to
accept Christianity.

In this modem scientific world, we must try our best to make people
forget about their religious differences and live peacefully.
Provocation in the name of spreading one's religion at the cost of
another religion should be stopped to save humanity.

S. Venkatachalam

 

INDIAN EXPRESS, 1 APRIL 1989

For human unity

Sir,-In the letters 'Pollution of Hinduism' (I.E., March 28), Mr. K.V.
Ramakrishna Rao and Swami Devananda have condemned what many of us
welcome as well-meant steps in the world-wide, Gandhian movement for
human unity in spirit and truth through (not inspite of) our great
religions.

For us in India. Truth is one, though sages speak of it variously. The
one fault of the Semitic religions is intolerance, the untenable claim
of being the *one* true faith. The cure for intolerance is *not
intolerance*.

Nothing is lost and something by way of harmony is gained, when
Christians use Sanskrit, Tamil, the syllable Om and the rites of *doopa*
and *deepa*.

Religions are not candles struggling for standing space. They are
candle-flames whose light and warmth merge and bring spirit nearer to
mind and matter.

K. SWAMINATRAN  
Dharmalaya,  
TTK Road,  
Madras - 18

 

NOT PUBLISHED BY THE INDIAN EXPRESS

RCC (Avadi) Post  
Madras - 600 109

1 April 1989

Foreign Funds

Dear Sir,

Either Prof. Swaminathan (I.E. April 1st) does not know anything about
Semitic religions except that they are intolerant, or he is deliberately
avoiding the central issue of conversion by means of inculturation and
trying to shift the blame for intolerance onto those few Hindus who
raise a voice of protest. Certainly, there is no religious contest
between Hindus and Christians, as the latter do not have anything Hindus
need or want. But it is also true that Hindus cannot meet Christians on
the level of ideology and foreign funds. Christians spend U.S. dollars
165 million every year to convert India's Hindus to their closed and
exclusive belief-system, and Hindus, for a variety of reasons, primarily
ignorance and poverty, cannot resist the Christian ideologue with his
promises of health and wealth. Since the 1960s, inculturation has become
the preferred method of proselytizing Hindus. Inculturation means that
all Prof. Swaminathan's candle-flames become one Christian candle-flame
at the alter of Jesus, the only son of God Jevovah. If this the kind of
"human unity" we want?

Yours truly,  
(Swami Devananda Saraswati)

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) The full text of Cardinal Rubin's letter, quoted by Mr. S.
Santiago, is as follows: Report on the State of Liturgical Reform in the
Syro-Malabar Church by the Sacred Congregation for the Oriental
Churches. (Text sent to all Hierarchs of the Syro-Malabar Church.
12.8.80)

Section 3: Observations on certain points of the 'Indian Mass' and the
'Indianized Mass (Dharmaram CMI group)' and related questions.

The 'Om' according to what innumerable Passages of the Upanishads
continually and repeatedly affirm, is the synthesis of ill the Vedas-,
and of all the 'gnosis' of Hinduism. Notwithstanding the attempt made in
various quarters to offer an accommodated Christian interpretation, it
remains so strong - qualified in a Hindu sense, is charged with meanings
so unmistakably Hindu, that it simply cannot be used in Christian
worship. 'Om' is not a revealed name of God. Besides, if even the Old
Testament tetragramme itself can no longer be used, how can this
syllable, so charged with special meanings, and charged with ambiguity,
be used to invoke God? Moreover, 'Om' is an essential, integral part of
Hindu worship.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
