+++
title = "19 Different Paths Meeting in God"

+++
APPENDIX 1  
Different Paths Meeting in God

This is an anthology[1](#1) of 12 articles contributed by distinguished
theologians Catholic and Protestant, all belonging to prestigious
divinity schools and universities. Some authors speak more
philosophically, others more sociologically, but the book has a kind of
unity which comes from a shared outlook. The authors also met at the
Claremont Graduate school, California, where their first drafts were
subjected to mutual criticism, thus ensuring further unity in the final
product.

The authors represent a minority view among Christian theologians,
probably the future view too. They are rendering a great service to
Christianity by trying to improve its ideological quality - they are
trying to make it think more charitably of its neighbours' religions, a
quality which it has traditionally lacked.

We in India used to a liberal religious outlook can scarcely realize the
boldness and difficulty of their venture. To us, the views they
represent are normal, but to their fellow-theologians in the Christian
world, their views are abnormal. Hindus tend to regard different
religions as different paths which eventually meet in God, but
Christianity has looked upon this plurality as wicked and as the
handiwork of the devil. From its beginning, Christianity has believed
that it is the sole guardian of truth and salvation and all outside of
the Church are mere, "*massa damnata*, an abandoned heap, excluded from
salvation", as Fulgentius Ruspe, disciple of St. Augustine, put it.

But due to many reasons into which we need not go here, during the last
half century, a new approach was tried. An unceremonious and soulful
denunciation of other religions became less evident. It was conceded
that they were not that depraved and that they also contained some
positive elements of moral and spiritual life. But the superiority of
Christianity still remained beyond question. Christianity is "unique",
it is "absolute", its revelation is "final and definitive", it provides
the standard by which other religions are to be judged which by
themselves are not sufficient and which truly find their fulfilment in
Christianity - these still remained the premises of Christian
theologians. Arguing it out proved an interesting game for them and they
played it with enthusiasm and proficiency. In the process, they
developed the art of sounding liberal without ceasing to be diehards.

But under a continuous pressure silently exerted by Hinduism-Buddhism,
even this approach is found to be unsustainable. Therefore, a new
theology is coming up which not only recognizes a plurality of
religions, but also accords them some sort of a rough and ready parity.
Other religions are co-valid. The authors of this anthology are
spokesmen of this view. They are doing pioneering work.

No wonder mainline theologians resist this view, which puts them in a
great dilemma. As Hans Kung puts it, "If all religions contain truth,
why should Christianity in particular be the truth?… the fate of
Christianity itself is in question." But not deterred by this
difficulty, the new theologians of pluralism and parity keep pressing on
with their views.

Langdon Gilkey, Professor at the Divinity School of the University of
Chicago, argues that "the sole efficacy had even superiority of
Christianity are claims we can no longer make, or can make only with
great discomfort". John Hick of the Claremont Graduate School,
California, one of the editors of this anthology, makes an outstanding
contribution. He rejects Christian "absolutism": he shows how
Christianity and imperialism have been inseparable; he quotes the
British historian, James Morris, who says that "every aspect of
(British) Empire was an aspect of Christ".

Rosemary Ruether, Professor at Garrett Evangelical Seminary, holds that
the traditional understanding of Christianity as the bearer of the only
or highest revelation has led to "an outrageous and absurd religious
chauvinism". She finds it astonishing that "even Christian liberals and
radicals fail to seriously question this assumption".

Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, Dean at Wesley Theological Seminary,
Washington, tells us of the "invidious effects that follow when one mode
of humanity is made normative for others". Writing as a feminist, she
says that Christianity's practice of absolutizing one religion, such
that becomes normative for others," has its parallel in its "sexism,
whereby one gender is established as the norm of human existence".

She thinks that much of current Christian liberalism is phoney. She
discusses the celebrated Hans Kung counted among liberal theologians,
and points out how he establishes false comparisons: according to her
the "fearsome, grimacing gods of Bali" - this is how Kung describes them
- may be no worse than "some bloody depictions of a crucified Christ".
Similarly, one is not very sure if the devadasi system of the Hindus
described as "temple prostitution" by many missionaries is very
different from Kung's "Christian consecration of virgins".

Tom F. Driver, Professor of Theology and Culture at the Union
Theological Seminary, New York, observes that from an early date
Christianity's "attitude to other religions has been shaped by the
colonial mentality"; that when "local religions could not be brought
under the Christian banner…. these religions were eradicated not
infrequently by the burning of books destruction of symbols and the
torture and slaughter of infidels".

W.C. Smith is Professor Emeritus of the Comparative History of Religions
at the Harvard University. Older generation in India will remember him
as a teacher in pre-Partition days at Forman Christian College, Lahore,
and author of an excellent book, *Modern Islam in India*. He says that
he has given up for good the word, idolatry, a Christian's fond name for
Hinduism. Several decades have passed since he used the word last, for
he now believes that no one has ever worshipped an idol though "some
have worshipped God in the from of an idol". He says that he came to
this realization when he read in the *Yogavasishtha*: "Thou art
Formless. The only from is our knowledge of Thee." He now believes that
a Christian "doctrine" too is no more than a "statue" and that for
Christians to think that "Christianity is true, or final or salvafic is
a from of idolatry". He adds that Christianity has been our idol. In the
same vein, Tom Diver says that there is "such a thing as an idolatrous
devotion to God and that Christianity has a lot of "Christodolatry".

Raimundo Panikkar, Professor Emeritus of the University of California,
another contributor, is well known in India. Heir to two religious
traditions, he was born and brought up in Spain as a Catholic, became an
ordained priest and a celebrated Christian theologian (Martin Heidegger
dedicated to him a poem of his, perhaps his very last). But as he grew
up, he also claimed his patrimony from his father's side and became and
interpreter of Hindu thought to his fellow-theologians in their arcane
language. In 1964, he wrote a book, *The Unknown Christ of Hinduism*.
But it will not disagree with his new thought if he now wrote a book,
*The Unknown Krishna of Christianity*. He has successfully crossed the
theological Rubicon.

Dr. Panikkar narrates how Christian missionary work from its early
beginning has passed through various phases, the current phase being
that of Dialogue. He reminds us that this word has come into prominence
after the dismantling of the colonial order and that "were is not for
the fact of the political decolonization of the world, we would not be
speaking the way we are doing today".

Paul Knitter, Professor of Theology at the University of Cincinnati,
Ohio, writes as a liberation theologian. According to him, the essence
of Christianity is "doing the work of resolving hunger, injustice, and
war - work that God through Christ called people to do". So we are back
to the same old story and dramatic personae: a mandate communicated to
the people at large through a favoured medium. In this format too, Jesus
remains the first or e even the sole fiddle and messianism retains its
full play. The only difference is that religious messianism is replaced
by a secular one which is no less arrogant and no better as communism
has proved. But the old power-adepts know that secular-radical slogans
sell better these days; therefore, they are up-dating their packaging
legends and marketing strategy.

If the medium is also the message in some way, we have to be wary on
that account. We know how liberation theology operates in India; its
work is full of mischief. We have to remember that it has been floated
by the same old Imperialist set-up.

At a recent International Conference of Mission Work in Rome, Cardinal
Josef Tomko criticized theologians like Knitter for being more occupied
with "social work" and "inter-religious dialogue" than with announcing
the Gospel. The answer to this criticism by one truly pluralist was
obvious: that announcing the Gospel was redundant, that it was even
arrogant, that other people do not need a Christian Gospel and probably
many of them have a Gospel of their own as good as the Bible.

But Dr. Knitter's answer was very different. "We are not saying outreach
evangelization should only consist of action of human welfare but we are
saying that working for human welfare, is an essential part of the
work... It is essential to the Gospel of Jesus Christ," he said.
Missionary strategists will have no difficulty in agreeing with this
view. They already know that "social work" is a great aid to
proselytizing.

A true pluralist would demand that Christianity liquidates its
missionary apparatus. What does it matter what theory is propounded so
long as this apparatus is intact.

The poor of the earth, the Third World countries have no chance against
it whether it stays religious or goes secular.

We cannot mention here all the contributors of the anthology but it is
thanks to their pioneering work and of others like them that a pluralist
theology is already in sight. But a fundamental question has yet to be
asked: How could Christianity live without pluralism for the last 2,000
years and do with so much hate for other ways and other fraternities? Is
it an accidental lapse or does it arise from a serious defect in its
fundamental spiritual vision, from an inadequate view of man and deity?
Has it to do with its Semitic origin? Or, even, is it at all the
spirituality of the meaning in which the word is understood by
Hinduism-Buddhism, Taoism, or Stoicism?

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *The Myth of Christian Unqueness: Towards a Pluralistic
Theology of Religions*. Edited by John I-Eck and Paul F. Knitter (Orbis
Books $ 17.95.) reviewed by Ram Swarup in The Statesman, Sunday Edition,
January 14, 1990.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
