+++
title = "1 The Teeth That Eat Men"

+++





The boy who would become Genghis Khan was born in a small encampment at the head of the Onon River in the fall of 1162, in the busy season of the year between the processing of dairy products from summer and the slaughtering of meat for winter. This was a time for gathering cedar nuts, wild onions, forest mushrooms, medicinal seeds, and wilted flowers to flavor winter soup and tea. It was the season when the herders could drink a constant supply of fermented mare’s milk and enjoy the final wild strawberries and raspberries with sheep or goat yogurt. It was, in short, the best time of year.

The acknowledged facts surrounding his birth are few and inauspicious. Only a short time before he was born, his mother, Hoelun, had been stolen from her husband by his father, the Mongol warrior Yesugei, who already had another wife and son. Despite the considerable effort Yesugei had expended to capture and claim his new bride, he almost immediately rode off again to raid the Tatars, a richer tribe of nomads living on the steppe with close ties to China. While her new husband was away, Hoelun gave birth to a son, who reportedly entered life clutching a small blood clot in his right fist. Later, the presence of this blood clot was interpreted to mean the boy was destined to conquer, something viewed positively by the Mongols but seen as a sign of his inherently barbaric nature by his enemies.

We know the childhood history of Genghis Khan from a series of Mongolian manuscripts derived from the one document, *The* *Secret History of the Mongols*, written immediately after his death.1 It contains a genealogy and myths about the origin of his family and combines the collected memories of eyewitnesses and participants in the key events of his life, often recalling the exact words of conversations. The *Secret History* presents information in a straightforward manner, with little embellishment. Later works added decorative flourishes to the story.

Because any story worth telling is worth improving, the simple facts about the birth came to be embroidered with the passage of time. In some versions the blood clot became a sacred stone, a jade seal, or a precious gem. According to the Buddhist *Pearl Rosary*, Genghis Khan was born with “beautiful signs” and “with a shining red jewel in his hand. On the same day a rainbow appeared in the sky.”2

When Yesugei returned from his campaign against the Tatars, he named his new son Temujin, after one of the warriors he had killed. The name meant Iron Man. Yesugei had built a reputation as a warrior willing to take chances, and he expected as much of his son. Although he was descended from a lineage of tribal khans, he himself had not been chosen as a khan. He owned some animals, but the *Secret History* portrays him as a hunter and warrior more than a herder.

The little that is recorded about Temujin’s relationship with his father is disturbing. In a society of nomadic warriors, fathers were frequently away when their children were born, but Yesugei’s absence may not have been entirely accidental. The problem seems to have stemmed from a question of paternity. Who was Temujin’s actual father? According to one eighteenth-century Mongolian manuscript, Hoelun was pregnant when she was kidnapped, thus making her first husband, Chiledu of the Merkid, his biological father.3 Later manuscripts, especially those written by Buddhists, gave no father’s name or endowed him with supernatural origins, presenting him as the reincarnation of a Buddhist deity, but few in his clan thought of him so highly.

Mongol society valued social paternity over biological ties. If a man accepted a child as his own, he would be taken as such by the tribe. Several times in Yesugei’s ancestry, the biological line of paternity had clearly been broken, but the child had nevertheless become a full member of the lineage and clan. Yet Yesugei had chosen to reject Temujin or to show a consistent indifference toward him.

Normally, at the birth of a Mongol child the father presented the first gift, usually a felt figure made from the wool of his sheep, but Temujin’s father was far away fighting. Another mysterious man happened to be present, a simple hunter of seemingly no importance called Jarchigudai. Though he was certainly not Temujin’s father, he played a fatherly role in the boy’s childhood.

Jarchigudai belonged to a small band of Uriyankhai, forest people living around the sacred mountain Burkhan Khaldun. The Uriyankhai hunted wolves, foxes, sables, ibex, deer, and forest antelopes, and unlike the herding nomads, who constructed circular felt *gers*, they lived in small conical tents of wood and bark. There were many bands of Uriyankhai, and although none herded steppe animals, some herded reindeer, which they milked and on which they rode through the forest while hunting. When the snow was too deep for the reindeer, Jarchigudai’s people strapped on wooden planks and propelled themselves forward with two poles. They could also attach bones to the bottom of their boots and skate across rivers and lakes. People who saw them soaring down the mountainsides or skimming across the ice sometimes thought they were flying. These uncanny skills inspired awe but also fear and suspicion among the steppe nomads, who attributed unseen magical powers to the Uriyankhai.

Mongols traditionally called a wise elder at the time of birth to foretell the child’s future. According to the *Blue Chronicle*, Old Jarchigudai, who would make an appearance at many important moments in Temujin’s life, was such a man, a Reader of Signs.4 He is said to have been the first to recognize the boy’s importance and to interpret the meaning of the blood clot. Too poor to own a horse, he had walked over the mountain to see the child. As a hunter he had neither sheep nor wool from which to fashion a gift of felt, so he brought the most valuable offering he had—a thick black sable fur that could be used as a blanket.

After Temujin’s birth, his mother had three more sons, Khasar, Khachiun, and Temuge, and finally one daughter, Temulun. Sochigel, Yesugei’s first wife, also produced another son, Belgutei, who was a few years younger than his brother Begter. By 1170 Yesugei’s household consisted of two women with a total of seven children under the age of ten. Because of the size of the family, each woman almost certainly had her own *ger*, but the two women lived close together. At this point, all dates are approximate, as the Mongols had no calendar. They gauged life by the moon and by how many times the forest or grass had turned green. Each year in the short summer new vegetation appeared, and thus another annual cycle had passed. Few people had the need or desire to measure time in spans longer than a few years. They calculated the age of infants in *oi*—they would be three, four, or five forests old—but after a few years or the birth of the next child, the family lost count so the term was not used for older children or adults.

The Armenian chronicler Hethum, who was generally favorable toward the Mongols, wrote in his 1307 work *The Flower of Histories of the East* that they lived “like brute beasts, possessing neither writing nor religion. They tended flocks of animals and moved from place to place searching for fodder for their herds. They were unskilled in arms, scorned by, and tributary to, everyone.”5

While the men were frequently absent hunting, herding, or raiding, the wives made clothes and the walls of their homes from wool, fleece, fur, and leather. Felt was their most sophisticated material, which they made by beating layers of wool together into a thick and rough but warm and water-resistant cloth used to line their boots and homes. Occasionally, the men returned from a raid with woven cloth from China, but the Mongols did not weave.

Lacking metal for pots, they cooked by heating stones in a dung fire and dropping them into a bowl or leather pouch filled with water and meat, or they cooked an animal in its own skin using the same method. Nothing was wasted. Before serving the meat, they passed the warm stones around so that every bit of animal fat that clung to them might be absorbed by their hands or rubbed onto their bodies as protection against the bitter dry air. Because the cold weather made bathing nearly impossible, Mongol men removed most of their body hair to protect themselves from lice, leaving only their facial hair and long wisps coming from the parts of the scalp not covered by a hat.



Throughout his life, Temujin maintained a close, albeit sometimes contentious, relationship with his mother, who generally favored her second son, Khasar, and her youngest son, Temuge. Temujin’s troubled status within the family was evident on several occasions. At one point when he was still very young, his father moved the family on to a new camp, leaving Temujin in the old abandoned camp. It is hard to determine whether this was by accident or design, but fortunately the young boy was found by Targutai Khan of the Tayichiud, who took him in. He described Temujin even then as having “fire in his eyes and light in his face.” Although Mongolian documents do not reveal how long Temujin lived with the Tayichiud, it was long enough for Targutai to take some credit for having raised him. As he later explained, “It seemed as though he could learn; so I taught him as though training a two- or three-year-old colt.”6

Eventually Temujin returned to his family, but not for long. Around 1170, when he was eight years old \(or in his ninth year, by Mongol reckoning\), his father decided to take him to live with his mother’s clan, the Olkhunuud, supposedly in search of a wife. Normally a boy lived with his future wife’s family for a few years and offered a type of service to them, giving them a chance to train and test him before allowing their daughter to leave with him, but eight years old was young for such an arrangement.

The story is filled with gaps. Normally the eldest son, Begter, would have been the first to be sent off. And why would Yesugei go to the clan of a woman whom he had kidnapped? Was he trying to make amends by giving them the boy? Or did he bring him because he believed that the son was not his? Was he trying to defuse some type of tension with other family members? Did Hoelun want him sent to her family for safekeeping?

In any event, Yesugei and Temujin never reached the pastures of his mother’s relatives. Several days after leaving home, they stopped for the night at the *ger* of a stranger named Dei-Sechen whose daughter, Borte, was one year older than Temujin. The *Secret History* describes both Borte and Temujin as “having fire in their eyes and light in their face.” Dei-Sechen offered to take Temujin as his intended son-in-law, and after spending only one night with the family, Yesugei impulsively gave his son to his host. The two men agreed to a marriage between the two children, and Yesugei left the boy and a horse with Dei-Sechen.

The casual manner in which the two men agreed to this marriage within a few hours of having met gives no indication of how important it would be, not only for the two of them but for world history. Although the intended bride and groom were mere children with no voice in the arrangement, they eventually became not only husband and wife, but the most powerful couple on Earth. Their descendants would rule vast empires, and their genes would find their way into royal families and aristocratic elites from China to Europe.

As he was leaving Temujin behind in Dei-Sechen’s *ger*, Yesugei said something puzzling. “I leave my son as your son-in-law, but he is frightened by dogs,” he said. “Don’t let him be frightened by dogs.”7 What did this mean? There was never any other evidence in the* Secret History* that Temujin was afraid of dogs or much of anything. Because they were in close proximity to Yesugei’s mortal enemies, the Tatars, he may have been referring to them. Another possibility is that he was referring to Temujin’s brother Khasar, whose name meant Wild Dog. Whatever the reason, the comment seems odd because Yesugei’s lineage claimed descent from a golden light beam that had turned into a dog, and much later in life Temujin constantly referred to his closest companions as dogs.

Temujin seemed to be in no immediate peril, but Yesugei was about to undertake a totally unnecessary risk. Having killed several notable Tatars in battle, including the warrior for whom his son was named, he nonetheless chose to travel through extremely hostile Tatar territory. Despite the obvious danger, when he encountered a camp and saw that it was in the midst of a feast, he decided he would join the drinking. Thirst triumphed over reason. Assuming, or hoping, that he could remain anonymous, he joined the festivity. The feasting Tatars recognized him at once. As shedding blood at a celebration would have brought terrible luck to all the participants, according to the *Secret History*, instead of disrupting the festivities, they gave him a slow-acting poison. Gradually, over the next three days, as he continued home on his horse he became increasingly ill. Upon arrival back at his family compound, Yesugei died. Monglik, a trusted friend of the family, went in search of Temujin and brought him home. He had lived with Borte and her family for barely more than a week, but the experience would remain seared in his memory.

In the wake of his father’s death, Temujin learned one of the most important lessons of his young life: never trust your relatives. Normally, at the death of a married man, one of his brothers or another close male relative would marry his widow and take responsibility for their children. But Temujin’s uncles refused this customary obligation. They would not marry Yesugei’s two widows or take in their seven children. The women were unwanted and the children simply too young and numerous to feed or to be of benefit to anyone.

After Yesugei’s death, the clan tolerated his widows and their brood through the first winter, but as spring approached, they exhausted the preserved dairy products and meats of the previous year. The forest animals in the surrounding area had been hunted or scared away. Hunger and wolves stalked the meager band. A single blizzard, a late cold snap, or an unusually heavy frost could thrust the community into disaster. Raiding enemies for food became nearly impossible for the weakened, emaciated horses and their poorly nourished warriors. It was at this time of year that the feeble perished and family members turned against one another. The weakest were sacrificed so that the strongest might survive.

A few months after Yesugei’s death, the clan exiled his two widows and their young children, who were a burden to them, and sent them to the steppe to die. Hoelun was a captive bride, stolen from her first husband; she was not a proper wife whose marriage had been arranged between two lineages, and thus the clan felt they owed her nothing. They passed the same judgment on Yesugei’s other wife, Sochigel, who may also have been a kidnapped bride. The announcement of the decision to abandon the destitute family came at the annual spring ceremony, when meat was burned in offering to the ancestors. The old women who controlled the clan rituals publicly and viciously excluded the two new widows and their children from participating. When Hoelun insisted on attending anyway, the women rebuked her. “You are one for whom the law does not require us to call you and give you food,” one snarled.8 “You are one for whom custom does not require us to call you and give you food,” echoed the other.

The ancestral ceremony concluded with plans to lead the surviving animals in search of desperately needed pasture. In the presence of the entire assembled lineage, the senior women pronounced a virtual death sentence on Yesugei’s widows and their children. Exclusion from the ceremony had been a mere prelude to their final condemnation. “Leave these mothers and children in the camp,” they ordered their fellow clan members, “and move on without taking them along\!”9

To be abandoned on the steppe is the worst fate for a nomad. As explained in the seventeenth-century manuscript the *Golden Chronicle*, “If one separates from one’s own kith and kin, one will become food for men around. If one separates from one’s relations, one will become food for orphans. If the many people perish, one will become food for isolated men. One may find all moving things; one will not find kith and kin. One may find tribes and people; one will not find one’s related families.”10

The clan headed away, searching for the warm mouth of summer and leaving the unwanted family to its doom. To ensure that they would not survive to pester them in the future, the departing relatives stole the family’s animals and possessions before deserting them. Only one old man among the whole tribe objected to the unjust betrayal of the women and children. Upon denouncing his fellow clan members, he was stabbed and left to die with the abandoned widows and their brood. What was done was done\! “The deep water has dried,” pronounced the *Secret History*, “the bright stone has shattered.”11



The Mongolian plateau is a high, dry, cold landscape that becomes steadily drier and warmer as one moves from north to south. Three ecological belts run from east to west. The south is a dry rocky desert steppe known as *govi* or Gobi, the central band consists of green steppes known as *tal* or *kheer*, and the north consists of a mountainous forest zone known as *khangai*. Temujin’s clan lived at the intersection of the steppe belt and the mountainous *khangai*, where the world of nomadic herders rubbed up against that of the forest hunters. They could venture out onto the steppe to herd their animals in the summer and retreat to the shelter of the mountains in the winter.

Life on the steppe is harsh even in the best of years. Scorching heat during the brief summer is followed by an interminably long winter. Dust storms, blizzards, and the threat of drought or flood constantly plague the land. Despite the hardships, Hoelun struggled defiantly to save her children. Rather than face certain death on the open steppe, she fled with them into the forests. Sochigel and her two sons either accompanied Hoelun or joined them soon thereafter. They headed to the highest and most sacred mountain in the territory. Because mountains are so venerated by the Mongols, naming them was viewed as taboo, so the Mongols used various circumlocutions or substitute names. The mountain to which Hoelun retreated is called *Khentii Khan*, King of the Khentii region, or, more commonly, *Burkhan Khaldun*, the Mountain of God. This was the mountain from which Jarchigudai had come to bring the sable fur to the infant Temujin.

To the nomad accustomed to the bright light of the steppe, where a horse and rider tower above all else and can be seen for miles around, the looming shadows of the forest must have inspired an awesome but eerie feeling. As described in the *Secret History*, it was a place of “swallowing quagmires... in woods made so impenetrable that a gutted snake could not creep in.”12 Yet the verdant patches of land on the mountainside contained fields of delicate edelweiss, waving feather grass, asters, lilacs, forget-me-nots, majestic veronica, and beautiful fireweed. In the summer, the fields swarmed with bees, black and orange butterflies, and spiders frantically spinning silk webs between flowers. Fat flies clustered as soon as the wind subsided, and the crisp, clear call of the cuckoo echoed from the cliffs.

The beauty and bounty of that first short summer and fall quickly gave way to the relentless cold of winter, when the streams and small rivers froze and animals disappeared into the earth. The green needles of the larch trees turned yellow and covered the ground with a golden carpet that was soon blanketed with snow. The bitter wind whipped around the edge of the cliffs with such force that it could peel the skin from an exposed face or cause toes to break off. Wolves howled through long nights that were so cold the moonlight itself seemed to have frozen.

Hoelun faced the dangers and made this land of shadow and mystery a refuge for her children. In the forest, she foraged vigorously to find anything they might eat. She dug roots from the ground with a black stick and made her sons search for rodents, small birds, fish, and other unclean foods that no herder would normally consider worthy of cooking. Fishing and hunting birds were talents of the Uriyankhai, the mountain people from whom the outcast boys soon learned these skills. The refugees hid in the small openings along the cliffs and built barricades to prevent men from entering the forest on horseback from capturing them.

Through Hoelun’s insistent striving and resourcefulness, Temujin and his siblings survived. She taught them what she could, but as a young woman from another tribe on a distant steppe, she did not know the specific traditions of her late husband’s land or the sacred spirits and stories of this strange place. For the steppe tribes, their land was their religion. They honored the mountains, rivers, passes, sacred stones, and trees. Exile from the tribe and from their homeland had meant exile from their spiritual community as well. Without father, grandmother, aunts, uncles, or elders of his lineage, having been rejected by his closest relatives as unfit to live, Temujin would have to find his own personal connection to the spiritual world.

As best she could, Hoelun instructed her children in the *Ancient Sayings*, a mixture of proverbs, myths, riddles, and poems. These held seeds of wisdom but no foundation for a united dogma or doctrine. The sayings were not prescriptive or instructional so much as they were stimulating of thought. They provided guidelines toward solutions and could be easily adapted to new situations, thus forming a living and flexible body of knowledge. Few Mongols were literate. They passed stories from mother to daughter and father to son, but mostly they believed in learning by example, by following the behavior of others rather than putting all their faith in words alone.

The abandoned family’s direst need was for food, warmth, and safety. Survival was the first order of business; idle curiosity, even the thirst for revenge, would have to wait for many years. An ostracized and condemned child who had done no wrong, Temujin buried his emotions deep inside, but the anger at the injustice of his situation gnawed constantly at his heart. “The teeth in the mouth eat meat,” offers one of the old Mongol sayings, but “the teeth in the mind eat men.”13

The teeth of Temujin’s mind grew sharper with each new indignity, each unwarranted insult, and each new winter.



Unexpectedly one day, while Hoelun and her family camped on the Burgi Escarpment, the old hunter Jarchigudai emerged again from the forest.14 Strapped to his back was his drum, the traditional bridge by which spiritually powerful men and women communicated with the spirit world.15 From then on Temujin’s moral and spiritual education was informally shaped by three people: his mother Hoelun, an old woman who had joined them and had “ears like a weasel and eyes like an ermine,”16 and the hunter of the mountain, Old Jarchigudai.

On Burkhan Khaldun, the old man taught Temujin the basics of spiritual life. It is not clear whether Jarchigudai was his name from birth or one bestowed respectfully later. The name signifies both a guide and messenger as well as moral principles.17 In name and in deed, Jarchigudai was Temujin’s spiritual guide, pointing the way toward the correct life.

He taught him that the Universal Mother existed in the great void, an abyss with no time or space, no person or spirit, no light or form, neither up nor down, no good or evil. She was the primal love searching for something on which to bestow her passionate affection, and for this she needed a child. From her infinite soul she created the sky, and because there was no light in the sky she took out her beating heart and made it into the sun to light the heaven. With the sky as her mate, she conceived a child in her golden womb, but because the world lacked a place for a child to be born, she made her body into the earth. To give the earth life, her breasts became the springs from which nurturing rivers flowed. As a good mother, she gave her body that her children might have life, grow, and flourish.18 She was every mother who gave her body to her children that they might survive.

The mountain had protected Temujin when the men of his clan and tribe would not, and from his mother and the old hunter he had learned to revere the mountain as the center of the world, the place where life begins. The three dimensions of the cosmos meet at the mountaintop. Above is the ocean of light known as *Tenger*, or heaven, and below is the ocean of water, *Dalai*. Where the male sky and the female sea join is the earth, which floats in the ocean of light and the ocean of water. It is on the mountaintop that Mother Earth meets Father Sky. Here the sunrays melt the ice and the water trickles down among the rocks and earth. As recorded on a stone near the Orkhon River more than a thousand years ago, “When the blue sky above and the reddish-brown earth were created, between the two, human beings were created.”19

The forested region of the mountain, the *khangai*, was the bountiful mother of life, but in the mountain heights above the tree line, where the large boulders and stony cliffs jutted upward out of the eternal snow and ice, the land was seemingly without life. This male element provided the hard bones of the earth. Together the female forest and the male rocks formed the origin of all being. They formed a universe consisting of three souls: male, female, and immortal. So each creature received an immortal and imperishable spirit as well as two mortal ones. According to Mongol belief, humans, like other animals, enter life with the male spirit in their bones, the female spirit in their flesh and blood, and the eternal soul in their mind and heart.



Winter on the mountain was a time for hunting and killing, and yet it was the most sacred season of the year. Snow, like milk, was thought to possess a spiritual purity that cleansed the soul as well as the body. Hunters rubbed their exposed flesh vigorously with fresh snow until the snow melted and their skin turned bright red, to prepare their bodies for the cold that always followed the snow, and purify them of their recent misdeeds. Though generally associated with the first big snowfall of the winter and performed primarily by men, the ritual could be enacted as often as the body or spirit might need restoration.

More experienced hunters such as Jarchigudai encouraged young men to push their bodies to the limits of physical endurance in other ways as well. Every day was a competition against whatever hazard presented itself—cold, heat, hunger, thirst, loneliness, or pain. When the day offered no new challenges, the Mongols invented them. They routinely held hot stones in their hands and rubbed them on their bodies or sat by the hottest fires trying to show no signs of pain. Each challenge was an opportunity for conquest, a personal conquest over oneself.

Rashid al-Din, a Persian chronicler who converted from Judaism to Islam but faithfully served the Mongols, wrote that in Genghis Khan’s homeland between the Onon and Kherlen rivers, the shaman used to “sit naked in the middle of a frozen river, and from the heat of his body the ice would melt and steam would rise from the water.”20 Others reported that the holy men walked naked in the winter snow.21 Central Asian mythology frequently connects nudity with spiritual powers, as the spirits were rarely clothed beings.22

The Mongols did not worship anthropomorphized deities. They recognized no god in human form with arms or legs, a head or face, or any deity that spoke to them in words. They simply acknowledged a supreme, divine power over the universe, an ineffable sacred presence without form or word that saturated the world. They did not believe in a god who descended to Earth to perform magical tricks, speak with burning tongues of fire, or copulate with human beings. They did not ascribe the human emotions of jealousy and anger to beings in the sky. Similarly, they saw no need for a god to speak to them or give them laws. They believed that each person contained a part of the divine essence of the universe, and from this divinity, each soul possessed a basic morality beyond anything that could be contained in human words or inscribed into law.

From the mountaintop, one can see the sky and judge its mood by the weather, but the earth displays its moods through the trees of the forest.23 In the Mongolian language, the forest, in addition to measuring the years of a child’s life, literally holds the collected wisdom of the Earth, as the word for “forest,” *oi*, also means “mind” and “memory.” When Mother Earth was happy with her human children, the trees prospered and fruits, nuts, or pinecones grew abundantly; their fragrance filled the air. When humans misbehaved, the trees no longer thrived, fruits withered, and their vibrant colors faded. The nomads who worshipped the highest mountain in the area honored the largest tree in the same way with offerings, prayers, and rituals to solemnize special occasions.

Persian chronicler Juvaini, who lived among the Mongols, wrote, “they approached the trees and made such obeisance as dutiful children make to their parents; they also showed respect and honor to the ground in which the trees grew.”24 The tree turns water into fire by absorbing the rain and transforming it into wood that burns. In a similar way, the tree produces incense that, when burned, transforms prayers into smoke and lifts them up to the sky. Earth, fire, and water—the female elements of life—unite in the tree.



The *Secret History* vividly describes the turmoil prevailing on the steppe during the period of Temujin’s childhood and youth: “the stars rolled in the sky,” one passage reads. “People fought without rest, and the earth rolled.”25 The Mongols lived in chaos churning without purpose or benefit, in a world where evil persisted without cause and without end: “People fought without wishing to; they betrayed and killed without wishing it.” Temujin grew up outside organized religion and beyond the reach of his tribe and ancestors, and for the rest of his life he remained deeply suspicious of both.

Amid the “whirling waters” and “blazing fire” of Temujin’s young life, Burkhan Khaldun became his refuge.26 Exile from the tribe went from a punishment to a unique opportunity for the physical, mental, and spiritual training that forever set him apart from the lesser men of the world. Like prior generations of nomadic children, he learned to use the mountain as a teacher, the rocks and trees as his scripture. The loosening of a strap on his horse, a falling rock, or an oddly placed tree could hold a message that the mountain was sending him from heaven. He gradually came to read these messages and to understand. Several times on the mountain, Temujin slipped in the saddle, and so he learned the value of constant balance. The greatest effort of strength or will could be quickly dashed by the slightest imbalance in the saddle. Horsemen must constantly adjust the packs that they strap to their camels, onto yaks, on their carts, and on their backs. Learning to arrange each item properly in its container, bind it, and balance it becomes one of the necessities of survival.

In the harsh and frequently unforgiving school of nature, Temujin acquired the skills to navigate, to find the way. On the open steppe a rider can find his way easily, because there is little to hide it. Dangers can be seen hours before they arrive. The sun by day and the North Star by night help the nomad to determine the location and thereby find the path to safety; but in the mountains, the way is rarely open or clear. Danger can lurk anywhere. Temujin learned to find his way by reading the patterns of the trees and the tracks of animals, and determining by their droppings which ones had passed and how long ago.

The young boy’s survival depended on learning to distinguish the echo of his horse’s hooves from the sound of other approaching beasts. It was on the mountain that his “intelligence came bursting forth; his mind began opening.”27 As powerful as the mountain was, it would not compel him to do what he did not want to do. It could only point the way. At a young age he had to choose for himself, and he frequently made the wrong choice. The Mongols believed that it takes seven mistakes to make one lesson, and Temujin had as much to fear from his own mistakes as from any other steppe warrior.

The ravines and rocky outcroppings of Burkhan Khaldun offered shelter, but they also offered a place where he could whisper his fears and his greatest hopes, wishes, and desires. In time, the intimacy between the young boy and the mountain substituted for what he was missing from his male kinsmen, who had rejected him and left him to die. The mountain became his confidant and guide. He rarely trusted or confided in people and seldom seemed as much at home or as happy as he was on his beloved Burkhan Khaldun. The important principles in his life, and the important relationships, originated there on its slopes, in its forests, under its shadow.

Temujin credited his survival to the blessings and protection of the mountain, and he vowed to honor and pray to it for the remainder of his life. He climbed to the summit, “hung his belt around his neck, put his hat over his hand, beat his breast with his fist, and nine times kneeling down towards Mother Sun, he offered a libation and a prayer,” the* Secret History *recorded. In the world order, his life had no more importance than that of a louse or a grasshopper, and yet, undeserving and hapless as he was, the mountain had saved and nourished him. “Every morning I will sacrifice to Burkhan Khaldun, and every day I will pray to it,” he vowed. “The children of my children must remember this.”28




