+++
title = "4 Conflicting Selves"

+++





Each person contains within them a multitude of selves, and within these various incarnations conflict and contradiction are inevitable. A certain part of one’s character seems to be set at birth, but gradually, with the experience of life, new aspects emerge and compete for dominance. Such a struggle marks the beginning of an independent personality, as we choose the person we wish to become. The constellation of conflicting selves changes over time, with different selves struggling to the fore while older ones fade away or stubbornly cling to their former importance. In the midst of these converging and competing claims one can sometimes hear the voices of one’s past, the phrases, stories, myths, and songs that the child learns and that remain in the adult as artifacts of an abandoned past.

Part of Temujin remained the bitter boy abandoned by the world, but over time, he also became the spiritual child of Burkhan Khaldun, the passionate and loyal friend of Jamuka, the aroused husband of Borte, the vengeful warrior who would not rest until he punished those who had tormented him or stolen from him. He had the pride of the self-made man of the steppe, but he recognized that others resented him as nothing more than a barbaric outcast hunting rats to survive. He became a resolute commander on the field and yet a hesitant and sometimes fearful head of family inside the *ger*.

His life unfolded as the struggle of these characters within him. How did a crying boy allegedly afraid of dogs become the indomitable conqueror of the world? Will the youthful, loyal lover of a girl of his age keep in check the rising conqueror with access to many women? Will loyalty to childhood friends dominate family needs? For Temujin, as for most of us, the rivalry within was often more significant than the outward strife.



After the rescue of Borte around 1179, Temujin was not yet twenty years old but he was becoming his own man. In addition to having found the romantic love of his life in Borte, he appeared to have found in Jamuka an eternal ally. With the determined optimism of a youthful friendship, the two men undertook for the third time the *anda* ceremony of bond brothers. This time they were not boys trading knucklebones or adolescents exchanging arrowheads: they were men making a solid vow. Each tied a gold sash around the other’s waist, and they exchanged horses. They swore to lead a single life and never abandon each other.1 By performing the ceremony in front of their followers, they showed that their union was both political and personal. Jamuka later claimed that he had been conquered by Temujin’s charisma.2 The words of the *Secret History* are simple and unadorned: “When Temujin and Jamuka loved each other, they loved each other.”3

The two young men feasted, drank, and slept together as sworn brothers under one blanket. Away from Burkhan Khaldun, Temujin became a herder as well as a hunter, and the two sworn brothers rode together at the front of their united band. For the first time in his life, Temujin had a boon companion. He was no longer struggling alone. At last he could create the family that fate had denied him. In addition to taking on Jamuka as his brother, Temujin acknowledged Ong Khan as his father. The Mongols refer to such an elective relationship as a “dry father” or a “son born with clothes”—in contrast to a natural son, who is born naked.

Temujin was simultaneously creating two new families. Sometime soon after the *anda *ceremony, probably in the winter of 1179–80, Borte gave birth to her first child, a son. Temujin named him Jochi, meaning *guest. *The name could have been given because Temujin and Borte were then living with Jamuka as a guest, but the choice was admittedly odd, and fed conflicting accounts of whether Temujin or Borte’s kidnapper was the biological father. Although he was always one of his father’s favorites, the controversy eventually prevented Jochi from being included in the line of succession. Remembering his own childhood, Temujin publicly and stubbornly embraced Jochi as his son. But families are sometimes easier to form than to sustain.

Within a year of Jochi’s birth, the great love between Jamuka and Temujin began to grow cold. Borte described Jamuka as emotionally fickle and said, “he has grown tired of us.”4 Jamuka either grew bored of Temujin, or he sensed the beginnings of a rivalry. One day, after riding together in front of a long line of oxcarts and herd animals, Jamuka told Temujin to camp apart from him. He was treating Temujin like a younger brother or subordinate, rather than as his *anda*.

Bewildered and humiliated by this fall in status, Temujin consulted with his mother and wife. Borte, who seemed never to have liked Jamuka and resented his influence over her husband, strongly favored leaving Jamuka and striking out for a new grazing area far away. She recommended that they not pitch tents where Jamuka suggested but instead that the family keep moving all through the night to get as far from him as they could. Temujin agreed. In a dramatic move, he fled with his household and livestock through the whole night, accompanied by a few who chose on the spot to follow him, and later joined by some who deserted Jamuka to find Temujin.

With this break, eternal friends had become permanent rivals.

Over the next eight years, the rivalry between Jamuka and Temujin festered. Both were vassals of Ong Khan, but rather than controlling the animosity between his two subordinates, Ong Khan provoked it, favoring one and then the other, sometimes goading them against each other. Ong Khan needed both men to help him fight his many battles inside as well as outside his tribe. Jamuka and Temujin both remained loyal to Ong Khan, calling him father and defending him repeatedly when he might otherwise have lost power, but they competed against each other.

While Temujin and his warriors were away fighting on behalf of Ong Khan, his base camp had grown into a small nomadic town, moving with the seasons and the flow of events. In the winter of 1183, Borte gave birth to another son, Chagatai, and three years later, in the early winter of 1186, she had a third son, Ogodei, a sickly infant whom she nursed diligently until he became healthy and strong. Possibly because of his childhood illness, Ogodei would always be her favorite; indeed, he was destined to become the favorite of all the sons and ultimately his father’s successor. By the time Borte gave birth to her third son, she was just over twenty-five, and Temujin about twenty-four. By modern standards, they were still quite young, but in a time when the majority of people would not reach age forty, they were a middle-aged couple with three growing children.



Temujin’s small and frequently changing band of followers included an eclectic mix of individuals who had joined him willingly and some who had been taken as captives. They were a true amalgam of herders and hunters from many clans and tribes—Uriyankhai, Tatar, Tayichiud, Jalayir, Barulas, Olkhunuud, and Khongirad. They constituted a multiethnic cross-section of the steppe, and represented a mixture of spiritual and religious practices. Although heavily influenced by many of the major religions of surrounding civilizations, they combined their beliefs and practices with animist beliefs in whatever way they deemed appropriate. None of his followers, at this time, could be said to be a true adherent of a world religion in any modern sense—not Buddhist, Muslim, Taoist, or Christian—yet steppe society had assimilated elements of all these religions swirling around them.

Despite owing allegiance to Ong Khan, Temujin was not a Kereyid, and certainly not a Christian. He was not ethnically a part of their group, and the vain and somewhat arrogant Ong Khan did not seem to want his uncouth band of misfits and renegades to come too close to his more refined and aristocratic court. Better to keep them out on the frontiers fighting off the Tatars and other marauding bands. Temujin and his men were like watchdogs guarding the periphery of Ong Khan’s territory.

Temujin wanted to be recognized as the chief of a band of followers and not merely the leader of a border detachment of varied strays. When he asked Ong Khan for recognition as a khan, so that he could become the leader of his own tribe, Ong Khan agreed. At this time, around 1189, Temujin was about twenty-seven years old. He gathered his followers at Blue Lake, near the Black-Heart Mountain, not far from Burkhan Khaldun, and his people proclaimed him khan and swore allegiance to him. “If we disobey in battle, take away our property and our families,” they swore. “If we disobey in peace, exile us and throw us out into the wilderness.”5

Temujin’s followers were divided into thirteen main camps, each with its own grazing areas and subsidiary camps. They were organized into three units of ten thousand, but in total, he probably had fewer than thirty thousand people under him. The women ran the main camps and cared for the animals while the men were away fighting. Borte operated the central compound as a mobile headquarters; her *ger* became the tribal *ordu*, or court, because her husband was khan. His mother lived separately with his youngest brother and had her own court and her own people assigned to her care and leadership.

Sometime between 1190 and 1193, while her husband was out on campaign, Borte gave birth to her fourth and final son, Tolui. She now had four sons. Among Mongols, the youngest son was known as *otchigen*, the prince of the fire. While the older brothers were expected to roam far away and establish separate families, the youngest son would have responsibility for the care of his parents.

Temujin arranged a marriage for his sister Temulun, but when her prospective suitor offered fifteen horses for her, he became outraged. “To arrange a marriage and to discuss wealth is to behave like a merchant\!” he exclaimed. He quoted one of the ancient sayings of the Mongols: “a meeting of the minds is made firm by mutual need.” All he wanted through the marriage was loyal friendship. “What mattered wealth?”6

As the newly emerging khan, Temujin began slowly to create new laws. Initially his laws were simply the customs that he knew and thought best, but gradually they began to grow and change as he adapted to new situations. He formalized the organization of his military and his staff, designating responsibilities corresponding to each man’s talents. “I appoint each of you to offices in different places,” he proclaimed, and then he designated them cooks, quiver bearers, commanders, messengers, equerries, horse herders, and overseers of carts.7 In most regards, his organization resembled a large household more than a nascent nation. Although each follower and staff member still belonged to a separate lineage and clan, they were now united as part of an emerging tribe, with a new, yet unnamed, identity—Temujin would not formally declare the Mongol nation for another fifteen years.

At his installation as khan, Temujin thanked heaven and earth for bringing him to this point in life, but no other religious ceremony is mentioned in the accounts. Ong Khan sent a message encouraging Temujin’s followers to remain loyal, coupled with a not-so-subtle admonition that the new khan remain loyal as well. “Do not break your word. Do not break your bonds,” he said. The steppe people frequently referred to their leaders as a collar, and he warned them, “Do not tear off your collar.”8

Temujin thanked his followers for choosing him over Jamuka, but his ascension to the office of khan only stoked the rivalry between the two men. Temujin dispatched messengers to inform Jamuka of his new office. The message seemed intended as an invitation for Jamuka to recognize Temujin as his khan, one that he would not accept. Jamuka accused the messengers of provoking hostility between the two leaders. They were “poking the flanks, pricking the ribs.”9

Soon the two Eternal Sworn Brothers were fighting each other again. The excuse was that one of Jamuka’s “younger brothers” stole a horse herd from one of Temujin’s men, who then went in pursuit of the thief and shot him with an arrow that “split apart his spine.”10 Under this pretext, each man rallied his troops and raced to battle.

Steppe warriors fought fiercely in battle, but they detested wanton cruelty. Mercy was valued as highly as valor. When the battle ended, the victors often adopted the children orphaned by the fight. But in his dealings with Temujin, Jamuka did not balance ferocity with charity. At one point, after unexpectedly defeating his rival, Jamuka followed his victory with a reign of terror, displaying unprecedented cruelty against his prisoners. He cut off the heads of some of Temujin’s captured officers, and others he had boiled in large cauldrons.11 Both forms of execution appalled the Mongols, not just for the grisly nature of the physical torture but also for their spiritual cruelty, for they believed that the soul would run out onto the earth through the spilled blood of the beheaded men and be eternally doomed. Similarly, by boiling the body, all the soul-bearing fluids—blood, bile, mucus, semen, and perspiration—were destroyed. Jamuka’s cruelty suggested a deep desire for emotional retaliation against the man he had once loved.

The battle and its grisly outcome did not settle the matter of who would be the true leader of the Mongols. The rivalry grew sharper a few years later when, possibly at the urging of Ong Khan, Jamuka’s supporters also proclaimed him khan. They gave him the title Gurkhan, an ancient and popular designation used by different groups at various times in steppe history. Now Ong Khan had two rival khans claiming leadership over his Mongol vassals, and he was mistakenly confident that he could balance the egos and ambitions of these two relentless rivals.

Despite Jamuka’s victory over Temujin, more of his followers deserted him and came over to Temujin. One of those was Monglik, who had been sent to summon Temujin back from Borte’s family when Yesugei had been killed. Monglik came with his seven sons to support Temujin. Soon after he began to live with Mother Hoelun and thereafter he was usually referred to as Father Monglik, giving him and his sons a special position within Temujin’s growing tribe. Temujin later recalled the union with Father Monglik as “fortunate and happy,” and promised to consult with him before making decisions every year and every month.12 This would later prove an unfortunate choice of words.



There were many greater dangers and more important enemies than Jamuka. For the next ten years Temujin, then in his thirties, and his fluctuating band of followers fought their way back and forth across the Mongolian steppe in never-ending feuds, raids, and battles in fragile alliances that were broken as easily and quickly as they were made. Most of these campaigns were in the service of the Kereyid ruler Ong Khan, but it became increasingly clear to Temujin that Ong Khan was an incompetent, petty, and avaricious leader with no goal beyond loot from the next raid. He was deceitful and often jealous of the success of his younger vassal.

The Kereyid’s traditional enemies, the Tatars, still threatened from the east. Ong Khan organized a war against the Tatars, and Temujin led the army. He was tiring of fighting the same battles against the same enemies again and again. He would defend Ong Khan’s interest in war, but after he won the battle, Ong Khan inevitably lost the peace, rekindling animosities with old enemies while making new ones.

Temujin began to act more independently, neglecting to consult Ong Khan or vet his actions with him. After defeating the Tatars in 1202, he held a meeting of his top men to decide how to avoid constant warfare with the Tatars. He chose to use two drastic and seemingly contradictory solutions to end the fighting with the Tatars permanently. To eliminate any future threat, he killed most of the men who fought against him, particularly their leaders. But he also incorporated many of the Tatars who had not been fighting against him into his tribe, including all the women and children.

By this time, Temujin was forty years old and he had been married to Borte for almost a quarter of a century. To cement the union of his tribe with the Tatars, he took Yesui, the youngest daughter of the defeated Tatar khan, as his wife, but at her urging he also agreed to marry her elder sister Yesugen. Borte took the news stoically. “One who is born a man takes both the older and younger sisters together,” she said. “A caftan with two layers will keep you from freezing.... A rope with three strands does not tear.”13 The Tatar sisters never replaced Borte, but Yesui was to play an important role as a counselor in the future, and, much later in life, she became a mediating force among his contending children. Despite the fact that their new husband had destroyed their tribes and annihilated their families, the two women remained loyal to him throughout their lives.

In addition to marrying the two Tatar sisters, Temujin set an example for his people by adopting a son from a prominent Tatar family. He gave the boy, Shigi-Khutukhu, to his aging mother to raise. Hoelun would eventually have four adopted sons and an unknown number of such daughters as her son conquered and defeated ever more tribes. These adopted children remained fiercely loyal and eventually held high offices. Of them, Shigi-Khutukhu, the abandoned Tatar boy, was to play the most important role.



Large gaps occur repeatedly in the record during these early years. The *Secret History* offers special details and even intimate conversations at some points, and then suddenly the narrative breaks off with whole years passing without remark. The gaps could occur for many reasons, but at least some seem to have been intentional. Either information was deliberately omitted in the original, or the text was censored and edited by unknown hands during the later decades, when the Mongols ruled China. What would later Mongols not want us to know about Temujin’s early years?

Whoever censored the document did not hesitate to leave a very detailed account of his killing his half brother or to spell out cases of contested paternity and adultery in the royal family. A hint of the missing chapters, however, was inadvertently provided in the first foreign report drawn up on Temujin and the Mongols. It was written by an ambassador from the Sung imperial court named Chao Hung, and his observations were transcribed during Temujin’s lifetime. He provided his emperor with a thorough ethnographic overview of the Mongols and their recent history.

His observations and reporting are generally excellent \(though he made a few notable errors\), but he includes one story that can be found in no other source. He wrote that in his youth, Temujin “was taken prisoner by the Jin,” referring to the Jurched, a Manchurian group then ruling northern China, and they “kept him as a slave.”14 This reputed enslavement occurred at a time when the Jin had attempted to wage a war of extinction against the Black Tatars, killing off the men and bringing the women and children to China as slaves. Even the poorest families in northern China reportedly had a few such slaves. Temujin may have been one such victim. Chao Hung maintains that through this experience, Temujin had an intimate understanding of the Jin court, and then describes him “fleeing home,” indicating that he had not been freed, but had escaped.

The story of enslavement, while possibly true, seems difficult to explain in light of Temujin’s later alliance with the Jin during his war on the Tatars. It was after this campaign that the Jin emperor awarded Temujin the military rank of *Jautau*, or pacification officer, in the border guard.15 Temujin certainly knew a lot about Chinese life and culture, more than he would have learned from hearsay and lore alone. While he admired and later adopted many aspects of Chinese technology and administration, gathered Chinese advisers and engineers, and showed a special interest in Chinese spiritual traditions, he sustained a lifelong hostility toward the Jin dynasty and their allies the Tatars.

Although the Tatars had killed his father, Temujin never cited this as the reason for his hatred. Instead, he attributed his feelings to something that had occurred around the year 1150, more than a decade before Temujin’s birth. At that time, Temujin’s ancestors were ruled by Ambaqai Khan, and they had good relations with the Tatars. Ambaqai Khan took his daughter to them on the assumption that a marriage had been arranged with a Tatar man. Before he arrived, however, another group of Tatars, probably border guards for the Jin dynasty, captured him. Although he had committed no offense, it was said that someone in the area had recently murdered a messenger of the Jin emperor and Ambaqai had been seized as revenge. It seems a flimsy pretext. A more likely explanation is that for the first time in many generations the Black Tatars, as the Chinese called these steppe nomads who lived farthest north and had a reputation as the most savage of all the tribes, were beginning to unite, and Ambaqai was one of their leaders. An effort to make a marriage alliance with a Tatar could have begun a dangerous unification of steppe tribes against the Jin. Whatever the reason, the Jin officials wanted to be rid of him. Determined to expand their influence deeper into the steppe, they sought to exterminate any who refused to become vassals.

While in captivity, Ambaqai managed to send a message to his clansmen. “I have been seized by the Tatars,” he said. Mongols often used specific poetic forms of alliteration and meter, similar to a limerick in English but much more serious in tone, to convey messages as exactly as possible in a way that could be easily memorized not only by the messenger but also by everyone who heard it. He used such a form to demand revenge:

Until the nails of your five fingers

Are ground down,

Until your ten fingers are worn away,

Strive to avenge me.16

The *Secret History* then falls silent, with no explanation other than that Ambaqai had been captured. For Mongols, the silence speaks louder than words. They know that Ambaqai suffered a horrendous fate beyond mere capture and imprisonment. Mongols felt a deep discomfort at the thought of mentioning the gruesome details of a death, for fear of summoning the injured party into the present, and so the account descended into ominous silence.

The Muslim chroniclers felt no such fear of gory details and seemed, in fact, to delight in them. Rashid al-Din, the great Persian historian, filled in some of the missing details.17 He wrote that the torture of Ambaqai began when the executioners nailed him to a special frame commonly called a “wooden ass.” Then he slowly died. Other accounts maintained that his executioners slowly peeled away his skin until he had been totally flayed, or they ordered death by a “thousand cuts,” first chopping off his fingers and toes and then more small chunks of flesh until, finally, he mercifully died.18 If true, this would explain his command to his descendants to wear away their fingers in pursuit of revenge. Whichever form of torture was used was also meted out to another of his male relatives who was captured about the same time. Usually, after an execution, the head of the victim was cut off and put on a pole in the market as a warning to all.

The winners joyfully exaggerate their victories, but the losers pick their sores, and, unable to move beyond the shame and anger of their loss, they use history to feed hatred. History nourishes the memory of past enemies and sharpens the hunger for revenge. Horrific as the story was, Ambaqai was only indirectly related to Temujin, and the events happened well before his birth. Furthermore, it was the two widows of Ambaqai Khan who had expelled Hoelun, Sochigel, and their children while making their spring sacrifice to their lost husband and other departed ancestors. What would make Temujin so determined to avenge the death of their husband? Unless some future scholar finds new Chinese or Persian records related to these events, the mysterious gaps in Temujin’s youth will continue to haunt us and be filled with mere speculation.



Temujin’s sons were growing up, and now he began a new phase in his political life. He recognized the value of marriage for making peace among tribes and creating lasting friendships and alliances, and he was ready to secure more formally his position of power. In a bold move, he proposed a dual marriage to his overlord: he offered to marry his son to Ong Khan’s daughter and offered a bride from his family for Ong Khan’s son.

Ong Khan refused. Temujin’s lowly family was not worthy of such an honor as to marry into the royal clan of the Kereyid. In the early years, Temujin had served Ong Khan as a faithful vassal, as his “dry son.” But Ong Khan treated him as little more than a mere convenience. Despite having risked his life repeatedly to help Ong Khan maintain power, Temujin remained a practical tool, nothing more. Temujin’s success in battle and growing popularity among his followers only fueled Ong Khan’s disdain. Thus far, he had been faithful to his lord, but as his power and confidence grew, the justification for remaining loyal began to wither.

Ong Khan grew increasingly suspicious of Temujin’s ambition and popularity. Having himself overthrown the ruler of his tribe, he knew all too well that today’s seemingly loyal subordinate could become tomorrow’s usurper. His sniveling son Shiremun resented the Mongol upstart’s military success and popularity and fed his father’s paranoia. Pétis de la Croix described Shiremun as “one of those obstinate Persons, who when they have taken a thing into their heads to believe or do are not to be convinced of their Error.”19

In the end, after so many years of service, Ong Khan betrayed Temujin and tried to kill him. He justified his plot by saying it was the correct path, using the same word—*arga*—that the old women had used when they had expelled Temujin’s family from the tribe.20 Temujin gathered his loyal followers and told them that the time had come to revolt against Ong Khan. According to Pétis de la Croix, he made a religious appeal to his followers for the first time: “Knowing the Power Religion has over the People’s Minds, he finished with assuring them that this important Enterprise which he now proposed to them, proceeded not from himself alone, but that the Almighty had inspired him with these Thoughts, and sent him to deliver them from the heavy Yoke of Slavery.”21

As Temujin prepared for revolt, many of the Kereyid deserted Ong Khan. Even the old khan’s younger brother Jaqa Gambu joined Temujin’s side.22 After a protracted and difficult struggle, Temujin defeated Ong Khan and his bumbling son, both of whom fled from the battlefield and died. As the chronicler Bar Hebraeus wrote, in an effort to explain the defeat of a Christian king by a non-Christian: “God took away the kingdom and gave it to one who was better than he; and his heart became right before God.”23

Temujin decided not to decimate the Kereyid as he had done to the Tatars. Instead, he encouraged liberal adoption and intermarriage between his followers and the defeated enemy. He accepted Ong Khan’s entire guard, the Torguud, as his own personal guard, in recognition of their unswerving loyalty to their defeated lord. Instead of breaking up families and destroying clans as he had done with the Tatars, Temujin initially allowed a majority of the Kereyid to stay together as a tribe and remain in their traditional territory.



News of Ong Khan’s defeat rippled across the steppe and eventually reached Europe. Until this time, no one outside of the Mongolian Plateau had taken any notice of the Mongol warrior unifying the tribes on the steppe and the constant warfare surrounding him. The news carried not because of his success, but because he had defeated the most distant king then known to the Western world. It tapped into a long-held hope in Europe that a Christian king from Asia would invade the Islamic world from the east and destroy the relatively new religion. Some western Christians hoped Genghis Khan might be that king.

This dream dated back to the twelfth century, when a letter, a forgery that may have been sent by Crusaders seeking more commitment from their Christian brethren, arrived in Europe with a romantic tale of a rich and powerful Christian kingdom in Asia.24 In every generation, it seemed that a new king in a different location was hailed as the possible savior of the Christian world. This mythical Christian king, sometimes called Prester John, sometimes King David, was thought to be a direct descendant of the three kings who had come from the East to honor Jesus at his birth.

It did not take long before the Christian ruler Ong Khan became identified as the mysterious Prester John. Not knowing who had defeated him, the Crusaders hoped that this new conqueror might turn out to be another, even more powerful, Christian king. No one had yet heard the name Temujin or his future title, Genghis Khan. It would be another generation before the Europeans understood the truth about the Mongols, at which point they would switch their focus from Asia to Africa and pin their hopes on the Ethiopian emperor of Abyssinia.



Once Temujin had incorporated the Kereyid tribe into his own, his erstwhile brother and enemy Jamuka joined the Naiman, a confederation of eight tribes in central and western Mongolia. Their aging Christian king Tayang Khan both feared Temujin and resented his success. To the Naiman, long established as a power comparable to the Tatars and Kereyid to the east, the Mongols were savage upstarts. Tayang referred to the Mongols as “these people with their quivers” and asked mockingly, “do they now want to rule themselves?” With the urging of his family, he planned a preemptive strike against them before the Mongols grew too strong. “Let us go and bring here those few Mongols,” he said, hardly realizing what he was up against.

The Naiman queen cautioned him to reconsider. “What could we do with them?” she asked. She then answered her own question by saying that the Mongols were too wild for almost any task. They smelled bad and wore dirty clothes. Even if she wanted to use one of their women to milk her animals, she would make them “wash their hands” before touching one of her sheep or cows.25

Tayang Khan gathered an army, but he soon lost his bravado. Having seen the Tatars and the Kereyid fall to the new vigorous conqueror, the Naiman khan defeated himself before the battle began. He trapped himself and the major part of his army on a mountain, thinking it impregnable, but when Temujin covered the steppe with hundreds of campfires at night, he made the Naiman think that he had raised an army far larger than he actually had. The Naiman warriors deserted during the night, many of them dying by falling and pushing one another as they descended the mountain in a panic.

Unable to hold his army and filled with resignation at the transitory meaninglessness of everything, Tayang Khan’s words seem as much a curse as an epitaph. “Life dies,” he sighed. His words echoed those inscribed on the Turkic monuments nearly four hundred years earlier, “A body suffers. It is the same for all.”26 During Temujin’s attack the next morning, Tayang Khan was killed. After the quick Mongol victory, the defeated khan was buried on the mountain where he made his strategic mistake and lost his kingdom.

Temujin had barely finished with the Naiman when he made a final strike against their remaining ally, the Merkid, whom he had first fought after they kidnapped Borte. He quickly crushed them, executed many of their leaders from the aristocratic lineage, and then incorporated the majority of the Merkid into his tribe. He divided them and placed them under the command of many different leaders, so that they could not form a united faction in any one territory, but he allowed them to keep their Merkid identity. They became loyal followers and played important roles in the future empire.

By 1204 Temujin, now in his forty-second year, had annihilated the three tribal confederacies surrounding him—Tatar, Kereyid, and Naiman—as well as most of the smaller tribes. For the first time since the fall of the Uighur Empire nearly five centuries earlier, one man ruled the entire Mongolian steppe. He controlled the entire Turkic homeland, the ruins of ancient cities, and the heart of what had once been a great nomadic civilization.

Now that he held total power over the steppe, Temujin took revenge on some of those who had betrayed him early in life. He captured two of the men who had first abandoned his mother and siblings on the steppe. After thirty years, rage still gnawed at his heart. The teeth in his soul had grown stronger and sharper, particularly against his uncle. “I will wipe him from my sight,” he declared.27 He then condemned both men to death for having violated the sacred principle of loyalty to kinship.28

With the fall of all three tribal empires on the steppe and the execution of those who had betrayed him, only Jamuka remained at large. One by one, he had lost almost all of his followers, and finally the few who remained turned on him and took him captive to Temujin. In 1205, after a public trial, Temujin ordered the execution of Jamuka and of the men who betrayed him. He had killed one brother to assert his dominance over his family and his future. Now he had overthrown the man he had called father and executed another whom he had loved as his brother. No one remained to dispute Temujin’s rule over all the tribes on the Mongolian steppe.



