+++
title = "04  4         TIPU SULTAN: AS KNOWN IN KERALA"

+++
4  
TIPU SULTAN: AS KNOWN IN KERALA

RAVI VARMA  

INTRODUCTION

Of late there has been a concerted attempt to distort and falsify
recorded Indian history, very often even by painting dark periods of
Indian history as glorious and progressive, to suit the selfish and
perverted interests of the ruling clique. One of these attempts relates
to the life and deeds of Tipu Sultan of Mysore. Most of his active life
as Sultan of Mysore was spent in Kerala, waging wars of territorial
annexation and Islamic conversions. Therefore, the true character of
Tipu Sultan can be best judged from his activities in Kerala. The
following is an earnest attempt to present Tipu Sultan as known from the
available records of Kerala history.

  
HISTORICAL REFERENCES

There is ample evidence, available in many authentic records of his
military operations in Kerala, to show that Tipu Sultan of Mysore was a
fanatic Muslim tyrant who was responsible for the destruction of
hundreds of Hindu temples, large-scale forcible conversion of the
Hindus, and perpetration of unimaginable brutalities on the Hindu
population in Kerala. All the available records such as *Malabar Manual*
of William Logan, *Historical Sketches* of Col. Wilks, *Voyage to East
Indies* of Fra Bartolomaeo, histories of Kerala written by K.P.
Padmanabha Menon and Sardar K.M. Panicker, historical research papers of
Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai, official reports of the English Company, and
the records of Chirackal, Zamorin and Palghat royal families besides
those from Trichur, Guruvayoor, Thirunavaya and Perumanam temples,
clearly and conclusively depict Tipu Sultan as the most intolerant
cruel, and fanatic Muslim ruler in the South. His main object, like his
father Hyder Ali Khan's, was to subjugate the whole of Kerala and
convert its Hindu population to Islamic faith by force. Tipu Sultan's
notorious *jih√¢d* - Islamic war-slogan - was SWORD (death) or CAP
(Islamic honour, i.e. forcible conversion), a cruel option for a hapless
Hindu population. For this, his most dependable and obedient accomplices
were his equally cruel and treacherous co-religionists - the Mappilas
(local Muslim converts) of North Malabar.

  
NATIONAL INSULT

The ruins of hundreds of Hindu temples destroyed, and heavy
concentration of Mappilas, all along the invasion routes of Tipu's army,
are standing and conclusive proofs of the brutalities and atrocities
committed by the fanatic Tipu Sultan in Kerala. He was, all through,
waging a cruel Islamic war against the Hindu population of Kerala, with
a large Muslim army under Muslim field commanders ably assisted by the
French, and with powerful field-guns and European troops. The period of
Tipu Sultan and his father Hyder Ali Khan from 1766 to 1792 is the
darkest period in Kerala history for all types of Islamic atrocities
including forcible conversions. In spite of all these, historical
documents and records are being deliberately suppressed, distorted and
falsified in order to project this fanatic Tipu Sultan of Mysore as a
liberal and magnanimous Muslim king. Worse still, this Muslim tyrant
from Mysore is being glorified and projected as a national hero like
Chhatrapati Shivaji, Maharaja Ranjit Singh, Rana Pratap Singh, and
Pazhassi Raja of Kerala. To perpetuate the memory of this tyrant Tipu
Sultan, the Central Government has released a postal stamp. Doordarshan
has sanctioned a video serial to glorify the deeds and life of Tipu
Sultan. And a special rehabilitation programme is being worked out for
the benefit of the descendants of Tipu Sultan in Calcutta. It is an
insult to our national pride and also to the Hindus of Kerala. At this
rate, who knows that tomorrow our secular Government and the motivated
Muslim and Marxist historians of Jawaharlal Nehru, Aligarh and Islamia
universities will not project as national heroes villains like Mahmud
Ghaznavi who destroyed the Somnath Temple, Babar who destroyed the Sri
Rama Temple at Ayodhya, and Aurangzeb who destroyed the Vishwanath
Temple at Kashi and the Sri Krishna Temple at Mathura? What a shame!
What a degradation!

  
SOURCE REFERENCE

Now, let us turn to the facts of history, compiled and presented in
*Malabar Manual* of William Logan published over a hundred years ago.
William Logan was Collector of Malabar and worked in various capacities
for over twenty years in Kerala, before 1886. The highly acclaimed
*Malabar Manual* was the result of his strenuous research and study of
various official records, oral history, and legends of Kerala. Because
the facts presented here are mainly from the *Malabar Manual* as edited
by Dr. C.K. Kareem,[1](#1) himself a Muslim, and published by the
Charitram Publications of Trivandrum with the assistance of Kerala and
Cochin universities, we are sure, they will be more acceptable as
authentic and unbiased than any other version of Kerala history.

To give the background of Tipu Sultan's wars and Islamic atrocities in
Kerala, it would be better to start from Hyder Ali Khan, Tipu's father.

  
HYDER ALI KHAN

After the decline and disintegration of the Vijayanagaram Empire, Raja
Wodeyar enlarged his small principality into a mighty kingdom and
established the Wodeyar Dynasty with Srirangapatanam as its capital
(1578-1761). Lord Shree Ranganatha Swamy was the family deity of the
Wodeyar family and, therefore, a magnificent temple dedicated to this
God was constructed there. Since then, the capital city came to be known
by the name of the presiding deity of the place. The last king of the
Wodeyar Dynasty was Krishna Raya who was overthrown by Hyder Ali Khan,
his army chief stationed in Dindigal, with the help of the wily
Purnaiyya. Hyder Ali imprisoned all the royal family members in
Srirangapatanam. Later on, he declared himself the Sultan of Mysore with
Srirangapatanam as capital in 1761 (p. 456 of *Malabar Manual*). It may
be noted here that Hyder Ali Khan's father was a Punjabi Muslim settled
in Mysore and serving as a soldier with the rank of 'naik' in the army.

  
INVASION OF KERALA BY HYDER ALI

During that period, there were a number of small kingdoms in Malabar.
Among them, the important ones were those of Kottayam (Pazhassi) Raja,
Kolathiri (Chirackal) Raja, Kadathanad Raja in North Malabar, and
Zamorin in South Malabar. There was also a Muslim ruler under Kolathiri
Raja. He controlled the sea trade through Cannanore port. The seniormost
male member of the Arackal Muslim family was known as Ali Raja while the
seniormost female member was referred to as Arackal Bibi. The family
originated from the Hindu royal family of Chirackal or Kolathiri. Though
converted to Islam years back, the Arackal family followed their
original matriarchal system as prevalent in Kerala. And though Ali Raja
was a subordinate chieftain under Kolathiri Raja, he used to disobey the
authority of Kolathiri quite often.

When Hyder Ali Khan overran Mangalore and reached the northern borders
of Malabar, Ali Raja invited and persuaded him to subjugate the Hindu
Rajas of North Malabar and offered his assistance. But it was only after
regrouping and equipping his army with more powerful field-guns that
Hyder Ali Khan launched the long-expected Malabar invasion in 1766.
After reaching Cannanore, he appointed Ali Raja as his Naval Chief (High
Admiral) and the Raja's brother Sheik Ali as Chief of Port Authority
(Intendant of Marine). After that, Ali Raja and his brother served Hyder
Ali Khan on land and sea and aided all his military operations with a
body of over 8,000 Mappilas (Muslim converts - name derived from Macca
Pillai, Ma-Pillai). None of the Hindu Rajas in Malabar at that time was
under the tutelage of the British or any other European power. The
English Company, with its headquarters in Madras and Bombay, had only
some pockets of influence in Mangalore and Tellicherry. The Kerala coast
was under the influence of the Dutch and the French who were established
in Cochin and Mahe respectively. Thus Hyder Ali's invasion of Kerala was
not to fight and defeat the British, but to subjugate the independent
Hindu kingdoms and for conversions to Islam. Neither Hyder Ali Khan nor
Tipu Sultan is known to have attacked any of the British establishments
in Kerala at any time.

  
ATROCITIES UNDER HYDER ALI

During his southward march of conquest and plunder, Hyder Ali allowed
Ali Raja and his barbarous Mappilas to act as army scouts and also to
commit all sorts of atrocities on the Hindu population of Malabar. The
Kolathiri Raja could not offer much resistance against the huge army of
Hyder Ali which was equipped with heavy field guns. On the other hand,
Ali Raja who had been made a tributary chieftain in Cannanore, seized
and set fire to the palace of the old Kolathiri Raja. The latter escaped
with his followers and sought protection of the British in Tellicherry.
Hyder Ali now entered Kottayam (Pazhassi) Raja's territory where he
encountered resistance. There were casualties on both sides. But the
Kottayam Mappilas betrayed and deserted their Hindu king and assisted
Hyder Ali Khan (p. 460).

The first serious resistance encountered by the invading army of Hyder
Ali Khan was in Kadathanad. The devastation caused by him during his
wars in Kerala was typical of fanatic Muslim invaders anywhere in India.
A broad picture of his Islamic atrocities as described by a Muslim
officer of Mysore army in his diary and as edited by Prince Ghulam
Muhammad, the eleventh and only surviving son of Tipu Sultan, is given
below. (Prince Ghulam Muhammad was later on exiled to Calcutta by the
British after the death of Tipu Sultan in 1799.)

'Nothing was to be seen on the roads for a distance of four leagues,
nothing was found but only scattered limbs and mutilated bodies of
Hindus. The country of Nairs \[Hindus\] was thrown into a general
consternation which was much increased by the cruelty of the Mappilas
who followed the invading cavalry of Hyder Ali Khan and massacred all
those who escaped without sparing even women and children; so that the
army advancing under the conduct of this enraged multitude \[Mappilas\]
instead of meeting with continued resistance, found villages,
fortresses, temples and every habitable place forsaken and deserted (p.
461).

"Wherever he (Hyder Ali Khan) turned, he found no opponent; and every
inhabitable place was forsaken and the poor inhabitants who fled to the
woods and mountains in the inclement season experienced anguish to
behold their houses in flames, fruit-trees cut down, cattles destroyed
and temples burnt. By means of Brahmin messengers despatched to woods
and mountains, Hyder Ali Khan promised pardon and mercy to the Hindus
who had fled. However, as soon as the unfortunate Hindus returned on his
promise of mercy and pardon, Hyder Ali Khan, like all the other Muslim
tyrants of North India, saw to it that they were all hanged to death,
their wives and children reduced to slavery (p. 468).

"Before quitting the country (Kerala) Hyder Ali Khan by a solemn edict
declared the Nairs deprived of all (social and political) privileges and
(ordered) not to carry arms. This ordinance was found to make the
submission of the proud Nairs absolutely impossible because they would
have thought death preferable to such humiliations and degradation.
Therefore, Hyder Ali Khan by another ordinance, consented to restore all
social and political privileges including carrying of arms, to the Nairs
who embraced the Mohammadan religion. Many nobles had to embrace Islam;
but a significantly large section (Nairs, Chieftains and Brahmins) chose
rather to take refuge in the kingdom of Travancore in the South than to
submit to the last ordinance" (p. 469).

It may be noted here that when Hyder Ali Khan reached Calicut with his
huge army, destroying everything on the way and forcibly converting to
Islam every Hindu warrior defeated or captured, the ruling Zamorin,
after sending away all his family members to Travancore State, committed
self-immolation by setting fire to his palace and ammunition depot
nearby, in order to escape personal humiliation and possible forcible
conversion to Islam.

  
TIPU SULTAN

Hyder Ali Khan had thus attempted and to some extent succeeded in
converting a sizeable section of Hindus, especially Nairs and Thiyyas,
to Islam by force and treachery. However, as soon as he left Malabar,
all Hindu Rajas, Chieftains and Nairs revolted and asserted their
independence. He died in December, 1782, and his son, Tipu Sultan,
succeeded him in Srirangapatanam. Tipu was also a fanatic Muslim king,
but more cruel and inhuman than his father in his Islamic wars and
conversions in Kerala.

By the time Tipu became the Sultan of Mysore towards the end of 1782,
all the Rajas and Chieftains of North Malabar had revolted and declared
their independence. The British had also become more powerful. The
immediate object of Tipu's early military operation was to subjugate and
retake the principalities which had revolted against the Mysore
suzerainty immediately after the departure of Hyder Ali Khan from
Malabar. So far, the Brahmins who were by nature quiet and honest, were
usually and customarily sent as messengers to high places. But because
of Tipu's orders to "seize, circumcise and convert the Brahmins to
Islam", they started refusing to carry his messages to Malabar. They
refused to oblige even the British who had extended and promised full
protection to them. It had been confirmed from Calicut that 200 Brahmins
had been "seized, confined, made Muslims and forced to eat beef and do
other things contrary to their customs" (p. 507).

  
ISLAMIC BRUTALITIES

According to the official report of Col. Fullarton of the British forces
stationed in Mangalore, worst type of brutalities on Brahmins were
committed by Tipu Sultan in 1783 during his siege of Palghat Fort which
was being defended by the Zamorin and his Hindu soldiers. "Tipu's
soldiers daily exposed the heads of many innocent Brahmins within sight
from the fort for Zamorin and his Hindu followers to see. It is asserted
that the Zamorin rather than witness such enormities and to avoid
further killing of innocent Brahmins, chose to abandon the Palghat Fort"
(p. 500).

As he proceeded with his Islamic wars against the Hindu population in
Kerala, Tipu Sultan committed many more brutalities. The Rajas were
unable to resist. But they did not like to be mute witnesses to
brutalities perpetrated by the Muslim army of Tipu. As a consequence,
the Kadathanad and Kottayam Rajas sent requests to the English Company
at Tellicherry for protection, stating that "they could no longer trust
Tipu Sultan and beseeching the Company to take the Brahmins, the poor
and the whole kingdom under their protections" (p. 507).

But the British did not render any help to the Hindu Rajas. Tipu's
brutalities were against all sections - Brahmins, Nairs and Thiyyas of
Hindu community, not excluding even women and children. Even Christians
were not spared.

"It was not only against the Brahmins who were thus put in a state of
terror of forcible circumcision and conversion; but against all sections
of Hindus. In August, 1788, a Raja of the Kshatriya family of Parappanad
and also Trichera Thiruppad, a chieftain of Nilamboor, and many other
Hindu nobles who had been carried away earlier to Coimbatore by Tipu
Sultan, were forcibly circumcised and forced to cat beef. Nairs in
desperation, under the circumstances, rose up against their Muslim
oppressors under Tipu's command in South Malabar and the Hindus of Coorg
in the North also joined them (p. 507).

"The revolt in the South Malabar was led by Ravi Varma of the Zamorin
family. Though Tipu conferred on him a jaghire (vast are of tax-free
land) mainly to appease him, the Zamorin prince, after promptly taking
charge of the jaghire, continued his revolt against the Mysore power,
more vigorously and with wider support. He soon moved to Calicut, his
traditional area of influence and authority, for better co-ordination.
Tipu sent a large Mysore army under the command of M. Lally and Mir
Asrali Khan to chase and drive out the Zamorin prince from Calicut.
However, during the above operations, Ravi Varma assisted not less than
30,000 Brahmins to flee the country and take refuge in Travancore" (p.
508).

It may be pointed out here that almost all female members and many male
members of different royal families such as Chirackal, Parappanad, and
Calicut, and chieftains' families like Punnathoor, Nilamboor,
Kavalapara, Azhvancherry Thamprakkal etc., fled to Travancore to escape
the brutalities of Tipu's army and temporarily settled down in different
parts of Travancore. Even after the fall of Tipu Sultan's regime in
Srirangapatanam, many of these families, wholly or partly, preferred to
stay back in Travancore because of the Mappilas' atrocities in the past.

The continued resistance and revolt by the Nairs and other chieftains
enraged Tipu Sultan who gave strict orders to his army under M. Lally
and Mir Asrali Khan to "surround and extricate the whole race of Nairs
from Kottayam to Palghat" (p. 508). After entrusting Calicut to a
powerful army contingent, he instructed it "to surround the woods and
seize the heads of all Nair factions". He then proceeded to North
Malabar to suppress the spreading revolt under Kadathanad and Pazhassi
Rajas. Prior to this, Tipu had sent a formal request to the English
Company at Tellicherry asking them "not to give protection and shelter
to Nairs fleeing from South Malabar" (p. 509). A similar letter had been
sent to the English Company in Tellicherry by Hyder Ali Khan in 1764
before he launched his Malabar invasion (*Kerala History* by A.S.
Sreedhara Menon, p. 372). These letters clearly show that neither Hyder
Ali nor Tipu was at war with the British.

It was at Kuttipuram, the headquarters of the Kadathanad Rajas, that the
huge army of Tipu Sultan with a large number of field-guns surrounded an
old fort defended by a small contingent of Nairs. After several days of
resistance, and finding it difficult to defend the fort any longer, the
Nairs submitted to the usual terms of surrender - "a voluntary
profession of the Mohammadan faith or a forced conversion with
deportation from the native land‚Ä¶ In short, either way they had to
embrace Mohammadan faith!‚Ä¶ The unhappy Nair captives gave a forced
consent and on the next day, the Islamic initiation rite of circumcision
was performed on all male members, closing the ceremony after every
individual of both sexes was forced to eat beef"(p. 510).

If this was not an Islamic war, what else was it? Do forcible
circumcision and feeding of beef form any part of normal wars of
territorial aggression? The War that Tipu Sultan waged in Kerala, was a
cruel Islamic war against the Hindu population, mainly for conversion of
Hindus by force. Yet there are degenerate Hindus in Kerala who admire
Tipu Sultan as a hero!

The doings of Tipu Sultan were held out as an example which other
detachments of the Mysore army followed. An original order sent to
various army contingents by Tipu was found among the records from
Palghat Fort, after its capture by the English Company in 1790. It has
been reproduced as a footnote on page 510 of the *Malabar Manual:* "It
directed (all military detachments) that every being in the district
should be honoured with Islam, that they should be traced to their
hiding places, and that all means, truth or falsehood, fraud or force,
should be employed to effect their universal conversion to Islam."

While escaping from Tipu's army, one of the princes of the Chirackal
Royal family in North Malabar was captured and killed in an encounter
after a chase of few days. As per the accounts of Tipu's own diary and
as confirmed by the English Company records, the body of the unfortunate
prince was treated with great indignities by Tipu Sultan. "He had the
dead body of the prince dragged by elephants through his camp and it was
subsequently hung up on a tree along with seventeen of his followers who
had been captured alive" (p. 512). Another chieftain, Korangoth Nair,
who had resisted Tipu, was finally captured with the help of the French
and hanged.

Such was the treatment meted out to Hindu nobles, chieftains and their
followers by Tipu Sultan of Islamic faith. He was no different from
other Muslim tyrants who had played havoc in North India such as Mahmud
Ghaznavi, Nadir Shah, Timur, Aurangzeb and Kala Pahar of Bengal.

After solemnising the marriage[2](#2) between the daughter of Arackal
Bibi and his son, Abdul Khalic, and conferring a portion of the
Chirackal principality on her, Tipu Sultan proceeded to the South to
subjugate Travancore and convert more Hindus to Islam. The persuasions
and threats he delivered to the Zamorin and the Cochin Raja to wage wars
against Travancore, either directly or on his behalf, did not succeed
because Tipu was regarded by all Hindu Rajas and nobles as a fanatic
Muslim. The Cochin Raja, though a tributary to Mysore, avoided meeting
Tipu, fearing forcible conversion when invited for a special meeting. At
the same time, he continued to send his tribute to Tipu as usual while
secretly assisting Travancore to build and strengthen the long defence
line (Nedunkotta Fort) through Cochin territory against the Mysore army
(p. 516).

  
INVASION OF TRAVANCORE

Travancore had an alliance (Treaty of Mangalore) with the English
Company according to which "an aggression against Travancore would be
viewed as equivalent to declaration of war against the English" (p.
566). The Dutch who were afraid of Tipu also agreed to transfer the
Kodungallur Fort to Travancore, mainly as a strategy to involve the more
powerful British in case of war with Travancore on that account. Since
Cochin was considered a tributary to Mysore, Tipu objected to the
transfer of Kodungallur Fort which was part of Cochin territory before
its occupation by the Dutch. Therefore, Tipu Sultan demanded of
Travancore to (i) allow free access to Kodungallur because the
Travancore defence line had stretched and passed through Cochin
territory, and (ii) surrender all Hindu Rajas and nobles from Malabar
who had taken refuge in Travancore. But the demand was rejected. That
was his pretext for waging a war against the Travancore State. In the
meantime, the Cochin Raja, who was under the guidance and protection of
the weak Dutch, openly shook off his tributary links with Tipu and
aligned with Travancore after the firm offer of support and protection
by the British. It may be noted here that Tipu never fought against the
British in Kerala. He fought only against the Hindu Rajas. His
hostilities against the British were stepped up only when his ally, the
French, waged wars against the British in Europe or his own kingdom was
threatened.

  
TIPU CRIPPLED AND DEFEATED

The Travancore Raja replied to Tipu explaining that he did what he did
as per the advice of the British (p. 517). That provoked Tipu. He
launched an attack against Travancore but was defeated in January, 1790.
According to Mr. Powney who was the Resident Representative of the
English Company in Travancore, Tipu's attack was not only effectively
stopped by the Travancore army, Tipu himself fell down from the rampart,
was seriously wounded, and was rendered permanently lame during the
counter-attack by the Travancore forces.

Tipu and his army were camping on the banks of the Alwaye river before
launching the attack on the Travancore defence lines (Nedunkotta Fort).
The Travancore army was no match for the huge Mysore army and the
monsoon season was four or five months away. Therefore, under the
guidance of Raja Kesavadas, the Prime Minister of Travancore, a
temporary bund was constructed way up on the stream by a team headed by
Kalikutty Nair. When the Mysore army launched its assault and Nedunkotta
was penetrated, the temporary bund was breached in the midst of heavy
fighting, causing an unexpected flood which drowned many Mysore soldiers
and rendered the gunpowder wet and useless. The result was panic and
confusion in the Mysore army. The triumphant Nair forces of Travancore
inflicted heavy casualties on the- invading army. But the valiant
Kalikutty Nair was also drowned in the sudden surge of water and became
a martyr.

That was the first time, January 1, 1790, when Tipu Sultan tasted a
humiliating defeat. It is recorded in Travancore history and also
confirmed by the local folklore that as the wounded Tipu was lying
unconscious in the battlefield he was rescued by a Nair soldier who
quietly carried the unconscious Sultan to the Mysore military camp
during the night and left quickly (p. 518). The brave Nair soldier could
have easily killed the unconscious Tipu as many Muslims have done to a
Hindu in similar circumstances; but his Hindu values of life prompted
him to deposit the helpless victim near the Muslim camp.

According to authentic historical records, the Nair forces of Travancore
attacked the Mysore army which was crossing the defence fortification,
and inflicted heavy casualties on it. The sudden and unexpected attack
made the Mysore Army panicky, and in the confusion Tipu Sultan fell down
from the ramparts of the fort into the ditch below along with his
palanquin. The fall made him permanently lame. Later on, the Travancore
forces recovered from the ditch the sword, the pallanquin, the dagger,
the ring and many other personal effects of Tipu and presented them to
the Dharma Raja. Some of Tipu's personal weapons and ornaments were sent
to the Nawab of Arcot on his request (*Travancore History* by P.
Sankunny Menon, published by Kerala Bhasha Institute, Trivandrum, pp.
191-92).

  
TIPU'S SECOND DEFEAT

Tipu retreated and sent for reinforcements from Coimbatore and
Srirangapatanam. He also "recalled all his Muslim troops despatched
earlier to different parts of South Malabar to hunt down and forcibly
circumcise the Hindus and convert them" (p. 518). After regrouping and
reinforcing his army, Tipu mounted another attack in March 1790 in order
to demolish the Travancore defence line. He reached upto Veropally
(Varapuzha) near Alwaye. Meanwhile, following firm assurance of support
and protection by the English Company who had by this time extended
their military power and political influence to the entire West Coast
and South India, some of the important Malabar Rajas such as Pazhassi
Raja, Kolathiri Raja and Kadathanad Raja, returned to their respective
kingdoms and asserted their independence from Mysore suzerainty. The
Cochin Raja shook off his tributary link with Mysore. The Zamorin and
the Palghat Raja were promised help by the British in their opposition
to the Mysore Sultan, with the promise of restoring their lost
territories to them after the defeat of Tipu. All the Hindu Rajas and
nobles had thus joined hands with the British against the war efforts of
Tipu mainly because of his Islamic atrocities against the Hindus in
Kerala. Revolt against the Mysore occupation forces broke out all over
Malabar and spread to Coorg with the return of the chieftains to their
respective areas. Before the end of 1790, the British captured Palghat
Fort and secured the communication channel from Coimbatore to the West
Coast for assisting the Travancore forces against the Mysore army. All
along, Tipu's forces assisted by the Mappilas were devastating and
plundering the entire country as per the recorded version of Martab
Khan, Commander of the Mysore army.

By the time Tipu Sultan launched his second attack and demolished parts
of Nedungotta in May 1790, heavy monsoon rains caused the Alwaye river
to flood the countryside. Since the Mysore army was not accustomed to
fighting during rainy season, it was easy for the Travancore army to
defeat Tipu's army. That was the second defeat Tipu suffered near Alwaye
in 1790.

In the meantime, Lord Cornwallis, the Governor General, himself assumed
the command of the British forces and pushed forward towards
Srirangapatanam, headquarters of Tipu Sultan. Simultaneously, the
Maratha and the Nizam's forces also advanced from different directions.
The final assault was mounted and Srirangapatanam surrounded in
January-February 1791 by a combined army consisting of the British,
Maratha and the Nizam's forces. Tipu Sultan, who-rushed to
Srirangapatanam, abandoning his military operations against Travancore,
was forced to sign a treaty in 1792 ceding the entire West Coast and
half of his other possessions to the Allies, thus relieving the Hindus
of Kerala from further Islamic brutalities.

  
ROLE OF THE BRITISH

It may be noted here that the Maharaja of Travancore had kept the
British Governor of Madras informed about the political developments and
the imminent military operations of Tipu Sultan against Travancore. But
the then Governor of Madras, Mr. Holland, in spite of the obligations
under the Treaty of Mangalore, specifically instructed the British
contingents sent to the Travancore borders, not to assist the Travancore
forces in case of war. When the Governor General, Lord Cornwallis, heard
about Travancore's victory over Tipu's forces, he assumed at first that
it was due to the active assistance rendered by the English Company. But
later on, he came to know about the dubious actions and the corrupt
character of Mr. Holland. The Governor of Madras was believed to be in
the pay of Tipu Sultan. So he was relieved of his responsibilities and
Lord Cornwallis himself assumed command of the Madras Army. The military
operations against Srirangapatanam culminated in Tipu's surrender and
the Treaty of Srirangapatanam signed in 1792. But as far as Tipu's
defeat and humiliation on the borders of Travancore were concerned, the
British played no role; the entire credit for the victory goes to the
strategy of Raja Kesava Das and the valiant soldiers of the Travancore
army. The British not only did not keep their solemn promise to the
Malabar kings and chieftains, but also insisted that Travancore should
pay heavily for the British "help".

  
DEATH OF TIPU SULTAN

The death scene of Tipu Sultan in 1799 has been completely distorted in
Gidwani's infamous novel. He projects Tipu as a hero and a martyr. But
as per recorded documents and official versions, Tipu, deserted by his
generals and surrounded by the Allied forces, mounted a horse and tried
to escape in the night like a coward. He was hit in the crossfire
between his personal guards and tile enemy forces, and fell down from
the rampart in the midst of dead bodies of common soldiers. Later in the
evening, a search was made for Tipu's body with the help of torches. His
body was finally recovered by one of his slaves and identified by the
Khilledar (*Tipu Sultan X-rayed* by Dr. I.M. Muthanna, p. 386).

Another version (by C.R.N. Murthi) is that while a bullet hit Tipu who
was lying helplessly in a semi-conscious state, one of his lieutenants
tried to rob the emerald chain from his turban. Tipu seized a sword and
cut off the leg of the robber who, in turn, shot his master dead (*Tipu
Sultan X-rayed* by Dr. I.M. Muthanna, p. 392).

  
END OF THE USURPER DYNASTY

It may be recalled here that the members of the overthrown Wodeyar Royal
Family were kept prisoners in their palaces all through the reign of
Hyder Ali Khan and Tipu Sultan. Tipu did not kill them because of his
fear of a popular uprising against him. His eleventh and only surviving
son, Prince Ghulam Muhammad, was exiled by the British to Calcutta and
the Mysore Kingdom which had been usurped by Hyder Ali Khan, was
restored to the Wodeyars. However, Prince Ghulam Muhammad was allowed to
take away with him a part of the wealth looted from Malabar and carried
to Srirangapatanam by Tipu. He was also given a substantial pension by
the English. Even today, the family trust created by Ghulam Muhammad out
of this looted wealth is the largest Muslim trust in Calcutta.

  
TIPU'S ATROCITIES

During the notorious Padayottakkalam from 1783 to 1792, Tipu Sultan had
committed a variety of atrocities against the Hindus and Christians in
Kerala. Some of them as narrated by the Christian victims are vividly
described by the famous traveller and historian, Fra Bartolomaco, in his
well-known book, Voyage to East India. Following is the verbatim
description of the atrocities by a Christian victim as given in the
book:

"First a corps of 30,000 barbarians who butchered everybody on the way,
followed by the Field-Gun Unit under the French Commander, M. Lally.
Tipu Sultan was riding on an elephant behind which another army of
30,000 soldiers followed. Most of the men and women were hanged in
Calicut. First mothers were hanged with children tied to the necks of
their mothers. That barbarian Tipu Sultan tied the naked Christians and
Hindus to the legs of elephants and made the elephants move about till
the bodies of the helpless victims were tom to pieces. Temples and
Churches were ordered to be burnt, desecrated and destroyed. Christian
and Hindu women were forced to marry Muhammadans and similarly their men
were forced to marry Muhammadan women. Those Christians who refused to
be 'honoured' with Islam, were ordered to be killed by hanging then and
there. The above version of the atrocities was obtained from the
sorrowful narration by the victims who escaped from Tipu's army and
reached Varapuzha (near Alwaye) which is the centre of Carmichael
Christian Mission. I myself helped many victims to cross the Varapuzha
river by boats" (Cited in *Cochin History* by K.P. Padmanabha Menon, p.
573).

It may be noted here that Fra Bartolomaeo was in the West Coast around
March, 1790. Evidence of Tipu's atrocities against Christians are also
available from the records of churches in Mangalore, Calicut and
Varapuzha.

  
TIPU'S FANATICISM

It would be very relevant to reproduce here some of the letters which,
Tipu Sultan had sent to his army commanders in different parts of Kerala
and outside. Following are from the research articles published by
Sardar K.M. Panicker in the *Bhasha Poshini* magazine of Chingam 1099 of
the Malayalam Era corresponding to August, 1923. They were obtained by
him from The India Office Library in London during his intensive
research regarding Kerala history. Tipu's real character is revealed
here.

> 1\. Letter dated March 22, 1788, to Abdul Kadir: "Over 12,000 Hindus
> were 'honoured' with Islam. There were many Namboodiris (Brahmins)
> among them. This achievement should be widely publicised among the
> Hindus. There the local Hindus should be brought before you and then
> converted to Islam. No Namboodiri (Brahmin) should be spared. Also
> they should be confined there till the dress materials sent for them,
> reach you."
>
> 2\. Letter dated December 14, 1788, to his Army Chief in Calicut: "I
> am sending two of my followers with Mir Hussain Ali. With their
> assistance, you should capture and kill all Hindus. Those below 20 may
> be kept in prison and 5,000 from the rest should be killed by hanging
> from the tree-tops. These are my orders."
>
> 3\. Letter dated December 21, 1788, to Sheik Kutub: "242 Nairs are
> being sent as prisoners. Categorise them according to their social and
> family status. After honouring them with Islam, sufficient dress
> materials may be given to the men and their women."
>
> 4\. Letter dated January 18, 1790, to Syed Abdul Dulai: "With the
> grace of Prophet Muhammed and Allah, almost all Hindus in Calicut are
> converted to Islam. Only a few are still not converted on the borders
> of Cochin State. I am determined to convert them also very soon. I
> consider this as Jehad to achieve that object."
>
> 5\. Letter dated January 19, 1790, to Badroos Saman Khan: "Don't you
> know that I have achieved a great victory recently in Malabar and over
> 4 lakh Hindus were converted to Islam. I am now determined to march
> against that 'Cursed Raman Nair' without delay. (Reference is to Rama
> Varma Raja of Travancore State who was popularly known as Dharma Raja
> for giving shelter in his state to all those who fled Malabar.)  

Thinking that he and his subjects would be soon converted to Islam, I am
overjoyed and hence abandoned the idea of returning to Srirangapatanam."

The last two letters quoted above were written after the first major
defeat of Tipu Sultan near Alwaye on January 1, 1790. All these letters
clearly betray the real character of Tipu Sultan whom a Kerala Muslim
historian, Dr. C.K. Kareem, describes as of 'Sufi' traditions! If this
is Sufism, what about Koranic Islam?

  
TEMPLES DESTROYED BY TIPU

*The Mysore Gazetteer* says that the ravaging army of Tipu Sultan had
destroyed more than 8000 temples in South India. The temples of Malabar
and Cochin principalities had to bear the brunt of plunder and
destruction. The *History of Cochin* by K.P. Padmanabha Menon and
*History of Kerala* by A. Sreedhara Menon narrate some of them:

"In the month of Chingam 952, Malayalam Era (corresponding to August,
1786) Tipu's Army destroyed idols of the famous Perumanam Temple and
desecrated all the temples between Trichur and Karuvannur river.

"Irinjalakuda and Thiruvanchikulam temples were also defiled and damaged
by Tipu's Army."

Some of the other famous temples looted and desecrated were as follows:
Triprangot, Thrichembaram, Thirunavaya, Thiruvannoor, Calicut Thali,
Hemambika Temple, the Jain Temple in Palghat, Mammiyur, Parambatali,
Venkitangu, Pemmayanadu, Tiruvanjikulam, Terumanam, Vadakhumnnathan
Temple of Trichur, Belur Siva Temple, Shri Veliyanattukava, Varakkal,
Puthu, Govindapuram, Keraladhiswara, Trikkandiyur, Sukapuram, Maranehei
Temple of Aaalvancheiri Tambrakkal, Vengara Temple of Aranadu, Tikulam,
Ramanathakra, Azhinjalam Indiannur, Mannur Narayan Kanniar and Vadukunda
Siva Temple of Madai.

The Trikkavu Temple of Ponnani was converted into Military Garrison. The
Christian Pilgrimage centre of Palayur Church and Varapuzha Church and
Mission buildings were among the several churches destroyed by the
ravaging army of Tipu.

In the case of Triprayar Temple, the main deity was shifted temporarily
to Gnanappilly Mana situated in a remote village, and in the case of
Guruvayoor Temple, the idol was shifted to Ambalapuzha Sri Krishna
Temple in Travancore State before the barbarian army of Tipu Sultan
reached there. However, both of them were brought back and ceremoniously
installed after the withdrawal of Tipu from Malabar towards the end of
1790. The Guruvayoor Temple was destroyed only partly because of the
pleadings by Hydrose Kutty who was a favourite of Hyder Ali Khan besides
being a devotee of Lord Krishna before his conversion. The damage that
can be seen even today on the installed presiding deity of Triprayar
Temple is believed to have been caused by Tipu Sultan's army.

According to certain personal diary notes of Tipu Sultan, the Chirackal
Raja offered to pay over Rs. 4 lakh in gold and silver to save the
destruction of the local Hindu temples by Tipu's army. But, true to his
character, Tipu replied that "even if the entire world is offered to me,
I will not desist from destroying Hindu temples" (*Freedom Struggle* by
Sardar Panicker). It was the reply of a typical Islamic ruler!

  
TIPU'S LAND-GRANTS AND PUJAS

With this background in mind, we may now have a look at the
circumstances that prompted the Islamic bigot, Tipu Sultan, to offer
land-grants and financial assistance to some Hindu temples, particularly
the Sringeri Mutt.

When the astrologers predicted an approaching malefic period from 1790
onwards and the combined forces of the British, the Nizam and the
Marathas started surrounding Srirangapatanam, Tipu Sultan panicked and
therefore did some good deeds - offering land-grants and even pujas and
feeding Brahmin - mainly to ward off the evil effects and to get
assistance from his Hindu subjects in his war efforts. He was reported
to have even fallen prostrate before His Holiness Sringeri
Shankaracharya and sought the latter's pardon and blessings (*Sakthan
Thampuran* by P. Raman Menon, and *History of Mysore* by Lewis Rice).

  
RESULT OF TIPU'S INVASION-HINDU EXODUS

The widespread atrocities committed by the Islamic tyrant and his
equally cruel army of Muslim converts in Kerala, can be understood only
from the authentic records available from various sources. According to
them, about half the Hindu population of Kerala fled the country to the
forests or Tellicherry and Travancore State. They included most of the
Hindu Rajas and chieftains who could not stand upto the mighty army of
barbarians and the powerful field-guns of the French. Important royal
families which migrated to Travancore State were those of Chirackal,
Parappanad, Ballussery, Kurumbranad, Kadathanad, Palghat and Calicut.
The chieftain families which did the same were those of Punnathur,
Kavalappara, Azhvancherry Thamprakkal, etc. Even the Cochin royal family
moved to Vaikkom Palace near the famous Shiva Temple when Tipu's army
reached Alwaye.

Many members of the royal families of Malabar who migrated to Travancore
State preferred to stay back even after the withdrawal of Tipu's army
and restoration of peace, because of their nightmarish experience and
the peculiar psyche of the forcibly converted Muslim population in
Malabar. The prominent royal families were (1) Neerazhi Kovilakam, (2)
Gramathil Kottaram, (3) Paliyakkara, (4) Nedumparampu, (5) Chempra
Madham, (6) Ananthapuram Kottaram, (7) Ezhimatoor Palace, (8) Aranmula
Kottaram, (9) Varanathu Kovilakam, (10) Mavelikkara, (11) Ennakkadu,
(12) Murikkoyikkal Palace, (13) Mariappilly, (14) Koratti Swaroopam,
(15) Kaippuzha Kovilakam, (16) Lakshmipuram Palace, and (17) Kottapuram.
The secularist admirers of Tipu Sultan have not even heard about the
records available from these Malabar families.

The nightmarish results of Tipu's invasion of Kerala have been aptly
described by the former editor of *Gazetteer of Kerala* and the renowned
historian A. Sreedhara Menon. They state as follows:

  
ISLAMIC WARS

"Hindus[3](#3), especially Nairs and chieftains who resisted Islamic
cruelties, were the main targets of Tipu's anger. Hundreds of Nair women
and children were abducted to Sreerangapatanam or sold as slaves to the
Dutch. Nairs were hunted down and killed and also deprived of all
traditional and social privileges. Thousands of Brahmins, Kshatriyas,
Nairs and other respected classes of Hindus were forcibly converted to
Islam or driven out of their traditional ancestral homes. Thousands
sought refuge in Travancore State while hundreds fled to forests and
hills to escape Tipu's atrocities which had completely shaken their
sense of security."

"The new phase of Mysore administration in Kerala resulted in unending
wars. Extreme cruelties of the invading army had badly affected every
section of the society, leading to the mass exodus of people from
Malabar."

"Many Hindu temples, royal houses and chieftain families were destroyed
and plundered. The exodus of Brahmins and Kshatriyas who were the
patrons and custodians of traditional arts and culture, resulted in
stagnation in the cultural field also."

  
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE

"Many prosperous towns were destroyed while the local and foreign trade
collapsed. Peasants who had to bear the brunt of army cruelties and
coercive taxation policies, sought refuge in forests and mountains. In
many areas, cultivation of pepper stopped resulting in the collapse of
pepper trade. Consequent to the stoppage of foreign trade coupled with
the precipitate fall in cultivation and local trade, economy of the
country was also shattered; and major sections of the people were
reduced to poverty. Thus every section of society was badly affected by
the military regime of the mysore rulers."

  
HINDU-MUSLIM CONFLICTS

"Huge amount of wealth in the form of gold and silver accumulated
through centuries of foreign trade, vanished from the country as a
result of loot and plunder during the chaotic period of the military
regime of Hyder Ali Khan and his son, Tipu Sultan. Another serious
development which had long term bad effects was that Malabar Muslims
joined hands with the ranks of cruel invading Mysore army and proved
their loyalty to Islamic faith by committing various atrocities against
Malabar Hindus. This earned them enmity of Hindus. To gain political
advantage, they resorted to forcible conversion of Hindus to Islam and
also widespread destruction and plunder of Hindu temples. The Mysore
administration under the Muslim rulers had not only encouraged such
cruelties against the Hindu population but also gave the local Muslim
converts special privileges and tax exemptions, leading to serious
cleavage and enmity for the first time, between the two communities,
Hindus and Muslims, in Kerala."

  
MAPPILA OUTRAGES OF 1921

According to the widely respected Congressman and freedom-fighter, K.
Madhavan Nair, "the notorious Mappila Lahala (Khilafat Riots) of 1921 in
Malabar could be easily traced to the after-effects of widespread
forcible conversions and cruelties committed by Tipu Sultan during the
Padayottakkalam". Thus Tipu Sultan was considered and depicted by all
the well-known historians from Kerala and elsewhere as an evil genius
and Islamic tyrant, much worse than even the notorious Aurangzeb who
beheaded Guru Teg Bahadur, destroyed thousands of Hindu temples
including Vishwanath Temple at Kashi and Sri Krishna Temple at Mathura,
and forcibly converted lakhs of Hindus in North India.

  
PROOFS OF ISLAMIC ATROCITIES

Tipu Sultan was like the notorious Kala Pahar - a renegade Brahmin
convert from Bengal - who used to celebrate every time he killed or
forcibly converted 10,000 Hindus. The darkest period in the history of
Kerala was the period of Hyder Ali Khan and Tipu Sultan from 1766 to
1792 - socially, culturally and politically. Ruins of hundreds of Hindu
temples destroyed by Tipu Sultan and his father Hyder Ali Khan are the
standing witnesses to their brutalities in Kerala. One also finds a
heavy concentration of Mappilas along the invasion routes of Tipu's
army, including the places of its temporary occupation, as in Mangalore,
Cannanoor, Ponnani, Kondotty, Malappuram, Calicut, Kodungallur,
Chawakat, Alwaye, Coimbatore, and Dindigal. This is another proof of
forcible circumcision and conversion of helpless Nairs, defenceless
Thiyyas and poor Cherumans on a mass scale. Even today, the origin of
many Kshatriya, Nair and Brahmin families settled in Travancore and
Cochin can be traced back to their ancestral families in Malabar - yet
another proof of the severity of Tipu's atrocities against Hindus during
his Islamic wars in Kerala.

  
MOTIVATED RESEARCH

If Tipu Sultan had done any good deeds, there should have been some
references to them in the authentic historical documents of that period.
The admirers of Tipu Sultan have never cited any authentic references.
They quote some observations and comments made by historians or
political thinkers of North India, especially of Jawaharlal Nehru
University, or Aligarh Muslim University, or some other Marxist school.
They have never bothered to study the voluminous documents available in
Kerala, Coorg and Karnataka. Their ignorance of South Indian history and
traditions is no justification for glorifying a cruel and fanatic
Islamic tyrant that was Tipu Sultan. He was a despicable character, an
Islamic fiend, and a national villain in the eyes of the proud
Malayalees and the valiant Coorgis.

  
TIPU - A CURSED NAME

If Tipu Sultan was a much-loved and respected Muslim ruler, as claimed
by his present-day admirers, why is it that even Muslim do not name
their children as Tipu, either in Mysore or in Malabar? Obviously, the
name itself is a cursed name. Anyway, that is the belief in the entire
West Coast and Mysore.

  
NATIONAL SCANDAL

If such a notorious character is presented on the official network of
Doordarshan as preaching patriotism, nationalism, high principles of
Hindu religion, and human welfare, that is not only a national scandal
but also a provocation for the Hindu community throughout the country.
It is better to bury deep and forget the repulsive memories of Tipu
Sultan and save the South from communal conflicts. The Hindus of Kerala
who were the victims of the Islamic atrocities of Tipu Sultan, do not
want to be reminded of him, just as the Jews do not want to be reminded
of Hitler, or the Romanians of Ceasesescu, or the Russians of Stalin.

  
DON'T FABRICATE HISTORY

Historical truth should not be allowed to be suppressed, or distorted,
or falsified in order to project a national villain as a national hero.
Today it is Tipu Sultan, tomorrow it will be Aurangzeb or Nadir Shah. If
a renegade Indian glorifies the notorious Tipu Sultan today through a
"historical novel", tomorrow the same or some other motivated authors
will produce more and better "historical novels" extolling Mahmud
Ghaznavi, Malik Kafur, Aurangzeb, and Nadir Shah for a tele-serial. As
Dr. I.M. Muthanna says in his famous book, *Tipu Sultan X-rayed*, "such
dubious and mischievous historians and novelists should be prosecuted
through judicial commissions so that at least in future such blatant
lies and invented stories will not be sold or published as history or
historical novels". If in spite of the voluminous evidences to the
contrary, the Doordarshan authorities agree to telecast anti-national
and anti-Hindu serials on its official network, consequences will be
terrible in the long run.

  
BURY THE SWORD

Every Hindu in Kerala knows that Tipu's slogan was "Sword" (death) or
"Cap" (forcible conversion). The "Sword" symbolises death to Hindus.
Thus the very title of the novel and the serial, "The Sword of Tipu
Sultan", is offensive and provocative. No self-respecting Hindu will
tolerate such an insult to his religion, culture and national pride.

There was only one Aurangzeb and one Nadir Shah. And also one Tipu
Sultan! Project them to the local people as known from authentic
historical records. Otherwise the very purpose for which the official
media of Radio and Doordarshan have been set up - to disseminate and
present correct information and not lies and untruths - will be
defeated. Let us hope that the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
will insist that the Doordarshan abides by the national motto -
SATYAMEVA JAYATE.

The secularist Government and parties refuse to see reason and insist on
projecting Tipu Sultan as a national hero. This shows their respect for
truth, history and sentiments of the Hindu community. The rise of Hindu
anger in the South, as witnessed in the recent past, is a direct result.

  
REFERENCES

> 1\. *Malabar Manual* by William Logan (Printed and published by
> Charitram Publications under the editorship of Dr. C.K, Kareem,
> Trivandrum).
>
> 2\. *Voyage to East Indies* by Fra Bartolomaeo (Portuguese Traveller
> and Historian).
>
> 3\. *Historical Sketches* by Col. Wilks, Vol. II.
>
> 4\. *A Journey from Madras through the counties of Mysore*, Canara and
> Malabar by Dr. Francis Buchanan Hamilton, Vol. II.
>
> 5\. *Mysore History* by Lewis Rice.
>
> 6\. *Selected Letters of Tipu Sultan* to various Functionaries by
> William Kirkpatrick, published in London, 1811.
>
> 7\. *History of Kerala* by A. Sreedhara Menon.
>
> 8\. *History of Cochin State* by K.P. Padmanabha Menon, Mathrubhoomi
> Publication, 1989.
>
> 9\. *Cochin State Manual* by C. Achuta Menon.
>
> 10\. *State Manual of Travancore* by T.K. Velu Pillai.
>
> 11\. *Freedom Struggle* in Kerala by Sardar K.M. Panicker.
>
> 12\. *Sakthan Thampuran* by P. Raman Menon, Mathrubhoomi Publication,
> 1989.
>
> 13\. *Life of Raja Kesavadas* by V.R. Parameswaran Pillai, N.B.S.
> Publications, Kottayam, 1973.
>
> 14\. Chronicles and Reports originating from Trippunithura, Calicut,
> Palghat and other seats of Kerala Royal families and from Temples of
> Trichur and Carmichael Christian Mission, Varappuzha.
>
> 15\. *Bhasha Poshini* of Chingam 10, 1099 (August, 1923), Article on
> Tipu Sultan by Sardar K.M. Panicker.
>
> 16\. *Malabar Kalapam* of 1921 by K. Madhavan Nair.
>
> 17\. *Travancore History* by P. Sankrunni Menon.
>
> 18\. *Tipu Sultan X-rayed* by Dr. I.M. Muthanna, Usha Press, Mysore
> 1980.
>
> 19\. *Archeology of Coorg with special reference to Megaliths* by Dr.
> Subbiah of Karnataka, Doctoral Thesis, Pune University, 1978.
>
> 20\. *Itihas Ani Kalpit* (History and Myth) by Setu Madhavrao Pagdi.
>
> 21\. Articles, literary works etc. of Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai, Ulloor
> S. Parameswara Iyer, Vadakkumkoor Raja Raja Varma, and Shri Govinda
> Pillai.
>
> 22\. *Mappila Outrage* of 1921 by K. Madhavan Nair.
>
> 23\. *Zamorins in Kerala* by K.V. Krishna Iyer.
>
> 24\. *Tipu Sultan* by B.N. Jog.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Dr. Kareem is a scholar and has secured his Ph.D from Aligarh
Muslim University with a research thesis on Administration of Kerala
under Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan. He has also written a number of
articles exonerating Mahmud Ghaznavi, Nadir Shah and Aurangzeb of their
well-recorded atrocities, forcible conversions and temple-destructions
in India. He believes that pious and magnanimous Muslim rulers, could
never do such things!

[2](#2a) This marriage alliance was formed by Tipu in order to gain the
confidence and support to the Mappilas.

[3](#3a) Irrespective of caste groups, all Hindus are generally referred
to as only Nairs in all the records of Mysore and European
administrations.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
