+++
title = "09  6         TIPU SULTAN: A FANATIC MUSLIM"

+++
6  
TIPU SULTAN: A FANATIC MUSLIM

RAVI VARMA

The Union Government's decision to ban the book on Prophet Mohammad
entitled *The Satanic Verses*, by an internationally renowned Muslim
scholar, Mr. Salman Rushdie, has been described as a shameful surrender
to the minority lobby of fanatic Muslim leaders like Shahabuddin,
Sulaiman Sait and Imam Bukhari. Similarly, the internationally acclaimed
film on Jesus Christ titled *Last Temptation of Jesus Christ* has been
banned in India so that the religious feelings of the tiny though
powerful Christian community may not be hurt. But what about the
religious sentiments of seventy crore Hindus in India? Neither the
socialist and secularist Union Government nor the secularist political
parties of different hues show any respect for Hindu sentiments. Why?
Because they do not mind hurting the religious feelings of seventy crore
Hindus in India.

Otherwise, how could a secular, democratic Union Government approve and
allow Doordarshan to project a fanatic Muslim king - Tipu Sultan - who
was only a usurper, as a national hero? It was Tipu Sultan and his
fanatic Muslim army who converted thousands of Hindus - Thiyyas, Nairs
and tribals - to Islam all along the invasion route, and occupied areas
in North Kerala, Coorg, Mangalore and other parts of Karnataka. Besides,
over 8,000 Hindu temples were desecrated and/or destroyed by his Muslim
army in Malabar, Cochin, Coorg, Mysore and Tamil Nadu.

Even today, one can see large concentrations of Muslims and ruins of
hundreds of destroyed temples in North Kerala as standing evidence of
the Islamic brutalities committed by Tipu Sultan in Kerala. But the
Union Government seems to want to distort Kerala history and project
this fanatic Tipu Sultan as a national hero like Chhatrapati Shivaji and
Rana Pratap Singh!

Let the advisers of the Union Government read history of Kerala written
by Sardar K.M. Panicker, K.P. Padmanabha Menon, and others to understand
the brutalities committed by the fanatic Muslim army of Tipu Sultan in
Kerala. Let them also know how valiantly the Zamorins of Calicut had
fought a relentless war against the Portuguese and the Dutch who wanted
to establish their supremacy on the west coast of Kerala. Another
respected Hindu king, Pazhassi Raja of North Malabar, who fought a long
guerrilla war against the powerful British General, Wellesly, and
defeated his army, had to sacrifice his life in order to uphold the
heroic and patriotic traditions of the Hindu Rajas of Kerala.

But the Union Government has not issued even a postal stamp or published
any authentic book on account of these heroes of Kerala.

Tipu Sultan was only a usurper. He fought a war of expansion against
Cochin and Travancore after running over the lands of a weak Zamorin. He
could not succeed in his ambition and became a cripple because of the
joint resistance by Cochin and Travancore armies. Simply because Tipu
Sultan died in Srirangapatanam while escaping in the night from the fort
which had been surrounded by the British army, does not make him a
national hero. He fought an imperialist war in South India seeking the
help of the French Army.

To project Tipu Sultan as a national hero is not only a distortion of
South Indian history, but also an insult to the seventy crore Hindus,
especially of South India.

*Organiser*, April 2, 1989  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
