+++
title = "14 DID SIKHS (AND HINDUS) VOLUNTARILY LEAVE PAKISTAN? I"

+++
**DID SIKHS (AND HINDUS) VOLUNTARILY LEAVE PAKISTAN?**

**I**

Pakistan propagandists, in order to hide the shameful crimes of the
Muslim League leaders, a part of whose programme it was to carve out a
purely Muslim State and to eliminate religious minorities from it, have
put forth a mischievous piece of propaganda that Sikhs (and by
implication Hindus as well) left Pakistan by a design.  Mat this
‘Design’ could have been passes ordinary human comprehension.  The
official Pakistan propaganda pamphlet contains this fantastic view:

“Sikhs……… stayed behind in Lyallpur till after the Partition and then
(were) deliberately evacuated by Sikh leaders to East Punjab without any
apparent immediate cause, seems to point out to a revision of the ‘Plan’
necessitated by some unexpected sequence of events.”

This remark contains several pieces of deliberate falsehoods and a lot
of *suppressio veri*, besides mischievous suggestions.  Let us analyse
it here:

(*a*) *Sikhs stayed behind lit Lyallpur till after Pakistan*.  Does the
writer imply that it had already before the partition been decided upon
by Muslim Leaguers that no Sikhs were to stay in West Punjab after
Partition, and that in view of such a Scheme it was surprising for any
Sikhs to have stayed in any parts of Pakistan after August, 1947?  It is
obvious that no one. the Sikhs least of all, expected or anticipated
anything like the total exchange of population which actually occurred. 
All decent people expected that on the establishment of Pakistan its
leaders would afford equal protection to all its citizens, irrespective
of creed, like all good Governments.  That is why Sikh and Hindu leaders
(see later in this chapter) exhorted Sikhs and Hindus to stay on in
their homes in Pakistan.  So, Sikhs continued to stay in all parts of
Pakistan except in the rural areas of Rawalpindi, Campbellpore, Jhelum
and Multan Districts.  They stayed there because these places were their
ancestral homes.  The question of any Sikhs ‘staying behind’ could riot
arise, unless it was arranged by Muslim Leaguers, as of course it was,
that no Sikhs be left in Pakistan.  On August 15 all Sikhs excepting in
specific areas of the districts mentioned, were in Pakistan.

(*b*) *“Deliberately evacuated.”* How in the name of sense and
reasonableness Sikhs were evacuated because decent normal life was
rendered impossible for them by the deliberate policy of massacre, loot
and dishonouring of women adopted by Muslims in all parts of Pakistan. 
Why the Sikhs evacuated is answered by the last words in this very
sentence quoted above……… *“necessitated by some unexpected sequence of
events.”* This “unexpected sequence of events” was the hell which was
let loose on Sikhs right from the 15th of August, and which fiendish
activity became operative in Lyallpur not long after this.

(*c*) If Sikhs (of Lyallpur) left because of some plan, then why did
Sikhs of other districts leave?  And why did Hindus leave?  Did they too
leave in sympathy with the Sikh ‘Plan’ of evacuation, supposing for the
sake of fantastic arguing that such a ‘Plan’ wherein evacuation for no
reason was involved, could have existed?

Muslim League leaders had long advocated exchange of population between
Muslim and non-Muslim India.  All those who advocated the establishment
of a Muslim State also advocated as its necessary corollary the exchange
of population.  Rahmat Ali, Syed Abdul Latif, Mr. Jinnah, all these have
been quoted earlier to have expressed strong and unmistakable views on
this question of exchange of Muslim and non-Muslim populations so as to
make the Muslim State more homogeneous, and to solve the minority
problem.  Mr. Jinnah said, referring to the driving out of Hindus from
Noakhali, that it was already transfer of population in action, and some
machinery should be devised for effecting it peacefully and on a large
scale.  Though, it may be said here that this exchange was no real
exchange-it was all the driving out of non-Muslims from Muslim majority
zones, while Muslims, except for the isolated case of Bihar, where the
Hindu riots were ruthlessly suppressed by the Congress Hindu Government
and Pt.  Nehru, everywhere were safe.

When Pakistan became a serious political proposition after H. M. G.
statement of February 20, 1947 and progressively as August, 15, 1947
approached, the Muslim pace of eliminating non-Muslims from Pakistan was
accelerated, till just on the eve of August 15 and after, it became a
ruthless driving out, an all-out campaign.

Sikhs and Hindus could not have desired such an exchange.  They would
rather have preferred, and they actually did prefer, to stay on in
Pakistan.  They decided to join the Constituent Assembly, to continue in
their occupations, business and services, and to stay in its territory
with their women, children and possessions.

In order to realize the improbable and fantastic nature of the supposed
Sikh attempt at leaving Pakistan in order to live under Indian rule, one
has only to look at the sacrifices it would involve on the part of the
Sikhs to make such a transmigration - These losses would be:

\(1\) Sikhs would leave behind vast lands, business, factories and
institutions, for which a very poor substitute both in quantity and
value could be found out of Muslim property in East Punjab.

\(2\) Land in East Punjab is poor, when compared with West Punjab.  Even
of this poor land, Muslims being mostly of the poorer classes and lower
castes, had the least productive patches.  These alone could be given to
Sikhs if they decided to come out of Pakistan.

\(3\) Sikhs left behind in West Punjab their most sacred shrines, which
would be ruined and desecrated if no Sikh was left in West Punjab.

So, it is not difficult, by the evidence of what Sikhs and Hindus had to
leave in Pakistan, to show that they could not have left their rich
possessions and their revered shrines just for a whim, fancy, or even
for a political stake.  Whole nations of millions do riot uproot
themselves so lightly: even for political ideals-individuals and small
groups may.  If they bid good-bye to all that is cherished and valued by
them, it is because to hold on to them is made impossible by powerful
causes.  And such causes were provided by Pakistan tyranny.

Hindus and Sikhs left behind in Pakistan fourteen hundred crores worth
of property, innumerable banks, factories, works, business houses, their
assets, lands, houses, gardens, more than five million acres of fertile
land, their institutions, magnificent hospitals and what is more, their
historic and sacred shrines, dearer than life.  Did they want to ‘ruin’
Pakistan by having several lakhs of themselves killed, maimed, forcibly
converted, their womenfolk dishonoured, their children cut to pieces and
having fifty thousand girls abducted? Why, in the name of sense, if the
Hindus and Sikhs wanted to migrate, did they not migrate while it was
still somewhat safe to migrate-that is, before August 15, 1947.  What
were Hindus and Sikhs waiting for till then?  After June 3 anyway, it
was clear to the meanest intelligence that Pakistan would be
established.  Far from wishing to migrate from West Punjab, Hindus and
Sikhs of the West Punjab decided to become citizens of Pakistan, and
actually elected their representatives to the Pakistan Constituent
Assembly.  This does not look like migrating, but like staying on and
obeying the laws of the new State.  The total number of Hindus and Sikhs
who migrated from the Western Districts of the Punjab east, prior to
August would be less than a million.  To put it at that would be making
a very generous estimate.  It was after August 15, when safety of life
in Pakistan was rendered impossible that the forty-five lakhs of Hindus
and Sikhs of the West Punjab, the entire Hindu and Sikh population of
the North-Western Frontier Province, of Baluchistan and Bahawalpur,
along with twelve lakh Hindus of Sind, left their ancestral homes to
seek safety in India.  Not only that, many Christians were forced out of
Pakistan and many untouchables.  From the other end of Pakistan too
thousands of miles away, from East Bengal, as many as twenty-five lakhs
of Hindus had to migrate to India.  Even in a credulous world it Is
somewhat hard to swallow that all these people, over a crore in number,
chose to be poor and miserable only for the pleasure of seeing Pakistan
go ruined economically.

In reality, such fantastic things are being said by Pakistan only to
cover up their own conspiracy and crimes against Hindus and Sikhs, whom
they persecuted, harassed and with murder, rape, arson and loot drove
out of Pakistan.  Here are a few grounds for believing that Sikhs and
Hindus left Pakistan under very great duress, and that they were
extremely unhappy to do so, as this coming away lost to them all that
was precious to them in the material and spiritual way.

**II**

Exchange of population or even driving out of Hindu and Sikh population
from the Muslim State has from the beginning been inherent in the very
conception of the State of Pakistan.  This has been amply argued in the
opening chapter.  When Pakistan was established, this inevitable
*finale* to the process of its establishment was executed with equal
zeal and collaboration by the people (Muslims) and.  Government of
Pakistan.  The process of elimination of minorities went on without
check by the Muslim police, officials and military.  On the contrary,
they abetted the process.  No responsible Pakistan or Muslim League
leaders condemned such attacks on Hindus and Sikhs.  Governor Mudie of
West Punjab revealed in his letter to Mr. Jinnah his determination to
throw Sikhs out of Pakistan at all costs (The full text of this letter
appears in the Appendix.  Excerpts from it have been quoted in two
places, earlier.) Jinnah did not have a word to utter about the murder
of over 800 Sikhs in Karachi on the 6th January, 1948.  Nor for the
matter of that, a word about the massacres of Noakhali, the
North-Western Frontier Province, Rawalpindi, Multan or any other.

Pakistan Press and its leaders openly advocated the elimination of Sikhs
from Pakistan.  Zafar Ali’s verse ‘*Koi Sikh rehne na pae Maghribi
Punjab men*’ has already been quoted.  The tempo of hate against Sikhs
was deliberately raised, in order to incite the Muslim masses to drive
them speedily out of West Punjab.

**III**

Driving Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan would bring great wealth into
Muslim hands.  This wealth has been estimated at fourteen hundred crores
in value.  It includes fifty-five lakh acres of rich land, good, firmly
built houses, many factories and works, institutions, innumerable shops
rich in merchandise and stores and godowns full of materials whose price
runs into crores upon crores of rupees.  Besides these there are
hundreds of well established schools, many colleges, hospitals,
charitable institutions and libraries.  In the banks in West Punjab,
Safe Deposit Lockers alone contained valuables worth about two hundred
crores.  All this was Hindu-Sikh property.  And it had to be left
behind.

As against all this, the total Muslim assets in the East Punjab do not
come to more than two hundred and fifty crores.  It would have been
madness for Hindus and Sikhs to have left their own magnificent
possessions for the beggarly Muslim assets, and to make a gift of all
that they had to Pakistan.

**IV**

Sikhs have left their richest lands in West Punjab.  It was their labour
which turned the jungles (*Bars*) of Lyallpur, Montgomery, and
Sheikhupura into rich wheat-producing land.  The industry and tenacity
of Sikhs made them masters of vast cultivated areas, *many times those
possessed by Muslims in Districts where Muslims were in a majority in
population*.  Take the case of Lahore.  Here Sikhs were only 18.32% in
the population. Yet according to the settlement report of the Lahore
District by Mr. G. H. B. Abell, I.C.S.

“About 66.7% of the cultivated land (in Lahore District) is in the hands
of the Jats, the great majority of whom are Sikhs.  They are commonly of
very fine physique and often blessed with brains as well.  They
represent a magnificent supply of human material.  They could be and
upto a point are, a very great asset to the District and the Punjab. 
The communal majority in the District belongs to the Muslims…… and the
typical zamindar of the district is Sikh Jat.”

A glance at the land-revenue paid by Muslims and non-Muslims in some of
the Muslim majority districts will show the relative position of Hindus
and Sikhs as proprietors, and will totally falsify any notion that
Hindus and Sikhs left these districts voluntarily, and not under extreme
duress.  
 

[TABLE]

Apart from these facts, the following claims made in the Sikh memorandum
to the Punjab Boundary Commission, in June, 1947 will give an idea of
the extent of Hindu and Sikh interest in the Western Punjab, which these
communities -would not lightly give up, unless compelled by overwhelming
factors:

In the Lahore Division as a whole Sikhs paid 46% of the total
land-revenue.  
  
^([1](#1))“Reference may be made to *The Punjab Peasant* by Sir Malcolm
Darling, formerly Financial Commissioner of the Punjab.  At page 41 of
this book he observes: “We now enter the heart of the Punjab, the tract
from the Jhelum in the north to a little beyond the Sutlej in the
south.  It contains all that is most characteristic of the Province.  It
is the cradle of the Sikhs and hundred years ago was the mainstay of
Ranjit Singh and his power.” At page l22 of the same book the author
observes: “The peasant proprietor is the backbone of the colonies as he
is of the Punjab.  In the Lyallpur colony he holds about 80% of the land
and in Shahpur nearly as much.  In the latter he was mainly recruited
from Northern Districts but in the former almost entirely from the
central Punjab.  A colony could hardly have had better material, for
Ludhiana, Jullundur and Amritsar represent the flower of the Indian
Agriculture.  They are the home of the Jat Sikh who has been described
as ‘the most desirable of colonists.’

“(In the matter of developing Colony Lands) the Jat Sikh has reached a
point of development probably beyond anything else of the kind in
India.  In less than a generation he has made the wilderness blossom
like the rose.  It is as if the energy of the virgin soil of the Bar had
passed into his veins and made him almost a part of the forces of nature
which he has conquered.  It is clear that the Jat Sikh from the central
districts of the Punjab has been very largely responsible for the
building up of the colony areas of Lyallpur and Montgomery in the
Punjab, which form the granary of a large part of India.  It may further
be mentioned that the Sikhs in the central Divisions of the Punjab have
largest Agricultural interests of all other communities put together.

“The number of peasant proprietors in Lahore District is 1,46,522 and
the cultivable area is 15,78,734 acres.  The Muslim peasant proprietors
number 41,029 holding 3,78,047 acres.  The number of Sikh peasant
proprietors, on the other hand, is 83,585 and they hold 10,01,438 acres.

LAHORE CITY

^([2](#2))“The city of Lahore consisted of the old walled town,
Anarkali, Civil Lines and scattered houses here and there along the
Lower Mall.  Lahore began to expand in 1914 and the house building
activity in Lahore received great impetus in the years 1929-37.  The new
Abadies (settlements) which come into existence since 1913 are Ramgali,
Gwalmandi, Nisbet Road area, Rishi Nagar, Sant Nagar, Ram Nagar, Krishan
Nagar, Janak Nagar, Qila Lachhman Singh, Qasurpura and Mohammad Nagar. 
Most of these Abadies are situate to the east and west of Lower Mall,
skirting round it from almost Ravi Bridge to Nawankot.  The other new
settlements of importance are New Mozang, Islamia Park, Chauburji
Gardens, Arya Nagar, Muslim Town, Garden Town, Model Town, Canal Park,
Wasanpura, Dharampura, Misri Shah, Bharat Nagar, Singhpura and Ramgarh. 
A prominent feature of the new Abadis around old Lahore is that their
growth has been on communal lines and that most of these Abadis are
predominantly Hindu and Sikh.

“A survey of Lahore carried out by the Punjab Government Board of
Economic Inquiry gives the number of dwellings, their average monthly
rent, ownership by communities, and distribution by localities.  The
survey shows that the total value of all dwelling houses owned by
non-Muslims within the Corporation limits amounts to 12,27,64,800
rupees, whereas the total value of dwelling houses owned by Muslims
amounts to 8.20,99,200. A complete census of the shops and commercial
establishments was also taken by the Board of Economic Inquiry.  The
percentage of shops owned by non-Muslims in the walled city comes to
63.  The percentage of outer Lahore comes to 67.  The total number of
shops in Greater Lahore, is 5,332 of which non-Muslims own 3.501.

*Factories in Lahore*

^([3](#3))“The Survey shows that out of a total number of 218 Registered
Factories working in Greater Lahore in the year 1943-44 as many as 173
or 80% belong to non-Muslims.  The total fixed capital invested in these
factories amounted to a sum of Rs. 2 crores 40.27 lakhs.  Of this the
Muslim investment amounted only to 58.91 lakhs of rupees.  Taking the
figures of total capital investment, fixed plus circulating, we find
that the total capital invested in the Registered factories in Greater
Lahore amounted to Rs. 6.29 crores.  The non-Muslim share in this total
investment was Rs. 5.12 crores.

“Lahore is an important banking and commercial centre and the money
market in Lahore is fairly well developed.  The Head Offices of as many
as 26 Banks belonging to non-Muslim are located in Lahore.  The total
number of Bank Offices working in Lahore at present, however, is 90.  Of
the banks and branches at Lahore, only three belong to Muslims.

“There are 80 offices of Insurance Companies in Lahore, 15 of them are
Head Offices of such Companies.  Of the Insurance Companies and offices
only two belong to Muslims.

“Lahore is an important educational centre of the province.  The
educational development has been very largely due to non-Muslim
enterprise.  The non-Muslim share in the promotion and development of
educational institutions is stupendous.  There are at present in Lahore
as many as 270 educational institutions, recognised by the Education
Department or affiliated to the Punjab University.  Of this about 100
institutions are devoted to female education.  The number of male
students in these institutions is 64,902 and women students 23,447.  Of
the 12 Arts and Science Colleges at Lahore, giving education to 10,647
students, only one is run by the Muslims and one by the Government.  The
other 10 are run by non-Muslims.  There are 15 professional colleges
imparting education to 2,620 students.  Of this number excluding three
colleges run by the Government, all are run by non-Muslims.  Of the 36
High Schools, imparting education to 26,647 students, only four are run
by Muslims.

“The total number of hospitals run on the modern allopathic lines in
Lahore is 12.  In addition there are four hospitals run on the
indigenous methods of medicine.  Not a single hospital run on modern
allopathic, or on the indigenous lines is run by the Muslims.

AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE

^([4](#4))“As stated above 90% of the colonists who came to colonise
this tract in the Sheikhupura district and Lyallpur district hailed from
Ambala, Ludhiana, Jullundur, Hoshiarpur, Amritsar, Gurdaspur and
Ferozepur districts.  The towns of Gujranwala, Lyallpur, Gojra, Samundri
and Toba Tek Singh are situate in this tract.  There is an overwhelming
non-Muslim population in these towns and the market is controlled by
non-Muslims.

“The Sikhs played a major part in the development of the rural area of
this part and the urban area was built up mainly by the enterprise of
Hindus.  It would be correct to say that almost the entire trade,
commerce and industry of the Lyallpur district and the portion of the
Sheikhupura sub-district is in the hands of non-Muslims.  In Lyallpur
District in the year 1945-46 the non-Muslims paid Urban Immovable
property Tax in the amount of Rs. 1,40,300 whereas the Muslims paid Rs.
22,900.  The amount of Sales Tax paid by the non-Muslims in 1945-46 was
Rs. 3,08,000 as compared to Rs. 17,000 paid by the Muslims.  The Income
Tax paid by the non-Muslims amounted to Rs. 59,50,000 as compared to Rs.
5,00,000 paid by the Muslims.  Of the total number of 72 Registered
factories in Lyallpur District, 57 factories are run by non-Muslims and
only 15 by Muslims.

“The tract mentioned above, comprising parts of Sheikhupura, Gujranwala
and Lyallpur district is one contiguous tract and is Popularly known as
the Shahidi Bar.  In the preceding paragraphs an account has been given
of the Sikh share in the development of this tract and there is no
gainsaying that but for the Sikh enterprise the rural areas in this
tract would not have been developed and but for the Hindu-Sikh
enterprise the markets in this tract would not have flourished.

“The peasant-proprietors again play a dominant role in the economic life
of Shakargarh Sub-District.  Out of the total area of this sub-district
the non-Muslims own 1,72,111 acres of land as against 96,958 acres owned
by the Muslims.  Again the non-Muslims pay Rs. 4,45,000 on account of
Land revenue in this sub-District as against a sum of Rs. 1,62,379 paid
by the Muslims.  The total number of villages of Shakargarh Sub-District
is 744 and of this number the non-Muslim villages are 408 as against 311
Muslim villages, the remaining 25 villages are mixed.

“The non-Muslims of Shakargarh Sub-District own the major portion of the
urban property in the Sub-District and pay a greater portion of the
taxes.  As against Rs. 5,485 paid as Hasiyat Tax by the non-Muslims the
Muslims pay only Rs. 2,943.  The Income Tax figures for the sub-district
show that no part of this amount is paid by the Muslims.  Kartarpur, a
place sacred to the memory of Baba Nanak is situated within the limits
of Shakargarh sub-district.

NAROWAL SUB-DISTRICT

“Adjoining the trans-Ravi tract of Gurdaspur District in the preceding
paragraphs is the Narowal Tehsil of Sialkot District.  The population of
Narowal Sub-District is 2,67,598, and out of this population the Muslims
are 1,46,982, the rest being non-Muslims.  The cultivable area in this
sub-district is 2,61,378 acres and annual land revenue assessed thereon
amounts to 3,95,768 rupees.  This would show that the economic interests
of the non-Muslims in this sub-district of Sialkot District outweigh the
economic interests of the Muslims.  This argument is reinforced by the
voting strength of the Muslims and non-Muslims for the District Board
elections.  The electoral rolls of the Narowal Sub-District for the
District Board elections would show that there are 16,031 non-Muslims
voters as against 12,895 Muslim voters.  The income-tax figures show a
greater disparity, the non-Muslims paying annually Rs. 18,523-4-0 as
against Rs. 2,716-1-0 paid by the Muslims.

**V**

To the facts enumerated above must be added the fact that in Montgomery,
Sheikhupura, Gujranwala, Gujrat, Jhelum, Rawalpindi and Multan Districts
Hindus and Sikhs had a large number of factories, banks, business firms,
urban housing property, schools, colleges and charitable institutions
which outnumbered the Muslim interest in these respects many times over
in spite of the fact that the Muslims in all these districts were in an
overwhelming majority in the population.

In the whole of the present West Punjab Districts, there were only two
Muslim Colleges-the Islamia College at Lahore and the Zamindara College
at Gujrat.  As against this, there were about twenty non-Muslim
colleges, including a first rate Medical College and an efficient
College of Engineering.  There were a large number of non-Muslim
institutions also not affiliated to the University.  In the matter of
schools, the same proportion works out.

Sikhs have some of their most sacred Gurdwaras in the West Punjab.  The
freedom of these Gurdwaras and access to them for purposes of worship
forms the sorest point of grievance which the Sikhs have at present
against the Pakistan Government, and what is regarded as the easy
attitude which the Indian Government is adopting with regard to this
matter so deeply vital to Sikh religious sentiment.

The holiest of the holy of the Sikhs, Nanakana Sahib, birthplace of Guru
Nanak-analogous to the Mecca of the Muslims and Jerusalem of the
Christians.  This Gurdwara also had a vast estate, developed along model
lines as a farming colony, and it yielded an annual revenue to the Sikh
community of about 20 lakhs of rupees.

There is then the famous Gurdwara Dehra Sahib in Lahore, site of
martyrdom of Sri Guru Arjan Dev.  There is the famous Shahidgunj, sacred
in Sikh history as the place where the pioneer upholders of the Sikh
Creed suffered torture and death at Muslim hands.

In Rawalpindi district there is the Panja Sahib Gurdwara, sanctified by
Guru Nanak, and so is the famous Babe di Ber in Sialkot.  In Gujranwala
District is Eminabad.  In Lahore District is Kartarpur, a place where
Guru Nanak resided for a considerable time.

Besides these more famous Gurdwaras, there are hundreds of other
shrines, associated with the Sikh Gurus, with holy men and with events
in Sikh history.

There are then places associated with Sikh history, such as the
Mausoleum of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in Lahore and his birthplace in
Gujranwala.  Sikh history and the dearest association of the Sikhs are
enshrined in these places.

To think that Sikhs and Hindus would leave en masse all that has been
mentioned above, if it had been possible for them to retain these, is
fantastic nonsense, worthy only of the mendacions propagandists of
Pakistan.

**VI**

After the establishment of Pakistan, a systematic campaign of hounding
Hindus and Sikhs out of Pakistan was initiated by the Muslim League, of
course with the connivance of the Government.  Various links in this
campaign are these.-

(*a*) Governor Mudie’s letter to Mr. Jinnah (in the appendix).

(*b*) Orders of the Deputy Commissioner of Montgomery that no Sikhs are
to be spared.  The following statement made by a Hindu Magistrate in a
court of law will bear out this:

Statement of Shri P. L. Sondhi, M. I C., Ferozepore, recorded by me in
the presence of Shri Banwari Lal, P. A. to D. C. and S. Mohan Singh
Batra, M. I C. Fazilka on solemn affirmation.

“About the last week of August, 1947, I was awaiting to be evacuated to
East Punjab after I had received my posting orders to Ferozepur.  I do
not actually remember the date but it was on the 23rd, 24th or the 25th
of August, 1947 that I happened to attend a joint meeting of the
Magistracy and Police held in the Court room of Raja Hassan Akhtar, P.
C. S. Deputy Commissioner, Montgomery at about 4 P.M. The D. C. in my
presence gave unambiguous orders to his Magistrates and Police Officers
who were present, that they must not spare any Sikh and kill or shoot
him at sight and that the Hindus may be spared for the time being.  I
was the only non-Muslim Magistrate who attended the meeting.

“I made a similar statement before the S. D. O. Moga on or about the
30th August, 1947.  I happened to meet the D. C., Ferozepore on 3-4-48,
who has recently taken charge of -this District, when I narrated to him
my experiences in Montgomery just before my evacuation. I told him about
the above facts and he asked me to make this statement in the presence
of three Magistrates in Court of the Additional District Magistrate,
Ferozepore which I have hereby done.”  
 

|                     |                            |
|---------------------|----------------------------|
| R. 0. & A. C.       | (Sd.) P. S. Multani        |
| (Sd.) P. L. Sondhi, | Addl. District Magistrate, |
| M. I C. Ferozepore  | Ferozepore                 |
| 5-4-48              | 5-4-48                     |

(*c)* The District Magistrate of Mianwali fixed dates and a time-table
for the evacuation of Hindus and Sikhs from his district.  Other
Magistrates doubtlessly did the same.

(*d*) The District Magistrate, Sheikhupura, where the biggest massacres
of all of Hindus and Sikhs took place, was an active party to all that
happened (vide statement of S. Gurdial Singh, Tehsildar of Sheikhupura,
later posted at Zira, Ferozepore District, in the appendix).

(*e*) Notices were served on non-Muslim shopkeepers and others to quit
Pakistan.  In this connection the following revealed by the Indian
Liaison Officer at Lahore will be illuminating:-

Office of the Chief Liaison Officer, East Punjab Govt.,

<div align="right">

105, Upper Mall, Lahore  
September 27, 1947

No. 118/C1003

</div>

I forward a copy of notice entitled “Quit Pakistan.” Such notices are
being received by non-Muslim shopkeepers.  They get very panic striken
and most of them are leaving their shops. I do not know what action you
c n take in the matter but I thought I should let you know that a large
number of non-Muslims, who receive such notices do not dare to open
their premises.  The one, of which I am sending you the copy, was
addressed to the Proprietor, Indian Stationery Shop, Hospital Road,
Lahore, and was delivered by post.  The original envelope and the notice
are in my possession.

<div align="right">

Yours sincerely,  
Sd/- Ram Rattan 

</div>

Encl.  Copy, of notice.  
Hafiz Abdul Majid Sahib, O. B. E., I. C. S.,  
Chief Secretary to Government West Punjab, Lahore.

----------

No. 119/CLO/3

<div align="right">

Dated 29-9-1947

</div>

Copy with a copy of the notice to the Chief Secretary to Government,
East Punjab, Camp Jullundur for information.

<div align="right">

Sd/- Ram Rattan

</div>

*Copy of Notice*  
*Quit Pakistan*

“You have been earmarked to quit Pakistan at your earliest possible.  If
you don’t follow this warning, none but you yourself will be responsible
for the consequences.

Public don’t want you to be here as fifth columnist and it would be
unwise on your part to seek for Government protection which would be of
no use at this stage.^([5](#5))

Pakistan

<div align="right">

Quit Pakistan

</div>

Anti 5th Columnist Organisation,   
               Lahore.”

**VII**

No Hindu or Sikh public leader ever advocated migration from Western
Punjab or for the matter of that from any part of Pakistan, till it
became absolutely apparent, after August 15, that life with any degree
of honour had been rendered impossible in Pakistan for Hindus and
Sikhs.  Below are given in detail pronouncements of Sikh and Hindu
leaders and newspapers advocating that Hindus and Sikhs must not quit
their homes in the Muslim majority areas.  These pronouncements range
from the 9th April (more than a month after the Amritsar, Rawalpindi and
Multan terrors) upto the 12th August, 1947 (the date on which Lahore was
a shambles for Hindus and Sikhs).  Below are these pronouncements.-

*Tribune*: 31-5-47.

Mrs. Sucheta Kriplani appealing to the refugees at Wah on 30-5-47
advised them not to leave their hearths and homes as this would spoil
their cases against real culprits.

*Vir Bharat*: 16-6-47.

The Frontier Hindu-Sikh Relief Committee issued an appeal to the Hindus
and Sikhs of Peshawar and N.-W. F. P. to return to their homes.

*Ajit*: 16-6-47.

L. Kotu Ram, M. L. A. of Bannu in a press statement appealed to his
co-religionists to return to their homes.

*Tribune*: 29-6-47.

Master Tara Singh contradicted the rumour in a statement to Associated
Press of India on 26-647 that he had advised Sikhs of West Punjab to
come to East Punjab.  He said that he was of the considered opinion that
non-Muslims of Western Punjab should continue to stay on in their homes.

*Vir Bharat*: 29-647.

S. Ajit Singh the renowned patriot appealed to the Hindus and Sikhs not
to leave their homes.

*Tribune*: 4-7-47.

Sardar Patel and S. Baldev Singh assured a Sikh deputation from
Rawalpindi to stick to their homes in Pakistan as they would enter into
a treaty with Pakistan Government for protection and safeguarding the
interests of minorities in Pakistan.

*Vir Bharat*: 4-7-47.

L. Dev Raj Sethi, M.L.A. (Congress) in a statement on 3-7-47 stated that
exodus was harmful and suggested that the people should resolve to stick
to the soil in which they were rooted.

*Vir Bharat*: 4-7-47.

Acharya Kriplani, Congress President assured the minorities in India
that they would never be treated as foreigners and they would be given
every assistance in the safeguarding of their interests.

*Vir Bharat*: 9-4-47.

S. Jagjit Singh Man, M.L.A., in a press statement exhorted the Hindus
and Sikhs who had migrated from the riot-affected areas of Jhelum and
Rawalpindi to return to their homes.

*Vir Bharat*: 9-4-47.

The Rawalpindi Relief Committee in a press statement advised the Hindus
and Sikhs to stick to their homes.

*Tribune*: 13-4-47.

S. Partap Singh, M.L.A., member of the Congress High Command (later
Minister, East Punjab Government) in an appeal to riot-striken people in
the Punjab on 10-4-47 asked them to remember that unorganised migration
of any people from the area where their ancestors had lived would add to
the difficulties of every one.

*Tribune*: 19-4-47.

S. Sawarn Singh, President of the Punjab Riot Sufferers Relief Committee
in a statement issued on 17-4-47 asked people not to migrate to places
outside Rawalpindi Division, but to settle down at the various centres
which Government had decided to protect.

*Vir Bharat*: 6-5-47.

Jathedar Mohan Singh, President, Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak
Committee, Amritsar, in a statement to the press advised the refugees
not to leave their homes and particularly they should not go out of the
Punjab.

*Tribune*: 26-5-47.

Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar Patel in an interview to Rana Jang
Bahadur Singh, Editor of *the Tribune*, on 24-5-47 advised people
through him not to be panicky and to stick to places and face the
situation bravely.

*Ajit*: 8-7-47.

In the public meeting at Tarn Taran, the Hon’ble Sir Buta Singh, Member
Council of State, S. Surjit Singh, M.L.A. (Central) S. Jaswant Singh
Jhabal, Jathedar Sohan Singh Jalalusman and other Sikh leaders exhorted
the audience to protect the life and property of minorities.

*Vir Bharat*: 8-7-47.

L. Avtar Narain, Vakil of Jhelum, Member, Constituent Assembly of
Pakistan, in a press statement exhorted the minorities in Pakistan that
they should not leave their hearths and homes and should become good
citizens of Pakistan.

*Vir Bharat*: 8-7-47.

At a minorities convention held at Rawalpindi on 7-7-43 Dewan Pindi Dass
Sabharwal and S. Sant Singh exhorted the minorities to stick to their
homes.  L. Bhim Sen Sachar, L. Avtar Narain, Dr. Lehna Singh, Parbodh
Chandra M.L.A. and Fazal Elahi M.L.A. (Christian) participated.

*Vir Bharat*: 8-7-47.

In his prayer speech Mahatma Gandhi reiterated that every Indian should
be treated equally and that the question of migration of minorities does
not arise.

*Bharat*: 10-7-47.

Goswami Ganesh Dutt sent a message to the minorities convention at
Rawalpindi exhorting the Hindus and Sikhs of Pakistan to stick to their
homes.

*Vir Bharat*: 3-7-47.

Mr. Mehr Chand Khanna, Finance Minister, N.-W. F. P. exhorted the Hindus
and Sikhs who had migrated from N.-W F. P. to return to their homes.

*Vir Bharat*: 15-7-47.

Dr. Gopi Chand Bhargava, Leader, Congress Assembly Party wrote to Khan
Iftikhar Hussain Khan Mamdot, President, Punjab Muslim League to try to
rehabilitate the riot sufferers of March in their original homes.

*Vir Bharat*: 17-7-47.

S. Ajit Singh, Minister, N.-W. F. P. in a press statement advised the
Hindus and Sikhs of Pakistan to rely on statements of Mr. Jinnah and to
stick to their homes.  The minorities, he added should be loyal citizens
of Pakistan.

*Vir Bharat*: 25-7-47.

The Hindu-Sikh Defence Committee of N.-W. F. P. issued a press appeal to
the Hindus and Sikhs that they should not migrate from their homes and
at their meeting they passed a resolution to a similar effect.

*Vir Bharat*: 1-8-47 and *Tribune*: 1-8-47.

Mahatma Gandhi during his visit to Rawalpindi gave instructions to
Congress workers and said that they were still citizens of both
Dominions and would remain so after 15-8-47 as well.  He advised people
not to migrate from their homes.

*Tribune*: 4-8-47.

Acharya Kriplani, President of the Congress told a press conference that
all citizens of a particular area must be loyal to the administration
and give it their honourable co-operation.  He was against migration.

*Tribune*: 8-8-47.

Mahatma Gandhi advised Congressmen who met him at the residence of Mrs.
Rameshwari Nehru at Lahore on 6-8-47 that they should die with dying
Lahore.

*Civil and Military Gazette*: 12-8-47.

In a press appeal to the people on 10-8-47 in Lahore Sardar Sawaran
Singh said, “In spite of the division of the country all of us Muslims,
Hindus and Sikhs--have to live together.  Let us, therefore, live in
peace so that the poor and the down-trodden may in the new freedom that
we have achieved get enough to eat and to cover their naked bodies,
leading to a happier and fuller life.”

**VIII**

Not only the Hindus and Sikhs, but even Christians did not find it easy
to stay in Pakistan.  That is because in the State of Pakistan, which
Mr. Jinnah, speaking at Kingsway Hall, London in December, 1946 said,
would contain one hundred million, *all Muslims*, can have no place in
it for any non-Muslims.  The following reports will make clear the
plight of Christians in Pakistan:

\(1\) Mr. William Joseph, President, All-Pakistan Christian League,
Lahore, has, on Saturday issued the following statement to the press. 
“In spite of the assurance given by the Qaid-i-Azam Christians are being
ill-treated in the West Punjab.  The rights of the Christians are being
crushed in every form of life.  We have, again and again, made
representations to the Prime Minister of Pakistan and to the West Punjab
Cabinet for our protection.”

<div align="right">

Civil & Military Gazette:  
May 19, 1947

</div>

Impartial observers everywhere have felt that in the exchange of
population Sikhs were terribly hard hit.  It would be fantastic to
imagine that Sikhs would invite these hardships on themselves unless it
was absolutely impossible to live in Pakistan. 40% of them became
refugees, left the best land in the Punjab in the Western Districts, and
also their holiest shrines.  In enumerating the losses of the Sikhs, Mr.
Ian Stephens, Editor of *The Statesman* says in the editorial of January
3-4, 1948:

“Probably about 40% of this small but doughty people are in one manner
or the other describable as refugees.  The transference, in the main,
has been from irrigated regions splendidly fertile to lands less
productive.  Prosperous colonies developed by an industrious and capable
peasantry have been abandoned, as has much other property in rural and
urban areas; some revered shrines are left on the far side of the
boundary.”

After reading all that has been related in the present chapter, only one
conclusion is possible,-that Hindus and Sikhs and even Christians have
been hounded out of West Punjab and the N.-W. F. Province according to a
set scheme, in order firstly to make Pakistan a purely Muslim State, and
secondly to get the property of non-Muslims for Muslims.  This process
only a little later extended to Sind, and to East Bengal.

In East Bengal under pressure from India, it has been only recently
arrested, to be revived who knows when?  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))From the memorandum to the Boundary Commission.

^([2](#2a))From Sikh Memorandum to the Punjab Boundary Commission.

^([3](#3a))Ibid.

^([4](#4a))Ibid.

^([5](#5a))The harassment and expulsion of Sind Hindus is a process
which is still a matter of daily occurrence. (*Compiler*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
