+++
title = "112 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: G. Allana, Pakistan Movement Historical Documents (Karachi:
Department of International Relations, University of Karachi, nd
\[1969\]), pp. 103-110. Typos have been corrected, and the paragraphs
have been numbered, but no other editing has been done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Full text of the pamphlet "Now or Never," published by Choudhary Rahmat
Ali as "Founder of Pakistan National Movement," in which the word
"Pakistan" appears to have been used for the first time in a document
(1933)

  

3, Humberstone Road,  
Cambridge, England.  
28th January, 1933

Dear Sir or Madam,

I am enclosing herewith an appeal on behalf of the thirty million
Muslims of PAKISTAN, who live in the five Northern Units of
India--Punjab, North-West Frontier (Afghan) Province, Kashmir, Sind, and
Baluchistan. It embodies their demand for the recognition of their
national status, as distinct from the other inhabitants of India, by the
grant to Pakistan of a separate Federal Constitution on religious,
social and historical grounds.

I shall be pleased if you will kindly acquaint me with your valuable
opinion on the proposed solution of the great Hindu-Muslim problem. I
trust that, vitally interested as you are in a just and permanent
solution of that complex problem, the objects outlined in the appeal
wiIl meet with your fullest approval and active support.

Yours truly,  
Rahmat Ali (Choudhary). (Founder, Pakiistan National Movement)  
First issued 1933; reissued 1934

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOW OR NEVER  
Are we to live or perish for ever?

\[1\] At this solemn hour in the history of India, when British and
Indian delegates are laying the foundations of a Federal Constitution
for that Sub-continent, we address this appeal to you, in the name of
our common heritage, and on behalf of our thirty million Muslim brethern
who live in PAKISTAN by which we mean the five Northern units of India
viz: Punjab, North-West Frontier Province (Afghan Province), Kashmir,
Sind, and Baluchistan. And we ask for your sympathy and support in our
grim and fateful struggle against political crucifixion and national
annihilation.

\[2\] Our brave but voiceless nation is being sacrificed on the altar of
Hindu Nationalism not ony by the non-Muslims, but also, to their lasting
shame, by our own so-called leaders with a reckless disregard of our
protests and in utter eontempt of the warnings of history.

\[3\] The Muslim Delegates at the Round Table Conference have committed
an inexcusable blunder and an incredible betrayal. They have agreed, in
the name of Hindu Nationalism, to the perpetual subjection of the
ill-starred Muslim Millat in India. They have accepted, without any
protest or demur and without any reservation or qualification, a
constitution based on the principle of an All-India Federation. This
acceptance amounts to nothing less than signing the death-warrant of
Islam and of Muslims in India.

\[4\] To justify their action they have taken shelter behind the
so-called Mandate from the Millat. But they forgot that sucidal Mandate
was framed and formulated by thedr own hands. It was not the Mandate of
the Muslims of India. Nations never gave Mandates to their
representatives to barter away their very souls; and men of conscience
never accept such self-annihilating Mandates, even if given, much less
execute them. At such a time and in a crisis of this magnitude the
foremost duty of saving statesmanship is to give a fair, firm, and
fearless lead--a lead which has presistently been denied to our eighty
million co-religionists in India by our leaders during the last
seventy-five years. In fact, for us, these have been the years of false
issues, of lost opportunities, and of utter blindness to the most
essential and urgent needs of the Muslim interests. This because the
leaders' policy has throughout been defeatist in spirit, nerveless in
action, and subservient in attitude. They have all along been paralysed
with dishonesty, fear, and doubt, and have, time and again, sacrificed
their own political principles and our national patrimony for the sake
of sheer opportunism and sordid careerism. To do so even at this fateful
juncture is a policy of betrayal. It will be fatal for. us not to look
this tragic truth in the face; for the tighter we shut our eyes, the
harder that truth will hit us.

\[5\] At this critical moment, when this tragedy is being enacted, we
earnestly appeal to you for your practical sympathy and active support
for the demand of a separate Muslim Federation--a demand which is a
matter of life and death for all Muslims of India, and which is outlined
and explained below.

\[6\] India, constituted as it is at the present moment, is not the name
of one single country; nor the home of one single nation. It is, in
fact, the designation of a State created by the British for the first
time in history. It includes peoples who have never previously formed
part of the Indian nation at any period of its history, but who have, on
the contrary, from the dawn of history till the advent of the British,
possessed and retained distinct nationalities of their own.

\[7\] One of such peoples is our own nation. In the five Northern
Provinces of India, out of a total population of about forty millions,
we, the Muslims, constitute about thirty millions. Our religion and
culture, our history and tradition, our social code and economic system,
our laws of inheritance, succession and marriage are fundamentally
different from those of most peoples living in the rest of India. The
ideals which move our people to make the highest sacrifices are
essentially different from those which inspire the Hindus to do the
same. These differences are not confined to broad, basic principles. Far
from it, they extend to the minutest details of our lives. We do not
inter-dine; we do not inter-marry. Our national customs and calendars,
even our diet and dress are different.

\[8\] It is preposterous to compare, as some superficial observers do,
the differences between Muslims and Hindus with those between Catholics
and Protestants. While both the Catholics and the Protestants are part
and parcel of one reli­gious system Christianity, the Muslims and the
Hindus are the followers of two essentially different religious systems.
Moreover, religion in the case of Muslims and Hindus is not a matter of
private opinion as it may be in the case of Christians; but on the
contrary it is a Civic Church, which lays down a most comprehensive code
of conduct to be observed by its adherents from birth to death.

\[9\] If we, the Muslims of Pakistan, with our distinct marks of
nationality, are deluded into the proposed Indian Federation by friends
or foes, we are reduced to a minority of one in ten. This reduction
sounds the death-knell of our nation in Pakistan. To help you to realise
the full magnitude of this impending catastrophe, let us remind you that
we thirty mlllions constitute about one-tenth of the whole Muslim world.
The total area of our five units, comprising Pakistan, is four times
that of Italy, three times that of Germany and twice that of France; and
their population seven times that of the Commonwealth of Australia, four
times that of the Dominion of Canada, twice that of Spain, and equal to
France and Italy considered individually.

\[10\] These are facts--hard facts and historic realities which we
challenge anybody to contradict. It is on the basis of such facts and
realities that we assert without fear of contradiction that we, the
Muslims of Pakistan, do possess a distinct nationality from that of the
Hindus of India, who constitute the Hindu nation and live--and have
every right to live--in most of India; and that we deserve--and
demand--the recognition of our national status by the grant to Pakistan
of a Federal Constitution, separate from that of the rest of India.

\[11\] In addressing this appeal to you and all other Muslims of India,
we are addressing it also to the two other major parties--British and
Hindu--involved in the settlement of India's future. They must
understand that, in this settlement, our body and soul are at stake. Our
very being and well-being depend upon it. Not only ours, but also those
of every other people in India. Therefore, to be acceptable to all, the
settlement must be fair to all. They can make it so, if they will.

\[12\] This is especially true when, to the selfish settlement proposed
by them, there is a just and reasonable alternative, which would lay the
foundations of a peaceful future for the whole Sub-continent; and which
would allow the highest development of all, including each of the two
peoples--the Hindu and the Muslim--without either being subject to the
other. This alternative is a separate Muslim Federation of at least our
five predominantly Muslim units-Punjab, North­West Frontier Province
(Afghan Province), Kashmir, Sind and Baluchistan. This Muslim Federation
of North-West. India would provide the bulwark of a buffer state against
invasion of India either of ideas or of arms from any quarter. And the
creation of such a Federation would not materially disturb the ratio or
the rights of the Muslim and Hindu populations in the rest of India. It
is, therefore, clearly in the interest of British and Hindu
statesmanship to concede our demand for this Federation, and to have as
an ally our free, powerful, and contented Muslim nation, possessing a
constitution similar to, but separate from, that which is being enacted
for India. For, nothing but a separate Federation of our homelands will
satisfy our people.

\[13\] This demand is basically different from the suggestion put
forward by Doctor Sir Muhammad Iqbal in his Presidential address to the
All-India Muslim League in 1930. While he proposed the amalgamation of
four out of the five above-named provinces into a single state, forming
a unit of the All-India Federation, we propose that all those five
Provinces should have a separate Federation of their own outside India.
We are convinced there can be no peace and progress in India if we, the
Muslims, are duped into a Hindu-dominated federation in which we cannot
be the masters of our own destiny and captains of our own souls.

\[14\] Let us refer here to the safeguards. Do the safeguards proposed
at the Conference give us any scope to work out our salvation along our
own lines? Not a bit. Safeguard is the magic word which holds our
leaders spellbound, and has dulled their consciences. In the ecstasy of
their hallucinations they think that the pills of safeguards can cure
nation-annihilating earth­quakes. The safeguards asked for by them and
agreed to by the makers of the Constitution can never be a substitute
for tbe loss of our separate nationality. Indeed, to believe otherwise
is suicidal insanity. For, what safeguards can be devised to prevent our
minority of one in ten in an All-India Federation from being sacrificed
on every vital issue to the aims and interests of the majority race,
which differs from us in every essential of individual and corporate
life? What safeguards can prevent the catastrophe of our Muslim nation
smarting and suffering eternally at the frustration of its every social
and religious ideal? What safeguards can compensate our nation awakened
to its national consciousness for the destruction of its distinct
national status? None. Because, however effective and extensive the
safeguards may be, the vital organs and essential departments of our
national life, such as defence forces and foreign relations, trade and
commerce, communications, posts and telegraphs, finance, taxation and
customs, will not be under our control, but will be in the hands of a
Federal Government, which is bound to be overwhelmingly Hindu. With all
this, can we, Muslims, achieve any of our ideals, if those ideals
conflict--as conflict they must--with the ideals of the Hindus?

\[15\] In this respect, the history of the last century is full of clear
warnings for us. Even one who runs may read them. To mention just one.
Despite all the safeguards and guarantees we have had in the past, the
very name of our national language­-Urdu--even now the lingua franca of
the Indian Sub-continent, has been wiped out of the list of Indian
languages. We have only to open the latest census report to verify it.
This by itself is a tragic fall. But even that is a trifle in comparison
with the tremendous issues involving our whole future as a nation and as
a power not only in India, but also in the whole of Asia.

\[16\] In the face of these incontrovertible facts, we are entitled to
ask our delegates for what purpose we are being pressed to sacrifice our
nationality and to submit ourselves and our posterity to non-Muslim
domination. What good is likely to accrue to Islam and Muslims by our
going into the Indian F'ederation? This is a thing which passes our
understanding. Are we to be crucified just to save their faces, or to
bolster up the preposterous falsehood that India can be a single nation?
Is it to achieve compromise at all costs, or is it to support the fatal
illusion that Hindu nationalism can work in the interests of Muslims as
well as Hindus? The whole business shows a mental muddle of such a
nature and on such a scale as has never been known in history. We have
suffered in the past without a murmur and faced dangers without demur;
but the one thing we would never suffer is our self-strangulation. We
would never crucify ourselves upon the cross of Hindu nationalism in
order to make a Hindu-holiday.

\[17\] May we ask also all those people--Muslim, British, and Hindu--who
are supporting the Federal Constitution, if it is really desirable to
make us sacrifice our nationhood in order to make India one nation? Does
humanity really stand to gain by this stupendous sacrifice? We dare to
say that in our nation the ancient fire of Islam still glows and
promises much for the future of mankind, if only they would let it live.
Can they not realize that, while in Europe, excluding Russia, in about
the same area as that of India and with about the same population, there
live and prosper no fewer than twenty-six nations, with one and the same
religion, civilisation and economic system, surely it is not only
possible but highly desirable for two fundamentally different and
distinct nations, i.e., Muslim and Hindu, to live as friendly neighbours
in the Indian Sub-continent. It is a pity that even our leaders have not
the courage to take their stand upon that truth and to insist upon its
application to India and thereby secure the minimum for our national
salvation.

\[18\] In any case, we are now face to face with a first-rate crisis,
the like of which has not been seen even in the long and eventful
history of Islam. It is not the question of a sect or of a community
going down; it is the crisis of the whole future of our eighty million
Muslims, who, till only yesterday, were the custodians of the glory of
Islam in India and the defenders of the frontiers of India.

\[19\] Such is the nature of this crisis. Dangerous as it is, there is
no need to despair. We can survive it, and have a still greater future,
if only we all answer this appeal like Muslims, oppose the Indian
Federation, and support the Pakistan Federation and do that at once.

\[20\] Let us make no mistake about it. The issue is now or never.
Either we live or perish for ever. The future is ours, if we live up to
our faith. It does not lie in the lap of the gods: it rests in our own
hands. We alone can make or mar it. The history of the last century is
full of open warnings to us, and they are as plain as were ever given to
any nation. Shall it be said of us that we ignored all those warnings,
betrayed our ancient nationhood into the Indian Federation, and let our
Islamic heritage perish throughout the Sub-continent of India?  


> > Rahmat Ali  
> >  (Choudhary )  
> > Mohd. Aslam Khan  
> >  (Khattak)  
> > Sheikh Mohd. Sadiq  
> >  (Sahibzada)  
> > Inayat Ullah Khan  
> >  (of Charsaddah)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp) --
