+++
title = "Cult substructure"
+++

To expand: There are few points.

Euro-American academia has a bit of a cult-like structure to it, i.e., there are certain beliefs that most of its practitioners don't challenge. For e.g., at the highest level the peer-review/journal publication/impact factor fetish. Thus, practices which are harmful to the field or simply unethical (sophisticated plagiarism & fake result production) are rampant. The degree varies from field to field & has some correlation with how ethnically diverse it is. A field which is dominated by people of Western Euro
ancestry, with few non-Euro ancestry folks tends to be more susceptible for certain cult nostrums taking root. For e.g.,paleontology is predominantly peopled by such folk; thus, even though it is rather close to the foundations of biology, it is overrun by the fads of navyonmAda & many of its younger practitioners believe in contra-biological constructions of that unmAda. 

Indology is structural v.similar. Even though it is the study of H & counterreligious traditions associated with H, it is rather uniform & doesn't have many H pracititioners. Moreover, it (especially its dominant American flavor) has some deep ties to the foundational movements behind navyonmAda (recall the graph we posted few days back). Thus, it has deeprooted links to that stream of thought -- as we have said navyonmAda is a svabhAva-vairin of ours. The occidental academe (like the Indian one) is rather "incestuous", i.e., the same people see each other in conferences of certain societies; have peer-review networks; come from comparable socio-mental backgrounds, which are quite unlike those of H. e.g. I heard some Americans talking about some bears & buffaloes or something like that. I thought they were talking of some animal fight; soon, I learnt they were talking about their favorite sports (either base- or foot- ball -- don't recall) teams. Thus, they have their own shared experience, which includes consumption of mada at the maNDapa & gobbling down large crustaceans much gusto. None of these intersect with the world of a v1. Thus, even if some of them were sympathetic to the v1s the bonds of the ingroup would override any desire to fight for an alien culture/people. 