+++
title = "121 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: **Sir Syed Ahmed on the Present State of Indian Politics,
Consisting of Speeches and Letters Reprinted from the "Pioneer"**
(Allahabad: The Pioneer Press, 1888), pp. 29-53. Modern facsimile
version (Lahore: Sang-e-Meel Publications, 1982). Translator unknown.
The text presented here has been slightly edited for classroom use, and
its punctuation slightly improved, by FWP. Paragraph numbers, and some
paragraph breaks, and annotations in square brackets have been added by
FWP. The original spelling have been retained; all the footnotes are
original. NOTE: In virtually every place where the *Pioneer*'s
translation says "nation," the Urdu word is actually "*qaum*," or
"community."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*[Sir Sayyid's introductory speech on these issues: Lucknow,
1887](txt_sir_sayyid_lucknow_1887.html)\*  
\*[The Urdu text of this 1888
speech](txt_sir_sayyid_meerut_1888_urdu.pdf)\*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SPEECH OF SIR SYED AHMED  
AT MEERUT \[1888\]

> *At the invitation of the Mahomedans of Meerut, Sir Syed Ahmed went to
> that town on the 14th of March \[1888\], and delivered two lectures,
> one on education and one on politics. He was met at the station by the
> leading Mahomedan gentlemen of Meerut, who raised a cheer as the train
> drew up at the platform, and threw flowers over him when he alighted.
> Carpets and red cloth were at once spread along the ground from the
> railway-carriage to the road. The first lecture was given at 8 A.M. in
> the durbar tent of the Meerut fair. Four hundred and fifty chairs had
> been placed in the tent, and not only were all filled, but a large
> number of people had to stand. The audience rose as the Syed entered.
> An address was first read, after which Sir Syed Ahmed delivered his
> first lecture which lasted an hour and twenty minutes, and was
> received with rapt attention. It was devoted to the condition of the
> Mahomedans and to the need of education; and was very effective, the
> audience being, at times, moved to tears. Next day in the evening he
> gave his second lecture on politics. As the Nauchandi Fair was at its
> height, the audience was very crowded, not less than seven or eight
> hundred being present, including many people belonging to the Delhi,
> \[\[30\]\] Saharanpur, Moradabad, and other districts. The audience
> was mainly Mahomedan, all the great Raïses being present, and great
> appreciation of the speech was manifested. At the close three cheers
> were given for the lecturer, and then the people adjourned to another
> tent where a tea-party was held in honour of Sir Syed, some hundred
> and fifty people sitting down to the repast. The utmost enthusiasm
> prevailed, and at the close Maulvi Hashmat Ullah, Statutory Civilian,
> made a speech, expressing the prevailing sentiment, and thanking the
> Syed for the great service he had rendered the Mahomedans. The
> political speech was as follows:--*

  
 {1} I think it expedient that I should first of all tell you the
reason why I am about to address you on the subject of tonight's
discourse. You know, gentlemen, that, from a long time, our friends the
Bengalis have shown very warm feeling on political matters. Three years
ago they founded a very big assembly, which holds its sittings in
various places, and they have given it the name "National Congress." We
and our nation gave no thought to the matter. And we should be very glad
for our friends the Bengalis to be successful, if we were of the opinion
that they had by their education and ability made such progress as
rendered them fit for the claims they put forward. But although they are
superior to us in education, yet we have never admitted that they have
reached that level to which they lay claim to have attained.
Nevertheless I have never, in any article, or in any speech, or even in
conversation \[\[31\]\] in any place, put difficulties or desired to put
difficulties in the way of any of their undertakings. It has never been
my wish to oppose any people or any nation who wish to make progress,
and who have raised themselves up to that rank to which they wish to
attain and for which they are qualified. But my friends the Bengalis
have made a most unfair and unwarrantable interference with my nation,
and therefore it is my duty to show clearly what this unwarrantable
interference has been, and to protect my nation from the evils that may
arise from it. It is quite wrong to suppose that I have girded up my
loins for the purpose of fighting my friends the Bengalis; my object is
only to make my nation understand what I consider conducive to its
prosperity. It is incumbent on me to show what evils would befall my
nation from joining in the opinions of the Bengalis: I have no other
purpose in view.

 {2} The unfair interference of these people is this — that they
have tried to produce a false impression that the Mahomedans of these
Provinces agree with their opinions. But we also are inhabitants of this
country, and we cannot be ignorant of the real nature of the events that
are taking place in our own North-West Provinces and Oudh, however their
colour may be painted in newspapers, and whatever aspect they may be
made to assume. It is possible that the people of England, who are
ignorant of the real facts, may be deceived on seeing their false
representations; but we and the \[\[32\]\] people of our country, who
know all the circumstances, can never be thus imposed on. Our Mahomedan
nation has hitherto sat silent. It was quite indifferent as to what the
Babus of Bengal, the Hindus of these Provinces, and the English and
Eurasian inhabitants of India, might be doing. But they have now been
wrongly tampering with our nation. In some districts they have brought
pressure to bear on Mahomedans to make them join the Congress. I am
sorry to say that they never said anything to those people who are
powerful and are actually Raïses \[nobles\] and are counted the leaders
of the nation; but they brought unfair pressure to bear on such people
as could be subjected to their influence.

 {3} In some districts they pressed men by the weight of authority,
in others they forced them in this way — saying that the business they
had at heart could not prosper unless they took part; or they led them
to suppose that they could not get bread if they held aloof. They even
did not hold back from offering the temptation of money. Where is the
man that does not know this? Who does not know who were the three or
four Mahomedans of the North-West Provinces who took part with them, and
why they took part? The simple truth is they were nothing more than
hired men. (*Cheers.*) Such people they took to Madras, and having got
them there, said, "These are the sons of Nawabs, and these are Raïses of
such-and-such districts, and these are such-and-such great Mahomedans,"
whilst everybody knows how the men were bought. We \[\[33\]\] know very
well the people of our own nation, and that they have been induced to go
either by pressure, or by folly, or by love of notoriety, or by poverty.
If any Raïs on his own inclination and opinion join them, we do not care
a lot. By one man's leaving us our crowd is not diminished. But this
telling of lies that their men are landlords and Nawabas of
such-and-such places; and their attempt to give a false impression that
the Mahomedans have joined them — this is a most unwarrantable
interference with our nation. When matters took such a turn, then it was
necessary that I should warn my nation of their misrepresentations, in
order that others should not fall into the trap; and that I should point
out to my nation that the few who went to Madras, went by pressure, or
from some temptation, or in order to help their profession, or to gain
notoriety; or were bought. (*Cheers.*) No Raïs from here took part in
it.

 {4} This was the cause of my giving a speech at Lucknow \[in
1887\], contrary to my wont, on the evils of the National Congress; and
this is the cause also of today's speech. And I want to show this: that
except Badruddin Tyabji, who is a gentleman of very high position and
for whom I have great respect, no leading Mahomedan took part in it. He
did take part, but I think he made a mistake. He has written me two
letters, one of which was after the publication of my Lucknow speech. I
think that he wants me to point out those things in the Congress which
are opposed to the interests of Mahomedans, in order that he may exclude
them \[\[34\]\] from the discussion. But in reality the whole affair is
bad for Mahomedans. However, let us grant that Badruddin Tyabji's
opinion is different from ours; yet it cannot be said that his opinion
is the opinion of the whole nation, or that his sympathy with the
Congress implies the sympathy of the whole community. My friend there,
Mirza Ismail Khan, who has just come from Madras, told me that no
Mahomedan Raïs of Madras took part in the Congress. It is said that
Prince Humayun Jah joined it. Let us suppose that Humayun Jah, whom I do
not know, took part in it; yet our position as a nation will not suffer
simply because two men stand aside. No one can say that because these
two Raïses took part in it, that therefore the whole nation has joined
it. To say that the Mahomedans have joined it is quite wrong, and is a
false accusation against our nation. If my Bengali friends had not
adopted this wrong course of action, I should have had nothing to do
with the National Congress, nor with its members, nor with the wrong
aspirations for which they have raised such an uproar. Let the delegates
of the National Congress become the stars of heaven, or the sun itself —
I am delighted. But it was necessary and incumbent on me to show the
falsity of the impression which, by taking a few Mahomedans with them by
pressure or by temptation, they wished to spread, that the whole
Mahomedan nation had joined them. (*Cheers.*)

 {5} Gentlemen, what I am about to say is not only useful for my own
nation, but also for my Hindu \[\[35\]\] brothers of these Provinces,
who from some wrong notions have taken part in this Congress. At last
they also will be sorry for it — although perhaps they will never have
occasion to be sorry; for it is beyond the region of possibility that
the proposals of the Congress should be carried out fully. These wrong
notions which have grown up in our Hindu fellow-countrymen, and on
account of which they think it expedient to join the Congress, depend
upon two things. The first thing is this: that they think that as both
they themselves and the Bengalis are Hindus, they have nothing to fear
from the growth of their influence. The second thing is this: that some
Hindus — I do not speak of all the Hindus but only of *some* — think
that by joining the Congress and by increasing the power of the Hindus,
they will perhaps be able to suppress those Mahomedan religious rites
which are opposed to their own, and, by all uniting, annihilate them.
But I frankly advise my Hindu friends that if they wish to cherish their
religious rites, they can never be successful in this way. If they are
to be successful, it can only be by friendship and agreement. The
business cannot be done by force; and the greater the enmity and
animosity, the greater will be their loss. I will take Aligarh as an
example. There Mahomedans and Hindus are in agreement. The
Dasehra**[/1/](#n01)** and Moharrum**[/2/](#n02)** fell together for
three years, and no one knows what took place \[that is, things remained
quiet\]. It is worth notice how, when an agitation was started against
cow-killing, the \[\[36\]\] sacrifice of cows increased enormously, and
religious animosity grew on both sides, as all who live in India well
know. They should understand that those things that can be done by
friendship and affection, cannot be done by any pressure or force.

 {6} If these ideas which I have expressed about the Hindus of these
provinces be correct, and their condition be similar to that of the
Mahomedans, then they ought to continue to cultivate friendship with us.
Let those who live in Bengal 'eat up their own heads' \[that is, involve
themselves in difficulties\]. What they want to do, let them do it. What
they don't want to do, let them not do it. Neither their disposition nor
their general condition resembles that of the people of this country.
Then what connection have the people of this country with them? As
regards Bengal, there is, as far as I am aware, in Lower Bengal a much
larger proportion of Mahomedans than Bengalis. And if you take the
population of the whole of Bengal, nearly half are Mahomedans and
something over half are Bengalis. Those Mahomedans are quite unaware of
what sort of thing the National Congress is. No Mahomedan Raïs of Bengal
took part in it, and the ordinary Bengalis who live in the districts are
also as ignorant of it as the Mahomedans. In Bengal the Mahomedan
population is so great that if the aspirations of those Bengalis who are
making so loud an agitation be fulfilled, it will be extremely difficult
for the Bengalis to remain in peace even in Bengal. These proposals of
the Congress are extremely inexpedient for the country, which is
inhabited \[\[37\]\] by two different nations — who drink from the same
well, breathe the air of the same city, and depend on each other for its
life. To create animosity between them is good neither for peace, nor
for the country, nor for the town.

 {7} After this long preface I wish to explain what method my nation
— nay, rather the whole people of this country — ought to pursue in
political matters. I will treat in regular sequence of the political
questions of India, in order that you may have full opportunity of
giving your attention to them. The first of all is this — In whose hands
shall the administration and the Empire of India rest? Now, suppose that
all English, and the whole English army, were to leave India, taking
with them all their cannon and their splendid weapons and everything,
then who would be rulers of India? Is it possible that under these
circumstances two nations — the Mahomedans and the Hindus — could sit on
the same throne and remain equal in power? Most certainly not. It is
necessary that one of them should conquer the other and thrust it down.
To hope that both could remain equal is to desire the impossible and the
inconceivable. At the same time you must remember that although the
number of Mahomedans is less than that of the Hindus, and although they
contain far fewer people who have received a high English education, yet
they must not be thought insignificant or weak. Probably they would be
by themselves enough to maintain their own position. But suppose they
were not. \[\[38\]\] Then our Mussalman brothers, the Pathans, would
come out as a swarm of locusts from their mountain valleys, and make
rivers of blood to flow from their frontier in the north to the extreme
end of Bengal. This thing — who, after the departure of the English,
would be conquerors — would rest on the will of God. But until one
nation had conquered the other and made it obedient, peace could not
reign in the land. This conclusion is based on proofs so absolute that
no one can deny it.

 {8} Now, suppose that the English are not in India, and that one of
the nations of India has conquered the other, whether the Hindus the
Mahomedans, or the Mahomedans the Hindus. At once some other nation of
Europe, such as the French, the Germans, the Portuguese, or the
Russians, will attack India. Their ships of war, covered with iron and
loaded with flashing cannon and weapons, will surround her on all sides.
At that time who will protect India? Neither Hindus can save nor
Mahomedans; neither the Rajputs nor my brave brothers the Pathans. And
what will be the result? The result will be this: that foreigners will
rule India, because the state of India is such that if foreign Powers
attack her, no one has the power to oppose them. From this reasoning it
follows of necessity that an empire not of any Indian race, but of
foreigners, will be established in India. Now, will you please decide
which of the nations of Europe you would like to rule over India? I ask
if you would like Germany; whose subjects weep for heavy taxation and
the stringency of their military \[\[39\]\] service? Would you like the
rule of France? Stop! I fancy you would perhaps like the rule of the
Russians, who are very great friends of India and of Mahomedans, and
under whom the Hindus will live in great comfort, and who will protect
with the tenderest care the wealth and property which they have acquired
under English rule? (*Laughter.*) Everybody knows something or other
about these powerful kingdoms of Europe. Everyone will admit that their
governments are far worse — nay, beyond comparison worse — than the
British Government. It is, therefore, necessary that for the peace of
India and for the progress of everything in India, the English
Government should remain for many ycars — in fact forever!

 {9} When it is granted that the maintenance of the British
Government, and of no other, is necessary for the progress of our
country, then I ask whether there is any example in the world of one
nation having conquered and ruled over another nation, and that
conquered nation claiming it as a right that they should have
representative government. The principle of representative government is
that it is government by a nation, and that the nation in question rules
over its own people and its own land. Can you tell me of any case in the
world's history in which any foreign nation, after conquering another
and establishing its empire over it, has given representative government
to the conquered people? Such a thing has never taken place. It is
necessary for those who have \[\[40\]\] conquered us to maintain their
Empire on a strong basis. When rulers and ruled are one nation,
representative government is possible. For example, in Afghanistan, of
which Amir Abdur Rahman Khan is the ruler, where all the people are
brother-Afghans, it might be possible. If they want, they can have
representative government. But to think that representative government
can be established in a country over which a foreign race rules, is
utterly vain, nor can a trace of such a state of things be discovered in
the history of the world. Therefore to ask that we should be appointed
by election to the Legislative Council is opposed to the true principles
of government, and no government whatever, whether English or German or
French or Russian or Musalman, could accept this principle. The meaning
of it is this: "Abandon the rule of the country and put it in our
hands." Hence, it is in no way expedient that our nation should join in
and echo these monstrous proposals.

 {10} The next question is about the Budget. They say: "Give us
power to vote on the Budget. Whatever expenses we may grant shall be
granted, whatever expenses we do not grant shall not be granted." Now,
consider to what sort of government this principle is applicable. It is
suited to such a country as is, according to the fundamental principles
of politics, adapted also for representative government. The rulers and
the ruled must be of the same nation. In such a country the people have
also the right of deciding matters of peace and war. \[\[41\]\] But this
principle is not adapted to a country in which one foreign race has
conquered another. The English have conquered India, and all of us along
with it. And just as we made the country obedient and our slave, so the
English have done with us. Is it then consonant with the principles of
empire that they should ask us whether they should fight Burma or not?
Is it consistent with any principle of empire? In the times of the
Mahomedan empire, would it have been consistent with the principles of
rule that, when the Emperor was about to make war on a Province of
India, he should have asked his subject-peoples whether he should
conquer that country or not? Whom should he have asked? Should he have
asked those whom he had conquered and had made slaves, and whose
brothers he also wanted to make his slaves? Our nation has itself
wielded empire, and people of our nation are even now ruling. Is there
any principle of empire by which rule over foreign races may be
maintained in this manner?

 {11} The right to give an opinion on the Budget depends also on
another principle, which is this: that in a country in which the people
accept the responsibility for all the expenses of government, and are
ready with their lives and property to discharge it — in such a country
they have a right to give their opinion on the Budget. They can say;
"Undertake this expense," or "Leave that alone." And whatever the
expense of the State affairs, it is then their duty to pay it. For
example in England, in \[\[42\]\] a time of necessity the whole wealth
and property of everyone, from the Duke to the cobbler, is at the
disposal of the Government. It is the duty of the people to give all
their money and all their property to the Government, because they are
responsible for giving Government all that it may require. And they say:
"Yes, yes; take it! Yes; take it. Spend the money. Beat the enemy. Beat
the enemy." These are conditions under which people have a right to
decide matters about the Budget.

 {12} The principle that underlies the Government of India is of a
wholly different nature. In India, the Government has itself to bear the
responsibility of maintaining its authority; and it must, in the way
that seems to it fittest, raise money for its army and for the expense
of the empire. Government has a right to take a fixed proportion of the
produce of the land as land-revenue, and is like a contractor who
bargains on this income to maintain the empire. It has not the power to
increase the amount settled as land-revenue. However great its
necessity, it cannot say to the zamindars, "increase your
contributions." Nor do the zemindars think that even in a time of
necessity, Government has any right to increase its fixed tax on land.
If at this time there were a war with Russia, would all the *zemindars*
and *taluqdars***[/3/](#n03)** be willing to give double their
assessment to Government? They would not give a *pice***[/4/](#n04)**
more. Then what right have they to interfere and say, "So much should
\[\[43\]\] be spent, and so much should not be spent"? The method of the
British Government is that of all Kings and Asiatic Empires. When you
will not, even in time of war, give a pice more of your land-revenue,
what right have you to interfere in the Budget?

 {13} The real motive for scrutinising the Budget is economy.
Economy is a thing of such a nature that everyone has a regard for it in
his household arrangements. It is a crude notion that Government has no
regard for economy and squanders its money; Government practises economy
as far as possible. Our Government is so extremely miserly that it will
not uselessly give anyone a single pice. Until great necessity arise and
great pressure be brought to bear on it, it will not spend a pice. It
has completely forgotten the generosity of the former Emperors. The
Kings of later times presented poets and authors with estates and
*lakhs* \[hundreds of thousands\] of rupees. Our Government does not
spend a pice in that way. What greater economy can there be than this?
Instead of rewards it gives authors copyright. That also it does after
taking two rupees for registering. It writes a letter as a *sanad*
\[warrant\], and says that for forty years, no other man may print the
book. Print it, sell it, and make your profit: this is a reward to you
from Government.

 {14} People look at the income of the Government and say it is much
greater than that of former empires, but they don't think of the
expenses of Government, and how much they have increased. \[\[44\]\] In
the old days, a sword of fifteen or twenty rupees, a gun of ten or
fifteen rupees, a card-board ammunition bag, and a coil of fuse was
enough equipment for a soldier. Now look and see how the expenses of the
army have increased in modern times, and what progress has been made in
arms, and how they are daily improving, and the old ones becoming
useless. If a new kind of gun or cannon be invented in France or
Germany, is it possible for Government not to abandon all its old kinds
of guns or cannon and adopt the new? When the expenses have grown so
much, the wonder is how on earth Government manages to carry on its
business on the small tax which it raises. (*Cheers.*) Perhaps many
people will not like what I am going to say, but I will tell them openly
a thing which took place. When after the Mutiny, the Hon'ble Mr. Wilson
was Financial Minister, he brought forward a law for imposing a tax, and
said in his speech that this tax would remain for five years only. An
honourable English friend of mine showed me the speech and asked me if I
liked it. I read it and said that I had never seen so foolish a
Financial Minister as the Hon'ble Mr. Wilson. He was surprised. I said
that it was wrong to restrict it to five years. The condition of India
was such that it ought to be imposed forever. Consider for a moment that
Government has to protect its friends the Afghans, and their protection
is necessary. It is necessary for Government to strengthen the frontier.
If in England there had been any need for strength\[\[45\]\]ening a
frontier, then the people would themselves have doubled or trebled their
taxes to meet the necessity. In Burma there are expenses to be borne,
although we hope that in the future it will be a source of income. If
under such circumstances, Government increase the salt-tax by eight
annas per maund, is this thing such that we ought to make complaints? If
this increase of tax be spread over everybody, it will not amount to
half or quarter of a pice. On this to raise an uproar, to oppose
Government, to accuse it of oppression — what utter nonsense and
injustice! And in spite of this they claim the right to decide matters
about the Budget!

 {15} When it has been settled that the English Government is
necessary, then it is useful for India that its rule should be
established on the firmest possible basis. And it is desirable for
Government that for its stability it should maintain an army of such a
size as it may think expedient, with a proper equipment of officers; and
that it should in every district appoint officials in whom it can place
complete confidence, in order that if a conspiracy arise in any place
they may apply the remedy. I ask you, is it the duty of Government or
not, to appoint European officers in its empire, to stop conspiracies
and rebellions? Be just, and examine your hearts, and tell me if it is
not a natural law that people should confide more in men of their own
nation. If any Englishman tells you anything which is true, yet you
remain doubtful. But when a man of your \[\[46\]\] own nation, or your
family; tells you a thing privately in your house, you believe it at
once. What reason can you then give why Government, in the
administration of so big an empire, should not appoint, as custodians of
secrets and as givers of every kind of information, men of her own
nationality; but must leave all these matters to you, and say, "Do what
you like"? These things which I have said are such necessary matters of
State administration that whatever nation may be holding the empire,
they cannot be left out of sight. It is the business of a good and just
Government, after having secured the above-mentioned essentials, to give
honour to the people of the land over which it rules, and to give them
as high appointments as it can. But, in reality; there are certain
appointments to which we can claim no right; we cannot claim the post of
head executive authority in any *zila*.**[/5/](#n05)** There are
hundreds of secrets which Government cannot disclose. If Government
appoint us to such responsible and confidential posts, it is her favour.
We will certainly discharge the duties faithfully and without divulging
her secrets. But it is one thing to claim it as a right, and another for
Government, believing us to be faithful and worthy of confidence, to
give us the posts. Between these two things there is the difference
between Heaven and Earth.

 {16} How can we possibly claim as a right those things on which the
very existence and \[\[47\]\] strength of the Government depends? We
most certainly have not the right to put those people in the Council
whom we want, and to keep out those whom we don't want; to pass those
laws that we want, and to veto those laws that we dislike. If we have
the right to elect members for the Legislative Council, there is no
reason why we should not have the right to elect members for the
Imperial Council. In the Imperial Council thousands of matters of
foreign policy and State secrets are discussed. Can you with justice say
that we Indians have a right to claim those things? To make an agitation
for such things can only bring misfortune on us and on the country. It
is opposed to the true principles of government, and is harmful for the
peace of the country. The aspirations of our friends the Bengalis have
made such progress that they want to scale a height to which it is
beyond their powers to attain. But if I am not in error, I believe that
the Bengalis have never at any period held sway over a particle of land.
They are altogether ignorant of the method by which a foreign race can
maintain its rule over other races. Therefore reflect on the doings of
your ancestors, and be not unjust to the British Government to whom God
has given the rule of India; and look honestly and see what is necessary
for it to do, to maintain its empire and its hold on the country. You
can appreciate these matters; but they cannot who have never held a
country in their hands nor won a victory.

 {17} Oh! my brother Musalmans! I again remind you that you have
ruled \[\[48\]\] nations, and have for centuries held different
countries in your grasp. For seven hundred years in India you have had
Imperial sway. You know what it is to rule. Be not unjust to that nation
which is ruling over you, and think also on this: how upright is her
rule. Of such benevolence as the English Government shows to the foreign
nations under her, there is no example in the history of the world. See
what freedom she has given in her laws, and how careful she is to
protect the rights of her subjects. She has not been backward in
promoting the progress of the natives of India and in throwing open to
them high appointments. At the commencement of her rule, except
clerkships and kaziships \[judgeships\] there was nothing. The kazis of
the pargana, who were called commissioners, decided small civil suits
and received very small pay. Up to 1832 or 1833 this state of things
lasted.

 {18} If my memory is not wrong, it was in the time of Lord William
Bentinck that natives of India began to get honourable posts. The
positions of Munsif, Subordinate Judge, and Deputy Collector, on
respectable pay, were given to natives, and progress has been steadily
going on ever since. In the Calcutta High Court a Kashmiri Pandit was
first appointed equal to the English Judges. After him Bengalis have
been appointed as High Court Judges. At this time there are perhaps
three Bengalis in the Calcutta High Court, and in the same way some
Hindus in Bombay and Madras. It was your bad fortune that there was for
a long time no Mahomedan High Court Judge, but now \[\[49\]\] there is
one in the Allahabad High court. (*Cheers.*) Native High Court Judges
can cancel the decision of English Judges and Collectors. They can ask
them for explanations. The subordinate native officers also have full
authority in their posts. A Deputy Collector, a Sub-Judge, or a Munsif
decides cases according to his opinion, and is independent of the
opinion of the Judge or Collector. None of these things have been
acquired by fighting or opposition. As far as you have made yourselves
worthy of the confidence of Government, to that extent you have received
high positions. Make yourselves her friends, and prove to her that your
friendship with her is like that of the English and the Scotch. After
this what you have to claim, claim — on condition that you are qualified
for it.

 {19} About this political controversy, in which my Hindu brothers
of this Province — to whom I have given some advice, and who have, I
think, joined from some wrong notions — have taken part, I wish to give
some advice to my Mahomedan brothers. I do not think the Bengali
politics useful for my brother Mussalmans. Our Hindu brothers of these
provinces are leaving us and are joining the Bengalis. Then we ought to
unite with that nation with whom we can unite. No Mahomedan can say that
the English are not "People of the Book." No Mahomedan can deny this:
that God has said that no people of other religions can be friends of
Mahomedans except the Christians. He who had read the *Koran* and
believes it, he can know that our nation cannot expect \[\[50\]\]
friendship and affection from any other people.**[/6/](#n06)** At this
time our nation is in a bad state as regards education and wealth, but
God has given us the light of religion, and the *Koran* is present for
our guidance, which has ordained them and us to be friends.

 {20} Now God has made them rulers over us. Therefore we should
cultivate friendship with them, and should adopt that method by which
their rule may remain permanent and firm in India, and may not pass into
the hands of the Bengalis. This is our true friendship with our
Christian rulers, and we should not join those people who wish to see us
thrown into a ditch. If we join the political movement of the Bengalis
our narion will reap loss, for we do not want to become subjects of the
Hindus instead of the subjects of the "People of the Book." And as far
as we can we should remain faithful to the English Government. By this
my meaning is not that I am inclined towards their religion. Perhaps no
one has written such severe books as I have against their religion, of
which I am an enemy. But whatever their religion, God has called men of
that religion our friends. We ought — not on account of their religion,
but because of the order of God — to be friendly and faithful to them.
If our Hindu brothers of these Provinces, and the Bengalis of Bengal,
and the Brahmans of Bombay, and the Hindu Madrasis \[\[51\]\] of Madras,
wish to separate themselves from us, let them go, and trouble yourself
about it not one whit. We can mix with the English in a social way. We
can eat with them, they can eat with us. Whatever hope we have of
progress is from them. The Bengalis can in no way assist our progress.
And when the *Koran* itself directs us to be friends with them, then
there is no reason why we should not be their friends. But it is
necessary for us to act as God has said. Besides this, God has made them
rulers over us. Our Prophet has said that if God place over you a black
negro slave as ruler, you must obey him. See, there is here in the
meeting a European, Mr. Beck. He is not black. He is very white.
(*Laughter.*) Then why should we not be obedient and faithful to those
white-faced men whom God has put over us, and why should we disobey the
order of God?

 {21} I do not say that in the British Government all things are
good. Nobody can say that there is any Government in the world, or has
ever been, in which there is nothing bad, be the Government Mahomedan,
Hindu, or Christian. There is now the Sultan of Turkey; who is a
Mahomedan Emperor, and of whom we are proud. Even his Mahomedan subjects
make complaints of his government. This is the condition of the Khedive
of Egypt. Look at the Governments of Europe, and examine the condition
of the Government of London itself. Thousands of men complain against
Government. There is no Government with which everybody is satisfied.

 {22} \[\[52\]\] If we also have some complaints against the English
Government, it is no wonderful thing. People are not even grateful to
God for His government. I do not tell you to ask nothing from
Government. I will myself fight on your behalf for legitimate objects.
But ask for such things as they can give you, or such things to which,
having due regard to the administration of the country, you can claim a
right. If you ask for such things as Government cannot give you, then it
is not the fault of Government, but the folly of the askers. But what
you ask, do it not in this fashion — that you accuse Government in very
action of oppression, abuse the highest officials, use the hardest words
you can find for Lord Lytton and Lord Dufferin, call all Englishmen
tyrants, and blacken columns on columns of newspapers with these
subjects. You can gain nothing this way. God had made them your rulers.
This is the will of God. We should be content with the will of God. And
in obedience to the will of God, you should remain friendly and faithful
to them. Do not do this: bring false accusations against them and give
birth to enmity. This is neither wisdom nor in accordance with our holy
religion.

 {23} Therefore the method we ought to adopt is this: that we should
hold ourselves aloof from this political uproar, and reflect on our
condition — that we are behindhand in education and are deficient in
wealth. Then we should try to improve the education of our nation. Now
our condition is this: that the Hindus, if they wish, can ruin us in an
hour. \[\[53\]\] The internal trade is entirely in their hands. The
external trade is in possession of the English. Let the trade which is
with the Hindus remain with them. But try to snatch from their hands the
trade in the produce of the county which the English now enjoy and draw
profit from. Tell them: "Take no further trouble. We will ourselves take
the leather of our country to England and sell it there. Leave off
picking up the bones of our country's animals. We will ourselves collect
them and take them to America. Do not fill ships with the corn and
cotton of our country. We will fill our own ships and will take it
ourselves to Europe!" Never imagine that Government will put
difficulties in your way in trade. But the acquisition of all these
things depends on education. When you shall have fully acquired
education, and true education shall have made its home in your hearts,
then you will know what rights you can legitimately demand of the
British Government. And the result of this will be that you will also
obtain honourable positions in the Government, and will acquire wealth
in the higher ranks of trade. But to make friendship with the Bengalis
in their mischievous political proposals, and join in them, can bring
only harm. If my nation follow my advice they will draw benefit from
trade and education. Otherwise, remember that Government will keep a
very sharp eye on you because you are very quarrelsome, very brave,
great soldiers, and great fighters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
NOTES

**[/1/](#m01)** A Hindu religious festival.  
**[/2/](#m02)** A Mahomedan religious festival.  
**[/3/](#m03)** Large landholders.  
**[/4/](#m04)** A farthing.  
**[/5/](#m05)** The position of Collector.  
**[/6/](#m06)** Thou shalt surely find the most violent of all men in
enmity against the true believers to be the Jews and the idolaters: and
thou shalt surely find those among them to be the most inclinable to
entertain friendship for the true believers, who say "we are
Christians."-- (*Koran*, Chapt. V).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on Sir Sayyid](../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#sirsayyid) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp) --  

  
  

