+++
title = "12 ROADS, ROADS, AND STILL MORE ROADS"

+++
Les routes, les chemins de fer, ces grands moteurs de la civilisation. 

-IMPERIAL PROSECUTOR, Agen, 1867 

"ROADS, MORE ROADS and always roads," wrote the prefect of Loiret in September 1867, "this sums up the political economy of the countryside." Until roads spread, many rural communities remained imprisoned in semi-isolation, limited participants in the economy and politics of the nation: France. 

Historical geography is in large part the tale of men struggling against space, and of the efforts made to tame space by creating ever more efficient, more reliable means of communication. In the beginning space is the master; its distances run wild, overwhelming man. Gradually space is conquered, distances are tamed, brought to heel or, rather, increasingly to wheel. Space becomes manageable. This process was still in progress through much of the nineteenth century. Many who lived when the century ended remembered the days when familiar places were farther, vaster, and more daunting too. That was what Eugène Le Roy remarked in 1899: "All these lands now are full of roads and highways... but in the days I speak of [and they were not far off] the forest was a great deal bigger than it is today... and one could discern only two bad roads that skirted it." Everything is in that passage: the novelty in 1899 of a land crisscrossed by new thoroughfares, the old untamed order of yesterday and its more chilling scale, the paucity of the old roads and their discouraging state. 

Yet France did not lack roads. Arthur Young had found reason to admire these monuments to the enterprise of the central government, but he had also found them empty, silent, "a perfect desert," even at the gates of Paris. Young had attributed this to the absurdity and oppression of the government. But it was due rather to the layout of the roads. A system built to serve the government and the cities and lacking a supporting network of secondary thoroughfares had little to do with popular habit or need. Administrative highways, a historian of the center called them, made for troops to march on and for tax revenues to reach the treasury. Lucien Gachon has noted the lack of 

[[196]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

correspondence between rural habitat and highways, between local roads and main roads. Both Roger Thabault writing about Mazières and Ernest Lavisse remembering the Thiérache confirm this. Houses were independent of the roads, sited with no regard for them or indeed so as to avoid them: a countryside still living, as it had done for centuries, turned in upon itself.8 

The road-building policies of the first half of the century did little to change this. Napoleon's roads had been built with an eye to strategic advantages; the Restoration tried to restore and complete the ravaged network it inherited; and Louis Philippe's ministers did the same, which was not very much, until the Duchesse de Berry's ill-fated rising in 1832 persuaded them to change their ways. A crash building program in eight departments endowed both the Atlantic west with a system of strategic roads and the Department of Roads and Bridges with the training for the more enterprising role it was to undertake after 1837.\* The department's main task was rather less to build new roads than, by repairing, grading, and servicing the existing highways and building solid bridges, to make troop movements possible in all weathers. This meant that, though the highway network was not greatly expanded, its viability improved immensely. In 1824 of 33,536 km of national highways only about 42 percent to 44 percent needed no more than regular upkeep. By the late 1830's about 70 percent of 34,512 km had been made serviceable; by 1845 almost the entire system, some 36,000 km, stood ready to be used. This figure would not alter markedly until after the First World War (in which the network comprised roughly 38,000 km).\* 

What has to be remembered, however, is that the highway system was only a skeleton. The main roads, to which most of our statistics refer until the 1860's, stood in the same relation to France as the Nile to Egypt: fertilizing only a narrow strip along their course, becoming nationally relevant only in terms of their tributaries and of what irrigation could be based on them. There was little such expansion before the 1860's, and the construction of a far-reaching road network that encompassed the entire country was only taken in hand under the Third Republic. 

The same was true of the first railway lines, which fanned out in the 1840's and especially the 1850's and left aside vast areas where the old way of life survived untouched. The railways took some time to make their mark; so that at Douai, in the industrial north, where a railway station was inaugurated in 1846, traffic for the first few years was so slight that the more enterprising among the bourgeoisie organized ballgames in it." 

\* The departments in question were Sarthe, Mayenne, Ille-et-Vilaine, Maine-et-Loire, Loire- Inférieure, Vendée, Deux-Sèvres, and Charente-Inférieure (see Henri Cavaillès, La Route fran- çaise, p. 203). As an officer pointed out: "Exécuter ainsi grand nombre de routes nouvelles, c'était offrir le travail à bien des bras inoccupés, et dés lors dangereux.... Unir par des routes nombreuses et faciles la Vendée à l'intérieur de la France, c'était aplanir les obstacles qui l'avaient jusque là tenue dans l'isolement,... c'était user par un frottement salutaire ce vieux type Vendéen qui perd chaque jour de son originalité." (Archives de la Guerre, MR 1234, Vendée, 1840.) 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[197]]

As railways spread, the network was seen (by a very few) to be designed, as the highway system was, to serve special interests, not the needs of ordinary people. Railroads, created by urban capital, went where the interests of capital and of urban industries took them, not where people actually lived. Indeed, railways played no small part in the underdevelopment of the countryside. Their heavy capital needs, and those of the urban improvements for which the Second Empire is famous, drained the budget for the country roads. From 2.2 million francs in 1853, the budget of the rural road section of the Public Works Department dropped off to an average of only 1.6 million over the next seven years. In 1855 the prefect of Cantal complained that the important stretch between Aurillac and Mauriac was going to pieces for lack of upkeep, "an object of terror for the travelers, abandoned by the traffic, no longer of our time." Yet repairs were not undertaken until 1864; the road was reopened to traffic in 1867, but things were not really in shape until 1874. We are reminded of the plaint of the deputy of Nord in 1861 summing up the situation: "You have voted millions to embellish the cities, you have voted fine monuments and we, we are still in the mud up to our knees.” And in 1865 Marie-Thérèse Romieu noted what few city people bothered to regret, that the train glided by her village, but did so without stopping. In any case, the mesh of the railway network was much too wide to cover all the land: "How many villages only a few miles from the railway line are really more isolated today than in the days when the post chaise and the stagecoach crossed them or passed nearby!” 

Not that traffic was lacking. On the contrary, much traffic and a poor communications network were characteristic of the old society. The circulation was intense. Trails, paths, tracks, lanes, and causeways covered the countryside: rough roads where, as the peasants put it, the Good Lord did not often pass. They served private needs, going from village to village, from farm or hamlet to field, orchard, pasture, or bourg. They served professional pursuits, like the special trails followed by glassmakers, carriers or sellers of salt, potters; or those that led to forges, mines, quarries, and hemp fields; or those along which flax, hemp, linen, and yarn were taken to market. There were pilgrimage routes and procession trails (mostly along the crests), leading to a miraculous fountain or to the chapel of a healing saint; there were traditional walkways for marriage and funeral parties; there were tracks demarcating fields, or farms, or communes-and even drawing a border between dialects." 

Along these, and on the roads as well, people and goods traveled-first of all the local people. Agriculture has been called an involuntary transport industry. The peasant is a carrier and a driver. In industry, the machine is stable, its raw materials mobile. Here the land is fixed: plows, harrows, cattle have to be taken to the land and then away again. This makes for a lot of movement, even before we count other comers and goers: local people setting 

[[198]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

out to see relatives or to make a pilgrimage; migrants going off to town or tramping in and out for haying or harvest; journeymen-artisans on their tour de France; basketmakers, knife grinders, tinkers, porters, and stevedores, tramps, vagabonds, bohemians, recruits on their way to join their units, veterans returning home, troops marching from one garrison to another, rag-andbone merchants, Savoyard chimney sweeps, itinerant showmen and mountebanks, hawkers and peddlers from every part of France. 

Yet amid such immense activity, most of the circulation was limited in scope. Goods and products were exchanged wherever possible between neighboring complementary regions, say, cattle and chestnuts traded for wine and grain; and the greater part of the tonnage moved only over small distances." The peasant's world was compartmentalized into small areas defined by his interests. It lacked a general sense of the space around, restricted itself to certain confines and corridors, like that between the village and the market. His vision of space and scale was structured in terms of potential movement and of routines; he ignored nearby places that he skirted on his way to and fro, even forgot they existed if a change of routine put them off the frequented trail. As for travel outside familiar trails, it was not undertaken lightly. In the uplands of Lower Vivarais, even as late as the 1890's many had never gone beyond the few miles within which they followed their pasturing sheep: "Going any 

further would be to leave the pays—a big and difficult business."10 Travel beyond the limits of a good stiff hike was indeed a difficult and costly undertaking.\* Young Georges Haussmann, posted from Poitiers to Yssingeaux in Haute-Loire in the 1830's, took six full days to make the 340 km to Le Puy and then a seventh to cover the remaining 28 km to Yssingeaux over the terrible Col de Pertuis. His arduous and costly route was typical of the problems encountered when one left major highways. But even straightforward trips were long until the Second Empire, and sometimes after that. By coach it took from daybreak to sunset to get from Gray to Besançon (44 km), and three days to go from Bar-sur-Seine to Paris (191 km). The packet boat that Frédéric Moreau took from Rouen to Paris (137 km) took two days; the bateau-poste of the Canal du Midi took five to cover the 224 km from Toulouse to Cette. The price of such a journey, on an average peasant's budget, must have been terrible. And to what end should it be undertaken? No wonder, when even short trips "represented a veritable expedition," that people rarely left their villages except for markets and fairs. The few who went to Paris, even once in a lifetime, were known as Parisiens, much as the pilgrim back from Mecca proudly bears his title for the rest of his life. And when one went somewhere, one generally walked. That could mean 66 km (or some 40 miles in one day), from Bourg to Troyes and back, to save the expense of overnight lodging.11 

The Gazette universelle de Lyon warned on August 7, 1827: "Le père de famille doit par précaution songer à son testament avant de monter en diligence" (Gilbert Garrier, Paysans du Beaujolais, 1: 224). 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[199]]

In 1880 the Collège de Saint-Flour presented no candidates for the Concours Général because, explained the principal, the expenses of a trip to Aurillac (74 km away) were beyond the parents' means. In most places conscripts and other travelers who had to make a trip were escorted some way beyond the village by the local people when they set off; proof that such ventures were still rare events. The France of the 1880's and 1890's remained vast. The timespace equation kept it so. When Maupassant and other Parisian Sunday fishermen took the stagecoach from Courbevoie to Asnières, 9 km away, that village was as far from the capital in time as Rouen (137 km) is today by train, or Nice (933 km) by plane: two hours. "Going to Toulouse is an expedition that counts in life," wrote a teacher from a village 56 km away, in 1886. And when, in 1887, an inspector of primary schools requested that the schoolteacher of Legé visit him in Nantes, 40 km away, he added, "that is, if the weather permits such an expedition: for you must expect over four hours of a bad public coach ride, in ordinary weather, to come here and as much to 

return. 

"12 

Even near Paris, at Courgent in Mantois, in the last year of the nineteenth century "one travels only if one must." Those who went to market knew Mantes (13 km) or Houdan (12 km), but there were many even among the better-off who had seen Paris (60 km) once or not at all. Three-quarters of the children had never seen a train, and some had never been as far as the next village. As for the colonial wilds of Corsica at that time, draft boards had to hold their meetings where the few roads crossed each other so that the conscripts of three or four cantons could attend with only average trouble.13 

Most of the nineteenth century was one consistent moan over the state of the local roads: they were nothing but ruts, sometimes four, five, and six feet deep, damp and miry. Peasants let the grass grow on them, stacked stones on them, drained off their fields in them, plowed over part of them, dug up mud from them to use on their own land, so that travelers were forced to tramp through adjoining fields, damaging the crops. Repairs, wailed a police superintendent in the Pyrenees in 1895, left them as bad as they were before, the potholes hardly filled: "The farmers have encroached on them or plowed over the whole road, leaving only one furrow." Bad enough when the weather was fine, the rural roads became quite impossible in winter. With the first rains, the cattle broke them up, and that is how they stayed till summer; the inhabitants made tracks through the adjoining fields, but these rude substitutes did not permit wheeled traffic. At Saint-Maurice-la-Souterraine (Creuse), roads were so bad the villagers could hardly get their dead to the cemetery; even cattle had trouble making their way, let alone people.15 Floods, or simply bad weather, washed away roads, isolated villages. Not even mules, only people on foot could pass (Ardèche, 1857). Not even pedestrians could use the roads (Puy-de-Dôme, 1896), and that for a period of four years! "Terrible misery," the authorities reported. Many country communes, for instance, in Velay, Vivarais, Gévaudan, and the Alps, were used to five or 

[[200]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

six months of winter isolation. But country towns, too, small and not so small -Mauriac, Aurillac, Meulan-were cut off for days on end, with serious problems when food no longer appeared on the market; especially for the poor who bought their pittance from day to day. As Marcel Lachiver has noted in his study of Meulan: "It was not the railroads that most changed the countryside in the second half of the nineteenth century; it was the creation of roads that could be used in all seasons.' "16 

And, one might add, the creation of bridges too. The old sacred awe of rivers and the fear of their murderous ire remained alive throughout the Second Empire. But rivers did not need to rage and ravage. Even at their most placid, many were hard to negotiate. In the Garonne valley, almost 300 km from Toulouse to Bordeaux, there was not a single bridge until the mid-nineteenth century. Fords were rare, dangerous and practicable only at low water. When bridges were attempted (at Agen, for instance) they were washed away--and, not surprisingly, there were many second thoughts about reconstructing them. The most eloquent testimony about the state of roads comes from school inspectors, who as late as the 1870's often had to cover great stretches on horseback or on foot to check on village schools.\* Their trials seem to have lessened after mid-century, or at least the records of such trials thin out at that time. But in a number of places the lack of roads or of adequate roads kept wheeled traffic at bay for a good time longer. In the large district of Prades (Pyrénées-Orientales) under the Second Empire, apart from one road opened to wheeled traffic, the territory had to be covered "over goat trails." Many bourgs in Forez and Vivarais had no real road until the 1870's. At Roche-en- Forez (Loire) the first road that a cart or carriage could use was built in 1875. At Saint-Pierreville (Ardèche) the first carts appeared in 1880. In Ariège some cantons remained roadless until the First World War. No carts, only mules and porters, reported a reconnaissance party surveying the area around Olette in the Pyrenees in the 1840's. At that, the mules made hard work of the narrow footpath, and the narrow footbridge one had to cross was often washed away." 

[[17]]

At the end of the century people in these areas remembered the first appearance of wheeled conveyances in local bourgs, which whole villages from 

\*Pierre Deffontaines, Les Hommes et leurs travaux, p. 399. In December 1838 a primary school inspector of Finistère at Guerlesquin, in the northeast corner of the department, was asked to make haste to Quimper. It took him three and a half days to cross the department on horseback, little more than 40 miles as the crow flies. His predecessor had died in 1836 from the hardships of his job (Louis Ogès, Instruction primaire, p. 31). But the primary school inspector of Bellac may have had it worse still, for he had to do his rounds on foot, and in an area, as he explained in a report in 1840, where the most abominable road was still considered passable. Indeed, the peasants even had a classification system for the degree of abominability: a road where the horse sank to its breast was rabiat (rabid), one where the rider sank to his eyes was péri (perishing), and one where rider and mount were swallowed without trace was despérat. All the local roads beyond Dompierre were rabiat or despérat! (Archives Départementales, Haute-Vienne T113, Feb. 13, 1840.) See also Archives Départementales, Cantal IT 501 (1835 and after, 1853, 1878). 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[201]]

roundabout turned out to see: Burzet after the July Revolution; Largentière under the Second Empire; Saint-Etienne-de-Serres and Saint-Pierreville in the high country northwest of Privas only under MacMahon and Grévy. When Louis Napoleon was President, the largest share of the traffic in Privas was carried by mules rather than by carts or carriages. The same must have been true for rather longer in the isolated uplands of Lozère where, Patrice Higonnet tells us, wheeled vehicles had remained practically unknown until the middle of the century. There, as in the Pyrenees and in the Alps, packing— by mules, donkeys, horses, the backs of men and the heads of women-remained the fundamental means of transport.1 

Even in the plains below, such roads as existed served only their immediate neighborhoods, so that these areas had to rely on animal transport for many products. "For the low country," went the Vivarais proverb, “the pack saddle. For the highlands the saccol." The saccol, used to carry burdens in Ardèche, was a sort of sack that dangled from the head and was lined with straw to cushion the weight on head and shoulders. In the Pyrenees there was a whole array of carrying devices, ranging from the headpads of twisted straw or rag on which the women of Béarn carried everything, including a child's cradle, to hooded sacks something like the saccol (Campan valley), straps or thongs worn frontally (upper Ariège), a pole or yoke balanced on the shoulders (Cerdagne), and kangaroo pockets to carry babies in (Gavarnie, Bigorre, Campan). Even the notion of putting everything to use, or leaving no stone unturned, which the French express as faire flèche de tout bois, was translated in local terms as de tout perràc cabadère ("of every rag a headpad").20 

Until 1860 or so, the peasant of Malarce or Lafigère (Ardèche) carried his chestnuts on his back to the market at Les Vans, four or five hours' walk on difficult mountain paths-50-60 kg for men, half as much for women. Later than that, until the Phylloxera killed the vineyards, the table grapes of Naves and of Gravières in southwestern Ardèche were sold at Villefort market in nearby Lozère, some 20 miles away: a four-hour trek with a load of 50 kg. In Ariège the charcoal burners who supplied the iron forges of Ax "carried 100-lb sacks for four or five hours, barefoot on difficult stony paths" and, on arrival, “hardly do they get a little bad quality bread." Back in the mountains behind Nice basic necessities had to come in by backpack, and local timber went out in long "processions," with every man carrying immensely heavy loads (140 kg-over 300 lbs-the official report tells us, but that sounds incredible). Hardly easier was the lot of the nail-makers of Haute-Loire, who had to get the iron for their nails at bigger centers like Firminy and bring it back in bars slung on their backs, 50 lbs at a time, once every week.21 

How long did this go on? It is hard to say. Presumably until decent roads permitted the use of wheeled vehicles. But in the 1890's Henri Baudrillart found the men of the Cévennes still wearing the saccol and the women wearing its female cousin, the chapsal or chasson, which, he explained, was a round 

[[202]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

pad worn on the head to carry loads of between 60 and 80 lbs--obviously less heavy burdens than the men appear to have carried on their saccols. “All the women of the region are trained to this sort of carrying from their tenderest youth and work with it as easily as if they were merely wearing a hat.” One had to fetch and carry. If possible with a mule or a donkey; but if not on foot. As the Forézien sang, bouncing his baby on his knee:22 

I'll take my donkey to Aurec. 

If there is no donkey, we'll go on foot. Hi colt! For tomorrow we'll go for salt. Hi mare! For tomorrow we'll go for grain. Hi horse! For tomorrow we'll go for wine. 

The song went far beyond the singer's means, which might extend to a mule or donkey but were limited most often to his own back and legs. 

In areas such as these muleteers remained prominent into the Second Empire, a tight-knit and traditionalist-minded group who wore pigtails well into the 1830's, a red wool bonnet (which they did not even remove in church) under a large hat, gold earrings, a red waistcoat and neckerchief, a white serge jacket studded with copper buttons, and green serge hose. Bedecked with pompoms, tinkling with bells, the pack-mules were as dazzling as the muleteers; and in many villages and small towns, in the Cévennes for instance, a mule train passing through was one of the few distractions of the time. It was also a nuisance, for muleteers were known to let their beasts graze in people's fields. They were also a notably rough and foul-mouthed crew; and any raucous child or adult was "a true pack-carter," or a muleteer.2 Yet they could not be spared: their caravans conveyed necessities. A mule could carry three sacks of coal (240 lbs), twice as much as any family donkey; and five or six muleteers provisioned a whole valley. One assumes that consumption would have been slight: a few goatskins of wine, some sacks of wheat, oil, small packs of merchandise, iron bars.24 Mules also carried Aubenas silk to Saint-Etienne, or wines of Roanne and Lower Vivarais to the Auvergne plateaus, as far as Mende or Le Puy. They declined only as roads and railroads advanced in the 1860's, to be replaced by carters: sign of a new order in transport. 

[[23]]

Another sign was the steady fall in the country's mule population (almost all concentrated in the south): 1840-373,800; 1862-331,000; 1882-250,700; 1887-237,400. Even the number of animals exported to countries with worse roads than France's-Spain, Italy, Portugal, and Greece-fell from an average of 27,500 a year in the 1850's and 1860's to an average of 15,000 in the decade 1877-86. The number of donkeys also diminished slightly: 1840-413,500; 1862 —396,200; 1886—382,100. On the other hand, the number of horses rose, along with the number of carriages and machines they pulled. Thus in Aveyron, 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[203]]

while donkeys dropped from 3,265 in 1893 to 2,155 in 1907, horses increased from 11,473 to 14,500.25 

The crux of all this lay in local roads, especially those the government described as vicinal, that is, recognized as necessary to the inhabitants of one or several communes to give them access to a market, a railway station, or some other neighborhood center. The improvement of these roads, which at the beginning of the Third Republic totaled ten times the mileage of the national highways, was recognized as a worthwhile expense as early as the July Monarchy. But when the Monarchy ended, more had been planned than done. It is hard to speak more precisely because credible figures are difficult to find. Even under the Second Empire, J. B. Proudhon had noted that whole categories were excluded from the statistics, and modern statisticians have found the same inadequacies in the later data, with traffic statistics referring primarily to the highway network, ignoring local roads altogether and, for a long time, all secondary roads as well. What evidence we have therefore would not fill a page. Théron de Montaugé, while praising the improvements achieved in Haute-Garonne under Louis Philippe, tells us that in 1866, out of 6,800 km of planned vicinal roads 5,000 remained unbuilt; and we learn from the agricultural survey of the same year that only one-third of 354,000 km of vicinaux were then in use, that work had begun on 68,000 km more, and that 168,000 km remained in the planning stage. Perhaps it was findings such as these, officially publicized at long last, that brought the decree of August 17, 1867, which sought to hasten the completion of vicinal roads, a decree widely welcomed by local authorities—more testimony to how much there was still left to do.26 

This is what statistics often do not show: that, as an official report said of the roads in Nièvre in 1858, most of them were "projects or hopes." Evidence of goodwill, of political promises, and of real interest in giving work to the poor so as to keep them out of trouble, scores of road projects flowered every spring, anarchically dispersed and not getting much done. Moreover, the engineers worked like Penelope. In Ardèche, for example, roads begun in 1861 were still only a few kilometers long in the 1880's. The same at Eygurande (Corrèze), where in the 1890's many of the roads planned in 1836 were still unbuilt, and those that had been opened were "in a deplorable state." As Jacques Lovie says about Savoy, the secondary roads remained mediocre. In most rural parishes, the grip of poverty that went with isolation remained unbroken.27 

The real change seems to have come after the law of 1881, which promoted the building of rural roads "recognized as being in the public interest." Coming when it did, this law would be the one most likely really to serve the interests of a public at last awake to the possibilities. When, in 1848, the204 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

municipal council of Chavignolles in Calvados had sought to provide the unemployed with work, it had a branch road built to the local nobleman's chateau.\* After 1876, such roads would be built to small hamlets and outlying farms. In Cantal, though roads multiplied after 1860, the movement accelerated in 1880-1900, when local roads became more numerous and better: 16 vicinal roads in 1850, 103 in 1870, 130 in 1899. In 1929 76 percent of the local roads in Vendée had been built after 1881. In Finistère the isolation of the countryside was broken after 1870, the vicinal network completed in the decade before 1900.29 

As a cul-de-sac, the Breton peninsula presented problems all its own. The first military network, finished as the eighteenth century ended, was built in straight lines, paying no heed to local circumstances or to relief. When it was done, the continental mass of the peninsula "remained as closed as before to the circulation of goods, men and ideas."29 The old roads had to be rebuilt in the second half of the nineteenth century, even while the network of vicinal roads was being built, and the railways too. 

The two main railroad lines reached Brest and Landerneau in 1865 and 1867, respectively, but they had no branches until 1881. Until these links were made and until narrow-gauge railways made tracks through the interior (1891 to 1914), bringing lime and chemicals, carrying out meat, butter, and fresh produce, most of the agriculture remained primitive. Even when all was done, the three departments of Lower Brittany had less roadway than the rest of France-Morbihan had only five-sixths as much as the national average, Finistère less than half as much-helping perpetuate their backwardness. What the General Council of Loire-Inférieure declared in 1841 remained true for a long time after: "The first of all fertilizers is the stone that paves our roads!"30 Bad roads put the cost of fertilizer out of reach, doubling the price of every cartload of manure, and turned current ideas of agricultural progress to nonsense. At the same time, there were many regions where the local materials were unsuitable for road work: shale or slaty rock, sandstone that crumbled easily, soft limestone, and even granites with high concentrations of feldspar, which weathered rapidly into fine clay and sand. In these 

\* On Chavignolles, see Gustave Flaubert, Bouvard et Pécuchet (New York, 1954), chap. 6. Marcel Gautier tells us that in the late 1830's at Mazières (Deux-Sèvres), familiar to us from the work of Roger Thabault, the Vicomtesse de Tusseau had her servants carry her from her chateau to the bourg, 3 km away, because the road was too bad for any other form of locomotion. In 1850 the road was still useless, even in summer. Real change came only after 1881. ("Quelques aspects de la circulation rurale en Vendée," Bulletin du Groupe Poitevin d'Etudes Géographiques, 1951, pp. 17-22.) 

+ Jacques Lovie, La Savoie, p. 206. Just north of Chambéry, it took three pair of oxen to pull half a cartload of manure up the slopes of the Chartreuse to Montagnole, only a few miles away. The 36 cubic feet of manure cost seven francs, their transport a little more than five francs. If one journal of land needed ten demi-voitures of fertilizer, the cost of such improvement would come to 120 francs-a prohibitive sum and vastly higher than the cost would have run in the plain or near a railroad. 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[205]]

regions the materials for the roadbed or the paving stone itself might well have to be hauled from far away. So, generally speaking, apart from the Paris area, the north, Bordeaux, and the Meuse, all or some road-building materials had to be imported.31 Only rails could facilitate this, especially in totally hopeless areas like the Landes, where there were no roads at all, just trails. After the attempt to use camels had failed in the 1830's, the problem of the Landes stubbornly resisted solution until the area had railways (the Bordeaux-Bayonne line, 1855, but all other lines inland 1875-1900), which in turn encouraged and permitted the building of real roads. 

The rails brought a new life and everybody knew it, at least in little cities like Saint-Girons (Ariège) where, when the news came in 1861 that its line had been approved in Paris, the whole city celebrated with ringing bells, cannonfire, and impromptu parades. But though Saint-Girons had its station by 1866, Tarascon further to the east waited until 1877, and a branch from there to the roadless wastes of Ax took until 1888. When it got there, most of the traffic around Ax was still carried by donkeys and humans. So for a long time railways were (as Emile Coornaert called them) "a spinal column deprived of articulations in the countryside." If what he said was true of the busy Flanders, east and northeast of Lille, it was even truer of areas more isolated or more difficult. Auvergne and the Limousin remained little affected by the lonely rails that crossed rather than irrigated them until 1880. Main cities were connected to Paris, but not to each other, so that Clermont was linked to Lyon and Tulle only after 1877.32 

In any case, the main lines needed branches, like the roads. A railway inspector, writing in the 1890's, judged that regions ten miles from a railway, or even less, gave it about one-tenth of the traffic that they would have given it had they been closer: "They close in on themselves to live off their own products instead of obeying the great law of exchange." A law of 1865 intended to create cheap railway links "of local interest" showed results only after another law, this one of 1880, established the economic conditions that made such enterprises possible. The length of rail that stood at 19,746 km at the end of 1879 had jumped to 26,327 km by 1882. It would be 64,898 km in 1910, if one includes nearly 12,000 km of lines "of local interest" and nearly 10,000 km of tortillards-electric tramways and narrow-gauge railways giving villagers easy access to markets where they could buy and sell.3 

[[34]]

Grass grew on some sections of the national roads as railways began to haul more of the long-distance freight (until bicycles and automobiles helped to revive them), but local roads, now seen as leading to and from the railway, 

\*Henri Cavaillès, "Problème de la circulation dans les Landes de Gascogne," Annales de géographie, 1933, pp. 561-82. In 1838 Etienne Arago had laughed at the idea that two parallel iron rods could endow the Landes with a new look. Some 40 years later Isaac Pereire could in turn laugh at Arago, boasting that the iron lines had bestowed a new department on France by turning wastes into living land (La Question des chemins de fer, Paris, 1879, p. 151). 

[[206]]

[[35]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

flourished. And so did communities with a railway station. Between 1866 and 1936 rural communes without a railway station in a zone 15 km on either side of the Paris-Lyon-Méditerranée line lost almost one-quarter of their population, while those with a station (excluding Paris) gained 1,645,373 inhabitants. More graphically, we can see what this meant to the little bourg of Amanlis (Ille-et-Vilaine), whose council rejected a narrow-gauge railway project in 1885 and only changed its mind in 1899; the line itself was not completed until 1903. By then livelier neighboring places like Châteaugiron and Janzé, with their stations, stores, doctors, and notaries, had attracted the villagers of the vicinity away from a bourg that was not that much closer than its competitors, which had in the meantime become more accessible by virtue of better vicinal roads. Where in the 1880's 15 percent to 20 percent of the communal population had attended church in neighboring parishes on Sundays, by 1925 the rector of Amanlis had lost more than one-third of his parishioners.38 

It was not just that the railway was a pole of attraction; it was, at least for a while, a shifting pole. The road served the railway; but it served above all people who wanted to get to the railway or to get to what the rail centers could offer. This meant an extreme instability of road traffic, which, while rails unfolded, kept shifting to ever-closer railheads, no matter in what direction these might lie. Thus, in the Indre, Aigurande looked first to Châteauroux, 48 km to the north, which got a railway station in 1847; then to Argenton, 30 km west-northwest, reached by a line in 1864; next to La Châtre, 26 km east-northeast, linked in 1882; and then back north to Cluis, 10 km away, 

in 

1903, three years before it got a station of its own.37 This sort of thing, which must have been repeated elsewhere, meant that traditional orientations were abandoned, traditional hostilities or habits laid aside, in the pursuit of new or at least newly perceived possibilities. The peasants' so-called inertia had mostly been the refusal to respond to challenges or conditions that struck them as inappropriate or irrelevant. As soon as novelties began to speak to their own situation, the peasants hastened to respond. 

[[38]]

So, roads and rail lines that were secondary in name but primary in fact brought the isolated patches of the countryside out of their autarky-cultural as well as economic-into the market economy and the modern world. The era of their building and the period of their completion were so close to the coming of the motor vehicle, which slowly replaced them after the 1920's, that their effects have not received all the attention they deserve. But the conjunction of secondary lines and of the roads built to serve them resulted in a crash program of national integration of unparalleled scope and effectiveness; a program that could operate on this scale only because, for the first time, economic and technological conditions offered the possibility for radical cultural change. Before culture altered significantly, material circumstances had to alter; and the role of road and rail in this transformation was basic. 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[207]]

Where and as long as local roads were lacking, localism was bound to remain “narrow, ignorant, apathetic, cross-grained," as a Cantalien described it under Louis Philippe. The lack of local roads, he continued, "forces the farmer to consume all his produce, invites him to inertia, to laziness, to wastefulness." After the 1870's and 1880's the concert of complaints turns into one of joy: the valleys of the Massif Central were now opened to fairs and economic activity. In Dauphiné, Savoy, Bresse, and Franche-Comté, marshy or mountainous areas-Oisans, Dombes, Vercors-were finally joined to France by road and railway branches. The rugged Vercors, shortly before a world unto itself, "a true fortress... deprived of communications with the surrounding country...any exchange almost impossible," hence miserable and ignorant, swiftly developed new resources (especially cattle) and became one of the richest plateaus in the French Alps.39 The area around Die also changed radically after 1880. The region had stayed almost self-sufficient. So long as mules were the only means of transport, there was no point in growing commercial crops 

for export, 

for instance fruit, to which its climate was well suited. Once roads and railroads breached the mountains and connected "this cell of the French Alps" to the life that flowed only some miles away, past the Drôme gorges in the Rhône valley's plains, buyers appeared for cattle, lavender, and in due course fruit from newly developed orchards; chemical fertilizer and superphosphates could reach the narrow valleys and help meet new demands; rye gave way to wheat; comfort replaced grinding poverty. The profound transformation can be dated to the railway's coming in 1894 and the years. immediately following, when the peasants became used to it and learned how to handle the formalities involved in shipping and receiving merchandise. The outside world, which till then had had little bearing on their own, now came in with a rush: skills like writing invoices and bills of lading, counting, and schooling in general acquired concrete meaning as occasions to use them multiplied. It was a story that repeated itself elsewhere.40 

As long as villages remained roadless, the peasants ignored general market conditions. Fruit and other produce could not be shipped for sale, so their possibilities were not worth exploiting. In Var figs were fed to local pigs; plums at Brignoles or Agen were kept for local consumption. The peasant sold what he could, when he could, at whatever price he could get. He lacked storage facilities and he needed cash. If, like most peasants, he carried his goods to market, he was very much at the mercy of the buyer. After hauling a load of chestnuts or charcoal on his back for four or five hours on difficult mountain paths, he was in no position to haggle much about what price he got, and the dealers knew it. In Ardèche, the canton of Valgorge and the Drobie river valley had been almost totally isolated for lack of roads and bridges. Mules could go as far as Deux-Aygues, but past that even men made their way through the valley with difficulty. A road had been planned since 1854. In 1875 it was still unbuilt. This meant that peasants driving a pig to market 

[[208]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

had 25 km to do on foot, one way, instead of the ten it would later be by road. Many fell victim to pleurisies as a result, and the official registers show that death rates jumped after the great annual fairs." As late as 1900, the peasant of Beaumont in Ardèche still made two bundles of heather, carried one for two miles, then went back for the other, and did this all the way to Joyeuse, eight or ten miles away. From Beaumont to Joyeuse, from Genestelles to Antraigues, from Intres to Saint-Agrève, pigs were taken to market tied to a stretcher or a ladder, carried by four men who could hardly afford not to sell at any price once they arrived.\* Roads that permitted carts, roads reinforced by railroads, would be an emancipation as important as political revolution, probably more important. 

Schoolteachers in Lot, writing in 1881, exulted over the arrival of roads that brought with them prosperity and "civilization." Hillsides were being cleared, stagnant waters drained, and fallow plowed and sowed; new vineyards turned out wine; and the local people had "the special satisfaction... of seeing the merchants come to them to buy their diverse products." The same at Cabrespine in Lauragais, where chestnuts and olives grew in abundance, but where lack of roads meant only mule-back transport that halved the seller's profit. Then, a new road finished in 1870 meant that "today [in 1882] the buyers come seeking chestnuts at Cabrespine and pay them as high as they could be sold at Carcassonne in the old days"-not so long before. After the road opened, we hear that the houses looked clean and comfortable, that the farmer could afford to mix his rye with a little wheat, that he drank wine and bought a sack or two of millet every year, either for himself or to fatten his pig, which better fed in turn provided him with more meat. This was radical change." 

[[42]]

There was still much room for improvement. The 1880's were only a beginning. Along the Tarn valley, where at that time there was still no road, villages like Brousse in Rouergue had never seen a cart. Hoisting a barrel of wine up the steep ramps to the Ségala plateau on which the village stood took three pair of oxen. A major enterprise. There could not have been much wine drunk in Brousse. Or much white bread eaten. By 1904 Brousse was still isolated, but it had a road. Wheeled vehicles could reach it. What had happened was that in 1902 a secondary line between Rodez and Carmaux brought lime and fertilizer to the shale and slaty rocks of the plateau, increasing agricultural production tenfold within a few years. Here was the Ségala shifting into the twentieth century, along with the rest of France! 

[[43]]

The same was taking place in other areas: in the Rhône valley, which saw a great expansion of commercial agriculture and where fruit, fresh, dried, or 

\* Elie Reynier, "Voies de communication," pp. 202-5. Pierre Charrié, Folklore du Bas-Vivarais, p. 294, mentions this method of carrying heather as being employed in all Tanargue, each load weighing 80 kg. It would be interesting to trace the dates when wheelbarrows replaced stretchers. This seems to have occurred sometime in the second half of the century in Creuse, Allier, and Corrèze. But when? (See "Enquête sur ... l'agriculture," Creuse 37, p. 13, in Musée des Arts et Traditions Populaires archives.) 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[209]]

candied, became a profitable export; in the Lot valley and on the Aubrac plateau, whose cattle and cheese were tapped only after 1908; in Corrèze, where the consumption of fertilizer increased 13 times and crop production 65 times between 1866 and 1906; in Brittany, where the whole face of agriculture was changed by the introduction of narrow-gauge lines between 1890 and 1914; in much of Isère and Dauphiné, whose isolated areas were gradually brought into the general swim during the three-score years after 1870.44 Ardouin- Dumazet in 1904 was still close enough to this recent past to find it exciting: "The railway-infusion of life," we find him exclaiming. And he was right to add that where the locomotive passed (one should add, and where it stopped), economic activity grew tenfold.\* 

It is doubtful that all of this could have happened, or could have happened quite the way it did, but for a political conjunction in which the interests of capital and of the politicians who sought ways to please it coincided with a political situation that lent new weight to the votes (hence views) of rural populations. "I would vote for the devil, if he built us the Beaume road," declared an elector in the desolate Drobie valley. He said this in the late 1870's, just when circumstances gave him a chance to do precisely that; and those soliciting his vote knew that it might go to them, or to the devils of the other side, depending on who could build a necessary bridge or get a much-needed stretch of roadway at last. 

[[45]]

Hence the crucial importance of the Freycinet Plan, so called after the name of its inventor, the statesman Charles de Saulce de Freycinet, who devised it as a way of buoying up the sagging French economy of the late 1870's. His plan has been linked with school-building, as a political decision designed to bring "progressive" ideas to France's backward lands and carry Republican scripture into refractory territories or areas still untouched by its message.\* This is to argue from effect to cause. Though its effects were cultural and political, the Freycinet Plan was an economic enterprise and undertaken for economic ends: to get a sluggish economy going, by pouring funds into it. It was what Marcel Marion, the conservative historian of financial policies, described as "setting aside all considerations of prudence and of measure": six billion francs to be spent in ten years, more than half of which was for 

\* Ardouin-Dumazet, Voyage en France, 32: 68. A report of December 31, 1861, in Archives Nationales, F102342 (Landes de Gascogne), notes that where new farm roads were built, permitting the replacement of the slow, cumbersome ox-carts, pine could be sold at five or six times. the previous price, but that roads were built only near the railroad, and the rest of the area, east of the railway line, remained roadless. There the situation was not much changed from 1839, when an army report found most Landais living and dying with no knowledge whatever of the world beyond their vast solitudes, "drowned in winter and parched in summer" (Archives de la Guerre, MR 1231). Dominique Renouard gives one pause with the statement that secondary lines never carried important quantities, and indeed that some carried a mere 1,000 to 4,000 tons a year. But he agrees that they were of great social use in dragging the countryside out "of its primitive existence" (Les Transports, pp. 46-47). This is my point; and we must remember that statistics in no way reflect the full impact of a railway line. 

[[210]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

building new railway lines. That was the program of 1879. Things did not quite turn out as planned. Instead of some 8,000 km of projected track, more than 16,000 km were built and better than nine billion francs were spent under electoral pressure. For the first time, millions flowed into the countryside, especially through those disinherited regions this study is about. A great deal of money went toward improving rivers, canals, and port installations; and substantial amounts were spent at last on the surfacing and building of vicinal roads.47 

The Freycinet Plan, wrote a contemporary, was "launched like a display of fireworks set off to glorify the Republic." And though this was not (or does not seem to have been) its purpose, that was how it worked out. Coming on the heels of the crisis of May 16, 1877, and of President MacMahon's resignation in 1879, the plan affirmed that the new regime did not by any means signify depression, carried the regime's influence into the countryside, and consolidated its hold through the patronage involved in the building programs and the administration of the railway lines. In this connection, the extraordinary rise in numbers of railway employees is most relevant: 86,300 in 1861, 113,000 in 1866, 172,000 in 1876, and 222,800 in 1881, they numbered 308,000 in 1907, 

355,600 in 1913, and 511,000 in 1922. An army of steady workers, looking for- 

ward to steady positions, was more effective than construction gangs in converting peasants to the modern world, for the road crews and railway builders came and went, a raucous foreign presence whose influence, however disruptive of the village youth, was but a passing one, unlikely to leave a lasting mark on a solid community. But the railway station offered steady jobs for steady people-in the long run an influence more subversive of traditional institutions.48 

Two occupational groups-carters and bargemen engaged in long-distance transport-were mortally wounded by the railroads, and their decline inevitably affected 

many established ways of life. The stores, stables, inns, smithies, and cartwrights that catered to them were among the casualties. So were many of the peasants close to the highway zone, who relied on the horse manure dropped on the highways and who had geared their production to the carriage trade, especially fodder and oats, but also vegetables, poultry, and wines for the travelers.49 Still, though there were many local and individual tragedies, road transport as a whole managed to adapt. River traffic did not. 

Waterways were widely used in the nineteenth century, but they were slow and uncertain, subject to currents that could be very strong, or to low water that could hamper or stop passage. Some could be open anywhere from 300 days a year to only a few weeks. It is small wonder that a more reliable alternative and one that did not depend on seasons or on particular and limited skills would readily take their place.50 So, how long river traffic survived depended only on the speed with which competing railway lines appeared to displace it. 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[211]]

The Rhône and Loire valleys were the first to succumb, assassinated, as a director of the Rhône steamship company put it, by the ministers of the Empire--and even by those of Louis Philippe. The Allier followed. In 1815 some 2,500 boats had plied the river, mostly carrying coal downstream to Paris. But by 1854 the Paris railway line had reached Arvant in the northwest corner of Haute-Loire, and the river trade collapsed in a few years. Meanwhile, property values in the arrondissement of Brioude (to which Arvant belongs) rose at an unprecedented rate now that local wine and timber could be sold more profitably.1 Floating logs down the Yonne and then down the Seine to Paris had furnished the French capital with firewood since the sixteenth century, and the Morvan with an important source of revenue. Then came the railsespecially the secondary lines into northern Nièvre-and finally the opening of the Nivernais canal to heavy barges, permitting the transport of dressed lumber, which was more valuable and in greater demand; by around 1880 the flottage was dead." 

[[52]]

The southwest resisted longest. It was well provided with a communications network of rivers and canals, a system that railways would replace but would not markedly supplement. But save for the Garonne, to which a line between Toulouse and Bordeaux offered an alternative after 1856, the rivers gave way only slowly to the railroads: the Tarn between Montauban and Gaillac in 1884, the Vézère between the Lower Limousin and the Bordelais about the same time, the Dropt between Bordeaux and Eymet in 1899. Only a tenth of the boats that plied the Tarn in the 1860's were left a decade later. But rafts and logs still floated down the Aude in 1895, carrying the timber of the Pyrenees to Limoux and Carcassonne. And 94 boats still worked the Dordogne in 1900, carrying 16,049 tons of cheeses, coal, charcoal, firewood, and timber for casks and staves from Périgord into the Bordelais. There, too, however, the traffic that once filled the river after the autumn rains was drawing to its close. As an old Loire mariner declared in 1900, the skills of the river navigator were as dead as those of the men who made the stained-glass windows of the old cathedrals: "Our descendants will not guess that there was ever navigation on the river."58 

They would not guess there had been so much industry either. 

What is generally described broadly as industrial revolution made inroads in France very slowly, at least compared to its advance in other industrial countries of the West. Its progress, that is, the replacement of handicraft production by machine production, was marked most vividly by the decline and eventual disappearance of regional and rural industries. 

These small, local enterprises, which were undertaken to boost the income of families unable to make ends meet by farming alone, have been called daughters of misery. As agricultural productivity improved, as more lands were cleared or salvaged from fallow, as root crops were introduced and de- 

[[212]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

manded more attention, peasants had less time to spare for such pursuits. Home production, especially in the realms of food and clothing, fell from an estimated 6-7 percent of total industrial production under the July Monarchy to around 3.7 percent under the Second Empire and kept on falling.\*\* Supplemental income could now be better sought in "modern industry"; and industrial products were proving relatively more accessible, driving home and local industry into ever-remoter vastnesses. 

The first victims of this process were the oldest of the cottage industriesspinning and weaving. By 1847 and 1848, in those parts of France that had been penetrated by the products of the new textile mills cotton had driven out flax. Where once tens of thousands of women and children had spun flax there was now nothing but a starving trickle, and handweavers had been reduced to begging. But in remoter regions home-weaving survived as a village craft, and households continued to work hemp or flax or wool into coarse, durable cloth for their own use. Thus in the Vosges handlooms were still flourishing when the Franco-Prussian war broke out. By 1889 textile mills had killed them.55 But there the influx of Alsatian immigrants to man the mills precipitated the process. Otherwise, it might have taken longer, as in Auvergne and Brittany, where the change waited on the coming of the railway.\* 

In 1860 the French planted 105,000 ha of flax and 180,000 ha of hemp. By 1938 only 6,000 ha of flax survived, and hemp was hardly grown at all.56 Of course, factory goods were cheaper and more elegant. But before the 

peasant took them up, he had to obtain the cash to buy them. At another level, he had to learn to discriminate between the relative costs of home-produced and store-bought goods, and indeed to understand that things made at home or traded in the village also had a cost. Finally, he needed an accessible alternative to that essential by-product of the flax fields, linseed oil, which was used to light the lamp, to enrich the soup, and to mix a salad. 

More variables perhaps than were involved with wool. There the adoption of factory products was a matter of means alone, which meant (at least, among other things) transport facilities that did not add to the price of goods shipped in from the towns. Savoy, for instance, had an old-established textile industry based entirely on local product and local handicrafts. Family herds supplied the wool, which was spun by hand, fulled in local mills turned by the local streams, and woven on family looms. The building of railways permitted the import of large quantities of low-priced woolens, which peasants found to be 

\* The last Breton weavers at Loudéac tried to hold out in 1890, but they were unable to do so for long. Though Brittany still had 15,000 weavers and spinners in 1896, they were relics of the past (Jean Delumeau, ed., Histoire de la Bretagne, p. 469). On the other hand, a survey carried out by the Lyon Chamber of Commerce in 1900 showed 47,406 handlooms in use in nearby rural areas of Rhône, Ain, Isère, Loire, Saône-et-Loire, and Vaucluse. Here was putting-out of the old sort, perpetuated because these part-time workers accepted rates that the canuts rejected (F. Dubief, La Question du vagabondage, p. 195). 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[213]]

of better quality and no more expensive than the old cloth. They had been thrifty and undemanding. New possibilities changed their mind. Savoy cloth -drap de Savoie-was condemned to death.57 

But manufactured textiles can easily go with industrial backwardness. Transport difficulties protect the persistent past. Where and while such difficulties persisted and the economic dimension was fixed by life on foot, a multiplicity of manufacturing centers persisted as well. And the fact that peasant labor was cheap, or satisfied with small profits, permitted certain local manufacturers to compete successfully for a good long while. The crucial factor always would be the availability and the accessibility of alternatives. Thus, with the development of viticulture in Lower Languedoc, the small drapery centers of Hérault, Gard, and Aude collapsed. The weavers began leaving the little towns to work in the vineyards where salaries were higher, and the textile works closed down one after the other until, in 1884, the drapery manufacture of the southwest was practically dead.58 

There was no clear divide between rural and industrial labor. When masons or roofers struck in Orléans, they went off to bring in the harvest. Small industrial enterprises, scattered through the country, relied on seasonal or part-time labor. Workers in these small brick works, tile works, tanneries, quarries, and mills tended to have their own garden, sometimes kept a field or vineyard. A tile mill employed four persons and one horse to knead the clay. A walnutoil mill would take on ten or fifteen women and a cow. The sugarbeet refineries of Nord called for more hands when the heavy demands of harvest had been filled, then sent them back to the fields after winter. Well into the twentieth century some of the porcelain factories of the Limousin continued to use wood-burning kilns, and their employees worked both as porcelain makers and as woodcutters, switching from job to job according to the season.59 

Guy Thuillier tells us that in Nièvre the miners no longer hired on as fieldhands after 1870;\* but in Haute-Loire, around Brioude, two-thirds of the miners were still farmer-owners, a situation that may have had "advantages from the point of view of public tranquility," but also created difficulties for the mine owners, who could "never control their enterprise." There and in neighboring parts of the Puy-de-Dôme, to the turn of the century, miners took off all the time they could, and especially Mondays, to work their plots of land. The same was true in such old-established industrial regions as the area around Thiers, renowned for its cutlery, where in 1894 the workers preferred "their 

And no longer saw social status in buying a piece of land after 1880-90 (Aspects de l'économie nivernaise, p. 343). Rolande Trempé tells us that at Carmaux, in Tarn, the struggle to turn peasant smallholders into a permanent work force took longer. Seasonal absenteeism, massive during sowing, haymaking, and harvest, affected from 10 percent to 50 percent of the labor force. In 1874 the mine directors bewailed the good crop that tied up their workers. Problems like these waned only after 1878, when the agricultural depression limited the choices (or temptations) of peasant-miners. (Les Mineurs de Carmaux, 1: 180-83, 190ff.)THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

[[214]]

liberty" (to work their fields) to higher wages, and the bosses had to resign themselves to this attitude. "This primitive industrial life," sighed the subprefect, "has its traditions that one must respect. 

[[9960]]

Iron-mining, iron-smelting, and related industries, such as charcoal-making and woodcutting, were extraordinarily widespread. Timber meant charcoal, charcoal meant ironworks. Like brandy, charcoal grew out of transport difficulties. In the Ardennes, in the Grande Chartreuse, in Périgord and the Pyrenees whole forests were felled for charcoal, which was made locally and shipped to forges or to cities. Small mines and forges dotted the countryside. In some hamlets of Périgord, "everyone had his mine!" The presence of ore close to the sandy surface, which could be scratched with a hoe or easily dug up, made for a forge every two or three miles along the shady valleys.\* But though wood was abundant, it was consumed at a phenomenal rate. It took some 2,000 lbs of wood to make 1,000 bricks and some 1,600 lbs to produce about 1.3 cubic yds of lime. To cast 200 lbs of iron required 700 lbs of charcoal, or roughly 2 cubic yds of hardwood. One of these forges could produce 150 tons a year, but such an output consumed between 25 and 40 acres of forest.81 

Not very surprisingly, these small charcoal-burning enterprises were hardhit when improved transport brought coke into a competitive position. The free-trade treaties of the Second Empire finished their ruin. In 1859 Haute- Vienne had 42 furnaces, in 1861 only eight or ten. In the 1830's Dordogne had 37 blast furnaces and 88 ironworks. The small Crempse river valley alone was filled with small ironworks, their machines powered by the river's waters. By 1864 only 31 of these enterprises were still alive, 33 having shut down. In 1865 an official report showed the fires out in almost all the forges of Dordogne. By 1900 the department had become purely agricultural. An industry based on water power, on the charcoal of local forests, and on shallow iron mines could not compete with better-sited works, once coal became accessible. 

[[62]]

The story was the same in other places. The Privas iron mines entered a decline after 1870. Production fell from 144,000 tons in 1853 to 41,000 tons in 1893 and a mere 3,000 tons in 1910. In Ariège, the last furnaces faded away in the 1870's. They had been decaying for ten or twenty years like those of Périgord, and for similar reasons. With them there disappeared a whole industrial, political, and social world. In Mayenne five ironworks that employed fewer than 1,000 workers and used local charcoal to smelt local ore mined by 100 or 200 men (in 1848) turned out 2,300 tons a year right through the Second Empire. The completion of the railroads finished them off at the beginning of the Third Republic, as it did those still holding out in Upper Brittany, as coke took the place of charcoal." 

\*Pierre Deffontaines, L'Homme et la forêt, p. 85. Similarly, the peasants living near Alès, in the Cévennes, exploited the accessible pyrite of Saint-Julien-de-Valgalgues and sold the ferrous sulfate. 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[215]]

The ups and downs of industry that throve in isolation and withered with it are illustrated in the story of the ironworks of the Semouse valley in the Vosges. They had been numerous as the nineteenth century opened, using the Semouse when it was high and stopping work when its flow dried up, trading on the proximity of Franche-Comté and on the needs of the surrounding region, where wire mills prospered at mid-century. In 1859 and 1860 steam engines were installed, including “a gigantic machine... with a stone chimney nearly 30 meters high." Then, competition from foreign imports and from more malleable puddled irons began to create difficulties, compounded after the Prussian war by the new mild steels of Bessemer and Siemens. The metal refineries gave in. By 1899 only two ironworks survived, working the mild steels of the big mills of Lorraine, "where ore is abundant, coal cheap, and transport easy.' "64 That said it all. 

The nail-makers whom we have encountered carrying their iron bars home from market found themselves under suspended sentences as well. Their tools and materials had changed very little since Diderot (son of a cutler) had described them in five pages of L'Encyclopédie. A good man working 18 hours a day for six days a week (on the seventh he took his wares to market) could turn out 24,000 nails a week. Then came machines and, with them, the saying "ça tombe comme des clous," a wondering comment at how much they turned out. Trade outlets shrank to narrow local limits. Nevertheless, where the harsh terrain discouraged competition, in Savoy, Forez, and Bourbonnais, hand-crafted nails managed to withstand the offensive of the machine product. Around Oisans, in Isère, nail-making died by 1875. But in the Alps, at Bauges, for example, the last nail forge closed only in 1901, the year when the Annecy-Albertville rail link opened. The Morvandiaux's nail forge, fed by a dog-turned wheel, went out about then, too. In Forez it took the First World War to kill the hand-made nail in many villages. But every carriage road, like the one that linked Les Près in Drôme to the outer world in 1872, pressed back the pack-mules, permitted heavy materials to come in by road on carts, and changed house-building patterns. Masonry and slate replaced timber and thatch-and standard nails replaced the specially shaped local nails, bent individually to suit each local structure.65 That was the typical unspectacular process of subversion: not one but several factors ushering in the new and wearing down the old.\* 

\*Much the same could be said about a far more important industry-the salt industry of the western marshes. Traditional supplier of the whole coast as far north as Amiens, as far south as Tulle, and inland to Paris and Clermont, the western salt industry had remained astonishingly stable between 1700 and 1866 (even in its reluctance to give way to the metric system). Then came the railways, whose networks favored the spread of eastern and southern salt. With no rail link to the Orléans network, western salt found it increasingly difficult to reach even Caen, Orléans, and Poitiers. Between 1852 and 1866 its Paris sales fell from 9,600 tons to 103 tons a year. The bourgeois owners thereupon sold the land to their farmers and sharecroppers, leaving the salt-pans to nature's mercy. (Marcel Delafosse and Claude Laveau, "L'Evolution des marais 

[[216]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

In the last ten or twenty years of the century, small industries based on local materials and on sales to an immediate clientele disappeared, lost importance, or simply stagnated. We find reports of regression coming in from everywhere. In the Limousin forges, paperworks using rags or the straw of rye, hatmakers, and weavers were all throwing in the sponge. In the Limagne in one community (a prosperous one) the local pottery, the wool-carding shop, and one of the two lime-kilns disappeared in the space of a few years. In the Pyrenees the espadrilles industry was slowly being broken by the competition of Toulouse, and local tanneries were helpless when faced with cheaper foreign leathers. In Cantal sabots, copper-smithing, cloth made of local wool, barely dragged along, and even fishnets were now woven by machines." These industries had all been based on poor communications. When communications improved, they could not hold their own. Once this had happened, or while it was happening, the peasants could find nothing to replace them as a source of supplementary income. The part-time earnings that had helped maintain "the patriarchal life" and its archaic institutions were no longer to be had. The closing off of subsidiary activities encouraged migration to the cities, particularly by the young; left an aging population in the countryside; and led to the abandonment of the poorest lands and then of the less-poor ones. On the other hand, this situation reflected the penetration of modern market goods and helped encourage it. 

One of the most important of these goods was wine, which as we have seen had only a limited market in the countryside during the first half of the nineteenth century. The railroads changed all that. But it was not just that they opened up new markets for the wine trade. They also permitted wineproducing regions to enter that trade. Until their coming, in Agenais and Armagnac for example, the further a village lay from a river, the more stills it had. Brandied wine was a more compact cargo than the sheer juice of the grape. The production and local consumption of brandy thus related to the access to a waterway, hence the ability to market a product that had to be hauled to the closest port on the Garonne, 10-15 leagues away: three or four days overland by ox cart. In 1830 the freight cost for such a trip was higher than the cost of sending a comparable amount of cargo from the Garonne ports to Paris. By 1862 the municipal council of Narbonne rejoiced that "the wine that passed through the copper [still] can now be put on sale since the coming of the railway." The same applied to the wine of regions like Auvergne, where at one time it had been so abundant and so cheap for lack of means of export that it was even used to mix mortar. 

The wines that benefited most were those of the Midi. By the late 1850's 

salants," pp. 256-59; A. Audiganne, La Région du bas de la Loire, pp. 2-12.) The old locution "C'est porter sel en Brouage," equivalent to carrying coals to Newcastle, died as the trade and the salt-pans of Brouage (Charente-Inférieure) died. 

[[68]]

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

217 they were selling in Lyon for a fifth of what they had cost under Louis Philippe, and reaching out for the Paris market. Soon, predicted a railway engineer in 1863, the hogsheads "painfully transported in Indian files of little carts pulled by the small oxen of the Tarn mountains will be carried at little cost by railroad" to Cantal and the Limousin. He was right. In the southeast, too, when a new line opened from Grenoble to Valence in 1864, the peasants of Morette (Isère) gave up their poor local growths for better, cheaper Midi wines, and grew walnuts instead, which they could export profitably over the new rails. This kind of thing happened more gradually in the center-in the Limagne, where in mid-century half to two-thirds of the rich farmlands were planted in grapes and where the wheel only turned with the century; and in Vivarais, where even the country roads were covered with trellises until the wines of the Rhône valley and regions further south came in by rail and road around the 1890's.69 Such places on the whole held out until the Phylloxera had destroyed their vineyards in the 1880's or, further north, in the 1890's. But the catastrophe past, few vineyards north of Périgord or west of Yonne were replanted on the old scale. Lower Languedoc, on the other hand, which rails had turned into a vast vine factory, destroying the old balance between agriculture and local manufactures, went through some manic-depressive phases in which disaster followed on prosperity, before settling into the industrial wine production that we know today. 

My purpose is not to chronicle the growth of the wine industry or of any other, but to suggest what the presence of viable and accessible roads and rails did to people and to their way of life. It changed them radically. It opened possibilities sometimes sighed for but never within reach. The turning wheels on road and railway, even wheelbarrows, meant vastly greater carrying power, more movement and faster movement, more productivity and more resources, more choice or at least more freedom to choose. The peasant used to bad roads began to resent and avoid them once he could compare them with rather better ones. Man who, in a geographer's words, had always ignored difficult terrain and stalked over it regardless, no longer did so once he had learned that such effort could be avoided. Roads would be left to die, not because they were unusable but because they were at last recognized as hard. But also roads, once something of a luxury, became a necessity. Roads and rails brought men into the market, permitted them to drink wine or sell it profitably, or to develop crops that could not be marketed before, and to give up growing others that could now be bought more cheaply. They also brought ruin to local enterprises no longer protected by earlier isolation, to outdated occupational groups like the riverboatmen, and to producers of mediocre local goods or crops fated to be outmatched by specialized ones. They set people on the move-because those people could get away more easily or because they had to get away, because things were going better or worse, because oppor- 

[[218]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

tunities beckoned somewhere else and could now, for the first time, be seized.\* The move was not only in space, but in time and mind as well: roads and rails introduced new foods into the diet, new materials in the building of the house, new objects in its interior, new tools in the fields about it, new things to do on holidays, and new kinds of clothes to wear. They offered opportunities for enterprise and hence for social mobility that were not there before; the jobs that went with roads and railways alone were temptations that set many on the move. 

Great motors of civilization, the imperial prosecutor of Agen had called the roads and railroads in 1867.† But what was needed before civilization could percolate to the rural masses were the humbler motors that the Freycinet Plan set within their reach. 

Not only civilization, but national unity too. There could be no national unity before there was national circulation. The Pyrenees, Brittany, Flanders, and the Massif Central were either self-contained or part of entities to which the larger entity, France, was largely irrelevant. The railways closed down the mule passes of the Pyrenees and eventually (as the economy and the mentality they spread caught on) made those peaks a wall for France. On the other hand, railways breached the Chinese wall that fenced in Lower Brittany and helped homogenize the lands along their routes. It was more than a coincidence that the old Breton minstrels first disappeared along the new railways. Or that the building of a local railway line from Furnes to Poperinghe turned the Flemish peasants' ancient north-south trade across the Franco-Belgian border to a more purely French direction. 

So roads, of stone or steel, welded the several parts into one. The postal service had a role in this as well. It too developed from an exceptional and costly service to a commonplace of everyday use. In the 1840's, when Benoît Malon's father died and his uncle sent a letter to say that he would take the boy, the arrival of the postman, in his smock with red-facings and a crossbelt embossed with a glittering shield of bronze, set the whole family astir. "It was the first letter mother ever received; in the six-household hamlet there weren't two letters a year; it cost twelve sous. The postman read it out. 

[[9970]]

\* And, finally, because third-class rail fares were more than halved between 1871 and 1910. This could lead to previously unheard-of ventures, as when, shortly before the First World War, René Bazin encountered a peasant family traveling in a third-class compartment somewhere in the Pyrenees: "Je n'avais jamais rencontré des paysans... voyageant si loin de chez eux, sans idée de lucre ou de piété. Et ce paysan touriste, encore mal éveillé et traîné par le monde, m'apparut comme un symptôme, comme le prédécesseur inconscient des masses qu'allèchent le billet à prix réduit, l'aquarelle affichée dans les gares rurales et l'envie grandissante de goûter à tous les plaisirs des riches." (En Province, Paris, 1921, p. 208.) 

In this connection, we may note the words of Claude-Joseph Tissot, dean of the Faculty of Letters of the University of Dijon, who thought that the best remedy for the epidemic of "demonic possession" in the wilds of Savoy in 1865 would be the completion of the last 16 km of road between Thonon and Morzine-for "with goods and travelers, ideas would circulate that would advantageously modify the prejudices of the populace" ("Les Possédés de Morzine," Revue moderne, May 1865). 

Roads, Roads, and Still More Roads 

[[219]]

In 1848 the English system of the prepayment of letters by postage stamp was introduced (actually beginning 1849). Letters henceforth cost only four sous to send, one-third the cost of Malon's uncle's letter, and postal traffic gradually increased. We have seen already that in the 1850's the use of stamps remained unfamiliar to some, and indeed the total postal traffic remained negligible: 3.64 pieces per capita in 1834, 4.86 in 1844, 9.06 in 1854, 19.75 in 1874, 37-49 in 1884. These figures include periodicals sent by mail, a category that in those years had little meaning for peasants (as opposed to rural notables). For letter post alone the figure, rounded off, jumped from one letter in 1789 for every French man, woman, and child to two in 1830. Not much of a jump. The figure stood at five in 1860, at nine in 1869, at 14 in 1880, at 20 in 1890, at double that on the eve of the war, and there it reached a saturation point. So the sharpest changes in the rhythm of growth occurred expectably during the Third Republic, notably it seems in the quarter century or so before the war."1 

In the remoter areas that most interest us, the pattern is roughly similar, though steadily behind France as a whole. Thus Corrèze and Creuse, which Alain Corbin has studied, bought about two and a half times as many stamps in 1888 as in 1845. But this still left these departments at about a third of the national average. Part of the trouble may have been the lack of post offices, least likely to appear in poor and difficult country, yet most needed there if such areas were to be reached or mail distributed. The large department of Aveyron, whose 305 communes were cut off from one another by numerous ravines that made distribution difficult, had 27 post offices in 1860, 43 in 1872, 78 in 1886, 110 in 1900, 145 in 1908. And there were villages like Mosset in Pyrénées-Orientales (which did not have a decent road to Prades, 10 km away, until 1882) that got their post offices in the twentieth century." My guess is that in areas like these the real acceleration of postal traffic came after 1880 or even later, and that when, in 1910, Emmanuel Labat found a Gascon village that was adding a third postman because the two it had were "overloaded by newspapers and postcards young men and girls have got into the habit of sending each other," the situation he described was both rare and recent.78 

It was nevertheless true that all postal activity was increasing. Postal orders (the salvation of a young boy in 1866, who used them to send home every five francs he earned as a peddler so he could not be robbed on the road) soared after they became exempt from stamp duty in 1879: 14.5 million francs' worth were delivered in 1881, 789 million in 1898. The optical telegraph (Chappe's semaphore) went out by 1852, leaving behind a description for those who gesticulate: that they have a telegraph in their stomach. Between 1851 and 1855 all the prefectural seats were linked to Paris by telegraph lines, Mende and Bastia bringing up the rear. But lesser places were not connected until the 1870's, so that sub-prefects in Tarn and Ariège, for instance, learned 

[[74]]

[[220]]

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

how the Italian wars were going by couriers, who were outpaced by ordinary travelers. The number of telegraph offices tripled and more, as the railroads spread between the 1880's and the end of the century. As a result, by 1897 in the fairly typical southwestern department of Tarn, where in 1859 the sole bureau at Albi had handled just 663 telegrams, mostly official messages, the traffic had reached a modern figure, above 140,000. More and more links that helped to persuade people that the land was one. 

[[75]]

A number of Frenchmen have spoken of roads as having cemented national unity.76 If this is true, and I think it is, the fallout of the Freycinet Plan did more to achieve this than the great highways of Monarchy and Empire, which cemented no more (though it was a great deal) than an administrative structure. If, as Maurice Bédel would have it, the roads "have forged the profound sensibility of France and, above all, its patriotic feelings," then it is in the latter part of the nineteenth century with macadam and steel rails that these feelings were hammered out." 

Communications are cumulative. It was Robert Louis Stevenson who persuaded the tribal chiefs of Samoa to cut a road through the wilderness, which later, in his memory, was called the Road of Gratitude. When it was opened in October 1894, a very good date from our point of view, this is what Stevenson said: "Our road is not built to last a thousand years, yet in a sense it is. When a road is once built, it is a strange thing how it collects traffic, how every year as it goes on, more and more people are found to walk thereon, and others are raised up to repair and perpetuate it, and keep it alive.”78 