+++
title = "14 RUS IN URBE"

+++

I shall say nothing just now of the peasantry because they live in a world of their own, with its own uses and traditions, which must be studied separately. 

-Po G. HAMERTON 

"IT WASN'T THE countryside, there were houses; it wasn't a city, the streets had ruts like turnpikes and the grass grew upon them; it wasn't a village, the houses were too high." Victor Hugo's description of the Faubourg Saint- Marcel, valid for the July Monarchy, could easily apply to many a country town one generation later-and even two! Country and town interpenetrated in small, sleepy centers like cerilly (Allier), Millau (Aveyron), Brioude and Yssingeaux (I:Iaute-Loire), Florae and Marvejols (Lozere), Saint-Flour (Cantal). Such towns, which acted as "tiny capitals" for perhaps half a dozen communes, were sleeping not-quite-beauties periodically awakened when the brief bustle of the weekly market or seasonal fair broke their quiet. Yet it was through these towns that the national culture and the changes it suggested were transmitted to the surrounding countryside. "Laboratories," Adolphe Blanqui called them, "where the enterprising spirit of the bourgeoisie prepares the experiments from which the country people benefit."l 

When Blanqui wrote and for a long time after, these little country centers were really closer to rural than to city standards. Large bourgs or villages in most respects, they struck city folk as primitive, dreary places, "gloomy and isolated" like Parthenay (Deux-Sevres) in 1882, from which "all intellectual life was banished," or like Vic-Ie-Comte (Puy-de-Dome), dragging along in anachronistic unpicturesqueness in 1903. In 1904 Mende (Lozere), capital of wild Gevaudan, was a "gloomy and sinister" place of exile for the teachers, officers, and civil servants who were forced to live there. The numbers of such rusticated exiles were sometimes remarkably large-in Mende proper, for example, they and their families accounted for 1,234 of the 5,261 residents-and where this was so, the trade and life of the town turned around their activities. There were a great many towns like Tournon (Ardeche), population 5,000, which "lives only by its sub-prefecture, its tribunal, and the strangers 

Rus in Urbe 233 

that the two attract. Take them away and you reduce half the population to misery."2 

The presence of a community of strangers in little towns like these, unrelated to their normal life, created something very much like a colonial situation. Taine had sensed this when, in 1864, he had described the provinces as being under the trusteeship of Paris, which civilized them from afar by sending them its commercial travelers, its civil servants, and its garrisons.· The situation had changed little two score years later. Ardouin-Dumazet, the professional traveler, noted that the town of Bellac (Haute-Vienne), without its garrison and functionaries, would not be very much. It had little industry, merely a bellows factory and a tannery, but at the marketplace "the peasant women stand in two rows by their meager wares: a cheese, a few cherries, strawberries, a rabbit or a chicken. Between them come and go the ladies, civil servants' wives followed by a maid, officers' wives accompanied by the orderly."3 Here is the typical colonial marketplace with its pitifully small heaps of produce, its endlessly patient sellers, making tiny but significant profits from catering to creoles or to colonists. 

Where towns were not islands for marooned representatives of the central power, they were (as M. F. Pariset said of the Languedoc) dependent extensions of the countryside. By and large living conditions in such towns were remarkably similar to those on the farm; the more so since a good proportion of their inhabitants were often actively engaged in agricultural occupations. Many doctors and travelers spoke feelingly about the lack of sewers in these farming towns, the utterly filthy streets, alleys, and courts, all used as public sumps, which made walking dangerous at all times, heroic after dark. There was the "primitive habit" of relieving oneself in the street, the only resort when most homes lacked any kind of cesspool. And there were the ubiquitous domestic animals-horses, oxen, chickens, ducks, geese, and man's best friend, the pig-worsening the muck and smells. In 1851 there were 185 pigs in the town of Florae (Lozere), about one for every ten inhabitants, and almost as many pigsties, attached of course to the homes. As Doctor Allaux noted at Pamiers (Ariege) in 1866, the general mess was much increased by the blood and offal of pigs slaughtered at home. But despite a good few complaints from sanitary councils, the "stubborn inertia" of the pigs' owners probably held out there through the 1890's, as it did at Privas and Tulle. It was difficult, as the doctor himself remarked, to ask that people cease to raise "pigs, geese, ducks, etc." in their homes; too many families lived off them.4 

There was another consideration: in areas like Provence, poor soil, relatively 

• Hippolyte Taine, Carnets de voyage, p. 321: "La province est une autre France en tutelle de Paris, qui la civilise et l'cmancipe de loin par ses commis voyageurs, ses garnisons mobiles, sa colonic de fonctionnaires, ses journaux, et un peu par scs livres." What other country, onc wonders, would consider itself the province of its capital?234 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

few animal droppings, and lack of means to buy artificial fertilizer made manure precious. Town and village streets were strewn with branches and leaves of aromatic plants (box, lavender, rosemary, sage) carried down from the mountains and left to rot in the streets and alleys, mixed with whatever contributions men or animals made. So there were permanent dung heaps in every street and alley, along with the rats that thrived in such singularly favorable conditions. A century-long battle of municipal and sanitary authorities to change this state of things had tough going against the opposition of the little man with no other source of manure for his patch of land, not even a privy. It was a long time before the sewage legislation of 1894 made an impact. But the removal of the family dung heap, together with the disappearance of the family hog, would radically alter the landscape of rural towns.5 

Meanwhile, other important steps had been taken to alter the face of small and middling towns, where the pulling down of picturesque houses and streets that we regret today came as emancipation. Age withered, years condemned. Old towns were ugly and grimy. Exceptions to this rule called for special comment. "Pezenas (Herault) is quite handsome, despite its age," marveled one officer. "Despite its antiquity, Dax is a pretty town," reflected another. And Privas would have been quite pretty but for the irregularities and the barbarian architecture of squares and houses that recalled feudal times too much for the modern eye.6 

By 1876 an architect pronounced Privas liveable enough, provided one stayed beyond the new boulevards built outside the old center. Some towns, like Orleans, cleared new streets in the center itself, as Paris was doing; in most the surrounding walls were torn down and replaced by broad boulevards to "give the city air" and free it from the constrictions of a hemmed-in past, conservatism, and narrowness of spirit as well as physical space. There was no voice of consequence that did not welcome the destruction of dark twisting lanes to let in air and light; the razing of ramparts to make way for "magnificent promenades"; the leveling of damp, ramshackle, unhealthy buildings to permit the building of "elegant new ones," better for health and comfort. The "strangled" towns, once stifled by their parapets, advanced to freedom, progress, and civic beauty. A newspaper in Var voiced the general pride and sense that new streets and buildings were not only superior to the old ones, but more beautiful, besides. "If our fathers, so proud of their strangled, tortuous streets, their tiny squares, with their banal fountains ... their heavy cloaks of stone, ... came back to life," imagine their amazement to see "spacious avenues, princely residences, charming homes ... open to sun and light, ... squares and walks shaded like lordly parks, ... pleasing gardens that would do the most opulent squire proud."1 

By the end of the century there was even artificial light. And if a city employee went around to put out the flickering gaslights at II P.M. or so, when honest people had long been in bed; and if as in Laval in 1902 only one street 

Rus in Urbe 235 lamp in four was lit on nights when the almanac predicted moonlight (even if there were clouds);8 at least these marvels of modernity softened the hold of darkness, moderated the grip of interminable winter evenings, and burned like promises of a new world in store. 

Cynosure of surrounding villages, the little town tended to be deadly dull. Boredom, ennui seems to have been the chief pastime of the small-town bourgeoisie. Many people in traditional societies may well have spent most of their leisure time being bored. But like all those who worked for a living, they had few leisure hours to fill. Those who did not work were largely concentrated in small towns, and there we find ennui practically a way of life.· Parisians banished to the provinces bear eloquent testimony to this. We hear the same bitter complaint from workers, from teachers, from noblemen forced to take up residence to tend to business, and from officials who despaired of finding anything to say in their reports. "In a district like this," apologized the subprefect of Ceret (Pyrenees-Orientales), "there is very rarely an incident of any importance ... and I ask myself with real uneasiness what I might possibly find of interest to report next week."9 

There were cards and pipes. There were ritual promenades. There was (where there was a courthouse) the occasional titillating trial, a sure draw to which the public could flock in such numbers as to make the floor collapse, as in Vic-Fezensac (Gers) in 1874. There was (eventually) the railway station, where idle strollers met to stand and watch the trains pass by. Ardouin-Dumazet arrives at Sainte-Foy-Ia-Grande, on the Dordogne, one Sunday afternoon. The year is 1901 or 1902. Around the station a great crowd. They have come, he explains, "voir passer les trains [should it have been le train?], occupation reguliere et dominicale de tant d'habitants de petite ville."lO 

There was the occasional burial; un bel enterrement was never scorned. And sometimes a hall where trav"eling actors could put on a show. The censors kept a vigilant eye on such troupes through the July Monarchy and the Second Empire, but small towns saw less and less of them after mid-century. Then, in the 1860'S one begins to hear of cafes-concerts, cafes-chant ants, alcazars, casinos, ever more numerous, patronized not only by the habitually idle, but by working-class families (lots of children), attracted by the moderate price of a consommation for which one got to hear an orchestra, singers, perhaps be treated to a pantomime. By the 1870's, "the least little town has one," reported a traveler through the Midi.ll 

There was, of course, gossip. And what gossip: "mesquinerie ... taquinerie ... bassesse," reported one Vogue to another in 1881. "C'est l'envahissement de 

.. A song of 1848 entitled "Tuer l'ennui" throws a suggestive light on this problem of boredom (which Musset's Fantasio had also encountered): "le ne sais rien en politique / Mais j'ai besoin de mouvement! / La rue eclate en fusillades, / Le peuple va droit devant lui; / AlIons faire des barricades! / Que voulez-vous! 11 faut tuer l'ennui!" (Eugene Pottier, Chants revolutionnaires, pp. 27- 28.) 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

la mediocrite ignorante et paresseuse ... s'agitant sur le theatre retreci du canton ou du departement ... triste spectacle."l2 Above all, there was the club and cafe. Somnolence, lethargy, idleness, reported the police superintendent of a small town in Ardeche in 1863; a backward civilization, an apathetic spirit, a population that never looked beyond the parish pump. "Three-quarters of our fellow citizens" (of the men, that is) spent their life in the cafe. Cafes were less for drinking than for sitting in, and for looking out of. There were cafes for different cliques and political groups, but there was always one main cafe where public opinion was made and whence it spread abroad, where the local paper might be written, where one could exchange all of the gossip and news of a small realm ruled by the idle, bored, and curious habitual customers. Interestingly, at Draguignan in Var the supremacy of the chief cafe (and of its twin, the circle) began to wane with the Second Empire and the 1870's, their eminence killed by the spread of an aflluence until that time restricted to a few. "Now," the historian Frederic Mireur wrote in the 1890's, "the idle are everywhere and nowhere." The former idlers were impoverished, idleness itself too diffused to prove one's eminence, and "the bourgeoisie has given place to merchants," with their altogether different tone.13 

So by the 1890's the bourgeois class, if we may use the term, was seen as differentiated: the merchants and wholesalers who sat in the cafes of Draguignan were not the bourgeois, the old urban aristocracy, but the jumped-up something else. They were not the bourgeois, for one thing, because they were not idle, and idleness was one important element of the old definition of the bourgeoisie. Yet they were bourgeois because they lived in cities, and their growing prominence indicated that society and social classifications had become broader and more complicated over the past decades. Blanqui, in 1851, had found no reason to distinguish among the bourgeois inhabitants of small towns. For him the bourgeois were still defined simply as those who did not work the land, rather than as one segment of the urban population as opposed to another, let alone as today to an industrial working-class. 

The traditional bourgeois was the man whose primary attachment was to the bourg, the agglomeration that had an urban style and vocation amid the dispersed farms and villages of the countryside. But we have already seen that this was a very wide category. It could include quite humble artisans whose base was in the bourgs at one end and nobles at the other. In part because nobles also lived in town, and their urban ties seemed so significant in peasant eyes, in part because the landed aristocrats lagged in numbers, riches, and power behind the rising business classes, noblemen were easily classified as bourgeois. Popular speech incorporated the traditional sense of dependency: the peasant's master was, by definition, a bourgeois. As H.-F. Buffet has said of the landowners of Upper Brittany: "Though they were often nobles, their tenants called them 'not'bourgeois.' They also said 'not'mattre'-our master." 

Rusin Urbe 237 

In Emmanuel Labat's Gascony, too, there were only peasants and bourgeois, the latter including nobles, who lived and drew their revenues in much the same manner as their untitled peers, so that "one makes no distinction between the twO."14 

Perhaps it was a matter of perception: "At Montlu~on," explained a subprefect writing from Allier, "every person who doesn't get his living from his work or from revenues acquired by his work is called a bourgeois. The bourgeois is the man who does nothing and who has never done anything." Though by any definition the bourgeois constituted a small proportion of the population, something like 10 percent, many men clearly qualified under this description, and more appeared to do so. Madame Lafarge, star of a famous murder under Louis Philippe, remembered the men of Tulle (that is, the men of the only social group that counted) passing their lives in the cafes or around the law courts: "They're almost all lawyers, solicitors, doctors, and Republicans."ltl A large share of the income of professionals came from private revenues, inherited or through marriage, and they cannot have worked hard or long. Many positions, like that of Maurice Barres's father at Charmes, were in any case nominal, providing a function or title in keeping with a man's social position, while making few demands on his energy or time. 

But there were also those who lived on rentes alone, whether from stocks, bonds, loans, or the renting of land, more than 6 percent of the population. Such rentiers were especially numerous in smaller country towns. According to the 1872 census, some 10 percent of the males in Cahors lived exclusively from private revenues. So did more than 8 percent of the men in and around Rennes, in 1874, and another 20 percent had some such income, which was supplemented by "professional activities." But in a really small town, like Florae in Lozere, where in 1851 almost exactly 10 percent of the inhabitants belonged to the bourgeoisie, 17 of the 100 heads of bourgeois families gave their profession as rentier or as living from the revenue of their property. Together with the town's five pensioners, we thus find an important proportion of men with time on their hands. The influence of such men while they lasted and the effects of their disappearance as a significant force in the small towns have never received adequate notice. And this in spite of Henri Febvre's perceptive remark that between 1880 and 1940 he had seen, as all men of his age could see with their own eyes, "the downfall of the man who does nothing, the man who does not work."16 

As long as they lasted and as long as the way of life that they represented lasted, people like these must have been at the very center of small-town life. Their means were limited, but their time was not: they could afford a good deal of it for desultory talk. If they were not all Republicans, as Madame Lafarge would have it, they were at any rate politicized, for politics-local and national-furnished matters for concern and debate where there were relatively few other matters to consider. In any case, they were brought up to it. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

A bourgeois's son was raised on classical studies. The ideals these taught him, however vague they were, accorded with the pursuits available to him and intensified their effect: to oversee the administration of an estate (albeit from a distance), to fill some public charge that would not prove too time-consuming, to make an occasional appearance "on the forum," and to reserve plenty of hours for the "pleasures of the spirit and of friendship" were worthy of the teachings of the Roman texts.17 

Roman or not this bourgeoisie was rural. Often it lived on an estate or within visiting range of it. Landed property meant first electoral rights, then economic prestige right through 1870. The bourgeois "measured his influence by the size of his lands." Even when an office, a profession, or a trade required him to settle in town, the land remained close and he stayed close to it because that was the true source of his fortunes, hence of his influence and status.18 

Needless to say, not all bourgeois did nothing. And clearly bourgeois was (and is) a confusing term that conceals even more differences than it reveals. According to Emile Guillaumin, in the first 20 years of the Republic, the population of cerilly fell into four major groups: great landed families, aloof from all the other groups and anchored firmly in their caste; a more accessible lot including doctors, pharmacists, notaries, the richest merchants, and a few civil servants; a third group composed of businessmen (traders, cattle dealers, and storekeepers), stewards and other estate agents, and the prosperous farmers who ensured the liaison with the fourth group, the "little people," small shopkeepers and artisans. It was chiefly the last group who emphasized the towncountry opposition, wearing suit jackets and putting on the dog to mark themselves off from the "peasants in blue smocks, whose speech [was] harsh, uncouth, and patoisant."· Yet it must have been the same men, closest to the peasants whom they despised and who resented and envied them in turn, who were the great carriers of the ways and manners that they themselves tried so hard to ape. 

This is where the term bourgeois can easily betray us. Where the bourgeoisie ended and the "people" or "little people" began depends entirely on the point of view. For most officials, after Guillaumin's second group. For the lower orders, somewhere in the fourth. Where the line is drawn does not really matter much, as long as we remember how flexible the term bourgeois wasand that the label did matter to people at the time, who made fairly refined distinctions (though these vary rather confusingly). Peasants were very much aware of what the Dauphinois Barnave had once denounced as importance, and this at all levels. Thus, the Beaujolais description of social mobility: "The 

• Charles-Louis Philippe, mon ami, pp. Io-II. Guillaumin has further distinguished subcategories within each group, noting, for example, a "sharp boundary between seneux and chop;nards" among artisans and small shopkeepers. See also in Andre Armengaud, Les Populations de l'est- Aquitain, P',254, the 1871 report of a Toulouse magistrate named Carol (Archives Nationales, C 2854), which reveals the rise of an intermediate class between ouvriers and bourgeoisie, a stream feeding Gambetta's nouvelles couches sodalel. 

Rus in Urbe 239 father had straw in his sabots, the son puts hay in his boots." Mistral, who belonged to the boot-shod sort, tells us that in his family of very prosperous farmers (a sort of "transition between peasants and bourgeoisie") the parents became obsequious before messieurs who did not speak like them, and that his father, who normally called his wife "the mistress," called her ma mouie (woman or wife) in front of his social superiors.ID 

What mattered even more was that one could quite easily move from one class to the other, then rise from shabby to less shabby bourgeoisie. And that the social hierarchy of the little towns was so structured that those who moved up a step remained close to each other and to those behind.20 This was yet another aspect of the bourgeoisie: on the one hand, idleness and the time to talk to others; on the other, activity and the opportunity to influence others, not only by argument but by example, too. It is a point that the sub-prefect of Aubusson in Creuse expressed well in 1853, when he explained that the bourgeoisie of his area was new, its popular roots still very much in evidence. "It is still the people, but richer and better schooled. Its intelligence and activity are remarkable, its pride and ambition immeasurable .... A bourgeoisie [like this] holds the people in its hand as I do my pen at this moment. It does their business, lends them money, flatters them by innumerable family connections."· Here was the aspiring bourgeois, pushing out the old. 

Costs and wages were rising, crop prices were not, because railroads prevented shortages by carrying grain all over the country. Yet land hunger kept land prices up. By the end of the Second Empire land fetched such high prices that even with the best management it paid no more than 2 or 3 percent, whereas safe bonds or stocks could bring returns of 5 percent or more.t By the turn of the century, the landed estate had become a burden; the shortage of hands had cut its income further and the prestige of the rural bourgeois, whose sphere of action shrank with their revenues, was singularly diminished. Increasingly isolated, the old bourgeoisie was being overtaken by new men who imposed themselves by wealth and services that brought them into broad contact with the peasants, with whom they dealt prOfessionally, in office, shop, or 

• "In all," he continued, "the bourgeoisie and the people live in a close relationship where the decisive influence necessarily belongs to the more intelligent." But for all that he felt the bourgeoisie's origins and "passion for equality [made] it essentially democratic" (Archives Nationales, FicIII Creuse 8, Aubusson, June 26, 1853). One might also cite in this connection Henri Beraud's Maitre Anselme, the patron of a small ironworks, "dont Ies gens s'etonnent qu'it precMt le desordre et qui repond: 'On est patron, c'est vrai, mais on est du peuple, et ~a se verra s'il le faut' " (Les Lurons de Sabolas, Paris, 1932, p. 92). 1" In a lecture delivered in 1877 a Champagne veterinarian explained that investment in a farm brought an average return of 2.5 percent. So the man who bought one did so not as a moneymaking proposition, but as an "affaire de luxe, de convenance," since he could get better returns elsewhere (Conjerence agricole faite par M. Boulland, veterinaire, Joinville, Haute-Marne, 1877, p. IS). Same song from M. F. Pariset, writing about Aude and Tarn in 1882: "C'est un tres grand luxe, aujourd'hui, que de possooer de la terre; un grand luxe quand toutes Ies choses de la vie ont singulierement rencheri, de ne retirer de sa fortune qu'un interet de 2 et 2.5 a 3 pour cent" (Economie rurale . .. Montagne Noire, p. 65). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

market, or into whose homes or stables or dram-shops they entered in a routine way to tend or heal. Meanwhile, as the large landholding became increasingly unprofitable, peasants made better money out of the acres that they could work themselves with the help of their family and at most a few closely supervised hired hands.21 

To live in a bourgeois way cost more. Comfort, food, social life all became more expensive. Small revenues from landed property would not keep pace. The men whose social and economic status depended on them reacted in three ways: by saving and drawing in their horns, by selling off, and by family planning or voluntary celibacy. The first method limited their everyday impact on society; the second removed the base of their influence and prestige; the third, which many times left a family without a direct heir, affected continuities that had been an integral part of the propertied class's regional influence. The alien heir of a local family that died out did not command the prestige or the interest his forerunners had enjoyed. In any case, he often sold out. Nowhere were all these developments clearer than in the southwest, where after the 1860's large estates began giving way to smaller holdings,'*' land passing to peasant farmers who could save more because they used the family labor force, hence did not have to worry much about high salaries; who worked the land harder than the hired hands of the large domains had ever done; and who diversified their farming and so were less affected by the fluctuations of grain prices. In any case greater demand sparked by rising living standards, coupled with improved transportation, meant that more crops could now be bought and sold in the market, and at better prices, at least from the point of view of the small producer, who ended up with more cash even if the market price was not so very high. More money meant more land, but also bigger, better-built houses, better diet, better dress, and better tools to turn out more produce. It also meant better education-for the peasant through broader social contacts, for his children through the school. Better able to learn the lessons that the rural bourgeoisie had to teach, the peasant tended in due course to take over their functions. By the eve of the First World War, Labat found the prosperous peasant of Gers replacing his erstwhile betters-not only in the country house or small chateau he bought from their heirs, but in their seats in the municipal council and mairie, as deputy to the justice of peace, on juries and schoolboards, as part of the prefectural administration. The peasants had become the "masters of village and of the countryside."22 

• A process that Pariset identified early on, in 1867: "L'ambition de possCder, l'inquietude, l'agitation, descendent des classes aisees dans les classes rurales et penetrent celle des metayers" (Economic ruralc . .. Lauragais, p. 128). 
