+++
title = "19 DIEU EST-IL FRANCAIS? ,"

+++

There's good and evil, God and the devil. God is good, we pray to him in church, we give him his due, that is religion. But religion does not allow us to ask God for earthly goods-at most, one can pray for everybody. Now, what's good for one isn't good for the others; for if my neighbor's land is struck by hail that's so much less [grain) on his land and my wheat, if I save it, will be worth double. Thus religion is about saving our souls from the eternal fire by observing the prayers and the services of Sundays and feastdays. But religion has nothing to do with our private interests. In the same way, the priest preaches that our happiness is not of this world and that we have been put here to suffer. That's well said, but too much is too much! ~EORGE SAND 

IN THE MID-1870's 35,387,703 of the 36,000,000 people in France were listed in the official census as Catholics. The rest declared themselves Protestants (something under 600,000), Jews (5°,000), or freethinkers (80,000). The secular clergy of the Catholic church alone included 55,J69 priests, one for every 639 inhabitants. Roman Catholicism remained, as it had been in 1801, "the religion of the majority of Frenchmen."l 

Whatever else this meant, it meant that the Church was an integral part of life. It presided over all the major occasions in a person's life-birth, marriage, death-and over the welfare of the community and the conduct of its members. It helped the crops increase and the cattle prosper. It healed, taught, and preserved from harm. Its pervasive power was apparent in the appropriation of godly terminology for more vulgar use: kyrielle (litany) for a long string of words or a tedious story; gloria for a confused noise of voices; glose for carping; peromnia or faire des dominus for hollow chatter; brimborion (from the breviary) for empty baubles or knickknacks. Most of the terms refer to uselessness or confusion, like rapronobis or orapronobis, used to describe something incongruous or stupid, or at any rate complicated, expressed in incomprehensible words taken from the most obvious place where the people would hear them-the language of the Church.2 

Dialect imitations of vespers, hymns, or canticles were abundant. Even more so, jocular graces thanking God for the soup being poured and praying heaven that no more mouths should appear to consume what was not enough already. Such playful familiarities do not tell us much about people's feelings, only that religious practices were part of everyday experience. They offered formulas that were repeated as charms and benedictions, even though their meaning was inevitably obscure. Witness this "Latin" grace pronounced after supper with no intention of levity:3 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Rogimur tibi garcias, jarnipotens Deus, prunas d'hiver, per un inficit, qui a vit Iou renard, per caromnia cercla cercloron. 

Amen! 

Agimus tibi gracias, omnipotens Deus, pro universis beneficiis tuis: qui vivis et regnas, per omnia secula seculorum. 

Amen! 

Religion provided spells and incantations, often written down and passed on preciously like amulets. These, like its ceremonies, were efficacious and protective. The peasant, noted Father Gorse in 1895, was proud to recite his prayers. "He has prayers for thunder, for sickness, for going to bed at night. They are good, very good, these prayers, says he, though he doesn't understand them very well, since they are in French," or in Latin. The ritual lent solemnity to private and public occasions, as the term solemnization applied to ceremonies like marriage attests. This was particularly important in rites of passage. The first communion, the first time one received the Eucharist, was crucial-a "great matter for country children; many cannot find a job before they have done it." Marking admission into the world of workers and of earners-almost an adult world-the first communion and the preparation for it, the catechism, provided the basic initiation into the moral mysteries of life. "The children did not know how to read, so the priest was teaching them the catechism by heart [which was] full of extraordinary words and which they laughed at," recorded Charles Peguy.4 They must have had a sense that obscure powers were properly invoked with obscure incantations. Only, when one spoke more clearly, the borrowed terms expressed sentiments on which the Christian message seems to have had little impact. 

Was Christ's personal message communicated in many a village church? We cannot tell. Those sermons that one finds concern themselves with the proprieties and transgressions of everyday behavior. Policemen were less concerned with immanent justice than with infringements of petty human laws; and village priests seem to have taken a similar view. This was their civilizing function. Along with this, it was their duty to see that their flock observed all of the formal and routine religious rites. It is by the practice of such rites that adherence to religion is generally measured. When there is little participation, even on high holidays, or when it declines, religion is said to decay . Yet what did church attendance mean to churchgoers? 

"Sunday, the peasants go to church," wrote Madame Romieu at the end of the Second Empire, "some moved by religious feeling, most by habit or by fear of what people say." One went to church because it was the thing to do on Sunday, because it was one of the few social occasions of the week, because it was an opportunity for talking business or meeting friends, acquaintances, relatives. It was--especially for the women, once men had grasped at the opportunities that fairs held out-the sole occasion to escape the isolation in which many lived, the major recreation or diversion in a restricted life. Observance, 

Dieu Est-il F ranfais? 341 business, and pleasure were combined. One went to mass wearing one's Sunday best, and given the muddy cart tracks, this often meant special pathsmass roads, chemins de messe. Public announcements were made by the village crier as the congregation left the service, public sales were often timed to fall after it, one could slip off later to call on the notary or the doctor, or drop in to the tavern, circle, or cafe. Even if a majority did not attend the service but went about their work as on any other day, "a multitude of peasants gathered in front of the church, discussed politics, made deals, filled the taverns."5 

In a world where entertainment was scarce, church provided a certain festive diversion. Those attending might well "love the high mass, the rich ornaments, seeing a great many statues of saints in their churches." Writing about his grandmother, Charles Peguy presented church attendance as a treat for the lonely child raised in a woodcutter's hut in Bourbonnais in the early 1800'S: "When she was good, she was allowed to go on Sunday to mass in the villageshe wore her sabots because one doesn't go to church barefoot, and she was happy because that's where everybody met, where they exchanged news, where one heard about deaths, marriages, births, where gossip flowed about what was going on, where servants were hired."6 

Observance clearly varied according to local tendencies. In a classic study, Andre Siegfried has pointed out the relationship between granitic terrain and the isolation, conservatism, and priestly vocations the rocky soil engenders. More recently, Serge Bonnet has sketched out a hierarchy of observance that runs from grainland down through vine to forest, where it is least prevalent.7 But the belief and behavior of the peasants never ceased to oscillate between observance and transgression. Until the Revolution church attendance was compulsory, and religious sanctions that could cause serious social embarrassment menaced those who skipped their Easter duties. The elimination of constraints broke this decreed unanimity. Those who had been quietly uncommitted (as in Aunis-Saintonge, where the forced conversion of Protestants had made lukewarm Catholics) were free to fall away.8 Political divisions and internal schism during the 1790's confused many more, and deprived parishes of pastors or cut sections of a community off from the only priest. For a decade or more, at least until the Concordat of 1801, a good number of young people grew up without catechism, whole communities did not attend church, and others ceased to celebrate traditional festivals. The Decadi created the habit of working on Sunday.'*' The absence of priests left marriages to civil 

• With Napoleon on Elba, the mayors of several communes in Yonne complained that the priests were trying to restore holidays abolished by the new calendar, and that they were abetted by cabarhiers, who encouraged "this false piety" so that "domestics on those days won't do anything." One mayor remarked: "Les habitants des campagnes qui avaient regrette autrefois la suppression de certaines fetes, les verraient rCtablir aujourd'hui avec repugnance, parce qu'ils savent qu'un trap grand nombre de fetes fait perdre aux cultivateurs et aux ouvriers du temps et de l'argent, et leur donne des occasions de depense." And another wrote: "Le peuple n'est cependant pas si devot pour lui donner tant de fetes; dies ne servent qu'a lui faire perdre du temps et depenser de I'argent." (Archives DCpartementales, Yonne III M147, Dec: 1814; Jan. 1815.) 

342 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE authorities and led to prolonged delays before baptism, if the ceremony was performed at all. 

Some communities came to rely on the services of laymen, who took over the functions of absent priests, performing baptisms, marriages, and burials. Archives contain numerous complaints on this score, especially against village teachers, whom peasants generally chose to take the place of the absent priest. Ad hoc arrangements of this sort could prove enduring. As late as 1837 we hear that Rouvres in Loiret refused to accept a priest and, worse still, prospered in its iniquity: "Baptisms and burials are performed right and left after a fashion; there is no mass or confession; the churchwarden tolls the Angelus, the schoolmaster recites the prayers for the sick, and all goes well."9 

Canon Fernand Boulard doubts that the Revolution really affected rural religious practice very profoundly, or that much changed in this realm until the last decade or two of the nineteenth century. He may be right. But there were discordances where there had once been at least outward unity. Men who had acquired Church property and would not submit, men who had married in a civil marriage and would not seek absolution for their sin, became centers of local opposition. Not many cases of this kind of sturdy opposition developed in communities that remained cohesive, but it flourished in areas where, as in Burgundy, the memory of clerical harshness and exploitation survived, along with the fear of a reconstitution of their great domains. In M~connais, where it was said that it was better to meet a black wolf in a forest than run into a white (Cistercian) monk-crafty, vindictive, and rapaciousthe devil appears as the hero in some local legends and triumphs over Christ, disgraced by the men who served him. The peasants had burned churches there in the Middle Ages and did so again in 1789, or stayed away thereafter. But even where the road had not been so prepared, hard times frayed clerical authority. Priests were forced to ask for help from their parishioners. Rival clergymen accused each other of the worst transgressions, diminishing still further the influence of the cloth. "People begin to separate religion from its ministers," asserted the Statistique of Lot in 1831.10 But religion was its minis~ ters, just as the state was bailiffs and gendarmes. And when, after 1830, liberal local mayors opposed the influence of priests loyal to the old order, they sought to sap their authority by encouraging the drift of men away from the sacraments.· 

• Note that when, after the Restoration, the Church refused the last rites, especially burial, to Catholics accused of flouting its authority, rival authorities encouraged by recent experience were ready to replace the priest in his functions. Thus we hear in 1834 that at Gaillefontaine, not far from Rouen, the mayor "has forced entry into the church to bring in the coffin, has had the bell rung, has himself with a few supporters sung the Office for the dead, and ... has completed the burial in the absence of the priest" (Nadine-Josette Chaline, "Une Image du dioc~se de Rouen sous l'episcopat de Mgr. de Croy," Revue de l'histoire de l'eglise de France, 1972 , p. 59). The next logical step would come, as it did in Provence, when local populations "unexpectedly and spontaneously" replaced the customary religious ceremonial with solemn civil burials. Maurice Agulhon finds in this "the first public symptoms of a still-unselfconscious dechristianization" 

Dieu Est-il F ran fais ? 343 We see that in the churches, as in the schools, non-attendance is a way of measuring ineffectiveness. The growing numbers of migrant workers going to the cities added to this trend. Urban workers worked Sundays and holidays, or did so very often. The more earnest the man, the more he worked. The less responsible were the more likely to get drunk during their free time. The Church did not see them either way. Like the Revolution, acquaintance with the city did not destroy religious sentiment. It simply made nonconformity possible or created another kind of conformity. Men who attended church at home because their peers did ceased to attend church where such attendance was exceptional. The city merely provided an opportunity for the collapse of practices "shallowly rooted in the personality." Returning migrants may well have lost whatever impulse to religious conformity they had left with. They did not necessarily bandy this about so long as the priest retained his influence in the community. But they were ready to welcome emancipation when it came.ll 

At any rate, all observers seem to have sensed the shallowness of faith behind the slackness of observance. In Beauce respectable farmers, "preoccupied by the care to augment their fortune, work to this end even on Sunday during the services, so that the churches are deserted." Not that they lacked respect for religion, "but they consider that the time they would spend in church would be lost for their work and their fortune."12 Not challenge, but indifference and hardheadedness. One farmer declared that he would rather go to hell, since heaven was too high and far away. He was not interested in salvation ("it's not in my way of thinking; ... it's not done"). The paradise he sought was here on earth. "The absence of religious sentiment [in the countryside, especially] is such that there are communes where scarcely one marriage in six is blessed in church" (Y onne, 1862) .13 

In 1874 the bishop of Limoges bewailed "this grievous inertia of the masses." Alain Corbin, who has found no evidence of a great increase in religious indifference in the Limousin before 1870, notes a "brutal fall of religious practice" just about that time~not yet the godlessness the bishop of Limoges described in 1875, "but indifference, an incurable apathy, the total abandonment of religious duties, [and] universal disaffection." In the Limousin the Church's identification with the Moral Order brought anticlericalism. But even there, as almost everywhere, the most detached or hostile maintained their loyalty to rites of passage and local festivals. More generally, as in Puy-de-Dome, "the religious question leaves our countrymen indifferent." though they "continue to go to church on Sunday out of habit." And on the other side of the Massif Central, "unfortunately" rural inhabitants "are often as yet unconverted to Christianity."14 

(see Edouard Baratier, ed., Histoire de la Provence, p. 448). For my own part, I find it evidence t~t ritual itself is more important than who performs it. The Church is fine, but one can do without it.344 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Whether unconverted or disaffected, people lost their respect for Church rules and Church prohibitions. The proportion of civil marriages grew, the delays between birth and baptism became longer. Once set at 24 hours of birth, the outside limit for baptism was extended to three days in 1830, to eight days in 1887, to "the soonest possible time" in the twentieth century. In one Sologne parish the average delay between birth and baptism, which was 2.73 days in 1854, had stretched to 15.12 days by 1901; in 1950 it ran well over three months. Less fear for the newborn's life, fewer epidemics, greater closeness between husband and wife, who was increasingly expected to play a pa,rt in the ceremony, but also indifference to what the sacrament of baptism meant and to the authority of the priest. Until 1902 in the Eure villages Martine Segalen has studied marriages were extremely rare during Lent and Advent. This also changed.15 One could do without the priest if one wanted to get married when he could not, or would not, perform the ceremony. 

From the Church's point of view, every innovation only made things worse. The bicycle was blamed for enabling young people to avoid mass. Tourists, visitors, and returning emigrants felt increasingly free to speak of their indifference to religious practice or even their scorn of it. Military service side by side with "pagan" urban workers made some peasants ashamed of a show of piety as a mark of their bumpkin backwardness. Finally, with war in 1914 there came a culmination of the pressures toward detachment. Yet, how far and fast would all these factors have worked if religion had been solidly anchored in personality?16 

Religion was an urban import, like education, and, just like education, it reflected the scholarship of the Counter-Reformation and the Enlightenmentthe two at one, at least, in being alien to the countryside. Tridentine and post- Tridentine missionaries, where they could, replaced familiar native rites and practices with new ones that were strange. These had no time to settle into tradition before the Revolution and the cascade of changes following it. Religious custom remained superficial, even though convention and the need for ritual kept it in being. In this respect, reputedly devout areas appear little better than incredulous ones. For the outwardly pious Solognot, religion was "an artificial system that he bore without understanding, lacking in efficacy and well above his preoccupations." A student of Normandy sounds the same note when writing of the Caux region, where Easter services were well attended compared with the Bray region, nearby. Here, around Doudeville-en-Caux, we are in the pays eglisier. But even in this churchly area, "the people are no more knowledgeable about religious matters; ... they just practice more."17 

Such comments may explain the frequent conjunction between indifference and some form of practice, as in Bourbonnais where peasants "have recourse to religion in all great circumstances, but following ancestral traditions rather than any real faith." Religion had didactic uses: "It fills the young with fear," and that was good and necessary, "but when we're dead we're dead," and 

Dieu Est-il Franfais? 345 that was common sense. Even those peasants who eschewed religious practice wanted a resident priest, for one thing, because he would teach the children to respect their parents and authority, but above all "for rites needed in social life and to ensure good crops, for festivals often connected with a healing saint."'*' In short, the ritual and the ceremonies that were the very core of popular religion were fundamentally utilitarian. Accordingly, we might expect such pragmatic formalism to decline when its utility no longer seemed apparent, or when rival authorities and formalities beckoned. 

This of course is advanced as merest supposition. I know no way of telling the spiritual hold that the Church had on people.t At the visible level, however, its influence was based on practical services and subject to its ability to keep these up: consecration (in an offici all y acceptable sense), healing, protection, making wishes come true, and not least providing a center for traditional practices. In all these things, official religion drew generously on the popular cult of saints, of healing agencies and other useful "superstitions." Superstitions have sometimes been described as religions that did not succeed. Perhaps, in our case at least, it is they that should be called successful, since so much official religion depended on them and survived largely by indulging practices endorsed by popular belief. The people of Balesta in Comminges, noted the village teacher in 1886, "are the more religious, the more superstitious they are.Ill8 A teacher is apt to be a prej udiced, hostile witness. But it would be wrong to doubt that the connection loomed large in the public mind. 

We know about the widespread usage of the cross-about how the plowman signed himself before he drew the first furrow, and again before he sowed the first handful of grain; about how he would not cut a slice out of a loaf without first tracing a cross on it. But how far did this, or prayers, or kneeling in the fields when the Angelus tolled, go beyond the propitiation of powers that were feared but little understood? Religious practice had not been affected by the Revolution, reported a correspondent of the Abbe Gregoire in 1790, and as for the principles of religion, they had never been comprehended: "people believe more in hell than in God; they fear the priest more than they do the devil."t If this was true under the Ancien Regime, it continued in its 

• M. Bardoux, "Des caracteres ... des paysans au Bourbonnais," p. 236; Yves-Marie Hilaire, "La Pratique religieuse," pp. 61-62. In the 1870'S Philip G. Hamerton described Burgundian religiosity as a mixture of faith and skepticism. But the faith rested in old wives' tales and traditional cults, whereas the skepticism focused on the Church, its claims, and even its miracles! (Round My House, pp. 262-63.) t Jules Marouzeau suggests that the Limousin term for religion in fact referred to ceremonies, not sentiment (which could well have been there, but remained unexpressed). See his Une En/ance, p. 36. On the rare occasions when sentiments are expressed, however, they appear skeptical indeed, as in the Auvergnat saying, "If only the Good Lord was a decent man!" (M.-A. Meraville, Contes populaires, p. 336.) No wonder that a Limousin description of a task carelessly carried out was that "it's done for the love of God" (Leon Dheralde, Dictionnaire de la langue limousine, Limoges, 1969, 2: 278). The love of God did not go very far. t Papiers de Gregoire, p. 10 (St.-Calais, Sarthe). The same letter attributes the persistence of belief in ghosts to the cures, who encouraged it so that the haunted would pay for masses to 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

essence in the new one. One Allier farmer, talking to Daniel Halevy about his youth in the 1860'S and 1870's, thought priests merely sorcerers who always prescribed masses along with their other spells~ne sort of magic bolstering another. At Larcau (Haute-Garonne) the priest was described as "the foremost village witch."19 

Much that was expected of the priest indeed fell in the category of magicwhite, of course, as when the priest said masses to cure animals that were under a spell, or when, during the traditional processions that wound their way through communal territory on Rogation Sunday, he threw stones plastered with a small wax cross (priest's dung in Franche-Comte) into the fields to keep the storms and hail away. We have already seen the power over natural phenomena attributed to priests, and the logical belief that some men of the cloth wielded more powers than others. A country priest deplored the way in which the Morvandiaux blamed crop failures, rust, or distemper on their divines. It seems quite natural that when, in the early 1890's, the bishop of Mende visited the village of Saint-Enimie (Lozere), his flock should find that his blessing of their valley made the almond harvest more abundant. In Bourbonnais "everything was blessed: the seed, the fields, the herds." In Meuse several priests were held to sit on clouds, thus helping to disperse them; and the Abbe Chevin, of Bar-le-Due, who died in 1900, was accused of having made a violent storm break over his own parish.20 

For those who connected Catholicism and sorcery, plainly, priests could be sinister figures, holding the powers of black magic as well. As a result of natural associations, the Limousins of the twentieth century still dreaded that "priests would usher death" into the homes they visited.21 The fear that stalked all the inhabitants of the countryside found in the church service not only appeasement but fuel. When sermons did not deal with public discipline, they frequently stoked the fires of brimstone and hell. That was the only way "to move such an almost savage populace," remarked a Breton. "A voice like thunder, dire threats, fists belaboring the pulpit, sweat running down his cheeks, the eloquent pastor fills his hearers with delicious terror."22 

Benolt Malon (another hostile witness) has denounced the obsessive effects this sort of thing could have on people, especially children, haunted throughout life by the dread of hell-fire, torments, retribution, and circumambient fiends. But priestly menaces were bound to be intimidating to the most sober when menace was the staff of everyday life. Living was marginal, disaster inexplicable and uncontrollable. This added to the countryman's Winnie-the- Pooh syndrome of seeing the trace of fantastic monsters in tracks that he had made himself.23 Where harm and ill-fortune were swiftly come by, nothing was easier than to claim that they were punishments of heaven. Long 

lay the errant souls. But if priests were suspected of feeding superstitions, superstitions also fed the priests; witness the Bearnais saying that witches and werewolves make priests eat fat capons (cited in Claude Seignolle, us Evangiles du diable, Paris, 1967, p. 134). 

Dieu Est-il Franfais? 347 centuries of trying to mollify and coax the powerful conjured up a religion where fear almost excluded love, a faith bent to flatter and do honor to the heavenly lords in order to obtain their protection or avoid their ire. Power and irascibility were what impressed. The peasants would not work their cattle on the feasts of the nastiest saints, the ones most likely to resent and revenge any irreverence; they sought to discover what "thrashing saint" lay behind their illness. Kindly saints could be invoked when they were needed; in grimmer mood, they evoked well-conditioned submission.24 

God was far away. The saints were near. Both were anthropomorphic. Saints were intercessors. One did not address God directly, but prayed to saints to request his favors, rewarded them if the crop was good or the weather fair, even chastised them, as at Haudimont (Meuse), where Saint Urban, accused of permitting the vines to freeze on May 25, his own feastday, was dragged in effigy through the nettles around his church.* The greatest saint of all, of course, was the Virgin, an unparalleled source of delivery from harm. The gwerz (ballad) made up when a new pilgrimage to her was launched in 1894 at Plouneour-Menez recited only recent and concrete miracles: saving men from falling, drowning, prison, and so on. These were the functions of a saint.25 

But the chief function of saints on earth was healing, and every malady was the province of a particular saint. The attribution could vary from region to region, with some local patron saint taking over duties another saint performed elsewhere; but it was a creation of popular design. The conjunction between saint and illness was determined by associations, some naively evident, others lost in the mists of time. Thus Saint Eutropius healed dropsy (Eutrope = eau en trop) ; Saint Cloud healed boils (furoncles are also known as clous) ; Saint Dietrine dealt with herpes and scurf (dartres = dietres in Morvan) ; Saint Aignan coped with ringworm and scurvy (teigne). Saint Clare (Claire) helped eyes see more clearly, and Saint Loup, by fine contradistinction, healed fright. Berry had its own array of saints destined by alliteration or obscure fiat to heal. For the deaf there was Saint Quen; for the gouty, Saint Genou; for crabbed and peevish women, Saint Acaire (in reference to femmes acariatres). In Finistere Our Lady of Benodet healed aches, depressions, madness, or simplemindedness-disorders associated with the head. Benodet literally means head of Odet, that is, the mouth of the Odet River.26 In Veurdre 

• Some rituals involved playful threats should the saint not do his duty. Thus, in Aude girls went to pray for a husband at a sanctuary of Saint Salvaire. They entered the saint's grotto and threw a stone, as hard as they could, at a rock at the far end of the cave while reciting the verse "San Salvaire, / Douno-me un fringaire / Ou te fiqui un pic /Sul nic." (Vouchsafe me a lover / Or I shall strike you a blow / On the nose.) Robert Jalby, Le Folklore de Languedoc, p. 78. The point of view was not limited to peasants. A travel er in Provence tells how, in 1887, in the parlor of a convent he found a statue of Saint Joseph turned with the face to the wall, in penitence for not answering the nuns' prayers for a legacy they coveted. Claude Seignolle, who cites this, claims that the practice was followed in other houses of the same order (Etlangiles du diable, pp. 130-31). 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

(Allier), not far from Bourbon-l'Archambault, Saint Faustin, whose statue stood in the church, became in popular parlance Saint Foutin, the resort of barren women. * 

Probably the most notorious saint born of popular whimsy and need was Saint Grelichon or Greluchon (from grelicher, which means to scratch or tickle). Saint Greluchon had started life as the funeral statue of a local lord of Bourbon-l'Archambault, Guillaume de Naillac, but we rediscover the figure in a recessed nook of that city's streets. Childless women came from afar to scratch a little dust from the statue's genital area and drink it in a glass of white wine. By 1880, when Sir Guillaume's lower parts had been scratched down to nullity, the dust was obtained from under the statue's chin. Finally, the statue-which had become a bust-was transferred to the museum for safekeeping.t 

I do not know what popular rumor the decision to remove Saint Greluchon aroused in Bourbonnais. Perhaps no one cared as the century ended and prolific motherhood began to be regarded with a cooler eye. But miracleworking agents enlisted strong popular loyalties. So did the traditions that called for rites to be performed in scrupulous detail, or otherwise fail in their intent. At Maizey (Meuse) the relics of Saint Nicholas were carried in procession through the streets in May, and the following Sunday's services then had to be celebrated in a country chapel about a mile away. In 1889 the priest tried to avoid the chore and to say mass in his own church. This disturbed his flock, and most of the men in his congregation, dressed in their holiday clothes, marched to the designated chapel so that the rite would be 

• Camille Gagnon, Le Folklore bourboTmais, 2: 77. Many of these local saints were pure figments of the popular imagination, with no tradition or standing in the Church. Thus, in Saintonge, Saint Bavard healed mutes, Saint Braillard healed convulsions, Saint Pissoux healed urinary incontinence, Saint Lacolique healed stomachaches. In one Saintonge village, Raymond Doussinet tells us, when a child was very ill two candles were lit: one to Saint Remy, the other to an imaginary Saint Finit (St. Remis = healed; St. Finit = lost). If the first candle outlasted the second, the child was saved (us Travaux, p. 436). One might add two other cases among many, where association or alliteration suggested a connection. Saint Fiacre was the patron of gardeners and was usually pictured holding a spade. But, as it happened, the first cab firm in Paris operated from the Hotel Saint-Fiacre, which bore a sign showing the saint, and he soon became the adopted patron of both cabs (fiacres) and their drivers. More important so far as the countryside is concerned is Saint Donat, the legendary martyr of the Roman legion Fulminans, who protected against thunder, lightning, and hail, and whose name can be found engraved on many a rural church bell. t Ibid., pp. 76-77. Popular canonization created many other healing or helpful saints of persons of local renown. Thus the Rhone rivermen of Aries had adopted as a saint one IsabeIet, the daughter of a ship captain who had always watched and blessed all sailings from the city's Quai de la Roquette. After her death in 1826 her remains were said to work miracles (Fernand Benolt, La Provence, p. 189). There were also converted rogues like Saint Unard of Andouille-Neuville (Ille-et-Vilaine), who mended his ways only to be mortally wounded by a carter he tried to help; pious folk like the oysterman Jo Camu of Cancale, who in 1860 offered his life for the welfare of his parish from which the oysters had disappeared (he died soon after his vow, and the oysters returned); and martyrs of the Revolution like Saint Poufra of the Republican light infantry, who cured fevers at Missiriac (Morbihan). See Henri-Fran~ois Buffet, En Haute- Bretagne, pp. 340-42. 

Dieu Est-il Franrais? 349 carried out properly. On the other hand, it appears that the change of a patron saint was often treated with equanimity, as was a substitution of the supposedly sacred image itself. At Villeneuve-de-Berg (Ardeche) the blacksmiths had no statue of their patron, Saint Eloi, to parade on his feastday. They solved the problem routinely by borrowing Saint Vincent from the vintners' corporation, removing the statue's pruning knife, and replacing it with a little hammer. Similarly, in the Alps, at the feast of Saint Besse the saint's devotees bought medals "of him" bearing the legend "St.-Pancrace." When the discrepancy was pointed out to them, it bothered them not at all. The fact was, they said, the likeness was close, and the effects were the same. To the traditional mind the patron saint was secondary to the rite, and to the site as well.21 . We can see this in the cult of "good" [i.e. healing] fountains, a cult that was generally abetted by the clergy on the theory that the saints who protected the fountains would be given a share of the credit for their restorative powers. Yet popular customs connected with healing fountains were, as a student says, "often purely secular," and certain spas kept their appeal with or without the Church's blessing. Near Areich (Gers) a long-established pilgrimage to the sanctuary and spring of Our Lady of Pibeque lapsed from the Revolution until 1880. But the source kept its prestige and its magic powers through the whole period. On Batz island, off the Breton coast, the old chapel dedicated to Saint Pol (de Leon) was shifted to the patronage of Saint Anne when, at the end of the nineteenth century, she was officially declared the patron saint of the peninsula. The pilgrimage continued as before. It was the place that matteredF8 

Familiar venues and familiar rites and actions could not be tampered with with impunity. When obstacles were raised to established ways, rebelliousness ensued. Thus, at Nourard-Ie-Franc, near Saint-Just-en-Chaussee in Oise, the cemetery chapel had statues of Saint Vaast and his bear. The bear was made of wood and stood on rollers. The chapel was a popular place of pilgrimage for mothers, who took their young children with them hoping that Saint Vaast would help them learn to walk. Ritual required that they tip the sexton to place the children on the bear's broad back and pull them for three turns around the chapel's crypt. At the end of the nineteenth century the incumbent priest, hoping to discourage this superstitious practice, had the bear burned. This caused an uprising in the parish, and delegations pleading with the bishop of Beauvais obtained a new bear, which apparently served Bray, Vexin, and Picardy until the war put an end to the pilgrimages.29 

Alphonse Dupront has written that all pilgrimages are made to a source of healing. But we should add that the pilgrims as often seek protection and favors, too. In Bresse one went to pray to Saint Anthony that one's pigs should "gain" during the year. In Bourbonnais shepherdesses attended the annual pilgrimage to Saint Agatha's shrine at Saint-Desire "in the first place to divert 

350 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE themselves and to secure a blessed hazel switch" with which to control their herds and be free of the fear of wolves.30 

Conditions obviously varied depending on the stand of the local priest; but priestly decisions were interpreted without illusions. At Carnac (Morbihan) the pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint Cornelius (Cornely), patron of horned beasts, was very profitable. Oxen and calves were offered to him; they were made to kneel in adoration of his statue, which stood above the portal of the church, then blessed by the priest and auctioned off under the saint's banner. Then, in 1906, the priests refused to bless the gathered beasts. "They haven't been paid enough," explained a hawker selling his toys at the local fair. "You don't find the church giving its blessing for nothing-at least not these days. But there, I daresay they will get on just as well without it."31 The year 1906 was a year of turmoil. But priests too galled or too rigorous to keep up traditional devotions were in a minority. As a general rule, they accepted current beliefs in healing fountains, stones, and megaliths. For one thing, as all observers hastened to point out, the gifts offered to their patron saints contributed to clerical revenues. Saint Anthony was offered pigs' feet, Saint Eloi horses' tails, and Saint Herbot cows' tails. More important, many saints were offered the beasts themselves, calves, lambs, chicken, and other gifts in kind. These would be sold by the verger after the ceremony, and the revenue could rise to as much as 1,500 or 2,000 francs-riches for men whose yearly income was only half as much."" 

For some priests the launching of a new pilgrimage spot meant big business, like the shrine in Picardy, complete with publicity, signposts, hostels, and eateries, which had to be suppressed in 1882 by the bishop of Beauvais. Others were satisfied with a modest but regular income gained from the sale of some small item, like the saint vinage at Miremont in Combrailles, a mixture of 10 liters of water and one liter of wine that was blessed by the priest and sold by the sexton at very moderate prices, and that was said to cure all cattle ills. Still other priests intervened to keep a pilgrimage site alive when people no longer had good reason to visit it. In Morbihan the church at Forges-de- Lanouee was dedicated to Saint Eloi as a patron of metalworkers. When the local forges closed down in 1886, the pilgrimages declined, and so did the church's revenues, until in 1908 the local rector instituted a blessing of horses (Saint Eloi was the patron of blacksmiths and, hence, of livestock in. general), which soon revived his trade.82 

• Archives Nationales, p17926x (Finistere). Stendhal, admittedly on the lookout for such matters, contributed two stories in this vein. Around Lorient one village priest made (it was said) x ,500 francs a year out of the handfuls of horsehair that he got for blessing horses or oxen. ("Blessing does not heal ailments, which would be difficult to prove; it protects one from them.") At Uzerches (Correze) rheumatics brought big balls of wool to throw at the statue of the patron saint, which stood about 20 feet away behind a railing. To be effective, the wool had to hit the statue on the exact part of the body to be healed, and petitioners had to keep throwing the wool until the right spot had been hit. (Memoiru d'un tourilte, 2: 50.) 

Dieu Est-it F ranfais? 351 That priests and their parishes profited from such religious undertakings does not make the undertakings any the less valid or the participants any the less sincere. Utility underlies most human enterprise, and in no way demeans it. The mother who trudged off carrying her child that it might be strengthened or healed was an admirable figure. The priest who sought funds to glorify the source from which such healing sprang-and perhaps its guardian as well-was human and perhaps even saintly. 

But to return to pilgrimages: these were perhaps important above all a~ a form of access to the extraordinary that was so rare in the cycle-bound life we have been talking about. The pilgrimage offered an excuse to leave the village, and with it, for a time at least, an inescapable fate.'*' Pilgrimages were festive occasions involving food and drink, shopping and dancing. The most ancient pilgrimages coincided with great fairs; markets and sanctuaries went together; the connection between trade and devotion seems to go back as far as Herodotus. Bakers and butchers, clothiers and peddlers, set up their stalls; people treated themselves to sweetmeats, wine, or lemonade, and purchased images, traditional cakes, and other ritual ex-votos to deposit in the sanctuary or tie to the branch of a nearby tree. The healing statue of Saint Stephen at Lussac-Ies-Eglises (Haute-Vienne) was invoked, like a good many others, by binding a ribbon on the statue's arm. The ribbons were bought from cloth merchants or from the stalls local women set up in the village streets. So were the wax limbs carried in the procession of Saint Amateur at Lamballe (C8tesdu-Nord); the "saffron-flavored cakes shaped like hens," sold to the devotees of Saint Symphorien at Vernegues (Bouches-du-Rh8ne); the yellow wax breasts offered by women to Saint Anthony's fountain near Brive (Correze); and the amulets or priapic figures, in cake or wax, sold from Normandy to Var at least since the seventeenth century. No wonder the peasants felt that priests were necessary because they made business gol33 And it is easy to dwell on the commercial aspects of religion. The point is that there was commerce because there were people, and people congregated because this was the only sort of festivity they knew. 

"It's more a pleasure trip than a pious action," caviled an eastern teacher in r888. What was wrong with its being both? At this unexalted level, the pilgrimage and traveling were one and the same thing. Indeed, in the Dombes vyazhou (voyage) was a synonym for pilgrimage. Relations and friends met at pilgrimage places regularly every year, and such predictable gatherings were convenient in times when communications were rare and difficult. They also afforded welcome breaks, especially to women. The pilgrimage was chiefly a feminine activity-perhaps because it was the woman's only socially 

• And for some, indeed, a way of escaping that fate. As Augustin Collot points out, there were professional pilgrims, of both sexes, who undertook to fulfilI the vows of those who could not carry them out themselves. In Maconnais and COte-d'Or this practice seems to have waned around 1860 (railways or faith?). In Brittany it lasted longer. (De quelques anciennes traditions, pp. 11-12.) 

352 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE sanctioned means of escape from home and its daily routine. Men had oppor~ tunities to visit fairs or to travel to farther places. Their lives were far more varied than those of womenfolk. These found their opportunity ih pilgrim~ ages, which they often undertook alone over great distances. A middle-aged woman around mid-century made her way on foot from Pommard (Coted'Or) to the shrine of Sainte Reine in Haute-Saone, a hefty march for any~ one. The same peasant woman went to see the holy cure of Ars, a good way south in Ain. There was no healing involved and no particular VOW.34 Dare we attribute her enterprise to the quest for personal satisfaction and to curiosity? Here was an eager public that the Assumptionists tapped when, in the mid-1870's, they enlisted the aid of railway companies in transporting the mass pilgrimages they organized, which were patronized largely by humble , . men s WIves. But let us hazard further. Even quite humble trips, for secular or devotional ends, took a person out of his element and opened up unfamiliar spheres. The extraordinary began much closer to home then than it would do today, and a trip of any kind was an understandable aspiration for those whose ordinary lives offered so little change. 

What could be more extraordinary than the miraculous? Perhaps this was what humble people welcomed in the news of the great miracles of the time. Miracles promise deliverance from the routine unfolding of predictable destinies; and they create a sense of expectancy and excitement the more potent for being the more vague. Millenarianism, which embodies all this in its most extreme form, is commonly attributed to baffiement-a sense of privation and restraint with no conceivable relief in sight. The promise carried by evidence of supernatural forces heals baffiement and frustration, and reinforces hope. It also holds out an opportunity to escape from the commonplace into the realm of the prodigious, to wonder over marvels and possibilities beyond familiar ken. Like the sensationalist canards the villagers were so fond of, rumors of a new miracle provided a semblance of diversion. 

Whatever the explanation, the rural world was eager for miracles. It exploited the regular sources of awe and thaumaturgy, and flocked when new ones were an nounced. Most of the time rumors of local miracles did not go beyond a limited radius. In 1840 the Holy Virgin seems to have manifested herself in several places in Vendee. But this was treated as local superstition. In the early J860's the Ursuline nuns of Charroux in Poitou discovered what they claimed to be the Sacred Prepuce, removed from the Infant Jesus at the circumcision and, in the words of Monsignor Pie, bishop of Poitiers, "the only part of Christ's body left behind when he ascended into heaven." The name Charroux was associated with chair rouge (the red meat of the cut-off prepuce!), and an elaborate festival in 1862 brought the fortunate convent into the public eye. But the miraculous discovery was unfortunately connected 

Dieu Est-il Franfais? 353 with Legitimist politics, and its later fortunes are lost in mists of contentious ribaldry.35 

At about the same time, in the fall of r862, the sixteen-year-old daughter of a rural postman of Saint-Marcel-d' Ardeche began to preach, predict the future, and promise miracles. The people came en masse from all surrounding communes until, in a few days, the furor died down.36 

In other cases the feverish excitement did not pass so quickly. When, in September r846, two shepherd children guarding their herds on· the deserted mountainside of La Salette saw an unnatural light and a tearful lady announcing the wrath of Christ in their own patois, curious pilgrims hastened there at once. The veracity of the children was contested, especially by the Church authorities, but the enthusiasm was too great to stifle. The evidence makes clear that miracles were validated and imposed by popular opinion, which the authorities-civil and clerical-accepted only unwillingly and under pressure. In a notorious trial of r857, concerned with the reality of the miracle of La Salette, the lawyers continually referred to the supernatural needs of the lower classes (explained presumably by their ignorance). It was wholly understandable, they said, that the common people should believe in such things, but they expressed some surprise at finding members of the upper classes sharing these views.31 

This same division and the same pressure of popular need appear in the earliest stages of the first and perhaps the greatest modern pilgrimage site-- Lourdes. In February r858, eleven-year-old Bernadette Soubirous encountered a "Beautiful Lady" beside a stream. The local nuns, priests, and civil authorities, afraid of complications, refused to believe Bernadette's story. The local gendarme sought to tell "the people ... that it is not in the nineteenth century that one lets oneself be carried away by such a belieL" Yet belief was stronger than skepticism. It spread like wildfire. Within a few days large crowds, mostly women and children, began to gather at the grotto of Masabielle. By the beginning of March they numbered 20,000 (the population of Lourdes was less than a quarter of that). "Disorder caused in the name of God is none the less intolerable disorder," warned the gendarme. All his superiors clearly thought the same. The records are full of it: "disorder," "regrettable agitation," "preserve order," "undeceive the population," "regrettable facts." But the population did not want to be undeceived. For it, disorder was hope and holiday. "The population ... wants to believe. When there are no miracles, it invents them; it insists on baring heads, kneeling, etc."38 

There were few priests, sometimes no priests, in the assembled crowds. The clergy, as the imperial prosecutor reported, "maintained an excessive reserve." But the ritual pilgrimages developed without their intervention and despite that of the civil authorities. It was several years before the bishop of Tarbes confirmed the miracles in r862, proclaiming the authenticity of the Virgin's354 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE appearance and the healing virtues of the grotto's spring. But clearly the voice of the people preceded the voice of God. In 1867 a railway line became available. By 1871 the pilgrimage had become international, and in 1876 the great basilica was consecrated before 100,000 pilgrims-a new tide in the affairs of men, flowing in the wake of the railroads.39 

The people wanted to believe-when there were no miracles, they invented them. They also invented appropriate ends for some of the official actors of the early drama, damned in their eyes for their skepticism. When the police superintendent of 1858 died in 1873, full of professional honors and properly buried with the last rites of the Church, popular lore invented tales of heavenly retribution. He had gone blind, it was said; he had first massacred his wife with a meat axe, then ended his own days; the horses had refused to pull the hearse bearing his remains. Similar tales were told about the local prefect, alleged to have been stricken cup in hand in the midst of a banquet while blaspheming Lourdes. The retributive fantasy went on to kill his wife, who broke her neck in a fall, and his daughter, who choked to death while eating a cold chicken. The people loved their miracles so much that they pursued those who would deprive them of their prodigies with implacable hatred. As a great prelate said in 1874: "On every side today ... all that one hears is miracles and prophecies."40 

What does all this tell us about religion? Conclusions do not come easily. That it was local and specific. That a peasant who did not believe in the Church, its foolishness or its saints, to quote a country priest, could share in local reverence and worship Saint Eutropius. That men who would not go to mass would undertake long pilgrimages to be healed or to have their beasts healed. And that, in one way or another, religious practices were interwoven with every part of life, but hardly in a manner that one would call specifically Christian.41 Leaving aside the entertainment that these practices offered, divinity was associated with vast unknown areas. God and saints-like fairiespossessed knowledge that was forbidden to men. They had to be propitiated :md persuaded to perform tasks that men accomplish only imperfectly (like healing) or not at all (like controlling the weather). The more men came to master such tasks, plumb the unknown, shake the tree of knowledge, the less they needed intercessors. 

The sales of the saint vinage at Miremont declined, to the despair of the sexton. In Sologne good Saint Viatre, who had done so much to heal the local fevers (malaria), was badly hurt by the spreading use of quinine and by the drainage and sanitation projects beginning to show results in the 1880'S. At Hevillers (Meuse) the priest read the Lord's Passion every day from May to September "to bring heaven's blessing on the goods of the earth"; then, before Christmas, the church treasurer went from door to door to collect grain in payment for this service. In the 1850's the treasurer got 800 lbs and more. By 1888, for all that things were better, he garnered only 330. Things were 

Dieu Est-il Franfais? 355 worse still in Perigord, where the popularity of Saint John the Baptist, whose accompanying lamb had made him the patron of the local sheepruns, declined with the century. At La Coquille, in northeastern Dordogne, where the ballade of June 24 brought some 5,000 pilgrims every year, the priest would get 40 or 50 lambs for his pains. By 1900 he got only three. By 1920, what with the rising price of wool, he scarcely got a pound of woo1.42 

In 1886 at Ligarde (Gers) a youth group voted to shift the local festival from January 14, the feast of the patron saint, to the last Sunday in September, which was more convenient from the point of view of work and weather. The observance of Rogation week declined-even in Brittany. The turn of the century saw fewer processions across the village fields with cross, banners, and bells to drive off evil spirits and to bless the crops. In the Limousin, where in 1876 many peasants still reckoned their age according to ostensions-great septennial processions with scores of villages in their entirety parading behind relics, drums, and banners-the emotional content gradually seeped away, and the penitents in their colorful costumes disappeared; and new religious groups that borrowed nothing from the old traditions meant little to the popular public. Politically inspired prohibitions keeping religious processions off the streets separated folklore and pious celebrations, hastening the decline of both.43 

Local pilgrimages of the popular sort leveled off or declined. Some were domesticated into the Marian cult. Others were suppressed because they gave rise to scandalous practices, as when Morvan women seeking a cure for barrenness too often found it in adjacent woods; or because they always brought disorders, like the wrestlers' pardon of Saint Cadou at Gouesnac'h (Finistere) that never failed to end in fights and brawls. The mercantile activities that had grown around traditional devotions killed them, like trees stifled by ivy. Easter Sunday processions had to be given up in some places because the streets and squares were too crowded with stalls and carrousels. Tourists and sightseers helped to keep observances alive as pure pageantry, but finally, "when everyone wants to watch the procession, there is no one left to take part in it." Between the wars, automobiles denied the roads to those pilgrimages traditionally made on horseback, and the enclosure of fields discouraged them. In 1939 the Courier du Finistere noted that the traditional procession stopped at the wires barring access to the ancient chapel of Saint-Roch at Landeleau. "What is the use in destroying the grass of a field to enter a building in ruins and without a roof?"H No such reasoning could have been accepted half a century earlier. 

Yet phosphates, chemical fertilizers, and schooling had spelled the beginning of the end. In 1893, a drought year in Bourbonnais when many men were having masses said for their emaciated cattle (which died anyway), the priest reproached Henry Norre, a self-taught man who farmed not far from Cerilly, for not attending church. "I haven't got the time," he answered. "And really, 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

I haven't got much confidence in your remedies for the beasts. My remedies are better; you can check." Daniel Halevy quotes another story about Norre. This time the farmer returned from the railway station with a cartful of fertilizer and met the priest. "What are you carting there?" "Chemicals." "But that is very bad; they burn the soill" "Monsieur le cure," said Norre, "I've tried everything. I've had masses said and got no profit from them. I've bought chemicals and they worked. I'll stick to the better merchandise."45 It was the requiem of nineteenth-century religion. 
