+++
title = "20 THE PRIESTS AND THE PEOPLE"

+++

A corpse was going sadly To its rest under the loam. A priest was going gladly To bury it quick and go home. 

SO SANG LA FONTAINE with his usual feeling for popular realities. We cannot be certain what kind of religion it was that decayed. But we can tell that the declining role of its representatives was fairly wide and welcome. Sympathy for men of the cloth was either lukewarm or downright bitter. The "good priest," charitable and kindly, whom we occasionally encounter in nineteenth-century novels, has found no place in popular lore, which provides no proverbs in praise of the clergy, but dozens that criticize its members. If your son is clever, advised one Correze proverb, make him a mason; if he is nasty make him a priest.1 Many Basque proverbs make reference to money-grubbing priests; and there is a story that Avarice, having killed a man, sought sanctuary in a church and has not come out since.'*' 

Most friction in the countryside stemmed from and turned about monetary concerns. The First Estate was no exception to the general rule. Priests were in an impossible position. Until the separation of church and state, their salaries began at 450 francs and doubled in a lifetime. Together with other perquisites and surplice fees, a priest perhaps made 1,000 or 1,200 francs a year. If he wanted to eat, dress, and live up to his station, he had to scramble desperately for every penny.2 This created difficult situations, for peasants held the representatives of an unworldly faith guilty of a distinctly worldly rapaciousness, and priests felt that they were rendering essential services that should be paid for. Both sides were right, but their relationship was only too often a demeaning one. In country villages, the prefect of Y onne reported under the Consulate, "no money ... no baptism, no marriage, not even extreme unction, 

• Georges HereIle, Etudes sur le theture basque, p. 166. Paul Sebillot quotes other sayings from different parts: "Be wary of a woman's front, a mule's rear, a priest on all sides"; "Clean house, neither priest nor pigeon. Peaceful house, neither woman nor chaplain." But none doubted that it took a certain talent to be a priest, and few that the clerical condition was an enviable one: "L'om es hurous, I Un jour quan I'om se marida, I Huets jours quan l'om tua Iou lard, I Toujours quan l'om es cure." (Le Folk-lore de France, 4: 231-39.) 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

even less any kind of funeral dirge; one haggles as in the marketplace; it is at this price or not at all." No wonder that in Saintonge (and probably elsewhere), the people held that the big bell of the church rang out "Doune! Doune! Doune!" (Give! Give! Give!).3 

The priest often appears as tyrant or exploiter, manipulating his monopoly of the essential rites of passage. Thus, at Bouan (Ariege) the gendarmes reported that he expected gifts or refused the holy sacraments and would not attend the dying, however poor they were, unless he was first paid nine francs. Nine francs in 1862 was a great deal of money! What little success Protestantism had in the countryside at mid-century reflected the peasants' attempts to escape from the high fees exacted by some priests. In Y onne, Ariege, the Limousin, we hear that "the popular classes" were turned away by clerical demands for money. Protestantism was cheap. A novel about the Limousin countryside (written by a priest) records frequent grumbles about the cost of masses, burials, and other services. A Protestant sympathizer remarks that the Protestant minister provides his parishioners a bench to sit on and a stove to warm the chapel, advantages that one did not find in the Catholic church.4 The priest in many-perhaps most-rural communities received contributions in kind that people identified with the tithes supposedly abolished by the Revolution. This seems to have been the case in much of western France, and was still practiced in parts of Anjou, Poitou and Gatine as late as 1888. In the southeast the catechism used in the diocese of Annecy in 1876 incorporated the duty to pay tithes as the seventh commandment-a passage that the Republicans did not fail to use as anticlerical propaganda.5 But even without such payments, clerical fees jarred. The masses said to lay ghosts or cast off spells laid on animals were costly. So was the occasional dispensation that was needed, say, to marry a cousin. And there was now an alternative authority to sanction occasions that had once been ruled by the Church alone. Country people were slow to avail themselves of this, but friction with ecclesiastical authority could now lead to a break and recourse to the civil power. Squabbles over fees and other differences could produce ugly incidents, like the one at Massat (Ariege), where the priest simply refused to marry a local man when the whole wedding party was in church, at which bride and groom stalked off, saying that they would do without him. A dispute of this sort, which could lead to civil marriage and hence, at death, to the refusal of Christian burial, might snowball into a village cause. One instance of the refusing of burial rites to a villager at Bourganeuf (Creuse) provoked serious local disturbances in 1841 and discredited the priest responsible for the trouble.6 

Death and funeral ceremonies were a constant source of friction, and inspired demonstrations against incumbents accused of discriminating between rich and poor. There was resentment against priests who charged a fee for the use of the pall (three francs at Soutein, Ariege), which meant that the poor had to go without. In Perigord sextons and priests levied a toll on corpses 

The Priests and the People 359 passing through their parish, a practice that led to considerable ill-feeling. At Saint-Andn~-le-Gaz (Isere) we hear that excessive burial fees had led to "open war" and, by the 1880'S, to the widespread abandonment of a religion embodied in a violent and resented priest. Hostility was not likely to have been made so manifest as this in small communities before the 1880'S, but it led to explosions when opportunity afforded, as at Lambesc, a fairly large bourg in Bouches-du-Rhone, in 1850.7 

Places in church cost money, seats and stalls had to be paid for, and there were frequent incidents between the sexton and the priest on one hand and local people trying to get in free-or to bring their own chairs to church. I am convinced that the amount of disaffection this alone caused was immense. The right to carry the statues and the banners of the saints in annual processions was normally auctioned off: 40-50 francs for Saint Radegunda, 15-20 francs for Saint Marien, one franc for a banner. A child's mastery of the catechism was measured (or alleged to be) by the gifts he brought to the priest and the number of candles his parents contributed. A child who was first in his catechism, and who should thus have been in the first rank in the communion parade, was relegated to fourth or fifth place, with predictable results for his and his parents' attitude. Grudges grew, rancor and hostilities festered, which when the time was right would help alienate men and their families from an institution they no longer needed to treat with caution.'s 

What was the role of politics in all this? In a direct sense, relatively minor; indirectly, vast. In a pastoral letter of 1875 the bishop of Limoges attributed the general weakening of faith (or we might better say the open exhibition of people's true feelings) to straightforward political causes: "the public events of 1870 and 1871, the September revolution, ... the Commune, secret societies, the ever more general reading of the newspapers, the agitations caused by the frequency of elections." Whatever else this meant, it was a token that the Church was deeply involved in politics. As all historians say and as contemporaries experienced, the Church was the core and the inspiration of organized resistance to the Republic that emerged after May 16, 1877. Particularly at the provincial level, ecclesiastical influence led the Bonapartist or royalist opposition into what was in effect a clerical party, eventually to be joined by conservative Republicans as well. In these circumstances Republicanism and anticlericalism were one, hence Gambetta's "Clericalism, theres the enemy!" Religion, declared the conservative biographer of the conservative and royalist provincial poet Arsene Vermenouze, "religion was the bond that bound the conservatives." And Louis de Vogiie confirms this: If you went to mass, you couldn't really be a Republican. If you were a Republican, you fought against priests, nuns, and superstitions.9 

It is true that certain economic or class rivalries found expression in religious terms, as they did in political ones: active adherence to a confession, as 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

to a political faction, because of frictions of a worldly sort; or, as in Gard or Haute-Loire, simply because of historical memories going back to the Wars of Religion.1o It is also true that in some places priests were agents or sup~ porters of revolutionary social change. The priest of the Left is not a twentieth-century phenomenon only. Social extraction, Christian doctrine, or merely the human sympathies of men particularly close to human tribulations produced a fair number of hostile critics of the existing order, easily accused of Socialism. Priests were denounced for inciting servants to disobey their masters and not to work on holidays in order to attend church services; for having canticles sung to the tune of "La Marseillaise"; for speaking ill of the rich and of employers; for "stoking the fires of antagonism between the poor and the better off." But this only encouraged anticlericalism among respectable property owners like the notary in Zola's Germinal, who "at dessert ... took a resolute free-thinking line" because the local priest sided with the miserable striking miners. The notary was, in his own view anyway, a man of the Left, against the Church that had betrayed him and the cause of property.ll 

A law of July 12, 1880, abrogated the legislation of 1814 forbidding work on Sundays and certain holidays. The previous law had been respected largely in the breach; but a conjunction of anticlericals and employers had wrought the new one, partly to spite the priests. Before it was repealed in 1906, this law helped provoke endless friction between conscientious clerics and the social groups most likely to furnish them support. But if the activities of pious or social-minded priests, even their politics after the 1890's, turned some conservatives or royalists against them, they did not endear them to Republicans. The gulf had been dug too wide. By 1899, as the Revue du clerge franrais admitted, in the public eye the clergy stood for backwardness, reaction, and conservatism.12 

As long as belief in the supernatural mission of the Church endured, the Church was not too closely identified with any particular section of the faithful. But in the nineteenth century skepticism was increasing, just at the time when the Church's close association with the upper classes and their views became more evident."" The Church no longer symbolized the unity of all, but stood for the domination of one particular faction. Faith in the declining Church was linked to a political stance that was also declining; both lost from the connection. 

The long-drawn-out struggle between the clerical party and the Republican regime forced people to take sides constantly in the most obvious terms: attending church, abstaining from processions, choosing their children's 

• In 1829 Monsignor de Queien proposed in a sermon at Notre Dame: "Non seuiement Jesus- Christ eta it fiIs de Dieu, mais encore il etait de tres bonne maison du cote de sa mere, et il y a d'excellentes raisons de voir en Iui I'heritier legitime du trone de Judas [ne]." (Quoted by Jean Meyer in Jean Delumeau, ed., Histoire de la Bretagne, p. 443.) 

The Priests and the People 

schools. After 1879 official reports hailed the increasing tendency to give up religious practice as a measure of growing support for the regime. In Decem~ ber 1879 the prefect of Cantal welcomed the disappointing level of attendance at the celebration of the feast of the Immaculate Conception: "The public saw in it an endeavor hostile to the government and has generally refused to associate itself with this." The old unanimities, already battered, were being further sapped by official pressure. Fear and deference, which had worked in favor of religious convention, began to work against it. Those who wanted to stand well with the authorities kept away. Those who wanted to conform now had to choose between different kinds of conformity. And the voice of authority, so powerful in its effects on certain communities "used to passive obedience, accustomed to direction from above," spoke with unexampled vio~ lence against the "degradation" and "besotting nature" of holding "absurd" religious beliefs.13 

"Absurd" beliefs could be enlisted on either side. In 1885 at Saint-Laurentsur-Gorre (Haute-Vienne) the priest complied with the regulation prohibit~ ing the ringing of bells in storms. The villagers resented his decision. The Radical municipal council spread the story that the new regulation was the work of priests, bishops, and nobles, who hoped that poor people would be ruined by storms no longer averted by the bells. Finally, the anticlerical municipal council overrode the prefect, directed the church bells to be rung in storms, and scored a point with the villagers.14 

This sort of thing helps remind us what rural politics were about, and stresses the level at which debate was carried on.* It is important to remember this as a simple truth when weighing anticlerical arguments, lest the basis of their appeal be misinterpreted. They were rational, but they were pitched in terms designed to move people with interests and a state of mind far removed from the intellectual urban ken. Thus reference to papal interference in French politics is said to have contributed to the Republicans' successes in 1877. Gambetta asked the peasants if they would want their sons sent to get themselves killed to put the Pope back on his throne. Was this an argument that clericalism had gone too far, as Andre Latreille and Rene Remond make it out to be, or simply an appeal to the French peasants' known reluC~ tance to lend their sons for anything but gain?t 

The notorious struggle between priest and teacher falls into the same cate- 

• In the Abbe Labrune's novel, Mysteres des campagnes, the village priest points out to peasants who are considering having an infant baptized by the Protestant minister that his rival wears spectacles. "Does he really?" (Argument whether he does or not.) Then: "If he wears spectacles, I don't want him to touch my child," says the father. (P. 233.) t Histoire du catholicisme, 3: 413. It was in fact widely believed that the Pope aspired to the French throne, and that his ambitions had only been thwarted by the Emperor's sending troops to Romc. But readiness to believe the worst of the Pope was based on an earlier and bitter prejudice sparked or spurred by the demonetization of the papal one-franc piece, which had circulated interchangeably with the French franc until the 1850's. (See Philip G. Hamerton, Round My HOMe, pp. 213-15.) 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

gory. Freres ennemis, their discord stemmed less from undeniable ideological differences than from their contest for authority. Priest and teacher were both local notables, their position based not on material wealth but on the possession of esoteric knowledge and the key role they played in communal affairs. Their social extraction was roughly similar: brighter (or physically weaker) sons of small artisans and peasant farmers, promoted by schooling. "Qui langue a, a Rome va," they said in Tarn-et-Garonne. Both represented official culture, especially in their command and use of French. To be sure, we have seen that priests often taught or preached in patois in order to reach and hold members of their congregations. Even so, for centuries they had been the only men with learning in their parish, and they were instrumental in the penetration of F rench.15 

The language of prayer, when it was not Latin, was French. One spoke French to gents of the upper classes; it followed that one used it when addressing God or saints. In Languedoc, for instance, the Catholic church began to use French in the fifteenth century, presenting most of its homilies in that language and sending missionaries out to preach in French. By the nineteenth century, these tendencies had grown stronger. Most of the bishops, like prefects, came from outside their diocese. They had no understanding and little sympathy for popular religious practices that the Church generally associated with paganism or folklore, or a mixture of both. Students were prohibited from speaking patois in seminaries, as in normal schools. The teaching orders were notoriously opposed to local dialects, and most of all the Jesuits, inventors of the infamous "symbols" borne in evidence of linguistic lapses. It comes as no surprise to hear a Breton nationalist criticizing them as well-meaning strangers only interested in the spread of French.16 

Challenged by the teacher, whom he was accustomed to treat as an underling, and by the teacher's wares, the priest began to take a different view of things. Where before priests had patronized what learning had been available in the village, now many suspected it because it could lead to "bad books." Their stress on the learning of the catechism clashed with the teacher's interest in other subjects, which were gradually recognized as more relevant to current needs. Catechism clashed with the school certificate, and the latter won. A peasant quoted by Gaston Mery in 1907 explained: "We compare what the teacher gives us with what the priest can give. Well, he gives us more. It's the teacher that has taught us how to read, and that is useful in life. He has taught us how to reckon and that is even more useful ... and then that is not all. If we need advice for our taxes, for our business, we just go to see him. He's got books and papers about farming, about fertilizer."l1 The things onc could see, the things one could touch, were taking over; and the school rode forward on their tide. The peasant's need had shifted from consolation to advice on concrete matters; and on this level, at this time at least, the presbytery could not keep up with the school. 

The Priests and the People 

With the school looming as an increasingly dangerous competitor, language took on a new role in the priest-versus-teacher struggle. The priest was cast or cast himself as a defender of local speech; first, simply to oppose the teacher's French, but also be~ause it helped preserve the faithful from subversion. Yet, though he played the reactionary in this struggle and was frequently accused of "the abuse" of using Basque, Breton, or other dialects in religious instruction, catechism, and preaching, reports indicate that most priests complied with official requirements-and thus with the historical tradition of their Church.18 

The struggle between church and school at the village level was thus cultural only in a subordinate sense. Agencies that had operated jointly and in a similar direction became rivals and had to adopt the weapons that lay at hand. As for the political struggle, it was-as we have seen in other politicsconcrete and personalized. The creation of lay schools led to incidents that inevitably snowballed. In Pyrenees-Orientales priests would not admit children from the secular schools to church events; mayors retaliated by prohibiting church processions. In Haute-Vienne mayors proposed to prohibit processions because priests used them to pressure parents not to send their children to secular schools. In Ariege some mayors prohibited processions "solely to avoid clashes," others because there might be trouble from "fathers hurt in their pride because of the preference shown to children of congregational schools." We hear of priests who used their influence to get a tenant's lease changed or revoked; who saw that work was given or taken away; who made a weapon of bread orders for the needy; and who baldly discriminated against the children of unregenerate parents in catechism or church. We hear of the tolling of the death knell for those who sent their children to lay school; and of a priest who refused the sacraments to a schoolteacher's mother.19 This does not sound too new, and one dares to think that the anticlerical side did not disdain similar methods. What matters is the resentment that the struggle bred and the lasting dissensions it created.* 

Religious pageants and processions, among the rare events that brightened the otherwise dreary days, were the first to suffer. Teachers perhaps pursued traditional observances with particular ruthlessness in their zeal to "uproot superstition." Republican officials banned or obstructed them as part of their anticlerical campaigns. Priests themselves, only marginally sympathetic, abandoned them as "medieval" or defended them merely as political issues. Meanwhile, the traditional songs sung at devotional feasts were replaced by militant canticles designed for the circumstances: "Sauvons Dieu et la Francel" or 

• Berenger-Feraud remarks that though many processions in Provence fell victim to politics around 1877, they were already in decline and would probably have died out unassisted (Reminiscences popuiaires en Provence, p. 343). We should give some thought also to the statement (in Theodore Zeldin, Conflicts in French Society, pp. 142-44) that many parish priests were driven to the verge of madness by friction with the local people and the local councils, sparked less by ideological disagreement than by the struggle for power.THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

"Nous Voulons Dieu, car les Impies Contre Lui Se Sont Souleves." This meant that even where traditional ceremonies endured, parts of tradition were lost-this time from the inside.20 

Thus clerical or anticlerical politics affected the popular mind indirectly. They helped to sap tradition and disintegrate practices that had been part of life for centuries. But political arguments as the cities knew them would not and could not engage the countryside until the country mind had shifted to the wavelength of the city. This would take a long time. Meanwhile, the existence, the pervasiveness, the vigilance of politico-religious conflicts discredited what had long been undisputed and advanced alternative attitudes. As the century ended, a portion of clerical opinion recognized the counterproductive effect of political involvement.21 My own belief is that pettier factors, more closely linked with the personality of the priest and his relations with the community, contributed at least as much to calling him into question. 

We have seen that straitened means condemned the priests to rapacity. There was less excuse for their authoritarianism. The best historian of the French priesthood in the nineteenth century, Father Joseph Brugerette, has attributed the unpopularity of priests to their "absolutist and retrograde ideas," which in his view ran counter to the ideals of greater social and political independence that were gaining ground.22 My own view is that the tendency toward independence, itself a product of novel possibilities, did not suggest rebellion against the priest or a complete break with him; it simply made it possible. Like the stern schoolteacher, the authoritarian priest was the product of an authoritarian family in an authoritarian society. They would all be challenged in due course, when opportunity offered. The priest's immediate problem was not that he was too absolutist, but that he was less retrograde than the villagers he sought to direct. Venality lost friends, but attempted reform lost more. 

There has been some discussion whether the "Jansenism" of many graduates of nineteenth-century seminaries contributed to what has been called de- Christianization-itself a misleading term if it suggests more than the abandoning of church rituals. As early as 1828 an old Yonne priest, trained before the Revolution, had criticized his younger colleagues: "The young reformers of humankind flatly refuse absolution to all but girls who do not dance and lads who never go to taverns ... and in this way they avoid the trouble of confessions." Doubtful about this view, Latreille and Remond remark that after all this was no more than "a certain moral rigorism or harshness, ... frequent in that clerical generation."23 Yet moral rigorism should not be underrated when its effects touched every aspect of popular observance and turned the priest into a killjoy-a resident and interfering Mrs. Grundy. 

The consoling cleric undoubtedly existed, but when we meet the priest he is always saying no. No drinking on the Sabbath, or in periods when a mass is being said, or while processions pass. No Sunday morning markets. Too 

The Priests and the People 

many pigs-disgusting animals; people feast on them when they should be fasting. The fishermen work on Sundays, the priests persuade fish merchants not to buy fish on that day. The reactions were expectable. At Usclades (Ardeche), the priest entered the local tavern to silence "certain songs," but had to retreat under a barrage of insults, followed by snowballs! In a village nearby the priest ran out of church to put an end to a noisy farandole troubling the evening prayers, broke the drum with his fist, and barely escaped lynching. Men were becoming less willing to accept this kind of interference, and even less willing to admit the priest's right to interfere in their private lives.24 

The practice of coitus interruptus, which was apparently spreading, led to vexation and acrimony. We know that in 1840 the bishop of Le Mans had been troubled by the number of young husbands showing themselves eager to avoid conception, though not intercourse. Questioned and condemned by their confessors, more and more of these, growing weary of ecclesiastical pressures, were keeping away from the communion table or abandoning religious practice altogether.'*' We have no way of knowing whether the bishop's concerns reflected rural practices, or only urban ones. The picture grows clearer, however, by 1867, when Redemptorist missionaries in the Somme reported that parish after parish was "ravaged by onanism." The men reproved for this vice refused to mend their ways and "live far from the sacraments." There and elsewhere, husbands evinced a growing resentment toward confessors who wrung every last detail of intimate practice from their wives. There had always been some objection, and this grew through the century, to confessors prying into private affairs-the profits of merchants, the small peculations of traders, the indiscretions of untoward talk or reading. Now, confession was attacked as an interference in marital relations, "probing the conjugal bed," and an invasion of privacy that excited minors to debauchery by suggesting notions they would not themselves have thought of. We can well understand why the occasional crime or deviation by a member of the clergy was greeted with acrid delight, even though as a rule embezzlement, sexual assault, indecent exposure, visits to brothels, and other lapses were de- 

• To the bishop's request for guidance, Rome replied that while the husband does indeed commit a sin by spilling his seed "outside the receptacle," the wife, for her part, could submit passively to such practices without committing the sin. E. Le Roy Ladurie, who cites the case, remarks that this subtle distinction .would become the basis of French theological and confessional practice, hence of the country's religious dichotomy: men = sinners, and as such are excluded or selfexcluded; women = resigned, innocent, and passive, and remain within the Church. (Le Te"itoire de l'historien, Paris, 1973, pp. 314-15.) This division could be complicated or reinforced by priests' attempts to use their hold on believing wives in order to influence the political behavior of their spouses. In, 1885 the priest of Payssas (Ardeche) exhorted the village women to make their husbands vote for the conservative electoral list "under pain of mortal sin" for wives who did not carry out instructions. In 1897 we hear about a man of Finistere who refused to follow his wife's electoral counsel and who "since that time could have no intercourse with her as a result of clerical proscription." (Alexandre Pilenco, Moeurs du suffrage universel, Paris, I~O, pp. 193-200.) See also Claude Mesliand, "Contribution a 1'etude de l' anticlericalisme a Pertuis de 1871 a 1914," Annales de sociologic des religions, 1960, pp. 49-62. 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

cently hidden from view. "The priest is the law, prohibition, forbiddance," wrote the Abbe Larichesse of Cantal in an 1865 study of confession. Familiar with claims that people avoided church because its doctrines ignored human passions, he did not see laxity as a valid remedy. No wonder that, by 1883, we find the public prosecutor at Grenoble noting that the reserve and mistrust with which the peasants of Isere treated their priests was "a form of self-defense" against the clergy's attempts to trespass on their freedom of conscience in newly reserved domains like family affairs and politics. An article in a clerical review published in the last year of the century summed it all up: "The clergy is unpopular. To men of the people the priest is by definition a hostile being."211 It was in this guise that many priests worked hard to saw off the branch on which they sat. 

"Modern" religion extolled new cults (the Virgin, the Blessed Heart of Jesus, the Holy Sacrament) over familiar ones, and sought to purify practice. The clergy had always shown a certain hostility to popular rejoicing as essentially pagan; feasting was gross, libertine, leading to violence and keeping peasants away from church services.26 Unable to eliminate such feasts, the Church incorporated them but did not cease to treat them with suspicion. Around mid-century the hierarchy set about purification. Balazuc, in Ardeche, boasted a Con£n~rie de Saint-Antoine (better known as the Fraternity of the Cow, because its members killed one every year and distributed its meat to the poor). In 1845 the priest found the fraternal banquets were too washed down with wine and suppressed the confrerie. His action set off a riot, but it was final in Balazuc and representative of a wider trend. Religious congregations and fraternities, especially penitents, had lost sight of their original purpose, which was to aid the poor, bury the indigent, honor their members in death. They had become social and drinking societies-blancs le matin et gris le soir, they said in Velay-<>r political clubs, their chief public function restricted to marching in processions wearing colorful, awesome robes and hoods. "This form of devotion no longer corresponded to the mentality of the population," commented a canon. Certainly not to the mentality of reforming clergymen. Far gone in their worldly ways, the penitents were reformed to death and left to expire slowly in the first two decades of the Third Republic. They were replaced with associations specifically dedicated to prayer and to pious works. The result was a setback on both sides: the new associations, which the clergy sponsored, sometimes wilted or died; meanwhile, the old groups, abandoned by the clergy, withered badly also. "In a few years," wrote Edward Harrison Barker in 1893, "there will be no Blue Penitents at Figeac. As the old members of the confraternity die, there are no postulants to fill their places. Already they feel, when they put on their 'sacks,' that they are masquerading, and that the eye of ridicule is upon them."27 The same was true for the whole popular cult of relics, processions, osten- 

The Priests and the People 

sions, rogations, statues, rocks, caves, and healing springs, successively routed out as excrescences. Branches or stones that women grated or gr-ound up against barrenness were done away with wherever this could be achieved. At Allanches (Cantal) one of the major local feasts-Saint John's, in midsummer'-":"'waned during the 1830's when local priests ceased to take part in "ceremonies outside religious worship" and restricted themselves to purely religious ceremonies. About the same time in Gers the miraculous fountain of Saint John the Baptist at Nougarolet was put out of commission by a priest intent on scotching superstition, who simply filled its basin in. In 1845 the rector of Ploemeur (Morbihan) had the village menhir torn down-one of the magic stones that peasants crowned with flowers, anointed with butter, or slipped money to. All over Brittany the ancient megaliths became "forbidden" or "accursed" stones.28 

Still, stubborn beliefs and practices survived even without clerical participation or endorsement. A song from Barjols (V ar) affirms it :29 

L'evesque es vengu, La capelo, la capelo. L' evesque es " vengu, La capelo n'a fondu. N aoustf(! festaren Sant Antoni, Sant Antoni, N aoustre festaren Sant Antoni quand voudren. 

o The the bishop's chapel, come, 0 the chapel. The bishop's come, The chapel he has torn down. We'll feast Saint Anthony, Saint Anthony, We'll feast Saint Anthony when we please. 

In 1865 a Nievre country priest decried "the multitude of vain superstitions" rampant among his Morvandiaux. About the same time, another priest in the Saumurois was denouncing the rain-making rite of dipping a processional cross in a magic fountain and throwing in some wine while calling on the fountain's patron saint, "you give us water, we give you wine!" The clergy, he insisted, should try to "suppress [the usage] as superstitious, and this despite popular complaints." In 1879 the rector of Tredarzec (Cotes-du-Nord) demolished the chief shrine to Saint Yves, center of a local cult the Church disapproved of, the shrine of Saint-Ives-de-la-Verite. It had no effect. A few years later a man said to have been condemned by the avenging saint was dead, and his alleged murderer acquitted. A new priest assigned to Breuilaufa (Haute-Vienne) in 1880 tried to put an end to the traditional practice of ringing the church bells on All Hallows eve and throughout the morning of All Souls. He locked the church doors, but the indignant peasants threatened to break them down, crying "that no one could prevent them from ringing for their dead." A few years later another Limousin village rose to defend its right to ring the church bells in a storm.so Other popular customs put up a solid fight. In Cantal just before Easter the shepherds made the rounds of local farms, singing old songs appropriate to the occasion and collecting bits 

THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

of food, eggs, and a few coins. "The clergy was hostile" to this "immemorial custom," the reveillers, perhaps because "the rusticity of the Evangelists [whom the shepherds portrayed] and of their songs appeared unworthy of religion." The custom survived none the less, at least to the 1890's. And menhirs continued to be worshiped despite ecclesiastic execrations. In 1896 the menhir at Plouguernevel (COtes~du-Nord) was crowned by a cross, and an accompanying tablet promised 40 days' indulgence for every Pater and Ave that the faithful said.sl The Church continued to join what it could not lick. One thing it sought to lick-and with a determination that cost it even greater popular sympathies-was the festival and the vulgar rejoicing that accompanied it. In Morbihan a local man of letters expressed regret in 1863 that priests, who once, far from condemning dancing, had given it tacit approval by coming to watch and applaud, had become rigorous and reproving. The permissive priest of yore was gone. For the new, stern cure, popular feasting went on for far too long. It kept a man from work not only while it lasted, but while he painfully recuperated in its aftermath. In any case, as the Oc ditty had it, "There is no feast without a morrow."3Z A feastday was likely to run into two or three, its participants carried away by the unaccustomed respite. What was much worse was the abandoned behavior: the unchaste dress of women and lewdness of the men, the return home at dawn, the drunkenness and debauchery without measure. Civilization meant measure, limits; but preternatural wildness kept breaking through. Savagery was too near the surface, too lightly chained, not to cast off its bonds. There lay the danger of those "lascivious dances" and the tunes that ushered in pagan violent moods.33 

Father Labrune in his Limousin village preached and campaigned against them. Reprehensible passions, unbridled license, obscene cries, offended chas~ tity, concubinage, and illegitimate children-all sprang from his flock's frenzied attachment to dancing. In Burgundy, too, the mid~nineteenth century saw a grand clerical offensive against dances and bals. The archbishop of Sens fulminated "against the deplorable abuses that reign in the countryside and that arise from dances and from public bals." One village priest in Yonne called for a state of siege in his commune of 376 souls, where "all the young ... crowded in the same hall (at night!) give themselves over passionately to dances of a revolting obscenity."34 

Priests often refused communion, even at Easter, to girls who went dancing and sometimes to their parents as well; but when, in 1858, the Minister of the Interior showed concern over the bishop of Tarbes's pronouncement of an excommunication of all persons "indulging in the pleasures of dance," the prefect of Hautes-Pyrenees reassured him: it was part of a clerical campaign against low necklines. Ladies had to be made to promise not to pass on decollete dresses to servants and maids "lest these be tempted to dress above their station and develop tastes that lead to many vices."35 So sauce for one 

The Priests and the People 

sort of goose was not meant for any other sort. Like dresses, dances permissible at one level of the social ladder were inappropriate when exhibited on lower rungs. It is true that the proprieties were in greater danger, but moral rigorism was also easier to exercise."" 

Dancing, in any case, competed with the contemplation and the prayer that should command Sundays-the day of the Lord. "Today Sunday does not belong to the Lord, but to dancing," sighed La Semaine religieuse of Montpellier in 1877. But Sunday brought for most the only intermission in hard labor. They wanted to enjoy it as they could, and there was a widespread custom that after mass or vespers people danced. Priests denounced this, and also railed against the reels and jigs that joined on saints' feastdays and pilgrimages. They tended to react to local fiddlers as if they were unclean sinners. We hear of one in Vernajoul (Ariege) who made a scene when the minstrels scheduled to play during the afternoon's celebrations of the Emperor's Day, August 15, escorted the mayor to church service in the morning. The report of the incident cites "his well-known feelings against music, dancing, etc." We hear about another priest, at Soutein (Ariege) who clashed with the mayor for licensing a public dance on the occasion of the local feast in 1884. The cure denounced it as immora1.36 

A folklorist of the 1880'S expressed regret at the oversensitivity of priests and warned that when these diversions held on pilgrimage days ended, the pilgrimages would end too. He was not fundamentally wrong. Pilgrimages endured, but when they were no longer part of popular rejoicings they represented only a religion from which the life had been drained away. Moreover, the danger to such institutions of the Church was all the greater because the Church was becoming more dispensable. Around 1900 the priest of Morette (Isere) refused absolution to a girl unless she promised to give up dancing. "If you don't want to give it, keep id" answered the girl.37 

The Church's firm base in popular need was declining, the framework it provided for social activity became less essential as more activities went on outside its purview, yet it persisted in restricting those that did. Far from sustaining "retrograde" ideas, the priest seems to have collaborated with the schoolteacher to stamp them out. The scorn that teachers showed for rustic superstitions was often shared by priests, who were increasingly reluctant to take part in magic rites decried by the official culture. The peasants "are very stick-in-the-mud and want essentially to keep their ancient practices"-shades of the village schoolteachers' decrying of routine! Reformist priests, on the other hand, were bent on renovation. Even familiar statues were sacrificed for posher urban plaster, and at Landivisiau (Finistere) in 1906 an English 

• Jean·Marie Vianney, cure of Ars, was the only priest who managed to extirpate dancing and taverns in the whole of his parish. To this day there are no dances at Ars, and the young go to neighboring communes for their fun (whereas in other areas many balls are organized by the priest or the Catholic youth groups). 

370 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE traveler noted so many old saints for sale for a few francs that one could have furnished a Breton paradise.3s 

The growing division between the Church and its public thus took two turns. Many among the hierarchy and clergy, fearing the modern world, cut themselves off from the cultivated classes, from the working class, and from what Brugerette called a society taken with independence.39 Many (sometimes the same) also disapproved of antiquated and semi-pagan forms of popular piety and worship: the colorful rituals of urban fraternities, the laxity attached to public ceremonial and festivities, the unregenerate magic practices. Yet the attachment of the popular masses to ancient things that the Church wanted to leave behind was even greater than their attachment to the Church. Eliminating the practices helped to estrange the people.* 

Archaic societies envisage their existence and survival as being dependent on exchanges between the world of the living and the world of the dead, the latter contributing to the fertility and renewal of the former. In France, as elsewhere, exchanges of this kind were symbolized by seasonal ceremonies that had been taken over by the Church, which also infiltrated or adopted the social organization that supported them: generational groups and fraternities. The great satisfying dramas that marked the rhythm of the seasons were reinforced by religious ceremonial. As supernatural interpretations crumbled under the impact of materialism, and even more before the puritanical expurgations of the clergy, the basis for the belief itself, where simple minds made simple associations, also crumbled. Removing the religious content of the natural magic also took a good deal of magic out of religion. The churchmen did not realize the danger of such reforms. Hard-pressed by contemporary criticism of superstitions, identical with long-held reservations of their own, they considered the tree of the Church too strong to be hurt by pulling off the ivy. Yet when the ivy had been pulled away, the tree was left alone and isolated. Over and over, the struggle over practices it disapproved of left the Church mistress of an emptied field. 

In the years before the First World War, as a priest was to note, "in towns [people] awaken to our ideas [while] our rural peasants become ever more pagan." Cardinal de Cabrieres also bewailed the rural population's "absolute and almost scornful indifference." The Catholic revival that has been much talked about, the "consoling growth of the eucharistic movement," the "religious and patriotic renaissance of Catholicism" around the turn of the century (Remond and Latreille date it from 1885 to 1914), was an intellectual and 

• Emile Durkheim has defined religion as a society based on certain beliefs and practices that are held in common by all believers and that are traditional, hence obligatory. The stronger and the more numerous these beliefs and practices the more integrated the religion and the greater its ability to preserve its cohesion and that of the believing group. "The detail of dogmas and rites is secondary," he says. "The essential is that they should be such as to keep up a collective life of sufficient intensity." (Le Suicide, 1969 ed., p. 173.) 

The Priests and the People 371 middle-class affair.40 From the words of an exultant priest, it is apparent that the nocturnal adoration, the fraternities of the Blessed Sacrament, the general communions of men and of the young, were a class phenomenon, since all the cases cited refer to schoolboys, for many of whom, as Baudrillart suggests, religion had become a kind of sport. =11= 

In fact, fewer and fewer men were being drawn to the priesthood. Their numbers dwindled steadily through the last quarter of the century, even under the Moral Order of the 1870's. Bishops had been complaining about the paucity of religious vocations since 1815, but their cries became sharper after 1871, when seminaries began to appear alarmingly empty: 34 students at Nlmes in 1875 against 80 before the war, 53 at Reims in 1878 against 100 earlier, and 90 at Verdun in 1874 against 150. "Vocations diminish in a frightening manner," lamented the bishop of Tours in 1877. In 1876 seminaries (grands seminaires) had 12,166 stUdents, in 1880, only 8,4°0. The number of ordinations reached their nineteenth-century peak of 1,753 in the year 1868, then declined rapidly until 1877, when they roughly stabilized at about 1,580. They fell from 1618 in 1904 to 1,014 in 1909 and 704 in 1914. In 1904 there were still 13.5 secular priests for every 10,000 Frenchmen-I: 739. In 1913 there were only 12-1: 832. By 1929 the ratio stood near I: 1,000:u By all accounts, these men, well-trained in pious practices, were ill-prepared to meet the challenges of the rising world or answer its criticisms. "The clergy on the whole dislikes the times it lives in, hence cannot heal them." An English observer well acquainted with the French was struck by the ignorance of village priests. This is confirmed by the impressions of outstanding priests like Alfred Loisy and Georges Fremont: mental laziness accompanied by "unbearable smugness."42 

The catastrophic drop in numbers was due in some measure to practical considerations that dried recruitment up. The military law of 1889 made seminarians liable for military service, in part with the deliberate purpose of discouraging clerical recruitment. Its effects were relatively negligible, however, since the most likely alternative, attending normal school, was little better; after all, apprentice teachers also served one year.t The separation of church and state was a more serious matter. The priest's prestige was seriously affected. "These gentlemen must have done something to be treated like this by the government," was one conclusion country men drew. Another, more mundane, was that priests were poorer and the priesthood a less desirable career.43 

• Abbe Bellamy, us EfJets de la communion (Paris, 1900), especially pp. 48ff; Henri Baudrillart, Les Populations agricoles, 3: 38. It is true that some impressive statistics were claimed for the Crusade of the Rosary, which ended shortly before 1914. Over 100,000,000 rosaries (it was reported) were said for the salvation of France. But the rosary is a mechanical form of prayer and does not necessarily reflect a high degree of religious feeling in the practitioner. t Still, Father Fremont in Nice noted on December 16, 1906, that of 54 students only 25 were left: "Les autres soot partis au regiment, sur l'ordre du Ministre de la Guerre" (Joseph Brugerette, Le Pretre franfa;s, 3: 29). 

372 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE 

Church authorities were the first to agree. Some expected that one-third of the priesthood would be left to starve. Many old priests sought to resign from a living that no longer provided them with a living, and some bishops, worried by the gaps threatening in many parishes, tried to compel them to stay in their posts. By 1908 in the Versailles diocese there were but 500 active parish priests to serve three-quarters of a million souls (and Versailles was a desirable area). Other priests girded themselves to earn some money. An alliance of worker-priests was organized and published a journal, Le Trait d'union, to help members in the trades they had chosen to pursue-carpentry, book-binding, watchmaking, embroidery, printing, cattle-raising, commercial farming. It also advertised remedies like the fragrant lozenges "excellent at burials." The alliance encouraged other priests to take up sidelines, as indicated by the title of its secretary's brochure, Metiers possibles du pretre de demain. In 1901 a special review was founded to help with the "Recrutement sacerdotal."" 

Above all, Holy Orders ceased to seem an honorable and secure career. Parental tenderness, opined the bishop of Reims, turned young people away from an uncertain profession. "It's only human wisdom." By 1910 the average number of incoming seminarians had fallen 50 percent. A survey shows very sharp drops in enrollment by 1910, four years after the Separation: from 85 to 20 at Ajaccio, from 100 to 53 at Angouleme, from 45 to 23 at Avignon, from 254 to 162 at Cambrai, from 70 to 24 at Langres, from 12 to 0 at Moutiers, from 65 to 30 at Nice, from 200 to 130 at Rodez, from 57 to IS at Sens, from 40 to 16 at Tulle, from 69 to 39 at Valence, and so on. Some children were discouraged by their schooling; after all, now authoritative voices told them there was no God, at least not the God of the priest: "J'sons bin oblige d'an crere." And simmering resentments, fed by the propaganda of enlightenment, were breaking surface: "We bear the priest a grudge because, when we were ~mall,he made us believe in hell, in the devil, in all those things that made us afraid. When we grew up we understood he had got us all excited about nothing, and it rankles.""5 Above all, the integrative functions once performed exclusively by religious institutions were now performed by numerous secondary groupings (clubs, associations, parties). Church ritual-designed to control situations and modify experience-was being thrust aside by new techniques. The priest who had once directed was relegated at best to a confirming role. And even this lost much of its importance as village society became less homogeneous. 

Paradoxically enough, this development was reRected in what was happening to the dead. The dead, as we have seen, had a role to play in ancient tradition; and though the Church added its own content to the old forms, it had accommodated the beliefs in the revitalizing agency of the dead. In the nineteenth century two things were to affect this. For one thing, sanitary and hygienic considerations, along with innovations in mortuary practices, 

The Priests and the People 373 pushed cemeteries from the parish center to nonpopulated areas.* Corpses dressed in a simple shirt or wrapped in a winding sheet had decayed rapidly and permitted a turnover in burial plots that kept up with parish needs. The greater prosperity and the desire to keep up with the bourgeois Joneses introduced elaborate coffins; villagers no longer were content with a few roughly finished planks crudely nailed together, but insisted on polished monuments, preferably upholstered and adorned with gilt. Their occupants lived up to their surroundings: a better shroud, the best clothes, a pillow, prayerbook, and rosary, and a supply of holy medals. By 1913 we find a widow at Chateauponsac (Haute-Vienne) describing the pomp with which her husband was laid to rest: fitted out in his wedding jacket over a new shirt, with his cane, his snuffbox full of fresh tobacco, a shroud of the best quality and a new woolen blanket, his hat beside him and under his head a feather bolster well plumped out.46 

Investments of this order demanded a durable resting place. Graves came to be bought or to be leased for longer periods. Poor Y orick could no longer be disinterred after a few years that his grave might receive another's bones. Increasingly luxurious tombs helped to differentiate the dead and mark their social standing. The second half of the century saw more and more cemeteries move from the cent er to the outskirts, a process whose suggestive overtones went beyond class divisions. 

Until cemeteries moved out of the village, churchgoers would stop and say a prayer over a relative's tomb. On Sundays churchyards had been the chief meeting-place. Before and after mass, groups formed to talk and to live together but also with the dead, before whose tomb one knelt. Now the removal of the dead reflected the accelerated dismissal of a past that also grew increasingly remote. It also reflected doubt about survival and another world. Testaments, once concerned in part with the dead person's future, prescribing masses, prayers, restitutions for the salvation of their souls, now concentrated on terrestrial property and its transmission.47 

Traditional rites were waning. Throughout much of France a dead person had routinely been provided with a coin, a throwback to pagan times, when this was meant to pay his fare across the River Styx: in I87I the mother of a dead girl, asked why she closed her daughter's hand over a sou, answered, "To let her have some fun in paradise." In many places the straw or straw mattress of the deathbed used to be burned. Beds with box mattresses made this costly, and the old custom disappeared. In Bourbonnais, until the 1890'S local women made a profession of laying out the dead and guarding them for a small fee and "all that is on the bed at the time of dying."48 Here, too, 

• We could do with more information on cemeteries, from the cholera epidemic of 1832, which led to the opening of new ones, to the attacks on clericalism, which included an attempt to strip cemeteries of their religious character and provided one more bone of contention for the angry 1880'S and 1890's.374 THE AGENCIES OF CHANGE more elaborate beds and bedding made costs too high and abolished another practice. Death shifted from public mourning to more private grief. Wailing and lamenting had long remained social affairs; the professional mourners who shrieked and tore their hair during ritual dirges represented the com~ munal grief at a struggle with death that was always doomed to defeat, the only opportunity to show a more general despair over a condition in which one never wins. Yet even this popular ritual faded away as conditions bettered. Grief that had been displayed in public came to be kept in the family. Pro~ fessional mourners seem to have persisted to the turn of the century, but we hear that the custom was greeted with derision in Lorraine in 1889. Just as professional orators over a tomb declined as schooling provided more fashion~ ably stereotyped phrases.419 

The dead remained important, and All Souls Day, their feast, brought into church even those who did not set foot in it at any other time. But the bishop of Limoges knew well what this betokened when he accused his flock in 1862: "The cult of the saints and of the dead is still the outstanding trait of your character." The cult of the dead may be the starting point of organized religion; but that religion need not be Christian. The cult of the dead may even be a substitute for the cult of a particular god. "The more a civilization eliminates God, the more it practices the cult of the dead," a student of the question has said.llo In fact, it can do without either. And without their representatives. 

