---
title: 290 LV

---
  

  


## LV

228 W. 39TH ST., NEW YORK,  
*20th December, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . Have patience and be faithful unto death. Do not fight among
yourselves. Be perfectly pure in money dealings. . . . We will do great
things yet. . . . So long as you have faith and honesty and devotion,
everything will prosper.

. . . In translating the Suktas, pay particular attention to the
Bhāshyakāras (commentators), and pay no attention whatever to the
orientalists. They do not understand a single thing about our Shāstras
(scriptures). It is not given to dry philologists to understand
philosophy or religion. . . . For instance the word Ânid-avātam in the
Rig-Veda was translated — "He lived without breathing". Now, here the
reference is really to the chief Prāna, and Avātam has the root-meaning
for unmoved, that is, without vibration. It describes the state in which
the universal cosmic energy, or Prana, remains before the Kalpa (cycle
of creation) begins: vide — the Bhashyakaras. Explain according to *our*
sages and not according to the so-called European scholars. What do they
know?

. . . Be bold and fearless, and the road will be clear. . . . Mind, you
have nothing whatsoever to do with the Theosophists. If you all stand by
me and do not lose patience, I assure you, we shall do great work yet.
The great work will be in England, my boy, by and by. I feel you
sometimes get disheartened, and I am afraid you get temptations to play
in the hands of the Theosophists. Mind you, the Guru-Bhakta will conquer
the world — this is the one evidence of history. . . . It is faith that
makes a lion of a man. You must always remember how much work I have to
do. Sometimes I have to deliver two or three lectures a day — and thus I
make my way against all odds — hard work; any weaker man would die.

. . . Hold on with faith and strength; be true, be honest, be pure, and
don't quarrel among yourselves. Jealousy is the bane of our race.

With love to you and all our friends there,

Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.