---
title: 291 LVI

---
  

  
  
  
  


## LVI

228 W. 39TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*10th February, 1896*.

DEAR SISTER, (Miss Mary Hale)

I was astonished at learning that you have not received my letter yet. I
wrote immediately after the receipt of yours and also sent you some
booklets of three lectures I delivered in New York. These Sunday public
lectures are now taken down in shorthand and printed. Three of them made
two little pamphlets, several copies of which I have forwarded to you. I
shall be in New York two weeks more, and then I go to Detroit to come
back to Boston felt a week or two.

My health is very much broken down this year by constant work. I am very
nervous. I have not slept a single night soundly this winter. I am sure
I am working too much, yet a big work awaits me in England.

I will have to go through it, and then I hope to reach India and have a
rest all the rest of my life. I hale tried at least to do my best for
the world, leaving, the result to the Lord. Now I am longing for rest.
Hope I will get some, and the Indian people will give me up. How I would
like to become dumb for some years and not talk at all! I was not made
for these struggles and fights of the world. I am naturally dreamy and
restful. I am a born idealist, can only live in a world of dreams; the
very touch of fact disturbs my visions arid makes me unhappy. They, will
be done!

I am ever ever grateful to you four sisters; to you I owe everything I
have in this country. May you be ever blessed and happy. Wherever I be,
you will always be remembered with the deepest gratitude and sincerest
love. The whole life is a succession of dreams. My ambition is to be a
conscious dreamer, that is all. My love to all â€” to Sister Josephine.

Ever your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.