---
title: 296 LXI

---
  

  


## LXI

NEW YORK,  
*14th April, 1896*.

DEAR DR. NANJUNDA RAO,

I received your note this morning. As I am sailing for England tomorrow,
I can only write a few hearty lines. I have every sympathy with your
proposed magazine for boys, and will do my best to help it on. You ought
to make it independent, following the same lines as the *Brahmavādin*,
only making the style and matter much more popular. As for example,
there is a great chance, much more than you ever dream of, for those
wonderful stories scattered all over the Sanskrit literature, to be
re-written and made popular. That should be the one great feature of
your journal. I will write stories, as many as I can, when time permits.
Avoid all attempts to make the journal scholarly — the *Brahmavadin*
stands for that — and it will slowly make its way all over the world, I
am sure. Use the simplest language possible, and you will succeed. The
main feature should be the teaching of principles through stories. Don't
make it metaphysical at all. As to the business part, keep it wholly in
your hands. "Too many cooks spoil the broth." In India the one thing we
lack is the power of combination, organisation, the first secret of
which is obedience.

I have also promised to help starting a magazine in Bengali in Calcutta.
Only the first year I used to charge for my lectures. The last two
years, my work was entirely free of all charges. As such, I have almost
no money to send you or the Calcutta people. But I will get people to
help you with funds very soon. Go on bravely. Do not expect success in a
day or a year. Always hold on to the highest. Be steady. Avoid jealousy
and selfishness. Be obedient and eternally faithful to the cause of
truth, humanity, and your country, and you will move the world. Remember
it is the *person*, the life, which is the secret of power — nothing
else. Keep this letter and read the last lines whenever you feel worried
or jealous. Jealousy is the bane of all slaves. It is the bane of our
nation. Avoid that always. All blessings attend you and all success.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.