+++
title = "Atreya rAmAnuja"
+++

In this posting, we shall enjoy the avathaara vaibhavam of Srimath Appullar,
the acharya as well as the maternal uncle of Swamy Deshika. The descriptions
are totally based on the accounts enshrined in the "3000 padi guruparampara
prabhavam" of Paramahamsetyaadi Srimath Tritiya Brahmatantra Swatantra
Parakala Yatindra Maha Deshikan, the 3rd acharya of Parakala Matam.

## Familial Lineage 
Appullar hailed from the lineage of Kidambi Aachchan, who was a direct
disciple of Ramanuja and an ubhaya simhasanadhipati. Of all the tributaries
that arise from Srimath Ramanuja, the lineage of Kidambi Aachchan forms the
rahasya paramparai (the lineage of esoterics). It may be traced as follows -

Bhagavad Ramanuja - Kidambi Aachchan - Kidambi Ramanuja Pillaan - Kidambi
Rangarajacharya - Kidambi Appullar (Note - This lineage further continues
with Swamy Deshikan)

## Avatara
Appullar's familial lineage may be traced as follows - Kidambi Aachan -
Kidambi Ramanuja Pillan - Kidambi Rangarajacharya - Kidambi Appullar.
Appullar celebrated as the amsham of Supratishta, was born in the kali year
4322, vikrama varsham, month of chittirai in the constellation of
Thiruvadirai to Sri Kidambi Rangarajacharya. Rangarajacharya named his son
as Ramanuja, in memory of his acharya and father, Sri Ramanuja pillaan.

## Studenthood
Right from his childhood days Athreya Ramanuja was very sharp in intellect
and he grew up to be profound in all the samanya shastras like shabda,
tarka, mimamsa. People began to admire him and compare him to Pillan and
would call him as "Appillaan". This name indeed stayed and he came to be
popularly known as "Appillar".
He was initiated into the esoterics of the tri-corollaries by Sri
Rangarajacharya, who later left to the heavenly abode. He later sought
refuge at the feet of Sri Nadadur Ammal and studied SriBhashya, Gitabhashya,
Aaraayirappadi and other works of Sri sampradayam. His colleagues included
the likes of Sri Sudarshanacharya (of Shrutaprakashika fame), Sri Vadakku
Thiruveedhippillai et al. These kalakshepams would be conducted along the
eastern corridor of Kachchivaaythaan mantapam at Perumal Koil Kanchipuram.
(Reminiscences of this may be seen even to this day)

## Appullar as a King maker
Upon the request of Perumal Koil Pundarikaksha Yajvaa, Appillar gave his
sister Totaramma in marriage to Ananthasuri, the son of Pundarikaksha
Yajvaa. To this couple was born the great Venkatanatha (Swamy Deshikan), one
of the greatest acharyas of Ramanuja siddhantam. When the child was around
five years old, Appillar took him to the kalakshepa goshti of ammal. It was
here that the young child Venkatanatha received munificent katakshams of
Ammal, which paved the way for him (Venkatanatha) to become one of the
brightest star of Ramanuja siddhantham. Ammal later instructed Appillar to
instruct and initiate the child into all the treatises of Srisampradayam.

As per the wish of his master Appillar, took young Venkatanatha into his
fold. He instructed the young child into all the samanya shastras first and
later into the likes of Sribhashyam, Bhagavad Vishayam, the esoterics of the
tri-corollaries et al. Appillar later got him married to one Thirumangai
Kanakavalli, who was equal to Swamy Deshika in noble qualities and inherent
virtuousness.

Having seen the prowess of Venkatanatha, Appillar initiated him into the
sacred "Vainateya mantram" or "Garuda manthram", that would help him in
refuting the other fallacious systems of philosophies and thereby to
establish the supreme parama vaidika Ramanuja darshanam.

Towards the end of his sojourn, Appillar called on Venkatanatha and said
"Dear child, It is the prophecy of my master Ammal that the darshanam of
Ramanuja shall be firmly established by you. It is therefore my wish that
you take these padukas of Ramanuja and the chakram and shankham (used for
samashrayanam) that has come down to us from him (Ramanuja)". Venkatanatha
received them on his head with utmost respect and enshrined them along with
his sacristy. Venkatanatha then held the thiruvadi of Appillar on his head
and received the munificent anugrahams of Appillar. Appillar later partook
the Sripaada teerthams of his acharya and left to the heavenly bliss.

Appillar was succeeded by his son Kidambi Athreya Padmanabhacharya.

## Works
Appillar's intellect and power of erudition knew no bounds. He had won the
title "Vaadihamsaambuvaahar". Appillar's works include his treatise on Nyaya
shastra known as "Nyaya kulisha".

His taniyans are as follows -

चैत्रार्द्रा-सम्भवं काञ्च्यां रङ्गराजगुरोस् सुतम्।  
सुप्रतिष्ठांशम् आत्रेयं रामानुजगुरुं भजे॥  

## Works on Appullar
Swamy Deshikan makes innumerable mentions about Swamy Athreya Ramanuja in
his works.

Srimath Thirukkudanthai Gopalarya Maha Deshikan, who came in the lineage of
Appillar as his 14th descendent has composed a stotram in praise of
Appillar. The same is known as "Vaadihamsaabuvaahaarya stotram".

This series will be continued with Vaadihamsambuvaaha stotram.

vAzhi vyAkhyAmuddirak kai !!!
vedAnthasUri charaNau sharaNam prapadye !!!