+++
title = "93 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
  
\*[THE HINDU-MUSLIM PROBLEM (1924)](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\*  
by Lala Lajpat Rai

PART 10 -- \[The Shuddhi, Sanghathan, and Tanzim movements\]  


**\[A\]** The aggressive Hinduism preached by the Arya Samaj was not
political in its conception. That it has been strengthened by political
considerations cannot, however, be denied.

**\[B\]** This is an appropriate place for examining the origin and
bearings of the *Shuddhi* movement of which we have heard so much of
late. The movement is as old as the Arya Samaj or even the Sikh
religion. The Arya Samaj claims that the religion preached by it is
universal religion, and aims at bringing the whole world under its
banner. In this respect its claims are as ambitious and wide as those of
Christianity and Islam. There was a time when the more orthodox section
of the Arya Samaj used to proclaim from the housetops that they were
non-Hindus; and that they were free to eat and drink and marry with
non-Hindus; and that even Hindus should undergo a certain amount of
*Shuddhi* before they could be admitted into the Arya Samaj.

The other section, which was believed to be more political-minded, was
opposed to all these claims of the Mahatma party of which Swami
Shraddhanand (then Lala Munshi Ram) was the head. *Shuddhi* with the
latter was purely the ritual of conversion, i.e., admission into their
Church. It had no political significance whatsoever. For a time, Lala
Munshi Ram's party maintained this attitude, and some of them attempted
to put into practice what they believed in theory. It was then that the
now-famous Dharmpal was made a hero. Soon after, however, they found
that by insisting on this idea and putting it into practice they were
bound to lose the practical sympathy of the Hindu community. This they
could not afford to do, as it was the general Hindu community that
greased the various mills they **\[\[208\]\]** were running. So better
counsels prevailed, and they changed their attitude.

**\[C\]** I know it as a fact, however (as I was an active member of the
Arya Samaj then), that serious efforts were made even then. to bring the
Malkana**[/21/](#n21)** and other Rajputs of the United Provinces and
Rajputana into the fold of the Arya Samaj. Some were actually so brought
at Aligarh and in the neighbouring districts. The Malkanas, however, did
not want to be "Aryas"; what they desired was to be re-admitted into
their own caste, and brotherhood on equal terms. To this the orthodox
Rajputs would not agree. So the matter remained in suspense for a number
of years, until the orthodox Rajputs consented to take them in. What was
at the back of the latter's mind in this change of attitude, is also
clear. It was the communal demands of the Muslim community, the policy
of Mian Fazl-i-Husain and the Multan riots,**[/22/](#n22)** which
created the necessary atmosphere. The principle of *Shuddhi* has now
been accepted by the Hindu Mahasabha, and I am free to confess that the
idea at the back of this decision is partly political, pardy communal,
and partly humanitarian, the latter element being more in evidence in
the *Shuddhi* of the untouchables.

**\[D\]** It was, it must be confessed, only natural that the Muslims
should be exasperated at this change in the attitude of the orthodox
Hindus, because the change opens out an entirely new chapter in Indian
history. The question raised by the movement is a fundamental one, and
although one can understand and appreciate the Muslim point of view, one
can see no way of stopping the movement as long. as non-Hindu agencies
are free to carryon their proselytizing work. The movement has come to
stay, and this fact should be philosophically accepted. That it has
direct political bearings cannot be denied, and the only way to minimise
its importance is to do away with communal representation. For the
present, the decisions arrived at by the Delhi Unity Conference may be
accepted as the final word in the matter.**[/23/](#n23)**

**\[E\]** At this stage we might discuss the *Sangathan* and the
*Tanzim* movements too. The *Sangathan* movement also (or to call it by
its proper name, the Hindu Sabha movement) represents an old idea. The
object was present to the mind of the founder of the Arya Samaj. But the
Samaj signally failed to realise it, as it went **\[\[209\]\]** on
developing its sectarian proclivities. I remember that when I was a
student of the Lahore Government College in the early eighties, a Hindu
Sabha was formed at the house of Raja Harbans Singh of Sheikhupura in
Lahore. That Sabha died in its infancy. Then the movement was revived
towards the end of the last century at the house of the late Lala
Balmokand, Reis, Lahore. Even this organization, however, remained
almost lifeless until the late R. B. Lal Chand put life into it.

But somehow or other, the movement never took root. It has benefitted
individual members, but it has done no good to the Hindu community as a
whole. It had two formidable rivals: on the political side the Indian
National Congress, on the socio-religious side the Arya Samaj. Fixed
between these two mill-stones, it was never able to lift its head
sufficiently high to be a success. The present movement is a reaction of
the Hindu-Muslim situation. There is nothing in its aims and objects or
its constitution that need make it anti-Muslim, but to be frank, the
fact that it is anti-Muslim is the only thing that keeps it alive.

The Khilafat Committees which were originally established to support the
Khilafat agitation have regularly and systematically carried on a
religious propaganda to which is directly traceable a part, at least, of
the present bitterness between Hindus and Muslims. At Cocanada, it was
given out that the Khilafat Committee would be used to organise the
Indian Muslims.**[/24/](#n24)** *Tanzim* is its other name. It is
obviously anti-Hindu.

**\[F\]** Personally, I would welcome both the movements, i.e., the
*Sanghathan* and the *Tanzim*, if they could unite the different
sections of the Hindus into one organization, in one case, and all the
different sections of the Muslims, in the other; for then it would be a
comparatively easy thing for the two main organizations to come to terms
with each other. But the task is hopeless. In my judgment the only
purpose which the two movements are likely to serve is to increase the
already existing estrangement between the two communities. The Muslim
movement is also intended to keep the Pan-Islamic movement going. One
cannot help noticing, and noticing with regret, that while the Muslims
do not open their purses for the relief of Indian sufferers from famine,
floods, earthquakes, etc., and that while very little Muslim money is
spent to improve the educational and economic condition of
**\[\[210\]\]** Indian Muslims, thousands and lakhs \[=hundreds of
thousands\] are sent abroad under one name or other. The phenomenon is
confined to India. One finds no evidence of it in other Muslim nations
like Egypt, Turkey, Morocco, Sudan, Syria, etc., etc.

**\[G\]** As far as internal organization is concerned, both movements
are bound to fail. The canker of sectarianism is as fatal in one case as
in the other.

**\[H\]** In the case of *Sanghathan*, the Arya Samaj and the Sanatan
Dharam Sabha will not allow it to flourish and succeed. They do not seem
prepared to transfer any of their functions or influence to the Hindu
Sabha. In the case of *Tanzim*, the different Muslim sects will not
unite to let it be a success. Both the movements will, however, be much
advertised though, to keep alive anti-Muslim feeling in one case, and
the anti-Hindu feeling in the other.  


NOTES

**[/21/](#m21)** The Malkanas, who lived mostly in the U.P. districts of
Agra, Aligarh, and Muthra, were originally Hindu Rajputs. They had
accepted Islam but followed Hindu social customs. Arya Samaj
missionaries made efforts to reclaim them to \[the\] Hindu fold, and
Muslim missionaries worked in opposition to them.  
**[/22/](#m22)** Serious Hindu-Muslim riots took place at Multan in
September 1922 in consequence of a dispute between the two communities
arising out of the Muharram procession.  
**[/23/](#m23)** The part of the Resolution passed at the Unity
Conference on 26 September 1924 dealing with Hindu-Muslim relations
contained the following clause with regard to proselytising workâ€“  
'That every individual or group is at liberty to convert or reconvert
another by argument or persuasion, but most not attempt to do so, or
prevent its being done, by force, fraud, or other unfair means, such as
the offering of material inducement. Persons under 16 years of age
should not be converted unless it be along with their parents or
guardians. If any person under 16 years of age is found stranded without
his parents or guardians by persons of another faith, he should be
promptly handed over to persons of his own faith. There must be no
secrecy about any conversion or reconversion.'  
**[/24/](#m24)** This was decided at the Khilafat Conference held at
Coconada in Dec. 1923.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [on to part 11](11part.html) -- \*[Lala Lajpat Rai
index](txt_lajpatrai_1924.html)\* --
\*[Glossary](../../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp)\* --

  
