+++
title = "06  APPENDIX 2         NEDUMKOTTA: TRAVANCORE DEFENCE FORTIFICATION"

+++
APPENDIX 2  
NEDUMKOTTA: TRAVANCORE DEFENCE FORTIFICATION

The Nedumkotta was a defence fortification constructed along the
northern borders of the erstwhile Travancore State. It passed through
the territories of the then Cochin State.

The Nedumkotta was built primarily to resist the invasion under Hyder
Ali Khan against Travancore State. It was raised mainly with clay and
mud, and reinforced with stones, laterite and granite at strategic
places. It started from the Krishan Kotta on the west coast, above
Kodungallur, and stretched upto the Annamalai Hills on the Western
Ghats. It was about 48 km long, twenty feet wide and twelve feet high.
Its alignment was along the Periyar river on the west coast upto
Chalakudy from where it went along the Chalakudy river upto the
Annamalai Hills in the east. There were underground cells to store
gunpowder and other war materials, special chambers for soldiers to
live, and look-outs and mounted field-guns all along the fortification.
Besides, on the north side of the fortification, ditches were dug twenty
feet wide and sixteen feet deep, and filled with thorny plants,
poisonous snakes, and hidden weapons. On the south side as well as on
the top of the fortification, wide roads were laid for the convenience
of military movements.

The fortification was constructed during the regime of Rama Varma Raja,
popularly known as Dharma Raja of Travancore, and under the direct
guidance and supervision of the then Prime Minister, Ayyappan Marthanda
Pillai, and the then Commander of the Travancore Army, the Portuguese
Captain D'Lenoy. This historic defence line was comparable to the Great
Wall of China except that the latter was more ancient and greater in
length. It was under the protective cover of this Nedumkotta that a
small army of Travancoreans under the command of Raja Keshavadas
defeated and frustrated near Alwaye a formidable army of Islamic
fanatics led by Tipu Sultan.

Today there is no physical evidence of the historic Nedumkotta in the
form of even ruins anywhere in the Mukundapuram taluka - Chettuva,
Parur, Kodakara, Chalakudy, Mullurkara, Enamanakhal and Karikodu -
through which it passed. However, some place-names having a reference to
the historic fortification are still popular in the northern borders of
the erstwhile Cochin and Travancore States - Krishnan Kotta (meaning
Krishnan Fort), Kottamukku (fort corner), Kottamuri (part of a fort),
Kottaparampu (fort land), Kotta Vazhi (fort road), Kottalaparampu
(magazine ground), Palayam (cantonment), etc.

Unfortunately, there are no memorials erected anywhere in Kodungallur,
or Trichur, or Alwaye to honour Dharma Raja who gave shelter in his
state to thousands of Hindus escaping from the Islamic brutalities of
the fanatic Tipu Sultan; or Ayyappan Marthanda Pillai who was the
architect of the historic Nedumkotta; or Raja Keshavadas under whose
direct command a comparatively small army humbled and defeated the
invading army of Tipu Sultan; or scores of valiant Hindu soldiers who
laid down their lives to protect their country and faith.

The most despicable and shameful act of the anti-Hindu secularist
government of Kerala since Independence was that instead of honouring
the legendary heroes of the land, a memorial in the form of a flagstaff
was erected near the historic Trichur Palace to perpetuate the memory of
the Islamic bigot Tipu Sultan who was instrumental in the forcible mass
circumcision and killing of Hindus, destruction of Hindu temples, and
devastation of the Malabar, Trichur, Alwaye and Kodungallur regions.

> Reference
>
> 1\. *Kerala Charitradharakal* (Historical Documents) by Naduvattam
> Gopalakrishnan, pp. 84-89.
>
> 2\. *Thiruvithamkur Charitram* (Travancore History) by P. Sankunni
> Menon, p. 161.
>
> 3\. *Kerala Charitram* (Kerala History) by A. Sreedhara Menon, p. 55.
>
> 4. *Malabar Manual* by William Logan, p. 455.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
