+++
title = "12  9         A LETTER TO SHRI P. UPENDRA"

+++
9  
A LETTER TO SHRI P. UPENDRA

DR. P.C.C. RAJA

To  
Shri P. Upendra,  
Hon'ble Minister for Information & Broadcasting,  
Government of India,  
New Delhi.

Sir,

I am a member of the Zamorin's family, Calicut. As you are perhaps
aware, the Zamorin of Calicut was the ruler of Calicut before the advent
of the British. I am a retired Headmaster of the Zamorin's High School,
Calicut. At present I am a practising Homeopathic physician. I am aged
79 years.

I am constrained to send this letter specifically with intent to stop
the telecasting by the Doordarshan authorities of the proposed serial
"The Sword of Tipu Sultan". Newspaper reports show that you have allowed
the serial to be telecast on the basis of a compromise deal and on
condition that some clarifications would also be telecast making it
clear that the serial is based on a fiction. In other words, the
telecasting of the abovesaid serial has been permitted by you in the
form in which it is published by Bhagwan Gidwani in his novel, *The
Sword of Tipu Sultan*. The net result of the permission granted to
telecast the serial would be to make out that Tipu Sultan was a great
and benevolent martyr, if not an outstanding ruler who possessed heroic
qualities, depicting Tipu Sultan as it does, as the citadel of all
virtues and good qualities. The proposal made by Sri. K.R. Malkani to
make an insertion that Tipu's rule in Kerala and Coorg is not being
dealt with in the serial, merits no consideration because the average
viewer would be left with the impression that Tipu Sultan was an ideal
ruler especially when several deliberate and grave omissions relating to
the terrible and inhuman atrocities that were really perpetrated by Tipu
Sultan during his infamous march into Malabar are seen to have been made
in the book of Bhagwan Gidwani. As a member of the Zamorin's family my
blood gets boiled even today when I hear the very mention of Tipu's name
because the worst crimes and the worst sort of atrocities were really
perpetrated by him on the Hindus of Malabar. In fact the Zamorin of
Calicut and the members of his family are well known for their religious
tolerance and catholicity of outlook as would be seen from recorded
history. But wholesale conversion of all people into Islam was indulged
in by Tipu Sultan at gun point. Those who did not obey had either to
flee away from the country or to face the bayonet. No other option was
available according to recorded history. It will be useful if you will
kindly refer to the writings of Prof K.V. Kristina Iyer as well as
*Malayalam Encyclopedia* (Volume 7, published by Sahithyaka Pravasthaka
Sahakarna Sangham Ltd., Kottayam, p. 996, para 3, column 1). The several
inhuman, barbarous, and brutal acts done at the behest of Tipu Sultan
cannot be summarised even in a thousand printed pages. In the
circumstances, a cryptic statement that Tipu's controversial roles are
not purported to be dealt with in the serial can hardly assuage the
feelings of the victims and would hardly render justice to the injured,
their families, and their successors. Kindly also refer to the report of
a joint Commission of Bengal and Bombay appointed to inspect the state
and conditions of the province of Malabar in the years 1792 and 1793
(Volume 1, paras 52, 64, 67) kept in the National Archives of India,
Janpath, New Delhi. A bare perusal of the above report will convince
anyone that Tipu Sultan, far from being a benevolent ruler, was one of
the worst fanatics, and more inhuman than even the Nazis.

As a member of the family which then ruled a large part of Malabar, I
cannot allow history to be distorted, much less allow the serial to be
telecast leaving out references to Tipu's atrocities and crimes which
really outshine and outnumber his meagre achievements. The result of
your present decision will enable an everlasting impression being
created on viewers who see the serial that Tipu Sultan was a man of
great religious tolerance and was a benevolent and secular ruler. The
truth and reality being that Tipu Sultan was one of the worst bigots
known to this land, all his so-called achievements and alleged glorious
deeds pale into insignificance especially before the several gruesome
and inhuman atrocities and monstrous barbarities that were perpetrated
at his command and direction, all with intent to establish his hegemony
and perpetuate his hold in this country. To slur over his misdeeds or at
least wink at them would really amount to travesty of justice and fair
play to a huge section of this country's vast population, whose only sin
was to be a member of the majority community.

I may also bring to your notice that the telecasting of this serial on
Tipu Sultan has every chance of pushing our ideal of national
integration farther into the remote future.

Before I conclude this report, I would also like to focus your kind
attention on another important aspect relating to the book, *The Sword
of Tipu Sultan* written by Bhagwan Gidwani, whether it be tided a
fiction or historical novel. I am referring to the several defamatory
passages contained in the book. I humbly repeat that the book is full of
slanderous allegations against the then ruler - the Zamorin - which have
absolutely no regard for truth. As you are aware, no one has a right to
sully the fair name and reputation of another person living or dead,
much less Bhagwan Gidwani or the publishers of that book. The several
passages in the impugned book are replete with innuendos and malicious
untruth against the Zamorin, the then ruler of Malabar. I submit that
the book is therefore liable to be banned both for the reason that
libellous and highly defamatory allegations are repeatedly made against
the Zamorin and also inflammatory statements and assertions are made
against the members of the majority community, all obviously with intent
to appease the fundamentalists in the minority community. I submit that
having regard to the fact that the Government of India was zealous in
protecting the rights of a minority community when it banned the book,
*The Satanic Verses* by Salman Rushdie, it behoves a secular Government
of which you are the Information Minister to immediately take steps to
ban the book and prevent further telecasting of the serial "The Sword of
Tipu Sultan" based on that book. I appeal to you as a member of the
Zamorin family that, to do justice at least to the Zamorin of Calicut,
kindly use your power and authority to stop telecasting of the serial
immediately and forthwith. The people of Malabar shall be grateful to
you if you will do that.

CALICUT  
May 23, 1990

Yours faithfully,  
Sd./-  
Dr. P.C.C. Raja  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
