+++
title = "01 1 The Situation at Present"

+++
**1**  
**The Situation at Present**

In an earlier series, *Hindu Society under Siege*, I had dealt with the
forces which threaten Hindu society, and are striving to throttle it out
of existence with aid and abetment from their international allies.

I undertook, at that time, to write another series regarding the steps
which Hindu society should take in order to break out of the siege, and
snatch the initiative from its sworn enemies.

I have delayed this second series deliberately. Firstly, I wanted to
watch and weigh the reactions from the readers of the first series.
Secondly, the more I thought over the subject, the more diffident I grew
about my own competence to deal with it adequately.

The response from the readers has been positive. I have received many
letters of appreciation from Hindus residing in all parts of the country
as well as abroad, and belonging to all sections of society and age
groups. Most of them have congratulated me for articulating, in clear
and concrete terms, what they themselves have felt instinctively and for
a long time.

A few scholars and journalists who have never been known for their
sympathy for Hinduism or Hindu causes have, however, remarked
caustically that I have “failed to frighten them”. Some other birds of
the same feather have dived deeper and referred to my “mentality” rather
than refute my facts or demolish my logic.

It was far from my intention to frighten any one, far less the Hindu
society which I aspire to serve. But our hand-to-mouth scholars and
journalists have only a number of shibboleths up their sleeves. If one
says that some events and trends are pregnant with bright possibilities,
they dismiss him as a “dreamer”. On the other hand, if one draws
attention to dangers that are maturing, they attack him as an
“alarmist”. What they always refuse to do is to join a serious debate on
any subject. And yet they strut around with superior airs as if they
know all the answers. Most of the time these superior airs hide only
stark ignorance, mental sloth, and moral indifference. I will not,
therefore, enter into an argument with this tribe.  
 

**MY DIFFIDENCE**

My diffidence, however, is an altogether different matter. Defence of a
living and complex entity like a society is no easy task. It needs a
sure touch which has to be sympathetic at the same time. A defence which
does not take into account the spiritual, moral, and cultural
aspirations embodied in and expressed by a society, can endanger rather
than energize it.

This diffidence is doubly warranted in the case of a vast and variegated
society such as the Hindu society, the like of which has been seen only
rarely in human history, at least not on this scale. It is perhaps
presumptuous on my part to deal with a subject which can be handled
adequately and wholesomely only by sages, seers, saints, and
visionaries. At the end of this exercise, I may only prove the old adage
that fools rush in where angels fear to tread.

Hindu society has grown and shaped itself in the vision of Vyasa and
Valmiki, Manu and Yajnavalkya, Narada and Vasistha, and a hundred other
exponents of Sanãtana Dharma in all its dimensions and dynamics.

Hindu society has been inspired through the ages by such mighty šãtras
as the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Gita, the Jainãgama, the TripiTaka,
the various Yogašãstras, the VãNî of Siddhas and Sants, and the
devotional outpourings of Alvars and Nayanars.

Hindu society has been defended, during its days of distress, by such
high-souled heroes as Chandragupta, Skandagupta, Vikramaditya,
Yasodharman, Bapa Rawal, Jayapala, Bhojadeva, Prithiviraj, Prataparudra,
Vir Pandya, Harihara and Rana Sanga.

Hindu society has fought a long-drawn-out struggle for freedom against
Islamic invaders under the leadership of such veterans as Maharana
Pratap, Shivaji, Maharaja Surajmal, Banda Bairagi, Lokmanya Tilak, Veer
Savarkar, Mahatma Gandhi, and Sardar Patel.

Hindu society has been reawakened and reformed by such visionaries as
Bankim Chandra, Maharshi Dayananda, Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo,
Rabindranath, and Subramanya Bharati.

It is small wonder, therefore, that I feel like an intruder in this
august field. No one is more aware than myself of the limitations of
head and heart from which I suffer. Adapting a metaphor from Kalidasa, I
can state my case in the following šloka:

> *kva dharma-prabhavah tantrah,*  
> *kva ca alpa-viSayã-matih,*  
> *titîrSuh dustaram mohãd,*  
> *uDupena asmi sãgaram.*

(I am a small mind when it comes to understanding the social system
which has been shaped by Dharma; It is only in a fit of folly that I am
attempting to cross the great ocean by means of a ramshackle raft.)  
 

**BUT MY HEART BLEEDS**

But my heart bleeds when I see this great society being attacked by
sheer barbarians whose only weapon is either a criminal theology
masquerading as religion, or a materialist dogma sustained by the lowest
in human nature, or a phoney modernism parroting the latest slogans from
the West. My mind is deeply disturbed when I witness the leaders of this
great society going on the defensive in the face of wanton aggression
from inhuman ideologies whose only stock in-trade is self-righteous
spite.

I fail to understand the selective journalism which spotlights *only*
the atrocities on Harijans when statistics go to show that caste Hindus
provide many more victims to violence in our countryside, which plays up
*only* stories of bride-burning without caring to find out what is
happening to old parents in many modern homes under the spell of an
imported culture which places a premium on what is described as youth,
which accuses Hindu organisations of aggression in every communal strife
without investigating the hard facts about provocation from the
so-called minorities, and which, in short, replaces serious debate on
every subject with a few mindless cliches - reactionary and progressive,
right and left, capitalist and socialist, revivalist and modern,
communal and secular, and so on.  
 

**OPENNESS OF HINDU SOCIETY**

History stands witness that Hindu society has never refused to listen to
those of its critics who have had the good of this society at heart.
This society has always accepted every well-intentioned advice, and
tried its best to reform and renew itself. This society has always
hanged its head in shame before every well-deserved reprimand, and done
a penance in good time, provided the reprimand has come from those whose
credentials are not in doubt.

Hindu society has never been a closed society which catches cold at the
very first whiff of a wind from outside. It has never been a
fundamentalist fraternity parroting the pontifications of self-appointed
prophets, or burning the entire incense of its reverence at the altar of
ridiculous revelations, or ruling out every rational and reflective
discussion of its dogmas. It has never been a regimented flock
grovelling in an orgy of sinfulness which can be washed only by the
blood of God’s only-begotten son, or waiting helplessly for fiats from
God’s viceregent on earth.

On the contrary, Hindu society has been the meeting point as well as the
melting pot of as many spiritual visions as the human psyche is capable
of springing up spontaneously. It has been a willing and welcoming
platform for as many seers, sages, saints, and mystics as have responded
to the deeper stirrings in the human soul. It has been a repository of
as many metaphysical points of view as human reason can render in human
language. And it has been a vast laboratory for as many cultural,
social, economic, and political experiments as human nature in its
widest range can carry out and cope with.  
 

**A PAINFUL SIGHT**

It is, therefore, a painful sight that the spokesmen of some puny and
petrified ideologies should be pointing accusing fingers at Hindu
society, and that this society should fail to muster sufficient
self-confidence to repel the attack. Hindu society never tries to tick
them off in good time with the stem warning they fully deserve. It has
never asked them, “Who the hell are you?” It has never told them, “Go
and get lost or, better still, do a bit of introspection. You are blind
with beams in both your eyes, and yet you have the cheek to raise a hue
and cry about a mere mote in one of mine. Here is some sound advice for
you. Stop telling lies about me, lest I be forced to tell the truth
about you.”

What is worse, a brood of professional Hindu-baiters has tried and
tested an armoury of cheap gibes - polytheism, pantheism, idolatry,
brahmanism, obscurantism, revivalism, fundamentalism, communalism, and
the rest - and discovered to its great glee that the gibes hurt. It is a
sorry spectacle indeed that this society should take these gibes as
well-deserved reproaches for its own good, and indulge in an orgy of
breast-beating at the behest of every Hindu-baiter. The sworn enemies of
Hindu society have made a great game out of some scare-words in order to
keep Hindu society on the defensive, and go on drawing apology after
apology from the spokesmen of this society, day in and day out.  
 

**THE BROOD OF HINDU-BAITERS**

Here we have the inheritors of some blood-soaked bigotries holding aloft
the flag of monotheism, and denouncing Hindu ways of worship as
polytheism and idolatry. Hindu society has yet to scan the scriptures of
these criminal creeds, and have a close look at their prophets,
saviours, and saints. The day Hindu society does that, these creeds will
beat a hasty retreat, and know not how to defend their dark doctrines
and horrid heroes.

Here we have the erstwhile traffickers in slave trade trumpeting about
“human brotherhood” and “social equality”, and brushing aside the whole
of Hindu society as a beehive of brahmin domination, caste
discrimination, degradation of women, bonded child labour, and what not.
Hindu society has yet to review the matrix of their societies, and
expose the true character of “human brotherhood” and “social equality”
from the annals of their remote as well as recent history. The day Hindu
society does that, the “human brotherhood” will give up its bark, and
the “social equality” shed its self-righteousness.

Here we have the salesmen of a “proletarian revolution” denouncing Hindu
society as primitive, feudal, semi-colonial, capitalist, and full of
class oppression in all stages and forms. Hindu society has yet to peep
into their “proletarian paradise”, and raise the curtain on a vast salve
empire sustained by mass slaughter and ceaseless terror. The day Hindu
society does that, the socialist swearology will lose its sting, and
know not how to hide the horrible scene.^([1](#1))

Here we have the minions of a mercenary culture dishing out lectures on
individual freedom, rule of law, parliamentary democracy, secular state,
human rights, rate of growth, distribution of prosperity, abolition of
poverty, and arrest of population explosion. This imported culture
frowns at the “fundamental failures of the Hindu social system” and the
“hurdles on the path of progress presented by the Hindu cultural
milieu”. They advocate “rapid modernization” of Hindu society in the
image of this or that Western model. Hindu society has yet to expose
this pompous priestcraft patronized by foreign foundations,
multinationals, secret services, and defence departments of the West,
and place on public view what is hidden behind its pretentious verbiage.

The day Hindu society does that it will show that their notion of
individual freedom does not function beyond a small class of the
English-educated fraternity; that their rule of law provides justice
only for those who can pay the price; that their parliamentary democracy
is a game of multiplying grievances in the minds of people who are then
manipulated by self-seeking politicians in a ruthless pursuit of power;
that their secular state is a promoter of separatism among the so-called
minorities some of which have been artificially carved out of the Hindu
society itself; that their human rights mean the right of plain
criminals to terrorize innocent citizens; that their rate of growth
really refers to the growth of their own bank balances besides what they
themselves bemoan as black money; that their distribution of prosperity
means distribution of the better and bigger jobs among themselves; that
their abolition of poverty means sweeping the mass destitution under the
carpet of doctored statistics; and that their arrest of population
explosion works out towards reducing the Hindus to a minority in the
only Hindu homeland. As regards their Western models, all of them are
sick with rising curves of crime, with boredom bred by excess of
hedonism, and with pollution at all levels - physical, psychological,
psychic, and spiritual - produced by hyper-industrialism and soulless
commercialism.

Here we have some two-faced secularists who try to impress Western
audiences by talking glibly about Indian yoga and mysticism, Indian
schools of philosophy, Indian panorama of sciences, Indian styles of
music and dance, Indian languages and literatures, and the Indian genius
for unity in diversity; but who go into uncontrollable tantrums if
someone tells them that what they are taking pride in is the Hindu
cultural heritage, or describes India as the Hindu homeland. The same
secularists not only do not object but also approve and applaud when
some of this cultural heritage is credited to Islam, or when visiting
VIPs from Islamic countries refer to India as the “second largest Muslim
country”. These are the people who have fashioned India’s foreign policy
in a manner which makes India look like the leader of an aggressive
Islamic bloc rather than a peaceful nation pledged to non-alignment and
friendship for all.

Hindu society has yet to affirm that all this spiritual, cultural,
philosophical, and scientific heritage is Hindu, and that no one who is
ashamed of being named a Hindu has a right to take pride in it. Hindu
society has yet to proclaim that India has always been and will always
remain a Hindu homeland, and that people who fail to come to terms with
Hindu society and culture have no place in this country. Hindu society
has yet to point out that the only contribution of Islam has been the
ruination of this country in medieval times and Partition with
wide-spread bloodshed in the recent period, and that projection of
Pan-Islamism in India’s foreign policy is neither sanctioned nor
supported by the Hindu masses who have no illusions about Islam, or
Islamic culture, or Islamic causes, or Islamic countries.  
 

**THE FAILURES OF HINDU SOCIETY**

Hindu society has so far failed on all these fronts because it has
failed to see the closed creeds and criminal ideologies for what they
are. It has been suffering from self-forgetfulness, and has been taken
in by the self-righteous slogans raised by these creeds and ideologies.
It has tried to ransack its own records in search of matching
prescriptions. In the process, Hindu society has been yielding ground to
wanton aggression all along the line.

Christianity and Islam have only to raise the slogan of monotheism as
opposed and supposedly superior to polytheism, and Hindu thinkers go out
in search of a similar monotheism in Hindu shastras. At the same time,
Hindu scholars line up quotations from the same shastras which are
seemingly denunciatory of polytheism and image-worship. The thinkers and
the scholars seldom stop to see that the monotheistic creeds are
creations of the outer and the lower levels of the human mind, and that
nothing which is prescribed by their criminal theologies can have a
place in the shastras of Sanãtana Dharma which have their source in the
highest reaches of the human soul.

So also in the case of the Christian claim of “social service”, or the
Islamic claim of “human brotherhood”, or the Communist claim of “social
equality”, or the modernist claim of “democracy” and “secularism”, etc. 
Hindu scholars keep busy marshalling quotations from their own shastras
in support of similar ideas, or citing examples from Hindu history of
those who put such ideas into practice. The wealth of Hindu
spirituality, philosophy, culture, history, and society thus goes on
getting weighed in a balance which is tilted against it from the very
start. It is small wonder that the entire Hindu heritage is found
wanting in the final assessment.  
 

**THE FIRST PRINCIPLE OF DEFENCE**

The first principle which Hindu society has to observe while preparing
its defence is that it will stop processing and evaluating its own
heritage in terms of ideas and ideals projected by closed creeds and
pretentious ideologies. On the contrary, Hindu society will henceforward
process and evaluate the heritage of these creeds and ideologies in
terms of its own categories of thought, and find out the real worth of
Christian, Islamic, Communist, and Modernist claims.

The first need of the hour, therefore, is for Hindus to become aware of
the fundamentals of their own faith (Hindu Spirituality), the premises
on which their own society has evolved (Hindu Sociology), and the
vicissitudes which their own society has experienced in the march of
Time (Hindu History). These are the three domains in which the Hindu
image has been distorted to the utmost by imperialist thought systems,
resulting in a deep sense of inferiority from which Hindus suffer at
present.

Hindus have become devoid of self-confidence simply because they have
ceased to take legitimate, well-informed, and conscious pride in their
spiritual, cultural, and social heritage.

This lack of pride has led to a serious weakening of the Hindu psyche.
Hindus are no more prepared to stand up and fight for anything, because
they no more believe or feel that anything is worth fighting for, not at
least to the bitter end.

The sworn enemies of Hindu society have taken advantage of this
enervation of the Hindus. They feel instinctively that threats coupled
with some show of violence are sure to frighten the Hindus out of their
wits, and make them yield almost anything including precious parts of
their homeland.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Since I wrote this para in 1983, the “proletarian paradise”
has been exposed as the worst hell known to human history.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


