+++
title = "03 3 The Spiritual Centre of Hindu Society"

+++
**3**  
**The Spiritual Centre of Hindu Society**

Hindu society has had to go on the defensive against monotheistic creeds
masquerading as religion mainly because it has lost consciousness of the
spiritual centre round which its religious, cultural and social life has
revolved, and which has sustained it through the ages.

Hindu society has failed to fathom the chasm which separates its own
sterling spirituality from the “only true” creeds because it has fallen
in love with a dead uniformity in place of a living plurality prescribed
by its own spiritual centre.

Hindu society will never be able to win the debate with thoughtless
theologies unless it rediscovers its own spiritual centre, and holds in
its hands the scales of yogic spirituality on which alone all theologies
should be weighed for whatever worth they have.

It was an active awareness of its spiritual center which emboldened
Hindu society, at the very dawn of its history, to explore all varieties
of religious experience, to evolve endless ways of religious worship, to
express its philosophical insights in many metaphysical points of view,
and to project its plastic genius in many forms of language, literature
and art.

It was an active awareness of its spiritual centre which encouraged
Hindu society to experiment with cultural, social, economic, and
political pluralism on a scale such as has been unknown to any other
human society.

It was an active awareness of this spiritual centre which provided an
inner stability to Hindu society in the midst of outer change, and which
proved its inexhaustible source of strength in weathering the
vicissitudes of worldly fortune.

Hindu awareness of its spiritual centre suffered a steep decline after a
long spell of spectacular creativity in all fields of human endeavour.
Hindu society also suffered a corresponding decline of its vitality and
vigour. Even so the awareness remained sufficiently strong to see Hindu
society through a few more storms.

One of these storms was the Islamic invasion which brought death and
destruction to large parts of the Hindu homeland. But thanks to the
still surviving awareness of its spiritual centre, Hindu society was
able to preserve its patrimony in the face of a totalitarian imperialism
spreading fire and sword, pillage and rapine for a thousand years.

It was the still surviving awareness of its spiritual centre which
enabled Hindu society to stick to its own Gods and Goddesses and to
honour its own seers and saints, in the midst of a large-scale
desecration and destruction of its temples at the hands of Muslim
swordsmen, and harrowing humiliation of its holy men and women by
haughty Muslim hoodlums. Some of these swordsmen and hoodlums styled
themselves as sultans and sufis, and proclaimed that they had been
commissioned by an almighty Allah to spread the latest and the last
*ilhãm* (revelation). But Hindu society refused to be hoodwinked by the
honorifics donned by these disciples of the Devil.

It was the still surviving awareness of its spiritual centre which
steeled Hindu society to witness the sacrifice by fire of hundreds of
thousands of its daughters who cherished their chastity above every
allurement offered by the Islamic marauders. Some of these marauders
were known as kings and generals, governors and great dignitaries, qazis
and mullahs, living in mansions full of every kind of luxury available
in the world at that stage of human history. But few daughters of Hindu
society yielded willingly and voluntarily to the amorous advances of
these animals masquerading as men.

It was the still surviving awareness of its spiritual center which
inspired Hindu society to send hundreds of thousands of its sons into
unequal battles and inevitable martyrdom against a militarily superior
monster. Countless Hindu heroes courted death in defence of their
heritage and honour rather than seek power and pelf in the courts of
Muslims swordsmen masquerading as monarchs.

And it was a resurgence of its spiritual centre which rallied Hindu
society round a counter-attack which rolled back the Islamic invasion,
and wrested victory from a ferocious and formidable foe. At the same
time, a victorious Hindu society was prevented by its spiritual centre
from being vindictive towards an erstwhile enemy, and extending to him
the same treatment which he had meted out to Hindus during the days of
his own domination. Muslims could have easily met the same fate in India
as they did in Spain, had not this spiritual centre of Hindu society
intervened and saved them from a holocaust which the Quran and the
Sunnah of the Prophet have prescribed for defeated adversaries.

Hindu society was humbled once more by another invader who swore by
another but a similar closed creed. The Christian missionaries mounted a
vicious and well-planned attack on the outer forms as well as the inner
core of the Hindu heritage. Hindu awareness of the Hindu spiritual
centre revived once more and the Christian attack was not only contained
but also reversed. Hindu thought stormed into the strongholds of
Christianity in Europe and America. Hindu religion and philosophy lent a
helping hand to the revival of humanism and rationalism in the modern
West against a fanaticism which had dyed Europe deep with several
hundred years of bloodshed.

What is this spiritual centre of Hindu society?

We must first understand quite clearly as to what it is *not*, before we
come anywhere near comprehending it in all its dimensions. This negative
approach has been rendered necessary because the language of religion
has been confused by Christianity and Islam to such an extent that
darkness now passes for light, the Devil for the Divine, vice for
virtue, and vice versa.

The spiritual centre of Hindu society is not constituted by *the* book
or *al-kitãb* revealed by an almighty Jehovah or Allah to a Chosen
People, through the only saviour or the last prophet, at a particular
point in human history. Nor is it a Church or Ummah entrusted with the
mission of saving mankind, if need be, by force and fraud. All these
formulations of religious doctrine are inspired and sustained by the
dark drives of an unregenerate human nature.  
 

**THREE SUBLIMITIES OF SANÃTANA DHARMA**

Hindu seers and sages as also Hindu shastras, no matter to what Hindu
sect they belong, designate this spiritual centre of Hindu society as
Sanãtana Dharma. This designation can be loosely translated into English
as the Perennial Philosophy or the Permanent Principle of Sustenance.

Firstly, Sanãtana Dharma says that the aspiration for Truth (*satyam*),
Goodness (*šivam*), Beauty (*sundaram*), and Power (*aišvarya*) is
inherent in every soul, everywhere, and at all times, like the physical
hunger of the body for food and drink. The satisfaction of this
spiritual aspiration is neither dependent upon, nor waits for, a
particular prophet or revelation, as the physical hunger has never been
dependent upon, or waited for, a particular pioneer in food production
or a particular textbook of food technology. The soul of the spiritual
seeker in all ages and among all races of mankind has soared upwards
till it has found its true status in its own heights.

Secondly, Sanãtana Dharma states that spiritual aspiration cannot come
to rest till it overcomes all limitations of human nature, lower as well
as higher, and emerges as master of one-self. Simultaneously, one
emerges as master of the universe also because human nature, in all its
dimensions, is a segment of Universal Nature. One arrives at the end of
one’s spiritual quest only when, Buddha-like, one can say to oneself: “I
have known whatever is to be known; there is nothing more to be known. I
have attained whatever is to be attained; there is nothing more to be
attained. I have done whatever is to be done; there is nothing more to
be done.” This is the boundless bounty which flows from becoming a
Buddha. This is the mighty meaning of becoming a Mahavira.

Thirdly, Sanãtana Dharma promises this supreme fulfilment, this acme of
attainment, to every being born in a world brimming with blind forces of
Nature, ignorance, evil, suffering, disease, deprivation, and death. The
path is summed up in three spiritual steps-self-exploration,
self-purification, and self-transcendence. One has to travel inwards and
upwards, and reverse the law of human nature in the raw which is
outwards and downwards. This reversal is not brought about by an outer
baptism but by an inner opening. The very first perception of the
earliest Hindu seers has been - *yathã piNDe tathã brahmãNDe* (as in the
microcosm, so in the macrocosm), that is, the way to world-discovery is
through self-discovery.

The Upanishadic prescription, *ãtmãnam viddhi* (know thyself) is a
variation on the same theme. It leads to the same attainment - *aham
brahmo’smi* (I am Brahma), *tat tvam asi* (thou art That), and *sah
tadasti* (he is That). It is a steep spiritual ascent at the end of
which the *Ãtman* (Self) becomes *Paramãtman* (Supreme Self), and the
*PuruSa* (Person) becomes *PuruSottama* (Superperson). In the language
of Theism, man becomes God.

Here there is no place for an almighty Jehovah or Allah, sitting outside
and above the Cosmos, communicating with his creatures through the
medium of a privileged historical person, and coercing them through a
Holy Roman Emperor or an *Amir-ul-mu‘minin* to conform to a closed code
of moral and social conduct. Here there is no place for a world-wide
warfare between a True One God who has to be wooed and worshipped, and
the False Many Gods who have to be disowned and destroyed. Here there is
no command for Crusade or *Jihãd* by a Church or an Ummah for spreading
the “only true creed” at the point of the sword.

Nor is a metaphysical speculation of any sort relevant to this spiritual
seeking which has an entirely and intensely practical purpose. The
Buddha was so indifferent to metaphysical questions that most of the
time he fell silent when he was faced with them. He always repudiated
all metaphysical curiosities with the stern rebuke: “How will it avail
you if you accept or reject this theoretical postulate or that? The
problem is practical. There is all this suffering. The suffering has a
cause. And whatever has a cause can be cured. I tell you of the cause,
and also of the cure.” Patañjali systematised this curative prescription
into a scientific discipline, the system of Yoga, locating all landmarks
and signposts along the path in purely psychological terms, without
reference to any metaphysical proposition.

One is, therefore, free not to give any name to the Self which seeks the
Truth. One is free not to accept the ontological language of *Ãtman* and
*Paramãtman, PuruSa* and *PuruSottama*. One is free to describe the
spiritual experience in cryptic aphorisms or sonorous songs, or to say
that it is indescribable and fall silent. It is the discovery and not
the description which is significant. All sects of Sanãtana Dharma share
this discovery in common, and have their starting point in it.

It is this spiritual centre of Hindu society which has been the
watershed of many ways of worship, each with its own outer forms; many
religious sects, each with its own private and public rituals; many
shastras, each with its own language and metaphor; and many metaphysical
points of view, each with its own ontology, epistemology, axiology, and
ethics. They are like the streams of crystal clear water which spring
from the same snow-clad Himalayan heights, which become many rivers as
they meander through the plains with many villages, towns and ferries on
their banks, and which merge in the same Great Ocean to become one wide
spread of water once more.  
 

**TRUE AND FALSE UNIVERSALISM**

This is the basis of true universalism envisaged by Sanãtana Dharma. One
is free to take a start according to one’s own individual stage of
spiritual evolution and preparation (*ãdhãra*), and also free to follow
along the curve of one’s own cultural moorings, one’s own individual
inclination and aptitude (*adhikãra*). The pace of spiritual progress
can be slow or fast, evolutional or revolutional, depending upon the
drive towards divinity which one feels within oneself. One is free to
choose this form of worship or that, this round of ritual or another,
this religious sect or a different one, this philosophy or some other
speculation.

Here there is no place for that counterfeit universalism which has only
one closed concept of God, one dogmatic designation of the deity, one
fixed form of faith, one regimented mode of worship, one rigid code of
moral conduct, and one strait-jacket of social culture. Here there is no
place for hysterical harangues to conform to the One True God’s
commandments in the only life one has, and no forced pace by fear of an
eternal hell or promise of an eternal heaven. On the contrary, here one
can start again after every false step, wander away and wait till the
inner call comes again, and resume the journey in as many rebirths as
are required to arrive at the ultimate goal of final freedom from
bondage.

It is this sterling universalism of its spiritual centre which has
sustained Hindu society as a spacious platform for the free play of a
large number of spiritual traditions, and for the fullest functioning of
a still larger number of religious denominations. Hindu society has
never known the religious strife which has characterised the closed
creeds throughout their history.

There have been prolonged and many a time heated debates among different
Hindu religious sects and Hindu schools of philosophy. Some sects and
schools have also used sometime a vituperative language about the
precepts or practices or both of some other sects and schools. But there
has never been breaking of heads, nor killing of heretics, nor a
desecration or destruction of rival shrines or shastras, nor a
marshalling of military forces in a war against another religious
community, such as has blackened the annals of Christianity and Islam.

Hindu history has known many monarchs who subscribed to this or that
particular religious prescription in their private lives. But Hindu
history has seldom known a prince who patronized his own sect to the
exclusion of others, or persecuted sects other than his own, as has been
the standard practice of potentates most highly honoured in Christian
and Muslim history.

Hindu society has sent out many saints and sages to distant lands down
the ages. But Hindu society has never equipped an armed force to impose
its own Gods on other people by fire and sword, as has been done by
Christian and Muslim societies whenever they got an opportunity.

There is no sociological explanation for the votaries of the Vedas, the
Jains, the Buddhists, the Vaishnavas, the Shaivas, the Shaktas, the
Alvars, the Nayanars, the Sikhs, and many other Hindu sects never
exchanging blows in pursuit of power, or privilege, or prestige for
people of their own persuasion. There is no sociological explanation for
several members of the same family subscribing to as many religious
doctrines and yet living amicably under the same roof.

There is no political explanation for princes engaged in warfare but
never quoting a shastra in support of their defensive or aggressive
designs. There is no political explanation for no conqueror casting a
covetous eye on any religious place, howsoever rich its coffers may have
been in gold and silver and precious stones.

There is no economic explanation for rajas and rich men contributing
with even-handed munificence towards the building of rival religious
shrines or towards maintaining the monasteries of rival religious
orders. There is no economic explanation for every householder extending
equal hospitality to monks and mendicants who come to their doors in
multifarious attire, and who invoke for their hosts the blessings of
different deities.

It is very often stated by students of Hindu culture that Hindus have a
genius for unity in diversity. But Hindus have never claimed to be the
Chosen People who are radically different from other members of the
human family, either in terms of native propensities or in terms of
creative capacity. In fact, Hindus are never tired of repeating that all
human beings, in all places and at all times, are similarly constituted,
have the same appetites and aspirations, can descend to the same depths
and rise to the same heights. In fact, Hindus have always failed to
understand why people do not practise religious tolerance, and continue
to quarrel over questions of no relevance to spiritual seeking.

The only explanation for this Hindu broad-mindedness, this Hindu spirit
of religious tolerance, and this open psyche of the Hindus towards all
currents and cross-currents of thought and culture, is to be found in
the spiritual centre of Hindu society. It is this spiritual centre which
has given to Hindu society a calm and quiet dignity of its own, and a
compassion which reaches out equally not only to all members of the
human family but also to all elements in the human environment-the
insects, the animals, the birds, the creepers, the plants, the trees,
the rivers, the oceans, the mountains, and the minerals deposited in the
womb of Mother Earth.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


