+++
title = "05 5 The Basis of Universal Spirituality"

+++
**5**  
**The Basis of Universal Spirituality**

Sri Ramakrishna was one day taunted by a sceptic that the Kali he
worshipped at Dakshineshwar was only a slab of black stone carved into a
bizarre female figure and decked with glittering trinkets. The saint was
taken aback. So far he had not cared to see the sacred icon in its
supreme spiritual splendour. He had been content to witness the Divine
Mother in all Her majesty in the cave of his heart whenever he was in a
state of *samãdhi*. Now he had been challenged to find out if what he
worshipped was a figment of his fevered imagination.

He entered the *sanctum sanctorum* and stood before the sacred icon. He
fixed his gaze on the holy figure, and prayed with all his concentrated
psychic power: *Mã ! dyãkhã dê* (Mother ! Reveal Thyself). And lo and
behold! The Divine Mother dazzled his physical eyes with the same
indescribable infinities as he had witnessed with his inner eye while
meditating on Her form. He looked back at the sceptic who had
accompanied him, and smiled with compassion. The sceptic had seen
nothing which he had not seen before. To his physical eyes, the Goddess
was still a slab of black stone. And it had not been given to him to
train the inner eye.

The point which was made that day at Dakshineshwar was that to the
physical consciousness a slab of stone in any shape or form will always
remain a slab of stone, while to another consciousness which has
awakened to some sublime dimension the same slab will reveal its
innermost mysteries. To a consciousness such as that of Sri Ramakrishna
who had already scaled the highest spiritual heights, the slab of stone
became an incarnation of *Sat* (Truth), *Cit* (Consciousness), and
*Ãnanda* (Bliss). It was not the icon which was inert and inconscient;
it was the witness within the sceptic which had not yet awakened to its
own spiritual power. It is not the Gods who are unwilling to reveal
themselves; it is the worship which has not yet known how to woo them.

This is the spiritual secret discovered by the Vedic seers. This is the
mystery and miracle witnessed and vouchsafed by Hindu saints and sages
throughout the ages. And this is the vast vision which forms the
spiritual centre of Hindu society.

There is a consciousness, inherent in all beings, everywhere and at all
times, which, when reached and brought forward, witnesses the world-play
as a drama of divine forms and forces. There is not a thing, nor a
thought which does not get transfigured from the terrestrial into the
celestial, whenever and wherever this consciousness comes into play.
Everything then returns to and resumes its supreme spiritual status, or
becomes the outer symbol of an inner sublimity. It is these sublimities
which invite the seer’s worship as Gods and Goddesses. It is these
sublimities which spur the *bhakta* to burst out in song and *stuti*,
the paens of praise pouring out of a grateful heart for being permitted
to witness what has been witnessed.

The Vedic seers were not primitive animists who invested the phenomena
of physical Nature with anthropomorphic attributes, as the “Science” of
Comparative Religion will have us believe. They were spiritual explorers
who discovered and employed well-defined yogic disciplines to raise up
human consciousness from its terrestrial turmoil to its transcendent
tranquility. Nor were the Vedic Gods and Goddesses born in the poetic
hyperboles of some barbaric bards, as the “higher criticism” of modern
Indologists will have us imagine. The poetry did not *precede* the birth
of the Vedic pantheon. On the contrary, it *succeeded* that birth when
the Vedic seers saw the inner secrets of outer forms.  
 

  

**SECRET OF IMAGE-WORSHIP**

Sages such as Sri Aurobindo who have meditated on Hindu iconography, and
savants such as Ananda Coomara-swamy, Stella Kramrisch, and Alice Boner
who have studied the subject, assure us that the forms and features of
Hindu icons have a source higher than the normal reaches of the human
mind. The icons are no photocopies of any human or animal forms as we
find them in their physical frames. They are in fact crystallizations of
the abstract into the concrete, of the infinite into the finite. They
always point beyond themselves, and a contemplation of them always draws
us from the outer to the inner.

Hindu *Šilpašãstras* lay down not only technical formulas for carving
holy icons in stone, and metal, and other materials. They also lay down
elaborate rules about how the artist is to fast, and pray, and otherwise
purify himself for long periods before he is permitted, if at all, to
have a psychic image of the God or Goddess whom he wants to incarnate in
a physical form. It is this sublime source of the *Šilpašãstras* which
alone can explain a Sarnath Buddha, or a Chidambram NaTarãja, or a
Vidisha Varãha, to name only a few of the large assembly of divine
images inhabiting the earth. It is because this sublime source is not
accessible to modern sculptors that we have to be content with poor
copies which look like parodies of the original marvels.

The same sages and savants inform us that the Hindu temple architecture
and the rituals that are performed at the time of *pûjã*, also have a
sublime source. This is a deep and difficult subject, largely beyond the
reach of the present writer. I shall, therefore, not proceed with it.
What needs to be emphasized is that the plurality of Hindu Gods, the
icons in which they are embodied, the temples in which they are
installed, and the rituals with which they are worshipped, are not mere
accessories and aids towards some deeper spiritual vision; instead, they
incarnate the vision itself.

Ram Swarup has presented the proper perspective on the plurality of
Hindu Gods as well as their incarnation in concrete images, in his
recently published book, *The World As Revelation: Names of Gods*. His
discussion leaves no doubt that the plurality of the Hindu pantheon, and
the large use of concrete images is not only quite in keeping with but
also necessary corollaries of (1) the spontaneous processes of human
psychology, (2) the normal growth of human knowledge culminating in
spiritual vision, and (3) the natural development of human language for
incorporating and communicating that knowledge and vision. I will quote
at length from Ram Swarup’s book because I find it difficult to clothe
his insights in my own language.  
 

  

**PLURALITY OF GODS**

He introduces the subject as follows:

“If we look at the word ‘God’, we find that though today it has acquired
a forced, intellectualized outward meaning appropriate to the mentality
of the present age, yet it still retains the memory of the idea of a
deity of a more intuitive people and of more spontaneous times.

“Etymologists connect this word with Gothic *guth*, which is Skt.
*huta*, which means ‘one to whom oblations are made’ and, therefore, one
who is worshipped. It connects us with the period when fire was a great
living symbol of the deity within and around. In later times, the symbol
was denounced as nature-worship by some sects but there was a time when
it claimed, along with the Sun and the Sky, universal acceptance. Even
Moses who belonged to an iconoclastic tradition had a glimpse of his God
through the medium of fire. And in the *Old Testament* itself, certain
hymns are considered ‘nature hymns’ by its scholars.

“Etymologists also connect the word with the German word gotse whose
original meaning was an image or a figure. In the Norse language also,
the word meant ‘image of a deity’. So the word perhaps referred to the
practice of worshipping God through various images and figures, a
practice quite common amongst different peoples all over the world,
ancient as well as modern.

“There is another feature worth noticing. Spengler tells us that the Old
German word for ‘God’ was a neutral plural and was turned into a
masculine singular by Christian propaganda. The same is true of the word
in the Norse and Teutonic languages. But after the heathens were
converted, God changed his gender and number. This can hardly be
regarded as the deepening of its meaning and conception.

“The Hebrew word *Elohim* too is plural in origin, form and sense. The
same is true of the Semitic word *El*. It is not the name of the deity
common to all but is a common name for different deities in the Semitic
world.

“Thus we see that the untutored and the more spontaneous intuition of
the human race excludes neither the plurality of Gods nor the use of
images and nature symbols from its religious sensibility. The denial
comes when the mind becomes too conceptual; or when dogmatic faith
develops faster than understanding.

“If we study the ancient religious literature of the Hindus,
particularly the Vedas, the Upanishads and the Mahabharata, certain
things stand out prominently. The very first thing is a very large use
of concrete image. There are Gods like Indra, PûSana, VaruNa, Ašvins for
whom there are no physical correspondences, but many important Gods like
Sûrya, Agni, Marut take their names after natural objects.

“There is also another important feature that we notice. The spiritual
consciousness of the race is expressed in terms of the plurality of
Gods. In these two respects, at least, the Hindu approach agreed with
the spiritual intuition of other ancient peoples.  
 

  

**THE PHYSICAL AND THE SPIRITUAL**

“The physical and intellectual are not opposed to one another. The names
of physical objects become names of ideas, names of psychic truths,
names of Gods; sensuous truths become intellectual truths, become
spiritual truths. As the knowledge of the senses becomes the knowledge
of the *Manas* and the *Buddhi*, the knowledge originating in the higher
organs of the mind also tends to filter down to the levels of the
*Manas* and the senses. So in this way even the highest knowledge has
its form, colour and sound. This need not lower down its quality in any
way. In fact, this is the only way in which the sense-bound mind
understands something of the higher knowledge.

“This reverberating, echoing and imaging takes place up and down the
whole corridor of the mind, at all levels of abstraction. Here, as we
traverse the path, we meet physical forms, sound-forms, vision-forms,
thought-forms, universal forms, all echoes of each other. We meet
*mantras* and *yantras* and icons of various efficacies and psychic
qualities. In one sense, they are not the light above but they are its
important formations. They invoke the celestial and raise up the
terrestrial.

“There is another reason why images in the Vedas and the Upanishads are
concrete. When the fever of the soul subsides, when the mind becomes
calm, when the spiritual consciousness opens, things are no longer
lifeless. In this state, things which have hitherto been regarded as
ordinary are full of life, light and consciousness. In this state, ‘the
earth meditates as it were; water meditates as it were; mountains
meditate as it were.’^([1](#1)) In this state, no need is felt to
separate the abstract from the concrete because both are eloquent with
the same message, because both image one another. In this state,
everything expresses the divine; everything is the seat of the divine;
everything is That; mountains, rivers and the great earth are but the
Tathãgata, as a Chinese teacher, Hsu Yun, proclaimed after his spiritual
awakening.

“According to Hindu thought, the names of Gods are not names of external
beings. They are names of truths of man’s own highest Self. So the
knowledge of the epithets of Gods is a form of Self-knowledge. Gods and
their names embody truths of the deeper Spirit and meditation on them in
turn invokes those truths. But those truths are many and, therefore,
Gods and their names too are many, though they are all held together in
the unity of a spiritual consciousness.”  
 

  

**THE ONE GOD OF THEOLOGY**

Next, he provides a peep into how the Western-Christian mind views the
Vedic pantheon. He proceeds:

“This way of looking at the Godhead is disconcerting to the Western
schematic mind. In the Vedic approach, there is no single God. This is
bad enough. But the Hindus do not have even a supreme God, a
*fuhrer*-God who presides over a multiplicity of Gods. If there has to
be a plurality of Gods as is the case in all polytheistic religions,
there could at least be a tabulated statement of Gods arranged in some
order of superiority and inferiority, each God having some distinctive
characteristics of his or her own. But here we have no such thing, no
ranking, no order of seniority and precedence, no hierarchy, no
recognizable magistracy; it is all anarchy. This melee could not even be
called a pantheon - a body of Gods, however disordered (Gk.
*pan+theos*); it is a body of demons and evil spirits, pandemonium
(*pan+diamon*).

“It seems that the Hindus were either confused about their Gods or that
these Gods were not jealous enough to be like the God of the Bible. The
Hindus worshipped their Gods in turn with the same supreme epithets. It
seems to be like a philanderer wooing several women at the same time
with the same vows, promises, and protestations and telling each in turn
that she is the only beautiful and true one for him. If they only knew
what the man was doing there would be trouble enough for him. In like
manner, if a Hindu God knew what his worshipper was telling his rival
God, it would either expose the devotee’s insincerity or the
powerlessness or his God.”  
 

  

**NO OPPOSITION BETWEEN ONE AND MANY**

Finally, he presents the Vedic point of view in the following words:

“But there is another approach, quite a different one, which was adopted
by the people of the Vedas. According to this approach, ‘Reality is one
but the wise call it by different names; they call him Indra, Mitra,
VaruNa, Agni, Yama, Mãtarišvãn.’^([2](#2)) Reality is like the Ganges:
different villages along its banks are differently named but they are
all on the same river; the people drink the same water and their soil is
watered and fertilized by the same source. The Reality is like an ocean
rolling against different continents; you taste it anywhere, it is the
same. The Reality is like a nugget of gold; it is the same at the
corners, at the top, or at the bottom, or in the middle. Like a lump of
sugar, it is sweet at all points. Similarly, whether you go East or
West, South or North, you move in the same pervading space and you meet
the same truth and principle of things.

“The Hindus do not call their Gods either “One” or “Many”. According to
them, what they worship is One Reality, *ekam sat*, which is differently
named. This Reality is everywhere, in everything, in every being.  It is
One and Many at the same time and it also transcends them both.
Everything is an expression, a play, an image, an echo of this Reality.

“In Vedic literature, the question of the number of Gods was no point of
dispute and agitated no mind. The number could be increased or decreased
at will. It all depended on the principle of classification, on the
context, and on the viewpoint.

“There are two ways of regarding the Godhead. In one approach, God is a
jealous one. He brooks no other. He is Ismael-like, his hand against
everyone and everyone’s hand against him. But in the Vedic concept, all
Gods are friends, one and equal. BrahmaNaspati is associated with Indra,
Soma and DakSiNa; they are invoked jointly. The Maruts are requested to
come along accompanied, *saMjagmãno*, by Indra, and both are called of
‘equal splendour’, *samãna varcasa*.^([3](#3)) Indra and VaruNa are
offered conjoint praise, *sadhastut*.^([4](#4)) They are invoked
together. ‘I invoke you both,’ says the worshipper;^([5](#5)) or, ‘come
Agni with the Maruts,’ is the repeated prayer of the devotee in another
hymn.^([6](#6))

“Spiritual life is one but it is vast and rich in expression. The human
mind also conceives it differently. If the human mind was uniform
without different depths, heights and levels of subtlety; or if all men
had the same mind, the same psyche, the same imagination, the same
needs; in short, if all men were the same then perhaps One God would do.
But a man’s mind is not a fixed quantity and men and their powers and
needs are different. So, only some form of polytheism alone can do
justice to this variety and richness.

“Besides this variety of human needs and humus minds, the spiritual
reality itself is so vast, immense, and inscrutable that man’s reason
fails and his imagination and fancy stagger in its presence. Therefore,
this reality cannot be indicated by one name or formula or description.
It has to be expressed in glimpses from many angles. No single idea or
system of ideas could convey it adequately. This too points to the need
for some form of polytheism.  
 

  

**OPPOSITION IS BETWEEN TRUE AND FALSE WORSHIP**

“In this deeper approach, the distinction is not between a true One God
and the false Many Gods; it is between a true way of worship and a false
way of worship. Wherever there is sincerity, truth, and self-giving in
worship, that worship goes to the true altar by whatever name we may
designate it and in whatever way we may conceive it. But if it is not
desireless, if it has ego, falsehood, conceit, and deceit in it, then it
is unavailing though it may be offered to the most True God,
theologically speaking. ‘He who offers to me with devotion a leaf, a
flower, a fruit, or water, that I accept from that striving devotee,’
says Lord Krishna in the Gita.^([7](#7))

“He also assures us that ‘those who worship other Gods with faith
worship me,’ for ‘I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices.’^([8](#8))
Devotion, faith, austerity, striving in the soul - they all belong to
Him; they are His food; they can never go to a false God though so
declared by a rival theology.

“The fact is that the problem of One or Many Gods is born of a
theological mind, not of a mystic consciousness. In the Atharvaveda, the
sage Vena says that he ‘sees That in that secret station of the heart in
which the manifoldness of the world becomes one-form’, *yatra višvam
bhavatyekarûpam*[⁹](#9) or, as in the Yajurveda where the world is
rested in one truth, *eka nîDam*.^([10](#10)) But in another station of
man, where not his soul but his mind rules, there is opposition between
the One and the Many, between God and Matter, between God and Gods.  On
the other hand, when the soul awakens, Gods are born in its depths which
proclaim and glorify one another.

“Worship is in man’s soul and the divine glory is reflected in every
symbol. Therefore, the Vedic seers worshipped Him in many forms and
under many Names. ‘Veneration to the great Gods, veneration to the
lesser, veneration to the young, veneration to the old, we worship all
the Gods as well as we are able,’^([11](#11)) that is their attitude. A
true heart’s homage cannot go waste; it cannot go to false Gods; in a
divine economy, it is taken up by That which is the secret meaning and
the principle of truth in everything.”

It was this all-pervading sense of divinity which inspired Hindu seers
and sages to sense the same *Sat-Cit-Ãnanda* sleeping in the stone,
stirring up in the sapling, smiling in the flower, singing in the bird,
shining in the sun and the stars, and resuming its own supreme status at
the summit of spiritual experience. It was in this crucible of concrete
spirituality that they saw the one Divine Substance manifesting itself
in a multiplicity of forms, and many Divine Diversities dissolving
themselves in one ubiquitous Unity.

It was these intimations from infinity which invited Hindu saints and
mystics to invoke the same Reality in many Names and Forms, and make it
accessible to each aspirant according to his or her aptitude
(*adhikãra*) and in keeping with the stage of his or her spiritual
development (*ãdhãra*). They devised many ways of worship and sang their
devotion unto the same Divinity in many languages. It was this vision of
the One-in-Many and the Many-in-One which is the source of the Vedic
verse, *ekam sad viprãh bahudhã vadanti*, which has now been torn out of
context and turned from a trenchant truth of Sanãtana Dharma into a
tawdry slogan of Monotheism.

This Vedic verse is neither a defence mechanism to be put into operation
whenever the monopolises of Monotheism mouth their war-cry of the ‘true
One God’, nor a secularist slogan to be shouted whenever a Muslim mob
stages a riot over music before a mosque or over a pig wandering away
into a Muslim *mohalla*. On the contrary, it is the statement of a
profound principle which informs sincere spiritual seeking everywhere,
at all times. It is the basis of a universal spirituality.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Chãndogya Upanishad, 7.6.1

^([2](#2a)) Rigveda 1. 164.46.

^([3](#3a)) Ibid., 1.6.7.

^([4](#4a)) Ibid., 1.17.9.

^([5](#5a)) Ibid., 1.17.7.

^([6](#6a)) Ibid., 1.17.1.9.

^([7](#7a)) Gita, 9.26.

^([8](#8a)) Ibid., 9.23-24.

[⁹](#9a) Atharvaveda, 2.1.1.

[¹⁰](#10a) Yajurveda, 32.8.

[¹¹](#11a) Rigveda, 1.27.13.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


