+++
title = "Nyt oil crisis"
+++

Source: [TW](https://www.nytimes.com/1974/03/03/archives/letter-from-tokyo-the-short-happy-life-of-japan-as-superpower.html)

LETTER FROM TOKYO
By Donald Keene

March 3, 1974, Page 229
<details><summary>विस्तारः (द्रष्टुं नोद्यम्)</summary>


*Does not include Games-only or Cooking-only subscribers.
About the Archive
This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print archive, before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve these articles as they originally appeared, The Times does not alter, edit or update them.
Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other problems; we are continuing to work to improve these archived versions.

</details>


## Oil crisis
Many Japanese have lately been recalling the old chronicles that told of men and countries whose glory “faded in the space of a dream.” The recent period of Japanese glory, from 1969 to 1973, when it seemed that a small, distant country would overtake the giants of the West, lasted somewhat longer than a dream, but it has ended with dramatic suddenness. The same people who only a few months ago.were talking and acting if the future held unlimited possibilities of economic expansion now gloomily announce, not without a touch of masochism, that they live in a .country completely at the mercy of others survival.

The immediate cause of this change in attitude is, of course, the oil crisis. The newspapers frequently remind readers that only 0.3 per cent the oil Japan needs is domestically produced. Japanese politicians visiting foreign countries had cone in recent years to expect the deferential treatment accorded to creditors, but now they are rushing from one obscure sheikdom to the next, desperately begging for oil and promising immense wards in return. Wags describe the current policy of the Government as less pro‐Arab (arabu‐yori) than pro‐oil (abura‐yori), but in face of the obvious and desperate need even the severest critics of the Government have accepted the pro‐Arab policy. Some even go so far as to suggest that the crisis has been a blessing in disguise, for has compelled the Japanese to make greater forts to understand the Arabs, their fellow Asians.

## Shortages
But for most people the oil crisis has little ideological significance. The effects are felt in the extraordinary inflation and the mysterious shortages, some genuine, others the results of unfounded rumors. It is not always clear why certain items have become scarce. Prepared mayonnaise, for example, is rationed at one tube to a customer many supermarkets, not because the mayonnaise itself is in short supply but because the tubes are of a plastic material made from petroleum. Panic buying of such items as sugar, detergents and toilet paper has led the Government to dump tons on the market to lower the prices, but it takes only a glance at the skimpy issues of newspapers and magazines to realize that a paper shortage, at least; must be genuine. One hears ports of manufacturers being unable to turn out cars, television sets or electric toasters because some small, indispensable part is unavailable. When production lines are temporarily paralyzed, however, Japanese companies, unlike those in America, do not lay off workers; instead they organize study sessions and the like to occupy the workers while they wait for the missing parts.

## Tanaka government blamed
Wherever one goes one hears complaints about the Tanaka Government, which is blamed for the inflation and shortages. When Kakuei Tanaka became Prime Minister in July, 1972, he enjoyed wave of popularity thanks mainly to his success in restoring diplomatic relations with China. He was popular also because he is not a member of the elite that had passed through the Red Gate of Tokyo University but is largely self‐educated; his formal schooling ended with elementary school. Even his profuse perspiring, which requires him to mop his brow every few minutes, confirmed the image of man risen from the common people; now that he has lost his popularity, some Interpret it as a sign of failing health, the stigma of his unsuccessful policies.

It is not hard to imagine a Tokyo housewife's indignation when she discovers that the prices of milk and of instant noodles (a popular lunchtime dish) have shot up 50 per cent over a weekend, and that some vegetables have doubled in price, but for a young couple looking for a place to live, the price of food is a secondary worry. conveniently situated apartment in Tokyo, no matter how small, is extremely expensive to rent and well beyond the means of the average man to buy. One American‐sized room, cut up into three or four tiny Japanese rooms, can easily cost $50,000 even in an unfashionable neighborhood. So most couples live in housing developments optimistically described as being 59 minutes by train from the center of the city.

It would be reasonable to conclude from this and similar evidence that the majority of Japanese —certainly those living in or around Tokyo—are faced with imminent financial disaster, but savings deposits have actually risen, the sliopi are doing record business, and the people one sees in the buses and subways are dressed conspicuously better than those in New York. Prices have soared, but no one is unemployed or hungry. Despite the high prices, the Japanese are eating much better than 20 years ago, and for the first time a noticeable proportion of the children even seem to be overweight. But it is exasperating to see the gains achieved after years of Immense effort canceled out by international developments over which the Japanese have no control. The Japanese today are rather in the position of Sisyphus when the stone he pushed to the top of the hill started to roll down again.

## Rich Japs
Some Japanese, it is true, are far too prosperous to worry about the cost of cabbage or instant noodles. When the oil crisis threatened to leave many homes without adequate heating, such people prepared to jet to their residences in Hawaii. A full‐page newspaper advertisement proclaimed in December, “Hawaii is no longer a foreign country—it has become like a Japanese resort... We have moved Japanese sensibilities to Waikiki. The Waikiki Park Heights has been built 100 per cent to meet the tastes of Japanese. As soon as you arrive in Honolulu and step into your room, the strain of being in a foreign country will completely melt away. The bath is Japanese‐style, and when you immerse your whole body in the hot water you will forget the fatigue of the journey.... You can eat Japanese and Chinese food on the premises. The restaurants are all branches of establishments in Japan, so the taste is exactly the same as in Japan. Our building has been designed so as to enable you to enjoy to the hilt your vacation in Hawaii with the pride of Japanese.”


Japanese who went abroad used to complain about the high prices, but for the rich, living abroad is now cheaper than living at home, and if they choose nevertheless to remain in Japan it is because life for them in Hawaii or New York or Paris is so much less amusing. Those who stay in Japan in the summer can jet to their villas on the northern island of Hokkaido, and even in the heart of Tokyo, where land prices are reputed to be the highest in the world, they may, have extensive gardens and perhaps a pool. If they worry about inflation, they can buy tea kettles of solid gold, Impressionist paintings or medieval manuscripts.

## Bills
Even the rich, however, are unlikely to dine in the most fashionable restaurants unless they can write off the bills as business expenses. The luxury of such restaurants is incomparable. One, carved out of two floors in a, modem concrete building in downtown Tokyo, consists of a bamboo thicket around which are disposed six or seven private rooms (there is no main dining room) each in a little building of its own, complete with garden and other facilities. The bill at one of Tokyo's extravagant restaurants can easily approach $70 a person, but even the expensive restaurants seem reasonable when compared to the elegant bars. A friend calculated that it cost him about $20 for each minute he spent sipping his drink in the company of the glamorous hostesses at one bar. A few restaurants, to discourage the less affluent, put up signs outside proclaiming that meals begin at 6,000 yen ($20) without drinks or service charges. Yet it is crowded everywhere, and reservations are essential, because most customers are. there ostensibly on company

## Envy
Some resentment is naturally expressed over the extravagance of the rich, not only because they obviously have so much more money than other people, but because the older generation, brought up on thrifty ways, has no sympathy for conspicuous consumption. The general prosperity has extended to almost everyone, but not uniformly. The old man sitting next to Au on a Tokyo bus may be carrying a shoulder bag from the dutyfree shop at the Copenhagen airport, and the girl across the aisle may sport a scarf signed in large letters by a Paris couturier, but they probably live in apartments that would seem grossly substandard even in less affluent societies. Some futurologists have predicted that discontent over housing cohditions will keep Japanese from feeling too affluent despite their general high standard of living and cause them to strive for even greater development.

## Prosperity measure
It has been only since 1969, when their favorable trade balance began to look too big to explain away as a temporary phenomenon, that the Japanese have grudgingly admitted that their country might not be so poor after all. But they retained, almost to the day of the devaluation in 1971, a childlike belief in the supremacy of the dollar, and the discovery that it was, in the words of a television commentator, “just a piece of paper” precipitated the celebrated “Nixon shock.” Fears were widely expressed that the increased cost of Japanese goods as the result of the higher value of the yen would result in the loss of trade and eventually in unemployment. Shops advertised “dollar shock” prices for wares that the Americans, presumably, would no longer want. But the predicted disaster failed to materialize. The old notion that Japanese goods were popular abroad mainly because they were so cheap was exploded, much to the pleasure of the Japanese. Some could not restrain their selfsatisfaction, and numerous cartoons depicted the rising yen unceremoniously kicking the dollar downhill. When underdeveloped countries started asking for loans in yen instead of in dollars, the triumph

The Japanese reserves of dollars Increased each month and the Government frantically tried to think of American wares to purchase. One magazine asked various celebrities what they thought should be done with the apparently inexhaustible accumulation of dollars. Some suggested that now was the time to buy back all the Japanese art treasures in American museums and private collections, others that Japan should make a grand gesture and give back the dollars, out of gratitude for American kindness during the hard years after the war. Various major companies and the Government itself gave generous gifts to American universities, and the Japan Foundation was established to promote greater understanding abroad at a time when Japanese prosperity was amusing not only envy but animosity.


Even as these efforts were being made to improve cultural relations, the Japanese, perhaps impressed by their own success, seemed to be losing interest in other countries. Unprecedented numbers of Japanese have traveled abroad, it is true, but this experience has tended to confirm them in the belief that Japan, after all, is the best place for them. Battalions of Japanese tourists, each led by a standard bearer with a magenta or azure pennant, are a familiar sight in every European capital, and the fashionable shops have signs that affirm, “Japanese Spoken Here.” But apart from souvenirs, the tourists take back very little. For some, the high point of the journey is the meal at a Japanese restaurant in Paris or London after days of enduring European food. They resemble the American travelers of the not so distant past who yearned for ice‐cream sodas in the midst of the garden of epicures.

## Culture conservation
For many years, foreign visitors to Japan, whether authors, artists or just plain businessmen—have gratuitously urged the Japanese to stick to their own traditions rather than slavishly follow the West. In most cases this meant little more than a belief that Japanese women looked more attractive in kimonos than in dresses, but the authors, at least, should have considered how a return to Japanese tradition might affect the sale of their own books in Japanese translation. 

There has, in fact, been a perceptible shrinking of interest in foreign literature during the past few years. The wellknown authorities on English. French and German literature now generally write about Japanese literature because the orders for articles from the newspapers and magazines are in that field. A marked revival of interest in the Japanese traditional arts has also occurred. Again and again, the Japanese themselves have predicted that the No and Bunraku theaters were doomed to perish because young people were interested only in more modern forms of drama, but the performances nowadays are usually sold out despite the steeply increased price of tickets. The teachers of No chanting and dance are kept frantically busy with requests for instruction from all parts of the country. 

A friend of mine travels every week to an automobile factory in a provincial city where he teaches the employes' club to perform 15th‐century plays. Opera has a following in Japan, and people pay up to $50 a seat for performances by visiting Italian or German singers, but the season in Tokyo lasts only a couple of weeks a year. Kabuki, by contrast, is performed 10 months of the year. and the two large theaters are generally sold out nowadays, though for a time the audiences seemed to be dwindling. And even the kimono has staged a revival. It has not displaced dresses for use in shops and factories, but every Japanese girl wants at least one good kimono, and the department store clerks at New Year's traditionally wear all their finery. 

Men have been slower to “return” to Japannese clothes, but last summer the jimbei, an old‐fashioned jacket of thin hemp cloth, suddenly became popular even with the now generation. with themselves has been revealed above all in the recent spate of books on the Japanese and their peculiarities. These books are by no means confined to praise for Japanese traits, but the Japanese seem to be pleased by the thought that, for good or bad, they are quite unlike other peoples. The lack of understanding foreigners display is frequently deplored, but most Japanese seem convinced that no foreigner, in any case, will ever really understand them. 

##  Self criticism
Self‐criticism is common and often sincere, and the press devotes considerable space to criticism from abroad. Recently a weekly magazine published a list of more than 100 complaints by Thai university students about the behavior of the Japanese residents of Bangkok. The unfriendly reception Prime Minister Tanaka received in Southeast Asia in January was extensively reported and may have induced some Japanese to reflect seriously on the need to change their tactics in that region, but in general the conviction persists that it is the Japanese who are misunderstood and neglected.

Most Japanese are understandably proud of their counttry and resentful of foreign criticism except for the gentlest variety, but some have reached the stage of disillusion with material prosperity that overtook young Americans a few years ago. The office of emigration to Brazil, which had been closed for lack of prospective emigrants, has now been reopened, this time not for farmers who dream of riches in the jungles but for young people disgusted with life in Japan. 

## Radicals
Apart from the small group of violent radicals whose activities make the headlines, most Japanese conform on the surface at least to what society expects of them, but the extent of dissatisfaction is apparent from the recent growth in strength of the opposition parties. Many vote for the Communist candidates even though their own political views are conservative, if not reactionary: They deplore the price Japan has paid for its prosperity and would like the fish were inexpensive and uncontaminated and the Government had something more personal to say than Guizot's “Enrichissez‐vows!'’

## Prophecies of disaster
Prophecies of disaster abound. The current bestseller is called “The Sinking of the Japanese Islands” and describes in the manner of science fiction, but with allegorical intent, the disappearance of Japan into the sea. Even those who do not go quite that far predict that Japan will soon be surrounded by waters empty of fish or other marine life. Already the Inland Sea, famous on travel posters for its lovely islands set among sparkling blue waves, is so badly polluted that most fish caught there have been declared unfit for human consumption. At other picturesque spots along the coast, pollution has reached such frightening levels that people who have eaten the local fish have been crippled much better in the mountains. When I first visited the town of Annaka a dozen years ago, it was a dusty place surrounded by rice fields. Today, the streets are paved, but a great monster of a zinc works stretches tentacles in all directions, and the rice harvested in the fieldi is purchased by the Government and destroyed because of its cadmium content.+++(5)+++

With such examples in evidence, it is small wonder that so many Japanese oppose Prime Minister Tanaka's plan to “rebuild” the Japanese islands by extending the superexpress trains to many remote regions, thereby opening them up to industries that have hitherto been clustered along the coast from Tokyo to Kobe. The prospect of trains roaring every few minutes through their backyards naturally dismays many people, but that is the least of their worries. Industrialization, which for so long seemed to be the one solution to the problems of a small country whose chief resource was its people, is now seen in a much less favorable light. Some towns have refused to permit the building of factories, even though they promised new revenues, because the people feared that the traditional way of life would be destroyed by fire‐belching

The luxury of refusing to build industrial plants is possible only because Japan is not suffering from unemployment. At present, though this was inconceivable when people shook their heads in despair over Japanese overpopulation 20 years ago, there is an acute labor shortage. Many well‐todo families who once employed three or four servants now must do without any. The streetcars in Kyoto used to have two conductors in addition to the driver, but the conductors have now been rePriteed by sweet‐voiced recordings, which announce the stops when the driver presses a button. Hotel corridors that formerly were crowded with maids, bellboys and the like are now deserted, and guests may be sternly informed that absolutely no room service is available. Even at the fashionable restaurants, where the bill is too horrifying to contemplate, guests are likely to be asked by the waitress at 9 o'clock if she could call a taxi. If they don't catch on, she appears 10 minutes later, this time changed from a kimono to a dress, and urges while they are still available.

## What if
It is hard to imagine what would happen if the oil crisis or some other disaster created real unemployment. Perhaps there would be a new rush to emigrate to South America, as in the immediate postwar years. No doubt the Communist party, which has increased its strength in the Diet this year from 14 to 38 mempers, even without unemployment, would vie for political control with Tanaka's Liberal Democrat party. The Communist party, though in principle allied with Moscow, is rather ambivalent, and prefers to insist that it is, above all, Japanese. Its official policy now is that it will maintain parliamentary government if victorious in the elections and not impose a one‐party system. Most Japanese intellectuals, even those who are distinctly non ‐ Communist, seem to view the growth of the Communist party with equanimity, explaining that it is now “sophisticated” in the manner of the French or Italian parties and has disavowed its violent tactics of former years. Some feel that only a Government including the Communists can effectively deal with the speculation in land and the unbridled growth of industry that have lowered the quality of life even in

## Anti-foreignism
Not all intellectuals share this attitude. Tetsuji Takechi, a noted director and producer who made several outspokenly anti‐American films, now plans to run for a seat in the Diet as a Liberal Democrat. He has apparently concluded that the American threat to Japan is no longer serious and that the real danger facing Japan is of Soviet domination. He once jokingly described his political attitude as Pi, a term meaning “drive out the barbarians” used a century ago by men opposed to opening the country to the West. Undoubtedly there is a residual dislike of foreigners in Japan even now. This is not likely to be felt by visitors, who will almost certainly be impressed by the great courtesy, even deference, shown towards foreigners, but the literature, films and television programs intended for the Japanese public often reveal another side of Japanese opinions of foreigners. A recent television documentary on San Francisco, for example, was no travelogue devoted to the steep hills and lovely harbor but a series of vignettes of drug addicts, Gay Libera all of them repugnant to most Japanese. This was by no means an isolated instance. The prevailing impression of America held by many Japanese today is of a dangerous and “sick” country. Some Japanese, of course, are intrigued and attracted by precisely these qualities, but if I tell the average Japanese that I live in New York, the response is not one of envy—as it would have been five years ago—but of astonishment that I have managed to stay alive this long. A friend who wrote an article on his impression of a recent visit to America was obliged to rewrite it five times by a literary magazine until it accorded with the image of “sick America” that the readers

America is not the only country to suffer from a bad press. England is generally written off as a spent nation, and even the Soviet Union, for long sacrosanct, is now openly criticized for its treatment of intellectuals. Of the countries of Europe, only Switzerland seems: to enjoy absolutely undivided affection, no doubt because of its orderliness and unpolluted mountains, but the country that attracts the most favorable attention is China. Few Japanese have been able to visit China in recent years—when compared to the hordes that annually pass through Europe and North America—and not all of them like what they see, but the reporting is almost uniformly laudatory. The television documentaries on China show women happily making embroideries or carpets, smiling because now, the announcer informs us, these wares are destined for the common people and not for the rich. If America is by definition “sick,” China is always portrayed as healthy, cheerful and making great progress. The simplicity of the lives of the Chinese and their faith in their Government, despite material hardships, awaken nostalgic remembrances among the old, and offer the young the promise of a more purposeful life than that of a minor employe in some mammoth organization. But I think it unlikely that the Japanese will follow the Chinese example, if only because of their unshakable conviction that, despite all the cultural influence received from China over the centuries, the Japanese and Chinese are basically quite different peoples.

Sometimes, as during the present crisis, the Japanese revert to the pessimism about their future that was so prev alent during the postwar years. The rising costs of labor and of raw materials obtained from abroad are bound to make Japanese goods more expensive. How, they wonder, will they retain their markets if their goods are no longer competitively priced? They doubt that any other country will help them, even if some dire emergency arises. Some sarcastically ask what America, Japan's friend, is doing now to alleviate the shortages. Others, including some members of the Diet who, in the traditional manner, have sealed a compact with their blood, favor rearmament, including nuclear weapons, in order to assert Japan's rights in an age of power, politics. The vast majority of Japanese, however, have a profound distaste for anything smacking of militarism. The ratio of defense expenditure to the gross national product is 0.8 per cent, the smallest of any major nation. Even if the present crisis is prolonged, there are unlikely to be many cries for a show

Some Japanese have welcomed the crisis. They are mainly people over 40 who remember the lessons they learned in childhood about the importance of thrift and of making do with what you have. Even though they now heat their houses with oil or gas, they remember affectionately winter evenings spent with their legs tucked inside a kotatsu heated by a few lumps of charcoal, and they feel that only in times of crisis do the Japanese show their virtues to greatest advantage. During a television program devoted to the hardships caused by current shortages, an old lady stepped up to the microphone and declared, “I know that what I have to say is going to be unpopular, but instead of worrying about what to do if we can't buy toilet paper, I think it'd be better if we did without it. We never used to have special toilet paper. Any kind of paper will do if necessary, and if worst comes to worst, we can use water instead of paper, the way people do in India and Indonesia.” The response from the studio audience was the most enthusiastic applause given to any speaker. Despite the many exclamations of despair over their predicament, the Japanese seem confident that if put to the test they will triumph over all obstacles, and if this involves enduring hardships, it will not be for the first time in Japanese his tory■

