+++
title = "18 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT YEOTMAL

**Abstract of Applications received on Tour**

*The 10th October 1954.*

 

[TABLE]

------------------------------

YEOTMAL

*The 10th October 1954.*

The Chairman explained object of the State Government in appointing the
Committee.

**Shri Uddhra Wankhede:** I was given baptisma in Wani in open market in
1938 and I also toured in several small villages with missionaries.  I
worked as preacher. I was given a scholarship of Rs. 11 per month from
the time I took baptisma.  In 1940, I was sent for Bible training. Rev.
Iker was here at the time.  In 1944, Rev. Telmore committed rape on my
wife.

**Rev. P. T. Gaikwad:** He is not Rev.

**Shri Wankhede:** Rev. Timothy is a Christian missionary.  I sent an
application about this to police station.  One man was sent to enquire
into the matter.  Nathar, Acquila and some others were executive members
of the Christians.  They (lid not give justice to me on the report of
the enquiry.  On the other hand they terminated my service.  Telmore was
transferred to some other place.  He sent me a letter saying that he had
raped my wife not once but twice before.  I have got a sanad of local
pracharak. I asked the executive committee the reasons of terminating my
services.  I sent a registered application.  In 1953 an article was
given in Tarun Bharat.  There is loss of my prestige.  I am still a
Christian.  Missionaries tell Hindus that they should boycot me.  There
are several people in the Mission who have disobeyed Ten Commandments. 
I am allowed entry into the church.  Mr. Timothy converted me. I was
promised economic lift and financial help.  Till 1940, I was given Rs.
30 per mensem including dearness allowance.  I used to preach in Mohalla
Patipura where all Mahars live.  I was formerly a Mahar.  I was given
preaching work. I used to say there that Christ has done good to all and
he pardons the sins of all.  Prayer is made “O Jesus, I am a sinner. 
Thou come in my heart”.  I have converted about 10 persons My Christian
name is Phillips.  Puffer Saheb of Free Methodist Mission Church used to
give me money.  He informed me that a resolution had been passed and
money was received for me from America.  All the workers in Yeotmal
district get their pay from America.  Now there are 150 to 200 workers.
I sell fruits now.  There are several employees who are paid monthly at
the rate of Rs. 100, Rs. 200, Rs. 500, etc. I am unable to give an
estimate of the total expenditure of the Mission.  Catholics allow
smoking and drinking.  Free Methodist Church lays down that there should
be no bidi, pan, cinema, drinks, etc.  It is supposed to be superior to
Catholics. I was 25 and my wife was 20 years of age when we were
converted.  I was outcast by my Hindu friends and relations.  We do not
observe Dasera.  Diwali, etc.  We observe Christmas.

**Shri Sadashivrao Chavan of Yeotmal:** I was converted in 1935-36. I
was economically distressed and financially hard hit.  Missionaries
promised me financial help and, therefore, I became Christian.  They
gave me a garden on rent basis.  When the land has been well cultivated
and is able to give far greater yield, they want to take it back. 
Similarly, a grass ganji, which I had taken on rent for Rs. 70, was
tried to be taken away from me.  Grubbs took me away from my house to
Abdulla’s house and snatched away my pair of bullocks by force from my
wife.  Five of them had come to lily house for this.  Patankar, Pleader,
was approached by me on the advice Of several people.  They give
allurement and convert after six months.  An honest and sincere man
cannot remain in their fold.  I was a Mahar before conversion.  When my
mother expired, these Missionaries did not come to bury the corpse.  My
caste-fellows (Mahars) refused to come because I was a Christian.  You
can get reports of my case from the Police Department.  I was
reconverted in about 1940.  Illiterate, people who do not know the
meaning of religion, are approached by missionaries.  They never visit
Brahnpura.  They also do not visit Musalmanpura.  They go to Maharpura
and such other illiterates.

**Rev. Davis:** I was here when lie became a Christian.  Sometime after
his conversion he was allowed to plough the garden.  No inducement was
given to him for becoming a Christian.  A lesson in my high school
career has made a lot of change in my life.  Before that, although I
believed in God, I thought that God was far away, but that night I felt
that God was within me.  There came a very great joy, and peace and
strength to me. I was educated in U. S. A. before I became a Missionary
of Methodist denomination.  Much more money is spent in U. S. A. to turn
people into real Christian than in India.

**Shri F. B. Lucas:** I have been educated in mission boarding, and
missionaries got me married.  During the last four years they have been
behaving very badly with me.  They wish that we should please them by
doing as they say, e.g., attend church meetings, etc. I have served
under them as a teacher and not as a pracharak. I do not know much of my
parents.  They were perhaps on some Mission Board in Igatpuri. I have
got a sanad of these people.

There is a Bible School in Yeotmal.  That is a Bible Training College.

**Rev. Davis:** We make distinction between Mission work and church
work.  There are about 35 pracharaks in this area.  We have a hospital,
a middle school, a primary school and a boarding.  Minimum age for
baptism is 18. In the last six months, about 100 persons have been
baptised in the four towns of this district and Pulgaon and Dhamangaon. 
This also includes baptisma given to Christian children.

**Shri Gaikwad:** We have some Marathas, Kunbis and Telugus among us. 
They are not students.  They are mostly workers aging from outside.

**Shri D. Y. Mahajan:** Secretary, District Association, Secretary,
Yeotmal District Jansangh, and Editor of a newspaper.  In the villages
of Kharagaon, Taroda, etc.  There is intensive Missionary Activity. 
These are eight villages. They have been omitted from the tour
programme. If the Committee visits these places, the Committee can get
more information.  Missionaries work among the illiterates.  Therefore,
most of the middle class of other people cannot give a correct picture
of conversion.  There is also no good organisation for reconversion in
this district.  Anti-national activities are of three types (1) Before
three to four years some foreign Missionary had brought an aero-plane
here.  He took photographs of these places and they were published in
America, but not in India.  We want that the photographs of any place in
our country should not be published in that country without the
permission of our Government.  So also a booklet has been published. 
Dr. Date, my friend, is not here.  He said that the photographs were
shown to him by a Missionary. (2) On the 15th August 1933 a lecture was
delivered by Sheokumar (a Christian )in a meeting of Christians.  He
said that Christians should conquer India and our Christian religion
should be a national religion in this country. This report was given to
me by my friend who is a national Christian.  I do not mind conversion,
if it is for -the sake of religion only.  Conversion gives birth to
anti-national tendencies.

The conversions have not been a result of conviction.  They are done by
inducement or allurements.  Missionaries give an amount Rs. 11 to Rs.
150 per month to convert for the first three years after conversion. 
When a convert gives up Hindu religion and its ties completely, the
financial help is stopped. The converts feel that the Missionaries here
are doing anti-national work.  There is no good system of censuring
their letters.  Their living is luxurious and rich, and not as it should
be.  One Mr. Samudra (a Christian) was sent to America by the Mission. 
He does preaching now.  This gives inducement and affords attraction to
poor and illiterate people.  The mission hospital in Umri provides free
medical treatment to those who cannot afford to pay for it.  Those who
receive free medical aid are attempted to be converted.

**Dr. Clyne:** Shri Sheokumar is a student in Hislop College and he made
a very good speech.  I do not think he ever said as alleged here.  He
might have spoken in enthusiasm.  He does not belong to our Mission.

**Shri Mahajan:** Today is Sunday market.  Therefore, many Mahars could
not come.  If you want, I can give their list.  The number of Christian
missionaries here has increased since the last two years.  Missionaries
tell the illiterate that their God does not speak.  He cannot walk, and
he is helpless even if a mouse makes water over it, and thus offend our
religion. They may convert but they should do so by conviction.  If the
foreign missionaries go away. I do not think there will be any clashes
among Indian Christians and others.  I can give evidence in support of
all that I have said.

**Shri Gaikwad:** Most of the stories told here are false.  I came here
in 1933.  I have nothing to say about Sadasheobhau.  Since the time I
came here, he never told me anything about what he said today.  There
are not more than 30 to 40 workers here.  We are not in charge of Pusad
taluq.  Instead, we have Pulgaon and Dhamangaon area.  We appoint a man
for one year as local preacher.  Mandali makes the appointment.  They
are appointed by the Hindi Khristie church.  Next year again there is
election of the Mandali and fresh appointments, missionary is only a
member of the church as any other Christian.  Missionaries should not be
blamed for the decisions of Mandali.  Mandali and Missionary are quite
different.  A Mandali consists of about 100 (there are about 200 in the
district).  About members 150 Christians have given an application
saying that the Missionaries have helped the people in the best manner. 
Missionaries are not doing any anti-national things.  Telmore is not a
Christian worker now.  The matter was enquired into.  Wankhede was found
to be a drunkard, a smoker and perhaps by now his services might have
been terminated.  He has not been seen as a Christian since 1940.  I am
a church Palak, but I do not know that he ever did any Christian
activity.

**Dr. Clyne:** There is no ex-communication and no refusal to prayer. 
Church is the Indian Cultural Organisation. I have been invited by the
Indian church.  The word “Missionary” is misused. As far as I am
concerned, we do not give false hopes. I am ashamed to hear the
allegations made by Mr. Mahajan.  He has been given false information b
somebody.  Mr. Timothy and nine Indians are holding high positions.
There is an element of a desire in conversion.  We do not encourage
conversion.

------------------------------

HARJUNA

*The 10th October 1954.*

There are 150 houses in the village.  There is a missionary camp here
and preaching is done by slides.  Formerly, there was a Christian colony
of the American (Free Methodist) Mission.  This was formerly an ijara
village and Missionaries had a share of one anna.  There is no church
here.  The colony has been removed since a murder took place in this
place.  There are only two Christian families nosy.  They marry in
Christians only.  There is no preacher.  Bible is read by one of them. 
No complaints against Government servants.  Missionaries say that the
poor will have no troubles after conversion.  Preaching was done
formerly in bazar.  Now it has been discontinued.  There is bhajan only
when there is camp.  People, both Christians and non-Christians from far
off places come for the camps.  The Christians say that they live under
His blessings.  They believe that there is no salvation without Christ
and accordingly they preach.

------------------------------

RALEGAON

*11th October 1954.*

**Shri Raghubirsingh Guruji:** Conversions are mostly by financial
allurement, cloth and education.  Free Methodist Mission (American)
works here. 22 preachers are from Mahar, Mang and Pradhan.  They say
that baptism has been given to them.

**Shri Udhao Thool:** I do not know my Christian name. I was given
baptisms before four years. I do not go to church because I do not get
time.  I Worship old Hindu Gods.  My son is getting free education.  He
does mission work and learns in their school.  He is now 14 to 15 years
of age.  He has been converted.  I was also converted (in Umri).  Kamal
is the name of my son.  I do not know his Christian name.  My wife has
not been converted.  We live together.

**Shri Upasha:** I was converted before about 11 months.  I used to go
to Christian bhajans when I was Hindu.  They liked my bhajan.  They
requested me to become Christian and pressed for it.  They showed me
allurement of giving a good house and good clothes.  They also promised
financial help of Rs. 100 to Rs. 150 if required.  Champat was with
them.  They said that Rs. 10 given to me should be returned to them or I
should become Christian.  Unwillingly I agreed to do whatever they
liked.  They used to give me daily wages for bhajan, because I used to
sing well.  Re. 1 per man and Re. 0-8-0 per woman are given to
non-Christians attending church for prayers.  After my conversion, I did
not get any money.

**Shri Kawadu:** I was told that my son would be given free education
and service.  He would also be helped in emergent times.  They were
pressing me for about one month.  After one month they give me
baptisms.  After conversion they were asking for Rs. 3 per mensem as
fees for the boy.  Therefore, I did not send my son to their school.  My
caste-fellows did not outcast me. We have all come back to our old
religion.  Upasrao was converted while in a state of intoxication.

**Shri Kawduji Pendor formerly of Ninigaon:** My son and daughter are in
mission school. Missionaries told me that if I become converted they
would educate my children and would give me books for reading.  Before 2
months my children were given baptisma and I was also given baptisma. I
do my previous work as a labourer.

**Shri Charandas:** I do not know my Christian name. I was converted
before one year. I never attended the church.  They said that they would
educate me, appoint me as preacher and get me married.  Now because I
did not go to church, they aid not allow me to take water from their
well.  Baptisma was given to me in a private house.  There is no regular
church here.

**Shri Vithal Balkrishna Onkar, Kelapur Janapada teacher:** One
Christian, who was questioned by me as to why he changed his religion,
informed me that he had fallen in love with some body, and he was
getting money a preacher.  Nathar used to threaten villagers with a gun
in 1951, which he used to carry with him.

**Shri Panjab Fulzela:** I was in Umri Mission Boarding. I was a poor
boy.  Missionaries told my father that I would get free education on
concession and therefore he agreed to it.  In boarding I was required to
ply Rs. 3 per month He did not find the boarding alright and he called
me back. I was given baptisma in Mission bungalow by Mr. Nathar. I was
promised freeship, but was not given it because missionaries said that
Christian religion was entered in my certificate and therefore I was not
entitled to any freeship. (Names are not changed on baptism in this
area.) In the A. V. School there is a Christian Headmaster.  He compels
boys not to use caps.  Even a teacher who is very orthodox has given up
his cap.  Students caps are thrown away.  Prachar books are distributed
free.

**Shri Champatrao Awale:** I was ill.  I went for medicine to Mr.
Nathar.  He gave me medicine.  Mr. Nathar promised all help, medical
facilities and even a good house.  He said ‘Why don’t you become a
Christian?’ I did not speak anything.  Mr. Nathar went in the house,
brought some water, poored it on my head.  No medicine was given to me.
I am in my own caste.

**Shri Davidas Kawale, age 20:** Missionaries promised me freeship in
the boarding, as my parents had expired.  They also promised service,
but they did riot give anything.

**Shrimati Ambabai Pardhan:** My son Namdeo was in first class.  He
passed and went to second.  Missionaries requested me to put him in the
boarding house.  He was sent there.  His fees were paid by me.  Before
sending they had promised free education and free boarding.  My son did
not become Christian.  I was promised freeship but after one year I was
asked for fees, which I was unable to pay.

**Shri Upasrao Tamoshar, Mahar:** One old man Anwikar promised me
spects.  Water was sprinkled on my head.  But I did not get spects.

**Shri Kawdu Pendor Pardhan:** Yesterday night wife of Anvikar asked me
it the Christian teacher had come to me.  She told me that if anything
was asked in the meeting, I should give out whatever had happened.  She
said that there is a conflict among Congress and America, and that is
why the Committee had come.

**Shrimati Ashabai Shelke (Wife of a preacher):** I preach among women.
I am Christian since the last 12 to 14 years. I know reading and
writing. I read books on God and prayers.  I can’t say what, books are
there on the Christian religion.  Whatever people ask me, I tell them. I
tell them by experience of salvation. I tell them that if they take
baptisma, they will get salvation.  Vishwasrao Shelke (her husband) gets
a pay of Rs. 45 including allowances.  Formerly she was a Mahar.

**Shrimati Anvikar:** I do preaching.  I do not receive any pay.  My
husband receives pay of Rs. 58-8-0 per mensem.  There are only two
preachers in this place.  My husband also tours.  He is a priest.  He
works here and in the neighbouring villages.  The church building of
this place is dilapi-date.  Its repairs will cost about Rs. 200 to Rs.
306.  It will have to be contributed.

**Shri Nathar:** One-tenth of income is paid for religion by each
Christian individual.  Some of it spent on Church building, Missionaries
and Mandali. There is a conference in Yeotmal district of Christians. 
All Missionaries and ordained ministers are members of this conference.
There is a central fund of this conference, and three different types of
churches, viz., Sponsored Standard church, added church, and Mission
church.  Aided churches send one-third among.  Standard churches send
the full amount.  The treasurer of the Central Find is Rev. Davis and he
will be in a position to say how much amount is there in the Fund.  The
church here is a Conference church.  We do not call it a Mission
church.  We do not baptise without getting satisfactory replies to our
discipline rules.  We follow Free Methodist Mission Rules. We take a
confession from every body that his sins can be pardoned by Christ
only.  I am a non-matric, trained in Yeotmal training school and an
ordained minister.  Mr. Anwikar has recently been made ordained
minister.  Before giving baptisma, I make very clear that a person does
not become Christian by allurement or force. I give plessiongs of the
Pious Soul, the Son, and the Father, and sprinkle water from a pot on
his-head. 25 persons have been baptised by me so far in this village. 
Upasya was converted by me four years back.  He was not converted in a
state of intoxication as alleged by him. Those who learn Bible do not
get sufficient time to earn their bread.  Therefore they are paid a
small amount.  That is by way of compensation.  I do not possess an arms
license and I had no rifle as alleged earlier.  One ex-soldier has got a
piece of land from Government and he cultivates it.  A preacher tells
his own experience to people.  He may not be able to read religious
books.  He informs them that he is pardoned for his sins and has got
peace of soul.  I keep a person under instruction for six months before
giving baptisma. Those who have spoken here about baptisma, have been
induced to do so.

**One Congressite:** No inducement was given. I simply brought the
people when I learnt that the committee was to come here.  Shrimati
Ambabai paid all the fees of her ward from the very first month.  There
was not even an application for freeship.  She only said that she was
unable to pay more than Rs. 3 per month.  Panjab Fulzele had come with
his brother, who is a police here.  Panjab’s father himself paid all the
fees.  Thool’s son is still in the boarding.  One boy's name is given as
a peon and the pay drawn in the name of the peon is utilised for paying
fees of four students who work in the school.

**One gentleman:** Students do not get leave for their religious
festivals even an applications from guardians.

**Headmaster of local school:** It is for boys to decide whether they
should put on caps or not.  I have simply said that those putting on
white caps, should put on clean caps.  None of our teachers puts on a
cap.  We cannot compel students to put on caps.  Some girls had come
with an application for leave when I was busy in cooking.  They were
asked to come later.  But they did not turn up.  Therefore the question
of granting them any leave could not arise.  This year they applied and
got the leave.

**Mr. Nathar:** When there is election, Christian come and ask me where
and to whom they should vote.  Mr. Davis is in charge of
correspondence.  He tours in November for about a week and does some
preaching.  So far I have advised them that the person who is considered
suitable should be given votes.

Chairman concluded with vote of thanks.

------------------------------

RUNZA

**Shri Nathar:** 8 to 8-30 life story of Jesus Christ is explained from
53rd chapter, reg. cure of diseases and salvation of sins. If people
feel that they can do well by praying Christ, they purchase these books
and read them.  It is not obligatory on people to hear religious
lectures.  Those who like may attend.  About 10 to 12 persons converted
during the last 10 to 12 years.  We allow freedom to patients to read
different religious books.  Last Commandment of Christ is to tell Good
News (Shukh Vartaman) in all the places, bazar, school or any other
place.  The psychological factor is most important.  We feel that it is
not always possible to reach people in their places and therefore we
take advantage of the facilities, which we get.

**Shri S. T. Gaikwad:** There is no preaching this side.  After rains we
start it during the night time by use of magic lanterns after giving due
publicity.

------------------------------

BOTONI

*The 12th December 1954.*

Attendance-About 200. 

Villages – Botoni, Jalka, Gokuldhara, Sarodhi, Khekadwai, Seonara,
Bynanda, Khadki, Pahirhir, Khairgaon.

**Shri David:** Abhang of N. V. Tilak.  Gajalsangrah, Upasana Sangeet,
and ballads are used for propaganda in small villages.  All attend and
take part in the bhajans irrespective of religion.  The effect is that
gambler gives up gambling, and a drunkard gives wine.  We do not work
particularly among the non-Christians but we give attention to
Christians.

We preach some times in a year.  We do it openly.  I am only a teacher.

We have got good results in the interior area of Wun Taluq.  In a camp
preaching is done for 15 to 20 days.  We tell about Christ’s sacrifice. 
We teach people. In our Mandli, we do not call a person Christian simply
because he is born of Christian parents. We want a he should behave in
such a manner as would be keeping with the teaching of Christ. We must
love Christ in such a way that we should be honest and sincere in our
every day life.  This yet there has not been regular preaching.  If
somebody comes to me, I give him a letter for medic aid or educational
facilities.  We are interested in doing that service also.  The people
in this tract are very poor.  There was opposition from Arya Samajists
but since we have got independence, there is no opposition.  There is a
Janapada school here.

------------------------------

UMRI

*The 12th October 1954.*

Visited the High School and hostel.  In the hostel there all Christian
boarders and preaching of Christ takes place in it.  In the school there
was a board that attendance at prayers is not compulsory and it is
simply optional.  Chairman explained the purpose of the committee.

------------------------------

KAMATHWADA

*The 13th October 1954.*

Dasharath Mahar was to be converted because he was ill and got himself
cured as a result of medicines received from Missionaries. But he is not
converted now.

Missionaries approach illiterates and poor persons, and not well-to-do
or all.

------------------------------

DIGRAS

*The 13th October 1954.*

**Darvekar Preacher:** People have been converted by conviction and not
by allurement.  Pay received Rs. 73-8-0 per mensem.  Bhajans and records
are sung in preaching.  There are 25 top26 Christians in the village.
Only seven to eight new Christians since the last two years.

------------------------------

WANI

*The 13th October 1954.*

**Shri Kundalik of Nargaon and Rajaram of Selupur of Arya Samaj:** 200
illiterates have been converted in this taluq.  Mission is a place of
entanglement.  These people want to bring back British Raj and establish
Isaisthan.  Hindus don’t help their Hindu brothers.  Therefore we are in
need of Communist activities.

**Shri Bapuji or Purshottam Sitaram Patil:** Preaching is done among
illiterates. They are given money.  Even sprinkling of water is enough
to convert them because they are very illiterate.  Allurement of service
is also shown.  The converts are mostly of Madge caste from Telugus.  In
Rajpur there is a population of 2,000, of whom about 500 are
Christians.  The work of proselytization is going on in this taluq at a
great speed.

**Advocate Deshpande:** I have no personal enmity with any Christian or
Missionary.  Christians have mixed up with the illiterates and therefore
they have been able to gain their sympathies.  In Taroda they have
purchased 77 acres of land worth about Rs. 37,000.  I was told that this
has been purchased by Dr. Clyne.  I do not think that Clyne has spent
his own money for this.  The land has been purchased for giving
employment to converts.

**Shri Moses David:** His brother Dr. David Clyne has sent the money.

Advocate Deshpande: This has come from foreign count. I have nothing to
say against the help.  But the idea underlying is objectionable.

**One gentlemen:** Each one has got freedom of propagating his religion
under the constitution. But it does not mean that foreigners should come
and preach in this country.

**Advocate Deshpande:** Before 1947 the situation was different.  Why
should we now tolerate their old activities? Freedom to propagate
religion does not mean that they have been given a license to preach. 
These people should not be encouraged to do as they like under the garb
of religion. Inducement is important factor. Foreign capital is next
important. Ecclesiasts had a very high position formerly. The Bishop
used to get a chair by the side of the King. Maruti (now Marcus) lives
in Taroda and looks after Clyne’s land and also makes conversions.

**Shri Bapuji:** There are two missionary shops and three teachers in
Rajur.  A christian is charged 4 pies and a non-Christian 4 annas for
the same medicine.  Even though a labourer earns Rs. 2 to Rs. 4 per day,
he is addicted to wine and, therefore, he is always in need of money. 
Missionaries do not look to these shops from the point of view of
benefit.

(Bapuni Patil promises to send information from Rajur in detail).

**Shri Mom David:** Service and money allurement may be true before some
years.  This has been stopped from the time Indian Christians came in
majority. In 1937 India Providential Conference was established.  Then
Indian Christians realised that it was their duty to run religious
dioceses. Two families were living in the neighbourhood of Bapuji
Patil.  They were Lilabai Naidu and Das, teachers.  They were not
allowed to take water from a well.  But I told them that they should not
try to insist on taking water from anybody’s private well.

**Shri Bapuji Patil:** They cook meat, which I do not like. This is my
private well.

**Shri Moses David:** I started a movement of Mahargarh Association in
Nawargaon and collected 4,500 rupees.  Details are available of this. 
Therefore the allegation is false.  Regarding money allurement, I am
prepared to show church records.  Money is sent to Central Fund every
month from Sirpur, Yeotmal, Mendoli and Umri.  We take only the amount
required for cloth and food, i.e., our bare expenses.  About Taroda,
there are seven Christian families.  They have separate property. 
Marcus sold his property and undertook preaching.  The Mission desired
that he should not stiffer later.  Therefore we have given him a field
of Rs. 3,000 to Rs. 4,000 on lease.  This amount has come from Mission’s
Fund.  The average expenses from this fund are 14,000 for preaching.
9,000 are contributed by Indians and 5,000 are received from abroad. 
Since 1937 it is our object to get rid of foreign influence, which we
feel is anti-national.  We maintain account books.  Rajur information is
false.  Andhra Christians come there.  There are only two priests who
are kept there for worship purposes.  Phillip Mallesh has a shop there,
but Missionaries have nothing to do with it.  There may be about 200
Christians.  Most of the people came from Andhra as Christian. 200 are
converted here.  There are other Hindu shops.  Phillip Mallesh has a
shop of grain and provision. We recover money for medicines from all. 
The accounts may be checked.  There are funds such as Central Pastors
Fund, Central Evangelists Funds, Central Workers Health Fund, Conference
scheme and the fifth is under consideration, viz., Provident Fund. 
These are attempted to be collected from local church bodies.  I was a
driver with Rana Lok Samsher Jang Bahadur.  I got Christ salvation
Message in Buldana district and I started preaching.  This shows that
preacher is in need of money even for his necessities.  We had to face
difficulties in British regime.  For example, Bhopal State was not open
to us for preaching.  Now we are free to propagate our religion in any
part of the country.  We are thinking of making a resolve not to expect
financial help from foreigners.  Villagers should build walls of
churches and we are prepared to give roofing.  Religious and social
rights are provided to Christians, such as arrangements for education of
children.  Central Pastors Fund is used for (1) construction of
churches, (2) hospitals and (3) education.  The fund for education is
also called scholarship fund.  We sent two Christian students to
college.  But they did not repay the amount.  Now the amount is
deposited with Government and it is advanced on 5 per cent loan.  We
have started an industrial co-operative society. Several cultivators
have taken loan from this society, but they don’t repay.  Such
cultivators who don’t pay are given punishment and their monetary
advantages are stopped.  They are not given money, bait they can come to
the church.  They have got full membership as probationers.  The list of
probationers is with the pastor.  The Committee settles marriages of
their sons.  We do not want to ruin their careers.  So also at the death
time.  Our schools do not receive the same facilities as are given to
other schools.  Regarding Indianization of churches, 75 per cent
religious work is done by Indians.  Mr. S. Root is in charge of our
Churches.  Village leaders should get training in Christian religion.
Ramkrishna Mission is also in America. There are several members if it.
Some of our Missionaries have given up Missionary work and become
Gandhiji’s disciples.

**Dr. Bidary (Christian):** One of the two preachers has been influenced
by America.  In one preaching he said that America is God’s country and
each country has to take loan from it.  The work carried out by Mr. Root
was not Appreciated by Indian Christians.  Mr. Root wanted that I should
not practise in Umri in the interest of Mission Hospital.  That is one
objectionable activity.  They want that our Indian Christians should not
have justice and there should be foreign domination.  Only very selected
few should have all the privileges.  My own mother-in-law who has served
for more than 30 years is still lying idle.  She is suffering from
paralysis.  All their reactions are such that they should have dominance
over us.  We have social injustice.  Our Indians must be on the top of
everything and if foreigners really feel that they have come to serve
God and preach God, they should work under Indians. Under the name of
religion, they have come here to work for their nation.  In certain
places, where people are not acting according to their wishes, they want
to eject such men.

**Shri Ramji Master:** I was an orphan. I spent 57 years in the Free
Mission.  I was thrown out of the Mission compound once.  This is before
24 Shri Root removed me from service.  Shri Sadashiv Patil gave me a
where Mrs. Root also came.  Dr. Bidari is doing useful service for
Christians in Kelapur taluq, but he is not liked by the Missionaries. 
Mr. Root and Mrs. Root have, so to say, outcaste him.  Mrs. Makasarum
and Mrs. Root showed me great hospitality when the Committee was to come
here.  Shri Moses used to say that there is no financial help for
Independent Christians.  Mr. Root is busy in creating division in the
Christian society here since the time he came.  My name is Ramji Samuel
Samsware.

**Mrs. Root -** in 1905 I came to India.  Before that I was doing
Christian work in America.  We preach here the same thing as we preach
in America.  We tell people not to do bad things.  People came to me and
wanted to become Christians.  I did not know what to do. I did not
baptise them.  But they became Christians.  I am old now and I have
several friends in India.  I can go to America, but I do not like to go
back.  When people come to me, I say that I do not make Christians, and
they should go to Indian Christians for that.  I had taken some ban
children about 7 months in age. They naturally are Christians. One Mahar
girl whom I had taken when she was 1½  months of age is doing well now. 
She came to me several times and calls me her mother.  Some times
somebody comes to me saying that his wife has gone away, and, therefore,
I should take care of the children. I am not trying to make India like
America.  Mr. Root-We have come here to serve India.  In the process we
may have made many blunders.  Rev. Moses, District Supdt. has given a
good idea of the work we do here.  If a man becomes Christian, it is a
long process.  As for American activities we have no concern with
American politics.  In 1937 I came and that time we had to sign a paper
that we would not take part in politics here.  We have to give that
undertaking while obtaining our Visa.

**Shri Gaikwad -** Mr. Root is a human being and if he has committed any
mistakes, it is human nature and he should be excused.  Christians do
not even ask for separate electorates.  We are proud of our country.  We
receive pay for the work we do.

**Dr. Bidary (Christian):** Out of 8 family members of Mr. Gaikwad. 7
are working in the mission.

Chairman concluded with thanks to those present.

------------------------------

DARWHA

**Shri Limaye, retired headmaster of Aided High School:** Personally I
and Puffer are friends.  Missionary movement is going on since the last
32 years. They preach against Hindu religion.  I have brought cuttings
from which are used for preaching.  Literature on Kishna especially from
Murdoch’s pamphlet, regarding life of Shri Krishna is used for
preaching.  Here he writes of Krishna as “disobedient and mischievous as
a child”.  Missionaries approach illiterates only.  Allurements of
cloth, food, money and service are shown to them.  This, in my opinion,
is anti-national activity.  They are establishing parallel Government
because it is the duty of Government to provide cloth, food, service,
etc.  They are taking on themselves the responsibility, which Government
should bear.  We cannot tolerate such things in free India.  Bishop
Caldwell also writes against Krishna in his book.  I do not know name of
the book.  The publishers are Dr. Murdoch, Christian Literature Society,
Madras.  Mostly bhajans and magic lanterns slides are used to create
hatred against Hindu religion.  Krishna is abused by telling his love
towards Gopis and debauchery.  These books are old, but they are used
for preaching. This is ungodly. Missionaries do good work.  They were
running a school at Darwha.  Now they do preaching only.  They receive
money from America.  I have no objection if people get converted by
conviction.  We suggest that Missionaries should study our religions
before coming here.  They should be examined in all religions through a
Commission and if they are found to possess adequate knowledge of all
religions then only they should be given permission to propagate
Christian religion in our country.  Shri C. W. Leadbeater about
(Murtipuja) idol worship says in his book “When ignorant Missionaries
tilt upon the 330 Gods of the Hindus, they are making a very grave
misrepresentation of a religion which is far more scientific than their
own”. Hinduism like every other religion knows perfectly well that there
can be only one God, though there may be countless manifestations of him
“in our life”.

**Dr. Khapli:** Some people were admitted in Umri hospital. 
Missionaries want to simply capture the number of people.  There is no
beneficial motive.  Mr. Puffer took photographs of Tajias, which were
not immersed.  I think Mr. Puffer may be using them to give publicity in
his country.  This is anti-national activity.

**Shri Bhagirath Marwari (student):** I was fined one anna in a primary
missionary school for not attending Sunday prayers.  The school closed
before 3 years.  Sumantrao Dhilpe (Christian) is the name of the
teacher.  Every day instruction was given about Jesus Christ.  Lord
Krishna was called bad names as a dacoit, etc.  A photo of Christ was
also given to me for worship.  Prayers were compulsory.

**Mr. Puffier. -** We have never authorised teachers to recover fines
from students for not attending prayers.  I am not aware if the prayers
were compulsory.

**Shri Mahadeo Tukaram Gowari:** He repeated Bhagirath’s statement.

**Shri S. R. Bhonsle (Christian):** I have the same respect for Hindu
religion as for Christianity.  Since the last 3-4 years we have got an
instrument like loud-speaker.  All people in the village including rich
and well-to-do assemble for our programme.  Therefore it cannot be said
that we preach among illiterates only.  I cannot say of the past, but
now we do not abuse other religions.  We have not a single book or slide
which is against Hindu religion.  Dr. Puffer has never done any
preaching during the fast 3-4 years.  Dr. Puffer has got the instruments
and I accompany him. Missionaries had a school here when they saw
necessity for it. Now they do not consider it necessary and have closed
it.  Their object was not to increase the number of Christians.  We
preach to all.  Our Object is that sins should be pardoned and souls
should get salvation.  We preach for eight days consecutively before
conversion. Missionaries have not given baptisms to anybody.  Almost in
all cases I have done the work.  There are people in this place who were
advised to take their children to Umri hospital . Therefore it is absurd
to say that medical relief is not offered to all in Umri hospital. 
There are three preachers in the taluq.  I get Rs. 99-8-0 per month. 
One gets Rs. 56-12-0. I was formerly a teacher.  I have baptised about
25 persons during the last three years from among Mangs Mahars, Labhans,
Kunbis and Marathas, etc.  We receive the amounts from our central
fund.  There are about 14 to 15 churches.  The accountant of the central
fund is Indian.  Mission gives its contribution and then it is given to
us as our pay.  I have been doing the work since the last 12 years.  I
will do the work even if I do not get pay.  I was 18 to 19 when I was a
teacher.  One preacher came to Yeotmal church.  I knew that after death
I have to go to another world, i.e., Heaven.  There I would get penance
for the sins committed by me.  Therefore I was anxious to get relief
from the sins and I repented for my sins near the altar, and I got peace
and joy of mind.  Since then I have been working for the Christian
religion.

**Shri Rathod, preacher:** I was converted from Banjaris.  Hindus teach
our own sanskriti which I am unable to follow.  I was a teacher and had
cultivation of 8 bullocks. A woman expired which I informed to one
‘Palak’. The Palak made prayers by which I was very much moved.  I
preach in Labhan (language). I do not deceive people.  I cell them that
they should give un all bad thing . My pay is Rs. 62-8-0.  I have been
working as a preacher since the last 20 years.

**Shri Jairam:** Christian preachers say that their God pardons our
sins.  My father was ill. A copy of the Bible was given to me who was
placed under his pillow and we were asked to make prayers to Christ. 
Then they said that they would give education and fields.  After the
death of my father they said that he did not get converted.  Therefore
at least we should get converted so that we could die ‘in light’.  We
took baptisms but nothing has been given to us.  One lame girl was shown
to me for marriage.  I refused and got reconverted.

**Shri Jairam (another man):** I was promised service and I took
baptisma.  I remained Christian for 6 to 7 years.  When my son grew up;
I requested missionaries to get him married.  But they said that he was
not educated.  I told them that they did not give me anything.  And I
reconverted myself to Hinduism.

**Shri Rathod:** Jairam became Christian with an axe in his hands and
had said at the time that he did not want anything after conversion.

Chairman thanked the persons present.

------------------------------

PUSAD

*The 14th October 1954.*

One mission institution in Pusad taluq.  No school, Church in the town.

**Shri Shukla, Pleader:** The pusad Mission Hospital is only a sort of
canvassing agency of the Basim hospital.  There is no good equipment in
this hospital. Preaching takes place in this hospital. There are two
preachers who tell about Christian religion to illiterates and poor
only.  The medicines given here are mostly some tablets. 15 to 20
females had become Christian, but they got themselves converted
willingly without any effort on any body’s part.  This shows that some
attraction was shown to them.  Sometimes it is said that your child is
so smart that you shall not be able to take care of it because of your
poverty and lack of facilities.  Shri Palaskar’s (Komtee) wife had been
to the Basim hospital for delivery and her child was requested to be
given to Christian Mission. This is before 2 years.  She was not willing
to part with the child.  Ultimately with the intervention of several
persons the child was given back to her.  Wamanrao Patil of Taroda was
converted.

**Shri Wamanrao Patil:** I live in Dahegaon near Umarkhed.  In 1924, I
was shown allurement of marriage, as I was not married till then because
I was poor man. I was married in Nagpur to one Tara.  She had a sister
Shushila at Akola.  The sisters were teachers and they were transferred
to Tumsar. I was a motor driver.  It was my condition for marriage that
the girl offered to me in marriage should be a vegetarian.  One day when
I went home I found that fish was cooked in my house.  I threw the pot
containing fish away and I beat my wife.  There, were three of them my 
wife, her sister and their mother.  One preacher from Nagpur came and he
advised us to live in peace, After some days my wife came back to me. 
Once when I was away on duty, my wife and her sister were observed to be
going away with some other driver.  Thereafter I stopped going on motor
bus.  The matter was reported to police and I chased them with a
sub-inspector of police.  They went to some mission bungalow in Sihora
with the chhota chief saheb.  The bada chief sahab was with me.  Next
day there was a great quarrel among the two chiefs and the chhota chief
hammered a ruler on the bada chief.  A meeting was later held in the
Mission and both the sisters were transferred to Chandur Bazar.  I left
the job and came to Chandur Bazar.  They did not leave their service.  A
compromise was later brought about to divorce each other.  In Dahegaon
they built a big school and entangled two to three persons.  Bhaurao
Patil was converted.  The villagers got annoyed and the missionaries
were driven out of the village.

**Shri Shukla Pleader:** Yadaorao Balkrishna Thekedar was chased by a
Christian girl and he wanted to marry her.  The girl was called here and
when she told her love affair, she was asked to embrace Hinduism, which
she refused.  This is indirectly an attempt to convert people to
Christianity. Had there been true love, the girl would have married him
by embracing Hinduism.

**Arya Samaj Mantri:** Shankar aged 14 to 15 was entrapped by some
Mission men on the attraction of marriage.  He was going to be converted
to Mission faith, but he was saved from that.  The matter was reported
to police.  The boy was prevented at Akola by his guardians and this
saved him from becoming a - Christian.  He will give evidence when the
time comes.  Even now some Christians go to his house to beat him. 
Before 3 years there was free distribution of handbills regarding
Christian religion.  Head Mistress of the Girls A. V. School, Meghwan,
brought her school girls to the magic lantern show, which was arranged
by Missionaries.  Last year they used to preach in cotton market.  The
preacher said that so long as he was Hindu he was in sin.  This is
against Hindu religion.  He further said that when he became a
Christian, his sins were pardoned by Christ.  I was not given a chance
to explain Hinduism, when I asked for it.  Next day they came and put up
a magic lantern show just in front of my house.  It was harmful for me
to allow their prachar there.  I requested them to give me a chance to
speak.  When it was refused, I took a gramophone horn and sitting in my
house I spoke in reply to the various things they spoke on the
microphone.  A widow remained in their hospital for four days.  She was
asked to become a Christian.  She complained to the police on
27-1-1954.  She was sent to Akola by collecting funds and then she went
to Pandharpur. Missionaries preach among illiterates and use cinema
slides.

**Secretary of the Local Hindu Mahasabha:** Foreign Missionaries are
responsible for conversion, though they do not live here.  They come
from Basim.  Well-to-do or able men do not become Christians.  Most of
the converts are from Hindu religion.  It is difficult to get witnesses
from converts.  Their love for the country (Punyabhumi) changes after
conversion.  Indian Christians are only servants of foreign
missionaries.  The request is that, at the time of conversion, it should
be specifically made sure (1) that the financial condition of the person
to be converted is sound, (2) he is educated or intelligent enough to
understand the principles of religion, and (3) ten persons should
certify that he is being converted by conviction.

**Pastor:** I was not here when all the things alleged here have
happened.  I am a pastor since the last 25 years.  My pay is Rs. 78 per
mensem.  I was employed on Rs. 13 per mensem.  There is no pension for
us.  There is provident fund.  We get our pay from Mission.  About ten
persons have been converted by me during the period of my service of 25
years.  All of them belonged to Scheduled Castes.  It has been clearly
stated in our religious books that there should not be idols of God. I
say that I myself was sinner. I do not say others that they are
sinners.  It is my object in preaching to help others in getting their
sins pardoned.  There are about 75 Christians here.

**Other gentleman:** We want that a particular religion should riot be
preached against the other.  We say all religions are equal.  Whatever
one likes, he should be allowed to do.  A Christian festival was held
here for 10 days some years back and educated persons were called
there.  The first song was from ‘I am a sinner’.  It should not be told
in this country that any particular religion is superior to any other
religion.  It is not compared.  Christ himself converted 4 souls in 3½ 
years.  We do not by numbers.  It is written in our Bible that we should
spread God’s message.  One soul converted is like one world to us. 
Christ never used the word ‘religion (Dharma)’.  He used the term
‘Kingdom (Rashtra, Rajya)’.  Christ has asked to establish World
Church.  Non-Christians have misrepresented the idea of ‘Kingdom of God’
as a political kingdom, whereas we mean ‘Kingdom of heart'.  I do not
recognise any Hindu, Musalman or Christian. I know two kinds of people
sinners and non-sinners. I was not a Hindu. But  I was a sinner though I
was born a Christian.  My sins were removed by the abilities of Christ.
I do not propagate the Christian religion, but I propagate the Christ.

------------------------------

UMARKHED

*The 14th October 1954.*

The Chairman explained the object of the committee-

There is a preacher here, he moves in weekly bazars.  There are three
methods of conversion (1) by conviction, (2) allurement (advancing loan
for purchase of bullocks), and (3) by discrimination in distribution of
medicines.  American Missionaries do come here.  Last year Rev. Greer
had been here.  There is no Government control on missionary activities.
They carry a copy of the Constitution with them to say that there is no
objection to propagate their religion.  Immoral women use immoral means
in their attempts to convert males patients in hospitals.  A time keeper
in mission service was thus entangled by a Christian mission girl.  It
is understood that foreign Missionaries prepared political maps in their
religious tours.

**Patil of Bramangaon:** Propaganda was made by a preacher who
distributed free books and promised help if people embraced
Christianity.  Majority of the people assembled at the propaganda was
illiterate and belonged to scheduled castes.  Preaching is only a show
and there is some other internal object.  We are afraid of Isaistan.

**Mr. Bansod:** Preaching is done at Chavdi also.  Denies allegations
made by Nankumar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
