+++
title = "28 Replies submitted by Shri Gurubachan Sing, Raipur To The Secretary, Christian Missionaries Activities Enquiry Committee, Secretariat, Nagpur, Madhya Pradesh. SUBJECT.-Replies to the Questionnaire."

+++
**Replies submitted by Shri Gurubachan Sing, Raipur**

To The Secretary, Christian Missionaries Activities Enquiry Committee,
Secretariat, Nagpur, Madhya Pradesh.

SUBJECT.-*Replies to the Questionnaire.*

Dear Sir,

The following are replies to the questionnaire you sent I am sorry I am
not in a position to answer all the questions.

5\. Conversion is always individual in nature.  As far as I know when
even more than one person become Christian, they all individually make
profession of their faith.  It is not our practice to baptise people as
a group on the confession of one person.  Even in on, family, husband
and wife make profession of their faith individually.  The children of
such a family may be baptized according to the practice of some church
if the parents so desire.  The same is true in case of parents who are
Christians by birth.

6\. Besides the Christians there are the Arya Samajists, the Hindu
Mahasabhaists, the Muslims and the Sikhs who are engaged in the work of
conversion.

7\. I cannot speak for non-Christian organisations but in the Christian
Church the practice has been and is that any person who desires to be a
full time religious worker he has to be first sure that he is called by
God to be a full time religious worker.  After he is convinced of his
call then he approaches church leaders, who recommend him for seminary
training.  After the. completion of his training in a seminary he comes
and works as a full time religious worker in any of the church or
mission organisation.

The scale of pay depends upon the worker’s education.  As a rule it is
similar to the educational workers.  No monetary reward is offered to
any successful worker.  When a person undertakes religious work as a
calling the reward is the satisfaction of his own conscience.

8\. As far as I know most of the alternatives in this question are not
used as methods of conversion by the Christians.  Christian medical
hospitals and dispensaries are not means of entraping people but
demonstrations of christian charity which even goes out of its way to
help those who are suffering.  The true motive is the motive of love. 
The Christians start schools and college to meet a certain need in the
country.  The same is true of Christian Leper Asylums, T. B. Asylums and
Social Service Centres.  A Christian who does not feel the need of doing
same kind of humanitarian or helpful task for others is not indeed a
genuine Christian and has not understood the genius of the Christian
Faith. In the Words of our Lord he professes himself to he a Christian
but he does not act according to the will of his heavenly Father.  Math;
7 (21).  Our Lord enjoins upon his disciples to be helpful to those who
are needy whether they be of any faith or fold.  The criterion is need
and not faith or fold.  Christ taught us this lesson in the parable of
the good Samaritan Luke 10 (30-37).  A Samaritan goes out of his way,
puts his life in danger and helps a person lying wounded and unconscious
by the way side.  This man was a stranger to him totally.  When the
Christians following this injunction of their Lord that they are to help
people in need irrespective of caste creed and nationality like the good
Samaritan start schools where there are no schools, hospitals, leper
homes when others despise the lepers and similarly open widow homes and
orphanages and thereby provide homes to the homeless, they should not be
suspected.  Rather the whole mission programme ought to be understood in
the above context.

The Christian missionaries or the Indian Christian do not extol foreign
culture.  Infact it is not possible.  Because the Christian missionaries
have come from all the countries in the West and the culture of any one
country varies from the others.  The Indian Christians have been always
good nationalists and proud of their Indian heritage.  If some educated
ones wear western clothes it is not an indication of change of culture. 
Many Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs do the same.

The Christians present Jesus Christ before the non-Christians.  They
present His wonderful life, teachings and the message of salvation. They
consider it their privilege to do so.  They do not decry other deities
and they have no business to do it.  However, occasionally debates are
held between followers and representatives of different faiths.  At such
occasions hot words are exchanged.  Then it is mutual and no speciality
of the Christians.  May I also add that the period of apologetics has
come to an end.

10\. My personal conviction is that a person cannot remain a Christian
if he is not sincere in his convictions.  It is not easy to become and
remain a Christian.  There is so much of persecution and social boycott
from the farmer group that only a man of conviction can take such a step
and can stand firm in it. I have known many such cases of conversion who
are firm in their Christian faith even to this day and have sacrificed
much for the sake of their conviction.

11\. No. In fact the Christians become more loyal to their country.  The
Christian Scriptures enjoins upon them to be loyal to the Government.

12\. The Christians preach in bazars, market places and in churches and
hold personal talks in homes as well, Prayers may be held in schools and
hospitals but they are all in the form of workshop and not preaching.

13\. Not until some interested people instigate. I have not known any
such experience.

14\. Neither pracharaks nor foreign missionaries use foul or
objectionable language.  In fact the foreign missionaries are so well
known fir cautious behaviour.

15\. Pracharaks are generally respected in the locality where they
live.  Some of these Pracharaks may be from the same area others may be
from outside.

They present Christ through preaching and through personal confession.
They also heap people in literacy, public health and give instructions
regarding agriculture.

16\. Educational qualifications of Pracharaks vary and their salary
according to their qualifications.  They are not offered any monetary
rewards.  As Pracharaks they are supposed to be fully devoted to their
task.

17\. They get 2-3 years seminary training.  Pracharaks are not sent to
foreign countries for training but Pastors, doctors, nurses and other
educational workers are sent to foreign countries for post-graduate
work, so that they may qualify themselves better for their work.

18\. The Pracharak may work in one or more than one village.  His
Supervisor may be an Indian or foreign missionary.

19\. We present the Bible or portions, of the Bible or tracts written on
the basis of the Bible.  These tracts are sold but at times, a person
may give a tract free, in that case he himself has to pay for it.

21\. No. This is not conceivable.

22\. In this area a Christian fair is held in Madkughat.  That fair is
different from Hindu or Muslim fairs, because it is a sort of spiritual
retreat, even though it is called the Madkughat fair.  There is a
committee of Christians which prepares its programme and the Christians
from all over Chhattisgarh participate in the fair.  Non-Christians are
welcome if they so desire.

23\. Christian missionaries pray for the State and Central Government. 
Such prayers are held on special national days as well as during the
Sunday Services.  Some pray for the well being of the Government and
officers when  they have their daily personal or family demotions. I
have not known any foreign missionary or Christian Pracharak making any
stigmatic remarks against our Government.

24\. The Arya Samajist, the Hindu Mahasabhaits, the Muslim and the
Sikhs.  The Arya Samajists sell literature.  I have some of their
books.  In these books they specially despise the Christians and
ridicule their faith.

26\. The Christians have been boycotted by their non-Christian relatives
or by their former caste fellows but not the non-Christians by the
Christian.  This is impossible.

32\. Yes.

33\. Yes.

34\. No. The Christian missionary will not stoop to such meanness.

36\. Good and co-operative.  The Christian missionaries have always
spoken very highly of our national reconstruction efforts such as
Five-Year Plan, Community projects, N. E. S. blocks, irrigation
projects, educational advances and many other such things which are
bringing about a tremendous improvement in the country.

37\. Yes.  In flood relief and on other occasions.

38\. No.

39\. Even though the missionaries do not give up their nationality they
do their best to identify themselves with the Indian people.  They learn
our language.  They become members of the Indian Church.  They
participate in programmes which are for the good of our country.  They
even learn to eat our food. I know many missionary homes where noon meal
is purely Indian.  Some of them even marry the Indians.  Most of them
spend all their lives in India in the service of our people.  After
their retirement, when they go back to their own country they remember
India and her people with much affection and regard.

40\. No. In fact, all the converts I have known they are respectable
Indians and boast of their Indian heritage.

41\. They give up such ancestral, religions or social practices which go
against the Christian principles.

42\. No. In fact, I think that they have been, and still are, for the
good of our country.

43\. The Roman Catholics, the General Mennonite Conference, the American
Evangelical Mission and the Mennonite Church in India, the Disciples of
Christ, the Methodists and the Missionary Bands in India.

These groups work in Chhattisgarh.

44\. No increase since 1947.  In fact, the number has decreased.

46\. The word “missionary” is normally used for a foreign missionary. 
The Indian workers in the mission are not called missionaries.  The
missionaries of the above missions conic from America except the Roman
Catholics who may have come from the continent.

47\. Foreign missionaries are specially well-qualified persons and are
University graduates.  Some of them are highly qualified for their
task.  Such missionaries may be doctors or educationalists or social
workers.

Their income in America is much higher than what they get here in India.

48\. In the American Evangelical Mission set-up, I had been sent to
America for post-graduate training in Theology and Social Work.  The
Mission Board in America paid my expenses.

49\. Those Indians who are appointed heads of institutions or in other
important capacity enjoy the same authority and status as the foreign
missionaries.

50\. Every sending Church, whether it is in America, England or
Continent, has a committee which is responsible to the Church.  It
appoints missionaries in its own country as well as send them to other
countries.  So, the supreme authority may be called the Church through
its Board which send out missionaries.  For example, the United Church
of North India which is an Indian Church has a committee called a
Committee of Missions.  This Committee is sending an Indian missionary
to East Africa.

In every Mission set-up, when the Church becomes a large group it
becomes an independent organisation and does not retain any organic
relation with the mission which is parent body.  This is true in India
today.  Our Church in this district, which is called Chhattisgarh Orissa
Church Council, is absolutely independent of the American Evangelical
Mission which is its parent body.  The Indian Church has become a part
of the United Church of North India which is scattered all over North
India from Bombay to Assam and from Nagpur, Raipur to Amritsar.

51\. The Church which sends its men supports them.

52\. The missions always maintain the good system of accounts which are
audited by Chartered Accountants generally.

54\. Non-Christians who are associated with mission organisations
receive as many benefits of mission money as any Christian receives who
is associated with the organisation.  If such non-Christians are working
in the organisation they get their salary and, if they are needy people,
then they get benefits from our institutions like any other person. 
Christian charity is not confined to the Christian group.

57\. (i) Religious, (ii) Medical, (iii) Educational, and (iv) Social.

58\. I have never heard of any mission courts in this district.

59\. The Mission's work is carried on both in city and in rural areas. 
We have our important institutions built in cities.  Raipur has a high
school, girls’ middle school, primary schools, book depot and the Gas
Memorial Centre.

Dhamtari has a mission high school, a normal school and a hospital. 
Bhatapara and Mahasamund used to have middle schools which were later
taken over by the Municipality and the Government, respectively.  The
same is the case of other cities and towns.  The missions have also work
in rural areas.  They meet medical, educational and other needs of the
people in rural areas who have been neglected otherwise.  The missions
sincerely endeavour to meet a need.

62\. Meetings of mission workers are held as necessary and the
proceedings of such meetings are made known to the members.

63\. Different mission work in different places.  As a rule, they do lot
interfere with each other’s work.

64 and 65. No.

66\. None.

67\. No. Foreign missionaries are not supposed to take any part in
politics and they do not take any.  They remain true to their pledge
given to the Government.

68\. No.

69\. There are general hospitals in Tilda, Dhamtari and Jadgeeshpur,
Bilaspur, Champa, etc.

70\. Admission is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed, religion
and economic status.  Any person who likes to make use of a pay ward has
to pay according to the prescribed rates.

71\. The missions have never used their humanitarian activities as the
means of conversion.

72\. No. The patients are not under obligation to participate in a
religious service nor any favour is done to those who do participate.

73\. Patients are free to read any books they like whether they be on
religion or atheism.  No books are distributed free.

75\. I can give you names of the Members of the Governing Body of the
Gass Memorial Centre.  They ate as follows:-

> \(1\) Dr. T. C. Seybold (American), Chairman.  
> (2) Rev. J. W. Sadiq (Indian), Secretary, National Christian Council,
> Nagpur.  
> (3) Mr. J. J. Anukoolam (Indian), Mid-India Christian Council, Mhow.
> M.B.  
> (4) Mr. R. J. McWan (Indian), Professor, Leonard Theological College.
> Jabalpur-Coopted.  
> (5) Bishop E. Weaver (American), Dhamtari-Coopted.  
> (6) Rev. O. H. Wany (Indian), Representative, Chhattisgarh Orissa
> Church Council, Pithora, Madhya Pradesh.  
> (7) Miss Grace Solomon (Indian), Salem Girls' School, Raipur.  
> (8) Rev. William Baur (American), Baitalpur.  
> (9) Shri Dharmraj (Indian), Representative, Y. M. C. A., Nagpur,
> Madhya Pradesh.  
> (10) Rev. Gurbachan Singh (Indian), Superintendent, Cass Memorial
> Centre, Raipur, and Secretary of the Board.

76\. No.

81\. No.

87\. I am sure on every school staff there are quite a number of
non-Christians.

93\. I do not consider the Christian mission’s activities objectionable
in any way. In fact, Christian missions have been pioneers in many areas
of life in the country and, thus, have been of much help to the country
in the field of education, medical work and social service, etc.

94\. The change of religion does not imply change of culture.  The
adherents of the Christian religion are found in every country of the
world, but all of them do not have the same culture.  Their culture
varies according to the country where they live.  This shows that
adherence to any religion does not imply change of culture.  In India,
people of same faith living in the north differ in their culture from
those living in the south.

95\. In State-owned schools, it is better that we should not have any
religious teaching but it will not be harmful in any way to have a
course of moral instructions.  But in schools run by private bodies if
such bodies with the permission of parents have either classes in
religion or moral instruction they should be permitted to have them.

96\. Consolation of religion is important for a patient.  The medical
authorities world over are appreciating the need of some kind of
religious consolation as a necessary aid to the medical treatment, hence
the psychosomatic conception of treatment in modern medicine.  The
choice of consolation should rest with the patient.

97\. A secular State should not interfere with religious rules,
practices and methods of propagation of any faith.  The quarrels among
different religious groups do not arise from any genuine zeal; they
rather develop from jealousy and misunderstanding and false notions of
religion.  The State should carefully differentiate between genuine and
false causes of quarrels.

98\. In India, different religions including Christianity have lived
peacefully for over a period of many centuries.  The rare instances of
persecution are largely due to certain emperors or kings who began to
consider themselves as over zealous followers and defendants of their
faith and persecuted the others.

Faith is a personal matter.  Faith is man’s response to God.  Every man
should be free to choose and follow his faith, because every man is
individually responsible to God.  Troubles arise when some interested
persons create misunderstandings and instigate people one against the
other.  If such elements are checked in time the different faiths can
live amicably in India as well as in any other part of the world.

<div align="right">

Yours truly.

GURBACHAN SINGH,

</div>

Date: 25th January 1956,

<div align="right">

Superintendent, Gass Memorial Centre,  
Raipur, Madhya Pradesh.

</div>

<div align="right">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

  
**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
