+++
title = "47 Oral statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. CAMP BILASPUR (25-7-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Oral statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee.*

CAMP BILASPUR  
(25-7-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Shri C. M. Ottalwar.  
*Occupation*-Advocate, Bilaspur.

I am practising here since 1930. I am residing at Bilaspur, since 1918.
I was in Congress up to 1946, which I had given up because I was
appointed as Public Prosecutor.  Now from 1946 to 1952 I was Public
Prosecutor.  During the general elections of 1951, I had to tour
extensively in the Takhatpur and Kota constituency.  I came in direct
contact with the Christian community at Pendra, during the said
election.  After 1952, I have been continuously touring in the villages
and contacting people of various communities.

I have made special enquiries in Takhatpur area regarding the work of
Christian organisation.  When the Committee visited Takhatpur last, I
had placed before it my impressions.  On the basis of my enquiries I
have drafted rough notes.  The information placed before the Committee
was based on this information. Thereafter, I elaborated the notes and
have handed over the same to Shri J. P. Verma, Advocate.

I came across a number of persons who told me that they were converted
because they were suffering from diseases and could not be treated
unless they embraced Christianity.  Some of the persons have appeared
before the Committee also.  The Mission runs a hospital at Takhatpur to
which the conversion incident refers.  Government had made a grant of
Rs. 10,000 towards the construction pf the hospital on a site belonging
to Muslim community and it was used as burial-ground.

I have come across four or five instances of young boys who came in
contact with young Christian girls fell love with them and wanted to
marry.

The Mission Authority would not agree to them without conversion to
Christianity.  These boys became Christians.  Thereafter regular
disputes in the village started and on many occasions 107, Cr.  P. C.,
had to be passed by the authorities.  Such orders were passed in Kewta
Dabri and Notimpur, both of Mungeli tahsil.  In these disputes and
litigations, the Missionaries sided the Christian converts.  This was
the usual *modus operandi* of the Missionaries to convert people mainly
to instigate the people specially Satnamis to start quarrels, disputes
and litigations, then to help them ultimately to conversion.

There is a civil suit filed, involving a dispute between a Christian
lady and a Muslim residing in Takhatpur.  The allegation is said to be
that this lady entered his house, did friendship and got some property
from him and then at the time of marriage she insisted on being
converted to Christianity.  There are also police reports in connection
with this incident.  That Muslim gentleman told me that the woman was
supported by the Christian Missionary.

Missionaries take advantage of famine conditions and other local
calamities in particular villages.  They render help and convert
people.  Many such converts are recently reconverted to their original
faith but some continue to remain as converts,

At Takhatpur, Mission Authorities have recently started a programme
similar to the Grow More Food and others of Government.  I was told by
some people yesterday that foreign aid had been received by the
Missionaries for distribution of loans, etc., but it was only given to
Christians although requests were made by non-Christians.

Mission Authorities carry on money-lending business.  They give on
simple receipts and take ornaments.  There have been several instances
where people became converts because they could not repay the loan.  In
the Takhatpur hospital, there is an underground cell in which pledged
ornaments are kept in custody. I got this information from the
goldsmiths of the locality.

Kewta Dabri is a small village in which there were disputes and
litigations between Christian converts and Ratiram and Malguzar.  After
Ratiram’s death, Madhao became convert and the disputes were then
settled.  Some Years ago, American tourist had visited Bilaspur and were
taken by the Mission Authorities to Kewta Dabri although it is a small
village which could normally attract no tourists.  I was informed that
the tourist gave visit to the Takhatpur Mission.  Ratiram was a leader
of the community of Satnamis and because of his relationship to his Guru
Adamdas was held in highest esteem among the Satnami area.  I have seen
the mode of dress and social behaviour of converts after embracing
Christianity.  They are trained to adopt Western methods and Indian
methods and culture are being looked down upon.  Ratiram’s son has
published pamphlets and booklets stating that he became a convert
voluntarily without any inducements from any one.  The money that is
spent here is alleged to be for propaganda against Communist but it is
against Indianity.  In the hospitals, Christian Prayers are offered and
indoor patients are also asked to join.  In their schools,
non-Christians are not entertained as teachers.  There is wide
difference in the outlook of Indian Christians and Indian Missionaries
who receive aid from foreign sources and are under the direct influence
of foreign Missionaries.  Therefore, I do not make any difference
between Indian Missionary and foreign Missionary.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* I do not know whether the entire area covered by
the Takhatpur hospital building was graveyard.  The information which I
have given is on the basis of the enquiries made by me and believed to
be true.  The hospital was firstly leper asylum.  At the instance of the
Missionaries, the Deputy Commissioner used his influence in acquiring
the land.  My impression is that in all these five cases the Mission is
concerned.  I have no knowledge that Ratiram’s son has changed his name
after conversion. I know of a school known as Chhattisgarh Madhyamic
Shala.  I do not know if there are Christian students or teachers in
that school.  I know some instance where people did not accept the
temptation offered to them of sending them to America.  I do not know of
any case where a Hindu was offered the temptation of being sent to
America on condition that he becomes a Christian and he was sent to
America.  By compulsion I mean that merely they are asked to attend the
prayers.  By compulsion means that the prayers are offered within the
four walls.  There is discrimination that Christian patients are treated
free, whereas the non-Christian patients are charged.  There is no other
hospital in Takhatpur, and hence patients are required to go to the
hospital.  There is an ayurvedic hospital.  From 1951 to 1954 my
estimate is that above 500 people have been converted, out of which
about 100 people must have been converted in hospitals during they were
patients.  Many of these were converted have now been reconverted. I say
that Indian Missionary is an agent of foreign Missionary because he
received his pay out of aid received from America.  I give an instance
of a gentleman like Rev. Massih.  I would call Dr. Sukhnandan as an
agent of foreign Missionary because he was educated at the cost of
Mission.  If a Hindu is working in a Mission institution he is less
dangerous and he is less agent.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Rev. Maqbul Massih of Church of India (Disciples of Christ),
Takhatpur.

My Christian name is Samuel Maqbul Massih.  My father’s name is Rev.
Warris Maqbul Massih.  Originally, I come from Rajasthan, but now I
became resident of Madhya Pradesh.  My grandfather embraced
Christianity. I am the Co-ordinator of Adhik Jiwan Yojna.  This
programme was started in October 1953, though I started working towards
since January 1954.  I am a paid employee. Prior to this I was in the
charge of Mission work at Fosterpur a village nine miles west of
Mungeli, on the road.  This programme, as well as the work in Takhatpur,
is under the Church of India (Disciples of Christ).  The Mission at
Fosterpur had a farm, primary school, preaching work in villages.  For
preaching work I had under me on the average 10 workers per year.

I also used to take part in the preaching work.  The educational
qualifications of preachers varied from the primary to matriculation. 
But every preacher was given a course of training in Bible School for
three years’ duration.  We used to start our preaching, in a village by
singing hymns; people gathered and then we narrated a Bible story and
explained the implications.  In the course of our preaching, we never
criticised other religions, and our preachings were very well received
by the people.  In many villages, the local villagers were no Christians
and in others where there were Christians our gatherings used to be
Christians as well as non-Christians.  Occasionally, we used to stage
dramas based on Christian stories and recite Yessu Bhajan.  Hundreds of
villagers of all communities used to attend our dramas and bhajans.  The
Bible recital used to be for about three hours in the manner in which
they recite Bhagwat in villages.  No non-Christian ever objected to our
preachings, dramas in the Bible and there was never any incident. 
During the 12 years of association with the work about 100 persons in
all including children were converted.  About half of them reverted to
their own Satnami faith afterwards.  The reconversion was not due to any
movement but because of family and other circumstances.  Before a person
is baptised, he is put to teaching for nearly a month, and full
enquiries are made, if he wishes to be a Christian voluntarily.  Even at
the time of baptism, he is asked question to that effect before a
gathering which on almost all occasions includes Christians. 
Occasionally, many persons used to visit me expressing intention to
become Christian asking for financial and other help.  I would not
accept such persons and say that I was interested only in those who
wanted to become Christians willingly and as a result of having faith in
the religion. I would generally warn them of the dangers of becoming the
Christians and the family excommunication and other persecutions to
which they may be put.  Baptisms used to take place.  It is not that
people by becoming converts ordinarily gain materially.  I have heard
Mr. Ottalwar’s statement and say that the charges made by him are
absolutely baseless.  We offered no allurements and no promises for
converting people.  A recent case of excommunication from a Christian
family was because she went and lived as a mistress of a Hindu boy. 
Even if she had gone and lived as a mistress of a Christian youth also
the same punishment would have followed because our religion does not
permit such illegitimate connection.

The Mission does not connive at a case in which a Christian girl tries
to allure a non-Christian boy with a view to convert him.

When the Committee visited Takhatpur last, I gave a detailed statement
regarding the Abundant Life Programme of which I am a worker.  The
statement made by Mr. Ottalwar that no portion of the Abundant Life
Programme money being used to distribute to Christians or non-Christians
is false.  Last time when I stated before the Committee at Takhatpur.  I
did not say that the main interest of starting the programme was to
build defence against Communist.  What I meant to convey to the
Committee was that poverty and ignorance were the means which gave rise
to the Communism and to raise the conditions which favour Communism and
that is why the Abundant Life Programme was to raise the standard of the
people and thereby to remove poverty and ignorance.  In the committee of
management there is no non-Christian at present.  But the village
programmes undertaken by us are in association with non-Christians.  In
1952, a World Convention of the Disciples of Life was held in Australia
and on their return some of the delegates passed through India.  They
visited the centres in Madhya Pradesh, where their Mission was working
and in pursuance of the programme some of the delegates went to
Takhatpur also and visited several villages including Kewta Dabri.  They
visited about 10 villages near Takhatpur.  Some of us, who were sent by
the Mission to America, have not gone on account of any allurement.  I
was myself educated throughout in Government Colleges and went as a
delegate to England. I was not sent to America by the Mission, secured a
fellowship under which I was in America for two years.  The next time I
visited America on the invitation from an American University to act as
a visiting Professor.

There is a World Organisation of Protestant Christians known as World
Council which is also related to the International Council.

*To Mr. Gurbachansingh.-* A delegate from India from our Churches went
to Australia, where the members of Disciples from America assembled. 
The delegate was Dr. M. Solomon of Bilaspur.  The Christian fellowship
transcends all creeds, caste or nationality.

*To Mr. J. P. Verma.-* Mr. Renald is the treasurer for the whole of the
Bilaspur district.  He is an American.  All previous treasurers were
Americans.  We get all our finances from him, as are required from time
to time.  The bulk of money is received from America.  There is an
American lady working at Takhatpur and her name is E. Shreve.  She works
in the women section.  She is a treasurer.  The money is received by her
and through her we get money.  Mr. McGavaran was her predecessor in
office.  Miss Elliot is the manager of the Burgess High School.  She is
an American.  Miss Elliot was also Principal before going to America. 
Before her, Miss Ennis, who was a Canadian, was a Principal.  Dr. M.
Solomon, who is the Medical Superintendent of Jackson Memorial Hospital,
Dr. H. H. Nicholson, who had been the Superintendent before.  She works
under Dr. Solomon.  I do not know what salary the American lady gets. 
Before she went on furlough, Dr. Solomon was working as her assistant. 
This arrangement was made in 1953-55.  Reports of our work are sent to
the Head Mission in America to the Mission Office in America.  Audit of
accounts of our income and expenditure is done.  Our Auditor is an
approved auditor.  Our account in Fosterpur was not audited in
Fosterpur.  The Abundant Programme is confined to my area within the
jurisdiction of our Mission. It is not spread all over the district
mostly because of our Mission does not cover the entire district, and
secondly, because this area was selected by the Mission in consultation
with me. Takhatpur is the central village round which the programme is
carried on.

We selected this area because some of our people who might receive the
help who are living there and because it was known to us.  By our people
I mean to say Christians. In the paid staff there are no non-Christians.
In the primary school of Fosterpur, there is non-Christian teacher. 
There is one American by name Salmonson who looks after the farm. He
succeeded me there.  The expense of the Bible School is done by the
Church.  I cannot say when the girl was excommunicated and for how long
she has been associating with him.  She was not excommunicated in my
presence.  Among the converts, the illiterate people are in great
majority and from those classes which are known to be Satnamis and
Chamars.

Ishucharan is one of the pracharaks and he has got sister by name
Premibai.  All audit is done at Jabalpur and every month all vouchers
are sent for audit.  The accounts were never audited in my presence.

The fellowship which I obtained for going to America is from Hardford
Seminary Foundation which is a religious body.  In America, I joined the
School of Religion of the Butler University.  There is no basement under
the hospital but there is one under the office and it is quite open. 
There is a lessening of foreign control over the Churches here, and I
welcome for it. But it does not mean if it implies the stopping of
interchange of Christian people of other countries and if it implies
mutual aid in resources and personnel, and experiences of Christian
people from the world.  I would welcome full control by Indian although
I would have no objection to receive foreigners as guests.  The Church
is now entirely under control of the Indians who administer it through a
committee known by the body.  Out of 5,000 total membership, there are
25 Missionaries.  It is possible that Missionaries are not elected.  The
money that comes from outside is spent in India and we administer it
entirely.  The foreign Missionaries are paid entirely by the Foreign
Boards directly.

I have been a member of the Congress party and I was a member of the
Bilaspur Congress Committee.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Shantilal Gopal.  
*Father’s name*-Janaklal Gopal.  
*Occupation*-Medical Practitioner of Champa.  
*Address*-Resident of Janjgir.

I am practising medicine at Champa. Janjgir is four miles from Champa.
That place is of Dr. Bowman.  His wife also is employed in hospital. 
She is an American.  The head sister is by name Hislop.  She is also
American.  Whenever Dr. Bowman goes on furlough to America he hands over
his charge to an American sister but not to Dr. Mathai who is Indian. 
There is a leper asylum at Champa.  The Medical Officer-in-Charge of it
is American by name Dr. Thesson.  Before, the Superintendent of the
hospital was Mr. Jenson, also an American.  There is an American
Missionary at Janjgir. I don’t know his name.  There is a lady
Missionary by name Miss Birthhalter.  Non-Christian patients have to pay
the cost of medicines and no receipts are passed but Christian patients
are treated free.  The concessions which are accorded to the poor
Christians is denied to the poor Hindus.

They have intimated the authorities that there is a charitable hospital
and that there they can take imported medicines free of duties but they
charge from patients. I have come across five or six cases in the last
three or four years. I know that non-Christian patients have to pay,
whereas Christians are treated free in the hospital.

I based my statement on the information received from the patients. I
mean some of them and not all.  That I often meet Dr. Mathai.  I do not
know that Dr. Bowman went two years ago. I know that he went on leave in
1942-46.  Spirituous medicines, and tinctures are received duty free.  I
do riot know the source from where it comes. I do not know whether they
pay the price of the medicine.  To the best of my knowledge, no receipts
are issued.  I protested to Dr. Bowman once but he replied that there
was no system of issuing receipts.  The permit exempting the duties is
countersigned by the Civil Surgeon.  I visited Dr. Mathai at his house
only once.  Twice I met him at the hospital. I did not ask him as to the
behaviour of Missionaries nowadays.  The dead body of a Mohammedan was
detained in the hospital, pending settlement of dues. But the dead body
was allowed to go.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Dr.  Theodore.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Occupation*-Medical Practitioner.  
*Address*-Champa.

I carry on a Nursing Home at Champa. I am a member of Congress for the
last 24 years.  I was a member of she Congress Medical Mission from
1946.  I was the first President of the Municipal Committee in Champa on
Congress ticket. I am the senior Vice-President of Champa Municipal
Committee on Congress. I am a member of the District Congress Committee
at present. I have been living in Champa for the last 25 years and I
know everything about Champa.  I know the working of the Champa hospital
and whole town.  To the best of my personal knowledge, I can say that
there was no discrimination made between Christian and non-Christian
patients in Champa in any medical institution.  At Champa hospital they
issue receipts for fees charged for in-patients and also for
registration when out-patient comes.  It is 2 annas per head and that is
charged both the communities without any discrimination.  They are
charged with for medicines (both).  Medicines are very expensive, and
the hospital charges the Christians and non-Christians equally. I am a
member of the Christian Church at Champa. I was the President of the
Church Conference but not now.  Irrespective of whether a person is
Indian or foreigner, he is elected by the conference. I was one of, the
conveners of the constituent body which framed the constitution.  When
last time Dr. Bowman went on leave in 1952 I know that Dr. Mathai took
charge of his office.  I cannot say about 1942 or 1946 as I was in Army.
I have not passed any medical examination but I am a registered medical
practitioner. I am registered medical practitioner in Homeopathy.  The
Nursing Home was opened by my wife and I was the proprietor.  Since 1935
my connection with the Champa is not so close.  To the best of my
recollection, Dr. Bowman was in charge of the hospital.  I am not
positive for Dr. Bowman.  In 1946, Mrs. Wristler was at Jagdishpur. I
have no recollection of Mrs. Wristler coming to Champa and attending the
hospital in 1946.  In my presence, no receipt was given to any Christian
but I know receipts were issued.  A Christian casually showed me his
receipt.  He was an indoor patient.  The outdoor patients do not get any
receipt for medicine for which they pay.  Dr. Shantilal has business
dealing with medical hospital but I have not.  There are two Presidents
of the Hospital Committee who act alternatively.  In the constitution it
is not expressly stated but it is understood.  Between the two the
senior man acts its President, There was no Committee when my wife was
working in the hospital.  The constitution is written.  There are two
conferences-one is Church Conference and the other is Missionary
Conference.  In the Missionary Conference, there are all American
Missionaries and some Delegates from Indian Christians.  In the Church
Conference, there may be foreign members who are elected by the body of
the members of the Church.  It is my inference from the constitution
that Dr. Mathai worked in the office of Dr. Bowman in his absence on
leave. I did not see any specific order. I was never accused of any
defalcation by the Christian Mandali.  At the last General Elections I
fought as independent candidate against all parties.  
 

(26-7-1955)

**No. 5**

*Name*-Mukund.  
*Father’s name*-Keshao Chitale.  
*Caste*-Brahmin.  
*Occupation*-Advocate, Bilaspur.  
*Address*-Bilaspur.

I started my practice in 1917, in Mungeli, and I shifted to Bilaspur in
1929.  Since 1951, I am doing Chamber practice.  I was Chairman of the
District Council for two years and member for five years. I was for 12
years member of the Co-operative Bank and as such I had to go to village
in the course of my work.  The Missions in Bilaspur district run
hospitals, churches and educational institutions.  Besides, preaching
work in village is also being done.

In course of their preaching they explain the implications of Christ and
illiterate villagers slowly get an impression that Jesus Christ is the
Saviour as they represent the Bible as Yissu Bhagwat, as stated by Rev.
Maqbul Massih. In the month of April last I heard in the verandah of my
house an Indian Christian preacher, who is an employee of the local
Public Works Department, accompanied by few ladies giving a lecture in a
public place near the Rest-house.  He first started singing with the
help of musical instrument and when people collected he started
preaching in course of which he referred to the superiority of Christian
religion over Hindu religion.  He said that Hindus worship many Gods and
that their Gods were only stones, that in Christianity if one asked
forgiveness he would be released of sins, otherwise in other religion
man has to suffer the consequences of his good and bad acts. There was a
crowd of about 150 persons mostly consisting of non-Christians.  As I
felt that obstruction to public traffic was being brought and order was
being affected, I complained of this fact to the Deputy Commissioner. 
He criticised the lives of Ram and Krishna, in a way offensive to Hindu
sentiments.

On the 15th August 1948 or 1949 two girls, students of the Mission
School, came to me and said that the national flag has not been hoisted
in the school building. I sent a note to the Divisional Superintendent
of Education and the District Inspectress of the Schools who presumably
went and settled the matter.  They informed me later that the American
lady Missionary in charge of the Institute interpreted the Government
circular in a particular manner and, therefore, the flag was not
hoisted, but when the Divisional Superintendent of Education explained
to her the correct implication, the flag was hoisted.

Some of the non-Christian teachers employed in the Mission School have
met me and complained to me about their non-confirmation on some grounds
or other.  They told me that they were not being confirmed because it
would facilitate removal of them from service.  In their schools,
attendance at Christian Prayer at the commencement of each day is
compulsory for non-Christian employees and the students.  No punishment
is given for non-attendance but displeasure of the authorities is
incurred.  This refers to the Mission High School on the jail Road.

I am of opinion that the influx of foreign money and personnel for
Missionary purposes should be stopped.  I object to the foreign
Missionaries being invited as guests, I have no objections to preaching
by Indian Christians within limits.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* I am of opinion that preaching of religion
should be within limit. I object to Christianity being preached in
public places.  No other religion is preached in such a way.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* The P. W. D. Clerk was preaching from a raised
platform and, therefore, was visible to me from my verandah although
several persons had surrounded him. I came to know subsequently that he
was a P. W. D. employee.  There was no quarrel or violence. I do not
want to disclose the names of those non-Christian teachers who came and
complained to me as they might be victimised by the Mission
authorities.  There are only three non-Christian teachers, out of whom
two had come to me.  Those teachers gave me information.  The headmaster
is an Indian Christian by name Mr. Scott.  They came about a month back
to complain. I did not consider it necessary to bring the complaint of
non-Christian teachers to the notice of Government. I did not ask them
why they were complaining.

As I do not want foreign Missionaries to come to India and preach
Christianity so I would not like Indian Missionary going to foreign
countries to preach Hinduism.  I do not object to foreign money coming
to India for purposes other than Missionary work. I had no occasion to
hear preaching by the adherent of any other religion in a public place
in a provocative manner.  
 

**No. 6**

*Name*-Mahant Anjordas.  
*Father’s name*-Deodas.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Deoli, tahsil Mungeli.

I am a Mahant of Satnamis community. I am Member of the State
Legislative Assembly.  I am a member of the Congress party.  I knew
Mahant Ratiramji of Kewata-Dabri.  He was my uncle, and I was frequently
visiting him.  There were about 15 or 20 families of Satnamis residing
in the village.

About four or five years ago, I had been called by Ratiram to his
village Kewta-Dabri to settle the dispute of a local Satnami who, at the
instance of Christian Missionary had started eating meat and drinking
liquor.  This is not permissible according to the rules of our
community.  I do not now remember the name of that Satnami.  But I along
with Ratiram went to his house.  The Padrisahab of Takhatpur who was a
foreigner came there.  In presence of all I asked him why he had taken
to meat-eating and liquor to which he replied that he would continue to
do so, that he would become a Christian and referring to us he said that
we shall also have to become Christian.  Along with that Satnami there
were about ten other Satnamis who had taken to meat-eating and
drinking.  We threatened to ex-communicate them, on which they started
abusing Ratiram and subsequently they became Christian.  About four or
five years after they had become Christian, Ratiram called me to the
villa-e again saying that the new converts had been threatening to
assault and kill the other Satnamis unless they became Christian.  I
reached the village in the morning and in the afternoon the foreign
Missionary from Takhatpur reached the village along with ten other
persons.  When I asked the converts why they were threatening others
they said they have now become Christians and were not afraid of even
and so would like other Satnamis to become Christians also.  The foreign
Missionary also requested Ratiram to become a Christian saying that
there was no harm in his being converted as such.  Ratiram reported the
matter to the police and subsequently sent applications to the Deputy
Commissioner, District Superintendent of Police and the Chief Minister. 
Proceedings under section 107, Criminal Procedure Code, were started
against the foreign Missionary and the local converts but about that
time Ratiram died.  Within a year of Ratiram’s death his son Madhao
became a Christian. I do not know why he became a Christian.  After the
death of Ratiram the proceedings under section 107 were automatically
terminated.

About two years ago, I had once heard Christian preaching being done
under the leadership of one foreign Missionary accompanied by some
Indian Christians.  The preaching was started by foreign Missionary in
Hindi and thus followed by the rest.  In course of the entire preaching
they generally used abusive language towards Hindu Gods, like Ram,
Krishna, Mahadeo, etc., and spoke very little of their religion.  Some
references made to Hindu Gods were like these: “That Ram was not real
son of Dashrath, that Krishna was a debauch having committed adultery
with number of women, that Mahadeo was a naked person giving to smoking
Ganja and Bhang and therefore such Gods were of no consequence.” They
exhorted the audience to embrace Christianity and to achieve Salvation. 
They said that if they became Christian, their sons and daughters will
receive education, will be appointed teachers and nurses and also get
high posts, like Tahsildar and Deputy Commissioners.

The following type of reference was made in regard to the first Guru of
Satnamis Guru Ghasidas.

That Guru Ghasidas on his way to Puri happened to meet a foreign
Missionary at Kattak, who explained the implications of Christian
religion to Ghasidas who became convict of it.  That Ghasidas became a
Christian and on return started his Panth, called “Satyanam Truth”.  A
book containing a similar description has been publisher and widely
circulated amongst the Satnamis.  On such type of preaching many
Satnamis have become Christians.  It is not true that Mahant Ghasidas
had become a Christian.  He was throughout an orthodox, a Satnami
Hindu.  Ghasidas was born in 1720.  I have heard this type of preaching
at several places including some fairs.

*To Mr. Gurbachansingh.-* Many Satnamis may be secretly drinking liquor
and eating meat.  At Kewta-Dabri, I saw the party of Satnamis taking
liquor, etc., along with the foreign Missionary for about two to three
hours. I tried to persuade them not to indulge in such vices.  But they
did not listen to us.  Ratiram was also-with me.  They were exhilarated
but not intoxicated.  In reply to my persuasions they would talk in a
hoarse voice.  Besides, myself and Ratiram there was no other Satnami
who had gone to talk to them.  Besides talking rudely, they did not use
any violence towards us.  Those Satnamis, after conversion to
Christianity, continue to take liquor.  I did not know that the foreign
Missionary taking liquor but the pracharaks who accompanied him were
drinking liquor.  I never had any occasion to take meals with any
Christian.  It is not correct that during election times I had stayed
for two days with Rev. Missih at Fosterpur or taken meals with him.  At
the party referred to above. I had myself seen liquor bottles being
used.

I do not know how exactly the proceedings under section 107 terminated
after the death of Ratiram.  The preaching that he heard at Dadh took
place four or five years ago.  I had no occasion to hear such type of
preaching. I have seen the pamphlet and read it.  It is stated therein
that Ghasidas became a follower of Christian religion.  My eyesight is
spoiled and therefore, I can’t point out the passage now.

I had no occasion to hear preaching done by any other religionist.  To
my knowledge, about a thousand Satnamis became converts after the story
was circulated.  I do not know how many Satnamis actually read the book
containing the story of Ghasidas.  Many Satnamis who are in possession
of the book but have not read it.  There are only about two per cent
literate Satnamis.  I do not know whether the Christians do any good
act.  When I go out on tour, Christians conceal themselves.  I know Dr.
Sukhnandan of Mungeli who runs an eye hospital there.  He is a popular
doctor but it is said that he treats only those patients who pay him his
charges.  I know Dr. Hiralal of Majgaon.  In their preaching the
Missionaries do not preach drinking.  I have not read any literature on
Christian religion.  
 

**No. 7**

*Name*-Shri B. D. Sukhnandan.  
*Father’s name*--Sukhnandan.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Occupation*-Medical Superintendent of the Mission Hospital at
Mungeli.  
*Address*-Mungeli.

I am Medical Superintendent of the Mission Hospital at Mungeli.  It
belongs to the Disciples of Christ. I am a Fellow of the College of
Physician and Surgery, Bombay.  I am a graduate of Miraj Medical School.
I have got Postgraduate Diploma in American University of Pensilyania.

In the calendar year 1954, 5,192 general patients and 2,685 eye-patients
received treatment from this hospital.  More than 80 per cent of the
patients who visited hospital were non-Christians.  We run a special
leprosy out-door clinics at the hospital which function twice a week. 
In 1954, about 65 patients received continuous treatment and on each
visit each patient used to be supplied free one seer of rice.  We
supplied free of charges spectacles to 357 eye-patients.  No glasses are
supplied to poor patients without discrimination of castes as majority
of them were non-Christians.  Three hundred and fifty-seven glasses were
supplied free, from January 1954-55.  They come from America.  These
glasses are supplied to the hospitals from America and are intended for
free distribution amongst the needy.  Last year, we supplied free
glasses to 12 Christians and 70 Hindus.  We occasionally charge Rs. 2 to
Rs. 3 per pair of glasses depending upon the type of frame used as
service charge to cover part of the expenditure incurred by us on
payment of duty at Bombay and classification, etc., of the glasses. 
During the last rainy season, we did free vision testing of about 8,000
students and 134 teachers of Janapada schools in Mungeli tahsil. 
Practically everyone was non-Christian.  We incurred an expenditure of
about Rs. 693 on the stiff engaged for the vision test.  It was done at
the instance of Janapada Sabha, Mungeli.

Last year, our Touring Eye-camps were responsible for 1,000 eye
operations, in 11 Eye-camps. We incurred expenditure of about Rs.
4,500.  The benefit of this service is received by the Hindus in the
rural areas.  Before our hospital work commences, we have a prayer, and
similarly in the Eye-camps also before starting work we used to gather
for prayers.  We attended the prayers as well as the staff and the
patients.  Although we do not preach but we do explain the implications
of our prayers to the effect that we are merely instruments in the hands
of God and that real healing is done by God alone.  Poor in-patients in
the hospital are supplied free food.  We do not get any grant from
Government.  Amongst the 120 in-patients in the hospital yesterdays only
five were Christians.  The staff is entirely Christian, except the
menials.  No pracharaks are employed by the hospital.  It is not a fact
that discrimination is shown to Christians in our work.  In making
payments we charge both from Christians as well as non-Christians
according to rules.  It is not correct that eligible Christians are
treated free, whereas non-Christians are charged.  Hardly 15 per cent
are paying cases in our hospital.  Out-patients, visiting our hospital,
are required to pay annas two per visit, irrespective of whether they
are Christians or non-Christians.  I have brought with me a number of
receipts which are issued to out-patients when they pay annas two. 
Bouting examination of the blood and urine, etc., and supplies of
medicine to all patients is done free, the only charges being levied
annas two.  We get Rs. 4,800 per year from America from the Church of
Disciples, America.  These are by way of donation.  The total
expenditure last year was about Rs. 83,000 and the income from all
sources was about Rs. 79,000.  Thus, we ran into a deficit of about Rs.
7,000.  The figure of income does not include the grant of about Rs.
4,000 from America.  Church of India gave Rs. 3,000 for the care of poor
Christians.  We do not receive any grant from any Hindu religious or
charitable organisation.  Dr. Rambo is the only foreigner and he gets
salary from home.  We have six doctors.  We hold Christian prayers in
the wards generally in the morning.  No objection has so far been raised
to the holding of such prayers.  There are no pracharaks in Mungeli, nor
any conversion.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* The final authority for accepting conditional
gifts from Hindus is the Executive Committee of the Church of India. 
About two or three years ago the non-Christians of Mungeli and
neighbouring tracts had accused us of converting people through our
hospital and, therefore, we had collected figures of Christian and
non-Christian patients served by us.  The religion of a patient is not
mentioned in our receipts.  It is possible from our register to obtain
information about the religion of a particular patient and it was on the
basis of these records that information religionwise was collected by
our staff about three years ago.  My parents were Christians when I was
born.  Prior to conversion my father belonged to Kathia community. 
First time I went with private expense and second time at the expense of
the Mission to America.  My wife is a medical social worker in
hospital.  She receives her pay out of the Hospital Fund.  There is a
Chapel in the compound of the hospital and every member of the staff is
required to conduct prayers on turn.  The notes which I have with me
here are on the basis on which I have made a statement are drawn from
the records of the hospital.  But it truly represents substance.  There
are portraits of Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru and religious people.  Expenses
on Eye-camps are incurred from separate funds which consist of
contribution made through our Church in America and charitable
institutions, like the Tata Church and Standard Oil Company.  Accounts
are audited by Chartered Accountants.  The prayer is in the name of
Jesus.  Among the menials, there are no non-Christians except sweepers. 
There is no Christian at Mungeli who works as a sweeper.  Neither poor
Christians nor poor Hindus are charged the admission charges of annas
two.  Within the Mission Compound, one foreign lady (American) resides. 
She visits in-patients in the hospital.  She visits only Christian
patients, specially women.  She does not preach in the ward. Dr. Rambo
has opened the school and dispensary at Khuria.  If a non-Christian were
to offer his own prayer according to his religion, I have no objection. 
I visited some non-Missionary hospital in America and there also prayers
are offered by the staff as well.  That is the prayer for healing.  
 

**No. 8**

*Name*-Beni Madhao.  
*Father’s name*-Ratiram.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-35 years.  
*Address*-Kewata-dabri.

I was ex-Malguzar of Kewata-dabri.  I became a Christian in November
1952.  I read the Bible and voluntarily became a Christian.  No
inducement was offered to me to become a Christian nor was any
allurement held out to me for coins, to America.  I cannot desire of
going to America as I do not know English.  There are Christians in my
village for the last 13 to 14 years.  Before 14 years, there used to be
disputes between my father Ratiram and the tenants who were not
Christians then.  There was a proceeding under section 107, Cr. P. C.,
after, there were Christians.  In that proceeding were involved seven
Christians and five Satnamis.  My father was also included in it.  The
case was compounded.  My father was alive, when the case was
compounded.  He was then an in-patient in Takhatpur hospital.

I know Mahant Anjordas.  About 10 years before, he used to visit but he
has not visited during the last 10 years.  He had borrowed a loan of Rs.
130 from my father and when on demand he did not pay, my father filed a
suit against him on account of which he did not visit.  Before I became
a Christian, I had on several occasions heard preaching of pracharaks. 
No such incident as narrated by Mahant Anjordas, about the party of
Christian foreign Missionaries and Satnamis ever took place in my
place.  Christians forbid drinking liquor and smoking.  After
conversion, my name was not changed nor have I changed my dress.  My
living in home is exactly as it was before.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* My father Ratiram, was a Member of Legislative
Council and wielding great influence.  After his death, I became
Christian.  Even during the life-time of my father, I had been thinking
of becoming a Christian, but due to respect for old man, I had to obey
his instructions not to become Christian. I was first drawn towards
Christianity on hearing the preaching of a blind preacher who used to
visit our place about five years ago.  Thereafter too many preachers
keep on visiting our village.  I had purchased a Hindi Bible for Rs.
three, I have studied up to 4th Hindi class. I do not know how many
chapters Bible contains and from what story it begins.  I do not know
with what story the Bible ends.  I cannot recite any verse from the
Bible.  I do not know Lord’s Prayer.  Rangiya became a Christian
sometime after the termination of the Second World War.  When Rangiya
had become Christian, the World War had not commenced.  I do not know
when the World War began and when ended.  I was also made a party in the
proceedings under section 107, Cr. P. C., which were filed before
Thakur, Extra-Assistant Commissioner.  Rangiya and other Christians had
complained that we were committing breach of the peace.  My father
signed the compromise deed in the Takhatpur Hospital.  The document was
sent to him by the Court for signature. Mr father did not file a suit to
recover Rs. 130 from Anjordas.  It is not correct that the Church which
was constructed in village two and three years prior to the death of my
father was constructed on the land of Tungan.  It is close to his
house.  Tungan does not live in that village now.  The land was
purchased by Rangiya from Dawang.  I built a bungalow after my father’s
death.  By bungalow, I mean a house.  My second wife had also become a
Christian along with me.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-Tilak.  
*Father’s name*-Mansaram.  
*Caste*-Aryasamaj.  
*Occupation*-  
*Address*-Chapa.

About six or seven years ago my wife contacted leprosy and I took her to
the Chapa Leper Asylum and admitted her there.  After about three years
when I went to take her back Shri Warner, a foreign Missionary in charge
of the Asylum told that she had become a Christian and that I should
take her back only if I embraced Christianity.  He also said (Shri
Warner), that he would purchase a sewing machine for me to enable me to
work as a tailor and construct the house for me after which he would
send my wife and perform another marriage if I became a Christian.  On
account of this I became a Christian but Shri Warner did not fulfil his
promise.  When I realised that the promises had not been kept I told my
wife to get ourselves reconverted to Hinduism but she did not agree.  In
consequence we had a quarrel.  Shri Theodore, of Chapa, having come to
know of this quarrel came to my house one day and assaulted me.  The
case has been started.  Dr. Theodore complained to the authorities that
I gave beating to my wife and hence I was arrested.  Originally my caste
was Teli.  My caste people are not admitting me to caste.

*To Rev. Gurbachansingh.-* There were other persons present when Shri
Warner had asked me to become a Christian before he would allow my wife
to the discharge from asylum. I visited asylum twice in three years. 
There may be 600 to 700 patients in the asylum.  I do not know how many
were Christians amongst them.  My baptism took place about a month after
Warner had promised that on becoming a Christian a house would be built
for me and a machine would be purchased.  During the period of one month
I was given no house, working as a labourer and Padrisaheb used to give
me religious instructions. I was not at all convinced by the religious
instructions given to me.  But in order to get my wife and the house,
etc., I agreed to become a Christian.  I continued to remain a Christian
for six and seven months after baptism.  When I decided to give up
Christianity and was removed from house I married another woman.  My
Christian wife does not live with me. I was never informed by the
Mandali that I have been excommunicated.  After assaulting me and
causing injuries, Theodore took me to station-house and got me
arrested.  I had informed the Station-House Officer that Theodore had
assaulted me and I also pointed out my injuries to him.  Pannalal,
Sub-Inspector, sent me to the hospital for medical examination. In the
case ultimately I was bound over.  
 

**No. 10**

*Name*-Bhakla.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Address*-Chapa.

I was an inmate of the Mission Leper Asylum at Chapa.  On being
admitted, the asylum authorities took away my *Ramayan* and gave me a
Bible to read.  The Foreign Missionary in-charge, the pastor and the
Mukadam, etc., used to tell me often to become Christian.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* I know reading *Ramayan* and *Bhagwat* though I did
not go to school. I can read Hindi.  The *Ramayan* which had contained
nine Chapters including *Lav-Kush*. (He was asked to read a newspaper
“Sawadhan” and he could read it.) I was an inmate five to six years.  I
was not discharged by the asylum actually but as I could not follow the
Christian wav of life of the asylum and hence could not give up my
religion so I left the asylum.  I left it of my own accord. I know Nanu
and Thakur.  I know Karibai.  I came to know her after discharge of
Kari.  Now that  woman Kari is with me.  She is my wife.  I married her
about five years ago.  I married her after I left hospital after two
months.  After I was admitted into the Leper Home, my first wife left me
and married another person.  After two years staying in the asylum, I
did not like their life.  
 

**No. 11**

*Names*-(1) Nanu Rajdan, Issai of Chapa Ghogranala. (2) Bartu Sukra,
Issai, Chapa.

Both state as follows:

We both know Bhakla, the previous witness.  Along with Bhakla, one Mst. 
Kari was also-an inmate.  It had become known that Bhakla, was carrying
illicit intimacy with Kari.  Even when Bhakla was an inmate of  the
asylum, he had constructed a house at Ghogranala, which adjoins the
asylum.  The Foreign Missionary in-charge used o advice Bhakla, to
behave in a proper manner, because he had his wife already living. 
Once, Bhakla went away on leave and did not return to asylum.  According
to the rules of the asylum, misbehaviour with women was not allowed. 
When we joined  the asylum, we were not Christians; during our stay
there, we became Christians.  We became Christians of our own accord,
and not because of any force or promise given to us by the asylum
doctor.  No such promises are given, or force used.  When we contacted
the disease, members of our family turned us out.  We were received in
the asylum, given proper treatment and we have been looked after by the
foreign Missionaries and other Christians working there.  I had
purchased a Bible for one rupee (small Bible) and when we read the
contents and saw the life of the Christian Missionaries we were
attracted towards their religion and so became converts voluntarily. 
Even now we are Christians.  Nanu says he nowadays stays in Ghogranala,
outside the Leper Asylum.  Ghogranala is a settlement of leprosy
patients.  In all, there may be about 700 or, 800 persons.  Some of them
were former inmates of Chapa Leper Asylum and others are from various
other asylums of the State as well as outside like Baitalpur, etc.  Four
or five persons out of the 800 mentioned are Christians. I left the
asylum after I was declared non-infective.  There are others, who have
run away from their homes for some reason or the other or with women. 
These persons still suffer from the disease. I do not know of any
special reasons.  Those who are still suffering from the disease have
run away from the Leper Home.  Government have appointed a Doctor who
gives treatment to the patients in the settlement under a tree. Such
patients, who become dangerously ill, are sent to the Chapa Leper
Asylum.  Others are treated by the Government doctors.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* On being discharged from the Leper Home we
occasionally work as paid labourer on the Mission land My brother,
Dindayal, has got a house built for me at Ghogranala. I was about 10 or
11 years old when I got the disease: I had a younger brother and no
father.  My mother’s father took me to the Leper Asylum at Chapa and got
me admitted there.  Dindayal is not a Christian.  Baratu lives in Leper
Asylum.  I am illiterate.  Baratu says he is illiterate and was told
about the Christian religion by the Missionaries and other pracharaks
who used to come for preaching.  In course of the preaching. the Sahab
used to refer to Krishna, as having kept a number of wives and we used
to listen.  The Sahab asked Nanu, also to become a Christian.  During
the time Kari was in the asylum, we could not (I Barati) know.  Kari
left the asylum of her own accord and she was not discharged as cured. 
Reading of *Ramayan* is not prohibited in the Leper Home.  Many persons
do read *Ramayan* although I had not actually seen them reading.  Nanu,
occasionally receives treatment from Leper Asylum.  Mission has not
helped.  Prayers are held in the Leper Home and both Christian and
non-Christian patients remain present.  
 

(27-7-1955)

**No. 12**

*Name*-Jankiprasad.  
*Father’s name*-Narayan.  
*Occupation*-Tailor.  
*Address*-Tarbhar, Bilaspur.

I was in-patient in Pendra Sanatorium.  I was on the paying bed. I was
in poor financial circumstances.  Dr. Thomas used to tell me if you
become a Christian it would be easy for me to get free bed.  In the same
manner the American ladies used to tell me.  The free beds used to be
allotted to the Christian patients when they were vacant.  After 7
months having moved through the Deputy Commissioner, I got a free bed. 
The American ladies used to distribute Christian tracts.  Once she found
me reading *Ramayan* and warned me that if I were to read *Ramayan* my
health would deteriorate and that I had no right to read *Ramayan* in
the hospital and that I would not get peace of mind thereby.  The
collective prayers are held in a week in church and those who can move
about are asked to join the prayer.  No Hindu is permitted to observe
the Hindu festival.  Ordinarily, the patients should go to bed at 9 p.m.
according to rule but a month before the Christmas rehearsals of dramas
are done and the patients are asked to attend them up to 11. All these
dramas relate to the life of Christ.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* The ward in which I was living, there were 20
beds.  All the 20 beds were full.  In that ward, except one, all were
non-Christians.  They were all paying beds. I cannot say definitely
whether all were paying beds.  I came to know there were 40 free beds
allotted by Government.  Some free beds are reserved for Christians but
the number I do not know.  The Christian doctor said free beds are
allotted under orders of Government and had asked my brother to apply to
Deputy Commissioner as suggested by the Christian Doctor.  I do not know
what orders were passed.

I also attended the Christian dramas.  To avoid the displeasure of the
medical officers in-charge we were compelled to attend the dramas.  Even
medicine was refused some times.  When the sisters would come and
explain to us that because of our refusal to follow their religion such
troubles would be given and therefore they would advice us to accept
Christianity.  This type of treatment continued till I got a free bed. 
I never made any complaint to the governing body.  I was discharged from
the Sanatorium in April 1952.  I also attended some prayers in the
Church.  The prayers used to be in the name of Christ for the welfare of
all the patients.  
 

**No. 13**

*Name*-Nandlal Dube.  
*Father’s name*-Sunderlal Dube.  
*Occupation*-Teacher.  
*Address*-Sakti.

For three and half years up to 1951 I was teacher in Mission Boy’s High
School, Bilaspur.  Prayers or Bible classes used to be held every day
after roll call was taken and absentees, were fined one anna.  Prayers
used to be in the name of Christ.  In respect of pay and training
Christians were preferred to non-Christians.  The fees of poor Christian
students was paid by the management of the different Missions. 10 per
cent freeships prescribed were awarded to non-Christians.  There were 4
or 5 non-Christian teachers in school and none of us was allowed to join
provident fund scheme.  The rules of the scheme were not supplied to me
in spite of my demand.  Because I got a better job I resigned. 
Occasionally, American missionaries used to come and deliver lectures to
boys in course of which the American culture was taught. I do not know
of any conversion of a non-Christian or a student of the school as a
result of such activities.  Prayers used to be held during the school
hours and in the beginning.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* I came to Bilaspur as a refugee from Western
Pakistan. I am not a trained teacher and I have got about 22 years
teaching experience.  I am now getting Rs. 105 as basic pay and Rs. 138
including dearness allowance in the Municipal Committee, Sakti, as
teacher.  The Mission High School classes at Chatapara were started
recently, and it was not recognised.  The school during winter is held
at 10-45 a.m. The teaching is started at 11 o’clock as in other school. 
After 11 a.m. there was no prayer.  Students used to assemble in their
respective class-room where roll call was taken and thereafter they all
proceeded to the verandah where prayer was held.  One Misra, who was a
teacher in the same school, joined B. T. Classes but I do not know
whether his name was recommended by the school or whether be applied
direct.  Mr. Misra was a Hindu.  Mr. James was sent from the school
management for B. T.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name*-Tularam.  
*Father’s name*-John.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Address*-Lata.

Prior to my conversion in 1947 I was a Satnami and doing cultivation and
business and earning Rs. 150 per month on an average.  Although I was
not a Mahant I was regarded as a leader of the community. I have studied
up to 2nd primary standard.

I became a Christian for the following reasons:-

\(1\) In the school at the time I was being treated by the teacher
cruelly like an animal.

\(2\) I used to be addressed contemptuously as belonging to the Chamar
community.  That was done by the Hindu teacher.  In my childhood I used
to hear from the elders of my community that Satnami belonged to a
distant community from Hindus and that instead of uttering the name of
Ram they should utter Satnam.  But in actual practice I found that all
customs and manners exhibit the same as those of Hindus but we Satnamis
were being treated badly and not given equal status. I, therefore, felt
that I could not become a Hindu.  I , therefore, started enquiries about
other religions and wanted to know something about Islam but as the
books were in Urdu I could not read.  I also tried to gather information
of Kabir Panthi but that sect did not appeal to me.  Once I had gone to
Takhatpur market where copies of Hindi Bible were being sold. I
purchased one book and studied it for one year.  One important feature
influenced my mind, namely, that it preached social equality amongst all
men.  When I had further gone towards this religion I sent round verbal
intimation to my community members saving that I propose to embrace
Christianity at a subsequent day and if they could point out a better
way of life in my own faith they should attend and convince me
accordingly.  No foreign or Indian Missionary ever gave me any
allurement or promise or temptation of material gain to induce me to
embrace Christianity.  At present, I am working as a Pastor in Christian
community in and round my village.  I receive Rs. 82 per month as
salary, paid to me by our Christian Mandali only (by disciples of Christ
Church).  There are 4 pracharaks within a radius of 6 miles.  In course
of my preaching neither I nor my other pracharaks ever criticised Hindu,
religion.  Before I became a Christian although I had respect for the
Hindu religion I understood that religion encourage caste and status and
the teachings there made Hindus treat Satnamis in the manner described
above.  These aspects of that religion I did not like.  From the
behaviour of the Hindus I understood that their religion must be
teaching like that.  When I do the preaching now I do not tell the
circumstances in which I became a Christian.

*To the Committee.-* In my preaching I do not compare the Satnami
religion.  After I became a convert about 150 more Satnamis embraced
Christianity.  Satnamis who come in contact with us compare our way of
life after Christianity with their own and those who are impressed
express their intention of becoming Christians.  After the intention is
expressed religious instructions are given for a period ranging from 3
months to 6 months at the end of which it is decided whether he
voluntarily and sincerely wishes to become a Christian or not.  Only
when we are convinced the baptism takes place.  No individual is given
religious instruction or baptism unless his wife also attends
instructions along with him.  'Therefore, conversion of husband and wife
takes place together.  As regards their minor children they are treated
as Christians but are not baptised unless they attain majority.  I did
not know either Brahmasamaj or Aryasamaj. I assumed the name of Tularam
Paul.  I never heard people preaching that Ghasidas ever embraced
Christianity.  Ordinarily, names are not changed on Baptism.  Paul has
been only added to my name but my name is not changed. I have not been
trained as pastor, nor as a pracharak.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* There is a committee constituted to manage the
church at my place during the last 3 years.  Rev. Maqbul Massih is the
President of the Committee.  Mr. Philip Sahadeo is the Treasurer.  There
is a Joint Secretary but I do not know his name.  The Church Mandali is
known as Christ Mandali and it has got its constitution in writing.  The
centre of my Mandali is at Takhatpur, under which are comprised
Jarhagaon, Lata and other villages.  Thai Mandali owns at Jarhagaon,
schools, hospital, fields, etc., and land.  I do not know the source of
the money, which is required for managing of all the expenses.  I am a
preacher since 1953.  Then I at once became a circle preacher.  In
1935-36.  I had started a case of adultery against a Satnami of
Sonbandha.  It is not true that the Padri of Takhatpur helped me in that
litigation, and went to the other Satnami’s house and forcibly got her. 
It is not also true that I became a Christian on account of this help. 
I divorced my wife because she would not agree to become Christian with
me.  My second wife agreed to become Christian and is with me. I have
got 7 children, my daughter is a trained teacher and is in service and
one son is pracharak and others are being educated in Mission schools. 
I bear their expenses.  A Christian of Pithora village has written a
booklet on the life of urn Ghasidas.  I have read that book known as
Satnam.  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-Tungan.  
*Father’s name*-Vishram.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Age*-35 years.  
*Residence*-Bhilai.

I had land at Kewtadabri where I resided before I came to Bhilai. 
Rangya’s house in Kewtadabri adjoins mine.  The Christian Missionaries
of Takhatpur used to visit his house and partake of meat and liquor.  I
objected to the same because it is not allowed in our community.  Mahant
Ratiram also objected to this several times but the Missionary nor
Rangya listened to them.  This went on for nearly a year when Ratiram
told Rangya and others that they would be ex-communicated.  Within a day
or two they became Christians.  This happened about 5 or 6 years ago. 
Prior to this their was no Christian in that village.  Mahant Anjordas
used to visit our village on several occasions when Ratiram was alive. 
He attended the funeral and death ceremonies of Ratiram.  Rangya and
others used to quarrel with me and threatened me to become Christian. 
Myself and one more Ratiram were the only non-Christians Satnami left in
the village.  Because of their quarrels in the village I had to leave
that village and take up shelter in the neighbouring village.  On the
site of my land they have constructed a church and have also taken
possession of my other land.  I had no quarrel with Ratiram.

*To Rev. Maqbul Massih.-* I do not know whether Ratiram had filed a suit
against my brother under section 500, I. P. C., nor did I know if
Ratiram had forcibly taken manure from my brother’s place, in regard to
the suit regarding the possession of my land by the Missionaries.  I had
filed a case before Naya Panchyat the but it was dismissed with cost.  I
do not know whether I was required to pay the cost.  After I left the
village I continued to be in possession of my house site where I used to
tie my cattle.  It is not correct that the then Malguzar had taken
possession of that site.  I had seen a foreign Missionary visiting
Rangya’s house often but I did not see him taking liquor there.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-G. N. James.  
*Father’s name*-N.  G. James.  
*Occupation*-Private business.  
*Residence*-Bilaspur.

I am a member of Independent Church of Christ, which has no connection
with the Mission. I have also started a church in the Railway Colony of
English-speaking people.  When I came to know of the visit of the
Committee to Bilaspur, I made enquiries regarding the harassment of
Christians by Government officials.  Five persons gave me information
which was given in writing and I filed copies thereof.  The originals
are with Rev. Massih.  I got complaints from Christian friends being
harassed by Government.  I asked them to get the statements of those
persons who were harassed.  I asked them to give and that in case they
gave them the original statements should be given to Rev. Massih and
that a copy be sent to me.  I got the copy from Missih.  Mr. Massih gave
both the copies, the original and the I returned the original to Mr.
Massih and kept the copy.  In the copies are neither the details nor the
persons harassed.  
 

**No. 17**

*Name*-Jhangul.  
*Father’s name*-Tularam.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Residence*-Chapa.

Four-five years ago I had taken my younger brother to Dr. Rambo of the
Mission Hospital, Mungeli.  Dr. Rambo said that I would have to spend a
huge amount on the treatment of my brother and when I expressed my
inability to bear that much expenditure Dr. Rambo said that my brother
should become a Christian and then he would be treated and cured early. 
I got my brother Jhadu admitted into the hospital and went home to
arrange fir funds.  When I returned after 2-3 days my brother Jhadu told
me that he had become a Christian.  He is still a Christian.

*To Rev. Maqbul Massih.-* When I cook my brother, he was not dangerously
ill.  
 

**No. 18**

*Name*-Jiwarakhan.  
*Father’s name*-Siria.  
*Caste*-Sarathi.  
*Residence*-Mungeli.

About seven years my cousin Pakla contacted leprosy and so I took him to
Mungeli Hospital and showed him to Dr. Hiralal who is a Christian. 
After Hiralal said that my brother and his son became a Christian, Pakla
would be given treatment free for leprosy.  We did not agree and so I
came back. I brought Pakla also with me.  Ale was taken subsequently in
my absence to Baitalpur Mission Home and when I went to the Leper Home I
was informed that my cousin had embraced Christianity together with his
son.  They continue to be Christians even now.

*To Rev. Massih.-* At that time leprosy patients used to be treated at
Mungeli.  There was no separate Leper Home at Mungeli.  Leprosy patients
used to go to Mungeli Hospital to enquire about admissions into the
Baitalpur Leper Home.  I did not know then there was a nearer Leper Home
at Jarhagaon than at Baitalpur.  Pakla is dead and his son is working at
Bilaspur. I have not met him for 3-4 years.  
 

**No. 19**

*Name*-Ramashankar.  
*Father’s name*-Baldeoprasad  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Takhatpur.

I am member of Takhatpur Gram Panchayat and Nyaya Panchayat. I am
Mandaleshwar of Congress.  I was canvassing for Congress candidate for
the general elections.  When I approached the members of the Christian
community for vote they said that they would be guided by Father
McGavaran.  When I approached him he said that the Christian would vote
for the Congress because it is our policy to support the Government in
power that the Christians would vote for the candidate according to his
instruction.  I had taken Kodu Satnami to the Leper Asylum at Jathagaon
and requested McGavaran to admit him in the hospital.  He said that he
would admit him if he became a Christian.  In 1953, I had taken a
cholera patient to the Mission Hospital at Takhatpur.  The patient’s
name was Ambikaprasad.  The Lady Dr. in charge by name Mrs. Lal said
that she would not admit the patient unless he embraced the Christianity
as the hospital is meant for Christians only. I was at Mungeli.  I was
living at Mungeli off and on and visiting Mungeli Hospital for nearly
eight months.  There, I came to know that while the hospital authorities
levied charges from every Hindu, rich or poor, and they did not charge
the Christians whether rich or poor.  An American lady used to often
visit the hospital, meet the patients asking them to pray in the name of
Lord Jesus for their recovery and that they should become Christians. In
1951, there was an extensive fire in the village Jharonga.  Tahsildar
and Thanedar and other officers appeared on the scene as also Rev.
McGavaran had come.  As the people assembled there, Rev. McGavaran
addressed them that if the people become Christians they would readily
receive help from the Mission and America.  Sub-Inspector Shri Sharma
was present at that time. McGavaran said that he would give help ten
times as much as Government would give.  I heard these words myself.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* There are more than 100 voters in Takhatpur.  I know
that McGavaran was the head of the Mission.  I approached him after
having the Christian population of Bandha, Guma and Sonbandha and
Takhatpur.  From all places, they said that they would vote according to
the advice of McGavaran.  I have passed Middle School Examination.  I do
not know that cholera patient is not admitted into the hospital. 
Although I knew that there were Hindu patients admitted into the
hospital I was surprised to find that the hospital was meant for merely
Christians.  As I took  her words and believed her, I took away the
patient.  I do not know whether there are any Hindus in the Jarhagaon
Leprosy Hospital.  
 

**No. 20**

*Name*-Bajrangprasad Murarka.  
*Father’s name*-Badrinarayan Prasad.  
*Caste*-Hindu.  
*Occupation*-Doctor.  
*Residence*-Bilaspur.

I am Provincial Secretary of All-India Licentiate Practitioners.  I am a
Medical Practitioner at Bilaspur. I am filing certified copy of
statement of P.W. 3 in a case before the Magistrate, First Class, and
three pamphlets entitled “Satyanami Panth”, “Satguru Khoj”, and
“Chandralila Sadhunika Wrutant”  
 

**No. 21**

*Name*-M. M. Scott.  
*Father’s name*-H. Scott.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Occupation*-Headmaster of Mission High School.   
*Residence*-Bilaspur.

I am Headmaster, Mission High School, Bilaspur.  Our school opens in
winter at 10-50 a.m. and the classes start at 11 a.m. Attendance is
taken when the classes start.  Prayers are not compulsory for anyone in
school and it is not correct that attendance is taken before prayer. 
Absentees are not fined anna one for absence in prayers.  At present, we
have five non-Christian members of the staff and during 1948 to 1951 the
number was six.  The scales of pay for Christian as well as
non-Christian teachers are the same and it is not true that we give
different scales to non-Christian teachers.  Out of the non-Christian
teachers, three are confirmed.  We have a provident fund scheme which is
open to all members of the staff including the temporary one.  On 22nd
October 1954, two non-Christian teachers were asked to become
subscribers for this fund but they refused to subscribe.  I have a
written letter to them.  Nandlal was a teacher in the school under me
for one year.  During that time he did not apply for joining provident
fund scheme, 1950-51.  He got an increment from Rs. 80 to Rs. 85 in my
time during 1951.  There are no Christian teachers in other educational
institutions of Bilaspur.  We have no Bible classes.  Only Moral Classes
are held between 10-50 a.m. and 11 a.m. After the moral lessons, we have
prayer.  Moral instructions are given both by Christian as well as
non-Christian teachers.  Prayer is held by the Christians.  Except those
students who come to school late, all others attend the Moral Classes
and the Prayer.  It is absolutely false that students first gather in
the respective class-room, attendance taken and then are required to
assemble in the verandah for moral instruction and prayer.

*To Shri J. P. Verma.-* There are Christian teachers in Municipal
schools.  
 

**No. 22**

*Name*-Mahipatsingh.  
*Father’s name*-Sarvasukhsingh Kshatriya.  
*Address*-Pendra.

I am in the employ of the ex-Zamindar Pendra.  In 1948, I visited
village Karhani, in connection with my work.  There a group of students
saluted me by saying “Bhandagi”.  I asked them whether they were Hindus
or not and told them to utter the name of Ram while offering
salutation.  They had informed me that their Christian teacher in school
had taught them to say Bhandagi and not Jay Ramji.  A few days later I
was told that those boys were dismissed from the school because they
started saying Jairamjiki.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* The school in the village was a Christian school.  I
told them to offer Jairamjiki, because Bhandagi was not a Hindu form of
salutation.  When the teacher rusticated the boys I requested the
teacher not to do so.  The whole school was closed that day.  
 

**No. 23**

*Name*-Shioprasad Ojha.  
*Father’s name*-Ramkishore.  
*Occupation*-Grain business.  
*Caste*-Hindu.  
*Address*-Mungeli.

In 1948 I was Secretary of the Mungeli Town Congress Committee.  I am
now a member.  The Pastor by name S. L. Ramju had sent me a complaint
regarding the prayer congregation to be held to mourn the death of
Gandhiji.  He sent it to me in my capacity as the Secretary of the
Congress Committee.  There was a meeting in the Church which was
attended by many persons including Lal, Maqbul Massih and others.  At
that meeting these people used disrespectful words about Gandhiji.  That
is how it was complained to me. I made an enquiry. I found that the
utterance of these disrespectful words to be correct, after enquiry. 
The Minister of the Church by name Ramju was dismissed because he made
report to the Congress Committee and Police.  I file the pastor's report
as well as my enquiry report.

*Rev.  Maqbul Massih.-* Disciplinary action was taken by the Congress on
me.  Now I again joined Congress.  
 

**No. 24**

*Name*-Sadaram.  
*Father’s name*-Kejha.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Address*-Talam.

About 10 years ago at the instance of a foreign Missionary and other
pracharak of Fosterpur village I had embraced Christianity.  They had
told me that if I became a Christian they would give me English
education, would purchase land for me and get me married.  So I became a
Christian.  I remained a Christian for four months but the promises
given were not fulfilled. I, therefore, came back to my own religion.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* If someone were to tempt me with money, etc.,
now to become a Muslim I won’t change my religion as now I am a grownup
person.  When I became a Christian I was young lad of 14 years.

Before I went to War, I was 22 years.  
 

**No. 25**

*Name*-Kalamprasad.  
*Father’s name*-Gaokaranprasad.  
*Caste*-Satnami.  
*Age*-45.  
*Address*-Fosterpur (Nagopahali).

I am Patel of Nagopahali.  There is a well in the village which was
being used by all.  That is adjacent to the main road.  Rev. Solomanson,
a Missionary (American Missionary), prohibited people from using the
well and put a fencing.  When I protested on behalf of the public he
said that he was not bound by the Indian laws.  Then we applied to the
Tahsildar for this.  On enquiry Solomanson was fined Rs. 30.  I file a
copy of application and order.  
 

**No. 26**

*Name*-Odhoji Gujrathi.  
*Caste*-Mistri.  
*Address*-Pendra Road.

About three or four years ago I had taken up carpenter’s work at Pendra
where I was running a furnitureshop. I came in contact with a Christian
girl who was studying in the Suman Khetan Christian School.  I felt
attracted towards her and she used to take me to her residence where her
widowed mother lived.  Her widowed mother and the pracharaks several
times asked me to become a Christian and said if I embraced Christianity
I would got married to that girl and then property would also be given
to me. I refused to become a convert and left Pendra village.  I shifted
to Katni, where the girl came to me after about three months and started
living with me as my mistress. After two years later I came to Pendra
Road and lived in the house of my mistress’s mother.  I had come for the
treatment of leg ailment.  There also the pastor and the other pracharak
used to visit my room and objected to the photographs of Hindu gods and
deities hung there.  They spoke contemptuously of those Gods and
deities.  On 25th August 1954, the Christians of Jyotipur assaulted me
and used violence against me.  They removed Rs. 200 from my person. 
Apprehending further danger I shifted to village Pendra Road from
Jyotipur.  I had reported the matter to the police but after four months
I was informed that the final report had been sent.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* She was not a Suman Khetan Boarder.  
 

**No. 27**

(29-7-1955)

*Name*.-Ramkrishna Pande.  
*Father’s name*-Kunjbiharilal Pande.  
*Occupation*-journalist.  
*Address*-Bilaspur.

I am a journalist for the last 15 years.  I have information concerning
the activities of Christian Missionaries in the Bilaspur district.  I
have already submitted memorandum before the committee.  In the year
1948-49, an agitation had been started at the instance of Missionaries
of Korba amongst the local inhabitants of Korba Zamindari on account of
which general defiance of authorities prevailed.  A process server was
assaulted and during an enquiry the police had to open fire.  Case had
been started against the Korba Zamindari people and when I gave
information to the police that the local report had been at the
instigation by the Missionaries of Korba.  The case was withdrawn.  The
Missionaries were P. H. Kolhajhar and Paul Evangel.  They were foreign
American Missionaries working in the area.

*To Mr. A. B. Shinde.-* The information about the part played by the
foreign Missionaries in this incident had been given to me in writing. 
The Missionaries told the people that they had become rulers of that
area and could recover taxes from outside the people who come.  The
people were Hindus, i.e., Scheduled Tribes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
