+++
title = "61 Oral Statement made before the Missionary Activities Enquiry Commission CAMP AMBIKAPUR (19-11-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Oral Statement made before the Missionary Activities Enquiry
Commission*

CAMP AMBIKAPUR

(19-11-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Ramchandra Purohit.  
*Father’s name*-Pandit Ramjilal.  
*Address*-Arya Hindu Dharma Seva Sangh, Delhi.

I work on behalf of the Arya Hindu Dharma Seva Sangh.  For the last two
years I work in the- Ambikapur-Jashpur area and pay visits for this
purpose.  Some persons of Bilaspur and Ambikapur had sent letters to our
head office at Delhi complaining that Christian Missionaries were
converting the local aboriginals by fraud, temptation and other means
and I was deputed by the head office to make enquiries on the spot and
to report what the facts were. I first came to Ambikapur and was
informed that about 400 workers were engaged in conversion activities in
Ambikapur-Surguja district and about 600 in Jashpur area.  I visited
some of the important places in the Surguja-Jashpur area and contacted
people. I was informed that three Missions were functioning in this
area-a Protestant Mission, a Lutheran Mission and the name of third I
have forgotten. I had contacted one pracharak at Sitapur and enquired
from him about the allegation which was made to me that monetary and
other temptations are given and people converted.  He replied saying
that he did not know anything about money or loans being given and that
his only work was to do preaching and make them good men. I met one
Jagdeo Uraon of Sitapur in the village and on asking him why he had
become a Christian he said that he had gone to a Missionary Doctor to
receive treatment and was told by the Doctor that if he got his choti
cut and converted to Christianity he would be cured.  He was converted
but was not cured of his illness and he told me that he wanted to be
reconverted. I asked him to come the next day when I would perform the
Shuddhi ceremony.  But he did not come and I was subsequently informed
that he had been given too much liquor on behalf of the Missionaries and
subsequently also was given Rs. 32 so that he might not be reconverted.

About 6 or 7 months back I had visited village Pathalgaon and there I
was invited by a foreign Christian Missionary to visit their primary
school.  Accordingly, I went there and saw school children wearing cross
round their necks. I asked the Reverend Fathers’ names from some of them
and when they gave out Hindu names I asked the Father the names of the
children and was told that he remembered only their Christian names and
not the Hindu names. I objected to his giving a Christian name to minor
children.  The foreign Missionary had informed me that he belonged to
the Belgium Mission and that his name was Gopalswami.  I, therefore,
asked him why he had given the children Christian names when he himself
had adopted a Hindu name, and to this he did not give a reply. I had
myself no occasion to meet the parents of any of the children whom I saw
at the school at Pathalgaon.  Three pracharaks have been engaged on
behalf of my institution.  They do Shuddhi (reconversion) work.  The
pracharak at Surguja has recently reconverted 8 persons in a village
name Sur and the pracharak at Pathalgaon has sent a list of 600 persons
whom he said to have reconverted.  We do not reconvert minors but only
adults.  We do not offer any inducements for reconversion but only tell
them that they should go back to their own religion and not commit the
mistake of following another religion.  This Shuddhi activity has not
resulted in any unpleasantness amongst the people.  There has been no
ill will or resentment from either party including the Christians.  We
do not run any schools.

*To Shri Shinde-*

My pracharaks do preaching for Hindu Dharma which is the same as Arya
Samaj Dharma.  They tell the people the good points of their old
religion and tell them not to become Christians.  There is idol worship
in Hindu Dharma.  Arya Samajists do not believe in idol worship.  The
three pracharaks have been engaged for propagating the Hindu.  They,
therefore, do propaganda in favour of idol worship religion and not the
Arya Samaj. The Uraons of this area are Hindus.  They worship Ram,
Krishna and numerous other Hindu Gods and Goddesses.  Wasudeo Uraon,
Hiralal Uraon, and Haribhajanlal Panka are our pracharaks.  Hiralal gets
Rs. 40 per month and the other two, Rs. 30 each as salary.  This
institution has not been sponsored by Arya Samajist.  The President is
Goswami Gandeshdattaji Sanatan Mahamandal and the Secretary is Pandit
Janardan Bhat both of whom are Sanatani Hindus. Including my present
visit I have come to Ambikapur thrice.  Before I was sent to this area I
was given a complaint received in the Head.  Office from Dr. Murarka of
Bilaspur and. accordingly I first went to Bilaspur and contacted Dr.
Murarka and others there.  They arranged for my visit to the
Ambikapur-Jashpur area.  The complaints related to not only this area
but some other areas of Madhya Pradesh. We do not object to conversions
to Christianity brought about by legitimate means.  We only object to
unfair means being adopted by Missionaries. I did not make a written
report to my Head Office but gave a verbal report of my impressions.  In
course of my enquiry I had taken down some notes including extracts of
complaints made by people to local officials and reports made to the
police. I have not brought the diary in which. I took down notes of my
enquires.  The diary is, however, available with me and the
correspondence which I had with the Head Office is also there.  I was
informed that besides temptations of monetary gain and loans, the
Missionaries gave the following allurements also :-

> \(1\) Giving education.  
> (2) Getting married.  
> (3) Giving service.  
> (4) Making doctors.  
> (5) Sending to America.

My own view is that these temptations were falsely given with a view of
mere conversion and were not intended to be carried out.  These reports
made by people were heard in the public.  One is Lutheren Mission and
another Dubki and the third as a Protestant Mission.  No Christian
pracharak came to me in Surguja State to object to the prachar done by
my man.  I do not know the name of Maharaja of Gwalior.  I do not know
whether the name of Maharaja of Gwalior is George.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Reverend Joel Lakra.  
*Occupation*-Principal, Theological College, Ranchi.  
*Address*-Ranchi.

I am a born Christian.  I belong to the Uraon Tribe.  My grandfather
became a Christian.  Uraons are not Hindus and they are called Sarna
Pujaris.  They worship many Gods called Bhutas and they have an idea of
one God.  The Adivasis in Surguja district include mainly Uraons.  We
consider that when converted to Christianity, these Uraons become better
persons.  We have engaged pracharaks in our Mission.  It is not our
principle to vilify other religions while doing propaganda for
Christianity.  I came across some Arya Samajist pamphlets decrying
Christianity. I have brought a few pamphlets with me which I am handing
over to the Committee.  I have marked some passages in these pamphlets
which are objectionable to.  Christians.

*To the Chairman-*

In the year 1948 I attended the conference of the world Council of
Churches held at Amsterdam, as a delegate of the Gossner Lutheren
Church.  In 1914, all the German Missionaries connected with the Mission
were turned out.  Since 1919, Gossner Church has entirely become
Indianised.  I was paid my expenses to go to Amsterdam by the Lutheren
World Council.  Lutheren World Federation represents all the Lutheren
Churches.  In India there is a Lutheren Federation of Churches.  This is
not connected with National Missionary Society.  There is a Lutheren N.
M. S. which is different from Indian Federation of Lutheren Churches. 
Mr. Dulles was present at the Session at Amsterdam.  He is not a
Lutheren Christian.  He had read a paper on some subject which I do not
remember, Lutheren World Federation had provided for funds being paid to
orphaned Mission one of which was Lutheren Mission.  At Geneva, the
offices of the Lutheren World Federation and the World Council of
Churches are in the same compound.  For carrying on the work of
evangelism in Surguja district there was constituted a Surguja Board.  I
and Reverend Tirkey and Reverend Kripadanam were the members of the
Surguja Board.  Once we had received Rs. 90,000 from the United Lutheren
Church Mission in America.  We had made an appeal first for funds for
the purpose of building churches and also evangelistic work.  Before
that we had received 8,000 dollars (i.e., Rs. 4-8-0 for one dollar). 
Reverend Kripadanam was in charge of the work which was started in
Surguja district in 1952.  I have come across the writing “Churches
expression rooted in the soil but supranational in their witness find
obedience”.  Obedience means carrying out the Commandments of Lord. 
Partnership in obedience means that there should be no distinction in
caste, colour or race when they come to Jesus.  I know Dr. Oberdoffer
who was the president of the Indian Lutheren Churches.  In 1947-48, our
Indian Church also helped Germany while they were in difficulty.  As I
understand the “expression supranational” it is that before Jesus there
should be no consideration of nationality.  It means that the Christians
alt the world over form an unity so far as obedience to Jesus is
concerned.  We consider that we are Indian by our nationality but when
it concerns obedience to Lord Jesus we do not recognise the barriers of
nationality.  In England, it would be difficult for the church to be
supranational.  In America, the church can go against the policy of the
State as it is supranational.

There is an executive of the W. C. C. and I. M. C. which may declare the
policy of work.

It was decided in the World Conference at Bangkok and in Lucknow that
the Christian Church has an obligation to participate in a political,
social and economic movements of the world.  In case of conflict between
the policy of the Church and the State, I cannot say definitely that
there will be a difference of opinion in Church too.

As I said in my article in “Ways bf Evangelism” there are Churches in
India which are still dependent on support from foreigners.  My church
is absolutely independent nevertheless we appeal for funds to the
Lutheren World Federation whenever there is deficit in our funds.  And
they send their donations in form of Christian charity without any
strings attached to it, that means they do not impose any conditions.

The Jharkhand movement which has been in some form or other holding on
has been put on its death-bed by the States Reorganization Committee
Report.  Jharkhand movement was not a Christian movement.  This passage
at page 60 of ‘Ways of Evangelism’ was brought to my notice and I still
support my views written therein.

I have not come across any attack on Ram or Krishna having been made by
a Christian preacher nor in any pamphlet.  In the manner of preaching,
there should be some understanding between the two preachers so that
there should be no bitterness.  Our pracharaks are specially instructed
not to hurt the feelings of the followers of other religion.

*To Mr. Chopda-*

I was President of the G. E. L. C. since 1942.  On my initiative a
society called Unnati Samaj was formed in the year 1920 with the
goodwill of Government as well as public.  The late Shri Bandiram Uraon
was a member of the Bihar Assembly was my colleague.  I went away to
Guntur as Professor and I was not connected with Adivasi Mahasabha. 
Adivasi Mahasabha took the name of Unnati Samaj.  Adivasi Mahasabha
originally was not a political body but it assumed political form when
it began to espouse the cause of Jharkhand.  The personnel is not the
same.  The constitution was also changed.

What I mean by the expression “took the place” is that the Adivasi
Mahasabha came into existence subsequently.  “Abua Jharkhand” used to be
published by the Lutheren Mission and at my instance that was stopped. 
There was only one press which was being run by the Lutheren Mission. 
There is a periodical entitled “Gharbandhu” is issued by the G. E. L. C.
Occasionally, the meetings of the Adivasi Mahasabha used to be held in
the Mission and Mission school compounds.  I do not remember that the
meetings of any political parties were being held in the compound.

Soon after the merger was announced in 1948, I had come to Ambikapur and
was guest of the Maharaja.  At that time I had a talk with Pandit Rudra
Narayan Mishra about the merger of Surguja State with Bihar.  There is
some understanding among the various Protestant Missions operating in
this area as regards the area of work.  This is called comity of
missions.  But the Roman Catholic Mission does not conform to it.  We
have got 80 pracharaks working in this area.  Referring to page 2 of
“Gharbandhu” of December 1951, he draws attention of Rev. Lakra to the
writing in the above page and questions him “Will you be able to tell us
the unknown way to Berlin?”

Shri Lakra replied even now I am unable to say.  As Germany was in
military occupation no one could enter it without the passport.  But I
was allowed without passport.  Through the British Zone I could go into
the American Zone.  At the Amsterdam Conference of 1948, only the
representatives of churches were present.  His attention is again drawn
to page 25 of the “Elements of Ecumenism” where there is some reference
to some interested individuals.  Rev. Lakra says that he is unable to
say anything about it as he is not the writer of it.  I was representing
India and the whole of Asia in the Lutheren World Federation from 1947
to 1952.

*To Mr. Shinde-*

I will not call Jharkhand a Christian movement.  There are more
non-Christian members in the Jharkhand movement.  As Christians are more
enlightened the leadership is mostly Christians and therefore 12 tickets
to Christians and 2 to non-Christians were given.  But that was done
with the consent of non-Christians.

NOTE.-Rev. Lakra said that he had not attended the Conference o Bangkok
and Lucknow and that he could not say anything about what took place
there.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Sanichara.  
*Father’s name*-Mangla Uraon.  
*Address*-Salba, Baikunthpur tahsil.

Three years ago there was an Indian preacher who came to me.  He was
accompanied by Patras, Anant Masi, a teacher in Baikunthpur School, and
a Survey Ranger of Baikunthpur.  This Ranger was a Christian.  They
pressed me to become a Christian but I refused.  I am a Hindu.  Then
after 2 or 3 days on Thursday market, the same number of people plus 2
additional persons again met me and took me to the priest’s house who
was an Indian.  He offered me Rs. 10. I refused to accept it and after
great deal of hesitation I took the money as it was put into my pocket. 
The same night three Christian ladies who were converts from Uraon Caste
came to me and again pressed me to embrace Christianity.  They said that
the Government is going to be that of the Christians and that I should
become a Christian.  Then Anant Masi, Patras and Ramsahai and Dular
followed by many persons came to my house with sticks and threatened me
saying that I had accepted Rs. 10 and would not be proper for me not to
become a Christian.  And then they thrust some boiled rice into my mouth
after touching it.  Then I reported the matter to the police and these
persons were prosecuted and they were convicted. (Copy of judgment in
Cr. Case No. 3 of 1953 before C. S. Shukla, Magistrate First Class,
Baikunthpur, shown).

*To Mr. Shinde of Jabalpur.-* When I went to the bazar I had only two
annas with me for purchase of tobacco.  Later on I spent Rs. 10 for my
private use.  I can’t say exactly what Raj means but what they said was
that you would be great man.  Now it is a British rule.  I took the
money because although I was reluctant to take it they forced me to take
it.  And I then accepted it.  My caste is Uraon but my religion is
Hindu.  I worship Ram and other Gods and Goddesses.  I do not know Arya
Samajists.  I heard from the elders of my village that the Committee was
to hold sittings here to record evidence and therefore, I came.  I came
here from Baikunthpur in bus. Badka Babu paid the bus fare Rs. 2 to
me.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Budhram.  
*Father’s name*-Sanni.  
*Address*-Batwahi.

Three days ago, *i.e.*, on Tuesday (last Tuesday) Nansai and three
others asked me to be a Christian. I refused.  Then Nansai struck me
with an axe in the village Batwahi. I was assaulted on the road.  They
were all Christians of my own village.  The injury to my left leg is
still there.  About a year ago the same Nansai had asked me to become a
Christian and I had refused.  At that time he had not offered any
inducements of money nor did he threaten me with assault.  I reported
the matter of recent assault yesterday to the police at Ambikapur. I was
got medically examined.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* During the year since Nansai told me to become a
Christian he did not ask me or threaten me at any other time.  Then he
assaulted me.  There was no dispute on any other ground.  Four people
caught hold of me and one, Nansai injured me.  My age is about 20. On
Tuesday, Nansai and his party assaulted me on the road.  Nansai asked me
whether I would become a Christian or not, and on my refusal he
assaulted me with an axe.  I was alone at the time.  
 

**No. 5**

*Name*-Tilaso, daughter of Sukhna.  
*Age*-18 years.  
*Address*-Narkeli village in Baikunthpur tahsil.

About 4 years ago I was married to one Dulla.  About a year ago he
became a Christian.  Patras and other Christians of the village made my
husband a convert.  Soon after this, Patras and others made me eat
cooked rice prepared by him and asked me to become a Christian.  I was
thus become converted.  Thereafter my husband married another Hindu
girl, converted her to Christianity and has given me up.  
 

**No. 6**

*Name*-Shiodhan.  
*Father’s name*-Iuthra.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Address*-Amgaon (Baikunthpur).

Formerly, I was a peon in the service of the Survey Ranger of my Ilakha;
he is a Christian.  My master used to tell me that I should explain to
my parents as well as other villagers to embrace Christianity.  William
Minz is the name of the Survey Ranger.  He asked me several times to
become a Christian but I did not agree.  He said that if I became a
Christian he would give me another job.  About a year back on one Sunday
the Survey Ranger asked me to accompany to the Church but I refused. 
The next day my services were terminated.  I had reported the matter to
the Divisional Forest Officer.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* I was doing peon’s work. The Ranger used to scold me
every day for bad work.  While terminating my services he said that as I
was not becoming a Christian I was being turned out.  On the morning
after refusal to attend Church the Rangersab had asked me why I had come
late and further that the work would suffer by my late attendance.  I
was removed from service two months after my refusal to go to the
Church.  During these two months he did not tell me anything about
becoming a Christian.  
 

**No. 7**

*Name*-Jituram.  
*Father’s name*-Manaram.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Address*-Salba in Baikunthpur.

About three years back Patras and Anant Masi and two other Christian
pracharaks had come to my house and asked me to become Christian.  They
to Id me that if I did not become a Christian I would have to repent. 
They offered me money and said I should become a Christian.  They
threatened that in case I refused to become a Christian they would
forcibly make me so by hurling a shoe at me, by putting touched food in
my mouth, by touching my cooked food and by such ways. I narrated the
incident to Babulal Sarpanch who asked me to report the matter to the
police.  Accordingly, I reported the matter to Baikunthpur police. 
Enquiry was made by the Station-House Officer.

*To Mr. Shinde-* I did not ask Patras how I would have to repent by not
becoming Christian.  He was offering me Rs. 10 but I refused to accept. 
He threw the money upon me and I threw the same at him.  
 

(20-11-55)

**No. 8**

*Name*-Shri Bhimsen Chopda.  
*Father’s name*.-Lala Keshoram Chopda.  
*Occupation*-Journalist and R. S. S. Worker.  
*Address*-Ambikapur.

I came to Ambikapur in April 1951. I was informed that Christian
Missionaries have started their activities in Samri tahsil and Sitapur
tahsil of this district and that they were converting people in large
numbers by giving them inducements and by adopting other unfair
methods.  As a journalist and a social worker I decided to make
enquiries and accordingly in November 1951 I went to Karondha village,
in Samri tahsil.  This village is situated on the border of Bihar.  Some
villagers told me that P. Karketta, a Padri, had visited the village and
had recorded their names in a register saying that they had become
Christians.  The villagers told me that they had not been converted and
that their names had been recorded without their consent.  P. Karketta
belongs to the Roman Catholic Mission.  On that occasion I visited about
12 or 13 villages.  Villagers enquired from me about Jharkhand and asked
if by becoming Christians they will not be required to pay land revenue
and other dues.  On asking the reason for such enquiries I was told by
them that Padri Karketta had been telling them that they should become
Christians and asked for Jharkhand where they will not be required to
pay land revenue or other dues.  The name of that Padri is Patras
Karketta who had his headquarters at Kanjiya in the adjoining district
of Palamaoha Bihar.

At Jawaharnagar village, P. Karketta met me; apparently he had been
informed of my visit to the villages and he was in search of me. I
discussed with him the purpose of starting conversion activities so
vigorously in the interior villages of this district and he told me that
the uplift of Adivasis could only be achieved by their embracing
Christianity and that the Adivasis cannot hope for their welfare at the
hands of the Congress Government.  I toured several other villages of
Madwa area and I was informed by villagers that P. Karketta carried on
propaganda saying that as Muslims got Pakistan, Adivasis should get
Jharkhand or Issaisthan, that their rule would soon be established in
Jharkhand where they would not be required to pay any land revenue and
would be permitted to cut jungles free. I was also informed that at
Chando village, Karketta had baptised two small children of six months
and one and half years, respectively, without their parents consent.  I
made enquiry from the father of these children and he told me that in
his absence the Padri had come and cut the chundi of the children who
were at that time ill and said that by becoming Christians they would
become alright.  At that time the children’s grandmother was in the
house.  I was informed by the villagers that reports of the activities
of P. Karketta had been made by villagers to the Sub-Divisional Officer,
Ramanujganj.  The Patel of Chando informed me that some time back a
foreign Missionary by name Burdett had visited the village and had taken
a procession out shouting slogans as follows:-

> “Ram should not be regarded as God and that idols in temples being of
> stones, should not be worshipped etc.”

Burdett belongs to the Church of Christ Mission.  The incident had been
reported to the police and was enquired into by the authority.  The
local people of Chando had not indulged in any clash or mar-pit when
this procession was taken out.  This was because of continued fear in
the minds of the people of the English foreigners.

When I returned from tour I discussed the question with local social
workers of Ambikapur and in course of these discussions Pandit Rudra
Narayan Misra informed me that some time back Rev. Lakra of Ranchi had
approached him with a request to create an atmosphere in Surguja for its
merger with Bihar.  Rudra Narayan Misra originally came from Bihar and
Rev. Lakra asked for merger as he was himself a Bihari.  Rev. Lakra
further told Shri Misra that he would send some pracharaks for this
purpose.

Once in the open season of 1952, I was going to Kharsia when at
Pathalgaon I noticed a large number of villagers going in batches.  I
made enquiries to find out if a fair was being held and was informed
that a Missionary had come and people were going to him to receive
loans.  As I was in hurry to go to Kharsia I did not make detailed
enquiries then but later on my return I enquired into the matter further
and was told that Pracharak Biswas Uraon of Ranchi had given out that
money, had been received from America for being given on loan to people
and whosoever wanted loans should get his name registered before agents
appointed by Biswas.  The large number of villagers whom I had seen
going were thus going to the agent for asking for loans.  The villagers
were of all castes including christians.  I was informed that Biswas was
acting under the directions of C. J. Tirkey.  Tirkey belongs to the
Lutheren Mission. I myself did not see any one registering names of
villagers for giving loans.  I do not know whether loans were given to
any one. I met several persons who told me that they had got their names
registered.  The list was given to me and I gave it to Shri Deshpande of
Jashpur for being filed before the Committee. I did not meet any
villager who told me that he had received any loan.  In course of my
tours of the interior villages I was informed that mass conversions in
each village used to take place and a general atmosphere had been
created that by becoming Christians people will improve their economic
conditions.  Conversions to Christianity were not allowed in the former
State of Surguja where an Act had been passed banning conversions
without permission.  After the merger of the State these mass
conversions started and, therefore, I considered the situation abnormal.
I went to Jabalpur and intimated some of my, co-workers and friends
about the situation prevailing in this district.

The situation prevailing in Surguja became the subject of discussion
amongst local leaders of the town including the former Ruler.  The
vigorous manner in which seven or eight missions had suddenly started
their work in this district, the enormous propaganda carried on in
favour of Jharkhand and the mass conversion described above created
alarm in the minds of the people who suspected some political gain
behind this movement.  The local leaders including the former Ruler
issued a printed appeal to the people.  These pamphlets were distributed
in the villages.

I became further interested in the movement and started making
enquiries.  I came across a book entitled “Catholic Dharma ka
Pracharak”. Instructions to the Catholic preachers are given in this
book (p. 32-33).  This book was used by pracharaks in this area.  I got
a copy thereof from the Catholic Book Stall of Ranchi.  It is intended
for use of the Pracharak.

The activities of the G. E. Lutheren Mission in Surguja were
occasionally reported in their official organ Gharbandhu.  I have
obtained some copies thereof and got them filed before the Committee. 
For more information regarding G. E. L. C. please refer pages 1292-293
of the Directory, 1951.

When the President of India visited Ambikapur about two years back about
seven to eight thousand persons had gone before him and informed him of
the mass conversion activities of the Missionaries and the dangers
thereof to the people.  A deputation of leading citizens had also waited
on him to request him to take action to prevent such activities.

*To Shri Shinde, Advocate.-* At Pathalgaon I saw two batches of 75 and
25 each of villagers going to receive loans.  I was at the motor stand
where the bus halts for about half an hour. I talked to some of the
villagers as to where they were going.  I went three months after my
return from Kharsia to make detailed enquiries about the offer of
loans.  I might have visited two or three villages for this enquiry.  I
do not know the root meaning of the word Jharkhand.  I am of opinion
that the Jharkhand movement is a Christian movement. I originally belong
to Dera- Ismailkhan and came to India after the partition having
witnessed the tragedy of partition.  I, therefore, felt alarmed when a
similar situation was being created here in the name of Jharkhand.  As
the proposed reorganization of the States is being done by the national
Government, I am  not alarmed about it.  About Jharkhand I was alarmed
because it was being converted into Issaisthan and be ultimately merged
with Pakistan.  I have not come across any booklet or pamphlets in
circulation in Surguja against Christian religion. Pamphlets entitled
“Issai Mat Pol Prakash and Kya Issa Khuda the”. These books shown to the
witness. I have not seen these in circulation in Surguja.

I have visited Chando on several occasions and have not heard any song
against Christians being sung.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-Prabhudas Kashyap.  
*Father’s name*-Benjamin Kashyap.  
*Occupation*-Teacher.  
*Address*-Kharcha village in Samri tahsil.

I belong to the Church of Christ. I am a born Christian.  My ancestors
were Uraons.  Uraons belong to Sarana Dharma.  Uraons cannot be called
Hindus because in their marriages they do not invite Hindus, ceremonies
are not performed by Brahmins and killing of cow is permissible in their
religion.  There is no caste system in Uraons.  About four months back a
Middle School has been started at village Chando by the Tribal Welfare
Department.  The village market is held on Mondays.  Jhagru Singh Patel,
the Assistant Teacher, and others hold meetings in the market every
Monday, use abusive and intemperate language towards Christians and it
appears that if on listening their speeches some Christians get provoked
and ask questions, rioting might take place.  They abuse Christians and
say that Christians will be turned out of the village, that the
Government is with them and not with the Christians and they sing a song
the last two or three lines of which state “that foreigners of white
skin will be turned out, that they will not become converts nor will
allow conversion to Christianity and that Christians will be turned out
of the country”.  I have heard this song being sung and taken down the
words which I am filing before the Committee.

The Headmaster of Chando and his assistant teachers perform Shuddhi
ceremony.  They recently reconverted five persons four of them became
Hindus voluntarily and one of them again became a Christian and stated
that he was threatened to become a Hindu.  No complaint of this has been
made to the authorities.  I came to Kharcha village about four years
ago.  Prior to that I was at Palamau (Bihar).

At present there are about 32 Christians including females.  They became
converts in the last four years after I came to Kharcha.  Village Chando
is about three miles from my village and has a population of about 65
Christians.  They have become Christians together about four years ago. 
There are two other villages where Christians belonging to my Mission
live.

*To Mr. S. C. Rai.-* Our expenses are met partly by local subscriptions
and partly by outside aid.  Our central office is at Bhandaria, in
Palamur district in Bihar.  There are two teachers and seven Pracharaks
engaged by our Mission.  I get Rs. 60 a month and the pay of others vary
from Rs. 45 to Rs. 60 per month.  In my opinion the Uraons are not
Hindus.  After Shuddhi those persons were converted as Hindus.  I do not
know whether Adivasis other than Uraons worship Sarana.  Although I know
that cow-killing is allowed according to Uraon religion I have not seen
any Uraon killing, a cow.

I have not composed the song.  The people of Chando and other villages
have started harassing Christians since people became converts.  
 

**No. 10**

*Name*-Safi.  
*Father’s name*-Bodhu.  
*Caste*-Manji (Baiga).  
*Age*-25 years.  
*Address*-Salainagar.

*(Examined in camera)*  
 

**No. 11**

*Name*-Tuswa.  
*Father’s name*-Pardeshi.  
*Caste*-Uraon Christian.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Bataikela.

About 4 or 5 months back I became a Christian.  When I became a
Christian the villagers assembled and asked me why I became a
Christian.  And they said that they will drive away Pracharak Manohar. 
I became a Christian voluntarily.  They came to my house where Manohar
Pracharak lived, assaulted him and asked him to leave the village. 
After about 2 weeks the pracharak came back to the village, and he is
still there in my house.

The same day the school master and the Patel Birsingh assaulted me and
forcibly took my thumb impression on the paper saying that I should
renounce Christianity.  But I did not agree. I still have top-knot. 
When any one becomes a Christian his top-knot is cut.  I have become a
full Christian.  I belong to the Lutheren Church.  Along with me four
other persons including their families of the village became Christians.

*To Shri S. C. Rai-*

I am not in the employ of Mission and do not get any money or salary
from them.  The schoolmaster Birsingh had asked me to give up
Christianity and not that I should become a Hindu.  I told him that I
had become a Christian voluntarily and therefore will not give it up. 
In my old religion I was required to incur huge expenditure on providing
goat, etc., for sacrifice but in the new religion this is not
necessary.  
 

**No. 12**

*Name*-Hiralal.  
*Father’s name*-Bimlaram.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Beljora in Sitapur tahsil.

From 1947 to 1950 I studied in a Government school in Assam and on
return from there joined the Muskutri Mission school in Jashpur.  I had
produced my school leaving certificate.  My parents are Hindu Sansari
Uraons.  At the Muskutri Mission my name was changed by the school
teacher to John Minz and formerly I objected.  The teacher said there
was no harm and hence used to answer to the name of John Minz.  When I
left the school a certificate was given in which I am shown as John
Minz.  My father’s name was also changed to Mangra Minz.  I later joined
the Loyola High School and when I left it last year I applied to the
Inspector of Schools for correcting my name in the certificate.

When I was in the Loyola High School the headmaster asked me to work as
a Pracharak on Rs. 25 per month salary but as I wanted to continue my
studies I refused. I was given free education.  The date of birth is
25th January 1936. (Certificate produced and seen).

*To Mr. Shinde-*

During the school I was required to attend Bible classes although I did
not want to attend.  No Padri or anybody told me in the school to become
a Christian.  When I left the Loyola High School in the middle of the
session they did not give me the school-leaving certificate although
demanded.  In the certificate the caste is shown as Uraon. I was not
given the school leaving certificate because I left in the middle of the
term and teachers said that I did not listen to their advice. I did not
complain to the education authorities that I was not given the school
certificate.  It is not true that I was rusticated from the Loyola High
School.  
 

**No. 13**

*Name*-Eliajar.  
*Father’s name*-Jagati.  
*Caste*-Uraon Christian.  
*Address*-Kharcha village, tahsil Samri.

I do not know to what Church I belong but I am a Christian.  I am a born
Christian.  Last year my father was assaulted by Deonath and as a result
of the injuries my father died.  A case concerning that incident is
going on.  About a month back the Police Sub-Inspector of Samri visited
my village to attach my standing crops.  He told me to become a Hindu
and said that I was being put to this trouble because I was a
Christian.  He told me that if I became a Hindu I would be allowed to
cut the crop because it was known to every one that for the last 10
years my father had been sowing the crops in that field.  The
Sub-Inspector further said that if I wanted money, he would give Rs.
10.  I refused to accept the money.

*To Shri Dube, Pleader-*

There was a dispute between Deonath and my deceased father over the
possession of a field.  In that quarrel I gave a stick blow first to
Deonath.  The re were about 10 to 15 persons present when the
Sub-Inspector offered me Rs. 10 to become a Hindu. I did not report the
matter to any one.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name*-Sukna.  
*Father’s name*-Sardar.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Karmi in Kusmi tahsil.

I am a panch amongst Uraons. I know the customs and manners followed by
the Uraon community.  They are Hindus, and follow the Hindu religion,
its customs and manners.  In respect of birth, death and marriages they
follow Hindu customs. Hindu festivals like Diwali, holi, etc., are
observed by us.  We worship the cows also.  Cow-killing is not allowed
in our religion.  The Uraons worship Shio and Mahadeo in Sarana. 
Amongst Uraons there are Gotras.  The people of the same gotra cannot
marry.

*To Mr. Shinde-*

I am illiterate.  Uraon is a caste of Hindus.  We are Uraon Kshatriya
All Uraorts are Kshatriyas.  Ramayan contains eight Khands.  My son
reads Ramayan to me. I am a Hindu Uraon.  We are Hindus from time
immemorial.  All Uraons know Ramayan.  I do not know what is meant by
“Balidan.” There is no inter-marriage between Uraons and non-Uraons.  We
do not have sacrifice of cows amongst Uraons.  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-Kanduram.  
*Father’s name*-Silva.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Karada.

Agnu Gaothia’s son has become a Christian and is a Pracharak.  He once
asked me to become a Christian but I declined.  Gaothia and his son said
that if I did not become a Christian according to his direction, he
would turn me out of the village.

*To Mr. Shinde-*

There are about seven families of Christians and about 12 of Uraons.  I
have never heard the name of Jharkhand.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-Mst. Ledhi w/o Sukha.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Address*-Deogadh, P. S. Sitapur.

One Rupsahai came to my village about a year ago along with other
persons and asked me to become a Christian.  When I refused they beat
me.  My husband was not present in the house at the time.  Rupsahai is
the Pracharak.  There are about six families of Christians and five
families of Uraons in my village.

*To Mr. Lakra-*

As there was no one else nearabout, no one came to rescue me when I was
assaulted.  I reported the matter to the Police.  No enquiry has yet
been made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
