+++
title = "05 UNRAVELING THE ESSENCE OF HAGAKURE*"

+++

The content of *Hagakure* is complicated, and unashamedly contradictory and ambiguous in places. Even the origin of the book’s name is open for conjecture. One theory cites a poem by the famous Buddhist bard Saigyō Hōshi \(1118–1190\) in the *Sanka-shū*. “*Hagakure ni chiri-todomareru hana nomi zo, shinobishi hito ni au kokochi suru*” \(“Hidden away under leaves, a blossom still left over makes me yearn to chance upon my secret love this way.”\)[^13] Another hypothesis suggests that “hidden by leaves” was a reference to the secluded environment in which Tsuramoto interviewed Jōchō. Other scholars allude to the fact that Jōchō often makes reference to stalwart service from behind the scenes, or “service from the shadows,” with no desire for recognition. It has even been postulated that the fifth Nabeshima lord, Muneshige, visited Tsuramoto and conferred the title himself.

[^13]: William R. Lafleur, *Awesome Nightfall: The Life, Times, and Poetry of Saigyo*, p. 653




It would seem that the most plausible of all these theories is the Saigyō one. Nevertheless, it has been discounted by distinguished *Hagakure* expert, Furukawa Tetsushi, due to a passage that indicates Jōchō’s contempt of Saigyō. “Kenkō and Saigyō were no more than lily-livered cowards. They masqueraded as writers because they were afraid to serve as samurai.” Still, Jōchō concludes this vignette with the observation: “A man who has renounced the world to become a monk, or old men retired from duty, may become absorbed in such books. But to be a useful vassal to his lord, a warrior must be completely devoted to him amidst his pursuit of glory, or even after falling into the chasms of hell” \(2-140\) Thus, it seems logical that Saigyō’s poem is the most conceivable derivation of the book’s title, especially with the added allusion to “secret love,” an important theme in *Hagakure* analogous with devotion and loyalty. “At a recent gathering I declared that the highest form of devotion is ‘secret love’ \(*shinobu-koi*\).” \(2-2\)

The premise for writing *Hagakure* stems from a vexation at the disintegration of warrior norms over previous decades, anti-shogunate sentiment, and nostalgic longing for the previous regimes of Lord Nabeshima Naoshige, first daimyo of the Nabeshima fiefdom, and his son and heir Katsushige \(1580–1657\).[^14] Jōchō laments how young samurai “talk of money, about profit and loss, their household financial problems, taste in fashion, and idle chatter of sex.” \(1-63\) Preoccupation with frivolities and consumerism was symptomatic of new generations of warriors who had never experienced battle, and therefore lacked discipline and the purity of intent reminiscent of earlier generations.

[^14]: See the timeline for a chronological list of events outlining the history of the Saga domain from the time of the Ryūzōji clan and the transition to the Nabeshima clan.




Jōchō’s discourse is multifaceted and ostensibly chaotic, but the spirit of *Hagakure* can best be summed up by the four simple oaths he alludes to throughout the text:



*I will never fall behind others in pursuing the Way of the warrior.*

*I will always be ready to serve my lord.*

*I will honor my parents.*

*I will serve compassionately for the benefit of others.*

\(See “Idle Talk in the Dead of Night”\)



At face value, the morals Jōchō is purporting here seem universal in nature, and not particularly burdensome. Underlying these outwardly serene pledges are powerful, emotive sentiments that penetrate to the very core of the samurai culture, in which life can be forfeited in an explosive instant of insanity for the sake of honor and loyalty. From the outset, Jōchō’s sermon is pragmatic and affirms what could be described as a cult of death.

Indisputably the most famous phrase in *Hagakure* is “The Way of the warrior \(*bushido*\) is to be found in dying.” Despite its seeming straightforwardness, this sentence is completely open to interpretation. Did Jōchō really mean that warriors should gleefully seize any opportunity to make the ultimate sacrifice? “If one is faced with two options of life or death, simply settle for death. It is not an especially difficult choice; just go forth and meet it confidently.” \(1-2\) This would suggest that this was, indeed, the case. Conversely, the very next sentence in the text provides a literal and figurative juxtaposition: “Only when you constantly live as though already a corpse \(*jōjū shinimi*\) will you be able to find freedom in the martial Way, and fulfill your duties without fault throughout your life.” \(1-2\) In other words, adherents of *bushido* should seek to nurture an indomitable fighting spirit free from concerns of life and death.

Within the context of yeomanly service \(*hōkō*\) and daily duties, *bushido* also implies commitment, perseverance, and devotedness. In this sense, the ideal of death can also be interpreted as a selfless application to service in the leader-follower relationship of vassalage, and the correct mind-set required. Consequently, as well as being a declaration of “death over life” in the literal sense, it also implies the nuance of “live as if dead,” where each and every second of one’s life is a precious, unrepeatable moment, and should never be used in vain.

The following passage confirms this. “With regards to the way of death, if you are prepared to die at any time, you will be able to meet your release from life with equanimity. As calamities are usually not as bad as anticipated beforehand, it is foolhardy to feel anxiety about tribulations not yet endured. Just accept that the worst possible fate for a man in service is to become a *rōnin*, or death by *seppuku*. Then nothing will faze you.” \(1-92\) That is to say, as long as one knows that the most appalling thing that can happen is disassociation from one’s *raison d’être* or death, then one should be able to live an uninhibited and productive life before meeting death in a dignified manner. *Hagakure* professes that life is a set that is completed by death; they are inextricably linked, and the nobler the death, the better the life it was. Furthermore, a noble death is the result of living life as if one were already dead.

This is an almost existential attitude, and Jōchō advocates not becoming confused in the face of a meaningless or absurd world. “Are men not like masterfully controlled puppets? It is magnificent craftsmanship that allows us to walk, jump, prance, and speak even though there are no strings attached. We may be guests at next year’s Bon festival. We forget it is an ephemeral world in which we live.” \(2-45\) For this reason, living with single-minded resolve \(*ichinen*\) and becoming a heroic warrior, the all-reliable supreme samurai referred to as *kusemono*, is the only way to liberate one’s self and add meaning in this fleeting existence.

But still, *Hagakure* is fraught with contradictory messages about death and service which cause confusion. Although the Tokugawa period was an epoch of relative stability, and warriors would rarely if ever smell the stench of death in their nostrils on the battlefield, there was always an undercurrent of honor-fuelled tension ready to erupt into fatal clashes of violence in the course of daily life. *Hagakure* abounds with stories of fights which generally extol the actions of warriors who unflinchingly despatch their foe in spite of the impending dire consequences of *seppuku*, or even the disgrace of execution as punishment for breaking the law.

For example, a story in Book 10 relays an incident in Kyoto in which a samurai hears from a passer-by that one of his peers is involved in a brawl. He rushes to the scene to find he is about to be finished off, so he charges in with suicidal intent, and kills the two attackers. He is arrested and tried by the Kyoto magistrate. In his defense he says, “I was told ‘your colleague is in a fight,’ and thought it would dishonor the military way if I ignored the situation. That is why I dashed to the scene. What’s more, it would have been unforgivable had I done nothing after witnessing the murder of a fellow clansman. I would extend the duration of my own life, but the spirit of *bushido* would perish in me. Thus, I dispensed with my cherished life to preserve the Way of the samurai. By forfeiting my life, I have observed the law of the samurai and upheld the warrior spirit. I have already laid down my life, and therefore humbly request that my punishment be meted out swiftly.” \(10-63\) Following this statement, the magistrate released him, and sent notice to his lord: “Your retainer is a praiseworthy fellow and should be treasured.”

On the other hand though, in another story contained in *Hagakure*, seeking a peaceful resolution is the recommended course of action for a samurai to take. It tells of two warriors meeting on a one-lane bridge, both refusing to give way to the other and threatening to resolve the situation with sword diplomacy. Then, a lowly radish seller comes between the two warriors and, “catching each one on either end of his shoulder carrying pole, picks them up and spins them around to the opposite ends of the bridge.” It is concluded that “There are many ways of solving problems, and this counts as constructive service to one’s lord. It is most unfortunate to see precious retainers die needlessly, or create needless discord.” \(2-124\)

Some passages advise that the warrior should be reserved and discreet when offering counsel to his lord. “If admonishment and opinions are not communicated carefully with a spirit of accord, it will amount to nothing. Insensitive protests will cause umbrage, and even simple problems will not be resolved.” \(1-152\) At the same time, Jōchō encourages samurai to actively seek recognition in the quest for honor and glory. “A samurai who does not care much for his reputation tends to be contrary, is conceited, and good-for-nothing. He is inferior to a samurai who craves glory, and is thus completely unusable.” \(1-154\) Or, “In matters of military prowess, train with all of your might to never be surpassed by others, and think to yourself, ‘My valor is beyond compare.’ ” \(1-161\)

Similarly, warriors are encouraged to vicariously support others to benefit the clan as a whole. For example: “It is an act of loyalty to educate others to become better retainers. Therefore, those with the will to learn should be given instruction. Nothing is more joyous than passing on knowledge to be vicariously useful in service through others.” \(1-124\) Nevertheless, another passage shows Jōchō’s defiance of orders so that he could accompany his lord in battle. “I cannot comply with this order when it will keep me away from His Lordship in battle. Please bear witness as I swear an oath to the god of war \(Yumiya Hachiman\) that I cannot possibly attach my seal of acceptance to this order… If it is determined that I should commit *seppuku*, then I will willingly comply.”

He then finishes with a comment urging warriors to surpass colleagues and prevail amid the rivalry that characterized warrior life. “A young warrior should be strong headed.” \(1-106\) Furthermore, “A samurai should be excessively obstinate. Anything done in moderation will fall short of your goals. If you feel that you are doing more than is needed, it will be just right.” \(1-188\)

Jōchō also advises prudence. “The best course of action is to first take a step back, understand the depths and shallows of various matters, and avoid provoking indignation in your master.” \(2-8\) Then again, he advises against judiciousness. “A calculating man is a coward. This is because he considers everything from the perspective of loss and gain, and his mind never deviates from this track. To him, death is a loss, and life is a gain.” \(1-111\) Often he sponsors rash acts, completely disregarding the outcome. “To retaliate entails just frenetically throwing yourself at your adversary with the intention of being cut down. Being killed this way brings no shame. Thinking about how to win may result in missing the best opportunity to act.” \(1-55\) This action is represented by another couple of keywords in *Hagakure*—*kichigai* and *shini-gurui,* or the “mad death frenzy.” “In any case, just give yourself over to insanity and sacrifice yourself to the task. That’s all you need to do. If you attempt to solve problems through careful manoeuvring, doubts will creep in and paralyze your mind, and you will fail miserably.” \(1-193\)

If all these incongruities were not confusing enough, the conflict that arises between “secret love” in loyalty and in the man-love relationships called *shudō* adds to the complexity of the dynamics of human relations depicted in the book. “The essential point in *shudō* is preparation to forfeit your life for the sake of your lover. Otherwise you risk humiliation. On the other hand, though, this means that you would be unable to surrender your life in the service of your lord. Through this contradiction, I came to realize that in *shudō*, you should love your partner, but not love him at the same time.” \(1-181\) *Shudō* is depicted as the purest form of reverential bonding between two males, based on ineffaceable trust and appreciation of each other’s inner qualities.

These are just a few examples of the multifarious nature of the content and contradictory tenets of advice that create a degree of abstruseness that leaves the message of *Hagakure* open for interpretation. This is precisely why reading *Hagakure* without a basic understanding of the complexities of the Tokugawa warrior community of honor, the samurai ethno-mentality, and, to a degree, local knowledge of Saga and its personalities, leaves one with the impression that the content is just the mad ramblings of a disgruntled old man. To be sure, the text undeniably contains a degree of this, too, and like any human being, Yamamoto Jōchō certainly had good and bad days when reminiscing to Tsuramoto. In fact, some sections of *Hagakure* were probably relayed with a grin, and even an element of humor can be detected, if one looks for it.

Many of the apparent inconsistencies in *Hagakure* can be assuaged by simply being aware of who—or what—level of samurai each vignette is directed toward. It is a common mistake to lump all samurai together, but there were many ranks within their world, and the responsibilities and expectations of each were markedly different. Therefore, the ideal deportment and style of loyalty differed as well. For instance, Olivier Ansart makes a distinction between two broad types of loyalty: middle-ranked samurai and below personified “symbolic service,” whereas “loyalty of counsel” was required of high-ranked warriors.[^15]

Middle- to lower-ranked samurai were encouraged to engage in unconditional service and blind obedience, being prepared to frenetically sacrifice their own lives by entering a “frenzy of death” with purity of intention. The low-ranked warrior had no influence on how the domain was governed, or what his lord thought. The only realistic homage they could pay to their lord was expressed using their martial skill and spirit in violent or self-sacrificial acts. This included frenzied fights to the death that reflected on the lord’s reputation of having valorous, decisive warriors in his domain. The samurai were essentially expendable pawns who could only dream of upward social mobility premised on selfless service from a young age. If he was noticed by his lord for acts of gallantry, or for is outstanding attributes, he could live in hope of being promoted to a higher position up the ranks. This, however, was very much the exception rather than the norm.

[^15]: Olivier Ansart, “Embracing Death: Pure will in *Hagakure,” Early Modern Japan: An Interdisciplinary Journal v. 18*, \(2010\): pp. 57–75






On the other hand, the “loyalty of counsel” was reserved for upper-ranking samurai. To fulfill their important duty of counselling the lord, as well as remonstrating with him for his transgressions for his and the domain’s benefit, required skills in diplomacy, selfless resolve, wisdom, and prudence. Honor was found in the act of offering judicious, yet discreet, advice. This, too, was a precarious existence, as it might mean sacrificing one’s life to take the blame for a lord’s foolishness, or to atone for angering him. In both virtual and counsel-based forms of loyalty, the important mind-set was to act in accordance with a single-minded, pure will and intention, referred to throughout the pages of *Hagakure* as *ichinen*.

**All that matters is having single-minded purpose \(ichinen\), in the here and now. Life is an ongoing succession of ‘one will’ at a time, each and every moment. A man who realizes this truth need not hurry to do, or seek, anything else anymore. Just live in the present with single-minded purpose. People forget this important truth, and keep seeking other things to accomplish. \(2-17\)**

A warrior who can demonstrate such resolve and purity in thought and action is hailed as a *kusemono*. In modern Japanese parlance, *kusemono* has negative connotations, indicating an eccentric or abnormal person—a quintessential weirdo. The *kusemono depicted in Hagakure*, however, represents the supreme warrior. Such an ideal man could be relied upon to always be there in a calamity, but remained behind the scenes when not needed. “Exceptional warriors \(*kusemono*\) are dependable men. Dependable men are exceptional warriors. I know this through considerable experience. Dependable men can be relied upon to keep away when things are going well, but will come to your aid without fail when you are in need. A man of such temperament is most certainly a *kusemono*.” \(1-132\)

The presence of the *kusemono* is pervasive throughout *Hagakure*. The *kusemono* is the archetypical warrior whom Jōchō aspired to be, and the unnamed hero of the book. It is the *kusemono* who embodies the essence of *Hagakure’s bushido*.




