+++
title = "04 FOUR         The Case of Sachchidanand Sakshi"

+++
FOUR  
The Case of Sachchidanand Sakshi

  
IN THE COURT OF SHRI ALOK AGARWAL,  
M M KARKARDUMA COURTS: DELHI

FIR No. 129/91  
U/Sec 153-A IPC

ORDER  
2.7.96

This order is being passed after hearing arguments on charge from both
sides.

The accused Dr. Sachchidanand Sakshi, has been charge-sheeted U/Sec
153-A IPC on the allegations of having promoted or attempted to promote
disharmony, feelings of enmity or illwill between the different
religions by way of his speech delivered on 19.3.91 at a meeting of the
Hindu Jagran Samittee held at District Centre, Vikas Marg, Delhi.

The proceedings have been initiated by a confidential letter dated
11.7.91 from one Shri M.U. Siddiqui, Dy. Secretary (Home), Delhi
Administration, addressed to the D.C.P. (Spl. Branch). A copy of the
letter was also endorsed to the D.C.P. East alongwith the copy of the
speech/slogans allegedly raised by the leaders/workers of Hindu Jagran
Samittee in the aforesaid meeting, for registration of case and
necessary investigation. The present case was accordingly registered at
Police Station Preet Vihar on 6.8.91.

I have heard the Ld. APP and the Ld. Defence Counsel on the point of
charge and have carefully gone through the police report u/sec 173 Cr.
P.C., and the documents filed alongwith it. One peculiarity of the
matter is *that it is not clear as to who is the first informant in the
case. Two eye-witnesses i.e. two of the police officials who were
present on arrangement duty, have been cited as witnesses but they have
only been examined u/sec 161 Cr. P. C, after the registration of the
case. The case is stated to have been registered on receipt of the
afore-mentioned letter dated 11. 7.91 from Sh. M. U. Siddiqui, Dy.
Secretary (Home)*. However the letter itself mentions that it is based
upon some transcripts of speeches/ slogans sent to him by the *D.C.P.
(Spl. Branch) for opinion*. One carbon copy typed on plain sheets of
paper purported to be of the speeches made by various leaders at the
said meeting has been filed on record, alongwith documents, but the same
is neither signed by any body nor does it mentions its author. Sh. M.U.
Siddiqui is admittedly not an eye-witness. There is nothing on record to
show as to who took down the said speeches and slogans and informed the
police. *There is no Audio/Video recording of the speech*.

So far as the *alleged eye-witnesses SI Krishan Chand and SI Om Prakash
are concerned, their statements have been recorded five months after the
incident and even after the registration of the FIR*. Further in their
statements the speech allegedly made by the accused has been copied down
verbatim. Obviously the said speech was already available with the
police since the case had been registered on that basis. The only
witnesses cited on behalf of the prosecution are SI Krishan Chand, SI Om
Prakash, Duty Officer and the SI Ram Phal. None of them, therefore, can
prove the FIR. As already mentioned above, no Audio or Video recording
or even the original transcript of the said speech has been produced on
record. In these circumstances I am unable to locate on record, any
material to connect the accused with the alleged inflamatory speech.

As the inevitable consequence of the above discussion, the accused Dr.
Sachchidanand Sakshi is hereby discharged. His PB/SB stands cancelled
and his surety discharged. File be consigned to Record Room.

(Alok Agarwal)  
Metropolitan Magistrate  
Karkarduma Courts, Delhi  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
