+++
title = "06 "

+++
SIX  
Islam Imposes an Emergency on India[1](#1)

Sita Ram Goel

No newspaper or periodical worth its name in India will publish what I
write in the lines that follow. Not because the subject matter is
seditious or sacrilegious or obscene, or even controversial, but simply
because it defies the Emergency imposed on this country by Muslim
theologians and politicians backed by 'secularist' intellectuals and
politicians and riotous Muslim mobs and plain terrorists.

The Indian intelligentsia, by and large, is very well aware of what
Emergency means. It had a firsthand experience during 1975-77 when Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi extended to everyone the fullest "freedom" to
extol her, but put in jail all those who asked inconvenient questions
about her doings. If any member of this intelligentsia is asked what he
thinks of that Emergency, the answer is always a loud disapproval. But
the same intelligentsia is not even aware that Islam has imposed an
Emergency on India, so that everyone has the perfect "liberty" to praise
its Allah, its prophet, its scriptures, its history, and its heroes but
gets into trouble if he so much as says that Islam should answer some
questions.

Muslims have a popular saying: *ba khuda diwana bash o ba Muhammad
hoshiyar* (have fun about Allah but be careful when it comes to
Muhammad). This seems to be a very apt warning because in the belief
system that is Islam, Allah has been replaced by his prophet. One cannot
be a Muslim merely by believing in Allah as the only God; one has to
believe in Muhammad also as the Last Prophet. In fact Allah is not and
cannot be known or even approached except through Muhammad. Allah has
spoken through Muhammad in the Quran and acted through him in the Hadis.

The Hadis, collected labouriously and preserved meticulously, has been
the source for the life story, Sirat, of the Prophet. We have as many as
six life stories which the orthodox theology of Islam regards as sacred
literature in which a "divine pattern of human conduct" is supposed to
have been unfolded.

So far so good. The trouble arises when persons other than pious Muslims
examine these life stories. There is a lot in them which offends man's
normal moral sense and natural reason. But Islam does not permit anyone
to probe that part of the Prophet's life. The Prophet himself had
pronounced and carried out death penalty for all those who asked
inconvenient questions about his person and mission. That became a
permanent prescription for all Muslims.

There were many incidents in medieval Indian history when Hindus were
put to death for making critical remarks about the Prophet. One of these
Hindus was a schoolboy who got provoked by remarks which one of his
Muslim classmates had made about Hinduism, and said something derogatory
about the Prophet. He was put to death. Many such stories in medieval
times must have remained unrecorded.

Muslim rule disappeared long ago from large parts of India but Muslim
terrorism continued to prevail. Even the Christian missionaries who
heaped vile abuse on all Hindu avatars, saints and sages, were careful
when it came to Muhammad. The Arya Samaj was the first Hindu movement to
take up a bold stand in this context. Maharshi Dayanand himself had
showed up Muhammad for the sort of man he was. Soon after, however, the
Arya Samaj was silenced effectively by a series of murders, notably that
of Pandit Lekhram and Swami Shraddhananda. The British were inclined to
permit fair criticism, particularly that which was based on Islamic
sources. But they could not prevent Muslim assassins from taking the law
in their own hands.

The movement led by the Indian National Congress made its own
characteristic contribution to Muslim self righteousness. In the hope of
winning the Muslims over to the nationalist platform, Congress leaders
frowned upon all criticism of Islam and the Muslim rule in medieval
India. Till the turn of the nineteenth century, Hindus by and large had
never accepted Islam as a religion or Muslim rule as a native
dispensation. The Congress leadership whitewashed both and, by means of
sustained propaganda, made them acceptable to the Hindu intelligentsia.

The Communists who appeared on the scene in the twenties went much
further. They glorified Islam as a message of social equality and human
brotherhood, while they denigrated Hinduism as a system based on class
exploitation and caste oppression. M.N. Roy wrote a book, *Role of Islam
in History*, in 1939 in which he hailed the advent of Islam in India as
a liberating force. Islam, he said, had come to complete the social
revolution which Buddhism had left unfinished but, like Buddhism, was
frustrated by 'reactionary' Brahminism.

Meanwhile, Christian missionary propaganda had made Brahminism the arch
villain of Indian history. Hindu reform movements had picked up the
plank. Brahminism was fast losing ground among the vocal Hindu
intelligentsia. People like E.V. Ramaswami Naicker and B.R. Ambedkar
identified Hinduism with Brahminism and declared war on both. So did the
Sikhs. The Jains also started distancing themselves from Hinduism. Now
it is the turn of the Ramakrishna Mission and the Arya Samaj. But that
is a different and a long story.

What is relevant here is that Islam continued to gain the lustre which
Hinduism was losing fast. In due course, it became a crime called
'communalism' to say anything except laudatory about Islam. The Quran
and the Prophet were winning fulsome praise on every public platform.
The slogan of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva* was becoming the national
consensus. It never meant that Hinduism could not be criticized, even
maligned and ridiculed. What it meant was that everyone was free to
praise Islam as much as he pleased. The Emergency which Islam had
imposed after its advent in India and which had caused resentment among
Hindus for a long time, now stood fully sanctioned by the Hindu elite.
All religions were equal. But Islam was more equal. Small wonder that
Muslims acquired an unpre-cedented sense of self - righteousness; they
had scored a triumph which their sword had failed to win for them in
more than a thousand years.

That was the situation when the country was partitioned and drowned in
blood by the Muslim League. The event entailed widespread resentment
against Muslims. But Islam was hardly mentioned; if escaped unscathed.

The Hindu movements like the Hindu Mahasabha and the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) had never showed any understanding of Islam even
before partition. Most of their ire had been directed against Muslims.
They had failed to see that Muslims were our own people alienated from
us by Islam. The only saving feature was that they had not come out in
praise of Islam. They had observed a stony silence on the subject.

The scene progressed after the advent of independence, particularly
after Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru took command of the Indian National
Congress and the country. His animus against Hinduism was derived from
his love for Communism. He knew next to nothing about Buddhism; the only
reason be hailed it as well as its hero, Ashoka, was that in his
perception Buddhism was a 'revolt' against 'reactionary' Brahminism. Had
he known the truth about Buddhism, he would have dropped it like a hot
potato. The same psychology made him fall for Islam. Otherwise he was
equally ignorant of, and equally indifferent to all religions. The
Secularism which be espoused was not borrowed from the modem West. For
him, it was only a smokescreen for Hindu-baiting. The fashion was picked
up fast by a servile intelligentsia and became a national cult. The more
one hated Hinduism, the more one prospered. Hindu-baiting became the
most profitable profession in politics, the media and the academia. The
word "Hindu" became a dirty word.

The Hindu Mahasabha had declined fast in post-independent India. But it
must be said to its credit that it never became ashamed of being Hindu,
and never went on the defensive when called communalist. It kept its
earlier stand un-compromised, though it had hardly any say in public
life any more.

The RSS, however, behaved differently. The ban imposed on it after the
murder of Mahatma Gandhi had frightened it out of its wits. It went on
the defensive all along the line, and started spending all its time in
proving that it was not a communalist organisation. It retained the word
"Hindu" in its private verbiage, but eschewed it from its public
pronouncements. The word "Bharatiya" defined territorially and not
culturally, became its substitute for the word "Hindu". All its fronts
including the political party, Jana Sangh, became "Bharatiya".

Meanwhile, Muslim theologians and politicians had acquired a veto on
pronouncing who was secular and who was communal. No one questioned that
claim, at least not the Hindu leaders and organisations. No
organisation, particularly no political party, could call itself secular
if it had no Muslim members. The Jana Sangh had aspired for the label of
Secularism from its very foundation. It was now shouting
sarva-dharma-samabhâva louder than everyone else. It tried its best to
enroll Muslim members. The highest ambition of the Jana Sangh and the
RSS now was that they be accepted as secular by the Congress, the
Socialists and the Communists. The other parties refused to oblige. The
more the RSS and the Jana Sangh swore by Secularism, the louder they
were accused of being communal. The RSS and Jana Sangh started losing
fast their own identity without gaining the one for which they aspired.

The custodians of Islam were now ready to apply the litmus test. They
staged a riot against a book, *Muhammad* by Thomas and Thomas, published
in the U.S.A. and reprinted by the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay. The
book narrated how Muhammad had become frightened when Gabriel came to
him with the first revelation from Allah. He wanted to know whether he
had been visited by an angel or a satan. So he rushed to his wife,
Khadija, and told her what had happened. She asked him to inform her
when Gabriel visited him next. He did so. Khadija bared her right and
left thighs turn by turn, asked Muhammad to sit on each, and see if the
visitor stayed on or disappeared. Muhammad did so. The visitor stayed
on. Next Khadija bared her bosom, made Muhammad sit in her lap and
embrace her. Even then the visitor did not leave. Finally, Khadija asked
Muhammad to have sexual intercourse with her. The visitor disappeared.
Khadija congratulated Muhammad that his visitor was an angel and not a
satan.

This story was based on what can be read in every orthodox biography of
Muhammad. Ibn Ishaq, the first biographer, says:

> Ismail b. Abu Hakim, a freedman of the family of al-Zubyr, told me on
> Khadija's authority that she said to the apostle of God, 'O son of my
> uncle, are you able to tell me about your visitant, when he comes to
> you?' He replied that he could, and she asked him to tell her when he
> came. So when Gabriel came to him, as he was wont, the apostle said to
> Khadija, 'This is Gabriel who has just come to me.' 'Get up, O son of
> my uncle, she said, 'and sit by my left thigh.' The apostle did so,
> and she said 'Can you see him? 'yes', he said. She said 'Then turn
> around and sit on my right thigh.' He did so, and she said, 'Can you
> see him?' When he said that he could she asked him to move and sit in
> her lap. When he had done this she again asked if he could see him,
> and when he said yes, she disclosed her form and cast aside her veil
> while the apostle was sitting in her lap. Then she said, 'Can you see
> him?' And he replied, 'No' she said, 'O son of my uncle, rejoice, and
> be of good heart, by God he is an angel and not a satan.'
>
> I told 'Abdullah b. Hasan this story and he said, 'I heard my mother
> Fatima, daughter of Husayn, talking about this tradition from Khadija,
> but as I heard it she made the apostle of God come inside her shift,
> and thereupon Gabriel departed, and she said to the apostle of God,
> 'This is really an angel and not a satan."'

These two paras can be read by anyone on p. 107 of *The Life of
Muhammad* published by the prestigious Oxford University Press, Karachi,
Pakistan, first time in 1955, and reprinted seven times till 1987. The
book is an English translation by A. Guillaume of Ibn Ishaq's *Sirat
Rasul Allah*.

Moreover, the authors of the book *Muhammad* bore no malice towards the
Prophet. On the contrary, they were endorsing, after the orthodox Muslim
fashion, that the revelations received by Muhammad had a divine source.

No one knows who or what was the target of Muslims going of the rampage,
demanding a ban on the book, and confiscation of all copies in print. It
is quite possible that Prime Minister Nehru wanted to finish K.M.
Munshi, the Kulapati of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan. Munshi had earned
the enmity of Nehru because he took pride in Hinduism. In any case,
whatever the motive, the book was banned. Munshi who was the Governor of
U.P. at that time not only apologised publicly but also lied with a
straight face that he celebrated the birthday of the Prophet every year!
He was never known to have any soft corner for anything Islamic. But he
was a weak man and a politician who felt uncomfortable if out of office.
No one cared to examine or point out the source on which the authors of
*Muhammad* had drawn.

The average Muslim does not know what is written in his scriptures. He
has the normal moral notions of his Hindu neighbours. The Muslim
theologians and politicians exploit his ignorance and mobilize him on
the streets by ascribing to "enemies of Islam" what is in fact contained
in their own sacred books! Even if some one points out the source, he
can be accused of quoting out of context!

The same pattern was repeated in the case of the Hindi translation of
Ram Swarup's *Understanding Islam Through Hadis*. The book was published
in the U.S.A. in 1982 and reprinted by Voice of India, New Delhi, in
1983 from plates of the original edition. It is a summary, chapter by
chapter, of Sahih Muslim, the second most sacred collection of Hadis. It
was examined by the Delhi Administration and found unobjectionable. So
another reprint was brought out by Voice of India in 1987. A Hindi
translation was also printed in the same year. Two thousand printed
copies of the Hindi translation were with the binder when they were
seized by the police on December 19, 1987. A Muslim neighbour had read
the translation and collected a mob which threatened to bum down the
binder's establishment. The police intervened, took away all the two
thousand copies of the book, and arrested the binder. The publisher,
Sita Ram Goel, was arrested the same day along with the printer. They
could be bailed out only after spending 18 hours in police custody. The
Delhi Administration to which the case was sent up by the police,
appointed two screening committees successively to examine the Hindi
translation. It was found unobjectionable. Finally, on June 2, 1990, the
Delhi Administration recommended to the appropriate court that the case
could be closed. But the Muslim complainant stood up in the court and
requested a postponement of the case. He said he would get the decision
of the Delhi Administration reversed. The court gave him time, again and
again, and on his failing to appear, dismissed the case on September 28,
1990.

Meanwhile, *Rediance*, a Weekly published by the Jamaat-e-Islami from
Delhi, had raised hell in its issue of 17-23 June, 1990. "Most portions
of the book are concoctions and distortions as well as defamatory and
derogatory to the Holy Prophet", it wrote. It went on to quote passages
from the translation without informing the readers that all of them are
found in the orthodox collections of Hadis as well as the pious
biographies of the Prophet! It depended on the ignorance of the common
Muslim and ascribed those passages to the writer, Ram Swarup! Small
wonder that some young Muslims visited the office of **Voice of India**,
a few days later, and warned that 'such gemmicks' could cause trouble.

But what happened on 27th November 1990 was the most surprising event in
the history of this case. A notification of the Delhi Administration
announced that the Hindi translation, *Hadîs ke Mâdhyama se Islâm kâ
Addhyana* had been banned and all its copies stood confiscated as soon
as published. There was not the hint of a reference that the same
Administration had screened the book not once but twice, over a period
of three years, cleared it as unobjectionable, and got dismissed the
case registered against the publisher and the printer.

Come March 1991 and the English original of the book was also banned by
the same Administration, without taking into account the fact that this
book had been in print and circulation in India for eight years and that
the Administration itself had found it unobjectionable after having
scrutinized it for months soon after it was published. Strange are the
ways of Secularism in India!  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This article was written for a periodical published from
Washington by a group of Indian residents in the U.S.A., but was not
sent because the periodical closed down.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
