+++
title = "06 CHAPTER IV SLAVE SULTANS OF HINDUSTAN"

+++
**CHAPTER IV**  
**SLAVE SULTANS OF HINDUSTAN**

Slavery was wide-spread in Islam. The early Turkish invaders and rulers
of India were slaves or scions of slaves.  Mahmud of Ghazni was the son
of a purchased slave, Subuktigin. Subuktigin in his turn had been bought
by one Alptigin who himself was a purchased slave. Alptigin was the
first Turkish slave-warrior-ruler who carried his arms into Hindustan.
His career and resourcefulness are symbolic of the Turkish slaves as a
whole.

Alptigin was purchased by Ahmad bin Ismail, the Samanid king of Khurasan
and Bukhara. The Samanid rulers had adopted the Abbasid custom of
enrolling slaves. They used to purchase small Turkish children and
impart to them training in arms and religious education. In course of
time these slaves were appointed to various offices but primarily as
bodyguards to Amirs and sentinels of frontiers. Such an one was
Alptigin. He began his career as a Sarjandar (Life Guard) and soon
became the head of Sarjandars. He proved to be a man of great ability
and courage and at the age of thirty-five was placed in charge of the
Iqta of Khurasan by the Samanid governor, Abdul Malik (954-961 C.E.). As
the Muqta of Khurasan he had 500 villages and about 2,000 slaves of his
own. Deprived of his office at the death of his patron, he betook
himself to Ghazni where his father had been governor under the Samanids.
At Ghazni he acted more or less as an independent chief.^([1](#1)) After
his death a number of his slaves like Baltagin, Pirai and Subuktigin
ruled over Ghazni, but of them the last one alone proved to be
successful.

Alptigin had purchased Subuktigin at Nishapur^([2](#2)) from a certain
merchant, Nasir Haji, who had brought him from Turkistan to Bukhara. 
Subuktigin was born in 942 C.E. (331 H.) He was captured by some Turk
marauders when he was about 12.^([3](#3)) Alptigin brought him up and
gradually raised him in posts of honour. He married his daughter to
Subuktigin and, in course of time, conferred upon him the title of
Amir-ul-Umara in recognition of his talents and because of the
psychological awe which self-asserting slaves instilled in the masters’
minds, to which Juwayni refers. Subuktigin “made frequent raids into
Hind, in the prosecution of holy wars.”^([4](#4)) After his master's
death he was raised to the throne by his nobles. He turned out to be an
ambitious ruler. With the help of his Turk and Afghan retainers and
troops he mounted attacks upon the Samanid power at Bukhara and after
years of continued fighting succeeded in securing the province for his
son Mahmud in 994 C.E. Mahmud took the title of sultan and was so
recognized by the Caliph. We meet Mahmud of Ghazni again and again
during his campaigns in India.

About two centuries later, the Ghauris wrested Ghazni from the
Ghaznavids. One of its great sultans was Sultan Shihabuddin (also known
as Muizzuddin bin Sam and Muhammad Ghauri). Just as Mustasim was the
first caliph to have collected a large force of Turkish slaves under his
employment, Sultan Muizzuddin bin Sam Ghauri also “took considerable
delight in purchasing Turkish slaves and educating them.”^([5](#5)) The
Sultan did not have a son who could succeed him, but this fact did not
cause him any worry because of his liking for and faith in his slaves.
Minhaj Siraj writes that on one occasion when a favourite courtier spoke
to the Sultan about the default of male heirs, he replied with absolute
confidence: “Other monarchs may have one or two sons: I have so many
thousand sons, namely, my Turkish slaves, who will be the heirs of my
dominions, and who, after me, will take care to preserve my name in the
*Khutbah* throughout those territories.”^([6](#6)) And so it happened. 
With the help of his Turkish slaves Sultan Muizzuddin built up a large
empire in India. He sent them there first as invaders and later as
governors and viceroys in various parts for its governance.

As said earlier, Sultan Muizzuddin possessed thousands of slaves many of
whom he purchased. Others must have been captured in campaigns because
financial constraints would not have permitted buying of all of them.
The life story of every Turkish slave who rose to any position of
prominence was full of adventure and hazard, “accidents and vicissitude
of the world”. Some of these have been recorded by contemporary and
later chroniclers. It is not possible here to study about them all in
detail. However, the careers of two, Aibak the ugly and Iltutmish the
handsome, may receive our particular attention as being samples for most
of them.

Qutbuddin Aibak, who rose to be the first slave-sultan of Hindustan, was
purchased, early in life, by Fakhruddin, the chief Qazi of Nishapur who
appears to have been a great slave trader. Through his favours and along
with his sons, Aibak received training in reciting the Quran and
practising archery and horsemanship. Expenditure on such instructions
used to be regarded as an investment by slave merchants: a trained slave
fetched a better price in the market. After the Qazi’s death his sons
sold Aibak to a merchant who took him to Ghazni and sold him to Sultan
Muizzuddin. Though ugly in external appearance, Aibak’s training had
endowed him with “laudable qualities and admirable impressions”. He
cultivated his compatriots by being most liberal with the “Turkish
guards, the slaves of the household.”^([7](#7)) Thereby he won their
affection and support. Merit raised him to the position of Amir Akhur
(Master of the Horse Stables). He was deputed to campaign in India
extensively, a task he accomplished with determination and success. In
course of time, loyalty and signal services to Sultan Muizzuddin secured
him the post of vice-regent in Hindustan. In accordance with
Muizzuddin’s desire, Tajuddin Yaldoz, another slave of the Sultan,
married his daughter to Aibak.^([8](#8)) Aibak extended Muslim dominions
in India by undertaking expeditions on behalf of his master. The Sultan
seems to have desired that Aibak should succeed him in Hindustan, and
after the death of the Sultan, he ascended the throne of Hindustan at
Lahore in 1206 and ruled up to 1210.

The career of Shamsuddin Iltutmish, who reigned as Sultan from 1210 to
1236, was more romantic and more eventful. He was a purchased slave of
Aibak and thus he became “the slave of a slave”. He originally belonged
to “the territory of Turkistan and the families of the Ilbari (tribe)”.
His father, Ilam Khan, happened to have numerous kindred, relations,
dependents and followers. Iltutmish, from his earliest years, “was
endowed with comeliness, intelligence, and goodness of disposition to a
great degree, so much so that his brothers began to grow envious of
these endowments”. They took him away from his parents on some pretext
and sold him to a slave merchant by the name of Bukhara Haji. The
merchant sold him to the Sadr Jahan or the chief ecclesiastic of the
place. He remained in “that family of eminence and sanctity… and the
family used to nourish him like his own children in infancy.”
Subsequently, another merchant by the name of Jamaluddin Muhammad bought
him and brought him to the city of Ghazni, where he was mentioned in
terms of commendation to Sultan Muizzuddin. After a long stay at Ghazni,
where the merchant wanted a high price for Iltutmish but could not get
it, he brought him to Delhi. Iltutmish had received good training as a
soldier and had also learnt the art of reading and writing. After many
vicissitudes, he was at last purchased by Qutbuddin Aibak for a high
price. Sultan Muizzuddin is believed to have said to Qutbuddin: “Treat
Iltutmish well, for he will distinguish himself.”

Iltutmish was first made Sarjandar to Qutbuddin. He was later promoted
to the offices of Amir-i-Shikar (Master of Hunt), governor of Gwalior
and governor of Badaon in succession. Qutbuddin Aibak had three
daughters, of whom two, one after the death of the other, were married
to Nasiruddin Qubacha, and the third was married to Iltutmish.^([9](#9))
Such close relationships ensured continuance of the governance of
Hindustan to the people of one tribe, that of the Turki slaves. But
relationships did not restrain their ambition. After Aibak’s sudden
death, the Amirs and Maliks placed on the throne his son, Aram Shah, and
Qubacha marched to Uchch and Multan and seized those places. The nobles
then invited Iltutmish from Badaon to assume charge of the empire.
Aram’s small army was overpowered. He was probably done to death and
Iltutmish ascended the throne of Delhi. He waded through blood to the
throne by doing away with most of the Muizzi and Qutbi Amirs. According
to the standards of behaviour then prevailing among Turkish slaves, he
could not be accused of disloyalty to Aibak’s salt for doing away with
his son, nor for that matter shedding the blood of his rival
compatriots.

Similar fluctuations of fortune attended the careers of other Sultans.
Tajuddin Yaldoz was purchased by Sultan Muhammad Ghauri when he was
young. In course of time he was appointed head of a group of Turkish
slaves. His ability and courage won him the confidence of the Sultan who
conferred upon him the office of the Wali of Kirman. Minhaj writers, “He
was a great monarch (of Kirman) of excellent faith, mild, beneficent, of
good disposition and very handsome.” After Muizzuddin’s death he became
ruler of Ghazni with the consent of Maliks -and Amirs. He was a great
warrior but was expelled by Qubacha who made himself master of the
country. Yaldoz hit back and occupied Qubacha’s Sindh and established
himself in the Punjab. But Iltutmish defeated him in 1215. Yaldoz was
taken prisoner, sent to the fortress of Badaon and there done to death.
Qubacha made his submission to Iltutmish in 1217 and was finally
eliminated in 1227.

Qubacha was the son-in-law of both Aibak and Yaldoz. By the command of
Sultan Muizzuddin a daughter of Yaldoz was married to Aibak and another
to Qubacha.^([10](#10)) It may be remembered that as per the Islamic
law, slaves could not enter into matrimony except with the consent and
permission of the master. Through Muizzuddin’s favour, Qubacha had
acquired considerable experience of civil and military affairs in
passing from humble to high posts. He was made governor of Uchch. In a
short time he made himself master of Multan, Siwistan and the whole
country of Sindh. But his ambition came in clash with that of Yaldoz and
Iltutmish and he lost in the game of power politics. Similarly, the
scions of Iltutmish lost to Balban, another ambitious Turkish slave.

Balban was a Turk of the Ilbari tribe from which Iltutmish himself had
descended. His father was a Khan of 10,000 families. In his youth, he
was captured by the Mongols who took him to Baghdad. Khwaja Jamaluddin
of Basrah purchased him from the Mongols, brought him up like his own
son and along with other slaves brought him to the capital city of Delhi
in the year 1232.^([11](#11)) Shortly after, Balban entered the service
of Iltutmish. This is the version of the official chronicler Minhaj
Siraj. According to Isami, however, some Chinese merchants brought forty
Turkish slaves along with other goods and displayed them before Sultan
Iltutmish. The Sultan rejected Balban, short statured as he was. But the
Wazir Kamaluddin Muhammad Junaidi, *noticing marks of promise in
Balban*, purchased him. Ibn Battuta’s version is like this: Sultan
Iltutmish purchased in bulk a hundred slaves leaving out only Balban.
When the latter asked the Sultan for whom he had purchased the other
slaves, Iltutmish replied, “for myself”. Balban pleaded that he may
purchase him for “God’s sake”. Touched by the appeal Iltutmish bought
him too. In short, Balban entered the service of Iltutmish and was
appointed his Khasabardar (Personal Attendant) and then enrolled in the
famous corps of Forty Slaves. Raziyah promoted him to the rank of
Amir-i-Shikar. When some nobles rose against Raziyah, Balban joined
their faction and assisted in her deposition. He helped in the accession
of the new king, Bahram, who rewarded him with the fief of Rewari to
which later on Hansi also was added. His shrewdness and cunning played
an important role in raising Nasiruddin Mahmud to the throne. In 1246,
he became the principal adviser to the king.^([12](#12)) A few years
later he further strengthened his position by marrying his daughter to
the Sultan, whereupon he was given the title of Ulugh Khan (the Great
Khan), and appointed Naib Mumlikat (Deputy Sultan). He was all powerful
in the politics of the Sultanate until he himself became king in 1265,
some say after poisoning Sultan Nasiruddin.^([13](#13))

*Slave Kings*

The success of slaves such as these has made many scholars praise the
medieval Muslim slave system as being marvellous, asserting that it
provided unlimited scope for rise so much so that a slave could even
become a king. This is not a correct assessment. Slaves were not
captured to be made kings; they were not purchased to be made kings.
They were abducted, captured, or purchased to serve as domestics,
guards, troopers etc. They were sold to make money. ‘Slave’ and ‘king’
are contradictory terms. If a few slaves could become kings, it was not
because the system provided them with such opportunities but mainly
because of their ability to indulge in unscupulous manipulations, muster
armed band of followers, and strike for the throne at an appropriate
moment. Isami puts the idea in suitable words in the mouth of the slave
Sultan Shamsuddin Iltutmish who declared: “You cannot take the world
through inheritance and boasting, you can take it only by wielding the
sword in battle.”^([14](#14)) Kingship was won through the sword, not by
mere loyalty or service. Slave adventurists openly supplanted the forces
of the reigning monarch to seize authority. The killings and blindings
of Caliph Umar (644 C.E.), scions of Alauddin Khalji (1316), Mubarak
Khalji (1320), Farrukhsiyar (1719) and Shah Alam (1788) by slave nobles
clearly shows that treachery stalked every step of the reigning monarch,
so that courtesy and conspiracy by slaves went hand in hand throughout
the medieval period. In such an atmosphere, loyalty was a luxury only a
few could indulge in. One thing is certain.  In these ‘favourable
openings’ for rise to the highest office no moral principles were
involved. All this is seen in the careers of the Turkish slave rulers of
India, who, just because they were successful, are called remarkable men
by some modern historians. In all their cases applies the dictum:
“Nothing succeeds like success.” For if some slaves rose to become
kings, myriads of others, equally ambitious and efficient, got nowhere.

Such an one was Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji. He had a hard time
getting recognition. He belonged to the Khalji tribe of Ghaur in the
province of Garmsir. He came to the court of Sultan Muizzuddin at Ghazni
and applied for enrolment in the Diwan-i-Arz (Military Department), but
he was rejected. Consequently, from Ghazni he proceeded towards
Hindustan, but was again rejected by the Diwan-i-Arz at Delhi. He went
to Badaon and later on to Avadh. The ruler of Avadh Malik Hisamuddin
Aghilbek (Aghilbek is a Turkish word meaning Lord of the flock), gave
him two fiefs for subsistence. He soon acquired all the requisites of
power like arms, men and horses, and began to raid the territory of
Bihar and Munghir. The fame of his bravery and news of his plundering
raids spread abroad, attracting to his standard a body of Khalji
warriors then found hanging about all over Hindustan. His exploits were
reported to Qutbuddin Aibak, who sent him a robe of honour and appointed
him to invade Bihar as the Sultan’s general in 1202 C.E.^([15](#15))
Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji conquered extensively in Bihar and Bengal
but then died unhonoured and unsung.

In short, as Yahiya concluded in the fifteenth century, “each and every
noble wanted to become sultan”,^([16](#16)) but of course only a few
succeeded. Slave nobles who attained fame, position and crown, were
feared, befriended and flattered; others were not given much attention.
About the first set a few encomiums by Minhaj Siraj are worth
reproducing. Qutbuddin Aibak was ugly and deformed, but because he
ascended the throne, he was, according to our author, “endowed with all
laudable qualities and admirable impressions… the beneficent Qutbuddin
Aibak, the second Hatim, was a high spirited and open handed
monarch, The Almighty God had endowed him with intrepidity and
beneficence the like of which, in his day, no sovereign of the world,
either in the east or west, possessed…”^([17](#17)) Nasiruddin Qubacha
“was endowed with very great intellect, sagacity, discretion, skill,
wisdom and experience…,”^([18](#18)) while Bahauddin Tughril, the
governor of Thangir or Bayana, “was a Malik of excellent disposition,
scrupulously impartial, just, kind to the poor and strangers, and
adorned with humility.”^([19](#19)) Sultan Iltutmish was “just and
munificent Sultan, upright, beneficent, zealous and steadfast warrior
against infidels, the patronizer of the learned, the dispenser of
justice… through his sovereignty… (and) valour the Ahmadi faith acquired
pre-eminence. In intrepidity he turned out to be another impetuous Ali,
and, in liberality, a second Hatim-i-Tai…”^([20](#20)) Even the
belatedly recognized Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji was “a man
impetuous, enterprising, intrepid, bold, sagacious, and
expert.”^([21](#21)) But when he lay dying of age and exhaustion after
the Tibetan debacle, our author could say nothing more than that “Ali
Mardan in some way went unto him, drew the sheet from his face, and with
a dagger assassinated him”, and add nothing more than that “these events
and calamities happened in the year 602 H (1205-06 C.E.).”^([22](#22))

Exaggerated praise was normal with the panegyrists for those slaves who
succeeded in wresting the throne. In all cases the length of the sword
and the strength of the supporters was more important than any claims on
the basis of inheritance or even an investiture from the Caliph. The
first four Caliphs were directly related to the Prophet. There was
therefore very great respect for the Caliphs in the world of Islam.
Conscious of the moral benefits accruing from Caliphal support, there
developed a tradition with medieval Muslim rulers to request for and
receive recognition of their sovereignty from the Caliph. But even this
recognition was of no avail before the power of arms. As Prince Masud,
son of Mahmud Ghaznavi, once declared, when his claims were being
superseded by his brother Muhammad, “the sword is a truer authority than
any writing”^([23](#23)) (or investiture from the Caliph).

In such a situation there was no sanctity of any letter of manumission
either. Manumission was of great importance in law, polity and society
of Islam. It is even asserted that “no slave could ascend the throne
unless he had obtained a letter of manumission (*khatt-i-azadi*) from
his master. …because a slave is no longer slave when he is manumitted by
his master.”^([24](#24)) Sure enough, many of the slaves tried to obtain
such letters; it provided legitimacy to their office. But many slaves
whose star was in ascendance lived almost like kings without receiving
or caring to receive any manumission letter. For example, as mentioned
earlier, Alptigin in Khurasan had 500 villages of his own and an
assemblage of 2000 slave troopers. As such as governor of Khurasan his
position was not inferior to that of any sultan, although he had not
been manumitted. But since the sword was the ultimate arbiter, even this
moral prop was not that important. Most of the slave Maliks of
Muizzuddin requested for letters of manumission from the Sultan’s
successor, Mahmud, and did receive them. Tajuddin Yaldoz and Nasiruddin
Qubacha received their letters of manumission on
request,^([25](#25)) but Qutbuddin Aibak received his letter of
manumission more than one year after he had ascended the throne of
Delhi.^([26](#26)) It is not clear when Balban received his letter of
freedom. At one place the contemporary chronicler, Ziyauddin Barani,
says that Balban used to maintain the paraphernalia of royalty even when
he was a khan,^([27](#27)) at another that he ascended the throne after
becoming free,^([28](#28)) and yet at another that all the Forty Amirs
(*Chahlgani*) had obtained freedom (buzurgi) at one and the same time so
that no one considered himself inferior to any other.

*Slave Nobles*

These Turkish slaves formed the ruling class of Muslim kings and nobles
in Hindustan. A few became kings while most others remained nobles. The
nobles were called Khans, Maliks and Amirs. The official status of a
noble was determined by his *shughl* (office), *khitab* (title), *iqta*
(land assignment) and *maratib* (status and position at the court). Each
nobleman of any importance commanded his own army and held his own
miniature court. Sometimes he gathered so much strength that the Sultan
began to live in fear of him. Alauddin Ata Malik Juwaini in his
*Tarikh-i-Jahan Gusha* writes that often the ruler of a Muslim country
“talks with fear with his own purchased slave, if the latter possesses
ten horses in his stable… If an army is placed under his command, and he
attains to position of authority, he simply cannot be commanded. And
often it happens that the officer himself rises in revolt (against the
king).”^([29](#29)) This was precisely the situation during the period
of the early sultans. When Sultan Muizzuddin was killed, the inheritance
of his dominions was contested between his relatives and Amirs in the
homeland and the Turkish slaves operating in India. “These slave Maliks
and Amirs, deprived the Maliks and Amirs of Ghaur, by force, of the bier
of the late Sultan, together with precious treasures, and took
possession of them” while they sent his body to Ghazni.^([30](#30)) This
conveys the idea of the clout of the Turkish slaves appointed in
Hindustan. Aibak, Iltutmish, Yaldoz, Qubacha and Balban were all
purchased slaves. They fought amongst themselves and faced opposition
from their slave nobles. The nobles flouted the wishes and dictates of
the rulers to make a show of strength. They formed pressure groups and
rejected the king’s nominee to the throne. Qutbuddin Aibak wanted his
slave Iltutmish to succeed him, but the nobles raised Aram Shah to the
throne of Delhi. Sultan Iltutmish made Raziyah his successor, but the
Maliks raised Ruknuddin Firoz to the throne. Balban designated Kai
Khusrau as his heir apparent, but the nobles placed Kaiqubad on the
throne. As if this was not bad enough, in the thirteenth century, during
the Slave Dynasty’s rule in Hindustan, out of ten rulers they killed six
- Aram Shah, Ruknuddin Firoz, Raziyah, Bahram, Alauddin Masaud and
Nasiruddin Mahmud. As we shall see later on, these slave nobles extended
Muslim dominions in India, collected huge treasures through loot, and
made their constructive and destructive contribution in the various
spheres of life. But they always posed a challenge to the king about how
to control them.

No king could rule by himself; he had to govern through the nobles or
Umara. They used to be appointed as Walis, Muqtis or Iqtadars to
administer their assignments. W.H. Moreland enumerates the services
rendered by some slave nobles like Tughan Khan, Saifuddin Aibak, Tughril
Khan and Ulugh Khan Balban.^([31](#31)) But they had to be kept under
control and there were many levers in the administrative machinery
through which the Sultan kept a control over them. The lives of nobles,
their titles and grants, were all dependent on the pleasure and mercy of
the monarch. The absolute powers of the king regarding appointment and
dismissal made the nobles completely dependent on him. The Sultan took
extreme care in selecting them, and appointed to this cadre either his
relatives or the most trusted persons. As a further safeguard some sort
of a spoil system was resorted to. On accession a new monarch removed
all nobles of his predecessor and appointed his own loyal slave
supporters to important offices. Hence the Muizzi, Qutbi, Shamsi and
Balbani slave Amirs (*Ghulams*) or nobles of Muizzudin bin Sam,
Qutbuddin Aibak, Shamsuddin Iltutmish and Ghiyasuddin Balban.

Turkish nobles suffered from an inborn arrogance. Devoid of humanitarian
learning and proud of military prowess, every one of them felt and said
to the other: “What art thou and what shalt thou be, that I shalt not
be?”^([32](#32)) Their continuous conflict born out of jealousy and
intrigue, was a constant danger to the stability of the Muslim state and
the monarch’s position. To show them their place the Sultan used to
inflict humiliating and barbarous punishments on those found guilty of
some crime. Malik Baqbaq, the Governor of Badaon and holder of a Jagir
of 4000 horse, got a servant beaten to death. Sultan Balban ordered
Malik Baqbaq to be publicly flogged. Balban also publicly executed the
spies who had failed to report the misconduct of Malik Baqbaq. Another
great noble, Haibat Khan, was the Governor of Avadh. In a state of
drunkenness, he got a man killed. Balban ordered Haibat Khan to be
flogged with five hundred stripes. He was also made to pay a
compensation of 20,000 *tankahs* to the widow of the victim. Haibat Khan
felt so ashamed that after this incident he never came out of his house
till the day of his death. Amin Khan, the Governor of Avadh, was hanged
at the gate of the city of Ayodhya because he had failed to defeat in
battle the rebel Tughril Beg of Bengal. Balban is said to have poisoned
even his cousin, Sher Khan, the Governor of Bhatinda. A well-established
espionage system helped in keeping the nobles terrorized. While terror
tactics made individual nobles squirm, junior Turks were promoted to
important positions and placed on par with the important. That is how
the slave rulers tried to keep individual slave nobles under control.

Under the Khaljis and Tughlaqs (fourteenth century) the nobles lived
under constant fear of the Sultan. “Nor did they do anything nor utter a
single word which could subject them to reproof or
punishment.^([33](#33))” The Afghan nobles, who were considered to be
difficult of control and therefore fairly independent, were no better.
Whenever a *farman* was sent to a district officer by Sultan Sikandar
Lodi (fifteenth century), the former received it with the utmost
respect. Sikandar reduced the highest nobles to the position of slaves
so that he could boast that “if I order one of my slaves to be seated in
a palanquin, the entire body of nobility would carry him on their
shoulders at my bidding.”^([34](#34)) Badaoni gives an eye-witness
account of the situation under Islam Shah Sur (sixteenth century). “In
the year 955H (1548 A.D.), when he was of tender age (the chronicler
Badaoni) went to the country of Bajwara, one of the dependencies of
Baiana … and witnessed the customs and rules in practice” - that the
high nobles holding ranks of 500 to 20000 *sawars* were ordered to set
up a lofty tent every Friday; a chair was placed in its centre on which
were kept the shoes of Islam Shah (how could the shoes of the Sultan be
procured? Were they sent along with the *farman*?). The nobles sat at
their proper places with bowed heads in front of them to show their
respect. Thereafter, the amin read out the *farman* containing new
regulations and reforms to be carried out by the nobles. If any one
disobeyed the royal orders, the officer concerned informed the Sultan
and “the disobedient Amir would forthwith be visited with punishment
together with his family and relations.” The Sultan also took away the
elephants and even *patars* (dancing girls) of the nobles at
will.^([35](#35))

Under the Mughals the nobles enjoyed a fair amount of respect but in
principle their status was not changed. In fact, all nobles took pride
in calling themselves *ghulams* of their superiors or the king. This
indeed became a part of Muslim etiquette and culture. This explains how
sometimes poets, physicians, musicians and scholars have all been
bracketed together as slaves. In fact, they all were. It is true that
some of them were not captured in war or purchased in slave markets. But
there were certain conditions of slavery which were applicable to them
as to the meanest of slaves. They were prohibited from visiting one
another or holding get-together parties without the permission or at
least the knowledge of the king. Further, they were prohibited from
contracting any matrimonial alliances without permission of the king or
the master. The king was heir to the noble; on his death his property
went to the king and not to his children, and the sons of the noble
became slaves of the king in their turn. Most of the kings kept a strict
watch on the activities of their greatest nobles. Hence there should be
no misgivings about the status of nobles and slaves. They were all
slaves, whether high or low. As pointed out by Pelsaert, their ranks,
assignments, “wealth, position, confidence, everything hangs by a
thread”. The king could take away everything at any time. “A trifling
mistake may bring a man to the depth of misery or to the
scaffold.”^([36](#36)) The position of the highest noble was as
uncertain as that of any slave.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) M. Ufi, *Jami-ul-Hikayat*, E.D., II, 179.

[²](#2a) Minhaj, 70, 71.

[³](#3a) Isami, I, 119.  Also Majumdar, *Struggle for the Empire*, V, 2.

[⁴](#4a) Utbi, *Tarikh-i-Yamini*, E.D., II, 18-19, 22-23.

[⁵](#5a) Khondmir, *Khulasat-ul-Akhbar*, E.D., IV, 145 besides others.

[⁶](#6a) Minhaj, 497.

[⁷](#7a) Minhaj 513, 514 and n.

[⁸](#8a) Hasan Nizami, *Tajul Maasir*, E.D., II, 221.

[⁹](#9a) Minhaj, 529-30.

[¹⁰](#10a) Minhaj, 500.

[¹¹](#11a) Ibid., 777-78.

[¹²](#12a) Nigam, *Nobility under the Sultans*, 38.

[¹³](#13a) Lal, *Early Muslim*, 64-65.

[¹⁴](#14a) Isami, II, 221.

[¹⁵](#15a) Lal, *Early Muslims*, 65-66.

[¹⁶](#16a) Yahiya, *Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi*, 140.

[¹⁷](#17a) Minhaj, 512, 513.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ibid., 531.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., 544.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., 597-98.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., 548.

[²²](#22a) Ibid., 572-73.

[²³](#23a) Ibid., 91-92.

[²⁴](#24a) M.A. Ahmad *Political History and Institutions of the Early
Turkish Empire of Delhi*, 1.

[²⁵](#25a) Minhaj, 398-99.

[²⁶](#26a) Aibak ascended the throne at Lahore on 24 June 1206 (17
Zilqada 602) more than three months after Muizzuddin’s death. His formal
manumission, sent by sultan Mahmud, the nephew and successor of the
deceased Sultan, was not obtained till 603 H/1208. Habibullah, *The
Foundation of Muslim Rule in India*, 88-89, notes 7-11.

[²⁷](#27a) Barani, p. 26.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., 25.

[²⁹](#29a) Juwaini, *Tarikh-i-Jahan Gusha* (Tehran), 19-21 and
summarized in Muhammad Aziz Ahmad, *Political History and Institutions
in the Early Turkish Empire of Delhi*, Lahore 1949, Delhi reprint 1972,
40-41

[³⁰](#30a) Minhaj, 492.

[³¹](#31a) Moreland, *The Agrarian System of Moslem India*, 216-220.

[³²](#32a) *“tu kesti ki man na am va tu ki bashi ki man na basham”*,
Barani, 28. For the struggle of Iltutmish with his compatriots see
Minhaj, 610, 774 and n. Also Tripathi, *Some Aspects of Muslim
Administration*, 26.

[³³](#33a) Barani, 284; also *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, 30.

[³⁴](#34a) Tarikh-i-Daudi, 40; *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqui*, 13(b). For more
references, Lal, *Twilight*, 189.

[³⁵](#35a) Badaoni, I, 496-97.

[³⁶](#36a) Pelsaert, 56 for the Mughal period; Barani, 282 ff for the
Sultanate.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
