+++
title = "08 CHAPTER VI ENSLAVEMENT AND PROSELYTIZATION"

+++
**CHAPTER VI**  
**ENSLAVEMENT AND PROSELYTIZATION**

Wherever the Muslims conquered - in West Asia, Eastern Europe, Africa
and India - there they made people slaves and converted them to Islam.
In this mission they were most successful in Africa and the least in
India.

At the advent of Islam, part of Arabia was under Abyssinian rule. When
Arabia was Islamized, the tide turned and the Abyssinians came under the
Arabs and they made slaves of Abyssinians and Ethiopians without much
opposition. Muslims have been quite satisfied with their achievements in
slave-making in Africa. Many Western scholars also have romanticised and
even defended black slavery in the Islamic world. Bernard Lewis quotes
many European historians to say that “slavery is a divine boon to
mankind, by means of which pagan and barbarous people are brought to
Islam and civilization… Slavery in the East has an elevating influence
over thousands of human beings, and but for it hundreds of thousands of
souls must pass their existence in this world as wild savages, little
better than animals; it, at least, makes men of them, *useful men*
too…”^([1](#1)) T.W. Arnold also writes that “devout minds have even
recognised in enslavement God’s guidance to the true faith, as the
Negroes from the Upper Nile countries… In those Africans there is no
resentment that they have been made slaves… even though cruel
men-stealers rent them from their parentage… freedom is in many
instances the reward of conversion… The patrons who paid their price
have adopted them in their households, the males are circumcised and…
God has visited them in their mishap; they can say *‘it was His grace’*,
since they are thereby entered into the saving
religion.”^([2](#2)) Lewis, however admits “that there are evils in Arab
slavery” and that even emancipated blacks are “rarely able to rise above
the lowest level.”^([3](#3)) Slavery is a degrading condition, and many
people do lose their dignity when they are kept in this condition for a
long time. It has been universally acknowledged that the later Western
managed slave trade in which Muslim Arabs were often the intermediaries,
has had a devastating consequence for African countries. There is no
reason to assume that the consequences of the earlier Islamic slavery in
Africa had more benign results for the Africans.

The Muslims kept black slaves as well as white ones. While West Asia by
and large became Muslim, bondage was a condition from which no one was
exempt including Greeks, Turks and Scandinavians, comprising even
scholars and poets. As late as the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
continuing shipments of white slaves, some of them Christians, flowed
from the booming slave markets on the northern Black Sea coast into
Italy, Spain, Egypt and the Mediterranean islands… But as “Africa became
almost synonymous with slavery the world forgot the eagerness with which
the Tatars and other Black Sea peoples had sold millions of Ukrainians,
Georgians, Circassians, Armenians, Bulgarians, Slavs and
Turks.”^([4](#4))

*Hindu Resistance to enslavement*

In India, however, the resistance by Hindus to enslavement by Muslims
was persistent and perennial. We have made a detailed study of Hindu
resistance against enslavement and concomitant cruelties of the Muslim
rulers elsewhere.^([5](#5)) Here only a few facts may be restated not to
leave any lacunae in the narrative.

The peasants scared by the prospect of enslavement, and finding the
treatment by the government unbearable, sometimes left the fields and
fled into the jungles. Often vanquished Rajas and aggrieved Zamindars
also retired into the forests and organized resistance from there. In
this confrontation Zamindars played the role of leaders and the peasants
joined under their banner. Medieval Indian society was to some extent an
armed society. In cities and towns the elite carried swords like walking
sticks. In villages few men were without at least a spear or bow and
arrows. Armed peasants provided contingents to Baheliya, Bhadauriya,
Bachgoti, Mandahar and Tomar Rajputs in the earlier period, to Jats,
Marathas and Sikhs in the later.

In the early period some angry rulers like Balban and Muhammad bin
Tughlaq hunted down these escapists in the jungles like wild beasts.
Muhammad Tughlaq was very keen on enslaving people and converting them
to Islam. The flight of peasants sent him into paroxyms of rage. Many
other rulers captured and clamped them in jails, but by and large the
peasants did succeed in fighting the enslavement policy of the Muslim
regime and did survive in the process.^([6](#6)) Nature, climate and
determination were on their side. Amir Khusrau, Ziyauddin Barani and
Vidyapati and many chroniclers of the fifteenth century described how
“the Muslims dominated the infidels” through powerful
armies.^([7](#7)) “But the latter fortify themselves in mountains… (and
uneven and rugged places) as well in bamboo groves which serve them as
ramparts,” writes Ibn Battutah.^([8](#8)) Two hundred years later Babur
also noted that “in many parts of the plains thorny jungles grow, behind
the good defence of which the people… become stubbornly rebellious…”
Timur, when he invaded India, describes the defences provided by
forests. The defence of the people, writes he, “consists of woods and
forests and trees, which interweaving with stem and branch, render it
very difficult to penetrate the country… (where) landlords and princes…
who inhabit fastnesses in those forests… live there like wild
beasts.”^([9](#9)) This was in response to the policy of enslavement and
proselytization practised by the sultans and their governors in all the
centuries of Muslim rule. Even a weak Sultan like Khizr Khan, and indeed
all Saiyyad rulers (1414-51) put the countryside of the Doab-Katehar
region to indiscriminate plunder w e the Rajas an Zamindars retaliated
with scorched earth policy. Like Ikhtiyaruddin Bakhtiyar Khalji before
him, Bahlul Lodi also turned a freebooter in his exertions to attain to
power and with his gains from plunder built up a strong force. This
policy of totally destroying villages and towns continued even when he
became the Sultan. According to Abdullah, the Sultan plundered Nimsar
Misrik in Hardoi district and “depopulated it of all riff-raff and
undesirable elements.”^([10](#10)) In the fifteenth century important
Afghan governors like those of Bihar, Ghazipur, Avadh and Lakhnau had
thirty to forty thousand retainers each. What havoc they must have
created can only be imagined.

To flee and settle down in forests was a very successful survival
strategy of the Indian people and this is vouched by many observers
including Babur. He says that when he arrived in Agra, “neither grain
for ourselves nor corn for our horse., was to be had. The villagers, out
of hostility, and hatred to us had taken to thieving and
highway-robbery; there was no moving on the roads… All the inhabitants
(*khalaiq*) had run away in terror.”^([11](#11)) And naturally they had
sought refuge elsewhere. For at another place he writes that “In
Hindustan… villages and towns are depopulated and set up in a moment… If
they (the people) fix their eyes on a place in which to settle… they
make a tank or dig a well… Khas-grass abounds, wood is unlimited, huts
are made and straightaway there is a village or a town.” There was no
dearth of forests and no dearth of water therein.^([12](#12)) The
countryside was studded with little forts, many in inaccessible forests,
some surrounded with nothing more than mud walls, but which nevertheless
provided centres of the general tradition of opposition and unrest. For,
the more the repression the more the resistance. Even emperor Jahangir
in the seventeenth century confessed that “the number of the turbulent
and the disaffected never seems to diminish; for what with the examples
made during the reign of my father, and subsequently of my own, …there
is scarcely a province in the empire in which, in one quarter or the
other, some accursed miscreant will not spring up to unfurl the standard
of rebellion; so that in Hindustan never has there existed a period of
complete repose.”^([13](#13)) In short, in such a society, “the millions
of armed men,” observes Dirk H. Kolf, “cultivators or otherwise, were
its (government’s) rivals rather than its subjects.”^([14](#14)) The one
attacked from the open, the other often warded off the attack from
jungle hide-outs. Those who took to the forest, stayed there, eating
wild fruits, tree-roots, and coarse grain if and when
available,^([l5](#15)) but surely all the time guarding their freedom.

To be brief, many Zamindars and peasants escaped into the forests
because of fear of defeat and enslavement, but in course of time they
were reduced to the position of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Backward Classes. For example, many Parihars and Parmars, once upon a
time belonging to the proud Rajput castes, are now included in lower
castes. So are the ‘Rajputs’ counted as Backward Classes in South India.
Take the case of the Thaaru women in the Tarai region as described by
Hugh and Colleen Gantzer. “Once upon a time… a group of beautiful
Sisodia Rajput princesses were spirited out of their kingdom by their
loving father. Though the old man was prepared to die in the
battlefield, with all honour, he could not bear the thought of all his
beautiful daughters dying in the fiery self-immolation pit of *Jauhar*.
He therefore summoned some of his bravest old retainers, charged them
with the task of guarding the princesses, gave them a posse of Bhil
warriors, and sent them to the safety of a remote Himalayan kingdom with
which he had ties of blood. Sadly, on their arduous journey the old
retainers succumbed to malaria and the other debilitating diseases that
the Tarai produces. Eventually when the last old Rajput male had died,
the princesses realised that they could go no further: neither they nor
their posse of Bhils knew the way and delirium had struck the old
retainers too swiftly to permit them to speak coherently… They were
young women, full of life. They didn’t want to die. So they made an
agreement with their Bhils that they would settle down there, in a
clearing in the fertile Tarai, marry them but on one condition. From
that day on their female descendants would always be superior to their
males. They would cook their food. Yes, for that is the tradition, and
they would have to cook food for themselves any way. So they would cook
their food but they would not serve them. And that is the way it still
is. Thaaru women cook their men’s food. But then they place the *thali*
on the floor and kick it towards their men… They had a trace of the high
cheek bones and almond eyes… But the most striking thing about the women
were the extraordinary bright, embroidered skirts and backless *cholis*
they wear. Also the columns of metal bangles they carried on their arms
and ankles \[which points to their Rajput ancestry\]… These women were
not the docile, subservient (type) we had often encountered in northern
Indian villages: they were proud (and) independent…”^([16](#16))

One has to travel through the country like Hugh and Colleen Gantzer to
meet such types, almost everywhere. Today the SC/ST and OBC (Other
Backward Classes) all count to fifty percent or thereabout of the
population of India. This staggeringly high figure has been reached
because of historical forces operating in the medieval times primarily.
Muslim rule spread all over the country. Resistance to it by the Hindus
also remained widespread. Jungles abounded throughout the vast land from
Gujarat to Bengal and Kashmir to Kanyakumari, and flight into them was
the safest safeguard. That is how SC/ST people are found in every state
in large numbers. During the medieval period, in the years and centuries
of oppression, they lived almost like wild beasts in improvised huts in
forest villages, segregated and isolated, suffering and struggling. But
by settling in the forests, these freedom fighters of medieval India
were enabled to preserve their religion and their culture. Their martial
arts, preserved in their *Akharas*, are even now practised in different
forms in many states.

The forest-village dwellers, whether escapees or resisters, suffered
untold privations. Still they had the satisfaction of being able to
preserve their freedom. But all victims of aggression were not so lucky.
Many groups and individuals could not escape from the clutches of the
Muslim invaders and tyranny of their rulers; they used to be captured
and enslaved. So that from the days of Muhammad bin Qasim in the eighth
century to those of Ahmad Shah Abdali in the eighteenth, enslavement and
distribution and sale of captives was systematically carried on by
Muslim conquerors and rulers.^([17](#17)) A Sufi of the stature of Amir
Khusrau wrote in the *Ashiqa*: “Had not the law granted exemption from
death by the payment of poll-tax, the very name of Hindu, root and
branch, would have been extinguished.” A few years later he asserted
that “the Turks, whenever they please, can seize, buy, or sell any
Hindu.”^([18](#18)) If this was the mind-set of the ruling elite as
expositioned by the famous Sufi, the vulnerability of the Hindu to
enslavement was truly great.

*Attack on Hindu learning*

The task of enslavement and proselytization could be made easy if the
intellectual elite, the leaders of Hindu society, could be first dealt
with and un-Islamic education suppressed. That is why in the early years
of Muslim rule priests and monks, Brahman and Buddhist teachers, were
generally slaughtered and their colleges and universities sacked.

For example, in the early years of Muslim rule, Ikhtiyauddin Bakhtiyar
Khalji sacked the Buddhist University centres in Bihar (1197-1202).
There, according to the contemporary chronicler Minhaj Siraj, “the
greater number of the inhabitants of the place were Brahmans, and the
whole of those Brahmans had their heads shaven (probably Buddhist monks
mistaken for Brahmans) and they were all slain. There were a great
number of books there; and the Musalmans… summoned a number of Hindus
that they might give them information respecting the import of these
books; but the whole of the Hindus had been killed.” All that the
invader could learn was that “the whole of the fortress was a college
and in the Hindi tongue, they call a college (*madrasa*)
Bihar.”^([19](#19)) During this period there were a large number of
centres of learning spread all over India.^([20](#20)) So thorough was
the massacre by the Khalji warrior in Bihar and later on by others in
other places that those who could read ancient inscriptions became rare
if not extinct. So that when Sultan Firoz Shah Tughlaq (fourteenth
century) shifted two Ashokan pillars from Khizarabad and Meerut to Delhi
and installed them there, he called some learned Brahmans to read the
inscriptions engraved in Ashokan Brahmi/Pali on the pillars; they failed
to read the script. Some of them tried to please the Sultan with cock
and bull stories by saying that it was recorded in the inscriptions that
no one would be able to remove the monoliths until the advent of
Firoz.^([21](#21))

It would appear that after the major and minor massacres of the type of
Ikhtiyaruddin’s, there were no pandits or monks left to read the Ashokan
Brahmi script for centuries; suppression of Hindu learning by
“demolition of schools and temples of the infidels,” continued with most
Muslim rulers right up to the time of Aurangzeb. Ashokan Edicts were
lying scattered throughout the country but these could not be read as
the experience of Firoz Tughlaq shows. It was left to the archaeologist
and Mint Master James Prinsep to decipher the script in the nineteenth
century and reveal to the world the glorious deeds of the great emperor
Ashoka. Muslim rulers in general and Firoz Tughalq and Sikandar Lodi in
particular considered the Brahmans as “the very keys of the chamber of
idolatry in whom the Hindus reposed their trust.”^([22](#22)) Therefore
they treated them with great severity. Brahmans, as leaders of Hindu
society, were the real obstacles in the Islamization of India. If they
could be suppressed, the task of proselytization would become easy.

*Slave-taking most successful missionary activity*

It needs no reiteration that every slave captured in war or purchased in
the market or sent in lieu of revenue or tribute was invariably
converted to Islam, so that slave-taking in medieval India was the most
flourishing and successful missionary endeavour. As K.M. Ashraf notes,
“the slaves added to the growing Muslim population of
India.”^([23](#23)) Every sultan, as champion of Islam, considered it a
political necessity to plant or raise Muslim population all over India
for the Islamization of the country and countering native
resistance.^([24](#24)) This slave-taking in war for spreading Islam was
not new or special to India; the system prevailed wherever Muslim rule
obtained. Throughout the medieval period Islam’s conquests and
aggressive wars were common and captured slaves helped in raising Muslim
numbers. As at one time or the other, most Muslims invaders and
conquerors were themselves slaves, and these slave-catching kings and
nobles experienced happiness at the possession of a dependent species of
property; this slave-property contributed to alleviate the hardships of
the noble’s own servitude. In their numerous families, particularly in
their county estates, they encouraged the marriage of their slaves and
let the Muslim numbers grow. On the other hand, once the captives were
reconciled to Islam and obedience (about which, in any case, there was
hardly any choice), their careers were opened to any new
opportunities. In the flowery language of Edward Gibbon, “by the
repetition of a sentence and the loss of a foreskin, the subject or the
slave, the captive or the criminal, arose in a moment the free or equal
companion of the victorious Moslems.”^([25](#25)) Although this freedom
and equality did not come at once, their servile origins were allowed to
be obliterated in the third or fourth generation. This was the reward of
conversion. There also developed a feeling of freedom even in slavery
and a vanity in belonging to the ‘ruling class’. After a few generations
the Indian Muslim forgot the circumstances of his ancestors’ enslavement
and conversion; he began to take pride in his new faith because it
opened up for him new avenues of rise and gave him a share in the
rulers’ or masters’ wealth and loot. And so enslavement and
proselytization went on hand in hand.^([26](#26))

Of the various channels of slave-catching, mounting a campaign or
fighting a war was the most rewarding. Muslim rulers had come to realise
that in the occasional or minor campaigns the harvest of slaves
collected was as good, if not better, as in major expeditions. There was
no harm if the operations were carried on in a low key. Thereby, because
of the sustained pressure, “the infidel captives might abandon their
false religion and accept Islam.”^([27](#27)) This was written by
Muhammad Bihmad Khani, himself originally a slave (as the name Khani
indicates), in the context of the wars that broke out in Hindustan after
the death of Sultan Firoz Tughlaq. The exertions of the Saiyyad rulers
in establishing their authority (1414-1451) also resulted in campaigns
in Katehar, Khor Kampil, Saket, Badaon, Rapri, Jalesar, Chandwar, Etawah
etc.^([28](#28)) In all these places, especially in the Katehar-Doab
region, the Muslim army contented itself “with the ignoble but customary
satisfaction of plundering the people” and putting the country to
indiscriminate devastation and enslavement.^([29](#29)) Meanwhile
foreigners like Shaikh Ali, the Mongol Governor of Kabul, also marched
into the Punjab, “slew a large number of people and took prisoner many
others.”^([30](#30)) During these continual campaigns Muslim captives
were sometimes released, but not the infidels who were enslaved and
converted.^([31](#31))

The Lodis who gradually reestablished the authority of the Sultanate
(1451-1526) continued with the traditional business of slave-taking.
Bahlul, the founder of the dynasty, “turned a freebooter and with his
gains from plunder built up a strong force.”^([32](#32)) If as a ruler
Bahlul led his army into Nimsar (in Hardoi district), and plundered the
place and depopulated it by killing and enslaving its
people,^([33](#33)) his successor Sikandar did the same in the Rewa and
Gwalior regions.^([34](#34))

During the fifteenth century exertions for proselytization through
enslavement were going on in the Muslim ruled regions which had broken
away from the Delhi Sultanate and established independent kingdoms like
Gujarat, Malwa, Jaunpur, Khandesh, Bengal and the Deccan. Detailed
accounts of these are found in my two books,^([35](#35)) and one who
wants to delve deep into the subject has to go through them. For obvious
reasons, major portions of the books cannot be reproduced here though
they are very relevant in the present context. However, a page or two
from one of them may be repeated here for two reasons: (1) not to leave
a gaping vacuum in the present narrative and (2) to give an idea of
slave-making in South India because we have, by and large, concentrated
only on the North in the preceding pages. “The first Bhamani King,
Alauddin Bahman Shah (1347-1358) despatched an expedition against the
northern Canatic Hindu chieftains, and his booty included ‘1000 singing
and dancing girls, *Murlis*, from Hindu temples’.^([36](#36)) In 1406
Sultan Tajuddin Firoz (1397-1422) fought a war with Vijayanagar and
captured 60,000 youths and children from its territories. When peace was
made Bukka gave, besides other things, 2,000 boys and girls skilled in
dancing and music^([37](#37))… His successor Ahmad Vali (1422-36)
marched through Vijayanagar kingdom, ‘slaughtering men and enslaving
women and children.”^([38](#38)) The captives were made
Musalmans.^([39](#39)) Sultan Alauddin (1436-58) collected a thousand
women in his harem. When it is noted that intermittent warfare between
the Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms continued for more than a century
and half, the story of enslavement and conversions need not be carried
on. Even ordinary soldiers used to get many slaves and, at the end of
the Battle of Talikot (1565), ‘large number of captives consigned to
slavery, enriched the whole of the Muslim armies, for the troops were
permitted to retain the whole of the plunder.’^([40](#40))
…”^([41](#41))

The Mughal emperor Akbar, disapproved of the custom of enslaving women
and children in times of war.^([42](#42)) He also prohibited enslavement
and sale of women and children of the peasants who had defaulted in the
payment of revenue. He knew, as Abul Fazl says, that many evil hearted
and vicious men used to proceed to villages and *mahals* and sack
them.^([43](#43)) According to W.H. Moreland, “it became a fashion to
raid a village or group of villages without any obvious justification,
and carry off the inhabitants as slaves.”^([44](#44)) It is appropriate
to suffix this statement with the cryptic remark of Koenraad Elst that
“A left-over from this period is the North-Indian custom of celebrating
weddings at midnight: this was a safety measure against the Islamic
sport of bride catching.”^([45](#45)) Jahangir had ordered that “a
government collector or *jagirdar* should not without permission
intermarry with the people of the *pargana* in which he might
be”^([46](#46)), for abductions and forced marriages were common enough.
But there was never an abjuration of the policy of enslavement as mainly
it was not the Mughal emperors but the Mughal nobility who must have
taken the lion’s share of enslavement, deportation and sale by the
state. It was not only Jahangir, a comparatively kind hearted emperor,
who used to capture poor people during his hunting expeditions and send
them to Kabul in exchange for dogs and horses; all Muslim rulers and
governors collected slaves and exploited them in the manner they
pleased. Under Shahjahan, as seen earlier, peasants were compelled to
sell their women and children to meet the revenue demand.

In any case, warfare went on as usual even under Akbar and Jahangir and
Mughal Generals went on with their usual ways in spite of the failings
of Emperors whose writ was not very effective. Abdulla Khan Uzbeg’s
force of 12,000 horse and 20,000 foot destroyed, in the Kalpi-Kanauj
area alone, all towns, took all their goods, their wives and children as
slaves and beheaded and ‘immortered’ (fixed heads with mortar in walls
and pillars) the chiefest of their men.^([47](#47)) No wonder he once
declared that “I made prisoners of five lacs of men and women and sold
them. They all became Muhammadans. From their progeny there will be
crores by the day of judgement.”^([48](#48))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) David Brion Davis, in review article on Bernard Lewis’s *Race
and Slavery in the Middle East in The New York Review of Books*, 11
October 1990.

[²](#2a) Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam*, 416-17.

[³](#3a) D.B. Davis, op. cit.

[⁴](#4a) Davis, ibid.; Elst, *Indigenous Indians*, 377.

[⁵](#5a) Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India, Indian
Muslims: Who are they and The Legacy of Muslims Rule in India*.

[⁶](#6a) Afif. 98-99.

[⁷](#7a) Barani, 268; Khusrau, *Dewl Rani*, 50; Vidyapati *Kirtilata*,
42-44, 70-72.

[⁸](#8a) Battutah, 124. Also Khusrau, *Nuh Sopehr*, E.D., III, 558.

[⁹](#9a) *Mulfuzat-i-Timuri*, E.D., III, 395.

[¹⁰](#10a) Abdullah, *Tarikh-i-Daudi*, 25; Ahmad Yadgar,
*Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana*, 23-27, 68; *Babur-Nama*, trs. A.
Beveridge, 487; Nizamuddin Ahmad, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, I, 342-43;
*Tarikh-i-Daudi*,107; *Mankhzan-i-Afghani*, 74(a).

[¹¹](#11a) *Babur-Nama*, 524.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., 487-88; Lal, *Legacy*, 270.

[¹³](#13a) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, trs.  Price, 225-26.

[¹⁴](#14a) Kolf, *Naukar, Rajput and Sepoy*, 7.

[¹⁵](#15a) Badaoni, Ranking, I, 377.

[¹⁶](#16a) Sunday Magazine, *Indian Express*, 19 January 1992.

[¹⁷](#17a) For details see Lal, *Legacy*, 271-287.

[¹⁸](#18a) Amir Khusrau, *Ashiqa*, E.D., III, 546; Nuh Sipehr, 561.

[¹⁹](#19a) Minhaj, I, 552.

[²⁰](#20a) B.P. Mazumdar has listed some of these centres in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries as existing in Northern India. In Bihar
they were Nalanda, Vikramsila, Odantapuri and Phullahari monasteries
near Monghyr. In North and Eastern Bengal they were Jagaddala, Somapura
and Devikota in North Bengal, Vikrampuri in Dacca, Pattikeraka in
Comilla, and Panditavihara in Chittagong. Minor *Viharas* were in
existence at Gaya and Valabhi and in Bundelkhand.

Hieun Tsang, in the seventh century, noted that monasteries existed at
the following places; although “we have no means to find out (how many)
continued to flourish in the eleventh-twelfth centuries”. But many
surely did. Hieun Tsang’s list included “Nagarkot, Udyana, Jalandhar,
Sthanesvara, Srughna Matipura, Brahmapura, Govisana, Ahichchatra,
Samkasya, Kanauj, Navadevakula, Ayodhya, Hayamuka, Prayag, Visoka,
Kapilvastu, Banaras, Ramagrama, Ghazipur, Tilosika, Gunamati, Silabhadra
near Gaya, Kajangala, Pundravardhana, Kamarupa, Samatata, Orissa, Berar,
Malwa, Valabhi, Anandapura, Surat, Ujjayini and Chitor” (Mazumdar,
*Socio-Economic History of Northern India*, 153-56).

[²¹](#21a) Afif, 302-315; Carr Stephen, *Archaeology of Delhi*, 292-293.
Thomas, Chronicles, 292-93.

[²²](#22a) Afif, 379-82.  *Zunnardaran kalid-i-hujra-i-kufr und wa
kafiran bar eshan muatqid und*; Dorn, *Makhzan*, I, 65. Farishtah, I,
182; Saqi Mustaad Khan, *Maasir-i-Alamgiri*, 51-52.

[²³](#23a) Ashraf, 151. Also Arnold, *Preaching of Islam*, 365.

[²⁴](#24a) Qureshi, *Administration*, 69, fn 1; Ishwari Prasad,
*Qaraunab Turks*, 173.

[²⁵](#25a) Gibbon, II, 782, also 720.

[²⁶](#26a) Barani, *Fatawa*, 98. Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan*,
177.

[²⁷](#27a) Muhammad Bihamad Khani, *Tarikh-I-Muhammadi*, English tr. by
Muhammad Zaki, Aligarh Muslim University, 1972, 57-58. Also Afif, 180;
Yahiya, 184-88; Badaoni, Ranking, I, 377; T.A., I, 266.

[²⁸](#28a) For identification of places see Lal, *Twilight*, 74-75.

[²⁹](#29a) Haig, C.H.I., III, 207; Farishtah, I, 162.

[³⁰](#30a) Yahiya, 218; Farishtah, I, 167; Bihamad Khani, 95.

[³¹](#31a) For detailed references Lal, *Twilight*, 103-104.

[³²](#32a) Ibid., 118.

[³³](#33a) Abdullah, *Tarikh-i-Daudi* 25; Yadgar,
*Tarikh-i-Salatin-i-Afghana*, 23-27.

[³⁴](#34a) Lal, *Twilight*, 170-72, 176-78.

[³⁵](#35a) *Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India*, New Delhi,
1973 and *Indian Muslim: Who are They*, New Delhi, 1990.

[³⁶](#36a) C.H.I., III, 391.

[³⁷](#37a) Sewell, *A Forgotten Empire* (Vijayanagar), 57-58.

[³⁸](#38a) C.H.I., III, 397.

[³⁹](#39a) *ibid*, 398.

[⁴⁰](#40a) C.H.I., 449. Also Sewell, 198.

[⁴¹](#41a) *Indian Muslims: Who are they*, 53-54.

[⁴²](#42a) *Akbar Nama*, II, 246. Du Jarric, *Akbar and the Jesuits*,
152-59. Also 28, 30, 70, 92.

[⁴³](#43a) *Akbar Nama*, II, 451.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 92; Sarkar,
*Aurangzeb*, III, 331-32; *Maasir-ul-Umara*, III, 442.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Elst, *Negationism in India*, 28.

[⁴⁶](#46a) *Tuzuk*, I, 9.

[⁴⁷](#47a) For action in this region in the reign of Akbar see Abul
Fazl, *Akbar Nama*, II, 195-96.

[⁴⁸](#48a) Shah Nawaz Khan, *Maasir-ul-Umara*, I, 105.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


