+++
title = "12 CHAPTER X SLAVE TRADE"

+++
**CHAPTER X**  
**SLAVE TRADE**

It is nowhere mentioned in medieval chronicles how slaves, captured in
war, were sorted out and separated for the purpose of being sold,
drafted into the army, given as gifts to princes and nobles or set apart
for domestic service. All that is known is that slaves were disposed of
on all these counts and many more. It appears that the sorting was done
on the basis of the looks of the females, physical fitness of the males,
intuition of the master, as well as the specific work that a slave was
deemed fit to do. An early example is about the capture of Brahmanabad
by Muhammad bin Qasim. Of the prisoners captured a selection was made
from the slaves and other spoils, “in order to detach the usual
one-fifth share of the State. The number of the selected slaves came to
about 20,000. The rest were distributed among the troops.”^([1](#1)) But
the criterion of selection has not been specified. Another instance is
about Amir Timur who invaded India in 1399, and took a large number of
prisoners. He writes “I ordered that all the artisans and clever
mechanics, who were masters of their respective crafts, should be picked
out from among the prisoners and set aside, and accordingly some
thousands of craftsmen were selected to await my command. All these I
distributed among the princes and *amirs* who were present, or who were
engaged officially in other parts of my dominions (to take care of
them). I had determined to build a *Majid-i-Jami* in Samarkand, the seat
of my empire, which should be without rival in any country; so I ordered
that all builders and stone-masons should be set apart for my own
especial service.”^([2](#2)) But such details are not available in most
cases.

*Sale of Slaves*

The majority of Indian slaves comprised captives made during wars. These
slaves formed property of the State. At the time of Muhammad bin Qasim’s
invasion of Sindh the head of the State was the Caliph and prisoners
taken in Sindh were regularly forwarded to him. Kufi, the author of the
*Chachnama*, rightly sums up the position. Out of the total catch,
four-fifths was the share of the soldiers, “what remained of the cash
and slaves was… sent to Hajjaj (the Governor of Iraq )” for onward
transportation to the Khalifa.^([3](#3)) In such a situation any special
acquisition had to be paid for in cash. Muhammad bin Qasim who wished to
possess Raja Dahir’s wife Ladi, avers the *Chachnama*, “purchased her
out of the spoils, before making her his wife.”^([4](#4)) But the price
he paid is not mentioned. Similarly, when Hajjaj sent 60,000 slaves
captured in India to the Caliph Walid I (705-715 C.E.), the latter “sold
some of those female slaves of royal birth”,^([5](#5)) but again their
price has not been specified.

Mahmud of Ghazni carried away large numbers of captives from India in
every campaign and sold most of them. Jayapala the defeated Hindu
Shahiya King of Kabul was publicly exposed at some slave market in
Khurasan by the order of Mahmud who “commanded that he might be ransomed
for the sum of eighty *dirams*”. Raverty suggests that “the word
‘thousand’ must have been left out. If not, Mahmud did not set much
value on his captive.”^([6](#6)) As Jayapala was old, the price he could
fetch in open auction probably could not be more than 80 *dirhams*. Or,
as Hodivala points out, the object of exposing Jayapala to public
derision was evidently to compel him into surrendering to his victor’s
demands and purchase his release on his captor’s own terms, which was
fixed at “200,000 golden *dinars* and 250 elephants; and the necklace
taken from Jaipal was valued at another 200,000 gold
*dinars*.”^([7](#7)) Therefore, 80 *dirhams* as the price of an old king
signifies nothing.

In one instance specifically Al Utbi gives an idea of the gain from the
sale of captives. According to his narrative, Mahmud, after his campaign
in Mathura, Mahaban and Kanauj (1018-19), returned to Ghazni with,
besides other booty, 53,000 captives and each one of these was sold for
two to ten *dirhams*. From this statement it would be safe to infer that
the lowest price at which an Indian captive was sold was two, and the
highest ten *dirhams*. It would also be safe to conclude that slaves
were captured by invaders to be sold to make money; for Utbi adds
that “Merchants came from different cities to purchase them so that the
countries of Mawarau-n-nahr, Iraq and Khurasan were filled with
them”.^([8](#8)) Earlier, in the expedition to Thaneshwar (1015),
according to Farishtah, “the Muhammadan army brought to Ghaznin 200,000
captives, so that the capital (Ghaznin) looked like an Indian city, for
every soldier of the army had several slaves and slave
girls”.^([9](#9)) Similarly, in the Kashmir Valley (1014 C.E.),
according to Utbi, the captives taken “were so plentiful that they
became very cheap…”^([10](#10)) But he does not say how cheaply they
were sold.

The mention of price at one place is hardly sufficient to estimate the
money value of Indian slaves sold in foreign lands in the eleventh
century. What was the value of two to ten *dirhams* in those days is
also not known. Abul Fazl traces the history of *dirham* from the time
of Caliph Umar, but his detailed and rather confusing account only shows
that the earliest *dirhams* of the Ghaznavid period were struck at
Ghazni and Lahore. It was a silver coin of great variations in weight
and value as was the case with the *dinar*, a gold
coin.^([11](#11)) Yet, the sale of thousands of slaves after every
campaign, as the figures of captives carried away by Mahmud
shows,^([12](#12)) brought good profit to the invader. No wonder that
besides treasure, captives also used to be regularly carried away from
India during the Ghaznavid occupation of Punjab for making extra money
through their sale. This lucrative business continued, and a scion of
the house, Sultan Ibrahim (1054-1099), once carried away one lakh
captives to Ghazni.^([13](#13))

During the first hundred years of Muslim rule, that is, under Aibak,
Iltutmish and Balban (1206-1290), slaves of both sexes were captured in
droves during military expeditions, but they were mostly distributed
among kings, nobles and soldiers for sundry duties.^([14](#14)) Large
number of workers were needed by these early sultans for clearing
jungles, making roads, as auxiliaries in the army, for construction of
buildings, as errand runners by administrators, tent fixers and workers
in camp establishments. Slaves were needed for arranging supplies for
households of all kinds of foreign Muslims from kings and nobles to
commoners, constructing small residential dwellings or grand and
imposing State buildings etc. Slave girls were needed in plenty for
providing pleasure and other services. All this work was done by
captives turned slaves. It appears that because of their being detailed
on these jobs, very few slaves were left available for sale. That is why
there is no specific mention of their sale during this period, But sale
of captives was a common practice. For example, it is mentioned that
Sultan Nasiruddin, son of Iltutmish (1246-66), had no “purchased”
(*laundi va khadima*) slave girl, that his wife cooked for him and he
earned his livelihood by selling copies of Quran written by
himself. “This story, however, is very stale indeed,” adds Raverty, “as
stale as the days of one of the early Khalifas”, for this very sultan
could present *forty head of slaves* to his nobleman Minhaj Siraj for
being sent to his dear sister in Khurasan.^([15](#15))

During the reign of Sultan Alauddin Khalji the Sultanate grew strong
(1296-1316).^([16](#16)) He conquered extensively and in every campaign
slaves were captured in large numbers. These were sold in various ways -
on the Spot,^([17](#17)) in the markets of Delhi, and of other
cities.  Sometimes even women and children of Mongol invaders were
captured and sold like Hindu slaves in Delhi and other cities of
India.^([18](#18))

*Sale Price of Slaves*

Alauddin Khalji’s Market Control has become famous in medieval Indian
history. He fixed the price of every commodity, including slaves. The
sale price of slaves was like this. The standard price of a working girl
was fixed at from 5 to 12 *tankahs*, and that of a good looking girl
suitable for concubinage from 20 to 30 and even 40 *tankahs*. The price
of a man slave (*ghulam*) usually did not exceed 100 to 200 *tankahs*.
The prices of handsome boys were fixed from 20 to 30 *tankahs*; the
ill-favoured could be obtained for 7 to 8. The price of a child slave
(*ghulam bachchgan naukari*) was fixed at 70 to 80 *tankahs*. The slaves
were classified according to their looks and working capacity. In the
case of bulk purchases by traders who had ready money and who had the
means to carry their flock for sale to other cities,^([19](#19)) prices
were fixed accordingly.

Who got the profit form such sales? If Alauddin Khalji followed the
example of contemporary rulers in West Asian countries, then the profit
went to him, that is, the sultan or the government.  This was also
customary. It is stated by Isami in his *Futuh-us-Salatin* that when
Mahmud of Ghazni defeated Raja Jayapala of the Hindu Shahiya dynasty, he
“carried him to the distant part of the kingdom of Ghazni and delivered
him to an agent (*dalal*) of the *Slave Market* …(and) at the command of
the king Mahmud they \[the Brokers of the Market, *muqiman-i-bazar* in
the original\] sold Jaipal as a slave for 80 Dinars and deposited the
money realised by the sale in the Treasury”.  Hodivala adds that “it
would be difficult to get better evidence than this of the ruler making
the profit.^([20](#20)) In some of the West Asian countries in the
Middle Ages, according to Ira Marvin Lapidus, the rulers used to take
over wholesale trade, in grain and also probably in other commodities,
so that profits from sale accrued to them rather than to the private
traders. Ibn Khaldun also says that “The slave merchants bring them to
Egypt in batches… and government buyers have them displayed for
inspection and bid for them, raising the price above their
value.”^([21](#21)) it was equally true of Alauddin. He treated the
merchants themselves as slaves. As per his orders, no middlemen or
brokers were allowed to visit the slave-market and examine the “goods”,
so that the profits of the traders were curtailed while those of the
Sultan swelled. No wonder then that at his demise the Sindhi (Multani)
merchants took out processions to rejoice at the death of
Alauddin.^([22](#22))

No rule about the sale price could be laid in special cases when the
catch was big or a very beautiful slave (“man or woman/boy or girl”) of
very high price, say 1000 to 2000 *tankahs* was brought for sale in the
market. Sometimes it created a very piquant situation as nobody dared to
buy him/her, lest the king should come to know that so and so was rich
enough to pay so high a price for a slave/concubine. Even then slaves
were sometimes purchased for high amounts. The poet Badr Chach claims to
have bought a slave named Gul-Chehra (Rose Face) for 900
*tankahs*.^([23](#23)) The title Hazardinari (of a thousand gold coins)
for Malik Kafur shows that a skilled slave could have cost anything. It
may therefore be contended that except in the reign of Alauddin when
prices were fixed, prices of slaves and concubines were uncertain,
varying according to fortunes of war and famine, looks of the person,
bargaining talent of the auctioneers, shrewdness of the
buyer^([24](#24)) and fluctuations in the market through influences of
demand and supply. For instance, when Muhammad Ghauri and Qutbuddin
Aibak mounted a combined attack on the Khokhars of the Salt Range
(Koh-i-Jud), “great plunder was taken and many captives, so that five
Hindu \[Khokhars\] captives could be bought for a
*dinar*”.^([25](#25)) Captives were so plentiful that they were also
sent “to sell in Khurasan, not long after.”^([26](#26)) On the other
hand, if the supply was short and demand great, the prices went shooting
high. Narrating the events of the reign of Sultan Qutbuddin Mubarak
Khalji (1316-20), the son and successor of Alauddin Khalji, Ziyauddin
Barani says that the strict regulations of Alauddin were all thrown to
the winds by the new Sultan, and Qutbuddin and his nobles gave
themselves up to a life of debauchery and licence. In such circumstances
the “demand for beautiful girls and beardless boys made them a scarce
commodity, and their prices rose to 500 and sometimes even to one
thousand and two thousand *tankahs*.”^([27](#27)) So, in the early
fourteenth century the lowest average price of a slave mentioned by
chroniclers was about eight *tankahs*, the highest 2000 *tankahs*.
Slaves in Hindustan were cheap during the Khalji period because of the
price-control of Alauddin Khalji and also because coined money was in
short supply. So that, writes Ziyauddin Barani, “a camel could be had
for a *dang* (small copper coin), but wherefore the *dang*?”^([28](#28))
In view of this some sort of barter should have been practised.

*Low Price of Indian Slaves*

Ziyauddin Barani reckons regulations regarding sale of “horses, slaves
and quadrupeds” under one category. T.P. Hughes quoting the *Hidayah*
says that slaves, male and female, are treated merely as articles of
merchandise, and “very similar rules apply both to the sale of animals
and bondsmen.”^([29](#29)) A milch buffalo cost 10-12 *tankahs*., a
working girl was cheaper.  The price of a good quality horse was 90-120
*tankahs*, that of a *ghulam* was 100 on an average. A handsome boy
could be had for 20 to 30 *tankahs*.^([30](#30)) It is therefore a
matter of some satisfaction that under the Khaljis the value of humans
in terms of price was not less than that of horses and buffaloes.

The contemporary chronicler Barani boasts that the cheapness of prices
in Alauddin’s time was not witnessed after his reign.^([31](#31)) But
the trend towards low prices was universal and spread over a long
period. Writing about the days of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1325-51),
Shihabuddin Al-Umari writes: “The Sultan never ceases to show the
greatest zeal in making war upon the infidels… Every day thousands of
slaves are sold at a very low price, so great is the number of
prisoners… (that) the value at Delhi of a young slave girl, for domestic
service, does not exceed eight *tankahs*. Those who are deemed fit to
fill the parts of domestic and concubine sell for about fifteen
*tankahs*. In other cities prices are still lower…” Probably it was so
because Ibn Battuta while in Bengal says that a pretty *Kaniz* (slave
girl) could be had there for one gold *dinar* (or 10 silver
*tankahs*). “I purchased at this price a very beautiful slave girl whose
name was Ashura. A friend of mine also bought a young slave named Lulu
for two gold coins.”^([32](#32)) It is very difficult to establish a
relationship between the prices of Delhi market and those of the
provinces. Umari continues, “but still, in spite of low price of slaves,
20000 *tankahs*, and even more, are paid for young Indian girls. I
inquired the reason… and was told that these young girls are remarkable
for their beauty, and the grace of their manners.”^([33](#33))

The cheapness of price of young slaves is indirectly attested to by Ibn
Battuta also. Such was their influx that at one place he writes, “Once
there arrived in Delhi some female infidel captives, ten of whom the
Vazir sent to me. I gave one of them to the man who had brought them… My
companion took three young girls, and I do not know what happened to the
rest.”^([34](#34)) Thousands of slaves were captured in the minor yearly
campaigns of Firoz Tughlaq and obviously sold, for, says the
contemporary chronicler Shams Siraj Afif that “in places which are
sacked and looted the captives are selected as per royal regulations.
Those fit for royal service (alone) are sent to the
court.”^([35](#35)) The others were sold. It was under such a system
that one of Firoz’s slaves Bashir Sultani could buy with money 4,000
slaves (*mal kharida*) for his personal service.^([36](#36))

From the fifteenth century onwards, we have some more information about
the sale of slaves and their prices at home and abroad. Babur writes in
his Memoirs that “there are two trade-marts on the land-route between
Hindustan and Khurasan; one is Kabul, the other, Qandhar. (Route to
Kabul was from Lahore, to Qandhar from Multan)… Down to Kabul every year
…from Hindustan, come every year caravans… bringing slaves (*barda*)”
and other commodities, and sell them at great profit. “In Kabul can be
had the products of Khurasan, Rum, Iraq and Chin (China); *while it is
Hindustan’s own market* (emphasis added).” There was also barter
prevailing with regard to the disposal of slaves. For example, William
Finch writing at Agra in about 1610 says that “in hunting the men of the
jungle were on the same footing as the beasts” and whatever was taken in
the game was the king’s *shikar*, whether men or beasts. “Men remain the
King’s slaves which he sends yearly to Kabul to barter for horses and
dogs.” Many other writers tell it besides Finch.^([37](#37)) Barter was
in vogue not only in the days of Jahangir but it was practised
throughout the medieval period.

*The Ain-i-Akbari*

The *Ain-i-Akbari* and other similar works giving data about the wages
of servants and labourers, in consequence indirectly giving the value of
slaves as a market commodity. W.H. Moreland observes that some of the
men employed on various works were free, while others were slaves, but
the functions assigned to the two classes were to a great extent
interchangeable and, therefore, for our purpose it is relevant to treat
them as a single group, and the price of slaves may be estimated on the
basis of wages paid to the free labourer. In Mughal India, in the reign
of Akbar (sixteenth century), and as seen by Bernier (seventeenth
century), “Freemen were hired at rates which sufficed for a little more
than a bare existence… a servant with no special qualifications cost
about 1 ½ rupees monthly at Akbar’s court, and perhaps 2 on the west
coast… Pyrard puts the price of a slave-girl at the equivalent of about
50 rupees in Goa, which was a very busy market for such commodities, but
the rate must have varied between very wide limits, depending as it did
partly on the qualities of the individual and partly on fluctuations in
the supply.”^([38](#38)) This price of 40 to 50 rupees for a slave paid
by the English was the average, “the earlier reference shows that the
Dutch demand had raised prices to about this level from the former
standard of Rs. 15 to 20.”^([39](#39)) The wages of free men, that is,
labourers and not slaves, were equally low. But the proportion of
slaves, who were valued as property, was more considerable than that of
servants, who can be computed only as an expense. It was more to the
interest of rulers, nobles, merchants and manufactures to purchase than
to hire their workmen. In the countryside, slaves were employed as the
cheapest and most laborious instruments of agriculture. But medieval
slavery was more necessary for urban service. So rural populations were
made captives and brought for work in cities. Rural slaves and servants
were not bought on the market but reproduced themselves through
demographic increase. In the cities themselves there was no dearth of
them. Pelsaert and so many other foreigners noted that men stood in the
market to be hired and “most of the great lords reckon 40 days to the
month, and pay from 3 to 4 rupees for that period.”^([40](#40)) “Akbar
sanctioned the following daily wages for workers and artisans - 2 *dams*
(copper coins, 140 to the *Rupia*) for ordinary labourers, 3 to 4 *dams*
for superior labourers, 3 to 7 *dams* for carpenters and 5 to 7 *dams*
for builders.”^([41](#41)) In several instances the lowest grades of
servants were entitled to less than two rupees monthly, “while the bulk
of the menials and of the ordinary foot-soldiers began at less than
three rupees… The minimum for subsistence at the Court is probably
marked by the lowest grade of slaves who were allowed one dam daily,
equivalent to three-quarters of a rupee monthly in the currency of the
time… These instances appear to justify the conclusion that early in the
seventeenth century foreigners could secure capable servants for
somewhere about three rupees a month. What this represents in real wages
is uncertain (but) the rates struck the Europeans as extraordinarily
low…”^([42](#42))

The inescapable conclusion deduced from the wages of labourers and
applied to the prices of slaves is that these were very low
throughout. There are not many references available about the actual
price of slaves and therefore this section is closed with the
information that “in the month of November (1947), Hindu and Sikh girls
brought by Pathan raiders from Kashmir were sold in the bazars of
ghulam,”^([43](#43)) for rupees 10 or so each in the wake of the
partition of the country, 1947-48.

*Import of foreign slaves*

As compared to Hindu slaves, who were often captured and sold in droves,
the price of foreign slaves was high. They used to be Muslims, were
always considered as talented, and in some cases essentially an item of
luxury. Foreign slaves were purchased from merchants coming from lands
beyond the river Sindh for as much as 500 to 1000 dinars. Both in the
*Hidayah* and the *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* the price of a slave repeatedly
mentioned, although in the form of examples, is mostly 1000
dirhams.^([44](#44)) For example Qutbuddin Aibak purchased two
accomplished Turkish slaves for one lakh *jitals* or 2,000 *tankahs* (at
48-50 copper *jitals* to one silver *tankah*).

Similarly, Iltutmish purchased Qamaruddin Timur Khan for 50,000 *jitals*
or 1000 *tankahs*.^([45](#45)) And the transaction was concluded after
great haggling and bargaining. In this context the sale of Iltutmish to
Qutbuddin Aibak makes an interesting and instructive reading. As seen
earlier, a slave merchant Jamaluddin Muhammad had brought Iltutmish to
Ghazni to sell him to Sultan Muizzuddin. “At that period, no Turk
superior to him in comeliness, commendable qualities… intelligence and
sagacity, had they brought to that capital.” The Sultan inquired about
his price. The merchants or their brokers mentioned the price of two
slaves together - one Iltutmish and another Ibak, as the “sum of a
thousand *dinars* of pure Rukni gold for each.” But the merchant
Jamaluddin Muhammad declined to sell Shamsuddin for that amount. An
angry Sultan then commanded that no one should purchase him, and that
the sale should be prohibited. Jamaluddin Muhammad took Iltutmish back
to Bukhara, which was a renowned centre of slave trade in the Middle
Ages.^([46](#46)) When he returned to Ghazni after four or five years,
Qutbuddin Aibak showed an inclination to buy Iltutmish and requested
Muizuddin for permission to do so. The Sultan replied: “Since a command
has been issued that he should not be purchased at Ghaznin, let them
take him to the city of Delhi and there he can be purchased.” The
merchant accordingly brought him to Delhi and Iltutmish and the other
slave were bought by Qutbuddin Aibak for the sum of one hundred thousand
*jitals*.^([47](#47))

Haggling and bargaining was possible in individual cases. In bulk
purchases price was settled for the whole lot at one go. Merchants from
Turkey, Syria, Persia and Transoxiana used to approach Muslim kings with
their consignments.^([48](#48)) Foreign slaves of both sexes were in
great demand in India. Males were needed for heavy duties, females for
concubinage and keeping surveillance on other harem inmates. Niccolao
Manucci writes that when in 1661-62 an embassy was sent by the king of
Balkh, “the envoys brought several Tartar and Uzbeg women with them for
sale. Aurangzeb purchased some of them. They were placed in the list of
numerous Kashgar, Qalmaq, Pathan and Abyssinian women. They were chosen
because they are warlike and skilful in the use of lance, arrow and
sword,”^([49](#49)) and therefore could serve as efficient guards of the
harem. For concubinage fair women from East European countries were
preferred. For example, Udaipuri-Mahall, the concubine of Aurangzeb, was
a Georgian slave girl.

Importation of foreign slaves went on right up to the eighteenth
century. In the fifteenth century, the Ottoman capture of Constantinople
in 1453 gradually diverted the immense flow of slaves from the Crimea,
the Balkans and the steppes of western Asia to Islamic markets. Later
on, the southward expansion of Russia, culminating in the annexation of
Crimea in 1783, gradually shut off the supply of white slaves to the
Islamic markets. As Africa became almost synonymous with slavery, the
world forgot the eagerness with which Tatars and other Black Sea peoples
had sold millions of Ukrainians, Georgians, Circassians, Armenians,
Bulgarians, Slavs and Turks.^([50](#50)) In Africa, in the nineteenth
century in the Sudan region there were farms that specialized in
breeding black slaves for sale like cattle or sheep. Other enterprising
merchants in upper Egypt reaped large capital gains by purchasing
prepubescent boys at a price of about three hundred piastres apiece,
having them castrated by Coptic monks, and then selling them as eunuchs
for one thousand piastres each.^([51](#51)) “Islamic civilization did
indeed practise castration of slaves on an unprecedented scale. Several
cities in Africa were real factories of eunuchs; they were an expensive
commodity as only 25% of the victims survived the
operation.”^([52](#52)) In short, black or white, castrated or
otherwise, the price of foreign slaves was high as, besides other
factors, it also covered the cost of their transportation.

Slavery was recognised by Prophet Muhammad. It was considered lawful in
Islam. Regular trade in slaves began with the Ummayad Caliph
Muawiya.^([53](#53)) in the days of the Abbasid Caliphs it gained in
impetus and extent. Slave trade spread so rapidly that no one was safe
from being enslaved in the heyday of Muslim power, and black and white
slaves were traded throughout the Muslim world. Brigandage was commonly
resorted to in order to obtain slaves. “The *Hudud al-Alam* (a tenth
century Persian document) describes the Sudan (the land south of the
desert separating it from the Maghreb) as follows: no region is more
populated than this. The merchants steal children there and take them
away. They castrate them and take them to Egypt, where they sell
them. *Among them \[the Sudanese\] there are people who steal each
other’s children to sell them to the merchants* when they
come.”^([54](#54)) Turks, Negroes, Ethiopians, Abyssinians, Berbers,
Slavs and many others were sold in “thousands”. White slaves were
costlier than the black. Egypt and Syria supplied a large number of them
and Italian ports formed transit points for export. In the tenth century
the most valuable commodity that was carried from Volga to Central Asia
was slaves. They were brought to the Oxus region, more particularly
Samarkand. There the best were put in the market for sale,^([55](#55))
and the trade was very profitable.

T.W. Arnold’s observations on this slave-taking in East European and
African countries is relevant in the Indian context. He writes that
“though the lot of many of the Christian captives was very pitiable one,
others who held positions in the households of private individuals, were
often no worse off than domestic servants in the rest of Europe. As
organised by the Muhammadan Law, slavery was robbed of many of its
harshest features, nor in Turkey at least does it seem to have been
accompanied by such barbarities and atrocities as in the pirate states
of Northern Africa… The condition of the Christian captives naturally
varied with the circumstances of their own capabilities of adapting
themselves to a life of hardship; the aged, the priests and monks, and
those of noble birth suffered most, while the physician and the
handicraftsman received more considerate treatment from their masters,
as being servants that best repaid the money spent on them. The galley
slaves naturally suffered most of all.” In East Africa the Arabs were
“given up wholly to the pursuit of commerce or to
slaves-hunting… Naturally the feeling of both chiefs and people was
hostile to the Muhammadans, who were hated and feared as
slave-dealers.”^([56](#56)) For the Muslims, on the other hand, slaves
were stolen through acts of violence and then converted into
commodities. “Slave is the most fundamental form of
property.”^([57](#57))

Slave trade was carried on both by sea and land routes. Import of slaves
from Africa and Western Asia was of substantial importance. “In the
centuries preceding the year 1500 Arabs and Persians had acquired a
position of predominance in the sea-borne trade of the whole of Indian
Ocean from Mozambique to the Straits of Malacca.”^([58](#58)) They had
settlements at seaports on both sides of India, and we meet with Muslims
at practically every Indian seaport. One of the commodities in which
they traded was slaves. They sold these slaves to Indian rulers and
nobles in such large numbers that the complexion of the government
looked foreign. Indian sultans imported slaves throughout the medieval
period for service in many fields, more particularly in administration
and army and saving their kingdoms from indigenous popular risings, for,
as Moreland remarks, even “Akbar’s court was essentially foreign, and
even in his later years the Indian element, whether Hindu or Moslem,
constituted only a small proportion of the whole.”^([59](#59))
Abyssinians were in much demand, and we read of them frequently in the
chronicles of the times. A regular traffic existed in the inhabitants of
Mozambique, and there was also an import trade from Persia and countries
lying beyond. Not only the sultans of Delhi or the Mughal emperors, but
even the sultans of the Deccan states imported slaves to keep their rule
established. Golkunda was connected with three great ports of Goa and
Surat on the west coast and Masulipatam on the east.^([60](#60))

For northern India, the land route was equally important if not more.
There were slave markets in all important Muslim cities in the medieval
world. It may be pertinent to recollect that Subuktigin had been
purchased by Alptigin at Bukhara and Qutbuddin Aibak had been purchased
by Qazi Abdul Aziz Kufi in the slave market of Nishpur. All rulers of
Delhi and Agra used to import foreign slaves. Sultan Shamsuddin
Iltutmish once sent a Muslim merchant to Samarqand, Bukhara and Tirmiz
to bring some slaves from those places. The trader purchased for the
Sultan one hundred slaves and Balban was one of them. Chinese traders
also once brought forty slaves and presented them to the Sultan. The
list of Shamsi slaves given by Minhaj Siraj mostly comprised purchased
slaves.^([61](#61))

*Internal Trade*

In India the Muslims established a number of slave trade centres.
Besides Delhi and cities in Bengal there is mention of Badaon in Uttar
Pradesh and Mandor in Rajasthan.^([62](#62)) But of course from the
narrative of the chroniclers it appears that slave markets existed in
almost all important places in the country, for slaves were also sold in
fairs held in major cities. In this inhuman business the Hindus were not
interested. Firstly, they were themselves at the receiving end, they
themselves were the victims. And secondly, as W.H. Moreland points out,
“We may infer from della Valle’s statements that the principal Hindus at
Surat - perhaps the most humane people that ever lived - disapproved
entirely of slavery.” Now few people are as good traders as Gujaratis.
They would have excelled if they had taken to slave-trading. But
catching and selling of slaves did not fit in with the Hindu psyche.
Although, commenting on the statement of della Valle, Moreland says,
“but I do not think that this remark can be extended to Hindus
generally… though in Akbar’s time at least it did not secure the
approval of all Hindus… The existence of slavery is testified to by the
travellers Abdur Razak, Conti and Barbosa.”^([63](#63)) It would be safe
to presume that it prevailed in the Deccan, because it prevailed farther
north in the country whence the Deccan dynasties had sprung and we may
believe Nikitin’s statement that in his time there was a trade in ‘Black
people’ in Bidar.”^([64](#64)) But the trade was carried on by Muslims
and not Hindus, for Moreland adds that in 1643, “a Nayak, or chief,
rejected a Dutch request for leave to buy up to 1000 slaves yearly on
the ground that the sale of human being was not only a scandal but a
sin.”^([65](#65)) All accounts point to the fact that Hindus, otherwise
great traders and merchants throughout India’s history, did not indulge
in slave trade.

But the Portuguese in this matter followed the custom of the Muslims.
“Linschoten recorded that they never worked, but employed slaves, who
were sold daily in the market like beasts, and della Valle notes that
the ‘greatest part’ of people in Goa were slaves.”^([66](#66)) The
Portuguese not only employed Indian slaves for domestic and other
duties, but they also regularly brought slaves from Abyssinia and
Mozambique for sale at good price in Goa and Surat. They dominated the
Indian seas where they pirated non-chalantly, captured slaves and sold
them in the markets of Hugli, Tamluk, Pipli, St. Thome, Ceylon and Goa. 
Pyrard (1608-11) observed that goods of all the world must pass Ormuz
and pay tribute to the Portuguese.^([67](#67)) It so happened that their
Governor in Hugli, Manoel Travers, infuriated Shahjahan when as a
prince, he was in rebellion and in a helpless position. Travers seized
some of the prince’s richly laden boats and carried away some of Mumtaz
Mahall’s slave girls. When Shahjahan became king he ordered the Mughal
governor of Bengal to chastise the Portuguese. After a sanguinary battle
on the famous river port Hugli in 1632 they were expelled from
Bengal.^([68](#68)) As a matter of fact the people of India hailed the
other European adventurers as liberators from Portuguese tyranny, their
forcible conversions and their obnoxious slave trade.^([69](#69))

The Dutch also indulged in slave trade. In this regard the views of
Coen, the great Dutch Governor-General, are worth noting. In 1623, he
advised his successor, not merely the prosecution of Asiatic trade, “but
the investment of all available capital in principal means of production
(‘many thousands of slaves’)… so that the returns for our native country
be made out of the gains of the inland trade and the ordinary
revenues”.^([70](#70)) From about 1620 the Dutch requirements from India
were, first, a large initial supply of slaves, and then a steady stream
of reinforcements to make good the losses. For example, Dutch families
in the Spice Islands needed a sufficient number of slaves, “mostly of
Indian origin” besides those who had experience of working on the spice
fields. Many imported slaves, “Bengalders, Arakandars, Malabars, etc.,”
were greatly affected by sickness owing to the change of climate on
arrival in the Islands and losses had to be made up. “There is nothing
to suggest that the Dutch merchants practised either force or fraud, and
we find them buying regularly from Indian dealers after obtaining the
permission of the authorities.”^([71](#71)) In 1661 a ship belonging to
the Sultan of Golkunda carried 300 slaves to Achin and slave trade was
regarded by Muslims as well as the Dutch, “precisely as any other branch
of commerce”.^([72](#72))

The Portuguese and the Dutch were followed by the British. The export of
slaves and indentured Indian labour by the British to various parts of
the British Empire when it was in the making, is beyond the scope of
this study. But the genesis of endeavours and achievements of the
European nations in the field of making and exporting Indian slaves was
a continuation of the practice by the Muslims in medieval times. It is
even said that the profits accruing to the Muslims from slave trade
tempted many foreign nations to join in the race. However, in contrast
to the foreign imported slaves, whose market price was rendered high by
cost of transportation and deaths in transit, the price of Hindu slaves,
sold abroad remained low. For example, Hindu Kush (Hindu-killer)
mountain is so named because thousands of enslaved Hindus died in
crossing it. But their numbers were so large that the price of survivors
remained low in foreign markets.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))*Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 163.

^([2](#2a))*Malfuzat-i-Timuri*, trs E.D., III, 447.

^([3](#3a)) *Chachnama*, trs. Mirza Kalichbeg Fredunbeg, 86.

^([4](#4a)) Ibid., 176.

^([5](#5a)) Ibid., 154.

^([6](#6a)) Minhaj, 82, n.7

^([7](#7a)) Ibid., 80-81 and n. 5. Also Al Utbi, *Tarikh-i-Yamini*,
E.D., II, 26; Hodivala, 192; Nazim, ‘Hindu Shahiya Kingdom of Ohind’, in
J.R.A.S., 1927, 494; Isami, *Futuh-us-Salatin*, text ed. by Agha Mahdi
Husain, 38.

^([8](#8a)) Utbi E.D., II, p.39. For detailed references see Lal,
*Growth of Muslim Population*, 214.

^([9](#9a)) Farishtah, I, 28.

^([10](#10a)) For detailed references Lal, op. cit., 213 and Ubti E. D.,
II, 50 and n.1.

^([11](#11a)) Ain., I, 36, 3s. Thomas, *Chronicles of the Pathan king of
Delhi*, 13-14. Also note by Ranking in Badaoni, trs., I, 18.

^([12](#12a)) Minhaj, 105n.

^([13](#13a)) Farishtah, I, 49.

^([14](#14a)) Fakr-i-Mudabbir, *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah*, 20;
Minhaj, Text, 175; Farishtah, I, 66-71.

^([15](#15a)) Minhaj, 675 & n 5, 686 & n 7; Farishtah, I, 74.

^([16](#16a)) Khusrau, *Nuh Sipehr*, E. D., III, 561; Barani, 297-98;
Isami, 569-70; Afif, 38.

^([17](#17a)) cf. Vidyapati, *Kirtilata*, 42, 72.

^([18](#18a)) Farishtah, I, 116, *daran sal zan va farzand mughlan ra
dar Dihli va sair-i-bilad hindostan batariq-i-asiran bindi farokhtand*.

^([19](#19a)) Barani, 314-15.

^([20](#20a)) Hodivala, 192-93.

^([21](#21a)) In *Ibar*, trs. by Bernard Lewis in Islam, 98; Ira Marvin
Lapidus, *Muslim Cities in the Later Middle Ages*, 52ff.

^([22](#22a)) Barani, 306, 385.

^([23](#23a)) Ashraf, *Life and Conditions of the People of Hindustan*,
236, quoting *Qasaid-i-Badr Chach*, Kanpur, 1877, 39.

^([24](#24a)) Ibid., 235-36.

^([25](#25a)) Hasan Nizami, *Taj-ul-Maasir*, E. D., II, 235; Minhaj, 484
n.

^([26](#26a)) Minhaj, 487 n.

^([27](#27a)) Barani, 384; Lal, *Khaljis*, 290.

^([28](#28a)) Barani, 312.

^([29](#29a))*Dictionary of Islam*, 598.

^([30](#30a)) Barani, 314-15.

^([31](#31a)) Ibid., 312; Farishtah, I, 113.

^([32](#32a)) Battuta, Mahdi Husain, 235; *Quaunah Turks*, 155 n.

^([33](#33a))*Masalik-ul-Absar*, E.D., III, 580-81.

^([34](#34a)) Battuta, 123, also 63.

^([35](#35a)) Afif, 267-68, also 119-20.

^([36](#36a)) Ibid., 444.

^([37](#37a))*Babur Nama*, I, 202, emphasis added.  Finch in Foster,
*Early Travels*, 154; Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 27-28n.

^([38](#38a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 87, 90.

^([39](#39a)) Moreland, *From Akbar to Aurangzeb*, 77 n.; Mukerjee,
*Economic History*, 75-76.

^([40](#40a)) Pelsaert, *Jahangir’s India*, 62.

^([41](#41a)) Lal, *Legacy*, 292. The wages given by Abul Fazl have been
indicated by Blochmann in shillings and pence and changed by Moreland
into Rupia and dams. *Ain.*, 235-36; Moreland, *India at the Death of
Akbar*, 191.

^([42](#42a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 192-93.

^([43](#43a)) S.Gurbachan Singh Talib, *Muslim League Attack on Sikhs
and Hindus in the Punjab 1947*, New Delhi, Reprint 1991 (first published
1950), 201. Also 80.

^([44](#44a))*Ashraf-ul-Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, 13, 228, 232; *Hedaya*,
Hamiltion, II, 187; *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband XII, 30, 67.

^([45](#45a)) Minhaj, 601-603.

^([46](#46a))*Camb. History of Islam*, I, 482.

^([47](#47a)) Minhaj, 599-603; Farishtah, I, 64-66.

^([48](#48a)) C.H.I., IV, 104.

^([49](#49a)) Manucci, II, 42-43.

^([50](#50a)) Bernier, 134-36; 144-45; 426.

^([51](#51a)) David Brion Davis, in his review of Bernard Lewis’s *Race
and Slavery in the Middle East* in *The New York Review*, October 11,
1990.

^([52](#52a)) Elst, *Indigenous Indians*, 375.

^([53](#53a)) Ameer Ali, *The Spirit of Islam*, 267.

^([54](#54a)) Claude Mellasoux, *The Anthorpology of Slavery*, 143.

^([55](#55a)) Ruben Levy, *An Introduction to the Sociology of Islam*,
I, 117-18.

^([56](#56a)) Arnold, *Preaching of Islam*, 172-73, 345-46.

^([57](#57a)) Meillassoux, *The Anthropology of Slavety*, 8.

^([58](#58a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 23-26.

^([59](#59a)) Ibid., 24.

^([60](#60a)) R.K.Mukerjee, *Economic History of India*, 99 and map
facing 110.

^([61](#61a)) Minhaj, 213-324; Isami, *Adi Turk Kalin Bharat*, 302;
Battuta, 171; Moreland, *The Agrarian System of Moslem India*; 217-18.

^([62](#62a)) Minhaj, 232, 237, 268; Battuta, 325.

^([63](#63a)) Major 29, 30, 31; Barbosa, 309, 358; della Valle, 157, as
cited by Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 91.

^([64](#64a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 91.

^([65](#65a)) Moreland, *From Akbar to Aurangzeb*, 79.

^([66](#66a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 91.

^([67](#67a)) R.K.Mukerjee, *Economic History of India*, 116; C.H.I. IV,
191.

^([68](#68a)) Lahaori, E.D., VII, 31-35, 42-43; Manucci, I, 182;
Bernier, 177; C.H.I., IV, 192.

^([69](#69a)) Mukerjee, op.cit., 103.

^([70](#70a)) Moreland, From *Akbar to Aurangzeb*, 63.

^([71](#71a)) Ibid., 77.

^([72](#72a)) Ibid., 79.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


