+++
title = "13 CHAPTER XI RULES REGARDING MANUMISSION AND SALE OF SLAVES"

+++
**CHAPTER XI**  
**RULES REGARDING MANUMISSION AND SALE OF SLAVES**

It has been seen in the preceding pages that a very prominent feature of
Muslim polity, society and economy in this country was its slave system.
Muslim history throughout the country and indeed in this world is
incomplete without its slaves. The two main sources of obtaining slaves
were by capture and purchase. The two main means of their disposal were
by manumission and sale. We shall here briefly discuss the problems and
rules associated with these two aspects.

Manumission of slaves was a pre-Islamic Arab custom for earning
religious merit. It was recommended by prophet Muhammad also. His advice
finds mention in both the Quran and the Hadis.  Manumission was widely
practised in India for various reasons and causes. For instance, many
are the blessings to those who fast during Ramzan, but if neglected
intentionally the offender must expiate his guilt by the manumission of
one male slave (*ghulam*) for every day that he broke the
fast.^([1](#1)) Or, when the emperor Shahjahan was ill, his daughter
liberated several slaves, made them walk round her father, and then sent
them away to carry his infirmities with them.^([2](#2)) It is not
mentioned whether these slaves were just sent away or released according
to the rules of manumission, but since Islam is stickler about rules, it
is probable that appropriate procedure was followed while freeing them.

After the compilation of the Quran and the Hadises, many schools of
jurisprudence developed with many manuals of commentaries and
interpretations on these two main source-scriptures. Named after their
founders Abu Hanifa (c. 699-767), Abu Abdulla Muhammad bin Idris (c.
767-820), Ahmad bin Hanbal (c. 780-855) and Malik bin Anas (715795). and
called the Hanafi, Sha’afai, Hanbali and Maliki, the four famous schools
of Islamic jurisprudence developed in the eighth-ninth century. In the
twelfth century Shaikh Burhanuddin Ali (530-593 H/1135-1196 C.E.) of
Marghinan in Transoxiana wrote the famous *Hidayah* or the Guide, a
well-known work of Sunni law. It is based on the Quran, the Hadis and
the four schools of Muslim Jurisprudence mentioned above. Throughout
medieval India Muslim Ulema, jurisconsults and judges (Qazis) depended
on these scriptures and law books for deciding cases about slaves.
Besides, during Muslim rule, spreading over several centuries, numerous
judgements, *Zawabits* (Regulations) and commentaries appeared
concerning matters of law and were referred to as precedents. Their
large numbers were bound to create confusion and sometimes lead to
decisions convenient or otherwise to particular parties and situations.
Emperor Aurangzeb therefore decided to consolidate the main canons of
Sunni law in one book. This resulted in the coming into being of his
voluminous magnum opus entitled the *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*. Bakhtawar Khan,
a nobleman of Aurangzeb’s court, has this to say about the
*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*. “As it is a great object with this Emperor that all
Muhammadans should follow the principles of the religion as expounded by
the most competent law officers and the followers of the Hanafi
persuasion and as these principles, in consequence of the different
opinions of the *kazis* and *muftis* which have been delivered without
any authority, could not be distinctly and clearly learnt, and as there
was no book which embodied them all… His Majesty, the protector of the
faith, determined that a body of eminently learned and able men of
Hindustan should take up the voluminous and the most trustworthy works
which were collected in the royal library, and having made a digest of
them, compose a book which might form a standard canon of the law, and
afford to all an easy and available means of ascertaining the proper and
authoritative interpretation. The chief conductor of this difficult
undertaking was the most learned man of the time, Shaikh Nizam, and all
the members of the society were handsomely paid, so that up to the
present time (early years of the reign) a sum of about two hundred
thousand rupees has been expended in this valuable compilation, which
contains more than one hundred thousand lines. When the work, with God’s
pleasure, is completed, it will be for all the world the standard
exposition of the law, and render every one independent of Muhammadan
doctors.”^([3](#3))

*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* thus forms the most important source book for Muslim
law in India. It was compiled in the later Mughal period, gathering
information from books and judgements of Qazis through all the centuries
of Muslim rule. And more importantly it was written in Indian
environment. Besides citing from the treatises and scriptures from the
Quran to the *Hidayah*, it quotes as its sources almost all great
authorities like Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Abu Yusuf, Imam Muhammad, Imam
Karkhi, Fatawas of Qazi Khan, *Fateh-ul-Qadiri, Sharah Ziadat-ul Utabi,
Akhtiyar-i-Sharai Mukhtiyar, Muhit-i-Surkhi*, etc., etc. The *Hidayah*
and the *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri* thus form the most authentic volumes for the
study of Muslim slavery in medieval India. Its corpus deals with all
aspects of Muslim law concerning the life of Muslims including the two
aspects under discussion - upkeep and manumission, sale and purchase of
slaves - in great detail.^([4](#4))

*Manumission*

Rules regarding manumission of slaves are given in the *kitab al-‘Ataq*,
and about sale in *kitab al-Biyu’*. But there is no book or chapter
whether on *Nikah* (marriage) or *Talaq* (divorce), barter or oath, sale
or purchase, mortgage or transfer of property, offspring and progeny, in
which slaves or slave girls do not find a prominent and lengthy
mention.^([5](#5)) This only shows that Muslim society was incomplete
without slaves and the slave system permeated every sphere of Muslim
life.

Manumission is of four kinds -*wajib* (obligatory), *mubah* or *halal*),
in accordance with Shara), *Mustahaj* ( a pious act), and *Haram*
(prohibited). Manumission can be done orally or in writing, but it has
to be done in accordance with rules and in proper form and proper words.
Captured slaves, if kafirs, could not be freed.^([6](#6)) To be kafir is
a disqualification (*aib*) both in *ghulam* (male slave) and *bandi*
(female slave). The Muslim detests the company of kafirs “because the
object, in the purchase of a female slave, is cohabitation and
generation of children.”^([7](#7)) T.P. Hughes on the authority of the
*Hidayah* says: “The Imam, with respect to captives, has it in his
choice to slay them because the Prophet put captives to death and also
because slaying them terminates wickedness; or, if he choose, he may
make them slaves, because by enslaving them the wickedness of them is
remedied, and at the same time the Muslims reap an advantage; or, if he
please, he may release them so as to make them freemen and Zimmis… but
it is not lawful so to release the idolaters of Arabia, or apostates… If
captives become Muslims, let not the Imam put them to death; … but yet
he may lawfully make them slaves, after their conversion…”^([8](#8)) But
kafir *ghulam* was not all useless. He could do work which was *infra
dig* or prohibited for Muslims.^([9](#9)) Once a slave converts, there
is provision for his freedom. If a slave apostatizes, he cannot be freed
until he returns to Islam. “An exposition of the faith is to be laid
before an apostate; who, if he repent not within *three days* is put to
death.” A female slave or free woman who apostatizes is not to be
killed, but she “must be daily beaten with severity until she return to
the faith.”^([10](#10)) A Musalman slave, purchased by an infidel,
becomes free after entering an infidel territory. The slave of an
infidel, upon becoming Musalman, acquires the right to
freedom.^([11](#11))

A recognised method of getting manumission was through the custom of
*tadbir*. It was so called when a master told his slave, “you are free
after my death.” After this declaration a slave was known as *mudabbir*.
A slave who was declared *mudabbir* by this master stood manumitted
after the death of the latter. It appears that there was keenness on the
part of the master, when he had grown old, to grant freedom to the
slave. But the bondsman, also grown old, did not necessarily care to
seek freedom in declining age. Grant of manumission in advanced age was
more beneficial to the master than to the slave. The former could get
rid of him; the latter could hardly find a buyer who would look after
him at the fag end of his life. Slaves who were captured or purchased
young, sometimes so young as to wet their beds - and there is mention of
such cases in Islamic law books^([12](#12)) - would have felt relieved
at their being declared *mudabbir*. They could have enjoyed their
freedom because they might be still young when the master died. But most
*mudabbirs* used to grow old in the service of the owner, in all
probability too old to be bought and usefully employed by a new master.
Therefore *mudabbiri* held no charm for him. He could have some hope if
the master died early. He sometimes wished it to be so, and initiated or
joined in a conspiracy to remove the master from the scene while he was
still young. For this he would have cultivated the habits of exhibiting
loyalty outwardly and practising hypocrisy by secretly harbouring
hostility. But loyal or disloyal, old and incapacitated slaves were
generally done away with by the new king or master. On the other hand,
old slaves were also reluctant to join the new distrusting dispensation.
As seen earlier, medieval Muslim society and polity is full of such
cases.

There was provision for partial manumission of a slave in Islamic law.
For instance, a slave could be exempted from doing a particular type of
work from a specific date.^([13](#13)) A slave could be freed to the
extent of one-half, one-third, or one-sixth. That is, if he is made
one-third free, he will repay two-third of his price for getting total
manumission.^([14](#14)) If the slave was shared by two masters, rules
of manumission were different in his case.^([15](#15)) The slave on
emancipation becomes *atiq* (freed man) or *mawla* (client) of his late
master, who becomes his *wali* (patron).^([16](#16)) Slaves cannot marry
without the consent of the proprietor.^([17](#17)) A master can permit a
slave to marry more than one wife, but not more than two wives at the
same time, according to most of the doctors.^([18](#18)) Marriage
between slaves with the consent of the master is valid. If contracted
without his permission, it is null.^([19](#19)) The marriage of an
infidel couple is not dissolved by their jointly joining the faith. If
only one of them converts, a separation takes place
automatically.^([20](#20)) Apostates are incapacitated from
marrying.^([21](#21)) If either the father or the mother be Musalman
their children become Musalman invariably.^([22](#22))

Every slave girl could be used as a concubine. As quoted from the
*Hedayah* earlier, “the object in the purchase of a female slave, is
cohabitation and generation of children.” Therefore for our purpose
words like slave girl (*bandi*) and concubine should be considered
synonymous.^([23](#23)) In a *bandi* physical fitness, correct
menstruation and absence of physical and mental defects were the main
considerations at the time of purchase. Odour in the mouth or armpits of
a *bandi* was considered a defect as she was meant to be kissed and
caressed, but not so in a *ghulam* who was required to do manual
work.^([24](#24)) Bernard Lewis quotes many Muslims who describe blacks
as “ugly, stupid, dishonest, frivolous and foul-smelling” and black
women with the same epithets - “the blacker they are, the uglier their
faces… there is no pleasure to be got from them, because of the smell of
their armpits and the coarseness of their bodies.” Similarly, a blind,
half-blind, squinted, deaf or dumb *bandi* or one having extra or less
fingers was considered defective. If the breasts are large or vagina
wide or baggy (which does not give requisite pleasure), whether in a
*bakira* (virgin) or a *taiba* (non-virgin), the purchaser has a right
to return her to the seller and claim refund of money.^([25](#25)) A
desire to do a little make-up, speak or walk daintily is excusable, but
too much sexiness, deliberate lowering of voice, blandishments and
walking with a provocative gait or swaying the hips are definite defects
in a slave girl.^([26](#26)) In short, whoredom and bastardy is not
desirable in a slave girl; it was not considered so bad in a *ghulam*
unless it was so excessive as to interfere with his normal
duties.^([27](#27))

The sale of an *am-walad* (mother of child), that is, a slave girl who
conceives from her master and gives birth to a child, is 'null' and
therefore wrong. The offspring of the master by a slave girl was
considered to be free. The woman also gained in status through
*istawad*, that is, right of the child. Henceforth the slave girl was
called *am-walad* and used to become free after the death of her
master. As the Prophet has said, “Her child hath set her free” (that is,
her child is a cause of freedom to her). So an *am-walad* cannot be sold
as she is free upon the master’s death.^([28](#28)) It is also not
correct to lend, mortgage, or give on wages an *am-walad* slave girl,
but if some stranger shares bed with her, the income is of the
master. If he marries her off to someone, the amount of *mehr* (dower)
also belongs to the master. To give her in marriage to a stranger is the
right of the master.^([29](#29)) His control over the *bandi* is total.
Parts of the slave girl’s body could be freed individually and
collectively. If the master told his *bandi* that her farj (private
part) is free or that her back or neck or head is free, she is freed
according to some jurists but not according to others.^([30](#30)) A
master may withhold permission from his female slave to dwell in the
house of her husband.^([31](#31)) If one buys a pregnant *bandi*, the
unborn would form part of the transaction. If she is collected in loot
then the offspring is also counted as slave together with the mother and
counted as property of the master.^([32](#32)) There are rules laid down
to determine if a *bandi* is pregnant at the time of purchase or
capture.^([33](#33)) if the master makes his slave girl *mudabbir*, then
her pregnancy and progeny also become *mudabbir*. If the pregnancy alone
is manumitted, then only the offspring becomes free, not the
*bandi*.^([34](#34)) Even after a bandi is declared *mudabbir* or free
after the master’s death he can continue to cohabit with her during his
life-time.

*Sale/Purchase*

It may be mentioned at the outset, even at the cost of repetition, that
the slave was the property of the master. “The slave forms the most
fundamental form of property which, as in the case of every property, is
a source of profit.”^([35](#35)) The master is empowered to endow his
slave with almost all privileges and responsibilities of freeman,
preserving at the same time his property in him inviolate, which
rendered him an attached dependent rather than a mere servile
instrument.^([36](#36)) This we have seen being universally practised in
the case of early Turkish slaves who were treated well by their master
merchants and sold at good profit.

In the *Hidayah*, rules about sale and barter of slaves are mentioned
under the category of any other property or commodity like land, trees,
clothes, fruit, grain and beasts.^([37](#37)) The price of a slave
depended on physical strength and good looks and such other
considerations like if he was shared between two or more masters or a
*bandi* was shared between two men.^([38](#38)) in the case of
partnership in a female slave, she becomes the property of the man who
has carnal relationship with her with the consent of the
other.^([39](#39))

There were elaborate rules in this regard so as to avoid contentious
sales.^([40](#40)) For example if a number of slaves were sold out of a
big group, those to be taken out were determined by odd or even numbers
of the slaves possessed by the seller master.^([41](#41)) A deception
with respect to the sex of the slave invalidates the sale which stands
cancelled (*akala*).^([42](#42))

Sale of a *mudabbir*, an *am-walad* or a *mokatib*, is null.^([43](#43))
A man purchases a slave. He finds some defect in him and beats and
tortures him. In case the signs of torture are visible on his person the
buyer is not entitled to return him to the seller and receive
compensation. If he flogs or slaps him two-three times but there are no
signs of such infliction on his body he will have the right to return
the slave to the seller.^([44](#44)) A *ghulam* or *bandi* who has
absconded is not to be purchased at any cost but has to be restored to
the master. “An absconded slave may, in every instance, be reclaimed by
the proprietor.”^([45](#45)) There is a whole set of rules detailed in
*Kitab-ul-Abaq* determining action about absconded
slaves.^([46](#46)) Repeated mention of such rules leads to the
inference that flight of slaves was not uncommon.^([47](#47))

Slaves who could not be broken or made to submit, sometimes took
revenge. In most cases they conspired to do away with the master. They
could steal or even do such irritating things as soiling the bed by
urinating.^([48](#48)) The all powerful master could strike back
mercilessly. “The power which a Muslim possesses over the persons of his
bondsman or bondsmaid is unlimited.” For example, a master is not slain
for the murder of his slave.^([49](#49)) “Amputation of a slave for
theft was a common practice recognized by law.”^([50](#50)) That is how
even physically defective and mutilated slaves were put up for sale in
the market. If a master killed his *ghulam*, it was taken that the
latter had died a natural death.^([51](#51)) That is why slaves by and
large remained loyal to the master and followed the rules laid down for
them. For example, when Imadul Mulk Bashir Sultani, the slave noble of
Firoz Tughlaq, became old and decrepit, he first got a letter of
manumission for himself written by the Sultan, and only after that he
freed his four thousand purchased slaves.^([52](#52))

Sale of slaves was so common in medieval India that it is referred to by
Persian chroniclers throughout the period.  Manumission too was common
although it is not mentioned as often. It is a good thing in Islam that
there are elaborate rules guiding their lives. There are some hundreds
of rules about the treatment and obligations, manumission, sale and
purchase of *ghulam* or *bandi*. All transactions were done in
accordance with the rules laid down by the Doctors of Islam. But a bad
aspect is that the rules went on multiplying and becoming complicated
with passage of time. From the eighth to the seventeenth century rules
became so numerous and so complicated because of *fatwas* and judgements
of Doctors that it became necessary “to afford to all an easy and
authoritative interpretation and standard canon” by launching the
project *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*. These rules could take care of all
situations, serious or sober or even pornographic.^([53](#53)) Rules in
the *Kitab-ul-Talaq* form an excellent treatise on sex-education. Still
a plethora of rules contained contradictions leading to various
interpretations. Owners of slaves and the Qazis could do a lot of
manipulation in sale and manumission. Naturally, the slave, generally
poor and exploited, was at the receiving end against the all-powerful
master. For us these rules and laws have an importance of their own. It
is on the basis of these historical and legal works compiled by medieval
Muslims that an idea of the lives of slaves who could be sold, bartered,
lent, mortgaged and used in so many ways, can be formed.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Herklots, *Islam in India*, 112.

^([2](#2a)) Manucci, I, 217.  Also Meer Hassan Ali, *Observations*, 215.

^([3](#3a))*Mirat-i-Alam* also known as *Mirat-i-Jahan Numa*, E. D.,
VII, 159-60.

^([4](#4a)) We have depended on two versions of the *Hidayah*: 1. The
Urdu translation done at Deoband by Maulana Jamil Ahmad Sukrodvi,
Muddaris of Dar-ul-Ulum; it is entitled *Ashraful Hidayah*. It was
published in 1980s, only vols. 1 to 5 and 8 to 9 were available to us.
2. The English translation of the work done by Charles Hamilton in 4
vols. in 1791; it is entitiled “*The Hedaya* (or Guide) - A commentary
on the Mussulman laws”. Hamilton gives a valuable Discourse,
iii-Lxxxviii, and an Introductory Address, ix-xii, at the beginning of
vol. I.

There are two Urdu translations of *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*. The one by
Allama Maulana Syed Amir All and published by Hamid & Co Delhi in 10
vols. in 1988 is very well printed and beautifully bound. The other has
been done by Maulana Mufti Kafi-ul-Rahman of Deoband. It is printed in
42 parts of about 100 pares each. The years of publication are not
given. The translation of Deoband has been found to be better than that
of Delhi in many ways.

^([5](#5a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Delhi trs. by Amir Ali, II, 125-277;
278=620.  IV, 195-544.

^([6](#6a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, XII, 5-8.

^([7](#7a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, II, 409.

^([8](#8a)) Hughes, 597.

^([9](#9a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, 138-39.

^([10](#10a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, II, 225-26, 228.

^([11](#11a))*Ibid*., 190-91.

^([12](#12a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, 134.

^([13](#13a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, I, 422-23; *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*,
Deoband, XII, 11-12.

^([14](#14a)) Hamilton, I, 437; *Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XIII, 10,
20-21; *Ibid.*, Delhi, VI, 445.

^([15](#15a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 104.

^([16](#16a)) Reuben Levy. *An Introduction to the Sociology of Islam*,
I, 116.

^([17](#17a)) Hamilton, I, 161.

^([18](#18a))*Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband; Hughes, 600.  VII, 34.

^([19](#19a)) Ibid., Delhi, II, 243 ff.

^([20](#20a))*Hidaya*, Hamilton, I, 174-76.

^([21](#21a)) Ibid., 176.

^([22](#22a)) Ibid., 177.

^([23](#23a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XII, 14-15.

^([24](#24a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 137; Hedaya, Hamilton, II, 408.

^([25](#25a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XXIV, 5-6, 26-27.

^([26](#26a))*Ibid*., 7.

^([27](#27a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, 138; *Hedaya*, Hamilton,
II, 409.

^([28](#28a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, I, 479, 482.

^([29](#29a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, Deoband, XII, 23

^([30](#30a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XI, 6, 8. Also Hedaya,
Hamilton, I, 421-23.

^([31](#31a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, I, 161.

^([32](#32a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XI, 18; XIII, 22.

^([33](#33a)) Ibid., XII, 12.

^([34](#34a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XII, 18, 21; XIII,12.

^([35](#35a)) Foreword by Paul E. Lovejoy to Claude Meillassoux, *The
Anthropology of Slavery*, 8.

^([36](#36a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, I, xxxvi.

^([37](#37a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, Deoband, VIII, *kitab-ul-Biyu*, 81-83.

^([38](#38a))*Fatawa-i-Alamgiri*, Deoband, XII, 26, 31-33.

^([39](#39a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, II, 331-32.

^([40](#40a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 149, 155-65, 178, 181, 187;
Hamilton, II, 386-90, 419-20.

^([41](#41a))*Hidaya*, Hamilton, I, 456-64, 538. *Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, XV,
57-71.

^([42](#42a)) Ibid., 425, 465.

^([43](#43a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 193-98; Hamilton, II, 468.

^([44](#44a))*Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, XXIV, 26.

^([45](#45a)) Hidaya, Hamilton, II, 189; *Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, XXV, 22-31.

^([46](#46a))*Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, Delhi, by Amir Ali, III, 485-501.

^([47](#47a)) For example, *Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, XXIV, 11.

^([48](#48a)) Ibid., 11-13.

^([49](#49a)) Hughes, 599; Hamilton, IV, 282.

^([50](#50a))*Hidaya*, Hamilton, II, 423-27; *Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII,
178, 181.

^([51](#51a))*Ashraful Hidayah*, VIII, 149.

^([52](#52a)) Afif, 444-45.

^([53](#53a))*Fatwa-i-Alamgiri*, XI, *Kitab-ul-Talaq*, 26-27.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


