+++
title = "15 POSTSCRIPT"

+++
**POSTSCRIPT**

We began by quoting Thomas Patrick Hughes to say that “slavery of Islam
is interwoven with the Law of marriage, the Law of sale, and the Law of
inheritance… and its abolition would strike at the very foundation of
the code of Muhammadanism”.^([1](#1)) The statement holds as good today
as in the early years of Islam. The rules of Islam remain the same for
all time, for Islam is changeless and unchangeable. As I.H. Qureshi puts
it: “The Muslim jurists and theologians believe in the supremacy of the
*shar* and hold that it is eternal and immutable in its essence. It is
based on the Quran which is believed by every Muslim to be the Word of
God revealed to His prophet Muhammad. Not even the Prophet could change
the revelation…”^([2](#2)) Muhammad could not change the revelation; he
could only explain and interpret it. So do the Muslims do today. There
are liberal Muslims and conservative Muslims, there are Muslims learned
in theology and Muslims devoid of learning. They discuss, they
interpret, they rationalize, but all by going round and round within the
closed circle of Islam. There is no possibility of getting out of the
fundamentals of Islam; there is no provision of introducing any
innovation. So, Muslim slave system could not remain confined to the
Middle Ages. Muhammad legitimized slavery in the Quran and therefore it
is recognized to be in complete conformity with Islam. Slavery is
considered an integral part of Islam.

That being so, Muslim holy men and men of jurisprudence, endowed the
institution with supreme religious sanction. According to Bernard Lewis,
“they were upholding an institution sanctioned by scripture, law, and
tradition and one which in their eyes was necessary to the maintenance
of the social structure of Muslim life.” For example, in 1855 the
Ottoman Empire ordered the governors of its far-flung districts to ban
the commerce in slaves. For rebellious Arabs in the Hijaz this was
exactly the kind of anti-Islamic, Western-influenced measure they had
been waiting for as case for throwing the Turkish rule. The Arab leader
Shaykh Jamal issued a legal ruling “denouncing the ban on the slave
trade as contrary to the holy law of Islam. Because of this anti-Islamic
act, he said… the Turks had become apostates and heathens. It was lawful
to kill them without incurring criminal penalties or bloodwit, and to
enslave their children.” The Ottoman Turks succeeded in suppressing
their southern rebels in mid-1856. But as a conciliatory measure to
prevent further secessionist movements, the Turkish government granted a
major concession to the slave traders who had long made the Red Sea and
the Hijaz a central route for transporting African slaves to the Middle
East. The Sultan’s government exempted the Hijaz from its 1857 decree
outlawing the trade in black slaves throughout the rest of the Ottoman
Empire. As late as 1960, Lord Shackleton reported to the House of Lords
that African Muslims on pilgrimages to Mecca still sold slaves on
arrival, “using them as living travellers cheques.”^([3](#3))

Till today, black slaves are being bought and sold in countries like
Sudan and Mauretania. “The Islamic doctrine of slavery was closely
linked with the doctrine of the inescapable struggle between believers
and unbelievers… and Pagans were routinely sold into slavery if they had
the misfortune of being captured by Muslims.”^([4](#4)) Right from the
fifteenth century Muslims would go on furnishing black slaves to
European slave traders. At least 80% of all the black slaves that were
ever exported from Black Africa, went through Muslim hands. A large part
of the slaves transported to America had also been bought from Muslim
slave-catchers.^([5](#5)) “Slavery, as far as established by law, was
abolished in India by Act V, 1843, but the final blow was dealt on
January 1, 1862, when the sections of the Indian Penal Code dealing with
the question came into operation.”^([6](#6)) The point to note, however,
is that life of slavery is lived by millions of *burqa*-clad Muslim
women kept behind bolted doors and by men who still believe in slavery
as a part of their religious and social life. *Burqa* remains the symbol
of slavery; its enforcement is now ensured by the dictates of
militants. As-Said al-Ashwamy, renowned Egyptian writer and chief
justice, on a recent visit to India, said, “insulating women if they
don’t wear the veil ensures that they wear it out of fear not faith…
women now accept the position of being slaves.”^([7](#7)) “There is no
doubt that many thousands of slaves are still serving in the wealthy
palaces of Arabia,” and now and then one hears about the condition of
girls from Malaysia, Sri Lanka, India etc., married by Shaikhs and
living in the Gulf countries as nothing better than slave girls.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Dictionary of Islam*, 600.

[²](#2a) Qureshi, *Administration*, 42.

[³](#3a) For documentation regarding Lord Shackleton and the situation
in 1960, see, Davis, *Slavery* and *Human Progress*, 317, 362. For
Quotes form Bernard Lewis see Review of his book, *Race* and *Slavery*
in the *Middle East* by Davis in the New York Review, October 11, 1990.

[⁴](#4a) Elst, *Negationism*, 101.

[⁵](#5a) Elst, *Indigenous Indians*, 375, 381.

[⁶](#6a) Herklots, *Islam in India*, 112 n. 2.

[⁷](#7a) Detailed report in *The Times of India*, 10 December, 1993.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


