+++
title = "08 "

+++
****

8\. EXAMPLES NOT TO FOLLOW

There are three countries which offer to India examples not to follow:
East Timor, Yugoslavia and Tibet. East Timor showed how converted
Christians provoke secession by alleging "persecution" and how the West
has a very short memory. Pundits have predicted for decades the
balkanisation of India, as it happened in Yugoslavia at the hands of
Kosovo; so far it has not materialised, but if India allows Kashmir to
go, who knows what might follow. And finally Tibet, because of it
isolation and feudalism which it did not care to redress in time, paid
also the price of its freedom

****

THE LESSONS OF EAST TIMOR FOR INDIA

There are a few lessons which the "referendum" of East Timor, and its
catastrophic consequences, have for India.

  
1) Colonialism is not over. The troubles in East Timor arose, not
because Indonesians, or anti-independence East Timorese are more
violent, or less democratic than any Europeans, but because when western
colonialists - the Portuguese in this case - were there, they converted
forcibly (or by means of economic enticement), large chunks of the
island. And not only they converted a people to a religion totally alien
to their culture and way of life, but also, like everywhere else in the
Third World, they planted a seed of separatism : "yours is the only true
religion and by embracing this true religion, you become superior, you
are part of us, the Great White Man". And as a result, a few generations
later, the erstwhile natives want to separate from the Infidel, they
want to be independent, to secede, with the result we have seen in East
Timor. The Karma of colonialism is not dead

1.  The West has a very short memory. Today the West sits in judgement
    on the "bad" Indonesians, or the wicked anti-independence East
    Timorese (read the non-Christians). But it forgets that for
    centuries - and till barely fifty years ago - it had shamefully
    colonised, exploited these colonies. Today the Prime Minister of
    Portugal has the effrontery to offer his country’s "good services"
    for the peaceful transition of East Timor to independence. But in
    the history of colonialism, the Portuguese rank first in terms of
    sheer brutality, rape, theft, murder, or conversions by force. In
    India, the Portuguese took full advantage of the tolerance of local
    Hindu kings of Kerala, grabbed land, killed people, converted
    innocent tribals. Later in Goa, they razed numerous temples to build
    churches, crucified Brahmins, forcibly married Indian girls to their
    soldiers... And on top of that, they had to be kicked out of India
    by force, as they refused to leave !

3\) There is also hypocrisy. If Britain can battle thousands of miles
away from home soil to keep the Falkland islands, which geographically
belongs more to Argentina than England, if France fights to retain the
island of Corsica in the face of repeated bombings and murders by
separatists, if The United States can bomb out Iraq because it has oil
interests in Kuwait, then why should Indonesia not retain East Timor, or
India fight to keep Kashmir, which has been part of its empire for
thousands of years ? And no hypocrisy is greater than the one showed by
the British, who divided to reign like no one else during their colonial
rule - and left a mess everywhere. Today the BBC may pontificate about
the violent ways of the IRA, the fanaticism of Muslim militias in East
Timor, or "the brutal hand of the Indian army in Kashmir", but it
conveniently forgets that it is England who converted a part of Ireland
to Protestantism, so as to divide the beautiful island, or that from the
very beginning of its rule in India, it pampered the Muslim minority and
always implied that it would give it independence when it would leave
India.

1.  Do not give a foothold to the U.S or the U.N. Of course, Pakistan
    and other Islamic countries - and eventually America, when it wants
    to pressurise India to toe its line on CTBT etc. - will exploit to
    the hilt the East Timor plebiscite, by saying it creates a good
    precedent and that Kashmir should follow suit. But the result is
    foregone : whatever the Governments of India’s illusions : like in
    East Timor, 96% of Kashmiris of the valley would vote for
    independence, which would immediately means appendage to Pakistan.
    But it is only because Indonesia went through a terrible economic
    crisis, that it became weak and had to give in to the dictates of
    the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the UN, which
    are all controlled by the United States. And the condition for being
    bailed out economically, was of course a referendum in East Timor.
    Today America prides itself in being the gendarme of the world and
    gives itself the right to bomb, kill, or imprison anybody it wants,
    regardless of international law. One also observes in the rest of
    the Western world a very dangerous moral belligerence, witness the
    cries for military intervention to implement independence in East
    Timor, by countries like Australia, who have the saddest of human
    right records in dealing with their own aborigines, or by this very
    arrogant and foolish man, Robin Cook, England’s Foreign Minister.

5\) Thus, we need a multipolar world. Instead of falling in the arms of
the US, just because they have condescended to say a few good words
about India’s handling of Kargil (but immediately after, Clinton dealt
India a slap for its "arrogant" nuclear doctrine), New Delhi should
fight against the dangerous unipolar world which Washington is trying to
impose upon us, and make strategic alliances with countries who have the
same aspiration. Such a country is France; and India must now make some
hard choices and select for instance Airbuses instead of Boeings for its
national airlines and buy its military hardware from France. The French
government has also to show some commitment and should sell India
nuclear plants, regardless of what the international community will say.

6\) BE INDIAN FIRST. Minorities should be told that they are first
Indian and then Christians, or Muslims - and not vice versa. In France,
there was a big controversy when Muslim girls insisted to come to
college with scarves on their heads; but the French government stood
firm and they were thrown out : "you are French first and you should
abide by the laws of France", they were told. Imagine if the Indian
Government would for instance stop subsiding the Haj pilgrimage, because
it does not subsidise any Hindu yatras, it would create such an outcry
amongst all the secularists of the country ! And this is the saddest
thing : that many of India’s journalists, intellectuals, and officials,
whether it is M.S. Gill, the Election Commissioner, or the President,
are so one sided. Bal Thakeray was disfranchised because he appealed to
the Hindus to vote for a Hindu, but when the Archbishop of Delhi, Alan
de Lastic, more or less openly tells India’s 25 million Christians to
vote for another Christian - Sonia Gandhi - everybody of course finds
this "secular" and the Indian Press, who has hounded Thakeray all his
life, just quotes Lastic’s letter without batting an eyelid. The recent
murder of priest Arul Dass is another example of dishonest journalism.
Dass was obviously killed by non-converted tribals, for reasons which
will be later discovered. But instead of calming the tensions, Lastic
and the Christian clergy have again accused the VHP, the RSS, or Dara
Singh, who seems to have developed magical powers to crop up everywhere
- and once more the whole Indian Press went up in flames about the
"communal" murder. But when a BJP candidate in Kashmir was brutally
murdered along with three innocent people, it made for three lines in
newspapers. Does that mean that the Indian Press thinks it is perfectly
normal for Muslims to kill BJP leaders ?

****

" THE BLACK KARMA OF THE WEST IN KOSOVO "

In 732 AD, French King Charles Martel stopped the Arab onslaught in
Europe at Poitiers, 329 km south-west of Paris, the capital of France.

Without this crushing victory, the whole of Europe would have become
Muslim, with incalculable consequences for its culture, religion,
history and future. As it is, the Arab world never got a strong foothold
on the European continent, as it did in the African and Asian
continents, except in two places: Spain in the 8^(th) century; and much
later, in part of the Balkans. But by the 13h century, Christian kings
had retaken the whole of Spain and the country was able to develop
around European lines, while assimilating the Arab influence, which
gives it today this extraordinary eastern atmosphere, unique in Europe.

Henceforth, there only remained in the hands of Islam parts the Balkans
(of which Yugoslavia and Albania concentrated the maximum presence), as
these were the closest to the Ottoman empire of today’s Turkey. Which
means in effect, that the only real European Muslims (by Europe we mean
today’s ECC), can be found in these two countries (because there are
other "White" Muslims" - in Crimea, for instance).

Serbia, a great nation, which embodies the best of the Slav spirit, had
developed a wonderful empire, which culminated in the 14^(th) century
with Emperor Dulsan, whose kingdom reached till Greece. But in 1389, the
Turks beat his armies in Kosovo (does that name strike anything ?) The
Serbian empire, a bastion of Western and Christian culture in Eastern
Europe, resisted, often alone, and was never washed out by the Muslim
onslaught. Kings like Milos Obrenovic I, united the Serbs against the
Turks and his son Michel Obrnovic II finally obtained the independence
of Serbia in 1867.

Thus, thanks to Charles Martlel’s victory in 732 and Serbian Kings like
Obrnovic, Islam was never able to penetrate the European continent and
Europe owes today its distinct Greco-Roman and Christian culture to
these brave men… But unfortunately, the good work of Charles Martel and
Milos Obrenivic have been rendered to naught by the Nato forces and the
United States of America…

Today we see the same thing happening in Russia which is waging a
desperate battle against Muslim fundamentalism in Chechnya: the West is
applying all kind of pressures so that it stops its military action,
thus giving Muslim fundamentalism a chance to spread like a cancer. Once
more,TV’s all over the world are showing images of Chechen civilians
being killed by blind bombardments, thus turning western opinion against
the "evil Russians", committing a genocide on the "good" Chechens.

The Dalai lama often said that the present sufferings of the Tibetan
people were due to a "black karma". When asked what was a black karma,
he explained that like an individual, a nation commits during different
cycles bad karma, evil actions - and that sooner or later, all those who
have participated in these collective unholy acts, come back together,
in the same place, at the same time, in the same country, to pay for
their bad karma.

Viewing the Chechnya problem from this angle, gives a totally different
picture than the one portrayed by the West. For whatever can be said
about the greatness of Islam - and there is no doubt that it fostered
powerful civilisations and empires, whose refinements and achievements
were unsurpassed in their days - the religion of Mohammed remains, even
today, a militant and violent creed, which does not tolerate other
religions and views all others as "kafirs", infidels. Hence the bloody
jihads Muslims are still leading all over the world, even as the 21^(st)
century draws near : in Chechnya, of course, but also in Algeria or in
Kashmir. The atrocities committed over the centuries by the Arabs and
Muslim armies in what is known today as Yugoslavia, are numerous and
well documented. There is actually, an interesting parallel to do with
India, where Hindus, like the Serbs, resisted the Muslims invaders, in
spite of the forced attempts at conversion, the rapes, the millions of
people taken in slavery, the killing of men by the thousands. In the
same way, during the second world war, many of the Muslim Croats and
Albanians ganged up with the Nazis and killed thousands of innocent
Serbs, many of whom had enrolled in the underground against the dark
forces which Germany was then incarnating (how strange that fifty years
later, a people who killed six million Jews, because they thought they
were ‘impure’, can play such an important role in Nato. On top of that,
very few know that the Germans, still thirsty for domination in Europe,
partly triggered the Yugoslav conflict, by being the first to recognise
Croatia, where there are many Germans and which sided with nazi Germany.
How short a memory Europe has !!!).

No doubt, Milosevic is a manipulating and bloodthirsty leader, who went
in for ethnic cleansing to solve the Kosovo problem; no doubt the Serbs
have committed many atrocities in Kosovo, while Nato was bombing them
out of their minds; no doubt the plight of the Kosovo refugees was sad
(but it was highly publicised by the western media and used by Nato as a
propaganda tool to justify the terrible bombing of the innocent
Yugoslavians - and there are much more needy refugees in the world -
about whom the US does not give a damn. ..) It is true also that Yeltsin
may have been a corrupt vodka-soaked leader whom the United States
supported, because it served their purpose to have a weak Russia, which
will never challenge for years to come America’s hegemony (thus today,
Putin, a "strong" leader, does not get the same support from the West).
But from a Buddhist point of view, were not the Kosovars (and today the
Chechens) paying for the long, bloody and terrible karma they exerted on
Yugoslavia for hundreds of years ? Or to put it in a more cartesian and
down to earth mould, were not the Muslims getting back a fraction of
what they had done to the Serbs ?

What the US and Otan have done in Yugoslavia is morally WRONG : it is
thus bad karma for Europe to bear. It is morally wrong not to support
Russia in its fight against Muslim fundamentalism in Chechenya. And one
day - if the Dalai lama’s theory about black karma is right - they will
have to pay for it. For what was the point of Charles Martel stopping
the Arabs in 732 and Michel Obrnovic II defeating the kalifat, if today
the West hands over on a gold platter a fully autonomous (and sooner or
later fully independent - whatever hypocrite noises the Otan makes about
it) nation to the Muslims in Europe ? And make no mistake about it : one
of the great traits of Islam - and also its biggest drawback - is that a
Muslim is a Muslim, wherever he is, whatever the colour of his skin
(that is, he helps his kindred brothers and sisters - contrary to the
Hindus, who have not yet learnt a little bit of Christian charity). The
Kosovar Muslims might look reassuring and harmless to the eyes of the
Otan (whom, if you noticed, never once pronounced the word ‘muslim’
during their war - it’s a bit like Indian newspapers saying ‘one
community attacked another community’, when Muslims go on rampage
against Hindus), even if it is beginning to show its true face, witness
the recent massacre of Serb civilians. But if you scratch a little bit
and give them some time, you will quickly realise that like any Muslims,
they consider all other religions as "infidel" and that the jihad is
still a sacred concept to them. Already, one can see that Saudi Arabia,
which the United States considers as a ‘soft’ Muslim nation, but which
actually sponsors international terrorism, is one of the biggest backers
of the Kosovar people; already you can see the ruthlessness and ultimate
motives of the Kosovo Liberation Army, which has been armed by the
western powers. Is the West mad then, that it has the never heard about
the snake that bites the hand which feeds him ? The Kosovo quagmire and
its disastrous consequences will take decades to solve.

Maybe Mr Xavier Solana, before embarking upon his ‘holy’ war on a
traditionally pro-western, Christian, reasonably democratic nation,
destroying bridges, factories, killing innocent beings, should have read
the book of Samuel Huntington "The clash of civilisations". He would
have seen that Hutington had correctly predicted that in the 21^(st)
century there will be a clash between two civilisations : the West and
Islam (with China sometimes siding with Islam for self interest
purposes). This trend had already started in India, also a pro-western,
highly democratic power, which is now battling in Kashmir the
fundamentalist side of Islam, as incarnated by Pakistan, which in turn
is helped by the Chinese, who gave it its nuclear bomb and ballistic
missiles to carry it. By allowing an independent Kosovo, the West has
made sure that the enemy is now in the heart of Europe.

****

THE TERRIBLE FATE OF TIBET

Thousands of oil lamps are scintillating in the starry night of
Dharamsala, in the Indian Himalayas at a height of 1800 metres. It is
here that the Tibetan community in exile has taken refuge around its
spiritual and temporal leader, the 14th Dalaï lama. And today Dharamsala
is celebrating the anniversary of the founder of the « Yellow Hats » the
sect of which the Dalaï lama is the head: young monks in saffron robes
are endlessly circling the temple, while chanting haunting Tibetan
religious hymns; one can hear in the crisp Himalayan air the sound of
trumpets blowing off in some far-off monastery, while nearby an old lama
is beating Tibetan cymbals. Everywhere, young children, laughing,
running, are lighting candles to celebrate the birth of their creed. At
last, Tenzin Gyatso, Fourteenth Dalaï lama, Ocean of Joy, Prefect Lotus,
All Compassion, and accessorily Nobel Laureate, appears at the top of
the temple. The crowd of Tibetans below, some of whom have just arrived
from Tibet, crossing illegally the Indian border at night, after days of
arduous and dangerous walking, prostrate themselves, muttering their
immense joy: they have reached their goal, they have seen the living
God...

But never has there been a darker hour in the history of the Tibetan
people. Not only the Chinese, who invaded Tibet in 1959, erased most of
Tibetan culture and religion in Tibet (see box), but the last living
symbol of Tibetan aspiration of Tibetan freedom, the Dalaï-lama is in
grave danger. On the 28th January 1989, died the Panchen lama, second
after the Dalaï lama, in the hierarchy of the Yellow hats. During his
life, the Chinese tried - vainly - to control him and to make him speak
against the Dalaï lama, and he spent several years in Chinese jails
where he was tortured. Traditionally, the Tibetans have always believed
that the souls of their great lamas quickly reincarnate themselves in
the bodies of young boys, generally of a rural background - and it is
thus that all the Dalai-lamas’ reincarnations, including the present
one, have been discovered. But this time the Chinese decided to chose
their own Panchen lama, so that they could manipulate him. Knowing that
the Tibetan people would never accept a panchen lama which was not
chosen according to the tradition, the Chinese Government nominated on
the 17th July 1993, to find the reincarnation of the Panchen lama, a
group of specialised monks, at the head of which they put Chadrel
Rimpoche, whom they thought as anti-dalaï lama. The Rimpoche and his
team short listed 25 young boys, who corresponded to the last
indications left by the Panchen lama before dying (generally visions
which are couched in poems and give some clues of the physical place
where he is to be searched for). But unknown to the Chinese, Chadrel
Rimpooche sent a list and the photos of those young boys to the Dalaï
lama. And on the 14th May 95, taking the Chinese by complete surprise,
the dalaï lama nominated one of those boys, Gedhun Choeki Nyima, as the
11th Panchen Lama.

Furious, the Chinese had the Chadre Rimpoche and the young boy, plus his
parents, arrested and taken to an unknown destination in China. Then
they proceeded, after having accused the Dalaï lama to interfere in
Tibet’s religious affairs, (a joke if there is one), to invoke an
obscure sino-tibetan treaty of the 16th century, between the Manchus of
the Qing dynasty and the 5th Dalaï lama, which gave the Chinese emperor
power to chose the panchen lama. A hundred Tibetan lamas were forcefully
flown to Beijing to give a semblance of religious assent to the whole
thing and on the 8th December last, the name of Gyaltsen Norbu, one of
the 24 other candidates (the Dalaï lama’s choice was omitted), was drawn
from a Golden Urn, another ancient Chinese custom, as the « true »
Panchen lama. « Funny, smiled the dalaï lama, in his retreat in
Dharamsala, the boy’s parents are known to have been for years faithful
members of the Tibetan Communist party, a rare thing in rural Tibet ».
But however the Dalaï lama may protest, he has absolutely no control, as
all the recent reincarnations of the great lamas, even those he has
chosen, such as the Karmapa, the third in the Tibetan hierarchy, are in
Tibet, that is in Chinese hands and they will make sure that they will
get thoroughly Chinese education. On top of that, 3 Tibetan trained by
the Chinese secret police, were arrested last month by the Indian
authorities, as they were trying to approach the Dalaï lama. If he ever
was assassinated, it might well mean the end of Tibet.

Q. You said once that Tibet is going through a « black karma ». What do
you mean by

that ?

A. The sufferings that the Tibetan people are experiencing today at the
hands of the Chinese, are due to a bad karma, bad actions committed in
previous lives. But you have to understand that different persons can
commit a bad karma at different times, in different places and under
different nationalities. And done day by the Grace of God, all these
persons find themselves together at the same time in the same place,
under the same nationality and repay their karma together. This is what
has happened in Tibet.

Q. But you also said that this black karma can also be turned into a
white karma...

A. It is the people who are tortured, the people who are lying trampled
on the ground, those who are shot, who are the ultimate winners. From a
Buddhist view point, much depends on their motivation at the time of
suffering: that is without hatred, without desire of revenge, wanting to
hurt the Chinese. Of course, the desire to reinstate truth, freedom,
that is not wrong. Thus by suffering one whitens all negative karma as
it is done now in Tibet. In the same way, one could say that the people
who are torturing, trampling others on the ground, killing human beings,
they are the losers, because one day, sooner or later, in this life or
another one, they will have to pay for this suffering they are
inflicting upon others. This is a mathematical and logical process,
there is no question of sin or guiltiness here.

Q. You mean that all innocent people who are suffering, is it because
they have done some negative karma in the past ?

A. Yes of course, of course. We the Tibetans for instance, who happen to
be on the receiving end of Chinese aggressiveness, are paying for our
own carelessness: feudalism, or not opening to outside world for
instance.

Q. People who are now Tibet, all of them have committed negative karma?

A. Yes, yes, of course.

Q. But if you take an earthquake, so many innocent people are dying. Is
it also black

karma ?

A. Yes of course.

Q. So there is no injustice in the world ?

A. Oh, in different forms you have to face the suffering consequences of
past mistakes in past lives or sometimes even in this life. But if our
side bears well, with non-violence, Chinese aggression, it may disappear
quickly. Non violence does not mean that

Chinese aggression should not be considered as an injustice. It is
therefore absolutely right to restore justice.

Q. So the Chinese in turn are creating a black karma for them, which
they’ll pay later ?

A. Yes, that’s right. That’s why there is more reason to feel compassion
towards the aggressor !

Q. When will the black karma of Tibet become white karma ? How much time
do you have to suffer before you find back happiness and harmony ?

A. Now as I told you earlier, just washing negative karma does not mean
creating virtuous karma. By suffering we erase negative consequences of
negative karma, but that does not mean you create positive karma. For
that we need a different effort. But the Tibetans are creating now a
very powerful positive white karma now. They are patriotic not on the
basis of winner and loser. We don’t enjoy our enemies suffering, we
believe in compassion, in human values. And it is that compassion, that
belief in human values, which the Chinese need and eventually *we can
help them*. And with these motivations which are true patriotism, this
is the way to promote virtuous karma. (The Dalaï lama laughs). Yours was
a real philosophical question !

Q. Speaking about virtuous karma, is it white karma that because you
have fled Tibet, the West has begun to discover through you Buddhism and
people are discovering something different than materialism.

A. Yes.

****

****

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
