+++
title = "14 "

+++
****

14\. THE RENAISSANCE OF INDIA

There is no doubt that under Prime Minister Vajpayee, India had entered
her Golden Period, her second Renaissance. But will the BJP remain
faithful to its original aspirations, or will it become "Congressized"
as Nostradamus has predicted? Do Indians even know about their own
civilization and how it influenced the whole world at one time?
Unfortunately schools and universities' curriculums teach a very bland
and westernized outlook on India and one man, Murali Manohar Joshi, is
fighting a lonely battle so that Indian children can learn to be proud
of their own countries. There has to be a Renaissance in all aspects of
Indian Life, including in science, where once India was a leader, but
today is just happy copying the West. Finally, will the mother of
Melting Pots become the India of the Third Millennium?

 

****

"NOSTRADAMUS AND THE BJP"

Michel de Nostre-Dame, better known as Nostradamus (1503-1566), was a
famous French astrologer whose predictions - which included the
assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, or the premature death of the
previous Pope - have proved infallibly accurate.

Last month, unpublished manuscripts of Nostrodamus have been discovered
(and authentified) in an old trunk in the French city of Lyon.
Curiously, there are two full pages, which deal at length with India,
particularly with the Bharatiya Janata Party and the just concluded
elections. We are giving here the first words in Latin, the language
which he used, along with a rough translation in English .

"Politicus Bharatus Janatus Indicus veni grandus est vingtus unus
centurus - Congressus oublium est …"

The Bharatiya Janata Party will come to dominate India in the 21st
century, as the Congress, will slowly sink into oblivion.

"Malheureusus, duo annum millenium trahisonus idealum est Congressus
ressemblum, fautum adoptus est. Electionirium Blanca Madamus
attaquum"...

Unfortunately, to achieve power, the BJP may gradually forsake most of
its idealism. In the 1999 elections for instance, (Nostradamus made here
a prediction error : he said duum millenium = 2000), instead of
concentrating on real issues - water, sanitation, education - it will
waste all its energies on attacking the White Lady (Sonia Gandhi, we
suppose).

"Surtoutnum idealus oublium Indianum magna Carta devenus est"…

But more than these basic issues, which any sincere politician should
have at heart, it will not address the real burning changes which India
needs to adopt so as to become again a Great Power.

And Nostradamus goes on to enumerate these changes :

"Congressus independantum Blancum copium est; necessarus changum
indianus cumum facus est"…

As the Congress had heavily borrowed from the White Man (British ?) at
Independence, it will become necessary to "Indianize" the nation so that
it may manifest again its true unique soul.

"Panchayatum villagum empruntus. Sanskritus introdum est. Historicum
ecritum manus, daemonus est. Yogum, respirationnus introdum est…"

Give back the power to the villages in the form of Panchayat.
Reintroduce Sanskrit as the national language. Rewrite Indian History,
which had mostly been devised by White Masters. Revive ancient
traditional systems such as pranayama, yoga, and incorporate them in the
education system and everyday life. Change the Constitution so that
democracy may not be perverted as it will be. Privatise the over-staffed
Iron Bird (Indian Airlines ?), which has the most expensive fares in the
world…

"Malheureusus, secularus montrarus Congressus devenium est, corptionus
introdus cancerus est..."

Unhappily again, goes on to say Nostradamus, the BJP in its eagerness to
prove itself secular (secularus is originally a Latin word), will tend
to become like the Congress : corruption, bureaucracy, the VIP plague,
the madness of subsidies and the hunger for power, may eat its inner
core as a cancer…

"Americanus octopussus contentus summum est; jaunus manus menacus
ignorum est, Gaullus manum oublius est. Aurobindus Ghosus Propehetus
ignorum est"…

It will try to please the American octopus (?) at the cost of India’s
integrity, will ignore the great danger of the Yellow Hand (China ?), it
will forget that a reuniting with Pakistan is of utmost importance for
the stability of the subcontinent, will shun the friendship of the Gauls
(France ?) and will also disregard the words of its Great Prophet,
Aurobindo Ghose.

And this is Nostradamus’ scoop - if we may say :

"Politicus Bharatus Janatus interminum dividus duum et novus politicus
formus"…

After some time, the Bharatiya Janata Party may split into two. Sincere
idealists will form a parallel party which will have as its political
platform many of the ideals which the BJP had forsaken.

"Indianus pretus reformus est, Grandus nationus manum"…

India by that time will be ready for the Big Change and the new party
will sweep away the polls and implement these reforms.

"Sanskritus savantuus nationalum languus, decentralisum governmentus,
aryanus theorum mortuum est, dharmum hinduus devenum. Christianum,
Islamus influencum"…

Scholars will sit down to modernise and simplify Sanskrit; government
will be decentralised; India will strive to form of a federation of
SAARC countries; the theory of the Aryan invasion will be proved false
and it will be shown that Indian civilisation is at least ten thousand
years old and has influenced all great ancient civilisations and
religions such as Christianity and even Islam.

And finally :

"Aurobindus Ghosus realisum est, Indianum Agus ancientus mortum non
est"..

And the prophecy of Sri Aurobindo will be fulfilled : "India of the ages
is not dead nor has She spoken Her last creative word. And that which
She must seek now to awake, is not an anglicised oriental people, docile
pupil of the West and doomed to repeat the cycle of the Occident's
success and failure, but still the ancient immemorial Shakti recovering
Her deepest self, lifting Her head higher towards the supreme source of
light and strength and turning to discover the complete meaning and
vaster form of Her Dharma".

P.S. Nostradamus had written a Post Script:

"Post Scriptum : Politicus Bharatus Janatus minus votus, realisus
stupidum est et changum exorcisus"…

As the BJP, in spite of its alliance getting overall majority (in 1999),
will actually win less seats than in the previous election (because of
it folly of forsaking its idealism and only attacking the White Lady),
it may come to its senses and take-up again its original ideals, thus
avoiding the Split. In this way, this semi-defeat may help to exorcise
the demons of mediocrity.

****

" SEVA AND GOVERNMENT "

In ancient India, the concept of "Seva", of service to others, was very
predominant. It was then felt that the very action of forgetting oneself
and giving one’s work towards the welfare of one’s brothers and sisters,
was one of the most powerful tools to the realisation of the inner Self.
Today, the tradition of Seva is being revived by many contemporary
spiritual movements which are creating a new avatar for Hinduism. More
than that, for the first time since independence, India has a Government
which can boast quite a few Ministers, who are bringing back the
practice of service to their country. That is to say, that they are not
in power to fill their pockets, but put the betterment of "Mother
India", before their own petty self-interests, or even those of their
parties.

One such politician is Dr Manohar Murali Joshi - and amongst all the NDA
Ministers, he is the one who has been most targeted by the Press. Yet,
Dr Joshi has a mission, an ideal - not for himself but for his own
country. The first thing that Dr Joshi feels is that "Indians lack self-
confidence", this very modern and western bend of mind which says: "we
can do it" and drives people to go beyond themselves to reach their
goals. And it is true : Indians are often self-depreciating and are
always comparing their countries to western nations and their
achievements. "Yet, says Dr Joshi, we should tell our children that
modern computers would not work unless India had not invented the
concept of the zero, or that high grade steel in ancient India was so
good that Alexander the Great wanted it to fashion his own sword, or
that rhinoplastic surgery was performed in Vedic times, long before it
was known in Europe".

Manohar Murali Joshi also believes that Indians lack "esprit de corps",
the team spirit which makes a nation great. "Look at our hockey or
crickets players, says Dr Joshi, they are great individually, but cannot
perform well collectively on a steady basis". Dr Joshi could also have
added that Indians are probably amongst the most undisciplined people in
the world: they always break queues, drive without thinking one second
about the other, clean meticulously their own front porch, but throw
their garbage in the street, and have hoarded so much black money that
if it would surface, it would make India one of the richest nations in
the world. And here again, the key is to educate : "It has been stated
that Hinduism, being too individualistic a religion, is responsible for
this lack of collective spirit, argues Dr Joshi, but nothing is further
from truth". And Murali Joshi to quote from Sri Aurobindo, India’s great
avatar of the New Age: "Indian civilisation lived with a noble, ample
and vigorous order and freedom; it developed a great literature,
sciences, arts, crafts, industries; it rose to the highest possible
ideals of spiritual knowledge "...

"It is the British, asserts Dr Joshi, who attacked and ridiculed
Hinduism, which they rightly perceived as the main obstacle to their
complete hold over India". And he could have added that they also
created "Macaulay’s children", Indians in body, but British in mind,
whose descendants can still be found amongst Indian Intelligentsia !
"Hinduism is very community-oriented religion, contends Dr Joshi, as
apart from the concept of seva, look how collective is our temple
worship, with its bhajans, or how the old Panchayat system was
democratic from the village all the way to the top (and not like today,
where everything is decided in Delhi, with the villages having
absolutely no say in anything).

What about the environment, which is so degraded today : tigers are
being killed at the rate of one day, says a recent report; every year an
area the size of France is deforested in India; and the holy Ganges is
so polluted that it is not even fit for bathing. Are not those who
defecate in the Ganges, cut their own forests and kill tigers, mostly
Hindus ? "But on the contrary, replies Dr Joshi, the Scriptures tell us
never to urinate in the Ganges, they enjoin us to plant trees at the
time of festivities and not to kill animals. It is again the impact of
ten centuries of colonisation which has made us forget this very Hindu
respect of Nature".

Finally, unless you educate Indian children about the greatness of their
own civilisation, which taught the concept of seva, of collective
discipline and respect for Nature’s bounties, there is no way that India
is going to produce the leaps and bounds which she needs to become a
superpower. You also have to rewrite Indian history, which basically has
been crafted by British historians to further their claim of superiority
on the "natives", using false evidence, such as the theory of the Aryan
Invasion, which all recent archaeological and linguistic discoveries are
proving as false. The history of the independence of India, which has
been concocted by Congress historians to show the Congress in the best
light, should be reviewed too and Indian children should be told about
the untold horrors of ten centuries of Muslim invasions so that they can
face their own history.

And this is the task that Dr Joshi has set for himself in the true
spirit of seva. Of course, "secular" historians and journalists, who
often have such a Marxist-inspired vision of their country, will scream
every time Mr Joshi makes a move towards "Indianisation" of what is
basically a very bland copy of Western culture. But just think how seven
years ago Dr Joshi had the guts to go and raise the national flag in
Kashmir on 15^(th) of August. Remember how he was reviled and ridiculed
by the Indian Press ? Today he would be hero… "We can do it"…

****

WESTERN SCIENCE AND SPIRITUALITY

Will Science and Spirituality ever meet ? This was the topic of a
seminar at the prestigious Indian Institute of Technology and Science in
Bangalore. Indian scientists, one after the other, expounded, each more
brilliantly than the other, on how reason, rigor, logic and the spirit
of inquiry are the most important parameters of Scientific discovery.
None of them, except for Abdul Kalam, made references to ancient Indian
Science and all of them spoke of science from a Western point of view.

It is true that Western Science, because of its immense material
resources, has come to dominate the world. One needs nowadays billions
of dollars for research - and India doesn't have them, nor can it
remunerate honorably its scientists and engineers – hence many of
India's top scientists have exported themselves to the West. But it may
also true that Western Science, however brilliant, is like a blind man,
because it dissociated itself from the Spirit as early as the 17^(th)
century. The first reason being that the Christian Church was extremely
powerful in Europe, not only in religious affairs, but it also kept
interfering in Government matters. On top of that, it was very rigid and
backwards in scientific topics, believing until very late that the Earth
was flat or that the world started in 4003 BC. And whoever disagreed
with these views was burnt at the stake !

The second reason is that many thinkers of the 17th century,
particularly French philosophers such as Descartes or Pascal, had
unilaterally decreed that the only valid scientific and philosophical
tool of enquiry was Reason and Logic. A third factor came in the 20th
century with the advent of Marxism and Communism, which felt that
spirituality poisoned people’s minds and hence had to be eradicated.

Was this divorce from the Spirit and Science beneficial to the West?
Well, Western scientists have been able to devise the most sophisticated
weapons to kill man; but man is still not capable of killing his own
ego; soon the United States will send human beings to Jupiter, or Mars;
but man today is not capable of reading his own mind! The truth is that
the West, in spite of a huge prosperity based on its tremendous
technological and scientific achievements, is becoming a sick society,
where children go on rampage killing other children with weapons; where
every other man and woman in the United States is under psychiatric
treatment for depression or for insomnia, where out of five marriages,
three end in divorce. .

Nobody in the conference, except Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, who was a guest
of honour, also bothered to ask this question: has Indian Science kept
in touch with the Spirit? Well, if you look at Indian Science in the
past, major discoveries, such as the position of the stars, the
calculation of solar eclipses, or the concept of the zero, were made at
the time when there was no instruments. How were they made? Because
there always was in India a profound and everlasting quest for the
spirit. It is in this manner that Buddha, was able to say, long before
Einstein, that everything in our Universe is constituted of atoms,
constantly changing, dying and being reborn at each moment. And this is
the first theorem that any scientist should apply: "Know Thyself, Know
Thy mind". Because If you know your own mind, then you can fathom all
other minds; if you know one particle of the world, you know all the
particles of the world. This is the truth that India has been practicing
for millenniums.

Finally, nobody in the symposium cared to mention that Western Science
owes a lot to India. Pythagoras, the father of modern Algebra, was
inspired by Indian mathematics; Egyptians built their pyramids by means
of Indian arithmetic; 18th century French astronomers were using Hindu
calculations of the positions of the stars and the solar eclipses… But
unfortunately, Indian Science has today a very Westernized outlook,
because what is taught in the universities and colleges might be the
best of the scientific knowledge, but there is a lack of that connection
with the spiritual, and hardly any mention of India's ancient tradition
of scientific enquiry. This is all because Western colonization : the
British were able, through education, to impart upon the Indian
intelligentsia, a certain Western bend of mind; on top of that, many of
India’s top scientists have a strong connection with the West, as the
ultimate achievement for them is to have a chair in a foreign
university, where some of them brand India as a backward, fundamentalist
country. Isn’t it so Mr Amartya Sen ?.

But the real issue is: how can Indian Science re-link itself again with
the spiritual? There is no question that the Spirit is very much present
in India: everywhere you go, you find ashrams, yogis, sadhus, ordinary
people practicing meditation or pranayama; the natural tendency here is
to understand that beyond visible things, there are levels and levels of
consciousness above us. There is also no question that Indian scientists
have proved that they can compete with the best: there have been Indian
Nobel laureates, there have been Indian geniuses like Ramanujan, who,
with no sophisticated means, were able to devise stupendous mathematical
theorems. But Indian science has to look again within and it has also to
delve in its scientific past. The secrets of the Vedas, for instance,
both spiritual and scientific, have never been fully deciphered;
Sanskrit too, mother of all languages, who could become THE scientific
language of India, has never been analyzed in a modern manner. And then,
not only will Indian science regain its predominance, but it could show
the West how to reestablish the spiritual link and unite at last Matter
and Spirit.

****

INDIA’S ROLE IN THE THIRD MILLENIUM

Has Western civilisation reached the end of the road ? Each culture has
its own uniqueness: the Greeks were great thinkers, the Indians
unsurpassed spiritualists, the Egyptians superb occultists. The West's
genius is undoubtedly materialism, its immense capacity to achieve
material perfection and its great vitality. But materialism has its
shortcomings and ultimately, because it blanked out spirituality, except
in a superficial and ritual manner, it may bring in the decline of
Western civilisation. The first signs of its weaknesses are already
there for everyone to see: the collapse of communism, the erosion of
capitalism with recession and unemployment and the on and off raging
wars in Yugoslavia and the ex-USSR republics. That the United States
still survives as a superpower, should not deceive anybody: often the
core is weakened, decades before it becomes outwardly apparent. History
does not happen in a few years. Materialism is doomed.

India has just entered the third millennium. It matters not that it is a
bit of an artificial date created by the West, who arbitrary decided
that the year zero started with the birth of Jesus Christ. India is
entering the Third Millennium. And what can she wish for Herself? That
she succeeds in her liberalization ? Overcomes the hurdles of
westernization, which has killed the soul of so many so-called Third
World countries? Or gets rid of the dreadful legacies Nehruvianism,
which tried to destroy all which was holy and ancient in this country
and embraced instead western concepts totally alien to India such as
Marxism ?…

And if she does this, then at last, in spite of her huge problems, will
India become a Super Power in the Third millennium. And at last, the
West will take notice of her, as it did of China 30 years ago. But what
more than China can India bring to the World? Democracy for sure,
because India is certainly a much more democratic country than China.
She has proved it in fifty years of strife, of fighting separatisms all
over the nation, of a people mature enough to elect their leaders and
send them back to their classroom when they felt that they did not do
well. India has remained a democracy in spite of the huge bureaucratic
babudom spawned by Nehruvianism and the corruption and an arrogant class
of westernized civil servants. What else does she possess more than
China ? India is also a bastion of pro-western, open-minded,
English-speaking highly cultured people. Soon the West will realize that
alone in Asia (with Russia), India is fighting a lone battle against a
rising sea of Islam fundamentalism, whether in Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, or Chechnya. No western nation could wish a friendlier
country than India, whose elite dreams of sending their her sons and
daughters to study in Harvard and always looks up at itself through a
western prism, although this has not stopped the US from ignoring India
all these fifty years…

But there is something else, something infinitely more important which
India can bring to the West. And it is NOT her democracy, which the West
has anyway. Not even her standing-up to Muslim fundamentalism, or her
westernize outlook… But her spirituality. India is a vast and ancient
land, which alone has managed to keep within itself, by the stubborn of
its people, who were battered by numerous invasions and by the silent
tapasayas of her yogis hidden in her Himalayan caves or her dark and
foreboding temples, the immaculate truth, the ultimate knowledge, the
secret of our destiny. At at a time when the world has never been
feeling so rotten, where mankind is erring on the road to evolution, at
a time when man has forgotten the Why and How of his existence and all
religions not only have failed, but have turned against their fellow men
as Islam (and partially Christianity) show us today, India holds the key
to man’s future.

Today, from the tip of cape Comorin to Kashmir, you cannot go to a place
in this country without finding some spiritual place, some sadhu
practising a particular tapasaya, some course in meditation for
householders. You have just to step out of the big cities, its five star
hotels, its mad traffic, its hurried businessmen with their ties and
briefcases and enter India’s country side, and you step again in India’s
immortal Dharma, you can still feel the line of continuity of 7000 years
of sages. This is the Wonder that IS India.

And what do you think would happen if this ancient knowledge –pranayama,
hata-yoga, meditation - still alive in India, was officially recognised
by the Indian Government, by Indian themselves and *UTILISED in every
day life*. What do you think would happen for instance if pranayama was
systematically taught to sportsmen from the beginning of their training
? It would produce *supermen*; it would be difficult to beat Indian
athletes, because through this marvellous technique they would have
achieved perfect concentration. What would happen if Indian businessmen
used too Pranayama ? It would double their capacity of work and endow
them with enthusiasm for their task. Or if school children were taught
at a very early age the combined techniques of pranayama, hata-yoga,
meditation and Ayurveda ? It would maybe produce the next human species
of our era, a race which is spiritualised in both mind and body.
Unfortunately, for the moment, not only the Indian government does not
recognise the Wonder that Was India, but it constantly denigrates these
great techniques which are part of India’s heritage; the Christian and
Muslim minorities reject them outright as part of the Hindu culture. And
also modern Indians, whether businessmen, intellectuals, or bureaucrats,
disdain this golden treasure of India.

But fortunately for the planetary evolution, India’s yogis, gurus,
teachers are going all around the world to spread this wonderful
knowledge. Some are genuine ones, some are semi-fakes, some are total
fakes. But it does not matter, because almost all of them carry abroad
the message of *yoga* and are propagating India’s eternal dharma around
the world slowly but surely and thanks to them, there are more and more
people in the West who are interested in Indian sciences, who practise
pranayama, hata-yoga, or meditation. It maybe even that India will have
to realise its Wonder when the West will point its finger at it, as
happened in a lesser way in Japan with its martial art techniques, Zen
Buddhism, rock gardens and Bonzai art, when America took hold of them.

For we have lost the truth. we have lost the great sense, the meaning of
our evolution, the meaning of why so much suffering, why dying, why
getting born, why this earth, who are we, what is the soul, what is
reincarnation, where is the ultimate truth about the world, the
universe... But India has kept this truth. India has preserved it
through seven millennium of pitfalls, genocides and mistakes.

And this may be India's gift to this planet during the next century: to
restore to the world its true sense. to recharge humanity with the real
meaning and spirit of life. India could become the spiritual leader of
the world.

For indeed, this is one of the most amazing paradoxes of today's world:
here you have a country, India, which rates today as one of the poorest
on this planet, which is disregarded by most Western nations (and many
of its own people), as irrelevant, backward, too bureaucratic - and
lately, as a hotbed of Hindu fundamentalism. Yet, India holds the key to
the world's future. For India is the only nation which still preserves
in the darkness of Her Himalayan caves, on the luminous ghats of
Benares, in the hearts of her countless yogis, or even in the minds of
her ordinary folk, the key to the planetary evolution, its future and
its hope. This knowledge which once roamed the shores of the world from
Egypt to China, is today lost everywhere. Europe has now entered a
turbulent Age; it will take a long time before it unites in spite of the
near uniformity of its races and religions. The West, in its thirst for
materialism, does not know anymore where it stands and has lost this
precious knowledge, which India still holds, alone in the world.

The 21st century then, will be the era of the East; this is where the
sun is going to rise again, after centuries of decadence and submission
to Western colonialism; this is where the focus of the world is going to
shift. And as when India used to shine her culture all over the Orient:
Japan, Thailand, China, Burma, or Cambodia and influence their
civilisations and religions for centuries to come, once more She will
radiate: "India of the ages is not dead nor has She spoken Her last
creative word; She lives and has still something to do for Herself and
the human peoples. And that which She must seek now to awake, is not an
anglicised oriental people, docile pupil of the West and doomed to
repeat the cycle of the Occident's success and failure, but still the
ancient immemorial Shakti recovering Her deepest self, lifting Her head
higher towards the supreme source of light and strength and turning to
discover the complete meaning and vaster form of Her Dharma. (Sri
Aurobindo)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
