+++
title = "04 Chapter 3 Proselytization in Provincial Muslim Kingdoms"

+++
**Chapter 3**  
**Proselytization in Provincial**  
**Muslim Kingdoms**

A year before the dawn of the fifteenth century, Timur had claimed to
have invaded Hindustan to destroy its infidels and idolators.[¹](#1)  In
the year 1400 India was predominantly Hindu; Muslims comprised less than
2 per cent of the population.  The country south of the Krishna River
right up to Cape Camorin formed the Vijayanagar empire and it was
Hindu.  On the west coast, the strip between Goa in the south to Chaul
and (future) Bombay in the north was in the hands of independent Hindu
rulers.  In the Bahmani kingdom conversions and immigration were
swelling Muslim numbers.  But the whole of Central India with Rajasthan
to the west and Gondwana to the east was Hindu.  East U.P., Bihar and
Orissa were also Hindu.  Only in Baluchistan, portion of the Punjab west
of the River Ravi, Sind and Bengal there were good number of Muslims,
but there too the Hindus were in majority.  In the heart of the
Sultanate - the eastern Punjab, Delhi and its outlying regions, and
western U.P. - Gujarat, and Malwa, Muslim numbers were rising but were
not yet large.  Timur might have made his declaration merely as a
champion of Islam, and yet he was not wrong in his assessment of the
Hindu population of India.

After Timur’s visitation, a number of independent Muslim-ruled kingdoms
like Gujarat, Malwa, Khandesh and Jaunpur also came into being at the
expense of the weakened Sultanate.  Bahmani kingdom had declared
independence about the middle of the fourteenth century, and Bengal too
had become virtually independent.  Curiously enough the break up of the
Turkish empire helped in the rapid rise of Muslim population in the
fifteenth century.  The Hindu rulers no doubt had gathered strength, but
they had to keep on fighting against newly established Muslim kingdoms
as well as the Delhi Sultanate and in the process, and whenever they
were defeated, a number of their soldiers and subjects were captured and
made Musalmans.  Besides conversions of non-Muslims in India a large
number of foreign Muslims also arrived from abroad during this period.

To keep themselves in power, the Saiyyad and Lodi Sultans of Delhi
(1414-1526) went on inviting Afghans from beyond the Indus to help them
stay in power.  Consequently, a large number of Afghan leaders and men
came into India like “ants and locusts” and helped in the rise of Muslim
population.[²](#2)  All these factors helped in swelling the ranks of
Muslims.  In this context it is worth remembering that this period was,
it appears, marked by feverish Muslim proselytization even outside
India.  All the European visitors to India like Nicolo Conti, Athnasius
Nikitin and Santo Stefano were compelled to convert to Islam on their
way to India.[³](#3)  In India itself, according to Barbosa, the sultans
of Delhi had made life extremely difficult for the
non-Muslims.[⁴](#4)  Many of the northern Hindus, especially the Yogis,
“unwilling to stay under the power of the Moors”, became
wanderers.[⁵](#5) Thus like the fourteenth century, the fifteenth also
was a century of rapid rise of Muslim numbers through immigration and
conversion.  In this chapter, therefore, we shall cursorily go through
the history of these kingdoms of India which were ruled by Muslim kings,
and see how Muslim number grew there in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries.

**The Sultanate - The Punjab, Sind and U.P.**

During Timur’s invasion the important places in the Punjab were
systematically sacked.  Punjab was always the first to bear the brunt of
Muslim invasions directed against Hindustan, and Muslim invaders were
keenly interested in making conversions.  The Ghaznavids and Ghorids had
occupied it and converted many people to Islam.  The Mongols had also
ravaged it occasionally.  And for many years at a stretch, during the
reigns of Sultan Nasiruddin and Ghayasuddin Balban (1246-86), they had
held the trans-Ravi and Sind regions under their sway.  Under them
conversions used to take place on a large scale.[⁶](#6)  In the second
quarter of the fifteenth century the successors of Timur were holding
parts of the Punjab to ransom, and rebellions of Muslim adventures were
creating anarchical conditions.[⁷](#7)  During this period and after,
therefore, the Muslim population of the Punjab swelled considerably
mainly due to proselytization.  Immigration of foreign Muslims too was
there on a good scale, for, as said earlier, the Saiyyad rulers, to deal
effectively with foreign invaders and local rebles, and the Lodis to
consolidate their position, invited large number of Afghans from across
the Indus.  Thus foreign immigration and campaigns helped in the rise of
Muslim population in the fifteenth century Punjab.

Uttar Pradesh formed part of the Sultanate from its very inception. 
Consequently “its invasion”, which brought converts, was ruled out.  But
in the fifteenth century, the region to the east and south of Delhi -
Katehar, Doab, Bayana and Mewat - had become a problem tract under
the Saiyyads, and there they contented themselves “with the ignoble but
customary satisfaction of plundering the people”,[⁸](#8) and obtaining
some converts in the bargain.  In eastern U.P. the flourishing Muslim
kingdom of Jaunpur again helped in the rise of Muslim numbers.  However,
the regular warfare between the Lodis and the Sharqis had made both of
them loosen their grip on neighbouring Hindu Rajas and Zamindars.  But
when the Sultanate once again gathered stability, the policy of
proselytization was revived with vigour.  Sikandar Lodi is credited with
sustained activity in this regard.  His intolerance in Gwalior, Mathura,
Banaras and Allahabad,[⁹](#9) his various “Islamic” regulations, and the
fact that a “contemporary (inscription) declares him a staunch Muslim
who made the foundations of Islam strong”,[¹⁰](#10) point to large
additions to Muslim demography.

By the fifteenth century Sind also contained a substantial population of
Muslims, but when actually Sindhis converted to Islam in large numbers
is not precisely known.  However, Muslims had been growing in number
there ever since the days of Mahmud of Ghazni.  Like in Punjab,
Ghaznavid governors had also ruled over upper Sind.[¹¹](#11)  Later on
the rule of Qubacha, his defeat by Iltutmish, the pressure of Mongols,
and the rule of the Sultanate of Delhi had all combined to Islamize
northern Sind to a large extent.  In southern Sind the Sumras, a native
Rajput tribe, was ousted by another Rajput tribe, the Summas, in the
fourteenth century.  The Summas were Muslims and Hindus by
turns,[¹²](#12) but ultimately they seem to have “adopted Islam, and
propagated the religion in their dominions,”[¹³](#13) so that when Firoz
Tughlaq invaded Tatta in 1361, he prohibited the plunder or captivity of
the people because they were Muslims.[¹⁴](#14)  But the Hindus were also
there in large numbers.  When Sultan Mahmud Beghara of Gujarat received
“complaints from Southern Sind where Muslims were said to be persecuted
by Hindus,” he marched to their relief in 1470.  He met many leaders of
Sumras, Sodas and Kalhoras who “told him that they were professing
Muslims but knew little of their faith or its rules, and were wont to
intermarry with and to live as Hindus.” In  Sind, “Compulsory
conversions to Mahometanism were not infrequent, the helpless Hindu
being forcibly subjected to circumcision on slight or misconstrued
profession, or the false testimony of abandoned
Mahometans.”[¹⁵](#15) Mahmud invited many of them to Gujarat “where
teachers were appointed to instruct them in the faith of
Islam.”.[¹⁶](#16)  In the first quarter of the sixteenth century, Shah
Beg Arghun, driven from Qandhar by Babur, expelled Jam Firoz, the last
of the Summas, and his son Shah Husain took Multan in 1528.  When
Humayun took refuge in Sind (1541)[¹⁷](#17)  Muslim population in the
cities of Sind had grown considerably. The countryside had a mixed
population in which half-converted Muslims and Hindus predominated.

**Kashmir**

Kashmir’s conversion to Islam on a large scale also dates from the
beginning of the fifteenth century.  Mahmud of Ghazni had made some
stray efforts at preoselytization.  Later on arrived in Kashmir one Shah
Mirza in saintly robes from Swat in 1315.  He entered the service of
Sinha Deva, the ruling prince.  Shah Mirza helped to oust the Hindu
dynasty, and finally he himself ascended the throne in 1346.[¹⁸](#18) 
Thus there were Muslim kings in the Kashmir Valley from the middle of
the fourteenth century.  However, it was during the reign of Sikandar
Butshikan (1394-1417), that the wind of Muslim proselytization blew the
strongest.  He invited from Persia, Arabia and Mesopotamia learned men
of his own faith; his bigotry prompted him to destroy all the most
famous temples in Kashmir - Martand, Vishya, Isna, Chakrabhrit,
Tripeshwar, etc.  Sikandar offered the Kashmiris the choice between
Islam and death.  Some Kashmiri Brahmans committed suicide, many left
the land, many others embraced Islam, and a few began to live under
Taqiya, that is, they professed Islam only outwardly.[¹⁹](#19)  It is
said that the fierce intolerance of Sikandar had left in Kashmir no more
than eleven families of Brahmans.[²⁰](#20)  His contemporary the Raja of
Jammu had been converted to Islam by Timur, by “hopes, fears and
threats”.[²¹](#21)

By the time of Akbar’s annexation of Kashmir (C.E. 1586) the valley had
turned mainly Mohammadan.  When Father Xavier and Brother Benedict went
to Kashmir with Akbar this is what they learnt: “In antiquity this land
was inhabited by the Moors, possibly a reference to Timur (contemporary
of Sikandar the Iconoclast), and since then the majority of the people
accept Islam.”[²²](#22)  When Kashmir was under Muslim rule for 500
years (1319-1819) Hindus were constantly tortured and forcibly
converted.  A delegation of Kashmir Brahmans had approached Guru Teg
Bahadur at Anandpur Saheb to seek his help.[²³](#23)  But Kashmir was
Islamized.

Those who fled to preserve their religion went to Laddakh in the east
and Jammu in the south.  It is for this reason that non-Muslims are
found in large number in these regions.  In the valley itself the
Muslims formed the bulk of the population.

**Gujarat**

The kingdom of Gujarat was established in 1396 and its rulers were
descended from Wajih-ul-Mulk, a converted Rajput.  This dynasty made
great efforts to spread Islam.  One of its famous rulers, Ahmad Shah
(1411-1442), was responsible for many conversions.  In 1414 he
introduced the Jiziyah, and collected it with such strictness, that it
brought a number of converts to Islam.[²⁴](#24) This Jiziyah was not
rescinded till Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat in 1573.  Even after that it
took time to go,[²⁵](#25) bringing converts all the while.  In 1420
Ahmad Shah punished the ‘infidels’ of Satpura; in 1433 he raided
Dungarpur and in 1440 he brought about Idar’s submission.[²⁶](#26)  All
his conquests were accompanied by conversions and boosted Muslim
demography.  Mahmud Beghara’s (1458-1511) exertions in the field of
proselytization were equally impressive.  In 1469 he led an army into
Sorath against the Mandalik of Girnar.  To the Raja’s protests that he
had paid the tribute regularly, Mahmud replied that he had come “neither
for tribute nor for plunder, but to establish the true faith in
Sorath.” The Raja went on fighting and fleeing and resisting for a whole
year, but then had to accept Islam,[²⁷](#27) and received the title of
Khan-i-Jahan.  It stands to reason that he did not convert alone.  In
1473 a raid on Dwarka brought in some more converts.  When Champaner was
attacked, its Rajput Raja Patai fought very valiantly.  He was defeated
but refused to accept Islam.  For this he was done to death with great
barbarity.[²⁸](#28)  In 1484 his son was made Musalman (again, not
alone) and in the next reign became the Amir of Idar, receiving the
title of Nizam-ul-Mulk.

About conversions through enslavement, Dr. Satish C. Misra, who has made
a special study of the history of Gujarat, writes that “the conflict (in
Gujarat) veered round two main objectives - land and women.  The
conqueror inexorably demanded, more often forcibly wrested, both land
and women…”[²⁹](#29) Surely a large number of women would have been made
Musalman during these wars.

Immigration of foreign Muslims was also not inconsiderable.  Ferishtah
writes that following the example of sultan Barbak Shah of Bengal, the
sultans of Gujarat and the Deccan also invited groups of Abyssinians and
gave them “positions of respect and trust.”[³⁰](#30)  But Gujarat needed
no lessons from Bengal.  She abounded in port-towns, and these were
doing brisk trade.  Her industry was also well-developed.  Traders
arrived from abroad as well as slaves and soldiers. “Because of the
constant threat from the Rajputs and other neighbouring peoples, the
Sultan of Gujarat (maintained) a large standing army, recruited mostly
from foreign Muslim adventurers to whom he (paid) handsome
salaries.”[³¹](#31) On the basis of the writings of Barbosa, Cortesao
and Azevedo, Professor Donald F. Lach summarises the situation thus:
“Moors from all over the Islamic world congregate in the cities of
Gujarat to carry on trade or to find employment as soldiers of the
sultan.  In addition to the native Moors and their co-religionists of
Delhi, a cosmopolitan flavour is given to life by the presence of Turks,
Mamlukes, Arabs, Persians, Khurasanis, Turcomans, Abyssinians, and a
sprinkling of renegade Christians.”[³²](#32)

In Cambay, Ratanpur and Rander, the Portuguese found a number of foreign
and Indian Muslims.[³³](#33)  According to Orta, who wrote around 1560,
there were a few local Muslims and some low caste Hindus in Bassein when
the Portuguese took it in 1535-36.[³⁴](#34)

**Malwa**

Since the days of Khalji and Tughlaq sultans of Delhi, there were large
number of Muslims in Malwa, both indigenous and foreign.[³⁵](#35)  These
numbers went on growing during the rule of the independent Muslim rulers
of Malwa, the Ghoris and Khaljis (1401-1562).  The pattern of growth of
Muslim population in Malwa was similar to that in the other regions. 
Captives made in campaigns against Kherla, Orissa, and Gagraun, in the
first quarter of the fifteenth century, would have added to Muslim
numbers.  Similarly, when sultan Mahmud led an expedition against the
Hara Rajputs in 1454, he put many of them to the sword, “and sent their
children into slavery at Mandu.”[³⁶](#36)  In 1468 from the ravaged and
burning town of Karahra (near Chanderi), 7,000 prisoners were
taken.[³⁷](#37)

The harem of Malwa sultans formed a great source of proselytization. 
The seraglio of Ghayas-ud-din (14691500) was filled with beautiful
slaves girls and daughters of Rajas and Zamindars.[³⁸](#38)  The number
of its inmates was 16,000 according to Nizamuddin and 10,000 according
to Ferishtah.[³⁹](#39)  However, with the rise of Rajputs to power in
Malwa, the enslavement of Hindus and the proselytizing activity of Malwa
rulers may not have been as sustained as in other regions.  Foreign
elements in the Malwa army and administration were also not conspicuous.

**The Deccan**

The Bahmani or the kingdom of the Deccan had come into being in 1347. 
With the extension of its dominion and power, Muslim population saw a
rapid rise.  Continual war with Vijayanagar, Orissa and other smaller
Hindu kingdoms brought slaves who in course of time became Musalmans. 
Nobles and soldiers of foreign extraction filled the army and political
life of the Deccan.  A few instances of these would suffice to give an
idea of the acceleration of Muslim numbers in the Deccan.

The first Bahmani king, Alauddin Bahman Shah (1347-1358) despatched an
expedition against the northern Carnatic Hindu chieftains, and his booty
included “1000 singing and dancing girls, *Murlis*, from Hindu
temples.”[⁴⁰](#40)  In 1406 Sultan Tajuddin Firoz (1397-1422) fought a
war with Vijayanagar and captured 60,000 youths and children from its
territories.  When peace was made Bukka gave, besides other things,
2,000 boys and girls skilled in dancing and
music.[⁴¹](#41)  Incidentally Firoz had a harem of 800 women of various
nations, but of course all Muslims.[⁴²](#42)

His successor Ahmad Vali (1422-36), marched through Vijayanagar kingdom,
“slaughtering men and enslaving women and children.”[⁴³](#43)  The
captives were made Musalmans.[⁴⁴](#44)  Sultan Alauddin (1436-58)
collected a thousand women in his harem.  When it is noted that
intermittent warfare between the Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms
continued for more than a century and a half, the story of enslavement,
conversions, and harems of kings and nobles need not be carried on. 
Even ordinary soldiers used to get many slaves, and at the end of the
battle of Talikot (1565), “large number of captives consigned to
slavery, enriched the whole of the Muslim armies, for the troops were
permitted to retain the whole of the plunder…”[⁴⁵](#45) Capture of women
and children in wars with Telingana and southern chieftaincies too added
to Muslim population.

The Deccan was also full of foreign Muslims.  Most of Bahman Shah’s
nobles were foreigners.  “His Afghan minister was succeeded by a Persian
from Shiraz and he again by a native of Basrah.”[⁴⁶](#46)  Ahmad’s son
Alauddin also surrounded himself with foreigners.  No wonder that in the
Bahmani kingdom two parties sprang up - Foreigners (better termad as
Afaqis) and Deccanis.[⁴⁷](#47)  Both were at daggers drawn for power and
in politics.  Humayun (1458-61) bestowed his favours upon the Foreign
faction.  His renowned minister Mahmud Gawan was a foreigner, who kept
an army of 20,000 men.[⁴⁸](#48)  Another Malik-ul-Tujjar, the governor
of Daulatabad, had with him 7,000 foreign horse.[⁴⁹](#49)  Sultan Ahmad
had a special corps of 3,000 archers from Iraq, Khurasan Transoxiana,
Turkey and Arabia.[⁵⁰](#49)

There were thus foreigners of all extractions in the Deccan - Arabs,
Afghans, Abyssinians, Egyptians, Persians and Turks.  Names of some
officers like Saiyyad Husain Badakhshi, Mir Ali Sistani, Abdulla
Kurd, Qara Khan Kurd, Ali Khan Sistani and Iftakhar-ul-Mulk Hamadani are
indicative of their foreign extraction and predominant
position.[⁵¹](#51)  Besides the Bahmani kingdom, Vijayanagar also
employed a large number of Muslims in its armies.

One class of foreigners, the Africans, need special mention.  Their dark
skin made them a class apart, not being considered equal by the other
fair-skinned foreigners.  “To the negroes were added the *Muwallads*, a
name applied to African fathers and Indian mothers.”[⁵²](#52)  In
politics they were partisans of the Deccanis, in status “low caste”, in
number very large.  It would not be unsafe to assume that at the end of
the fifteenth century foreigners in the Deccan were in the neighbourhood
of a million.

**The Malabar Coast**

In Malabar, Muslim population increased considerably during the period
of fourteenth-fifteenth-sixteenth centuries.  In Quilon, the pearl
fishery was monopolized by the Muslims who were there in large
numbers.  Such was their strength and influence that, although the ruler
of Quilon and his armed retainers were always close by the city, the
real arbiters of justice in local affairs seemed to be the wealthy
“Moors” who ran the fishery.[⁵³](#53)  Both Barbosa and Barros talk of
the large number of Muhammadans, both foreign and indigenous, in
Malabar.  The foreigners included Arabs, Persians, Gujaratis, Khurasanis
and Deccanis.  The local ones were called Moplahs.  They were mostly
Sunnis, they lived in cities and made their living by trade.  They
comprised about 20 per cent of the total population.[⁵⁴](#54)  Barbosa
contends that they were so numerous that the advent of the Portuguese
alone prevented Malabar from becoming “a Moorish state.”[⁵⁵](#55)  A
letter from Goa of the Year 1568 asserts that “the Malabar nation is
Muslim, and they are almost all pirates and hostile to the
Christians.”[⁵⁶](#56)  But the arrival of the Portuguese provided a
check and a challenge to Muslim proselytizing endeavour.  They had
captured Goa, Daman and Diu in the early years of the sixteenth
century.  In their triumphal entry into Goa (C.E. 1510), “the clergymen
were at the head of the procession.” Albuquerque encouraged his soldiers
to marry in the families of his Turkish officers.  Force was also openly
used for obtaining converts.  And we shall see later on, the Portuguese
tried to check conversion to Islam.

**Bengal**

Sind and Punjab lay on the route of Muslim invaders.  They bore the
brunt of so many Muslim invasions for a thousand years from 712 to
1761.  In these provinces as well as North West Frontier Province and
Baluchistan Muslim immigration too was considerable.  Therefore, the
extensive growth of Muslim population in this region is understandable. 
But Bengal, especially eastern Bengal, calls for a special study, for
Bengal did not lie on the route of the Muslim invaders.  Nor did it form
a base of operations for further conquests into India as were Punjab and
Sind.  But Bengal was another region where the rise of Muslim population
was rapid, and probably in the medieval period itself eastern Bengal
especially began to have a majority of Muslim population.  An
explanation for this phenomenon has posed a problem before scholars and
demographers.  However, as we shall see presently, the overall picture
of Islamization in Bengal is quite clear: only in details it is a little
blurred.

The main reason for large-scale conversions in Bengal, as indeed
elsewhere, lies in the proselytizing endeavour of its Muslim rulers and
(this is peculiar to Bengal) Sufi Mashaikh.  Muslim invasions from
northern India had started from the early years of the thirteenth
century.  Bakhtiyar Khalji had invaded Nadia (1203) and Balban had
marched (c. 1279-80) as far as Sonargaon in eastern Bengal.  The
Tughlaqs continued to assert their authority over Bengal and led many
expeditions into it.  During such campaigns some usual conversions would
have taken place.  But large number of Muslims were made under the
independent Muslim rulers of Bengal.  “It is evident, from the numerical
superiority in Eastern Bengal of the Muslims… that at some period an
immense wave of proselytization must have swept over the country and it
is most probable that that period was the period of Jalaluddin Muhammad
(converted son of Hindu Raja Ganesh) during whose reign of seventeen
years (1414-1431)… hosts of Hindus are said to have been forcibly
converted to Islam.”[⁵⁷](#57) About these Dr. Wise writes that “the only
condition he offered were the Koran or death… many Hindus fled to Kamrup
and the jungles of Assam, but it is nevertheless probable that more
Muhammadans were added to Islam during these seventeen years (1414-31)
than in the next three hundred.”[⁵⁸](#58)

Employment prospects also helped in the rise of Muslim population, for
says Barbosa: “It is obviously an advantage in the sixteenth century
Bengal to be a Moor, in as much as the Hindus daily become Moors to gain
the favour of their rulers.”[⁵⁹](#59)

Moreover, “the enthusiastic soldiers, who, in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, spread the faith of Islam among the timid race of
Bengal, made forcible conversions by the sword, and, penetrating the
dense forests of the Eastern frontier, planted the crescent in the
villages of Sylhet.  Tradition still preserves the names of Adam Shahid,
Shah Halal Mujarrad, and Karmfarma Sahib, as three of the most
successful of these enthusiasts.”[⁶⁰](#60)  The story of conversions
under independent Muslim kings of Bengal (1338-1576) is not very clear
as written records about them are few, but stray references clearly show
that “at some times and in some places, the Hindus were subjected to
persecution.”[⁶¹](#61)  Tradition credits the renowned Shah Jalal of
Sylhet making large-scale conversions.  In Mardaran thana in Arambagh
sub-division of Hoogly, where the Muhammadan population predominates
over the Hindu, there is a tradition that Muhammad Ismail Shah Ghazi
defeated the local Hindu Raja and forcibly converted the people to
Islam.[⁶²](#62)

Hand in hand with the proselytizing efforts of the rulers was the work
of Sufis and Maulvis.  From the time of Muhammad bin Tughlaq to that of
Akbar, Bengal had attracted rebels, refugees, Sufi Mashaikh, disgruntled
nobles and adventurers from northern India.  The militant type of
Mashaikh found in Bengal a soil fertile for conversion, and worked hard
to raise Muslim numbers.  Professor K.R. Qanungo has noted that the
conversion of Bengal was mainly the work of
Barah-Auliyas.[⁶³](#63)  Professor Abdul Karim has also referred to
militant Sufi proselytization.[⁶⁴](#64)  But Dr. I.H. Qureshi is the
most explicit in this regard.  He writes: “The fourteenth century was a
period of expansion of Muslim authority in Bengal and the adjoining
territories.  A significant part was played in this process by the
warrior saints who were eager to take up the cause of any persecuted
community.  This often resulted (in clash) with the native authority,
followed, almost invariably, by annexation…”[⁶⁵](#65)  This also shows
how elastic were the methods adopted by the Sufis.  They acted mostly as
peaceful missionaries, but if they saw that the espousal of some just
cause required military action, they were not averse to fighting.  “The
Sufis… did not adopt the Ismaili technique of gradual conversion… They
established their *khanqahs* and shrines at places which had already had
a reputation for sanctity before Islam.  Thus some of the traditional
i.e. (Hindu) gatherings were transformed into new festivals. (i.e.
Muslim).  As a result of these efforts, Bengal in course of time became
a Muslim land…”[⁶⁶](#66)  In brief, the Sufi Mashaikh converted people
by both violent and non-violent means, occupied their places of worship
and turned them into *khanqahs* and mosques to make Eastern Bengal
specially a Muslim land.

Stories of forcible conversions in Bengal are narrated by Muhammadan
medieval historians themselves with great gusto and we need not dilate
upon them.[⁶⁷](#67)  From early times “each seat of Government, and each
military station was more or less a centre of missionary agitation”.  We
find another agency from across the seas working towards the same end. 
Arab merchants carried on an extensive and lucrative trade at Chittagong
and disseminated their religious ideas among its inhabitants.  When
Barbosa visited Bengal at the beginning of the sixteenth century, he
found the inhabitants of the interior Gentiles, subject to the king of
Bengal who was a Moor, while the sea ports were inhabited by both Moors
and Gentiles.  He also met with many foreigners - Arabs Persians,
Abyssinians and Indians (probably Gujaratis).  Caesar Frederick and
Vincent Le Blanc, who were in Bengal in 1570, also inform us that the
island of Sandip was then inhabited by Moors.[⁶⁸](#68)  In the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries Chittagong surely was one of the centres from
which unceasing propagandism was carried on.  When it is realised how
Muslim merchants from India played a major role in the conversion of
Mallaca and then the other parts of South-East Asia to Islam,[⁶⁹](#69)
an appreciation of their proselytizing endeavour and achievements in
Gujarat, Malabar and Bengal can be easily made.  Thus foreign Muslims
were there too in large numbers in Bengal.  They migrated on several
occasions and for various reasons.  Some came in the wake of conquest,
others as traders and businessmen.[⁷⁰](#70)  Ruknuddin Barbak Shah
(1460-74) was probably the first ruler who maintained a large number of
Abyssinians as protectors of his throne.  He recruited 8,000 Habshis and
gave them key positions in his government.  Aside from the Abyssinian
eunuchs at the court, it was common for other eunuchs to act as harem
guards.[⁷¹](#71)  In addition to the Abyssinians, Bengal played host to
other foreigners, especially merchants from Arabia, Egypt, Turkey and
other parts of India.  Many stayed on in Bengal because of its
fertility, riches and cheap food.[⁷²](#72) “Little is reported by
European writers about the Hindu population of Bengal beyond remarks to
the effect that their children are sometimes sold to be eunuchs, that
many of them become converts to the Muslim faith, and that they
constitute the majority of the population outside the port
cities.”[⁷³](#73)  While European accounts of Gaur talk of a mixed
population of Muslims, Hindus and foreigners (Moors), the *Manasa
Vijaya* of Vipradasa (composed 1495) mentions large population of
Muslims in Satgaon.  It says, “The Muslim population of Saptagrama is
innumerable; they belong to the Mughals, Pathans and Mokadims, Saiyyads,
Mullas and Qazis…”[⁷⁴](#74)  Obviously Bengal cities had a good number
of Muslims in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

The methods of conversion employed in Bengal were the same as seen
elsewhere in medieval India.  But what made Bengal different from many
other parts of India as non-resistant and vulnerable to conversions was
its peculiar political, religious, and social condition.  Politically,
Bengal could not withstand Muslim attacks from the very beginning as is
clear from the shocking non-resistance of Lakshman Sen to Bakhtiyar
Khalji’s invasion. Perhaps the kingdom was already thoroughly
infiltrated by Muslim adventures from the west and traders from the
north.  Its Muslim governors and rulers, due to its geographical
location and the unsatisfactory medieval means of communication, mostly
remained independent of Delhi, provoking, nevertheless, occasional
attacks from the Delhi Sultans.  Such emergencies brought the local
rulers and the people closer to each other.  Besides, “throughout the
period from the 13th to the 18th century, the northern, eastern and
south-eastern frontiers of the Muslim ruled area of East Bengal remained
in fluid condition and the boundaries swung to and fro with tides of
fresh conquests…”[⁷⁵](#75) (and conversions).

Thus the People of Bengal accepted their Muslim rulers as one of
themselves, and the rulers on their part adopted and patronised the
people’s language and literature, art and
culture.[⁷⁶](#76)  Translations of many important Hindu works were done
at the orders of Muslim rulers,[⁷⁷](#77) and “as a result of this
interaction of Hinduism and Islam curious syncretic cults and practices
arose, (there) grew the worship of a common God, adored by Hindus and
Muslims alike, namely, Satya Pir.  The Emperor Hussain Shah of Gauda is
supposed to be the originator of this cult…”[⁷⁸](#78) Adherents of such
cults provided potential converts to Islam.  Muslim rulers were keen on
increasing Muslim numbers.  They could provide jobs and other economic
incentives to conversions and, as has been pointed out earlier, Barbosa
was struck by the fact that in Bengal “everyday Gentiles turn Moors to
obtain favour of the King and Governors”.  Others converted as the only
means of escaping punishment for crimes.  Besides, wherever Muhammadan
rule existed slavery was developed, and “slavery was accepted by the
Hindus as a refuge for their troubles.  Delhi court obtained not only
its slaves (in thousands, as for example under Firoz Tughlaq) but also
eunuchs from the villages of Eastern Bengal (a wide-spread practice
which the Mughal Emperor Jahangir tried to stop).  The incursions of
Assamese Maghs, the famines, pestilences and civil wars… drove them in
sheer desperation to sell their children as Musalman slaves”.[⁷⁹](#79)

To such compulsions obviously the very poor and socially backward people
would have succumbed.  For the rich other methods were brought into
operation.  The Census of India Report of 1901 says that “the tyrannical
Murshid Kuli Khan enforced a law that any Amal, or Zamindar, failing to
pay the revenue that was due… should, with his wife and children, be
compelled to become Muhammadans”, but the practice was much older as
vouched by the *Banshasmriti*.[⁸⁰](#80)  Conversions, such as that of
the Raja of Samudragarh, had a chain reaction.  The converted Rajas and
Zamindars used to compel others in their lands to become Musalmans for
fear of losing their support, nay even for making them their active
Muslim supporters.  In this regard we have seen the achievements of
Sultan Jalaluddin, himself a convert form Hinduism.  Kala Pahar, the
dreaded iconoclast, and Murshid Quli Khan were Brahman converts.  So was
Pir Ali or Muhammad Tahir, a Brahman apostate, who “like all renegades…
probably proved a worse persecutor of his original faith than others who
were Muhammadans by birth.” The Census report of 1901 continues to say:
“The present Raja of Parsouni in Darbhanga is descended form Raja Pudil
Singh, who rebelled against the Emperor and became a Muhammadan by way
of expiation.  The family of Asad Khan of Baranthan in Chittagong, has
descended from Syam Rai Chowdhari who was fain to become a Musalman… The
Diwan families of Pargana Sarail in Tippera, and of Haibatnagar and
Jangalbari in Mymensingh, the Pathans of Majhauli in Darbhangha”, all
sprang from old Hindu houses.  They, their propagation, and their
progeny added to Muslim numbers.

The religious condition of Bengal too made people vulnerable to Muslim
proselytization.  The Pala rulers of Bengal were Buddhists and Buddhism,
in spite of the damage caused to it by Bakhtiyar Khalji, remained
prevalent in the land until at least the fourteenth century.  The Senas
were Hindus.  They patronised Brahmins and Sanskrit.  They were
destroyed by Bakhtiyar, but not Hinduism.[⁸¹](#81) However, a sort of
rivalry between Buddhism and Hinduism,[⁸²](#82) and zeal of Muslim
“Saints” combined to create a situation for people’s exposure to
conversion.

The social structure of Bengal too was not coalesced. It was an
amalgamation of Hindus, non-Hindus, and foreigners.  The invaders and
immigrants from the side of Assam, Tibet and Burma were not Hindus. 
Abdul Majid Khan even goes on to say: “In fact India or the land of the
Hindus ended in Bengal west of the Bhagirathi.”[⁸³](#83) The statement
is not quite true, but in the Bengal Census Report of 1872 Beverley has
explained in great detail the difficulty of settling who are and who are
not Hindus.[⁸⁴](#84) The dark, short and broadnosed people of Bengal are
called pre-Dravidian by anthropologists.  Tibeto-Chinese or Mongoloids
also came into Bengal and have become part and parcel of the people.  It
is not known when the Bodo section of the Tibeto-Burman branch of these
people (Bodo, Mech, Koch, Kachari, Rabha, Garo, Tipra) came to Assam and
East Bengal, but are found spread all over North and East Bengal.

In brief in eastern Bengal, Chandals and Pods and in northern Rajbansis
and Koches predominated; the proportion of orthodox Hindus was very
small.  Pods, Chandals and Koches all have traces of Buddhist
influence.  Among Koches traces of Buddhist influence still survived
when Ralph Fitch visited the country in the sixteenth century.[⁸⁵](#85) 
Muslim religion must have crumbled the defences of Chandals, Koches,
Pods and other tribes and low classes on whom there was little Hindu
influence.  Thus it were the peculiar political, religious, but more
especially social conditions of Bengal that exposed its people much more
to Muslim proselytization.  Had the common, poor, unsophisticated
sections of the backward classes been left to themselves, they might
have remained contented with their local forms of devotion and folk
culture.  But Muslim rulers, soldiers and Sufi Mashaikh left the high
and the low hardly any choice in the matter.  The lower classes of
course were more vulnerable.  However, the picture of proselytization in
Bengal is not very clear and the problem is still open to study.

But there can be no doubt as to the local origin of most of the
Muhammadans in Bengal, especially in North and East.  Dewan Fazle Rabbi,
however, has tried to prove that Bengal Muslims are mainly of foreign
extraction.  Nothing can be farther from the truth, but before we
critically assess his ill-founded thesis, we shall sift the evidence
about the local origin of Bengal Muslims which in itself would refute
their extra-Indian nativity.  Brian Hodgson writes about the voluntary
conversion of Koch tribe of North Bengal,[⁸⁶](#86) Dr. Wise about the
tribes about Dacca, and Buchanan Hamilton about other tribes, but they
all agree that Bengal Muslims are descendants of local
inhabitants.[⁸⁷](#87)  And the appellations and professions of the low
class indigenous people did not change with their conversion, as will be
clearly seen in the following Table.

**Table**  
**Showing Muslim Functional Castes in Eastern Bengal[⁸⁸](#88)**

  
 

[TABLE]

In other parts of the old province of Bengal also the general opinion,
buttressed by census enumerations, is that the Muhammadans are recruited
mainly from local converts.

It may be generally said that almost the whole of the functional groups
such as Julaha and Dhunia and the great majority of Shaikhs, probably
nine-tenths in Bengal and possibly half in Bihar, are of Indian origin. 
The foreign elements may be looked for chiefly in the ranks of the
Saiyyads, Pathans and Mughals.  Even here there are many who are
descended from Hindus, because high caste converts are often allowed to
assume high titles.  “In Bihar a converted Hindu of the Brahman or
Kayasth caste is usually allowed to call himself a Shekh (Shaikh) and to
associate and intermarry with genuine Shekhs.  A Babhan or Rajput in the
same circumstances, becomes a Pathan… In Mymensingh high caste converts
are given title of Khan and call themselves Pathans… (Even) the lower
castes… after the lapse of some years… are gradually recognised as
Shekh.”[⁸⁹](#89)  As Nazmul Karim rightly points out: “The pseudo-Syeds
have been on the increase not only in India but throughout the Muslim
world, even from the beginning of Islamic history”,[⁹⁰](#90) and the
high titles among Bengal Muslim do not necessarily point to their
foreign extraction.

Khan Bahadur Dewan Fazle Rabbi of Murshidabad wrote a book in Urdu
entitled *Haqiqat-i-Musalman-i-Bangala[](#91)*91 to prove that Bengal
Muslims were mainly of foreign extraction.  This was done probably to
controvert the statement of Beverley in the Census Report of 1872 that
“the existence of Muhammadans is due not so much to the introduction of
the Moghal blood into the country, as to the conversion of the former
inhabitants.” Mr. Abu Ghaznavi of Mymensingh, who prepared an excellent
account of the Muhammadans of his district, probably in connection with
the 1901 census, also supported the foreign origin theory, but he
admitted that local converts bulked largely in the total.  In Muhammadan
histories no mention is made of any large-scale Muhammadan immigration
from Upper India, and in Akbar’s time the climate of Bengal was
considered so uncongenial that an order to proceed there was considered
a punishment.  Muslims came to Bihar first, but there their number has
remained small.  Foreign Muslims would not have chosen to settle in the
swampy regions of Noakhali, Bogra and Backergunje.

In short, analysing the data collected by Mahalanobis in 1945 about the
ethnic groups of eastern Bengal mainly, Majumdar and Rao also arrived at
the conclusion that Muslims of Bengal are of indigenous origin mainly
from lower classes.[⁹²](#92) These accepted Islam with their local
prejudices, minor beliefs, forms of devotion, folk tales and folk
cultures, and of course retaining Bengali as their mother tongue.  And
this explains the great rise of Muslim population in Bengal which did
not lie on the route of Muslim invaders and was also situated far away
from the seat of Muslim imperial power.

In conclusion it may be emphasised that even when historical forces had
divided the country into a number of independent states consequent on
the break-up of the Delhi Sultanate, the work of proselytization
continued unabated.  Indeed, it made the task of conversion easy.  Small
regions could be dealt with in detail and severe Muslim rulers, orthodox
Ulema and zealous Sufis worked in them effectively.  It was due to
extraordinary situations that the Kashmir valley and Eastern Bengal
became Muslim-majority regions as far back as the fifteenth century.  In
other parts of the country, where there was a Muslim ruler, Muslim
population grew apace in the normal and usual way.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Sharafuddin Yazdi, *Zafar Nama*, Bib. Ind. Text (Calcutta,
1885, 88),  2 vols., II, p.14. Also *Mulfuzat-i-Timuri*, trs. in Find D,
II, p.429.

[²](#2a) So much so that Rizqullah says that under Sikandar Lodi one
half of the country was assigned to the Farmulis and the other half to
other Afghan tribes.  *Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, trs. in E and D., IV, p.547.

[³](#3a) Major, India in the *Fifteenth Century*/(London,1857)
Introduction.

[⁴](#4a) Barbosa, Duarte, *The Book of Duarte Barbosa*, 2 Vols.,
(London,1918-21), II, p.230.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., I, 230-33.

[⁶](#6a) Mohammad Habib, *Some Aspects of the Foundation of the Delhi
Sultanate*, Dr. K.M. Ashraf Memorial Lecture (Delhi, 1966) p.20. 

[⁷](#7a) For the anarchical conditions in the Punjab see Lal,
*Twilight*, pp.79-100.

[⁸](#8a) *Ibid.*, pp.101-109. Also C.H.I. III, p.207.

[⁹](#9a) Lal, *Twilight*, pp.77, 192.

[¹⁰](#10a) *Ibid.*, p.187.

[¹¹](#11a) *Tuhfat-ul-Kiram*, E and D., I, pp.341-42.

[¹²](#12a) *Ibid.*, p.337.

[¹³](#13a) C.H.I. III,p.501; also *Tarikh-i-Masumi*, E and D, I,
pp.224-26, and *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1845,
pp.159-60.

[¹⁴](#14a) Afif, op. cit., p. 233.

[¹⁵](#15a) *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1841, p.20. Even
in the nineteenth century Hindus in the service of the Amir were obliged
to wear beards like the Muslims.  Thornton, *Gazetteer*, IV, p.296.

[¹⁶](#16a) C.H.I., III, p.309.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Ibid.*, pp. 501-502.

[¹⁸](#18a) Ferishtah, II, p.337.

[¹⁹](#19a) *Ibid.*, II, p.341.

[²⁰](#20a) C.H.I., III, p.281, Zain-ul-Abidin (1420-1470), the Akbar of
Kashmir, recalled the exiles, assuaged the fears of the Hindus, and
abolished the Jiziyah, but the converts continued to remain Musalman.

[²¹](#21a) *Zafar Nama*, op. cit., II, pp.168-69. Lal, *Twilight*, p.39.

[²²](#22a) Lach, Donald F., *Asia in the Making of Europe*, (Chicago,
1965), vol. I, p.467.

[²³](#23a) Macauliffe, M.A. *The Sikh Religion*, 6 vols., IV, pp.371-72.

[²⁴](#24a) Ferishtah, II, pp. 185. Also Satish C. Misra, *The Rise of
Muslim Power in Gujarat* (Bombay, 1963), p.175.

[²⁵](#25a) R.P. Tripathi, *Some Aspects of Muslim Administration*
(Allahabad,1936), p.318.

[²⁶](#26a) C.H.I., III, pp. 298-300

[²⁷](#27a) *Ibid.*, pp.305-06.

[²⁸](#28a) *Ibid.*, p.310. Ferishtah, II, p.202.

[²⁹](#29a) S.C. Misra, *op. cit.*, p.205.

[³⁰](#30a) Ferishtah, II, p.298.

[³¹](#31a) Castanheda, *Historia do descobrimento e conquista de India
pelos Partugueses* (Third Ed. Coimbra, 1928), II, p.316. Mentioned in
Lach, *Asia in the Making of Europe*, p. 399.

[³²](#32a) Lach, I, 401.

[³³](#33a) Barbosa, *op, cit.*, p.140; Orta and Pires in Lach, I, 404.

[³⁴](#34a) Lach, I, 405.

[³⁵](#35a) U.N. Day, *Medieval Malwa* (Delhi, 1967), pp.6-7.

[³⁶](#36a) C.H.I., III p. 356.

[³⁷](#37a) *Ibid.*, p.360.

[³⁸](#38a) Day, op-cit., p.244.

[³⁹](#39a) *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, III, p. 351.  Ferishtah, II, 255.  Dr.
U.N. Day op. cit., pp.244-46 thinks that the figure of Nizamuddin is
exaggerated.  Probably it is not.  When it is realised that Ghayasuddin
had two battalions of Habsh and Turkish women guards, each of 500, the
figure of 1600 (given by Wolseley Haig) appears to be too small to be
true.  In fact according to Pires, who wrote between 1512 and 1515 the
king of Malwa was said to have 2,000 women warriors who rode out to
battle with him. (*The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires* (London, 1944), I,
P.37 cited in Lach, I, p.420). A harem of 1600 inmates would have hardly
aroused any comment from medieval chroniclers.  But Ghayas’s saraglio
was an unique institution.  It was built with beauties collected from
all over the world (Ferishtah).  Girls were also abducted to supply its
requirements.  “Besides the musicians, singers, and dancers, usually
found in a royal seraglio there were goldsmiths, blacksmiths,
shoemakers, weavers, potters, tailors, makers of bows, arrows, and
quivers, carpenters, wrestlers, and jugglers, each of whom received
fixed wages, their officers, also women, being paid at high rates…”. (W.
Haig and Ferishtah).  The wages - two seers of grain and two tankahs per
head per day - given to harem inmates were so low as to make one feel
that it was a stable for women rather than a harem.  If the number was
manageable the women would have been paid and looked after better.  In
view of all this, the figure of 16,000 may not, after all, be an
exaggeration. 

[⁴⁰](#40a) C.H.I., III p.375-76.

[⁴¹](#41a) Sewell, A Forgotten Empire (*Vijayanagar*), pp.57-58.

[⁴²](#42a) C.H.I., III, p. 391.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.*, p.397.

[⁴⁴](#44a) *Ibid.*, p.398.

[⁴⁵](#45a) *Ibid.*, III, 449.  Also Sewell, p.198.

[⁴⁶](#46a) *Ibid.*, III, pp.403-404.

[⁴⁷](#47a) H.K. Sherwani, *Mahmud Gawan* (Allahabad, 1942), pp.61-7l,
esp.p. 63 and n.50.

[⁴⁸](#48a) C.H.I., III, p.432.

[⁴⁹](#49a) *Ibid.*, p.406.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Sherwani, *op. cit.*, p.65.

[⁵¹](#51a) *Ibid.*, pp.65-68.

[⁵²](#52a) C.H.I., III, p.404.

[⁵³](#53a) Barbosa, II, pp. 122-23.

[⁵⁴](#54a) W. Logan, *Malabar* (Madras, 1951), I, p.199. Also Lach,
368-69. On the impression of Barbosa and Barros.

[⁵⁵](#55a) Barbosa, II, p.74.

[⁵⁶](#56a) Lach, *op. cit.*, I, p. 447.

[⁵⁷](#57a) C.H.I., III, p.267.

[⁵⁸](#58a) *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1894, Pt. III,
p.28.

[⁵⁹](#59a) Barbosa, *The Book of Duarte Barbosa*, II, p.148. Also
Castanheda cited in Lach, I, p. 415.

[⁶⁰](#60a) *Loc. cit.*

[⁶¹](#61a) *Census of India Report*, 1901. VI, Pt. I, Bengal,
pp.165-181.

[⁶²](#62a) *Ibid.*

[⁶³](#63a) “Bengal was not conquered by seventeen Turkish cavalieres (of
Bakhtiyar Khalji); but by the *barah-auliyas*, or twelve legendary
Muslim militant saints, the Pirs who cropped up after the seed of Islam
had been broadcast in the plains of Bengal.” K.R. Qanungo, *op. cit.*,
p. 151.

[⁶⁴](#64a) Abdul Karim, Social History of Muslims in Bengal, pp.136-38,
143-146.

[⁶⁵](#65a) On the authority of Jadunath Sarkar, *History of Bengal*,
pp.68, 70.

[⁶⁶](#66a) Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi, *The Muslim Community of the
Indo-Pakistan Subcontinent* (610-1947), Monton & Co., S-Gravenhage,
1962, pp.70-71, 74-75.

[⁶⁷](#67a) Here is one such story cited in the Census of India Report,
1901, Vol. VI, Pt, I, Bengal, pp.165-181.

“While the Muhammadan population was still scattered, it was customary
for each householder to hang an earthen water-pot (*badana*) from his
thatched roof, as a sign of his religious belief.  One day a Maulvi,
after some years’ absence, went to visit a disciple, who lived in the
centre of a Hindu village, but could not find the ‘badana’.  On enquiry
he was told that the Musalman villager had renounced his faith and
joined an outcaste tribe.  On his return to the city, the circumstances
being reported to the Nawab, a detachment of troops was ordered out, the
village surrounded, and every person in it compelled to become
Muhammadan.”

Also see M.L. Roy Chowdhury, “Preaching of Islam in Bengal (Turko-Afghan
Period)”, in *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress*, Twentythird
Session, Aligarh, 1960, Pt. I, pp.168-181, esp. p.171, where quotations
from Bijoygupta’s *Padma-Purana* and Jayananda’s Chaitanaya Mangal show
some methods of forcible conversions.

[⁶⁸](#68a) *Voyages de Le Goowz*, p.157, cited in Census Report,
1901,op.cit.

[⁶⁹](#69a) D.C.E. Hall, *A History of South East Asia*, pp.177-183.

[⁷⁰](#70a) Abdul Karim, p.140-41.

[⁷¹](#71a) Barbosa, II, 147.

[⁷²](#72a) Lach, I, 416

[⁷³](#73a) *Ibid.*, I, pp. 417-18.

[⁷⁴](#74a) Sukumar Sen, *Bangla Sahityer Itihasa* (Calcutta, 1940),
p.114, cited in Abdul Karim, *op. cit.*, p.153.

[⁷⁵](#75a) Nafis Ahmad, “The Evaluation of the Boundaries of East
Pakistan” in the *Oriental Geographer*, II, No. 2, July, 1958, p.101.

[⁷⁶](#76a) D.C. Sen, *History of Bengali Language and Literature*
(Calcutta University, 1911), pp.10, 12, 13-14.

[⁷⁷](#77a) Tara Chand, *op. cit.*, p.214.

[⁷⁸](#78a) *Ibid.*, p.217.

[⁷⁹](#79a) Census of India Report, op. cit., for 1901.

[⁸⁰](#80a) It gives a historical sketch and genealogy of the family of
Raja of Samudragarh, a place situated between Katwa and Bandel Railway
Stations.  Since the writer Satya Krishna Biswas was descended from Gopi
Mohan Biswas, the last Diwan of the ruling house (*op. cit.*, p.10), the
narrative appears to be quite reliable.  It says that after Bakhtiyar
Khalji overran Bengal, it became a rule that if revenue was not
deposited within the prescribed time, the defaulting landlord
(*bhuswami*) had either to lose his land or become Muslim. This is also
referred to in the *Banglar Itihasa* of Babu Raj Krishna (p.7).
*Banshasmriti* says that once Raja Ranjit Bhatt of Samudragarh went to
deposit his land revenue, but at the Treasury he found that the Raja of
Krishnanagar had not reached in time.  He reflected that if the Raja of
Krishnanagar became Muslim, much harm would be done because he was a
bigger landlord.  Therefore, “in the larger interest of Hinduism”,
Ranjit Bhatt deposited his money as revenue on behalf of the Raja of
Krishnanagar and himself became a Muslim.  But the most interesting part
of the narrative is that on his return to his land the newly converted
Raja started compelling others also to embrace Islam (because perhaps
therein alone lay his security and defence).

According to the author of the *Banshasmriti* the family still lives in
Samudragarh, now only a small village.  All the members are given two
names - one Hindu and the other Muslim at the namakaran ceremony.  The
present Raja’s (1926?) Muslim name is Ichamat Khan and Hindu name is
Makhan Lal Thakur.

[⁸¹](#81a) P. Saran, *Resistance of Indian Princes to Turkish
Offensive*, Sita Ram Kohli Memorial Lectures, Punjabi University
(Patiala, 1967), p.34.

[⁸²](#82a) R.C. Mitra, The Decline of *Buddhism in India*, pp.78-79.

[⁸³](#83a) Abdul Majid Khan, “Research about Muslim Aristocracy in East
Pakistan” in Pierre Bessaignet (Editor), *Social Research in East
Pakistan*, pp.18-25.

[⁸⁴](#84a) p.131, also pp.96,129.

[⁸⁵](#85a) *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1873, Pt. I,
p240.

[⁸⁶](#86a) *Essays on Indian Subjects*, I, p.108, cited in Census of
India Report, VI, Pt. I

[⁸⁷](#87a) *Statistical Account of Rangpur*, p.221, cited in Census
Report, 1901, VI, Pt. I, Bengal, pp.165-181.

[⁸⁸](#88a) Extract from *Census of India*, 1931, V, Part I, p.423.

[⁸⁹](#89a) *Census of India Report*, 1901, VI, Part I, Bengal,
pp.165-181.

[⁹⁰](#90a) A.K. Nazmul Karim, “Muslim Social Classes of East Pakistan”
in *Changing Society in India and Pakistan*, University of Dacca (Oxford
University Press, Pakistan, 1956), pp.120-30,138-143.

Karim also quotes the well-known saying "Pesh az yin qassab budem,
badazan gushtem shiekh: ghalla chun arzan shawad, imsal syed meshawem." 

(The first year we were butchers, the next Sheikhs, this year, if prices
rise, we shall become Syeds).

[⁹¹](#91a) Its English translation is also available, entitled *The
Origin of the Muhammadans of Bengal*, Thacker, Spink & co., Calcutta,
1895.

[⁹²](#92a) D.N. Majumdar and C.R. Rao, *Race Elements in Bengal*, Asia
Publishing House (Bombay, 1960), pp. 74-77.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)  [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
