+++
title = "04 "

+++
<div class="Section1">

 

**5. Hindu response to the demographic challenge**

**5.1. Some panicky solutions**

       This leaves enough time to do something, assuming that "doing
something" is in principle possible and desirable.  So, what are the
options?  It hardly makes sense to react to this demographic aggression
with a Hindu demographic counter-offensive, as suggested by the Puri
Shankaracharya, if at all it were possible to surpass the Muslim
community in this respect.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  A similar idea is that birth
control should be made compulsory for all, e.g. by enforcing vasectomy
on every father of two children.[\[2\]](#_edn2) 

       A sinister alternative routinely imputed to the RSS is the
expulsion of all Indian Muslims to Pakistan, "the state which was, after
all, created for them".  This kind of statement can be heard in speeches
by the more extreme wing of the Hindutva organization, e.g. in the
popular audio-taped speeches by Sadhvi Ritambhara propagating this
position, including the slogan: *"Mussalman ke do hi sthan, Pakistan ya
qabrastan"*, "There are only two places for Muslims, Pakistan or the
graveyard". 

       This slogan apparently dates back to the Partition and its
massacres, as related to me by eyewitnesses.[\[3\]](#_edn3)  At that
time, the evacuation of Muslims from India was, coupled with an ordered
evacuation of Hindus from Pakistan, an entirely serious proposal: all
Hindus would vacate Pakistan, and all Muslims would go to Pakistan,
leaving only their buried ancestors behind in graveyards in India.  The
proposal was formulated by Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar in his *Thoughts on
Pakistan* (1940), and meant to save millions of lives (including those
yet to be lost in future clashes resulting from Hindu-Muslim
co-existence in the respective countries of the subcontinent, esp.
India).  Today, however, it could only be done by means of extreme
violence, comparable in intensity to (but a hundred times larger than)
the full-scale civil war which led to the expulsion of the French
inhabitants of Algeria in 1962.

       A few years ago, Anwar Shaikh, a convert from Islam, offered a
political solution (which he later retracted): "There is only one
solution to this horrendous problem, that is, disenfranchise all Muslims
of India.  A vote is the right of a patriotic citizen who thinks good of
his country and acts accordingly.  These people lost their Indian
citizenship by dividing their own motherland to create
Pakistan."[\[4\]](#_edn4)  Apart from the questionable desirability of
such a disenfranchisement, it is obviously a recipe for civil war, for
how long would an ever-larger Muslim community tolerate it?

       Perhaps Baljit Rai is thinking along the same lines when he
offers the undefined concept *Hindu Rashtra* as a solution: "Hindus,
Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists and others (Muslims excluded)
living in India have no option but to live either in a Hindu Rashtra or
Muslim India, i.e. India as Dar-ul-Islam.  That is the stark
reality."[\[5\]](#_edn5)  Unfortunately, he fails to explicitate how the
declaration of India as a Hindu state would stop the Muslim increase
leading to a Muslim majority.  Nepal is formally a Hindu Kingdom, yet it
fails completely to put up any kind of effective defence against Islamic
immigration and Christian proselytization, which are fast destroying the
Hindu character of the country.

       Some desperate Hindus have advocated the reintroduction of
polygamy, e.g. one Ashok Vashisht in Britain pleads for adoption of
polygamy to counter the effects of Muslim polygamy.[\[6\]](#_edn6)  His
argument is that Muslim polygamy, even if it does not yield a higher
birth rate by itself, is nevertheless a decisive trump card in the
Muslim demographic offensive, because it limits the availability of
women for other Muslim men and thereby forces them to scout around for
non-Muslim women.  There is something demeaning about this kind of
competition, and it overestimates the demographic use of polygamy vastly
(polygamous households are rather few and tend to have a lower number of
children per woman).  But its main conceptual weakness, as also of the
other options mentioned, is that it is predicated on the acceptance of
the continued Islamic identity of the Muslims.     

 

**5.2. Reconversion**

       Within the above schemes, the choice seems to be one of simply
letting the Muslims take over India as soon as they become numerous
enough; or implementing one of the said scenarios of demographic
competition or ethnic cleansing.  One cannot blame anti-Hindu authors
for highlighting such ideas as all too similar to certain forms of
xenophobia and racism elsewhere.  But rather than shrieking about the
horrible plans being concocted in Hindutva backrooms, we should take a
look at an established Hindu alternative for these extreme "solutions".

       The alternative we mean is not to just shrug it all off and say:
but why should anyone object if Muslims become the majority?  That is a
valid option in theory, but one which is unacceptable to every single
Hindu worth his salt.  After the treatment which Hindus have received in
Muslim-majority states and regions, from legal discrimination in
Malaysia to ethnic cleansing in Kashmir and genocide in East Pakistan,
aborting any evolution which would turn India into a Muslim-majority
state is an agreed policy goal. 

       The other alternative, the one advocated by a string of activists
from Dayananda Saraswati to Abhas Chatterjee, is that Hindus challenge
the Muslims' adherence to Islam.  In Chatterjee's words: "We consider
these alien ideologies to be enemies of our nation.  The goal is to
bring our minorities back into our nation after destroying the deadly
intoxication of these ideologies."[\[7\]](#_edn7)  This was also the
solution offered by Swami Shraddhananda to "save the dying race".
        

       This reconversion may take the form of reawakening some
peripheral, superficially islamized communities to their pre-conversion
Hindu identity, an approach which has worked in the case of the
reconverted Malkana and Meherat Rajputs.  But today these semi-Hindu
Muslim communities are becoming scarce due to *Tabligh* campaigns and
the spread of *Madrassa* education, making the Muslims more Muslim.  In
the larger picture, even the successes which have been achieved by the
reconversion movement may not amount to much, for there have also been
conversions of Hindus to Islam. 

       This leads to considerations of a second approach: educating
Muslims about the less than divine basis of Islam to shake well-grounded
believers in Islam out of their beliefs.  The whole idea strikes modern
Hindus as quite foreign to Hinduism, which has come to be seen as an
entirely spineless jellyfish, tolerating everything, approving
everything.  In reality, Hinduism has quite a tradition of debate,
including wagers in which the loser agrees to convert to the winner's
school of thought; an unusually energetic Hindu may try to revive this
tradition.  

       This polemical approach is much more difficult, not least because
it necessitates a profound reformulation of Hinduism in modern terms and
the shedding of a lot of superstitious deadwood which Hinduism has
accumulated over the centuries.  Hindu society is not in a shape to
teach others lessons and tell them what is wrong with them; or so Hindus
feel.  That is exactly how Swami Dayananda understood the situation when
he conceived the *Shuddhi* programme together with a reform of Hinduism:
reconversion of Muslims is only possible if it is combined with thorough
internal reform, both in the social and the intellectual domains.

       Demanding as the project of reconversion may be, it is the only
civilized solution to the looming threat of a Muslim demographic
take-over of India a few decades from now.  Of course, Hindus may be
lucky and wake up one day to find that Islam has imploded from within,
that the Ayatollahs and the Ulema of Al-Azhar and Deoband are suddenly
telling their flock that the whole thing was a mistake.  The Hindus were
that lucky in the case of Communism, which surprised them with its
implosion, so it is really possible; nonetheless, luck rarely comes to
those who count and depend on it for their survival.  Time has not run
out yet, and if Hindus make a start today, they can comfortably organize
the salvation of their country from the rising tide of Islam.

 

**5.3. A secular afterthought**

       To a modernist outsider, there is something quaint and unreal
about this alternative: either islamizing or hinduizing India.  Perhaps
this is na√Øve Enlightenment optimism, but I wonder if the present
worldwide revival of religious identities can at all persist once the
information revolution has had its full civilizational effect.  As late
as the 1960s, Protestants in the Netherlands used to warn each other
against the Catholics, who were allegedly planning to take over the
country with their high birth rate.[\[8\]](#_edn8)  The suspicious
Protestants were right, for today, Catholics are very slightly more
numerous than Protestants in the Netherlands, a state created by a
Protestant freedom struggle; only, the two communities together hardly
command the loyalty of half the population anymore, for both have lost
their adherents at a dramatic rate.  Moreover, with the mental
secularization of even the remaining Catholics, the idea of a Popish
Plot to seize power has become surrealistic. 

       Like the Dutch Catholics, Indian Muslims should be encouraged to
outgrow their religious conditioning, and to explore the spiritual
sphere afresh.  This will automatically bring them in closer touch with
their Hindu surroundings, and help them reintegrate into the society
from which they were estranged by Islam.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[1\]](#_ednref1)  The Shankaracharya was quoted to this effect in
*India Today*, 31-5-1986, with the comment: "Hindu stalwarts like him
are convinced -- however ludicrous it might sound -- that a conspiracy
of sociology and demography will soon render the Hindus a minority in
their own country."

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[2\]](#_ednref2)  Not that this is so extreme, for even model
secularist Khushwant Singh writes (*Need for a New Religion in India and
Other Essays*, UBSPD, Delhi 1993, p.16): "We must disenfranchise parents
who have more than two children and forbid them from holding elective
offices.  We must also make sterilisation of both parents on the birth
of their second child compulsory."

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[3\]](#_ednref3)  Including Madanlal Pahwa, a refugee from West
Pakistan and an accomplice in the Mahatma Gandhi murder case, whom I
interviewed in Mumbai, January 1996.

</div>

<div id="edn4" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[4\]](#_ednref4)  Anwar Shaikh: *Is India Going Islamic? -- a Review*
(private pamphlet reviewing Baljit Rai's book, Cardiff 1994), p.8.  In
his latest book (*A Tale of Two Gujarati Saints*, A. Ghosh, Houston
1998), he explicitly abandons this position.

</div>

<div id="edn5" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[5\]](#_ednref5)  Baljit Rai: *Is India Going Islamic?*, p.107

</div>

<div id="edn6" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[6\]](#_ednref6)  A. Vashisht: "Marriage game: beat the Mussalman",
*Young India*, July 1995.

</div>

<div id="edn7" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[7\]](#_ednref7)  A. Chatterjee: *Hindu Nation* (Voice of India,
1995), p.45.

</div>

<div id="edn8" style="mso-element:endnote">

[\[8\]](#_ednref8)  And as late as 1976, my schoolteacher of Catholic
religion told us to have many children, for this was the way to make the
Catholic community stronger and more powerful.  On present trends, the
Catholic minority in Northern Ireland is all set to numerically overtake
the Protestant majority.

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/appendix.html)**

**[BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/demogislam/part4.html)**

</div>

</div>
