+++
title = "08 4 Plunder (Ghanîmah) in the Hadis"

+++
**4**  
**Plunder (*Ghanîmah*) in the Hadis**

\(1\) Is plunder compatible with religion and piety? We have seen that
the Koran itself says ‘yes’. But it appears that some objection was
raised against this view as early as the Prophet’s own life-time. The
Prophet himself met this objection in a somewhat longish *hadîs*. We
find him declaring in favour of the Koranic view by contrasting Allah’s
dispensation regarding plunder in the epoch of former prophets with that
in his own. The same issue had been raised when the followers of a
former prophet had amassed a goodly amount of loot which Allah
apparently disapproved. So “a fire approached the spoils to devour
them”, but stopped just short of touching it. The prophet of aforetime
was clever enough to guess the reason for such strange behaviour on the
part of the divine fire. And he told his followers, “One of you must be
guilty of concealing a part of the spoil. So come forward and touch my
hand by way swearing fealty to me.” One or two hands stuck the prophet’s
hand and, true enough, on questioning they disgorged “gold equal in
volume to the head of a cow”. So the whole plunder was put together and
Allah’s fire promptly lapped it up. To the prophet of Islam, the meaning
of this parable was unmistakable. As he reasoned:

“The spoils of war were not made lawful for any people before us. This
is because Allah saw our weakness and humility and made them lawful for
us” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4327).

\(2\) It should be clear from the foregoing episode that the Hadis makes
its own addition to the Koranic doctrine of *ghanîmah*. The *mujãhid*
must despoil the infidel as a matter of course, but he should not
‘misappropriate’ any portion of the loot. The plunder is property of the
Islamic state so long as it is not doled out to each according to his
performance, the Prophet’s (or the Sultan’s) ‘holy one-fifth’ being the
pick of the basket. Keeping the plunder for oneself without reference to
the commander is a grievous sin. As the Prophet puts it in another
hadîs:

“Fight against those who disbelieve in Allah. Make a holy war; do not
embezzle the spoils” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4294).

In fact, ‘embezzlement of spoils’ is one of the deadliest sins in Islam.
This comes out in a number of *ahãdîs*. A slave of the Prophet was
killed in *jihãd* against the Jews of Khaibar (AD 628). When people
started greeting him as a martyr, the Prophet cried out:

“Nay, not so. By Him in Whose hand is the life of Muhammad, the small
garment he stole on the day of Khaibar but which did not fall to his lot
is burning like the Fire (of Hell) on him” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 210).

\(3\) I have said that this doctrine of embezzlement or misappropriation
of the spoils is an addition to the Koranic doctrine of plunder made by
the Prophet on his own. But it must be understood that what the Hadis
has added to the Koran is but a logical corollary. Plunder, this side of
religion, is a vocation natural to robbers. If robbers go on a
plundering spree, it is only the iron discipline of the leader that
prevents them from falling out among themselves for a larger share of
the gain. Now if one were to invoke divine sanction for the plunder, one
must similarly make provision for divine disapproval against its
misappropriation. The two things hang together, and what the Hadis has
added is only a legitimate extension of the Koran.

\(4\) The Hadis has made many other additions to the doctrine of
*ghanîmah*. It would be tedious to enumerate all of them, but one
important addition, equally logical, merits mentioning. “The Messenger
of Allah allotted two shares from the spoils to the horseman and one
share to the footman” (*Sahih Muslim*, Nos. 4358-59). The learned
Pakistani translator of Imam Muslim refers to the vast Islamic
literature which expounds this tenet and he himself breaks into lyricism
in extolling such beauties of the Hadis.

\(5\) A far more important extension made by the Hadis to the doctrine
of *ghanîmah* is the inclusion of the whole world as the Mussalman’s
rightful ‘field of spoliation’ so to say. The Koran speaks of the “other
gain which the Muslims have not yet been able to achieve” (K 48/21). The
Hadis tells us that the “whole of earth belongs to Allah and His
Apostle”. Because such *ahãdîs* touch the issue of Islamising the whole
of humanity this *hadîs* merits quoting *in extenso*. But first of all a
preliminary word.

The reader should know that early Islam became prosperous by destroying
one by one the Jewish settlements around Medina and wresting their lands
and goods and women and children as plunder. A *hadîs* refers to this
practice of spoliation with absolute candour and incidentally brings out
the theory of wholesale Islamisation of humanity. The *Sahih Muslim*
narrates on the authority of Abu Hurairah:

“We were sitting in the mosque when the Messenger of Allah came and
said: Let us go to the Jews. We went out with him until we came to them.
The Messenger of Allah stood up and called out to them: O ye assembly of
Jews, accept Islam and you will be safe” (No. 4363).

This last sentence has been called the “communication of the message”
(of Islam) and, as has been explained previously, this is the best mode
of inaugurating a *jihãd*, The *hadîs* then indicates that the Jews were
not agreeable to the call. The Prophet repeated the call three times
consecutively and failing a satisfactory response said:

“You should know that the earth belongs to Allah and His Prophet, and I
wish that I should expel you from this land” (*Ibid*).

In other words, the whole earth is the *mujãhid’s* field of spoliation.
The Hadis has not minced matters, but divulged the supreme mission of
Islam with absolute frankness.

\(6\) As the last item of Hadis’ addition to the Koranic doctrine of
*ghanîmah*, we may mention the treatment meted out to the female
captives whom the *mujãhid’s* ‘right hand possesses’. As mentioned in
the previous chapter, they are subjected to unrestricted concubinage.
The following hadîs brings this out without a vestige of vagueness or
obscurity:

“At the battle of Hunain, Allah’s Messenger sent an army to Autas…
Having overcome (the infidels) and taken them captive the Companions of
Allah’s Messenger seemed to refrain from having intercourse with the
captive women because of their husbands being polytheists. Then Allah,
Most High, sent down regarding that: Forbidden unto you are the women
already married except those whom your right hand possesses” (*Sahih
Muslim*, No. 3432).^([1](#1))

In fine, the infidel’s wealth, women and children - all are lawful
plunder for the *mujãhid*. (1) To enjoy such plunder is glorious, if
only less glorious than propagating Islam or contemplating the pleasures
of the hereafter. The Koran proclaims its lawfulness and sanctity. The
Hadis extends the Koranic message. The Hadis particularly dwells on it
as a sort of special dispensation denied to former prophets. (2) The
spoliation of Jews is elaborated in the Hadis as an earnest of Islam’s
mission over the whole earth. (3) The matter of “those whom one’s right
hand possesses” is explained in the Hadis with breath-taking candour.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Koran 4/24. The Arabic phrase for “those whom your right
hand possesses” is *“ma malakat ayman u kum”*.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
