+++
title = "11 7 Slaughter of Infidels in Jihãd: The Evidence of the Sunnah"

+++
**7**  
**Slaughter of Infidels in *Jihãd*: The Evidence of the Sunnah**

The generosity shown by the Prophet to his kinsmen at Mecca was not
matched by anything in relation to the Jews of Medina, nor, for the
matter of that, to any Jewish tribe of Arabia. Actually, the Prophet’s
uniformly stringent measures adopted against the Jews contrasted most
signally with his leniency towards the Arabs. To account for the
contrast, D.S. Margoliouth credits the Prophet with being a “champion of
the national idea” of the Arabs, and this supposition does give a
national explanation of his uniform hostility to the Jews. As
Margoliouth puts it, “With this attitude \[namely the Prophet’s supposed
nationalism\] agreed his ordinary tenderness for the lives of Arabs when
he massacred Jews without mercy.” Whatever the explanation, the
Prophet’s treatment of the Jews brings out a most important body of
Sunnah connected with one aspect of *jihãd*, namely, “making slaughter
in the land” (K 8/67). To illustrate this aspect, a short account of the
massacre of the Jewish clan of Kuraizah is in order.

This event had taken place three whole years before the conquest of
Mecca, and it may be said that the Sunnah regarding slaughter of
infidels in *jihãd* had been well established by it, so that the
Prophet’s lenient treatment of the Meccans was an exception designed to
prove the rule. To understand the rule clearly we must remember that the
destruction of Banu Kuraizah was an episode connected with the Battle of
the Ditch. This battle took place in 627 AD following a siege of Medina
by a body of the Koreish and sundry other tribes. By that time Banu
Kuraizah had been left as the only considerable Jewish tribe in Medina,
those of Banu Kainuka and Banu Nazir having been banished a few years
previously. It was alleged by most of the early Muslim writers that Banu
Kuraizah were in league with the Koreish and this opinion has been
broadly accepted by most of the latter-day scholars. The Jews did not in
fact participate in the battle, but their hostile movements kept the
Muslim army on tenterhooks during the month-long siege. As soon as the
siege was raised, the angel Gabriel is said to have visited the Prophet
and asked him to punish the “traitors” immediately without thinking of
rest or repose. As a *hadîs* puts it:

“Gabriel said: you have laid down arms. By God, we haven’t laid them
down. So march against them. The Messenger of Allah asked: Where? He
pointed to the Banu Quraiza” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4370).

What transpired after this is easily described. The Prophet laid siege
to the stronghold of Banu Kuraizah, who were starved into suing for
submission. The Jews offered to face banishment leaving their property
behind. The Prophet did not agree. They appealed for mediation by the
Arab tribe of Aus of which they were clients. The Prophet agreed to this
and asked the Ausite chief, Sa’d bin Muã‘z, to administer judgement.
Sa’d pronounced the verdict in the name of Allah. All male members of
the Kuraizah (barring children) were to be put to death, their women and
children were to be sold into slavery, and their property was to be
distributed among Muslims. The Prophet praised Sa’d as having “adjudged
the case with the judgment of God, the Exalted and Glorified”.^([1](#1))

The slaughter of Banu Kuraizah sheds a lurid light on the early annals
of Islam. A big pit was dug in the market place of Medina, and 800 Jews
(according to Muir’s calculation) were brought down, chained and
manacled, to be beheaded in cold blood. The Prophet himself presided
over the massacre. The able-bodied prisoners were brought in companies
of five or six, seated in a row on the brink of the pit, and beheaded in
a leisurely manner, their bodies being cast into the pit. A woman whose
husband had just perished, admitted to having killed a Muslim by
throwing a big stone during the siege and, having refused the gift of
life granted to the enslaved womenfolk, was promptly despatched at her
own request. Her smiling face as she stepped forward for execution is
said to have haunted the Prophet’s child-wife Ayesha to the end of her
days.^([2](#2)) The Kuraizah showed signal courage in facing death, but
for Islam the punishment meted out to them merely constituted the
canonical precedent for “making slaughter in the land”.

It must be mentioned that barring Muir few European scholars have found
fault with the Prophet for the gruesome murder of the men of Banu
Kuraizah. According to D.S. Margoliouth “Those who had taken part openly
with the invaders of Medina could not very well be permitted to remain
there. To banish them was unsafe; to permit them to remain was yet more
dangerous. Hence they must die… And since it would appear that the
Kuraizah had turned against the Prophet merely because he was in extreme
danger, their fate, horrible as it was, does not surprise us. If they
had not succeeded in harming him, they had manifested the will to do
so.”

More recently a French scholar, Maxime Rodinson, has defended the
Prophet in stronger language. As he puts it, “from a purely political
point of view, the massacre was an extremely wise move. The chosen
solution was undeniably the best.”

The Muslim apologist Syed Amir Ali too has defended the Prophet. He
argues that as the Jews themselves had wanted the Ausites to arbitrate,
no question of blaming the Prophet can possibly arise.

It is not necessary to comment on these judgments pronounced by
latter-day critics. But the reader must be reminded of one thing even at
the risk of tiresome repetition. To the devout followers of Islam, the
massacre of Banu Kuraizah is part of the Prophet’s Sunnah. It is not as
if the matter ended with the slaughter that took place in 627 AD in the
market place of Medina. Over the centuries, the *mujãhids* have been
inspired by this part of the Sunnah to emulate the Prophet in similar
massacres of the infidels. Timur at Delhi, towards the close of the 14th
century, followed the Prophet’s seventh century exploit at Medina by
murdering in cold blood *one hundred thousand* Hindu prisoners captured
by him during his prolonged *jihãd*. A devout follower of the Koran and
the Sunnah he “made slaughter in the land” rather than seek ransom for
his helpless victims. It is not the 800 Jews of Medina, but the millions
of infidels slaughtered in subsequent centuries that should make us
pause and reflect. Not only that. Those who defend the Prophet should
reflect on the fate of the millions of infidels for whose heads the
*mujãhid’s* knife is being sharpened in all Islamic countries right at
this moment.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *Sahih Muslim*

[²](#2a) This indicates that the women of Medina had been invited to
feast their eyes upon the gruesome spectacle.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
