+++
title = "02 PREFACE"

+++
**PREFACE**

It was the summer of 1982.  VOICE OF INDIA had hardly started its
programme of publications.  One fine morning an aged and visibly ailing
sannyasi dropped in at my office in New Delhi.  He had travelled all the
way from some place (I forget the name) in Andhra Pradesh.  Someone had
given him a copy of my booklet, *Hindu Society Under Siege*, and having
read the chapter, ‘Residue of Christianism’, he had concluded that I was
the guy he had been looking for.  He introduced himself as Baba
Madhavdas and placed on my table printed copies of a summary of the
Niyogi Committee Report in English and Hindi, published by him.  Before
I could ask him to take a seat, he shot a question at me, “You must have
read the full Report?  What do you think of it?”

I felt small and confessed that although I had seen the full Report soon
after it was published; I had not read it even cursorily.  His face
fell.  I had disappointed him.  He brightened only when I told him the
story of how I had missed reading the full Report till that time, and
promised to read it as soon as I could lay my hands on it from a
Government shop or some library.  He told me that it was no more
available in the Government shops because Christian missionaries had
bought all available copies and destroyed them.  Even in libraries, it
was rarely available because the same missionaries had seen to it that
copies were removed, or borrowed and not returned.

When the Report was published by the Government of Madhya Pradesh in
1956, I happened to be in the district town of Shahdol in Vindhya
Pradesh (then a separate State, now merged in Madhya Pradesh) for filing
my nomination papers from that Lok Sabha constituency in the Second
General Elections (1956-57) as a Jana Sangh candidate.  Pandit Prem Nath
Dogra, President of the Jana Sangh at that time, was also in Shahdol
that day.  He was on a lecture tour of Vindhya Pradesh.  We were staying
in the same room as guests of a local gentleman.  As we sat and chatted
about the shape of things in the country at that time, half-a-dozen
Party activists rushed into the room in a state of excitement and placed
three volumes on the bed on which Pandit Dogra was sitting.  One of them
shouted in a tone of triumph, “Here it is at last.  Christian
missionaries have been disrobed (naNgA kar diyA hai).  Now it is for the
Party, Panditji, to take it up and make it known to the country at
large.”

Pandit Dogra thumbed through the volumes and promised to place it before
the Working Committee of his Party at the very next meeting.  Then he
handed over the volumes to me and asked me to go through them so that I
could tell him in the evening the gist of what they contained. I looked
at the title.  It was *Report of the Christian Missionary Activities
Enquiry Committee Madhya Pradesh*, 1956 in 2 Volumes and three Parts,
Volume II being divided into Parts A and B. It became famous as the
Niyogi Committee Report because its Chairman was Dr. M. Bhawani Shankar
Niyogi, a retired Chief Justice of the Nagpur High Court.

I glanced through the Report and was impressed by the evidence
marshalled, literary as well as oral.  What struck me as very
significant was that the Christian missionary activities in India had
been viewed as part of the world-wide missionary operations.  But that
was all. I could not find time to read even Volume I of the Report
because I was busy otherwise throughout the day.  In the evening Pandit
Dogra took away the Report with him as he was going to another place to
address a meeting. I was certainly curious to know more about Christian
missionaries than I knew at that time.  It was only a few months earlier
that a Jesuit priest from Patna had tried and failed to convert me.  The
talk I had had with him during a retreat in a Catholic monastery outside
Hazaribagh in Bihar, had left a bad taste in the mouth.  The convert I
met in the library of St. Xavier’s School at Patna later on had turned
me against Christian missions.^([1](#1))

Years passed and I forgot all about the Niyogi Committee Report.  The
struggle to survive after having invited the ire of the, Nehruvian
establishment by the opposing Communism, was too grim.  Moreover, I
wanted to know much more than I knew about my own SanAtana Dharma and
its culture, before I could evaluate Christianity and its missions. I
was ready for that task to a certain extent when I wrote that essay in
*Hindu Society Under Siege* in the last quarter of 1981.  But I had yet
to learn a lot.

Baba Madhavdas did not tell me why and when he had taken sannyas, and
how he had got involved in Hindu resistance to Christian missions.  All
I could learn from him was that he had moved all over the tribal areas
in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal and Assam,
starting since a few years before India attained independence in 1947. 
He had watched the Christian missionaries and their activities from
close quarters, and the knowledge he had acquired about their means and
methods was considerable.  And he was very happy that the Niyogi
Committee Report had confirmed in so many words all that he had learnt
first hand about the missionary apparatus and its operations.  At the
same time, he had felt deeply pained that whatever resistance to
Christian missionaries he had noticed before independence, had
evaporated fast as soon as Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru emerged as a colossus
after the death of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel.

He had begged for small amounts of money, bought copies of the Niyogi
Committee Report, and presented them to leaders of the Jana Sangh, the
Arya Samaj, the Hindu Mahasabha, the Vishva Hindu Parishad when it was
formed in 1964, and various rich men known for their sympathy towards
Hindu causes.  All that he wanted them to do was to read the Report and
mobilize public opinion for persuading the Indian State to stop the flow
of massive foreign funds, which Christian missions were using for
conversions by means of force, fraud and inducements.  But his appeals
had fallen on deaf ears.  Different people had advanced different
reasons for their unwillingness or incapacity to do anything in the
matter.  As a last resort he had got several thousand copies of a
summary of the Report printed in English and Hindi and distributed them
widely as he moved along.

He was happy once more when after the passing away of Pandit Nehru and
before the rise of Indira Gandhi to supreme power, the Congress
Governments of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh had passed Freedom of Religion
Acts in 1967 and 1968 enabling the authorities to prevent conversions by
means of force, fraud and inducements.  Now citizens who came to know
such malafide cases of conversion in these two States could report to
the police or move the courts.  But he discovered very soon that the
Acts remained dead letters because people who could notice and report
such cases were simply not there in the missionary fields.

The Jana Sangh and the Vishva Hindu Parishad had disappointed him in
particular.  When he asked the leaders and workers of these
organizations to read the Report, they said that they had no time for
books because they were active in the field.  But when he requested them
to survey the field and report the cases of malafide conversions to the
concerned authorities, they had replied that the police was corrupt and
the courts too slow to do anything.  At the same time, they had boasted
that they were developing and employing some “positive” methods to match
the missionary network and beat them at their own game.  He had yet to
see these “positive” methods bearing fruit.  Conversions were going on
as ever before.

Baba Madhavdas felt totally disheartened when I told him the truth about
VOICE OF INDIA, namely, that it had no office of its own, no staff
except myself, and very limited funds collected through donations mainly
from a few small businessmen with big hearts.  He was, he said, a tired
old man, sick in body and disillusioned in mind, and wanted to retire to
Vrindavana so that he could die in peace.  He wanted me to do him a
favour - take the few hundred copies of the summary he had left with
him.  I bought them immediately and included the title in the catalogue
we published next.  At the same time, I promised to the Baba that I
would read the full Niyogi Committee Report and reprint it as soon as I
got sufficient funds.

I read the Report soon after and was overwhelmed by the wealth of
material it presented, theoretical as well as empirical.  But funds for
reprinting the Report were not available till now.  Meanwhile, I had
summarised the Report in my own way in my *History of Hindu-Christian
Encounters* published in 1989.^([2](#2)) That summary is being included
in the Introduction to the reprint.

The name of this volume which combines the reprint with an introduction
has been suggested by Arun Shourie, as in the case of *Hindu Temples:
What Happened to them*.

<div align="right">

**Sita Ram Goel **

</div>

New Delhi  
25 December, 1997  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)I have told the story of what I heard and saw in How I Became A
Hindu (1982), Third Enlarged Edition, Voice of India, New Delhi, 1993,
pp. 46-49.

[²](#2a)A Second Enlarged Edition has been published by Voice of India,
New Delhi, in 1996.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
