+++
title = "05 No. 993 CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY ACTIVITIES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE, MADHYA PRADESH"

+++
No. 993

**CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY ACTIVITIES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE, **  
**MADHYA PRADESH**

FROM

> Dr. M. B. Niyogi, M.A., LL.M., LL.D. (Hon.), Kt., C.I.E.,   
> Chairman, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Madhya
> Pradesh, Nagpur,

  
To

> Shri K. B. L. Seth, I.C.S.,  
> Chief Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur.

<div align="right">

  
*Nagpur, 18th April, 1956.*

</div>

SIR,

I forward herewith the report of the Christian Missionary Activities
Enquiry Committee appointed by the Government of Madhya Pradesh, by
Resolution No. 318-716-V-Con., dated the 14th April, 1954, to enquire
into the activities of the Christian Missionaries in Madhya Pradesh, and
other matters.

2\. The particulars of the process of the enquiry are fully set forth in
the opening part of the Report.  The Committee are presenting their
report containing their conclusions on facts as contemplated in the
Terms of Reference, as also their Recommendations.  The Committee are
unanimous as to their recommendations on the question.

3\. There has been, indeed, a delay which may appear inordinate in the
preparation of the Report, but this was unavoidable for the reasons that
the members could not devote their full time to the task on account of
their usual preoccupations with their professional work and that
considerable time was taken up with the visits of the Committee to some
of the most interior and almost inaccessible rural areas inhabited
mostly by Tribals who form the chief target of Missionary activity.  To
study the question from the historical point of view many books had to
be referred to and as some of the books were not readily available they
had to be obtained from the open market.

4\. At the concluding stages of its labours judgment was delivered by
the Nagpur High Court in the petition filed by Shri G. X. Francis under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.  In discussing the petition
their Lordships considered the powers of State Governments in appointing
such Committees, the extent to which such Committees can enquire into
facts, the extent of religious liberty guaranteed in our Constitution
and the extent to which State Governments car, restrict or regulate the
activities of religious bodies.  Independently of this judgment the
Committee had come to almost the same conclusions, and the suggestions
made therein fully considered by them.  It may be stated that throughout
their deliberations the Committee were guided solely by the necessity to
maintain intact the solidarity and security of the country, to prevent
disruption of society and culture, and to emphasise the essential
secular character of the Constitution.  If they have drawn attention to
certain disruptive tendencies inherent in, or incidental to, the
exercise of certain liberties in matters of religion, they have done so
not with a view to curtailing individual rights and freedom, but to the
exercise thereof in a manner consistent with public order, morality and
health.  After all, the goodwill of the majority community in any
country is the greatest and the safest guarantee for the fulfilment of
Constitutional obligations, even more than law courts or executive
authorities. The Committee have noted with great satisfaction that
amongst a large section of Christian people there is a realization of
this basic factor. The Committee hope that their recommendations will
lead to further searching of the heart. They have touched upon some
highly controversial matters and would, therefore, request Government to
elicit public opinion before taking any action.

5\. I take this opportunity to tendering for myself and on behalf of the
Committee, heart-felt thanks to all those, including the Missionaries,
who gave to the Committee the benefit of their knowledge of facts, and
their views, by personally appearing before the Committee or by sending
their memoranda in response to the Questionnaire issued to them.  The
public spirit, which prompted them to accord their ready and willing
co-operation, merits high appreciation.  Acknowledgment of indebtedness
is also due to those in the Committee’s office, who rendered valuable
assistance in various ways, as also to the Member-Secretary of the
Committee, who rendered considerable help to the Chairman in drafting
the report and last but not the least to those who assisted in the
enquiry in the role of amicus curiæ.

<div align="right">

Yours faithfully,

M.B. NIYOGI.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
