+++
title = "12 EXPLANATORY TOUR NOTES INCLUDING IMPORTANT PETITIONS RECEIVED BY THE COMMITTEE ON TOUR DISTRICT RAIGARH DHARAMJAYAGARH 6th June 1954 -- 9-15 a.m. to 12 noon. Present-Chairman and Members"

+++
**EXPLANATORY TOUR NOTES INCLUDING IMPORTANT PETITIONS RECEIVED BY THE
COMMITTEE ON TOUR**

DISTRICT RAIGARH

**DHARAMJAYAGARH**

6th June 1954 *--* 9-15 *a.m.* to 12 *noon.*

**Present-Chairman and Members**

The meeting was held at the Dharamjaygarh Club, where officers and
non-officials including Christian and non-Christian Uraons of interior
villages were present.  A list of the villages, from which villagers had
assembled, is attached.

2\. Shri Lobo and Shri Francis, on behalf of the Christian Regional
Committee, were present as observers. Shri John Ekka, M.L.A., was also
present.

3\. Addressing the audience, the Chairman pointed at the outset the
purpose for which the Committee had been appointed by Government and
intimated that the Committee will proceed in an open public impartial
and judicial manner to find out the truth.  He appealed to the audience
to cooperate with the Committee and to place before them whatever
information they may have in their possession concerning matters
relevant to the enquiry. He pointed out that the Committee, at present,
was engaged in a preliminary survey and wanted to find out what exactly
are the grievances of non-Christians against Christian missionaries and
of the Christian missionaries against non-Christians including officers
of Government.

4\. *Shri K. P. Mishra, ex-Chairman, Janapada Sabha*, pointed out that
in the regime of the previous Ruler, conversion to another religious
faith was banned, but, on the death of the Ruler, the management of the
State was taken over by the Political Department as the successor was a
minor, and during his regime, Christian missionaries started their
activities.  They converted masses of Uraons in villages by giving them
monetary and other allurements with the result that an enquiry was held
by European officers of the Political Department in the year 1930.  As a
result of that enquiry, it was held that these conversions had been
effected by temptations of loan, etc., and the Political Department
ordered that the money advanced by Christian missionaries should be
refunded through the treasury.  Thereafter, an Act was passed under
which the entry of Christians into the State was banned.  Shri Mishra,
therefore, placed before the Committee his view that a similar
legislation should he enacted by the present Government.  His charge was
that missionaries converted innocent Uraons and Kharias by giving them
monetary temptations, by advancing them loans and by telling them that,
they would lose their fear of police and petty Forest and Revenue
Department officials and will not be required to go in begar if they
embraced Christianity.

5\. A case of one *Shri Mayaram, Janpad Member*, was quoted by Shri
Mishra to show how people were induced to become Christians.  According
to Shri Mishra, a Christian pracharak, came to Mayaram’s house, stayed
therein, gave Rs. 25 as rent for a portion of the house which would
ordinarily get only about Rs. 5 and later appointed Mayaram as a
Pracharak on. Rs. 30 per month. Later, Mayaram became a Christian and
told several persons including Government officers that he had embraced
Christianity for sake of monetary help.

6\. *Shri Bhayalal Sharma, a teacher*, narrated his own experience of
how people were converted.  During 1939-42, he was in Baloda Bazar in
Raipur district, where an American missionary, was engaged in preaching
and converting people.  In the course of preaching she used to criticise
bitterly the Hindu religion and especially Lord Krishna.  Individual
temptations were given to Bhayalal Sharma also, but he was not prepared
to embrace Christianity.  He has toured the interior of Dharamjaygarh
and Jashpur extensively and his opinion is that similar activities of
the missionaries are going on in these areas.

7\. One old Uraon named *Buranshah of Laxminagar village* told that
conversions were effected by cutting the topknot and advancing money. 
Re-conversions were allowed after a fine was paid off.  In his village,
however, Uraons have not yet become Christians though attempts are being
made by missionaries to convert some people.

8\. *Mohan, an Uraon* of about 18 years of age, stated how he became a
Christian along with his father and other persons of the village about
10 years ago. After conversion, his name was changed to Johan.  At
present, he is a pracharak and has recently started a school, which has
14 students, all Christians. From the beginning of next year, he
proposes to teach Christian religion to these persons also.  According'
to him, a young lad of a village went to Ginabahar mission centre, where
he learnt Christian religion and was appointed a pracharak.  It was as a
result of his preaching that the whole village consisting of six houses
became convert.  The villagers met in a panchayat and decided to become
Christians.  They informed the missionaries who came to the village
after about a week and the villagers were baptized in the village
church.  He does not know if any loan was advanced to his parents before
conversion.

9\. Shri D. N. Tiwari of the Tribal Welfare Department also gave
information about the methods employed by Christian missionaries in
various parts of the tahsil in order to convert people.  According to
Shri Tiwari, Christian children were prevented from going to Government
or Janpad schools by various coercive measures including imposition of
fines by the missionaries on the parents of such boys.  In some
villages, where a large number of persons became converts, they were
coerced so that the remaining population also became converts.

10\. Members of the Committee asked questions to Christian and
non-Christian Uraons present to know local customs, etc.

11\. Before dispersing, Shri Francis, President, Catholic Regional
Committee, presented an application to the Chairman requesting him that
an assurance may kindly be given that Christian men and women who will
tender written or oral evidence before the Committee will be protected
from the effects of executive vengeance and wrath as, according to Shri
Francis, Christian tribals of Jashpurnagar were apprehending that they
might be

PATHALGAON

*6th June 1954.*

Domandas Panka of Raymer (Kabirpanthi) complained that they are induced
to become Christians by affording educational facilities to children.

2\. The following persons reported that they were converted by giving
loans for plough:-

> \(1\) *Mangra of Kamrai* - His choti was cut off. Took Rs. 6 and paid
> back Rs. 20.  The loan was advanced from Tapkara.
>
> \(2\) *Zakdu of Pokhankot* got a loan of Rs. 20 from Tapkara, for
> which he was baptized, his choti removed.  He got reconverted by 95 in
> repayment of the loan.
>
> \(3\) *Zangu of Tildega* was given Rs. 9. He signed a book, was
> attending church every Sunday. He was demanded money, when refused to
> go to church. Repaid the loan by paying Rs. 30.
>
> \(4\) *Seetaram Gaothia of Raymer* was approached by foreign
> missionary of Mendiakhar for conversion.
>
> \(5\) *Thura of Surajpur* was offered a loan for plough and was
> threatened that if he did not take it he would be shot down when their
> *raj* would be established.

3\. Dewar (now Dunis) of Kamrai was converted in 1935 in Tapkara,
According to him, there is no religious preaching as such by the
pracharaks.  He himself is now a pracharak.

*List of villages from which people had assembled.*

 

|     |            |      |            |      |               |
|-----|------------|------|------------|------|---------------|
| 1\. | Pakhankot. | 9\.  | Bandigarh. | 17\. | Raghanithpur. |
| 2\. | Kunkuri.   | 10\. | Talgaon.   | 18\. | Pathalgaon.   |
| 3\. | Kamrai.    | 11\. | Paraghati. | 19\. | Yerekachar.   |
| 4\. | Raymer.    | 12\. | Ila.       | 20\. | Mudapara.     |
| 5\. | Sapkal.    | 13\. | Bantangar. | 21\. | Palidi.       |
| 6\. | Tildah.    | 14\. | Kilkila.   | 22\. | Turi.         |
| 7\. | Lipti.     | 15\. | Godhi.     | 23\. | Zakhadpur.    |
| 8\. | Dodagulha. | 16\. | Diwanpur.  |      |               |

--------------------

LUDEG

*The 6th June 1954.*

Number of village’s represented-15.  Person’s present-About 500.

\(1\) Somraram of Ludeg, (2) Manguram of Rede, (3) Bokha Uraon of Ludeg,
and (4) Likhanram of Bangaon submitted complaint of the following
nature: -

The Christians destroy Sarnas, if the Uraons do not become Christians. 
The number of Christians has increased after the merger of States.  The
Pracharaks threaten that they will drive away those people who do not
become Christians, as soon they are going to have Jharkhand.  The
Pracharaks tell them that the Hindu religion is bad.  They preach
Jharkhand.  The Luther Mission particularly does so.

Manguram was Pracharak two years ago.  He was converted in 1947 by
giving him a loan of Rs. 100 from Tapkara.  He became Hindu after paying
off the loan.

Michael Lakda of Ludeg, a Christian, told that the Uraons drink rice
beer and eat pigs.  Therefore, they are outcast.  He was a Pracharak
getting Rs. 30 per mensem and used to go to Ludeg from 1935 on tour with
the priest.

Michael told that he had no troubles with Government officers.  He was
attacked by the non-Christians in Ginabahar.  He never speaks against
the Hindu religion.  He teaches in a school and is a Pracharak.

Vidyadhar Khuntia (Yadao-non-Christian) Gaothia said, in 1948 Hindus
from Jashpur, Udaipur and Surguja came to Ludeg because they were
threatened that they would be massacred, if they did not become
Christians and did not agree to Jharkhand.  He also informed that in
Majghotri bungalow, a cow was slaughtered to insinuate Hindus.

*Villages represented at Ludeg.*

 

|     |             |      |             |      |                |
|-----|-------------|------|-------------|------|----------------|
| 1\. | Chiknipani. | 6\.  | Kukurgaon.  | 11\. | Batrabahar.    |
| 2\. | Rede.       | 7\.  | Kukurbhuka. | 12\. | Kudkel Khajri. |
| 3\. | Birimdega.  | 8\.  | Bangaon.    | 13\. | Kudekela.      |
| 4\. | Badhanapur. | 9\.  | Bemla.      | 14\. | Zekhanpur.     |
| 5\. | Mudakhela.  | 10\. | Saraitola.  | 15\. | Ludeg.         |

---------------

ARA

*The 7th June 1954.*

One hundred and fifty persons from four villages present.

Jagdish Tirkey (Christian), Secretary, Jharkhand Party, Jashpur, told
that the headquarters of the party is Ranchi.  Its President is Shri
Jaipal Singh. Local president is Shri Michael Tirkey, a Christian. 
There are 100 members on the Working Committee, of whom one
office-bearer is a non-Christian.  His name is Dharmorao and he is
assistant volunteer.

Maituram Nagesia, of Dharan (a non-Christian), said that the Hindus are
opposed to Jharkhand.  If there is Jharkhand, he requested that
Government should help the people against the Christians.

Abdia Kujur, a Christian by birth, said that if Government improve their
conditions of living and bring them prosperity, they do not want
Jharkhand.  Government should give schooling, scholarship, agricultural
and medical facilities.

Balram Pradhan, Uraon from Kharsoto (a law graduate of the Patna
University) said that the movement is purely a Christian movement.  It
fosters in illiterate masses and its members are 97 per cent Christians.

Shri Jagdish further informed that the Ram Rajya Parishad and the
Congress Party are against Jharkhand.  The Praja-Socialist Party is in
favour. There are no Communists in the movement.

The Pastors do not take any interest in Jharkhand movement.  All other
Christians including Catholics are in favour of Jharkhand.

Tuppo, headmaster (a Christian), said that a person is told that there
is salvation from sin in Christianity, and if he is influenced by this
and wants to become a Christian, he is baptized in a church and his name
is changed after baptism.  A register of baptism is maintained in a
church. This is with the Padri.  There are families in which there is
only one Christian and others are non-Christians.  They eat together but
worship separately. All students have to attend a prayer.  There are
Christian and non-Christian students in the school.  There is also Bible
teaching once a week.  A school building is used for worship, if
necessary.

Premsukh Kujur, a local Padri, is in charge of Ichakela church since the
last one year.  He is originally from Sindoga sub-division of Ranchi
district.  Villagers seek advice regarding private individual matters
including money matters.  Premsukh says Padris do not advance money.  He
is in charge of 9 churches.  After prayers, enquiries are made regarding
individual health and difficulties.  Musa Turkey, a Pracharak, is also a
vaidya.  They also visit non-Christians.  They are given medicine, if
they want it. When the financial position of the padris is sound, they
help the villagers financially also. Premsukh has so far advanced Rs. 40
to Samuel of Biropani for purchase of bullocks.  Rs. 2 was given to one
non-Christian Loko also.  There are 19 pracharaks in his jurisdiction. 
Their pay is Rs. 15 to Rs. 22 paid out of local contribution.  They do
not get anything from mission.  The Christian population in 19 villages,
having churches, is 4,000.

Premsukh, says, there is no complaint about failing Christian students
in schools deliberately.

One Kandra from village Sukda was advanced loan and later after 4-5
years, was converted to Christianity.  Several cases have been lodged
against the Father in the court.

Vishwanath, son of Leda, from Saila village of Kunkuri school, was
converted to Christianity and through him his parents are also being
converted.

The preachers who visit villages say that the villagers are without
religion and therefore they will not get salvation if they have no
religion.  They don’t attack the Hindu religion.  This is not true of
Lutherand Mission.  That is why their number is small.  It is suggested
that more facilities for financing money, educational facilities, etc.,
should be given.

Bahalu of Amertoli was induced to become a Christian by Gholang Padri as
there was a coin to be English raj in a short period.  All the people in
his village are Christians, and as he is the only non-Christian, he is
socially boycotted.  He is not allowed to draw water from well.  He has
been removed from service.  Babu Dugraj Kisan, of Amertoli, ex-gaotia,
and Stanislans (Toli) confirmed about social boycott.

Mangaldas of Ara from mouza Kodra said that a padri from Gumla division
of Ranchi district has been coming to his village for the last three
years, but he is resisted.  There is singing ‘ganabajana’, etc., when he
comes.  He tells people that the Government is sinful, and so there is
no rain.  Harihar Sukul of Sakardegaon confirms this.

---------------

JASHPUR

*The 7th and 9th June 1954.*

**Shri J. Minj, Pleader, Jashpur:** Aboriginals do not worship God. 
They are not Hindus.  Budhu Kujur is a tribal name.  Hindus drop out
Kujur and add ram to Budhu making it Budhuram and thus call him Hindu. 
This has been done by the Inspectors of Schools.  Tribal surname is not
changed in Christianity.

**Shri Deshpande, Pleader:** Uraons have no surnames.  They keep the
name of clan.  After arrival of missionaries, they have been putting on
these surnames.  They think their gotra as a sacred name.  Budhuram is
the real name.  Giving a surname is to make the boy feel that he is a
Christian.  Police complain about this.  Conversions are not genuine.
Uraons have two Complaints-one is against conversion, and the other is
regarding hurting their national feelings.  Their economic conditions
have not improved even on conversion.  Similarly no change in moral
conditions.  Pro-Bihar movement is a separate entity.  This shows that
they want to carve out a Christian State out of India.  There is no
difference among the various sections of Christians so far as Jharkhand
movement is concerned.  Political meetings are held in prayer houses.  A
number of instances will he quoted at the time of evidence.  Foreign
missionaries are taking most active part.  Non-Christians are not
generally asking for Jharkhand. In places where they are in an
overwhelming majority, the missionaries openly talk of Jharkhand. 
Non-Christian adivasis are not interested in Jharkhand.  Advancing
loans, holding stocks (grain bank) and coming to the aid of people are
some of the methods adopted.  It is not possible to give information
about the total financial aid.

Gustav Munda (of Lutheran church) ex-M. L. A. reconverted to Hinduism in
November. 1953-now **Sukhedeo Sukra** of Sundergarh (10 miles from M. P.
border), Orissa State: Missionaries take active part in elections. 
After independence, tribal religion is good for the sake of India's
unity. Tribal people join different churches and the unity of the people
is lost.

**Tribal Welfare Department Official:** Christians take objection to
sending boys to Government schools.  Harishankar Mishra, Assistant
District Inspector of Schools, Jashpur, intimated that one mission
school was granted provisional recognition after merger.  After the
expiry merger of the period, the mission school did not approach for
recognition.  Christian missionary schools are charging fees in cash or
kind, which is against the rules of recognition.  Scale of pay of
teachers is not as recommended by Government.  Names of students have
been changed by the mission authorities and not by Inspectors.  Mission
authorities also refuse certificates to non-Christian students.  Copies
of inspection notes (of schools) were given, but missions did not
fulfill the necessary conditions of recognition.  Preachers are teachers
and it is binding on them that they must teach religion.  Mission
schools have unhealthy competition with Government schools.

On way to Gholang, the following complaints were made by villagers from
20 villages:-  
 

|     |             |      |             |      |            |
|-----|-------------|------|-------------|------|------------|
| 1\. | Kessra.     | 8\.  | Kujri.      | 15\. | Kantaber.  |
| 2\. | Gumtal.     | 9\.  | Nimgaon.    | 16\. | Gariatoli. |
| 3\. | Dungartoli. | 10\. | Ratamati.   | 17\. | Manora.    |
| 4\. | Khargota.   | 11\. | Timarna.    | 18\. | Dantoli.   |
| 5\. | Benjora.    | 12\. | Pakhartoli. | 19\. | Dehgan.    |
| 6\. | Dadgaon.    | 13\. | Bengta.     | 20\. | Bildi.     |
| 7\. | Bhadkela.   | 14\. | Gamaria.    |      |            |

It was mentioned to the Committee by villagers that missionaries gave
allurements of education to children and monetary assistance for
agricultural purposes.  They hate Hindu religion.  Christians performed
a drama against Hinduism at Chirotoli. Missionaries say, “Become
Christians and then you will get Jharkhand”.  Villagers do not want
Jharkhand.  They also say, “We will give free nistar and charai in
jungles.  If you don’t become Christians now, we will convert you
later”.

At Timarna (two miles from Jashpur), non-Christians’ services have been
terminated.  Well water is also not allowed to he taken.

**Fairuram of Manora** village said, “These are Catholic Christians and
Father Bulcans instigates people to do so”.  His wife was threatened for
taking water.  There were several Christian wells.

Saruwa was converted by giving medicine.  He was forcibly made to kneel
down and pray.

Punia Budhia also said the same thing.

------------------------------

GHOLANG

*The 7th June 1954.*

Present-2,000.                                                         
Villages-114.

**Shri J. Tigga, Advocate, Gumla, District Ranchi (Bihar):**
Missionaries have been in Jashpur State since 1905.  They have helped
that State and now they are helpful to the Indian Government.  Mission
schools have not yet been recognised.  Every school should be recognised
for the betterment of the country.  Students of all religions go there. 
We do not want to disturb peace.  All are agriculturists.  Our main
object is to spread education. 10 per cent girls are educated. 
Protection should be given to us as minorities.  Three girls of Uraon
Christian community educated up to Matric and at present working as
teachers in Jabalpur and Delhi.

**Pracharak of Chichli:** One man was converted on 12th March 1954 with
his own consent.  Receives pay of Rs. 5 per month.  Has cultivation of 7
acres.  Complains against Mangru Patel of Saila and says he abuses
Father.

**Alexis Toppo (Vishwanath)** of Sanna was converted as Catholic in
1947.

At present 19 Wears of age. Parents and grandfather alive and not
converted. He says, “I was enrolled in school when I was six years of
age. I became Catholic with due consideration and not at the instance of
anybody. I had taken permission of my parents before conversion. I live
with parents.  Five maunds rice is taken in the school as fees.  Rs. 63
per month be-sides boarding fees inclusive of boarding charges”

C.O., T. W. D., says, “Don’t send your sons to mission school”.  He is
Sansari.

Complains against Deshpande of Jashpur that he abuses Fathers. 
Deshpande is responsible for all the troubles.

**Marha (now Phillip Ekka). -** A distillery has been erected in his
field.  He wants that it should be removed from there.

**Lucas** wants that the school should be recognised and helped.

**Petros** says that Christians do not want Jharkhand.  Catholics are
not in favour of Jharkhand.  At present they are P. S. P. followers.  A.
D. I. S. asks the teacher how many students should be passed.  A. D. I.
S. did not allow students of Gholeng to appear at primary examination in
Jashpur.  Treatment was unfair. 31 students were allowed to appear at
the examination out of 52 after giving test. 16 passed out of these 31. 
Previous test should not be conducted and the examination should be
conducted here.  The examination should be for three days and in
writing.  We do not get wood.

**Marquis. -** The whole progress is made as a result of the conversion
to Christianity.  We have improved and progressed very much.

Chairman thanked the gathering.  The Committee visited the Gholeng
school and the church after the meeting was over.

------------------------------

RAYKERA ON WAY TO GINABAHAR

*The 8th June 1954 -- 8-30 a.m.*

About 100 people.-Village (1) Raykera, (2) Ghursa, (3) Kandara, (4)
Mayali, (5) Deogarh, (6) Jokhari, and (7) Bodokatha.

**Masat Baiga of Jokari:** Christians play drama against Hindu religion.
The people agreed to send a copy of the drama. Christians want to
destroy Sarnas of Adivasis saying that there is ghost in it.  They are
prevented from sending pupils to Adivasi schools.  Christians preach
Jharkhand. Cows are used by them for ploughing instead of bullocks with
a view to hurt our religious feelings.  They are also forced to eat
beef.

**Ladhuram of Raykera:** Place of worship where they had installed
Mahadeo has been ploughed down.

------------------------------

ON WAY TO GINABAHAR

*The 8th June 1954 -- 9 a.m.*

About 50
people.                                                         
Villages-12.

 

|            |             |            |
|------------|-------------|------------|
| Ghatmunda. | Khejurkher. | Ladoh.     |
| Kunkuri.   | Ginabahar.  | Teradi.    |
| Remte.     | Gerakota.   | Ambachuha. |
| Bakoube.   | Rajadandi.  | Kerdali.   |

The people who were mostly non-Christians, complained against Christians
and presented applications and spoke about the performance of drama,
which is Anti-Hindu.

------------------------------

GINABAHAR

*The 8th June 1954 -- 10 a.m.*

Present-Two-third Christians and one-third non-Christians.

**Ramghora Choube, Hindu:** A Hindu girl, 12 years of age, by name
Budhni Urai, has been kept in a Christian house.  She was not traceable
for three days.  She has property.  It is understood that it is proposed
to marry her to a Christian.  Her father’s name is Raghubara, who has
expired in Rajouti. Her mother has gone to Assam.  Bhuddu Uraon (Hindu)
was entrusted with the care of the girl when she was five years of age. 
She stayed there for five years.  He was her brother.  Nanuram,
Christian, of my mouza has kept the girl in his house since the last
five months, with a view to convert her.  A complaint has been given to
police.  Shri John Ekka, M.L.A., is also involved in this case.

A Christian Father threatened on the 19th February 1954 some 800 Hindus
(converts).  With his fear they again became Christians.  The case has
been reported to police.

At the instigation of Christian missionaries this meeting has been
called and has been attended by non-Christians and they are ventilating
their grievances from their platform.

Petros and Benjamin of Katmoda (seven others also) say that they were
fraudulently converted to Hinduism by some mission.  They were asked to
keep topknot.  That has since been removed.  They were told that they
would be given clothes and land.

**Petros Tirkey. -** The complaints against missionaries are false.  We
are born Christians.  Our parents were Christians.

**Benidhar of mouza Lodma, Hindu agriculturist. -** A drama was
performed by Christian boys where it was said that Ganges water does not
give salvation, so also going to Mandirs, and abused Hindu preachers,
Devdevta and Tukdoji.  Some Hindus went to see and others were
Christians.

**Daluram of Chuhikuha:** We were making kirtan.  In the end, when we
said ‘Seetaram ki Jay’, Christians came and said ‘Jesus ki jay’ and
‘Jharkhand ki jay’.  ‘Ram was only a raja, he was not a God’.  This
happened only once on 6th May 1954, Thursday.

**Gabriel of Ludhma:** In the fair held in the month of May, a teacher
from the Tribal Welfare Department interfered.  Report was made to
police.  Sub-Inspector of Police came and troubled us.  We were not
given food.  There were 11 actors in the drama.  Four dramas were
performed, viz., Jashpurka Sadhu, Mattipuja (witchcraft), Budhabudhi and
Soneka Gufa.  The witchcraft said that I cure patients by giving them
flowers.  We took one month to learn this drama.  Two of the shows were
moral and three were Tamasha.

**Sukhpalsingh of Remte and Jaisingh:** On 19th May 1954 we were
performing kirtan. Christians from Dhodhidet came.  They were about 150
in number.  Cyril was among them.  He shouted ‘Mary Amma ki jay’,
‘Jharkhand ki jay’.  Their road was different, but they came
deliberately by this road, because we were doing kirtan.

**One Christian of Dhodhidet:** It was dark and so we went by a short
cut. We did not say Jharkhand ki jay. We were about 100 in number.  We
said, Meri Mata ki jay.

**A Christian from Tangargaon:** After Janpad election, a complaint was
given against Boko Sardar in writing.  Nagan Padri was taken to Atras
Soma’s house for fear of Boko.  Boko Sardar abuses Christians in
Tangargaon with a dagger in his hand.  He did not beat anybody.  Simply
he shouted.  Made water in church.

**Gurbal Baiga, Non-Christian, Ludhma:** One man was tied by
Christians.  A sarna plant was also axed. I beard all this.

**Bhandari in Kunkuri since Raja’s time:** Swamiji and Deshpande said,
‘You can’t become P. S. P. as you are Raja’s servants at the time of
Janpad election.  Swamiji said, ‘You become Hindu; otherwise I do not
want to see your face.’

**Thomas, Forest Guard:** Complains against Hindus.

**John Ekka, M.L.A.:** We are blamed for Jharkhand, but we do not want
it. We are not anti-nationals.  Charges of conversion levelled against
us are false.  My grandfather brought missionaries from 136 miles in
Ranchi and we became Christians.  Christian and non-Christian spirit was
not there previously, but since Deshpande’s coming this has started.  On
October 11, 1941, Deshpande came to church in procession with a view to
perform kirtan.  Deshpande is responsible for all the troubles.  The
result of this spirit will be very bad.  This may result in disturbance
to peace and order.  Political differences have been introduced
recently.  Some Hindus started pro-Bihar movement.  This movement is not
of Christians only.

------------------------------

MUSKUTRI

*The 8th June 1954.*

Present-2,000.                                                         
Villages-58.

**Dilbodhandas, Panka, Kabirpanthi:** Took loan of Rs. 20 from
missionaries.  Two houses and land have been taken.  Still the
missionaries want Rs. 30 for complete repayment.

There were six more persons having the same complaint.

**Bikna Urao of Pakdi Kachha:** Two tests in primary final examination
of Mission School students.  Officers of Jashpurnagar ask caste when
approached for appointment.  There was a class of patwari training in
Muskutry, where 53 students learnt and 52 passed.  One of the students
sought the job of patwari.  The Kanungo said, that he does not recognise
Anamat training in Madhya Pradesh.

The school teacher says, “We cannot count you as tribals because you are
Christian”.  In Patel election the man selected by Christians was not
appointed but votes were taken.

In Basan mouza, Pakhnikota toli, there were 50 Christians and 22
non-Christians.  Voting was also the same for patel.  But the man who
secured 22 votes was selected because it was said that, that man getting
highest number of votes was a Christian.  Budhadhar of village Mukundram
was appointed by Tahsildar.  The other person who was supported by
Christians was not appointed.  We went to court nine times, but no heed
was paid because we are Christians.

Boko Sardar spoils sanctity of the church. Patwari reports cases of
Christians bringing grass lands tinder cultivation.  There are no
Christian patwaris.  Christians are required to pay double the bribe for
recording changes by the patwari.

The Christian Father present said that in Ghugri village Christians are
riot allowed to graze cattle and wash clothes in public places. 
Government officers don’t help.  There is likely to be a communal clash.

In the Muskutri hospital, it was reported that it was visited by 500
patients per month and people came from far off villages.

------------------------------

JASHPURNAGAR.

*The 9th June 1954 -- 9 a.m.*

Sub-Divisional Officer, Police, stated that it is not a fact that
Ghatmunda people were made to say in the thana for the whole night.  He
also said that enquiries were made against Boko Sardar as and when
complaints were received against him, but nothing had so far been found
on which he could be prosecuted, and there was also no evidence and
witnesses to help Government from the complainant party.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
