+++
title = "14 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT RAIPUR

*The 15th July 1954.*

The Christian Missionaries Activities Enquiry Committee, Madhya Pradesh,
met non-officials of Raipur and representatives of Hindus and Christians
in the Circuit House, Raipur, on the 15th July 1954, at 8 a.m.

**Deshpande, Pleader**, on behalf of the Hindu community, stressed the
point that due to the conversion the converts become anti-national.  He
said that the methods of conversion were also wrong.

**Professor Jainarayan Pande** narrated the wrong methods of
conversion.  He said that in the hospitals the patients were given free
treatment with the condition that they would become Christians after
recovery. When a patient is confined to bed and has no hopes of
recovery, he is asked to pray to Christ, the only God, and not 33 crores
of gods as in Hinduism, and He will save you. If the patient survives,
he thinks, that it is Christ who saved him, and thus he is converted.

In the Christian schools, right from the primary stage the students are
preached the Christian religion and at this tender age the boys having
no knowledge of other religions or even of their own Hindu religion
become staunch followers of Christianity.  There is also partiality in
these institutions though there are no hard and fast rules laid down for
this.

In schools, the Christian religion is preached even in school hours.

He also stated that there are four types of missionaries working in this
area-American, Menonites, Roman Catholics and Evangelical.

**Lala Gurudayal (Hindu Mahasabha)** also gave out the wrong methods of
conversion.  He said that, some months back, a Christian preacher had
been to Raipur who used to preach that Christ can give sons to those who
have none, can change the sex from girl to a boy and can give eyes to
those who are blind. Many illiterates used to go to him and many people
have been converted by him.

He also stated that the Christians, while preaching their own religion
abuse the Hindu religion by saying that Lord Krishna was a thief, the
water of the Ganges is impure and so on.  The conversions are also found
in the lower castes.  There is every fear that, if these conversions are
not checked, there is likely to be a move for separate national unit,
such as, Pakistan.

**Shri Rama Sharma** said that the missionaries show some allurements
for those who would be converted into Christianity, such as, free
education, free medicine, etc.  They are also told that they would be
married to educated girl if they are converted into Christianity and
their status would also be raised.

**Ganorwala** said that the institutions in the cities by the Christian
missionaries are simply eye-wash to show that they are doing human
service, while in the rural areas their aim is different.  They try to
convert the poorer and illiterate classes in great numbers.

**One Samuel Mahalan (Christian)** said that there were about 82 persons
in the Leprosy Camp opened by the Christian missionary, but as soon as
it has been taken over by Government they have changed their religion
and have now become Hindus.  He could not say definitely, whether all of
them at the time of admission into the Camp were Christians.

At Raja Talao, three Christian girls were converted forcibly into Hindus
and were married to Hindu boys.

He also said that the Christian boys are asked to do ‘puja’ on Nag
Panchami day and also Ganesh Puja.

**Vasant Joshi** narrated a story in which he said that at Basan Kala, a
patwari, told him that his son was seriously ill who was about six years
old. When he took the boy to the Christian hospital he was asked to pay
the treatment charges and, if he was not in a position to do that he
would be given the facility of free treatment on condition that he would
change his religion.  The Patwari, therefore, did not admit the boy in
the hospital.

One M.L.A. also said that the Christian are successful in their
conversions in the lower castes due to their poverty and illiteracy.

------------------------------

CAMP DHAMTARI

*15th July 1954.*

The American Menonite Mission is functioning in this area.  They have a
Leper Home at Shantipur about four miles away which accommodates about
400 patients suffering from leprosy-both males and-female-and children. 
They have a general hospital at Dhamtari, a High School and a Normal
School for teachers.  The population of Christians in Dhamtari is
reported to be in the neighbourhood of 2,000 out of a total population
of 25,000.  The Menonites are pacifists and some of the foreigners
working in the local institutions are doing alternative service in
India. These institutions receive grants from Government and
non-Christians are freely admitted. A list of suggested topics for moral
instruction classes, Dhamtari Christian Academy, Dhamtari, is attached.

------------------------------

**Abstract of applications received on Tour of Raipur district**

*The 16the July 1954*

 

[TABLE]

------------------------------

RAIPUR

*The 16th July 1954.*

In the interview with officials on 16th July 1954 at Raipur Circuit
House, the following information was supplied by the officials present
in reply to questions put to them.

Mission schools are self-sufficient.  They receive grants from
Government.  Discrimination in appointment of staff may have been shown
in Christian schools.  Mrs. Raje went into the text-books on morality
prescribed in Christian schools, but she did not find anything contrary
to rules in them.  Bible classes are held before the school hours.  In
schools there are no Bible classes, but prayers before the studies
begin. All Christian schools are recognised.  In the form of admission
it is stated ‘I agree to abide by the rules’ and guardians sign the
agreement without knowing what it is.  This is one of the ways of
conversion unconsciously.  It was considered desirable that the
authorities concerned should do checking of these forms in their regular
inspections, though there are no complaints in the matter.  There are
1,053 primary schools in three districts, out of which 12 are managed by
Christians. There is one Mission middle school and the rest are 20 in
number.

There is no complaint about hostility against each other.

There are no complaints about admission of patients to hospitals.  The
leprosy hospital was managed by the Mission authority prior to 1947. 
The Mission has headquarters in London.  There were 236 patients then-86
Christians and the rest non-Christians.  Now there are only three
Christians.  A complaint was made by the Christians to the Deputy
Commissioner, that Christians patients were asked to change their
religion and undue pressure was brought to bear on them.  An enquiry was
made into the matter and the patients said that they were willingly
going back to their own religion, viz. Hinduism.  There is only one
Government leprosy institution, two are non-Christian and the rest are
managed by Missions.  Majority of the patients have become Christians. 
There are complaints of undue pressure by non-Christian patients.  These
papers may be available in Nagpur.  Majority of the leper home staff is
foreign, even for non-technical jobs.  There were some complaints made
to the Leprosy Specialist by the patients.  Government aid is granted at
the rate of Rs. 10 per patient per month.  The patients do not make
complaint because they have to stay in the institutions. One
Girdharilal, who was in Champa Leprosy Home, said at Ghogranala that
patients from mission leprosy hospitals have come out of leprosy homes
and settled outside the homes, because they do not like to change their
religion.  The grounds for their leaving the Mission leprosy homes are
disciplinary action, bad treatment, etc.  This is the case not only in
Champoli (Champa?) but at other places also.  The patients are very few
Christians there.  The whole administration is run by mission Gabers. 
London is their headquarter.  Mahars, Kahars, Telis and Satnamis are
generally converted.

The policy of Catholics is to have as many Indians within their fold as
possible.

In a children’s nursery, if the children refused to go to church, they
are kicked.

Christians in some tribal areas do not get the same concessions as are
admissible to aboriginals.  They do not live like aboriginals, e.g., do
not observe Karma dance, marriage customs, etc.

In some cases it was noticed that Christians used the word ‘invasion’
with a view to assimilate people.

------------------------------

PITHORA

*The 17th July 1954.*

**Shri Ramlal Dube and Banarsidas:** There are many converts in Fulzar
State.  Inducements are shown.  In 1942, there were many conversions,
because there was control on yarn and villagers were given yarn by way
of inducement.  Garagharsia caste people are converted on a large
scale.  The missionaries receive financial aid from America and other
foreign countries.  There is one supervisor with eight pracharaks under
him.  The conversions are mainly because Hindus do not care for the
Garagharsias, and they are poor and illiterate.  There is discrimination
in Jagdishpur Christian High School hostel.  There is no fee for
Christians, whereas for others they charge Rs. 31. There is no change in
the moral of converts. Ganda and Garaghasis do not intermarry even on
conversion.

**Shri Obel Wani.-** I am a Christian by birth.  Father also a
Christian.  Grand-father was converted perhaps after the famine of 1867,
when he left Durg district and came to settle in Baloda Bazar tahsil. He
was appointed to work as a pracharak after conversion.  The payments are
made out of Church Fund and Mission Fund. The main body is the
Chhattisgarh Orissa Church Council of the United Church of Northern
India started by Evangelical Church of America, but now it is completely
managed by Indians.  The headquarters of this is in Raipur, and its head
is Rev. M. D. Wani who lives in Mahasamund. The institution does
evangelical work and the management of church in this area.  There are
three centres in the villages in my charge.  Pracharaks use certain
books.  These will be handed over to the Tahsildar. (To be obtained from
the Tahsildar.) We go to a villages, whether there are Christians or
not, and have open air meetings. When a man is suffering, we tell him
our meaning of death, what Jesus said about death and the message of
Jesus.  In illness, we say people should believe in superstition, how
one should get over the disease etc.  The object of my preaching is to
obey the command of my Lord Jesus Christ, and to give new life to a man.
450 villagers have been living in this village who are Christians. I
came here in 1947, and have converted 25 persons in seven years. I give
monetary help to Christians, but I have not given any help to
non-Christians.  A man will confess what sins he committed and open his
heart.  This is taken as his willingness to embrace Christianity. 
Change of religion is not for a position, but it is for a life.  There
is difference of thought regarding going to heaven, etc., among the
Christians themselves.  Converted people live better life than their
non-Christians brothers.  They put on clean cloths, go to church, give
up certain bad habits such as drinking, etc.  No Christian has been
reconverted to Hinduism.  There is also no trouble from Government
servants.  About financial aid, 75 per cent of the money comes from the
Mission, mainly evangelical mission.  Boarding house was built with
American money. I received Rs. 120 as salary plus Rs. 23 as allowances. 
Rs. 3 is the increment.  I shall get 150 as the maximum of my salary. I
can get any higher responsibility, but there will be no change in
salary.  A church elects certain members of the church as managing
members.  Even a layman is elected to this post.  His record of work,
character, qualifications are also taken into account.  We have to
retire at the age of 55 and we get provident, fund. I contribute two
annas per rupee and the same amount is contributed by the church. I am
not a graduate. I am a graduate in theology from Jabalpur.  When parents
become Christians, their children also come under the Christian fold.

**Moderator.-** I am B. D. and, therefore, I get Rs. 10 more as pay. I
get the same pay as Mr. Wani. I am elected for a term of three years. 
We are servants of the Church and not of missions.  All Christians are
supposed to pay 1/24th of their income.  Generally one-tenth is given.

------------------------------

JAGDISHPUR

*The 17th July 1954.*

Attendence-200

The Committee visited the school, hospital and printing press run by the
Mennonites here.  In the school, they found that the girls were all
Christian in the class visited by them.  It was told that 46 students
were Hindus out of 184 students in the classes visited by them.

In the hospital it was observed that the whole staff is Christian. 
There were sayings of Jesus on walls.  Patients have to pay fees,
irrespective of their religion.

In the printing press, four students were Hindus and 4 Christians.  It
was seen from the books printed that literature on Christianity is
available at Christian Book Depot, Raipur.

The Chairman at the outset of the meeting explained the purpose of the
enquiry and assured a fair, impartial and open enquiry.

**Shridatt Sharma of Delhi -** Schools and hospitals are no doubt good,
but the object in running them has to be noted.  There is no Government
rule that persons should be appointed on the staff from a particular
community only.  A boy of Sakra was told that if he became Christian, he
would be given free education, and I can quote many more instances and
give evidence. In the hospital also, patients are asked to pray to Jesus
and to go away if they do not believe in Jesus. Mahajan Rameshwar’s son
was admitted to hospital on the payment of usual charges viz., Rs. 5,
but he was asked to quit the same day because I stay with his father.
Santosh Wari, a teacher of Sakra told him that the Christians abuse
Hindu Gods like Ram and Krishna. I can produce evidence. There were five
Pracharaks per village.  They have been preaching since the last 30
years.  Only poor and innocent are converted. We have no objection if
they preach, but their methods are objectionable.

**Gunnidhipal, son of Shamsunder of Jagdishpur.-** A palak, Christian by
religion.  Living in Jagdishpur since the time the mission was not in
existence in that place.  Some persons of Kandadongar sold their lands
at the instance of missionaries and went to Mudidih and now they are in
a bad state.  Good treatment is not given by the principal of the
school.  Eleven persons were fined by the panchayat on the false charge
of making balwa. In 1950 more than one parties were created by
missionaries. Missionaries were asked to give up Christianity.  Baptist
and Mennonites are working here.  I belong to Church of Christ.  (He was
degraded on punishment by Mennonites).  I showed the atyachars of
Saraipalli people. I am not a paid Pracharak, but I do Prachar.

**Tranonidhi Pal -** A palak.  My brother has not given the correct
information.  Kandadongar people were not Christians first.  At their
request we made arrangements for them at Mudidih.  They wanted to take
away the land permanently, but missionaries did not allow them to do so
and therefore they are making this complaint.  No inducements are shown
for conversion.

**Jageshwar of Jagdishpur -** A Christian. - I worked for about eight to
nine hours under the Memsab and went home.  Next day I was not given
work nor my pay.

**Lochankamar - Christian. -** We were treated as less than dogs, out
now missionaries have given us life and educated our children. Jakeshwar
was a chaukidar at Memsab.  He committed theft at the bungalow and,
therefore, he was removed from service by Memsab.

**Sundersingh – Christian. -** I  was a beggar being blind. My mother is
also blind. Nobody cared for us.  Missionaries came to me and they took
me in their fold. I have got wife, children and their education by the
favour of missionaries.

**Bishnucharan, Malguzar of Bitori. -** Inducement of free education,
and abuse Hindu religion and Gods.  No school having higher classes is
opened b the Christians in his village.  Homer Pastors brother became
Arya Samajist because of internal differences.

**John Gordia. -** I am the first boy in Fulzar and Deori houses to be
so educated.  My parents were scheduled caste.  During the period of
famine, missionaries came to this land like God and helped us.

------------------------------

BASNA

*The 17th July 1954.*

Attendance-200.

Local M.L.A. opened the meeting with his speech, and Chairman explained
the object of the enquiry.

**Narsingdas:** Came from Delhi some eight years back.  I tell a story
of Chandkhuri hospital.  We were called for prayers, the next day we
were admitted to the hospital.  Same was the case when I went there
after two years.  In front of Seth Santlalji’s house, there is a
library.  When Shridatt Sharmaji was taking about eight persons from
Dhabakhar to Saraipaili for shudhi, Dr. S. Bamwar and compounder
Yudhistir who were standing at the above spot, said that the persons
were dogs.  They would not give them medicine.

**Isabux (Christian):** Dr. Dester and his Sevabhavan are bogus things.
I have been troubled by American gang too much.  Christians cut
prohibited trees in forests.  My father, who was also a Pracharak,
reported the matter to Shri Sapre, Manager, Court-of-Wards.  My father
was put in custody for some time.  Here, there is American imperialism. 
Mr. Hooper and Mr. Gardiner may be good.  The permits of foreigners are
renewed every year on 31st October.  Sevabhavan is a money-making
factory. I have written Fulzer Charitra. (He is requested to present it
to the Committee.) I did not get a single job for the last 26 to 27
years.  When I said that Geeta punishes a sinner, the missioners said
that Jesus pardons sins, and from that day the are hostile towards me. 
Dr. H. E. Dester, St. Moyar, J. R. Drakeyson, Dr. Bawan will renew their
permits in October this year, because they have to do so every year. 
Their permits should not be renewed by Government and they should be
asked to go back to their countries.

In Mohadi, Champa, Janjgir, Korba and Jagdishpur, there is a committee
and they have got their own rules and laws about grave-yard, etc.  There
are Christian funds, such as, Pastor Fund, Poor Fund, Conversion Fund,
Widow Fund.  There is no account about this.  Money comes from America. 
I have moved in missionary melas.  They tell lies.  They are mad after
luxury. They will prove worse than the British.  Mennonite is a gang. 
They earn about Rs. 30 per day in the hospital. (To get a report from
Deputy Commissioner about foreign missionaries in the district.) Dr.
Dester is here since the last 25 years.  Inducements of free education,
advantage of ignorance are used for conversion.  This is a
denominational church.  The Pracharaks get their pay, food, clothing,
children allowance, etc., I have never worked for the mission. I have
worked for the Church of England for three years in Benares.  There are
280 churches all over the world.  I belong to the Disciple of Christ
Church.  There are seven branches in Madhya Pradesh.  They are
Evangelical, Disciple of Christ, Mennonite, Payadhoona, Mennonite
Chhirkal Swedish at Sagar, Church of Scotland, Holmer’s Association and
Roman Catholics.  In Chhirka, only water is sprinkled on adults and
blessings are given to children.  There is Bible teaching prior to this
ceremony.  There was robbery in my house three times and I have reason
to believe that it was done by doctor’s men.  There is no account of
American money. The Indian Christian Association Branch has not been
allowed to be formed in Fulzer.

**Kishori Mohandas:** In Gidhli, Tulsiram Mandir’s pujari, by name
Mukteswar Panda, patwari of Tosgaon, thana Basna, was shown inducement
of Rs. 2,000. She is the wife of a boy from Amapai.  He is a patwari in
Bilaspur district, perhaps in Janjgir.  He was taken to other place.  He
was not given the money, but he was told that when his wife was
converted, he would get the money.  When he took his wife and got her
converted, he was given the money.  Basudeoji Mishra.  He has made a
complaint about this to the Jabalpur Congress Bhavan.  This is a case of
1953.

Inducement of peppermint, new dhoti, is also shown for conversion.  I am
a scout.  Mr. Thisan, Principal of Jagdishpur School, said that your
boys are coming here not to take education but to make agitation and he
refused them admission.

**Yudhistir Kumar (Christian):** I worked in Jagdishpur Hospital for the
last 16 years.  People came for bhajan willingly.  They are not brought
by force.  Contradicts the statements made against Dr. Dester.  Now, I
am not a compounder there.  I had a quarrel with the doctor, because I
gave an injection without his permission.  Some Hindus said, that the
Christian religion is a religion of ‘Vaishya’s santan’; and I,
therefore, spoke to them (as stated above). I did not call them dogs. I
called them dog-like.  There is facility given to Christians in
hospitals that less fee is charged to them.

**Surajbhan Gupta:** In Vikhapali, there is a pastor. He gives loan and
does prachar. Jagdishpur men go there. Rushi, a Harijan, has been
reconverted to Hinduism.  He has been told that, if you become Christian
again, we will not demand money from you.  Rs. 30 recovered from him. 
Rushi was advanced loan. He was never asked to repay it (Rs. 45).  When
he became Hindu again, demand was made from him.

**Benjamin (Christian):** Bible is taught in mission schools, but Hindu
boys are not compelled to become Christians. I am a pracharak of
Jharbhandh. There are three villages in my charge and 36 pracharaks in
my circle.  I get a pay of Rs. 41 and dearness allowance of Rs. 11.
Wherever we have got churches, there is a pracharak for 2 to 3
villages.  We tell truth to the non-Christians, but we do not compel
them.  The object of my preaching is to meet Jesus and I have got good
company thereby, i.e., dharma.  There are no schools in charge. There
are 36 Pracharaks in one circle, i.e., two police thanas. I am a
Mennonite.  Pay is given according to seniority and qualifications.
Minimum is Rs. 35 to Rs. 40. My place of birth is Ichapur near Saripali.
I became Pracharak after two years of my passing matric.  Before that I
was a teacher in Janapad School.  There I was getting Rs. 50. I am a
born Christian. Eprian was my predecessor.  He is even now a Pracharak.
He is in charge of only one big village having 50 Christians.  In my
three villages there are 24 Christians.  There are now new converts. 150
persons have been converted to Christianity in my circle during the last
few years.

**Bhagwanprasad Hota:** I was a student of Jagdishpur High School. 
Religious books were given to patients and doctors expected the patients
to be reading them when they paid visits.  Doctors abused even Hindu
religion. Mr. Harry, a Pracharak of Gwalior, had been there.  He called
bad names to Hindu religion.  There is devotion (prayers) in schools. 
This is a matter of 1951.  I was not compelled to attend devotion, but
as a school rule I had to go. Attendance is taken in class and then boys
are asked to go to prayer

**Isabux:** Expressed fear of revenge.

**Tarachand of Basna:** Complains against doctors of Jagdishpur.

**Joseph Ganda of Jagdishpur:** Contradicts the allegations made against
Sevabhavan.  Bhagyawati of Rusda, a patient of small-pox, has, been
given complete help.

**Miss Danwar (Indian Christian):** Born in Champa in Bilaspur district.
Mission did not give any help to me and my eight brothers for education.
Bharat Darpan gives history of Christians.  Padris did not come from
Europe America.  I do not be g to any church.  I am a member of the
Indian Council of Church.  My own men do not appreciate my work because
I do not belong to any particular church.  The Christians perhaps think
that I come in their way and therefore they do not appreciate my work.

The Chairman thanked the audience and requested them to maintain
brotherly relations irrespective of their caste or religion.

------------------------------

MAHASAMUND

*The 18th July 1954.*

**Hiralal Agrawal, Janpad Councillor:** Sermons from Bible are given in
Dr. Samuel’s private dispensary, some of which are offensive to idol
worshippers.

**Jatashankar Sharma:** Criticises Samuel’s hospital.  Red Cross is
prominently displayed.  Patients are required to offer prayers.  They
abuse Hindu Gods.  Speeches are delivered in bazars that boys are cured
by becoming Christians and die by remaining Hindus.  I have heard this
by my own ears and reported the matter to police. Inducements shown.
Antinational prachar is done.  Instigated to combine and demand
Isaistan. Dr. Samuel is here since the last five years. I cannot say how
many persons have been converted during this period.  Christians had
taken about 20 persons to Birkon for conversion.  When we got the news,
we went there and explained to the persons concerned.  They did not
thereupon become Christians.  Much amount is being received and many
pracharakas are given amounts since the last two years.  Dr. Samuel’s
quotation from the Revelation.  It is just one verse.”

""\[a S&gt;a\[m{H$m\| Am¡a Aodídmog\`m\| Am¡a oKZm¡Zm\| Am¡a IwZr\`m\|
Am¡a ì\`o^Mmna\`m\| Am¡a Q&gt;m{Ýhm\| Am¡a \_yoV©\[yOH$m\| Am¡a
PyQ&gt;m\| H$m ^mJ Cg Prb \_\| o\_b{Jm Om{ AmJ Am¡a J§YH$ g{ ObVr h¡.''

**Dr. Samuel:** We preach in the hostel, in the bazar and in villages,
but we do not preach compulsorily. I have no certificate giving me
exemption of excise duty.

**Shri Mani (Moderator):** Nobody has complained that my Prachar is
offensive. (A report was made about this to police.) Khalari bazar case
is that my Pracharak in Bhorgaon was taken out of his house by the
Seth’s son and I reported the matter to police.  Hindus have not raised
any objection except this time to Christian preaching.  Hindus have
given a report to cover up my report. No conversion in the last three
years since the time I have come.

**Dr. Samuel (in continuation of what already stated):** Idolatry is
condemned in Bible.  We Christians do not worship images.  As a
Christian we do propaganda of our religion.  It is listed among the sins
given in the Bible.  I have nothing to do with politics.  I do not make
any statements in the bazar.

**Deonath Sastri of Bhoring:** My wife was kidnapped by a Christian. 
There is no trace of her. She was taken in the night at 12 o’clock in my
absence.  M. D. M. Singh took her away. The matter has been reported to
police.  It is two year old.  She had ornaments on her person. An
abortion was done by Singh.

**Shri Mani:** M. D. M. Singh used to do prachar before I came here.  He
made an Akhil Bhartiya Satnami Sangh and, therefore, when I came here he
was dismissed by our body.  He kidnapped the wife of Deonath and,
therefore, he was excommunicated.  There is one other Pracharak who also
did similarly.  He got entangled with one Christian girl.  He was also
excommunicated.  Very often we are duped in cases of conversion.  People
come for other than religious motive.  Therefore, we have made a rule
that we will see his life for two years, whether he comes to the church,
whether he pays his contribution and whether he is honest.

**Chandrapal of Sakra:** A bachha was found near the shop of a darji. 
The Darji was influenced by Christians and he was made to keep the
bachha and his mother who was a Christian.  This is one year old
incident.

The people present said that they had no objection if anybody embraced
Christianity by conviction.

**Local M. L. A.:** The act of Dr. Samuel is bad from the profession
point of view.  The doctor himself beats drum and makes prachar of his
religion.  The doctor should not do this.  If there is any unrest, the
responsibility will be of the doctor.  There is every possibility of
unrest if Christians continue their activities.

**Shri Mani:** I was appointed by the Chhattisgarh National Church
Council.  I am the President at present.  When I was appointed there was
some other president.  Had I been a servant of the mission. I would have
got pay as Gurbachansingh.  He receives a pay of Rs. 515 per mensem from
the Evangelical Mission.

**Shri Sen, Pleader:** Gurbachansingh is a pro-American person. 
American money is being flowed into India.  A national-minded man like
Shri Mani was not given the opportunity of going to America, but
Gurbachansingh was selected because he is pro-American.

**Shri Mani:** Missionaries wanted that I should serve them. But I do
not want to serve them. I want to serve Church.

Chairman thanked the audience and informed them that this is
preliminary, and we will record evidence after some months.

------------------------------

SIMGA

*The 19th July 1954.*

Attendance-100.

**Chakrapani Shukla, M.L.A., of Baloda Bazar, and Chairman, Janpad
Sabha:** A man from mouza Khandwa, by name Badhai Satnami Sukhadeo, went
to get himself treated for leprosy (Kod).  Pracharaks went there from
Simga and told him that he should get his family converted.  He was
prepared to get converted alone.  But they insisted on the family's
conversion.  Simon Pastor and other five persons were responsible for
this prachar.

**Sitaram of Simga:** When I took my daughter-in-law for delivery to
Tilda hospital, I learnt there that people were told to become
Christians.  I am afraid that by saying such things they will not care
for me from next time.

**Narsoba Bhonsle:** Manglue Kewat of Simga was taken to Bisrampur in
service.  He was ill.  He was converted taking advantage of his
illness.  This was seven years ago. Six to seven women tried to make
prachar here, but they were not successful, because in 1940 it was
experienced in Bisrampur that Christians were not helped by Padris when
there was famine.

It was told that there are no Christians in Simga proper.

The Chairman concluded the meeting by advising the people to live
peacefully and in co-operation.

------------------------------

BISRAMPUR

*The 19th July 1954.*

Persons from Bhatapara also present. Bhatapara 11 miles from Bisrampur.

**C. R. Lodge, headmaster of local high school:** There is a primary
school and a clinic (leper) here.  There are 110 lepers, out of whom two
are Christians. This was formerly a mission village. There was only
forest. Now 1800 is the population and majority of them are Christians. 
Non-Christians live on the border of the village.  There is no
conversion during the last four or five years.  All are born Christians
here.  No responsible missionary posted here at present.  Marwari,
Lohar, Raut and Kewats live here.  Christians do cultivation also.  This
is the first mission station established in Chhattisgarh in 1868.  This
was started as a sort of rest camp.  There is only one pastor by name R.
N. Jacob. I was educated in Jhansi in American institution, was teacher
in St. Paul’s at Raipur.  My pay at present is Rs. 165 per mensem. 
Regarding school fees, I have to give an account to Government.  All
have to pay fees of Rs. 2-14-0.  Those who are poor and whose parents
are members of Church (40 out of 60) get their fees paid by the Church. 
There are 60 per cent non-Christians in freeships given under Government
rules.  We have religious teaching in the school outside school hours
and it is optional.  We have taken written statements from the guardians
of pupils.  Six annas are taken from all, because it is games fee.  All
are given books free and we collect Rs. 3 as rent of the books per
year.  There are five teachers in middle and eight in primary schools. 
XII are Christians.  There are cases of boys and girls going out for
higher education from this place.  There are three non-Christian
students who do not attend bible classes.

**Chiranjilal Marwari:** There is a propaganda going on here that
Congress has been given Raj for 10 years and British Government will
come after that.

**Balbadprasad Shukla, M.L.A., from Bhatapara:** Both the primary and
the middle school are Government aided.  All staff is Christian.
Christian boys have to pay Re. 0-6-0 and non-Christians have to pay Rs.
2-14-0 in middle school.  No fees in primary.  Freeships are given only
to Christian boys.  In Baitalpur there is a dispensary.  It was closed
for two years for want of a doctor.  No doctor was appointed because
Christian doctor was not available for service.  In meetings held by
missionaries, no time is allowed for other (non-Christians) to make any
speech.  In Mungeli tahsil, Ratiram’s son has been converted to
Christianity in Kewatdabri mouza (he has been request to send the matter
in writing).

**Ganpatrao Naidu of Bhatapara:** Cows are slaughtered in Ganeshpur near
Bisrampur.  There is no evidence.  But it is suspected that this is done
by Christians.  A cow has been slaughtered today in Marrakona.  Bible
period should not be allowed even outside school hours.

**Hariram Agrawal of Bhatapara:** I had taken my mother to Tilda
Hospital before three years.  There five to seven girls used to come in
the afternoon between 12 and 3 and they brought pictures with them of
Ram, Krishna and Jesus.  They would keep picture of Krishna and say that
he was Badmash, Ram was disobedient ; and because these Gods of Hindus
are sinners themselves, Hindu dharma cannot give salvation from sin. 
They would then produce Jesus’s picture and say that he would give
salvation from sin. He sacrificed his life for that.  This was done in
General Ward where there were about 50 patients.  I do not recollect the
names, but I shall be able to identify the girls. At Bhagela, a Hindu
boy saw a dream that he could become Christian and marry a Christian
girl.  He married the girl by conversion.

**Bajirao Niru, M.L.A., Bhatapara:** There was a quarrel with Macha
Bhat.  He was converted to Christianity by saying that his quarrel will
be settled if he became a Christian.  A pamphlet has been printer and
distributed.  It is mentioned in the pamphlet that Padri has come by
crossing seven seas for the benefit of people. I will send the book to
the Committee.

**Reverend Gurbachansingh:** Dr. Gulhati was a Hindu doctor at Tilda. 
Private practice is not allowed in mission hospitals, and, therefore, no
one is willing to accept the job.  Pastors do not say that Congress raj
is for 10 years.  This may be the loose talk in village people and
pastors have nothing to do with this.  In the Christian Mela no one is
allowed to speak, because it is a Chhattisgarh Christian Mela for
Aradhana, and it has been accepted by Government as a fair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
