+++
title = "20 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT BULDANA

KHAMGAON

**Abstract of applications received in Buldana district**

*The 16th October 1954.*

 

[TABLE]

------------------------------

KHAMGAON

*The 16th October 1954*

The Chairman as usual explained the purpose for which the Committee has
been set up by the State Government and introduced the members.

**Shri Bhatia, Chairman, Janapad Sabha:** Missionary menace, like T. B.,
is a great disaster in our country, which will destroy it.  Government
should, therefore, take a step to check it.  Missionaries may live in
this country.  Hindu religion does not hate them.  But they should not
enter into objectionable activities.  I am not in a position to give the
number of converts since 1947.  There are a girl’s school and a boarding
here.

**Muss Janet, Head of the School:** Christians here have no cause for
complaint or trouble.  There is no conversion here.

**District Superintendent of Christian:** We believe that there is only
one God on earth and it is Christ.  We tell people accordingly.  It is
His desire that we should go out and tell the shubhwarta (good news) to
every one.  If anybody does not do so, he is not a real Christians I
speak only of Khamgaon whereas my other friends present here have been
speaking in general terms because they have nothing to say against our
work in Khamgaon.

**Shri Brahmapure:** A comparative study of religious preaching should
be compulsory for anyone who preaches particular religion.  God’s
kingdom on earth, which the missionaries preach, means Christian Raj. 
But ours is not a Christian Raj. Missionaries may be using idiomatic
language in their prachar, but it has adverse effect on our illiterate
brothers. This is only one of the many instances.  Extracts from Bible
are also used for prachar.  The reservation of seats for candidates of
different categories in railway and other central services is the result
of religious fanaticism.  Christian converts have no love, affection or
sincerity for India.  The demand for Isaistan is a symptom of this. 
Culture and nationality cannot in my opinion, be different.  The
fundamental policy of the State should be such that such converts should
not be allowed to live in our country.  There are different
denominations even among Christian missionaries.  Missionaries from all
over the world have been functioning in our country.  These foreigners
do not come here purely for the sake of religion.  They are directly or
indirectly connected with foreigners.  Such people as have been obliged
and converted by them are bound to have affiliation for foreign
countries of these missionaries.  Raj Kumari Amritkuwar visited the
State and gave a certificate to these people.  This should not have been
done, particularly when the Commission was to come here.  In Canada one
of our Swamis, who had gone there for preaching Vedanta, was asked to
quit that country.  Even in Foreign countries, there is relation between
religion and politics.  In Kabul one man has become Ameer. He says that
three Bs should be kept away by his successors.  First B comes from
Bible, second from Brandy, and the third from Banias.  We do not invite
anybody from foreign countries.  They oblige such people as are
illiterate and backward.  They have obliged us too much so far.  It is,
therefore, time for them now to go away.  If they want to remain here,
they should remain as Aryas.  One Kirtankar from Ahmednagar had come
here.  Everyone knows how he used to abuse the Hindu religion.  In the
past Government servants used to check missionary institutions.  They
may not be doing so now.  A major girl from Nagpur was brought here by
missionaries.  When her husband and father came to take her aw Dr.
Chande, Dr. Barve, Kale and myself went and called the girl.  She
refused to come unless her husband becomes Christian.  Her husband and
father put the girl in our car.  Miss Maw of the Mission also tried to
get into the car but the driver of the car did not allow her to enter. 
Miss Maw then went to local police S.-D. O. who took out warrants of
kidnapping against us.  The trying magistrate in his judgment asked that
the girl should given in charge of, Miss Maw.  This shows the
favouritism of Government officers towards Christians.  There is no
trace of the girl since then.  Government should make a law that Hindus
should not be converted.  Punishment should be imposed on those who
break it.  Forty lakh dollars are being provided to these people by
American Government.  The political aspect of this should be clear from
this fact.

**Shri Dar, Member, Hindu Mahasabha:** Missionaries go to Government
primary schools and children there are attracted by them because they
give them sweets and there photographs, pictures of Christ are freely
distributed by them in such schools.

**District Superintendent:** We deny this allegation.

**Shri Dar:** Do not go to small children to attract them.  You come to
us. A tailor’s wife was being taken away by some missionaries.  When I
intervened, I was told that they had obliged the tailor.  Even a secular
man like Jawaharlalji has confessed that missionaries have political
motive.  There is political motive behind conversion.  Shri S. D. Gill,
an ex-Christian missionary, has said that when a man becomes a
Christian, he does not remain an Indian.  There is change in his
loyalties and affinities.  There is extra territorial loyalty.  We make
no distinction between different foreigners, whether he be a Goanese or
Portuguese.  Even Indian Christians have supported our move for driving
out foreign missionaries from this land.  It has been stated in Meek
Committee’s report that conversions to Christianity should be stopped in
this country.  When foreigners pay to preachers, we feel that they may
be taking a pledge from them that so many persons must be converted. 
The Committee should try to get a copy of the pledge and find out the
object of receiving such a huge financial aid from foreign countries.

**Anekar Vakil, Hindu Sabha:** I have presented an application on behalf
of the local Hindu Sabha.  We have acquired swaraj to preserve out
religion and culture.  Religion and politics cannot be divorced.  The
Second World War was fought by Hitler to extend his culture.  I wish
that the Committee’s report should be ideal for the whole world. 
Foreign aid should come to the Government of India instead of direct to
the missionaries here.  They can utilise it to the best advantage.  They
say that we should become Christians.  Our religion teaches us to make
others Arya. If we work with their zeal, what will be the position. 
Will there be no clashes in the future?  So far as Buldana district
affairs are concerned, Chikhli mission has purchased 125 acres of black
soil.  Missionaries activities are very secret.  From census reports it
may be seen that between 1941 and 1951 Christian population in this
district has increased.  I have made basic suggestions in my
application.

**Shri Dongre Vakil, President, Bar Association:** Missionaries object
to our preaching in their localities, but they preach in our localities.

**District Superintendent:** These people have several times preached
near our compound.

**Shri Narayan Mapari:** In one of the Kirtans of Mr. Carner’s brother
he abused Hindu religion.  I, therefore, requested Mr. Carrier to allow
me to speak a few words after his Kirtan. In the course of his Kirtan he
said that Hindu Gods are of stones, and stones are in latrines,
buildings and temples.

**Mr. Carner:** This is false.  This was a private programme. I did not
like to allow him to speak in our private programme.

**Shri Narayan Mapari:** Christian schools and hospitals are run merely
with the object of proselytization.  My wife was formerly a Christian. 
She has been converted to Hinduism now.  When her sister was in
Christian custody at Pendra Road, I went with my wife to her and she
(aged 11 to 12 in 1950, May) desired to come back with us but the
Christians refused to send her.  Shri Dehankar and Gopalprasad, Pleaders
from Bilaspur gave me an application, which I gave to Police.  They made
enquiries, aid said that there is no girl of the name.  This is the fate
of children in mission orphanages.  Till now there is no trace of my
sister-in-law.  One Harijan from Chikhli had come here to take away his
sister and he requested my help.  But he did not turn up again.  It
appears that the missionaries have sent him away after bribing.

**Shri Supaji:** I do not know any cases of conversion, or of
allurement.  Missionaries oblige people.  Reads out his speech, which
was written for him by some one and supports the missionaries, speaking
highly of services rendered by them).

**School Headmistress:** I have been in the school since the last two
years only.  There is no mission activity in the school and no books
have been given to the children during school hours.  We visited the
primary school here once as requested by the District Inspectress of
Schools.  We also allow teachers from other schools in our school for
some time.  If you think that we have done any harm to you, we are
prepared to make necessary changes in our working.  Our school is always
visited by the District Inspectress and she did not find anything
against us so far.

------------------------------

MEHKAR

*The 16th October 1954.*

The Chairman introduced the members of the Committee and explained its
object.

**Shri L. Deshmukh, Landlord:** We feel there is some behind the
religious activities of missionaries.  There is no in this conversion. 
Missionaries stand surety for thieves at convert them.  Such things have
taken place in British regime. I cannot say if there are any cases after
independence, but I heard that there are some.

**Shri S. L. Mannote, Christian Palak:** I spread the message of
Christ.  I spread religion. I have been doing this since 1939. I preach
the Christ of the Bible. There is no objection to my doing so, except by
a couple of persons sitting here.  I have never said that people should
change their religion.  But I wish that there should be a change of
heart.  I try for that and shall be doing so. Regarding the allegation
that we preach to the sufferers, we say that on the alleged occasion
loud-speakers were used and the life of Jesus Christ was explained for
two hours, which could be heard in the whole town.  Therefore it cannot
be said that we approach the illiterates only.  About taking advantage
of economic distress, I do not think that those who made this
allegation, will be able to point out a single instance of this. Dr.
Spiker used to come here formerly. Now Dr. Vikar Comes.  Females from
respectable families of this place come to mission hospital.  I give a
beat of drum that all needy should come there.  When they come,
naturally there they talk to us on different things.  Christ has said
that the sufferers should be helped. I am talking about conversion of
heart.  In the conversation in the hospital.  I tell them how Jesus
Christ cures the patients and their souls.  He is the greatest physician
in the world.  Regarding providing employment, since missionaries have
no political influence, it may well understood what they may be doing to
provide employment.  About abuse of Gods, I have been preaching in this
taluq and in Maharashtra, but I have preached Christ of the Bible and
nothing besides that.  I have never uttered a sentence against Hindu
religion. I have told people about the saving power of Jesus Christ.  I
take particular care to see that no words are en against any other
religion.  There is an allegation that land has been given for Christian
temple instead of giving it for school.  In this connection I have to
say that I am a citizen of India.  When we requested the D. C. for land,
we stated therein that when Muslims and Hindus have several mosques and
temples, why should we not have a single church.  Even if a man is
baptised, it does not mean that he is a true Christian.  There must be
purity of heart.  There was a camp in Wadgaon in 1939.  People come from
distant places for camp and take part in bhajans etc.  About criminal
offences and surety by missionaries under section 110 or 107, this was
an old practice before independence. (The Chairman said that the
Committee is not concerned with that.  About the allegation that the
Christian religion does not allow two wives…… the speaker went on to say
further, but the chairman informed him that this is not important from
the point of view of the Committee).

I am an ordained priest.  My pay is just sufficient to meet my bare
necessities.  I get Rs. 100 per mensem.  Luther Mannote is my name.  I
have converted about 8 to 10 people so far. I may have baptised some
people. (In a roundabout manner avoids to give out the caste of the
people converted). I get my pay from local church. 1/10th of it is
expected to be contributed.  The church of the Nazerene has a central
fund.  Shri Sadasheo Dongardive is its treasurer.  Missionaries do not
force me to preach.  I do not preach for money.  It is because of the
love of Christ.  I am not the only preacher.  In my religion every one
is expected to preach.  Otherwise he is not a true Christian. There are
about seven pracharaks in this taluq.  Their pay comes mainly from
central fund and partly from mission.  There is a congregation of 20
persons here.

**Shri P. N. Kale, Pleader, President, Taluq Congress Committee:**
People go to the bazar for purchases and listen to their prachar. 
Missionaries should not think that they go to listen to their prachar.

**Shri B. G. Deshpande:** Missionaries do not preach Christianity but
they misguide the people, when they say that Christ is the greatest of
all apostles.  This is nothing but repetition of Angul.

**Pandit Awasthi:** Why missionaries are active in India only?  Why do
they not go to other countries? In India there is a change of culture by
conversion.  An Englishman praises Thames like anything.  Similarly an
Indian Christian praises the Thames.  He does not speak highly about the
Ganges.  We say that Christians are ours and they should remain ours.

**Shri M. I. Deshmukh, Pleader:** The mission property in Mehkar is
worth about a lakh of rupees.  This is purchased with the money received
from foreign countries.  Even doors and other things of mission bungalow
have come from abroad.  Why did they not employ local carpenters and
others for these things and give them employment? We have not been able
to build such a building as their mission bungalow for our Bhatji, even
though we have been living here since long.

**Shri K. T. Sangle, member A. I. C. C.:** In our Ved-Puran there are
instances of walls moving and buffaloes reading Ved.  Then why not read
that and why read Christ.  When the hearts of missionaries are not
changed, why should they think of changing the hearts of others.  That
is false. They come to India but they do not want to mix with people
here.  It is their money that mixes with the people and not their
hearts.  I do not remember that Christians ever preached Mahatmaji’s
doctrine.  I am of Kakri Sampradaya and sing Bhajans.  Our object is to
bring about change of heart of persons like Luther.  In the famine of
1939, August-September, missionaries used to stand on the road and
obstruct people from going to gitti camps. They used to say “why do you
go to gitti work?  Jesus will give you money. Embrace our religion. 
Take money and join our religion. Why do you do gitti work?” Their
British support disappeared after independence. Once Hindu Gods and
Krishna were abused by missionaries. I asked some questions to the
preacher but he was not able to reply.

**Shri M. L. Deshmukh, Vakil:** YMCA, Nagpur’s collection is after
independence.  Prof. Dharamraj was accompanied by Government revenue
officers from Mehkar.  We do not get admission to YMCA.  Our taluq
contributed Rs. 15,000 for the purpose.  Why Government officers should
help when there are no Government instructions on the subject?  I am not
criticisms any particular revenue or other officer, but my point is that
even now Government officers patronise Christians but they are not
inclined to patronise local organisations.

**Shri Luther:** We get converts from towns as well as villages.

**Shri Kale:** In 1951 a woman aged 50 or so was converted to
Christianity in Bhadegaon village.

**Shri T. S. Saoji:** I know a case of hospital conversion, where a man
getting Rs. 45 had become Christian to receive cheaper and careful
medical help.

**Shri Carner:** Replies to all points and says that false charges have
been levelled against Christians.  We do not want to teach people about
Krististan.  We tell people to cooperate with Government.  When there is
a war, I do not think we will to against India.  We try to approximate
our standard of living here with the one we are accustomed to in
America.  The money comes from America because we are poor.  We preach
that Christ is love.  I did not preach anybody.  I left my father and
mother, my family and nay standard if living.  I hive done all this
sacrifice for Christ and his love. Is it not sufficient proof of my
sincerity to Christ and his love? We do not want to denationalise people
here.  We help the Government in all its activities. I can only speak
for myself.  I cannot speak for all the missions in India.  If some of
the Christians vilify other religions, I believe it is a mistake on
their part.

------------------------------

CHIKHLI

Chairman explained the purpose of the committee.

**Dr. Ramvilas Nathmal Daga of Jansangh:** Manibai village, 15 miles
from Chikhli, has almost been converted.  We have a man here who was
converted.  Now he has come back to Hinduism.

**Shri Dhondu Sheoram Borkar:** I was a Christian before 15 years. 
Later I became a Hindu. I was poor.  There was no cultivation for me in
the jungle and no house to live in the basti.  Christian preachers
approached me and said that I was very poor and if I became a Christian,
they would educate my children and help me in emergencies.  Taking into
consideration the circumstances in which I was placed, I considered it
proper to become a Christian.  I remained so for about 8 to 10 years and
my children were admitted to school.  But after some months they
demanded fees from me. I have four children. I used to get only Rs. 8
per mensem as pay and the fees of these children was Rs. 11 per mensem. 
I could not, therefore, pay, the fees, and my children were removed from
school.  All the children have thus left the school now.  They are
approaching me again for conversion.  They request me to send my sons to
school.  They say they will have Krististan when their number
increases.  They also criticise Hindu religion. I used to receive about
Rs. 5 to Rs. 10 per month for a year or so after conversion.  Those who
are well-to-do do not become Christians.  Only poor persons are
attempted to be converted.  There are many such people in villages. 
There may be about 5,000 Christians in Chikhli taluq.

**Dr. Daga:** I can give many applications from those converts who have
come back to the Hindu religion.  In different countries different
religions have patronage of the State.  Similarly Hindu religion should
be patronised by the State in India.  Government should open a branch of
the Ecclesiastical Department for Hindu religion.  Lakhs of rupees are
spent on various schemes by Government.  Government should spend
something on Ecclesiastical Department by saving some amount on their
schemes.

**Shri Borkar and Daga:** There is no restriction on scheduled caste
people for entering any temple.  No inducements are given for
reconversion to Hinduism.

**Shri Bhatkar, M. P.:** Ninety-nine per cent of the converts are from
my caste, i.e., the Scheduled Castes. I run a Chokhamela hostel here. 
In 1924 all Scheduled Castes converts in Janephal were brought back to
Hinduism. Unfortunately we have no funds to give them employment.  Most
of these were reconverted to Christianity by missionaries.  I do not
mind their propagating any religion.  But they should not abuse other
religions.  Missionaries distribute free books. Generally there is more
conversion among Mahars and Mangs.  Criminals such as thieves are told
that if they convert to Christianity, there will not be police watch
over them.  Many are converted when they are minors.  There are some
boys in my hostel, whose names were changed without permission in
Christian hostels.  Their parents are ignorant and illiterate. This is
true.  Names of my children were changed by missionaries without my
knowledge and permission.

It is difficult to say how many of these are victims of this practice,
because there is a form, which seeks permission of parents for Bible
classes and attendance at prayers.  Most of the parents are not
educated.  Therefore they sign these forms blindly.  People think that
admission and teaching is free in mission schools.  But when students
leave their schools, parents are asked to pay fees, which is impossible
for them.  Out of a total population of 205,000 in taluq scheduled
castes are 34,000.  When the question of scholarship for scheduled
castes and backward classes comes up, converted students record their
names as Mahars.

**Shri James:** Our mission school is only up to 8th class.  Children
passing out from it go to Government high school.

**Bhatkar:** Here is only one temple of devi to which everyone is
allowed entrance. Other temples are not open to Harijans. Some of these
are private. But almost all the temples are not open. In Amdapur there
is a boarding, which is not open to all. Missionaries are spending more
on their hostels than Government is doing on our hostels. Two educated
Harijan girls here have no service, whereas others have got it. Harijan
boys are not taken up in police service in the State.

**Shri C. C. James:** Instances can he quoted where many people come of
their own for conversion.  So far as I know, no money has been given to
Borkar for conversions alleged by him.  We are in somewhat the same
situation as Government.  Fees in our schools are low.  We allow
religious teaching in our schools.  We are gradually increasing our fees
from time to time.  This year a Christian student said that if his fee
was not reduced, he would turn Hindu. I told him that we are not Roman
Christians and do not give fee and other concessions.  In past years,
several people came to me saying that they wanted to get themselves
converted.  But I found that they were mostly in search of some
concessions or facilities. I refused to convert them.  Ours is
definitely an Evangelistic mission and, therefore, we are interested in
change of heart.  There have been no doubt cases of some Christian
converts going back to Hindu religion.  We are not interested in the
mere name “Christian” without belief in Christ as the Saviour of the
world.  It is said that uneducated people come to us for conversion. 
But those who come to us are in misery and poverty, and are hungry of
love.  And, therefore, they want to see the true God. Educated people
also come to us. But they do so when there is need for them.  We say
that Christ alone can give salvation, because we do not know any other
religion or God.  There need not he any suspicion about agitation for
Krististan.  We are very much against it. I have never heard it from any
Christian.  We would certainly be against anything like that.  Christ
did not encourage the people to live in, talk of or form separate
countries.  In Palestine, Christ did hot encourage a Krististan.  When
relations between America and India are not cordial our interest may be
divided.  But they cannot be so on Pakistan issue. I think people of our
denomination will be loyal to the country when there is war.  Christian
countries on the whole were very favourable to India's independence. 
Before coming to India, I had an opportunity of knowing what the
Christian missionaries spoke of this land and whether other independent
people liked to see India independent. I never heard any missionary
speaking in favour of continuance of the British power in India.

**Shri Carner:** I personally believe that one reason for bringing
independence to India is the principle of Christ, viz., Love.  That has
influenced people in India very much.  Christian influence might have
been more in India than in other countries.

**Shri John Minikrao Meshramkar:** I deny the charges made by Dr. Daga
of Jamgarth.  In our schools holidays are given to Hindus and Muslims
during heir festivals.  We give national holidays.  Holiday is not given
for Desra.  We do not give all the holidays mentioned in the Education
Manual, because the students in our school are 99 per cent Christians. 
Hindu teachers are given sectional holidays.  Christian holidays are for
the whole school. Religious education is not compulsory in our school. 
There are 280 students in all in primary and middle schools.  Out of
these, 24 are non-Christians.  Consent is obtained in writing from
guardians or parents before giving bible training to their wards.  Every
year the parents give permission.  Today only I have come across the
first instance where the consent form is not singed by a guardian. We
distributed warm clothes to Christians here because they were received
for them from their American brothers.  Clothes were not easily
available here during the war period and, therefore, they were sent from
America for their Christian brothers.  Christians may have given them to
others.  Some Musalmans in Eklara were also given these clothes. We do
not insist on American medicines only.  We purchase medicines from local
market (Dr. Daga’s shop).  We do not take away small boys as alleged. 
There is only one mission hostel in Chikhli and, therefore, Christian
boys from other places, in the taluq come here.  We never uttered the
word “Krististan”.  We do not write “Harijan” for Christian people. 
Gaya and Namdeo Borkar’s names were not changed to Christian names as
alleged earlier.

------------------------------

*The 17th October 1954.*

Chairman explained the object of the State Government in appointing the
Committee and the purpose of the meeting.

**Shri Ramrao Patil:** When India is declared a secular State, all
religions should have equal right and, therefore, the preaching by
Christians should be stopped.

**Shri Dongre, Secretary, Buldana District Jansangh:** We have no
objection if a person is converted by mental and spiritual satisfaction,
i.e., conviction.  But missionaries do not stop with preaching their
religion. A new tendency is created among the converts.  There is
peaceful work in this district.  Where mass conversions have taken
place, there is aggressive action.  For example, in Travancore, 200
Hindu temples have been destroyed.  In Chikhli taluq, there are
churches, schools and other means of prachar at Yeota, Malwandi,
Manubai, Eklara, Kawhala, Amdapur, Undri, Mes, Antri, Develgaonmahhi,
Deulgaonraja and Dhau.  The mission school in Chikhli has 300 students. 
Of these, 5 to 6 per cent are Hindus, 5 to 6 Muslims and the rest
Christians.  Every day a prayer is sung in the school according to the
Christian religion.  In Bombay State, Gita recitation has been stopped,
as ours is a secular State.  Missionaries may conduct schools but
politics and religion should not be allowed to interfere with the
education of our young generations.  Christian schools are not closed
even on gazetted holidays, particularly on Hindu festival days.  Diwali
holidays in mission schools are hardly for three days when other schools
give ten days holidays for Diwali.  Hindu teacher get holidays with some
difficulty, but Hindu students do not get them at all, because they have
free education at Christian hands.  Poor boys are attracted to their
schools because they get there freeships.  They are afraid of taking
leave, because if the do so, the may be removed from the school. 
Mission schools charge Rs. 5 as fee for IXth class.  In this way
monetary aid is rendered to 70 families. Only such people are rendered
help, in whose case there are some chances of conversion.  About 50
families of students receive help.  Hindu names of students are changed
to Christian names in their schools without baptism.  This amounts to
fraud.  Concrete cases of this will be given in future.  Bible period is
compulsory in Chikhli mission school.  The reason for this is said to he
that about 80 per cent of the students are Christians.  Most of the boys
are indirectly completed to be present at these Bible classes.

Another plate used by Christian missionaries for religions preaching is
their hospital.  In Chikhli mission hospital, non-Christian patients are
told that prayers are offered to Christ for their recovery.  They are
given medicines and thereby they recover.  Poor patients are misguided. 
They are made to believe chat Christ has recovered them.  Those who have
no faith in prayers are also subjected to such phenomenon.  A book of
Rev. Baba Padmanji was given under the pillow of a patient for his early
recovery. Rev. Baba Padmanji wrote his novel in 1956 to show that
Christian religion is better than Hindu religion.  In this book he
criticises Bhisma and others who are held in high esteem by Hindus. 
Hindu Gods are abused in the books, which are used as a means of
prachar.

An example of aggressiveness of missionaries in Kelvad, mass meeting may
be given on one of the boards exhibited in the meeting it was painted
that everyone should take a vow that he would convert at least one man
during the year. In Manubhai village, it was preached that theirs was
not Indian nationally. Missionaries speak highly of America and try to
create affinity towards it. In cinema slides, they compare poverty in
India and wealthy living in America, thus lowering India in the eyes of
its sons. It is preached that we should live like America.

**Suggestions to improve -** Mass conversions should be stopped.
Conversion in bloc proves that missionaries resort to means other than
conviction.  Therefore, a magistrate’s certificate should be insisted
upon in cases of bona fide conversion.  If funds contributed by Indian
Christians only were utilised for conversion propagandas, there was
nothing objectionable.  But it is well-known that their funds come
America.  Government should examine their accounts every year.  There
should be Government control on their funds.

Forms were distributed in Chikhli mission school only three days before
the visit of the commission, and permission for attendance of students
at Christian prayers was sought from their guardians.

**Shri Kanade Shastri:** The present political situation is such that it
is not necessary for foreign missionaries to supply grain, cloth, etc.,
to our countrymen.  Everyone should be free to propagate religion.  No
minor should be allowed to change his religion. There should be legal
check on conversions. Whatever help is received for the poor, it should
be under Government control.  There need, therefore, be no mission
hospitals.  Government may employ American doctors.  But the hospital
control should be with Government and it should not be called a mission
hospital.  In America, no religious prayers are offered in hospitals.  I
was in America in a T.B. hospital.  There is no restriction on anybody
about prayers. I do not believe that patients cannot be cured in
hospitals without prayers. Those who believe in God pray him at the time
of taking medicines.  Everyone should have freedom to opera hospitals. 
There may be class to give knowledge of other religions. But they should
not be included in schools.  Primary education should be entirely in
Government hands.  People get converted in thousands when there is
famine.  Before two years, when there was actuate shortage of
foodgrains, about 35 persons from a near village came here and after
about a week got converted.  The term ‘Rice Christian’ came in vogue
when people became Christian in Madras and other tracts during famine. 
Everyone should be free to change his religion, but every conversion
should be by conviction.  Rules regarding teaching religion in schools
should be similar for all.

**Shri Kanetkar:** I am a member of the Rationalist Press Association
since 25 years.  A letter was received by our association from England
enquiring whether its object wag achieved.  This shows that the object
of sending money is obviously to convert people.  There is acute
economic distress.  So long as there is economic distress, all
conversions, which take place as result of this distress should be
stopped.  The method of registration of converts is useful for check
against converts by fraud and allurement.

**Shri John Mackay:** In Chikhli mission school, we give concession in
school fees to orphans.  Prayers are held in chapel outside school
hours.  We have not got Baba.  Padmanji’s text book.  We use Holy Bible
for advising people.  Those who like, read the book.  Copies of it may
be had from the Bombay Tract Book Society.  We do not preach ‘Christian
religion’.  We preach Christ.  We do not want to convert people.  Those
whose hearts are changed, come to us and say that they should be
converted to Christianity.  All sorts of people, educated, uneducated,
assemble at our preachings.  As Christians, we do believe in Him.  There
was time when I did not believe in Christ.  But now I am convinced of
Christ.  Conversion is not the work of man.  It is the work of God.  I
do not think that there can be mass conversion.  Conversion is always
individual.  We give the same simple Gospel message to all educated or
uneducated.  I cannot ask anybody to change his religion. I tell my
personal experience of what Christ has done for, me to everyone, even in
railway train.  I tell of the Gospel.  We love India and that is why we
come here.  As far as our salaries are concerned, we can have much more
in our own land.  We come here to give our personal experiences and not
to enjoy bookish knowledge.  Our aim is to help India and there should
be no misunderstanding about it.

**Shri Gangadhar Sawatram, Preacher:** I receive Rs. 100 as pay from
central fund.  We have our Assembly budget and district budget.  All
churches contribute to central fund.  And if there is a deficit, it is
made good from foreign.  We preach in very clear words.  We do not
deceive anybody.  Christ’s Command is to spread his message in the
universe.  We do not convert a man immediately on request.  But we wait
for several months, and then if he is found suitable, he is given
baptisma.  We believe that patients can be cured by prayers without
medicine.  It is also our experience.  Even though we believe in this,
we give medicines.  We do not speak about any other religion, We exhibit
a picture of Christ and speak about Him only.  About 15 to 20 persons
have been converted in the district during the last two to three years.
Our work is confined to religion and, therefore, we do not turn our
attention to other things.  We would have converted many people by
allurement of money, if it was our main object.  Each one of us is a
preacher of Christ, whether he receives pay for it or not.  It is his
duty to give evidence of Christ.  We don’t spoil (batwine) a man as
alleged but by change of heart a man improves himself.

Chairman thanked the audience and the meeting concluded.

------------------------------

MALKAPUR

*The 18th October 1954.*

**Shri Bapat:** All the missions here are working with the primary
object of spreading religion, and they say that their activities are
conducive to their religion.  They have a centre in the hill area.  They
convert illiterate, and poor persons.  They have no idea of resulting
national injustice.  By spreading Christian religion they shift their
loyalties to Christianity and those countries, which follow that
religion.  They start dispensaries where free medicines are given. 
Freeships are given m schools to such people as are likely to embrace
Christianity.  If missionaries want to do social work, they should not
do with that motive.  They should not try to convince people that
Christianity is in any way superior to other religions.  They say that
Christianity gives salvation and Christ will absolve them of their
sins.  This is a misstatement.  They also do kirtans and recite abhangs
and try to show that all the Hindu saints were Christians though they
professed to be Hindus.  Hindu deities are represented in a perverse
manner.  Their activities are, thus, aimed at converting people.  This
should be stopped.  Before 1947, they had Government support.  Now, they
have none. Therefore, they dabble in politics.  They are now making
propaganda to have separate State groups.  No case of conversion has
occurred in Malkapur taluq.  We have read in papers about this in some
other states.  They should do humanitarian Work only and not aim at
conversion.  They have no hospital, school or hostel here.  When
foreigners desire to spend their money on charitable purposes in this
country, they should be asked to donate all the funds to the Central
Government, who will see that they are properly utilised according to
the wishes of the donors.  The motive underlying conversions is
objectionable from our point of view.  Help is rendered to those people
only who are likely to embrace Christianity.  Christian and Missionary
Alliance is working here.

**Shri R. T. Ingley, Secretary, Local Harijan Hostel:** Missionaries
were trying to convert me also, but I proved a tough job for them.  Last
year, it so happened, that they asked me about the Superintendent of the
hostel.  I do not know to what mission they belonged or whether they
were authorised.  Since they say that their work is humanitarian, they
should have rendered help to my hostel, which was in need of help.  But
they did not even show me their face since then.  This proves that they
have motive behind help.  A page from the 1936 Annual Report of the
Disciples of Christ, has been enclosed with my application. 
Missionaries have been active in Takhatpur area, where satnamis live. 
If they want to provide employment on humanitarian grounds, they should
give employment to the children and the whole family of non-Christians.
I am talking in general.  No case of conversion ever occurred in this
area.  This area is mainly inhabited by lewa kunbis.  They are strong
exponents of bhakti cult.  They are very hard working and industrious. 
They take bonds for service for five years, ten years or for the whole
life.  They have no temptation to fall prey to any exploitation or to go
to any other religion.  They themselves are followers of Vaishnav cult. 
They had their saint Chokhamela.  Mahar community was once upon a time a
community, which had home industries and other business.  'Those who had
no profession, fell victim to missionaries in the hope of getting
employment.  Exploitation of the poor and ignorant leads to their
conversion.  Casteism holds good even in Christianity. I have said this
in Satara.  One Suryawanshi, has written an article in which he says
that Maharashtra Christian have a culture different from other
Christians.  This shows difference among Maharashtra Christian, Madras
Christian, etc. Sabnis, Waghmare, Sontake have their origin in
particular castes.  They do not inter-marry even though they have
converted to Christianity.  Since there are political aspirations of the
people in a democratic set up, population means a great deal.  If many
people are converted to Christianity, our numerical strength is affected
and that is a direct challenge to depressed classes.  The spirit of
denationalization is a great danger to us.  In Satara side, there is a
difference between the American and Indian Christians.  Ramoshis (Mang)
Christians supported Dr. Samuel (an Indian) while Dr. Jones (American)
was supported by Mahars.  That way, the quarrel went on for years.  Some
people were talking highly of America and deprecated India. I have
respect for principles of Christianity.  Christians could not give me a
good book on Christ.  In this area there are no conversions and no
complaints so far as I know.

**Shri V. L. Appa, Chairman, Janpad Sabha:** The world is advancing. 
Our secularism and political solidarity should not be disturbed.  We
have experience of the Muslim rule.  We have to save secularism.  If
missionaries here have our welfare at heart, they should hand over their
funds to the State in the name of Christ.  They may insist on having
their own personnel for execution and set up their board to see that
their policy is implemented.  There should therefore, be no objection to
entrust Government with the funds.  If this is done dissatisfaction and
distress among our minds may go away.  Mass conversion is a horrible
thing.  It should be stopped. In a family, every individual member
should have full freedom to decide before conversion.  In Travancore,
over 350 temples were destroyed.  This has appeared in news papers. 
There is a most pathetic crisis in the book of Laxmibai Tilak, which it
is said that her husband repented and repented for having become a
Christian.  One Deshpande from Malkapur came to me for employment.  That
man was not wanted at home and was in search of a guardian.  He came in
contact with a missionary and got himself converted.  He was married in
Bodwad to a girl by Christians.  He became an enthusiastic missionary. I
state this to show that there is a psychological moment in the life of a
man, which changes him.  But this moment is temporary.  There are some
tricks of missionaries like “bolka dhalpa” (a speaking wooden piece). 
Deshpande was working as a teacher in Bodwad.  His father’s name is
Ramrao.  His whereabouts are not known to me. I want that there should
only be mental conversions.  There should be a permit or a licence
system for conversion.  There should be no mass or family conversion.
(Reads out from his application.) Conversion should be checked in all
cases except where they are by conviction.  Social and religious ideas
go simultaneously.  We may give Indian Christians full liberty, but the
foreign element cannot be trusted.

Since our country has been declared secular, we have no objection to
Christian missionaries doing religious propaganda but the methods of
propaganda adopted by them should be strictly watched.  They should not
be allowed to propagate among illiterate and poverty-stricken people.
Let a man have education and then let missionaries preach him.  The
reason for each conversion is ignorance and temptation.  In my own
village Rohinkhed (23 miles from this place) before 20 years
missionaries came and preached principles of Christianity in a square
and when Ram and Krishna were decried, I was irritated and warned that
my Gods should not be abused. I threatened them and since then no
missionary turned to my village. I do not know if that type of preaching
goes on in other villages.  Regular camps are held in villages in
Chikhli twice a year.

**Mr. Albert B. Shaw:** We have adult baptism. “Christian” means “Christ
like one”.  The complaints voiced here are general, whereas the
committee wanted to hear complaints about the taluq.  We think of God as
"three in one God the Father, God the son, and God the Holy”.  We preach
through Christ.  If the holy spirit does not convince you, it will do no
good.  We present the Gospel to anybody.  God has asked us to preach the
Gospel to everyone. When Dr. Ambedkar had the intention of changing his
religion some missions, might have come forward and given allurements,
but I have not given any allurement.  We have six months probation for
carrying out conversion. I agree to the proposal of making a declaration
before a magistrate and giving a period of probation for conversion.
“Free will” means the ability of accepting or rejecting a religion.  You
should give a personal testimony to show that one is not under the
influence of anybody. We do not baptise a person without convincing
ourselves by carrying out a test for six months.  In Nandura, there is a
Mahar.  I have watched him for six months. I have that conviction within
me that a true Christian must deliver the message of Christ to all. 
That is why I have come here.  My motive is to preach the Gospel.  In
this taluq there are 44 Christians.  Out of them, 21 are children.  We
have Sunday school in the morning.  There is one pastor here.  We get
money from America.  This is all freely given. They may give more if
they think that we are in need of more money. I did not make any appeal
for money. I am not allowed to do it.  Our mission here has no
hospital.  Except preaching, we have no other work.  All of our
Christians are loyal to India.  In case of war between America and India
I have no suspicion that Indian Christians of my denomination will go
with India. I do not think that Indian Christians will have any
affiliation for America, though their main church is in that country.

Chairman thanked those present and the meeting concluded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
