+++
title = "21 Previous"

+++
DISTRICT MANDLA

**Abstract of applications received in Mandla district**

MANDLA  
(*The 13th November 1954.*)

 

[TABLE]

------------------------------

NAINPUR

*The 12th November 1954.*

At the outset Chairman introduced the members.

**A non-Christian:** Change of religion is objectionable, but it is only
sentimental.  Allurement of money to innocent people, which may be in
the form of help to needy persons, is practised in this area.  Similarly
free education of children.  People who were formerly Gond, Baigas and
Pardhans are now calling themselves Christians.

**Ratiram (Christian name Simon):** I am a labourer and was converted 25
years ago by padri women by showing allurement of land for cultivation.
I was not given any land. I am even now a Christian. I was Pardhan
formerly, I was serving under missionary.  Reconversion to Hinduism
takes place in my community if some fine payment is made to the caste. 
My marriage was arranged by the Christians.  I had married a Christian
girl.  I do not go to church. I was baptised by Father in church and was
taught certain prayers.

**Barati Gond of Dhanora:** One lame man who is a Christian has been
removed from service.  He was converted on the allurement of service. I
live in Dhanora.

**Bhagwandas:** People work in the Missions and after some days they are
asked to be Christians.  If they do not, their services are terminated. 
Therefore, for fear of losing service they have to become Christians.  A
Father extracts wine from kismis on a large-scale.  He has got a permit
for this on religious grounds.  Twelve boxes if ‘kismis’ come from
Jabalpur per week.  The Father gives the wine to tribal people by way of
allurement.  He may be sending it even to Nagpur, but we are not able to
prove it.  The ‘kismis’ parcels brought in luggage and not in parcel
van.  During Easter and Christmas missionaries give wine to tribal
people.  This is objectionable from the social point of view.  People
from the South and Ranchi side are converted and brought here. I saw one
Oraon woman with one Gond woman selling fuel.  The Gond woman, when
questioned by me, said that she would also become Christian very shortly
as her husband was given work by Missionaries.  People from this side
are converted and taken to South (Madras) side.  This is deliberately
done to remove them from their relation and to deprive them of their
affection.  Bible is taught in the Mission school.  Government should
open a school, where there is no other school than only a mission
school.  Similarly they should do about hospitals.  The Missionaries get
an opportunity to oblige us during times of necessity and therefore we
become Christians.  Their work of love and sacrifice influences the
people from their childhood.  They provide service and when they cannot
go anywhere else but are solely dependent on Mission for service, they
are asked to become Christians or else their services are terminated. 
If Government opens a school, boys will stop going to Mission schools. 
One Mission school was closed at one place because some other school was
opened there.

**Gopaldas:** I was in Koni centre.  Once when I was ill, I was admitted
to Mission Hospital, Bilaspur.  At the time of admission, my caste was
asked and after 10 to 15 days I was asked to become Christian, which I
refused.  Therefore, very shortly I had to be away from the hospital. 
People do not become Christian willingly or by faith.  Advantage is
taken for conversion of the helpless condition of poor people.

There is not a large number of cases of conversion of educated people. 
But those who become converts, are given education up to B. A., etc. 
There is not much conversion in Dhanora, but converts from outside are
mainly kept there.  We cannot give exact details about this.

------------------------------

MANDLA

*The 13th November 1954.*

At a meeting held at the circuit house, the chairman, explained the
object of the committee and introduced its members.

**Shri Umeshdutta Pathak:** There is a case of conversion by fraud at
Saledanda of Loota, vs. Hajari, decided by Civil Judge, Mandla (case no.
not known) and its record is in Jabalpur.  There is an ugly scene in
Dhanora near Nainpur. At this place it will be seen how the village, is
converted.  Since 20 to 25 years old padris have gone. Dutch and Italian
(they call themselves as such) have come since, 1920, and more so since
1926.  I saw them active in Dindori tahsil.  At Dohania and Banghania
there was intensive work of missionaries.  They used to give free
education and interfere with litigation cases by influencing Government
officers.  These were their methods of obliging people with a view to
convert them. I saw this process going on intensively from 1926 to 1931.
Therefore I opposed Elwin as much as possible for keeping his
headquarters as Karanjia. Father Elwin was making the people
Assam-minded. His work was of a different type.  According to my
reading, he was not interested in conversion.  Many people were sent by
him to Assam tea garden and even now the link continues.  I do not know
if the Catholic Mission was interested in that.  Dohania and Dulbaher
were centres for conversion by processes, which were anti-national and
they were utilising all methods used by Elwin such as attracting bodys
from other schools.  A large number of them has come back to Hinduism. 
Their methods of conversion were financial help, legal help and
influence on Tahsildars, police sub-inspectors and other village
officers.  They were the masters of the village.  Mr. Hyde who was an
Anglo-Indian, was Deputy Commissioner then.  He was favourable to them. 
Similar process I noticed in Dhanora near Nainpur, which is the biggest
centre of Roman Catholics in Mandla district.  There was a sort of their
colony.  Nearly half of the village was converted.  During the Second
World war there was not much employment near Nainpur.  Therefore,
missionaries gave employment in their fields.  They have cultivation in
this district. I have reasons to believe that the work continues even
now, but these days they do not move about in the district because of
old age.  Conversions are still taking place.

**Shri Rombharos Agarwal:** Conversion is bad for a religion. 
Conversion brings about an illegal activity about the land Alienation
Act.  That tribal who gets converted loses the legal rights given to him
by the Constitution as an aboriginal.  It should be made clear in the
Constitution that a man should remain in his own motherfaith (i.e.,
religion by birth).  Not a single man, in my opinion, has been converted
by conviction.  It is a fact that neither the Government nor the public
care for them.  The converts are unable to understand the nature of
religion. I do not personally know the procedure for conversion.  The
fundamental attraction is not conviction. I want that the Committee
should do away with the elements, which lead to conversion by other
methods than conviction. Nothing is being done by the State here. 
Missionaries are doing conversion and preaching at all their centres. 
The number of converts during the last 10 to 15 years in Mandla district
may he taken at about 5 digits (10,000), Rev. Heertum converted some
people by resorting to hunger strike. Shri Chavan was EAC then.  This
may be in about 1942.  In a particular, area near Dhanora this was
done.  I do not know if there are any foreign missionaries in this
district now, because these days I do not go out of the city.

**Shri Sheoprasad Verma:** Secretary Arya Samaj Mandla, read out a
cutting from Navbharat, dated the 24 Jun 1954, and some other
references.  He also said that at Ginwani (Dindori tahsil) conversion
was done under the threat of a gun.  A Police Sub-Inspector enquired
into this and the complaint was found to be false).  Sundersingh and
Gobindsingh of Bijora did not get water from missionary well because
that well is kept locked by missionaries.  This may be a private well,
which is within a compound.  These are no cases of Christian converts
coming back to Hinduism.  There are several sects of Gonds here.  No
attempt was made at reconversion.

**Father Xavier:** The allegations heard by me here appear to be wild. 
I have nothing to say about such allegations.  A reply will be given to
you by our Jabalpur Bishop.  I do not know anything even about the fast
of Rev. Heertum.  There was some conflict started by Father Elwin in
1944.  We started a Normal school in Sijhora that time.  Father Elwin
wanted the school in aboriginal area.  It was not a religious
institution.  The number of converts during the last 10 to 15 years may
be 300 to 400.  The total population of Christians in the district may
be below 1,000.  I am speaking of Catholics.  In recent years there are
few conversions.  We have been working the interior. Villagers are not
so simple as you consider them to be. We do not offer any inducement. 
We belong to a registered company Prefect Apostolic Co. Jab, and one of
the aims of the company is social work, which, includes education also. 
In the schools we do not teach religion.

**Father K. N. Kurian, Gondwana Mission:** In my opinion the
non-Catholic Christian population may be 600 to 700.  From missionary
point of view this is the worst place in the whole world.  The same
society, which works here, works in South India also but the results
here are very poor.  This is most disappointing to us.  We cannot give
up our work because it is difficult.  During 1900-1918 there were 10
missionaries and there must have been at least 20 pracharaks in this
district.  They did a lot of work but the results are not encouraging. 
The defect in their work is that they did not train local leadership,
but they did the work themselves.  Christianity has opposition from the
very beginning.

**Father Xavier:** Comparing the quality of work the result is not
disappointing.  It may be so if only the number is compared.

Vanvasi Sewa Mandal has a school here.

------------------------------

BICHCHWAS

*The 14th November 1954.*

At the outset Shri Malviyaji explained the object of the State
Government in setting up the Committee and introduced the members.

**Shri R. K. Pande:** The district has been utilised by missionaries for
their work because it is mostly inhabited by aboriginals. Children
living in their Ashram are compelled to attend church. Orphans are
rendered help only when they become Christians. They are sent to outside
places where they change their dress, etc.   On return to their places
during holidays, they attract other villagers by their fanciful living.
They are sent to other provinces so that they should not be influenced
by their men here.  Outside people are brought here.  Some teachers were
appointed by them, but when they did not agree to be converted, they
were removed from service.  Only such persons are working here as come
from other provinces.

In the Health Department, sisters and mothers of the Missions visit
houses and attempt to oblige people by rendering free medical advice and
aid.  Some of their agents do Mantra Tantra.  The local people believe
in this.  These agents tell them that Father will drive away the ghost. 
The Father them gurluki mala, (a garland of Gurlu fruit) with a Cross
and they are asked to put it on.  Similarly photos are distributed
freely for worship.  In some Adiwasi house, I have found all these
things.  In one house I found that a picture was given to a tribal by a
Father for daily worship.  There was a poor man with two children.  The
man became ill and there was Mantra tantra.  Medicines were also given,
but he expired.  The children also fell ill and when the mother of she
children was very nervous, Mantra Tantra was done.  But the agents told
her that it was beyond their power and she should go Christian Father
Fathers gave her a mala (garland) and when her children recovered, the
woman wanted to go back.  But the Father said that again the ghosts
would come and so the woman should serve under them and live there.  She
was thus compelled to live there.  This was some time about 13th May
1954.  The Bishop had come at Kurela and I learnt that the children and
mother were converted to Christianity. I questioned them, but they said
that they had not changed their religion.  They simply worship Catholic
Bhagwan.  Financial aid is also given and when repayment is not made in
time, conversion is forced on people.  All servants of the Mission are
compulsorily required to attend the prayers.  I have made enquiries
about this and have come to know that it is a fact.  Advantage is sought
to be taken of the poverty and ignorance of people.  Deori is the place
where Missionaries came first.  Now practically the whole of Deori is
Christianised.  In Sihora there are several persons who do not say that
they are Christians, but they convert others to Christianity and their
caste fellows know it.  One of the agents invited his wife's sister as
guest to his place and then pressed his wife and her sister to go to
Bishop.  The Missionaries themselves do not work so much among the
people.  Their agents are very active.  They say that there is no other
Bhagwan than Catholic Bhagwan, in whom every one should believe. I am a
social worker and do not know any religion.  The Missionaries should
have their head office in cities, and teaching should be entrusted to
Education Branch.  School and church should not be linked together.
Hospitals should be under the Medical Branch separate from church.  They
should be asked to change their methods of service. At present they
pretend to serve but really speaking they attempt to increase their own
number.

I understand that they also tell people through their agents that the
British Government was good and the Congress Government is not doing
anything for the poor people.  This shows that there is some political
motive.

The name of the woman with three children whose case has been quoted by
me already, is Sumatri of Paolina Rewa, jogin by caste.  Names of sons
are Samaru (name not changed), and Meraha (now changed to Joseph) and
daughter Kapuri (now Mariam).  Her husband's name is not known.

In Narharganj a Christian school boy was appointed Forest Guard at Kisli
Jangwani.  Radhelal Pathari’s daughter Pacchabai, aged about 13 to 14,
was given favourable treatment and she was converted by him.  A case was
started against him by Mawai Police station.

Eleven persons have been converted on 13th May 1954. When the Bishop
visited this place.  One Teli from Sihora was harassed by the
Missionaries because he was living in their compound.  An application
was given in this respect to Shankerlal Tiwari, Minister.  Threats are
given of shooting.  I do not know bow far this is true.

Tribal girls from Dindori, aged between 6 to 17, belonging to different
villages, are brought to Kurela for training. When I saw them, they were
about 12 in number.  The girls informed that they are not Christians. I
reported the matter to police to find out whether they had come with
the, consent of their parents.  A report was called by the local Police
from Dindori.  Two Fathers checked the report and it was made known by
Dindori police that there was no truth in the report.

**Christian Father:** In this area we do not use the word Christian. We
call ourselves Catholics to distinguish from Protestants.  The case of
girls training at Kurela is two-years old.  Now I do not know where the
girls are.

**Shri Pande:** In Manegaon, nearly half of the village is Christian. 
They get about Rs. 2 to Rs. 3 per mensem by way of salary for attending
the church every Sunday.  All tribals, poor and lame also, go there. 
Those who are poor and lazy also go.  Father distributes the money.  It
is not given in the form of charity after prayers.  Bhaiyalal Gond
Kastakar of Sukhai receives this sum.  He attends church since the last
4 to 5 years.

**Shri Baredi Bhoi Gond of Mudia Araj (100 miles from here), Janapada
Councillor:** Narsing of Manegaon was outcast about 3 years back but the
Father requested us not to do so.  Anant Singh Bhoi Mukhi was called for
medicine by the Father but was asked to pray before it was given. 
Photos of Jesus (and not of national leaders), are in mission schools. 
They may also be playing some mischief with votes.  Christians were
instructed by Missionaries not to vote at the Janapada election.  The
Fathers visited villages where there are Missions, and also other
villages.  They did not come to my village.

**Shri Himmatsingh Partati of Bichchia of the Vanvasi Sewa Mandal:** I
had cultivation in Chhindwara district when my cattle expired, I was
offered help by Christian Father when I approached him.  I became a
teacher in Mohgaon.  I used to go to Balpur (near Ghassor) to receive
pay.  There was a rule that all should offer prayers at the church
before receiving pay.  After 5 to 6 months they asked me to change my
religion. When I refused, services were terminated.  Some 15 to 20
persons had been converted there.  My mother’s sister’s husband had no
issue.  He was told to become Christian and he converted himself.  The
man has been outcast and thus there is division in our family.  During
my training period, I got opportunity to go to Jashpur in Raigarh
district and visit primary schools at Deori, Sijhora, Kudela, Nandgaon
and Sakwar.  There is Medicine in schools.  In Ghansor side, baptism is
done by sprinkling water on head and a few drops in the mouth.  They
remove the topknot and give a necklace with Cross.  There is difference
in our marriage customs and dress and of the converts.

**Shri Ambikaprasad Shrivastave:** Christian officers indirectly help
Missionaries.  In mouza Soldanda there was some scuffle and a police
report was given by Ramsukh head constable of Mamdla.  D. S. P., Shri
Ross had called these paper, because the Father had seen him and he was
interested in this. Ramsukh was her for about six months.  I have gone
to Sihora several times.  The people have got several things to say, but
they say that if the Padri knows this, he will abuse them.  Missionaries
are adopting political tactics.  One day they may contest and win
elections.  Foreign Missionaries will set up such candidates as will be
in their grip.  They will have their own Ministers and will have greater
foreign contacts.  We are therefore afraid of this impending foreign
sovereignty.

**Shri Hiralal Saraswat, Headmaster, Bhoomijan Indian Middle School,
Sijhora:** Only Catholics of my school go to church and no others.  I am
here since the last 10 years. I am a Brahmin and not a Christian. 
Anandsingh Bhoi’s son Mathulal or Mathusingh does not go to church. I am
secretary of the multi-purpose co-operative society, Sijhora.  The total
capital is Rs. 1,100 and there are about 200 shareholders.  Even
non-Christians are shareholders and members of the working committee. 
Christian Father is the president of the society.  There are 11 members
of the working committee, of whom 3 are Catholics and the remaining
non-Catholics.  The society runs grocery and other shops. My pay is Rs.
110 per mensem.  It in paid by the Mission.  There a re six teachers in
the middle and high school. Of these 5 are Catholics.  There are 40 boys
in the Middle School boarding.  There is no separate arrangement for
Catholics and non-Catholics.  No fees are charged to anyone.  We take
Rs. 2 per year. No grant is received from Government.  There is a girls’
mission school at Kudela and daughters of Catholics go there for
education.  There is no case in my schools of a non-Catholic becoming a
catholic.

**Shri R. K. Pande:** Persons from Ranchi come here as teachers.  The
object is to take them out of the influence of their relatives.

**Shri Solomon Khes, Headmaster, Primary School:** I come from Simdega
sub-division of Ranchi. I am here since 1937 in Sijhora.  I am Christian
from the time of my grandfather.  Three Catholics from Dhanora are
here.  Adult education is also done by me. I do preaching some times. 
There is one more preacher by name Motidas. I receive Rs. 50 per mensem
as total emoluments.  I am a trained teacher of Bihar Board.  I have
passed 7th E.T.G.  I can be promoted as Middle School teacher. I do some
cultivation given by Government under the Grow More Food Scheme.  I do
not know if any body receives pay of Rs. 2 or Rs. 3 per mensem for
attending church as alleged earlier. Non-Catholics some times attend
church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
