+++
title = "27 Replies submitted by the Catholic Sabha of the Raigarh district Replies To the Chairman, Committee of Enquiry into Missionary Activities, Nagpur. Ginabahar, the 24th January 1955."

+++
**Replies submitted by the Catholic Sabha of the Raigarh district
Replies**

To the Chairman, Committee of Enquiry into Missionary Activities,
Nagpur.

Ginabahar, the 24th January 1955.

Herewith I beg to submit the replies of the Catholic Sabha of the
Raigarh district to the Questionnaire issued by your Committee.

<div align="right">

I am,

Yours faithfully,

(Illegible),

President, Catholic Sabha of Raigarh district,   
Ginabahar, Kunkuri P. O.,  
Raigarh district.

</div>

These answers are given by the Committee of the Catholic Sabha,
representing the Catholics of the districts of Raigarh and Surguja, in
pursuance of a resolution passed at their meeting of the 9th January
1954, at Ginabahar.  They refer chiefly to the Jashpur Sub-Division,
where Catholics are numerous.  They relate exclusively to the Catholic
community.

Before we answer to any particular question, we beg leave to make a
query ourselves: “What is the aim of this Questionnaire?”  We ought to
suppose that the members of the Committee desire to ascertain the facts,
and nothing but the facts.  Yet, it seems absolutely evident that these
questions, as they are framed, are calculated to elicit as many
accusations as possible against missionaries and against Christians. 
Are we to surmise that, during their “exploratory tours”, the members of
the Committee have found so little that can damage our reputation that
now they must address themselves to every fanatic, and suggest what
accusations should be made”.

Surely, the members of the Committee are fully aware that such a series
of veiled charges-for often these are not questions, but scarcely veiled
accusations-is a potent means to exacerbate sectarian feeling, and to
incite religious fanatics to lay charges against those whom they
dislike, yes, false charges without number.

With such a method the Committee will find it easy to accumulate a huge
mass of unproven accusations.  Will these be taken as evidence of our
guilt, or as proof of the intolerance of certain communalistic elements?

What renders the case worse is that. on this occasion. the accusers know
quite well that they have the sympathy of the police. of petty
officials, yea, of the Madhya Pradesh Government.

The irrelevancy of many of these questions is glaring; no less glaring
is their anti-Christian bias.  Several of them contain stinging insults
to our priests, and to us, Adivasis.  We can describe them only as
“nasty”.

INTRODUCTORY

1\. What is the total population of Christians and non-Christians-   
(a) Scheduled Castes, (b) Scheduled Tribes, and (c) Others-in your
district in 1947, 1951 and 1954, respectively?

2\. What reasons do you attribute to the rise or fall in the population
as given above?

3\. How many of the present Christian population are born Christians?

Answer: The Census figures of 1951 should provide an answer to this
question.  But these figures have been cooked.  The 1951 Census
enumerates only 9,692 Christians in the Jashpur tahsil, every one knows
there were many more.

The 1931 and 1941 censuses put the number of tribals in the Jashpur
tahsil at 65.9 and 63.9 per cent of the total population, respectively. 
In the 1951 Census, the figure has dropped to 33.7 per cent.

The reasons are not far to seek: simply tampering with the true
figures.  Was this abetted by the Madhya Pradesh Government? Certainly,
the Madhya Pradesh Government based itself on these false figures, when
it had the tribal reserved seat taken away from the Jashpur tahsil.  We
believe that this seat was taken away precisely because Christians are
too numerous on this side.

CONVERSIONS

We shall not answer questions (4) and (5).

6.  What are the organisations in your district engaged in the work of
conversion? Do the agent of these organisations approach the people
individually?.

Answer: These organisations are:-

\(1\) The police and certain officials  
(2) The Adivasi Welfare Department  
(3) The All-India Vaidik Shuddhi Samaj of a certain Swami Ramanuj
Saraswati;  
(4) The Arya Samaj; and  
(5) Certain Christian Missions.

7.  Please give a complete idea of the working of such organizations. 
How are pracharaks recruited, and where do they come from? What are
their emoluments? Are rewards offered for successful work?

Answer: The chief methods of the police and minor officials are force
and fraud, bullying and terrorisation, threats of jail and loss of land
trumping up false court cases against priests and prominent Christians.

The methods of the Adivasi Welfare Department are: attempts at
Hinduizing through schools, giving evidence in court against Christians,
stirring up communal animosity, laying false charges.

The methods of Swami Ramanuj are the spreading of the most shameless
lies in the press and through fly sheets; for instance, that the
Christians are gathering and hiding in the woods, arms and ammunition,
against an eventual rising; frightening poor people into re-conversion
by threats of loss of land; also offering to give land; offering
fabulous salaries to would-be converts to Hinduism.

The methods of the Arya Samaj are known to every one.

The methods of the Christian missionaries are service of the neighbour,
persuasion, never force or fraud.

8.  What, to your knowledge, are the methods used for conversion?  Are
any of the following methods used?:-  
(a) Advancing loans.  If so, what are the terms on which loans are
advanced?  
(b) Promising or providing free medical facilities?  
(c) Giving free education to children?  
(d) Promising help in litigation?  
(e) Promising relief from social disabilities suffered in ancestral
religion or class, and a better social status as Christians?    
(f) Offering employment?  
(g) Holding out hopes of better marriages and greater social freedom?  
(h) Extolling Christianity and foreign culture?  
(i) Threatening danger of damnation to unconverted souls?  
(j) Extolling Jesus Christ and decrying non-Christian deities?  
(k) Holding out hopes of political advantage?  
(l) Threatening social boycott and harassment?  
(m) Other fraudulent and unfair means?

Answer: This question is a monument of perfidious suggestion.

It also implies a complete misunderstanding, of what conversion really
is.

How often, of late, have we heard it said that conversion is a matter of
conviction and of change of heart.  Yes, it is that, for a man’s soul is
his own, and no man can make him believe against his will and internal
assent.

In the course of these answers, we shall have to mention attempts at
forcing people to change their religion, or frightening them into
abandoning their faith.  Such people are victims and not converts.

To us, a convert is a man that truly believes in Jesus Christ and the
Catholic Church will accept no other converts.  And true belief or true
internal conviction has nothing to do with what you dub “methods”.

We beg to point out that what in the first instance induced a man to
enquire, and to give his attention to the Christian message is a
different thing from what finally determines his internal belief.  This
is not a subtle distinction but a plain fact. 

Now suppose, merely for the sake of argument, that any of the things
which you enumerate under (a) to (g) had first attracted a poor enquirer
towards the Christian faith, where would be the crime?  What human law,
what moral or divine law would be, or any one else, have violated?

We desire to draw your special attention to item (e) “promising relief
from social disabilities suffered in ancestral religion and class, and a
better social status as Christians”.

Don’t you think that it is with a very bad grace that you should wax
indignant against us, when we try to escape from the yoke which caste
Hindus have fastened for so many centuries on untouchables and Adivasis.

Surely, we are entitled to try and seek relief from such disabilities. 
And, even now, what do you offer to us, Adivasis? You say that you will
welcome us in the Hindu fold.  We know only too well what rank you will
assign us there.  And then you pretend to be horrified, if we seek
“relief from social disabilities”.

You are at pains to prove that the conversion of the Adivasis to the
Catholic faith is due to certain “methods”, which you deem worthy of
censure.  You imagine, that a host of priests swooped down on us, and
we, “simple” Adivasis, fell victims to the wiles of those designing
individuals.

This is an utter travesty of the true facts.  The truth is that the
preachers of the Catholic faith did not come to us, but that we went to
them.  We ourselves, often at considerable risk, managed to pierce the
iron curtain, which, in the olden days, the rajas had fastened on the
frontiers of their States.  It is more than seventy years ago that some
of our forefathers walked many miles to go and seek the ministers of
Christ across the State boundaries, and besought them to come here.

Again, in the early years of the 20th century, our fathers made several
attempts to induce Catholic priests to come to Jashpur.  Deputation
after deputation was sent to them, but it was only in 1907 that Catholic
priests did come to visit us.  For eight years they had no house to live
in.

You want to believe that schools, hospitals, social uplift work and the
like were “methods” to entice us into Christian fold.  These things came
int6 existence long after we had spontaneously given our adherence to
Christianity.

What were the motives that animated our fathers when they sought
Christ’s ministers? This may or may not be relevant.  But we shall not
deny that the yoke they bore in those days weighed intolerably heavy on
their shoulders, that forced labour and police exactions made their
lives miserable, and that they sorely longed for relief.  But they also
desired to escape from the fear of evil spirits, and sought in
Christianity a purer and a more soul-satisfying religion.

If, through our adherence to the Catholic faith, we have found
deliverance from tyranny, and an improved moral, social and economic
status, that redounds to the honour and glory of the Catholic Church and
of her ministers, not to their discredit.

But what we want to emphasize most emphatically is that we have freely
embraced the Catholic faith, and have entered the Christian fold with
our eyes open.  In our land, the Christian priest is not an intruder,
who surreptitiously, or by force or fraud, stole his way into our
villages.  We ourselves, time and again, have begged and besought him to
come and preach to us the message of Christ.  It may be true that some
of those who held us in bond-age, resented his coming, because they
dreaded lest the Christian faith would make us conscious of our human
dignity, and would teach us to stand up for our rights.  But we,
Adivasis of this land, we did go across the frontiers to call the
Catholic priests, we constrained them to come to us, and we protected
them when their lives were threatened.

There were no “methods” of conversion in your sense; we freely chose to
embrace the Christian religion, just as today, in the face of some
pressure, we freely choose to persevere in that religion.

\(h\) “Extolling Christianity and foreign culture”.

Answer: We strongly protest against this dishonest manner of identifying
Christianity with foreign culture.  Such identification is absolutely
unwarranted.  We are Adivasis and Christians, and we rejoice in our
Indian culture.  No one has ever extolled to us foreign culture.

\(i\) “Extolling Jesus Christ and decrying non-Christian deities”.

Answer: The question is unfairly put.  We do extol Jesus Christ, for
with all true Christians, we believe that He is the Son of God made Man
and very God Himself, and we do not believe in non-Christian deities.

But we do not “decry” such deities.  The question seems to insinuate
that we, or our priests, go about the street and hurt the feelings of
other people by insulting their “deities”.  The respect every man’s
honest belief, and do our best to give pain to no one.

We cannot say that the propagators of Hinduism in these parts do show
the same respect for our honest convictions.

\(j\) “Threatening danger of eternal damnation to unconverted souls”.

Answer: It is rather funny that this helfire business should interest
the Committee.  It holds a very small place in the mind of the
Christians. We have never yet come across a priest that went about
threatening eternal damnation to any one.  Such threats exist only in
the minds of the enemies of Christianity.  The Christian message is one
of love and not of damnation.

But, if the Committee really wish to know what is the Catholic doctrine
in the matter, here it is for their edification: however, we would
insist that, though we hold these things very firmly, we are not in the
habit of shouting them on the housetops to every passer-by.

We hold that liars, thieves, murderers, swearers of false oaths,
adulterers, oppressors of the poor, destroyers of the good name of
others, and such like people, unless they repent with their whole heart,
and crave the divine forgiveness, are not worthy of eternal bliss, but
rather deserve eternal punishment.

But please notice, we do not say that they shall be damned.  We believe
in God’s grace and in the mercy of Christ, who can change the sinner’s
heart.  To God alone, so we think, it belongs to determine an immortal
soul's eternal fate.

No sane Christian has ever said that all Hindus or all non-Christians go
to hell.  What we hold and believe is that all those, who sincerely
follow their conscience, shall receive God’s reward; that all those,
who, knowing the truth, refuse to follow it, deserve the divine
chastisement.

That, to our way of thinking, is fairly reasonable, and, we do not see
why any one should take offence at it.

\(k\) “Holding out hopes of political advantages”.

Answer: The questioner is blest with a remarkable imagination, if fie
honestly fancies that a tiny minority, the object of so much obloquy and
slander, can promise political advantages to its adherents.  It is the
other way about.

\(l\) “Threatening social boycott and harassment”.

Answer: The members of the Committee cannot be unaware that the shoe is
on the other foot. It is we that are threatened with harassment, and
would to God there was merely a question of threats.  The harassments
are real.  Being dragged to the courts on false charges, losing one’s
lands, being bullied by the police, losing one’s employment through
which one earned one’s daily bread, these are not only threats,

It is the Madhya Pradesh Government that proposed that we, because we
are Christians, stall no longer be regarded as Tribals.  This is not
boycott, perhaps? The same Government recently issued a circular,
reminding us of their decision that members of backward classes, who
have become Christians, shall be denied scholarships and other favours
to which backward classes are entitled.  Is this boycott?  It is not
irony, it is barefaced impertinence to ask whether we Christians
threaten other people with boycott and harassment, when we are made to
suffer these things every day.

How many literate people (persons of the matriculation standard and
above), and how many well-to-do people (persons with an annual income of
Rs. 1,000 and above) have been converted in your district since 1947?

Answer: We look on this question as outrageous.  Does it imply that only
matriculates and persons with an income of Rs. 1,000 and above are
entitled to choose their religion, and are they alone to enjoy freedom
of conscience?  We have more respect for the dignity that belongs to
every human being.

We desire to remind the members of the Committee of the fact that,
before we embraced the Catholic faith, there were no matriculates in
this part of the country.  It is due to the devoted labours of our
priests and nuns, and to our own determination to raise ourselves, that
some of us are matriculates now, and B.A.’s also.

But it has become the fashion for some people even for Ministers of the
Madhya Pradesh Government, to tell us that we simple Adivasis, are not
fit to choose a religion; and, therefore, we have not the right to
embrace the Catholic faith.

If that is their honest persuasion, let them be consequent with
themselves, and let them prevent the Arya Samaj, the police, the Welfare
Department and others from stampeding us into Hinduism.  And by what
“methods”?

Whatever you may say, during all these centuries, we, Adivasis, have
stayed out of the Hindu fold-you know very well that we do not worship
the cow-and for us to become Hindus is just as much a conversion as it
is to become Christians.  If you are sincere, please do put a stop to
all this noisy and violent Hindu propaganda.

The Constitution has given us political rights.  We have the franchise
and may cast our vote, even our womenfolk.  So you admit that we have
reached a degree of political maturity, and that we know what is good
for us and for our country.  But, in the matter of religion, which
concerns us most intimately, we are to remain your wards, we are to
profess the religion that you design to choose for us.

Many cultured Hindus, possibly some of the members of this Committee, do
us, Adivasis, the grievous wrong of regarding us as sub-human.  This we
fiercely resent.

It is true that, for centuries, we have been backward and have suffered
oppression.  At whose hands, we need not say.  But we are human beings,
and we can judge what is good for us, in matters both temporal and
spiritual.  We are not infants.  We want to be free; free to lead our
lives as we choose: free to enjoy our fields and the fruit of our
labours; free from the bullyings of the police, and the landlords, and
the petty officials, and the rajas; free also to profess the religion of
our choice.

We never were Hindus, and if we do not choose to become Hindus, you have
no right to penalize us; and, if we choose to become Christians, we do
no more than use a right, that belongs to all human beings, and that is
solemnly guaranteed in the Constitution' of our country-for this is our
country as much as it is yours.

We would tell the members of the Committee the story of a convert who
was not a matriculate, nor did he have an income of Rs. 1,000 or above. 
He was a “simple” man, with plenty of common sense, and he had become a
Christian when of mature age. The police were very zealous in their
attempts at re-converting him, but both threats and cajolings proved
vain.  Finally an official tried to argue:

“Why be a Christian”, he said. “Your priests give you schools for your
children and assistance in your troubles.  The Government is far more
powerful, it will give you better schools and loans on easy terms, and
many more things………”.

The “simple” man answered: “Yes, I have heard these promises often, but
I see nothing coming.  Let that be.  What we want is to save our souls. 
Even if the Government gave us what you promise, would it save our
souls?”

The official’s answer was a volley of abuse.  But abuse is not
argument.  The old man knew what he was about, and he had the better of
the official, who possibly was a passed or a failed matric, and had an
income of Rs. 1,000 per annum and above.

11\. Do you think that conversion to Christianity adversely affects the
national loyalty and outlook of converts. Give instances and state
reasons.

Answer: This question is unjust, and offensive, extremely so.  The
present Prime Minister of India, many a time and, recently, in a
gracious message addressed to a large Catholic gathering at Bombay,
declared that we Christians are part and parcel of the Indian nation, as
much as Hindus, and Muslims, and Sikhs and others.  But the members of
this Committee will suspect us of disloyalty, and they invite
accusations-slanderous accusations -against us.

This is cruel and unjust.

We can only say that we are Indians, that we love our land and our
nation, that we have no other country, that we have not the slightest
connection with any other country.  By what right can Hindus claim the
monopoly of loyalty to the motherland?

In view of the fact that our sons and brothers are doing, and for years
have done, loyal service in the India army, the suggestion is simply
slanderous and mischievous,

12\. Where does Christian preaching with a view to conversion usually
take place? Do you know of this being done in any of the following:-(a)
Houses of individuals and mukhyas in villages, (b) schools, (c)
hospitals, (d) orphanages and other charitable institutions, (e) bazars,
(f) fairs, (g) churches, (h) any other places?

Answer: Does such a question really deserve an answer?  Does the
constitution forbid the preaching of religion in any of the places
mentioned? If anyone can prove that we disturb the peace, or go out of
our way to hurt the feelings of others, let him do so.

But the Committee may be interested in the following edifying details
about the preaching of, Hinduism in this district.

Boko Sardar, who under the spiritual guidance of Swami Ramanuja
Saraswati, is a very zealous propagator of Hinduism, at Tangergaon
entered the Catholic village chapel, and to persuade the people of the
superiority of his creed, defiled the chapel by urinating in it all
round the walls.

The same Boko, with a party of Hindus, entered another Catholic village
chapel, and there sang kirtans.

During the Janpad election campaign, end of 1953, the Ram Rajya
Parishad, on the pretext of political propaganda, in several bazars of
this Sub-division, poured forth the foulest insults and calumnies
against the Catholic religion and its ministers.

And the next question asks whether “such preaching” offended the
religious sensibilities of people.  Yes, we were offended, and
grievously so.  Boko’s kirtan exploit is before the court, but not his
feat at Tangergaon.

13\. Has such preaching offended the sensibilities of people of other
religions? If so, has it resulted in unpleasant consequences?

Answer: We suggest that the question is not fairly put.  The question
ought to ask whether the Christian faith was preached in such a manner
that people had a right to be offended.  But this is assumed.  You
object to all, preaching, do you?

That communalists and fanatics and people who object to the granting of
freedom of conscience to anyone but themselves, have taken offence, may
be true enough.

But who is to blame for that?  Is it those that simply use a
constitutional right, or those that would deny other people the freedom
sanctioned by the law of the land? Why blame us for the intolerant
spirit displayed by others?

If there have been unpleasant consequences, the blame does not lie at
our door, but at the door of a bunch of religious fanatics.  And it is
unbeseeming that the Committee should appear to encourage those people
in their attempts at bringing about “unpleasant consequences”.

14\. Do foreign missionaries also use such Language, or is it only
Indian Pracharaks?

Answer: We are not aware that any Catholic preacher, whether Indian or
non-Indian, ever used language that could give offence.  But we must
once again tell the Committee that the shoe is on the other foot.  It is
Swami Ramanuj Saraswati, Boko Sardar, the speakers of the Ram Rajya
Parishad, who specialize in vile abuse of the Catholic religion.

15 to 20 These questions deal with pracharaks and are not very relevant.

Answer: The salaries of pracharaks are very small, far smaller than are
offered to Hindu pracharaks in these parts.  For instance, at Lureg,
there is a Catholic pracharak, whose salary is probably below Rs. 30 Per
month.  He was offered Rs. 200 per month, with a bicycle into the
bargain, if he would renounce his faith and turn Hindu pracharak.

As far as we know, it is not the custom to give special rewards “for the
successful propagation of the faith”.  But if the Committee intend
making a suggestion, we agree that it is a sound one, and we will ask
our priests seriously to consider it.

There seems to be confusion about the term “pracharak”.  With us. 
Catholics, the word has a fairly broad meaning.  Generally, it
designates a village leader, whose task it is to gather the Catholics on
Sundays for a religious service and common prayer.  He is an ordinary
villager, possibly more intelligent than the rest, but without special
training.  He has been chosen for his moral standing in the community
and for his qualities of leadership.  His salary is nil, but, at times,
he receives Rs. 3 per month as travelling allowance.

There are very few pracharaks that are whole-time religious workers,
probably, not ten in the entire Jashpur Sub-Division.  These men have
received some training in religious knowledge.  It is their duty to
teach prayers and religion to children, and to be of general assistance
to the parish Frequently, they know the elements of medicine, and, thus,
can render much service to Christians and to non-Christians in a
country, where medical relief hardly exists.  Their salary is rarely
above Rs. 30 per month, if it is as high as that.

As to religious literature, it should be obvious to the Committee that
printed matter is fairly unimportant in an area, where illiteracy is the
rule, and literacy the exception.  We have our prayer books, hymn books,
bibles, catechisms, which can be had in bookshops anywhere.

21\. Do you know of cases where patients or school children were refused
help at critical stages, unless they got themselves converted?  If so,
mention names of individuals and institutions concerned.

Answer: This question, as so many others in this Questionnaire, is an
echo of slanders spread by fanatics.  We regard it as deeply offensive
and as a stinging insult.

No such accusation has ever been proved, nor had we heard it before
these days when communal passions have been aroused.

But here is a true case for the Committee’s consideration.

The members of the Committee have visited the little Catholic Hospital
of Muskutri, right away in the jungle.  Latterly, the Circle inspector
of the Adivasi Welfare Department of Sanna, sent an accusation to his
headquarters at Nagpur, stating that the Sister and the Father at
Muskutri had refused treatment to a woman, mauled by a tiger, unless the
husband and the victim agreed to become Christians.  The man and the
woman, so ran the story, refused.  The victim was taken away and died.

The Deputy Commissioner of Raigarh ordered an investigation.  On the day
before the Sub-Divisional Officer of Police arrived, before the enquiry,
the daroga, so it would seem, summoned the husband and another man, kept
them confined the whole night, and, with the usual threats and
cajolements, tried to induce them to accuse the Father and the Sister. 
These men said, “ji, han” to every suggestion of the policeman, but, the
next morning, they spoke the truth, and so the whole thing collapsed.

We have not heard that the Circle Officer, responsible for this slander,
has in any way been reprimanded or punished for the grave wrong he had
done.  Indeed, why speak of punishment? He had done what some people
expected him to do.  But this time the vile trick failed. 

22\. Are fairs held by Christians……?

Answer: We do not know about any fairs.  But, on certain occasions, we
do meet in large numbers, for instance, for processions or at Christmas
and Easter for solemn religious services, all in the church grounds. 
Oil such occasions, we pray, together and sing our hymns, and, perhaps,
listen to a sermon.

After the religious exercises there may be drumming and dances, and
merry-making.  These things used to offend no one, and they can offend
only such, as object to our very existence.

Latterly, we have noticed that, on such occasions, the police patrol the
church grounds.  Whether they have reported anything very treasonable we
do not know.

23\. Do missionaries and pracharaks make reference to the Central and
the State Governments in India or to foreign Governments? If so, what is
the nature of such references?  Please give specific instances.

Answer: Neither our priests, nor our pracharaks, nor we ourselves bother
our heads about foreign governments.  This question is simply the echo
of a stupid slander.

Do the Committee wish to know whether we and our priests have the
audacity of criticising the Government? Such criticism may be a criminal
offence in Russia, but it is generally regarded as a democratic right in
civilised countries, and is certainly generously indulged in here in
India.

The Fathers and Sisters are not addicted to criticising the Government
of India, that is not their line.  But it is quite possible that they
have expressed on more than one occasion their dissatisfaction with the
ways of the Madhya Pradesh Government.  If the think and say that the
Madhya Pradesh Government does not treat, Christians justly, then they
have said no more than we do say ourselves.

Surely, the very Ministers of Madhya Pradesh Government will not pretend
that it is just to refuse recognition to all our primary schools.  Right
or wrong, the Chief Minister simply says, “I will not recognise them”. 
When the question of appealing to our constitutional right in regard to
our schools was mooted, a good Government officer put it this way: “Do
not appeal to that.  If a person is married with a bad wife, he must
live with her……”  The implication is clear.

Does the Questionnaire want to imply that our priests foster disloyalty
by comparing the Indian Government to certain foreign Governments?

In that case, the answer is, that no one has ever heard them making such
comparisons.  Neither they nor we are interested in foreign Governments.

24\. Are there non-Christian agencies in your district encased in the
work of re-conversion?  If so, please name them.  What are their methods
and what success do they meet with?  Do they offer any inducements?  If
so, what?

Answer: This repeats questions 6 and 7.

Non-Christian agencies:

\(1\) The police and certain officials;  
(2) The Adivasi Welfare Department;  
(3) The All-India Vaidik Shuddhi Samaj of Swami Ramanuj Saraswati,
helped by a certain Boko Sardar, and Shri R. K. Deshpande, Pleader,
under the auspices of the Ram Rajya Parishad; and  
(4) The Arya Samaj.

Their methods: -

\(1\) The police display great zeal in trumping up false cases against
priests and prominent Christians.  And, whenever it is rumoured that a
person contemplates becoming a Christian, the police are on the spot to
“enquire”-as if a person's religion were the business of the police!
Police enquiries may be very disagreeable to the persons concerned.

One method of the police is to catch hold of people, confine them in
some room, till they “freely” sign some document, or agree to inculpate
a priest or a Christian. Thus, in the case of Muskutri, already
mentioned; also in the Lodma Theatrical Case, which we shall mention
later; also in the Kunkuri Buffalo Case, which can be briefly stated
thus:

Next to the Catholic High School, lay a wounded buffalo.  The school had
absolutely nothing to do with the matter.  The owner of the animal and
some people of his village were summoned to Kunkuri, illegally confined,
and pressed by the daroga to sign a paper that the fault lay with the
Fathers of Kunkuri.  As usual, these men were not even allowed to go out
to satisfy a call of nature.  Yet, the trick failed.

At present, several cases are pending before the courts, in which the
police have displayed great zeal.  During the previous fifty years,
there had just been three cases instituted against priests, and, in all
the three, the verdict was “not guilty”.  But, now, all of a sudden our
priests have become a criminal tribe, guilty of the gravest offences,
even threat of murder.

Ever sane man in the district knows that the aim is to destroy the
prestige of good man.  The attempt is stupid, because Christians and
non-Christians alike, know the true facts.  They imagine that, if they
can get a priest in jail, especially a European priest, there will he an
end, to the Christian religion.  Such attempts at besmirching the good
name of our priests can hurt only the slanderers.

Perhaps, it may interest the Committee, if we try to trace the origin of
this unholy police campaign, and of these attempts to paint our priests
as criminals.  In 1952, or in the beginning of 1953 the Madhya Pradesh
Government sent to the Central Government a report filled with the
wildest accusations against missionaries.  This report seems to have
occasioned the now notorious, pronouncement of Dr. Katju in the Lok
Sabha, a pronouncement that caused a great intensification of the
anti-Christian press campaign.

In the course of time, the charges made by the Madhya Pradesh Government
were duly answered, and so, this Government had now to substantiate its
accusations.  Shall we be rash if we surmise that local officers were
commissioned to do this job? At all events, at the end of May and in the
beginning of June, the then Deputy Commissioner of Raigarh, undertook a
tour in these parts, and, strange to say, exactly following his trail
arose a series of trumped-up charges against priests and Christians.  A
hint (or was it more than a him?), received from higher up, supplies a
ready explanation for the sudden outburst of zeal on the part of the
police and of the employees of the Adivasi Welfare Department.

We may add that this very Deputy Commissioner demeaned himself to
browbeating in person a poor Ahir widow and her grandchildren, who had
become Christians.  This case was laid before the Committee in June.

(2)  The methods of the Adivasi Welfare Department. - It is openly
admitted that the Adivasi Schools are Hindu and hinduizing schools. 
Little Budhu Tigga is entered as Budhu Ram, and this is proof that he is
a Hindu.

Teachers and officers of the Welfare Department seem to specialize in
laying charges and giving evidence in the courts against priests and
Christians.  They also are active in stirring up communal feeling; the
following incident took place at Saraitoli recently :-

The Catholic Mission had acquired a plot of land.  The Welfare Circle
Organizer of Sanna, at five in the morning and in pouring rain, led a
party of pupils of the Adivasi School to do puja and erect a devasthan
on a strip of waste land right in the midst of the church ground.

Naturally the Christians protested.  Every one in the place is well
aware that there had never existed a devasthan on that spot.  But the
Circle Organizer, abetted by the police and by Mr. V. Joshi,
Sub-Divisional Officer, pretend it is old devasthan and so the fat is in
the fire.

\(3\) The methods of Swami Ramanuj Saraswati, Boko Sardar and R. K.
Deshpande and consorts are of particular interest.

Swami Ramanuj is a sadhu, who is said to have good reasons for not
showing himself in Orissa.  In this State be specializes in giving
“press conferences” at Nagpur, where lie “reveals” the monstrous crimes
of the missionaries, and implores the Government to protect the safety
of the State against the dark schemes of these plotters.  He gets a
certain class of Newspapers to print that these wicked men are
accumulating weapons and ammunition in view of an eventual rising, that
is, to establish Christiansthan, on the model of Pakisthan.  India faces
the danger of another division.

A couple of months ago, the Sadhu discovered that the Dutch Ambassador
had paid a visit to the Lureg Church, and speeches were made there and
Swami Ramanuj knew who were the speakers and what they bad said, and he
revealed it all for publication in the Hitavada, a paper that seems
always ready to print his slanders.  Unhappily a little later the
Hitavada had to eat its words and had to publish that no Dutch
Ambassador had been within a thousand miles of Lurek.  So then all the
reasonable things, which the Sadhu had “revealed”, were not spoken after
all, and, possibly, were fabricated by Swami Ramanuj.

This holy man has, as his helper here in Jashpur, a man that goes by the
name of Boko Sardar, and that is said to be a son of the late
grandfather of the ex-ruler.  Boko is certainly an ex-convict and has
served a long term in jail for attempting to murder two Catholic
priests.  And he is said to be generally drunk.  He, with the Swami,
will drive into a village in a jeep; there, he will widely rush about,
dagger in hand, and utter fierce threats. Then some people are got hold
of, and Boko pours forth a flood of abuse against the Catholic priest
and the Catholic faith; he threatens the poor men with loss of their
lands and he will even seize them by the throat, so much so, that, on
one occasion, even the Sadhu is said to have remonstrated against these,
all too strenuous, ways of imparting religious instruction.

Finally, the men are made to set their thumb impression to a paper which
states that they “freely renounce Christianity”.  We are told that the
Swami also tells these men, before they give their thumb impression,
that they are acting absolutely freely.

Then their heads are shaven, a little “chundi” being left; they are
given a Hindu name and their conversion is complete.  Certainly the
period of probation and instruction has not been unduly protracted.

As to threats of loss of land we may say that certain Christians used to
have on lease land that belonged to the ex-ruler.  Boko is the manager
of these fields, which have been taken away from the Christians and let
out to non-Christians.  We are told that we have no right to complain,
because the raja can let his lands to whomsoever he pleases.  And that
is said by people that grow so vocal about “baits”.  Also, a few
Christians held the little job of raja’s bhandari (storekeeper at the
Barns). We know at least of one case where the man was dismissed after
lie had refused to rum Hindu; and we believe that several have lost
their jobs for the same reason.

You ask how many were thus re-converted.  We know of some sixty, and not
one of these was a matriculate or had an income of Rs. 1,000 per annum. 
Or do you advocate that standard only when there is question of
conversion to Christianity?  Of these sixty men, thus freely converted
to Hinduism, three have persevered and have been given lands.  All the
others, practically at once after their “re-conversion”, expressed
regret for an act of weakness done under duress, and offered to repair
their fault.

Perhaps we may tell you about one case that has a special interest. 
Swami Ramanuj and Boko had been operating at Tangergaon 'm the manner
described above, and had made a little bunch of converts.  Their heads
had been shaven and they had received a Hindu name, and their fields
would not be confiscated, and they would be rewarded with more lands,
and all the rest.  Unhappily, though these conversions were absolutely
free and the outcome of a change of heart, by no means the result of
force and fraud as when people become Christians, the converts did not
persevere on the road they had taken with such enthusiasm.  Among them
was a certain Victor.  Like the rest he was rather ashamed of himself
and regretted having yielded to threats.  After making pubic reparation
he went to another village, with the perfectly legitimate object of
escaping the further attentions of the Swami and of Boko.  Soon after,
he enlisted in a labour gang for service outside the State.

At Tangergaon every one was perfectly aware of these facts and knew the
man’s whereabouts.  Possibly, the police did not know; at any rate,
several times the police came along and tried to persuade Victor’s wife
to lodge a complaint against the Fathers for kidnapping her husband.

The poor woman did not take the bait, but the case was too manifestly a
foul crime perpetrated by the Father, that it could not be left
unnoticed.  A while ago the Hitavada of Nagpur carried the following
piece of information: “In the village of Tangergaon a certain Mr. Victor
had disappeared. (For the occasion the paper “mistered” him).  He had
recently been converted to Hinduism and had been given a Hindu name. 
There is strong suspicion that the missionaries have kidnapped him……”

We beg the Committee to bear with us if we give them still more ample
information concerning the methods of re-converting Christians.

At Lureg and Patthalgaon the Swami has at his disposal the Hindu Dharm
Raksa Dal; the Arya Samaj and the Hindu Mahasabha also seem to flourish
in these places.  Here one way is to organize morchas against the
Christians, and to shout “Down with the Christian religion”, “Clear
out”, “Go to Pakisthan”, “No room for you in India”……

At Lureg, on the 25th July 1954, a prominent Christian was murdered in a
particularly brutal manner, and it is widely surmised that
anti-Christian hatred was one of the incentives to the crime.

Some time after the murder, there was a morcha, and a small group of
excited people went and shouted slogans in front of the houses of the
Christians, and, in particular, before the house of the bereaved widow. 
And one of the leaders of the group was a man whom the entire
neighbourhood suspects of being the instigator of the deed.

A piquant details: whilst this murder case is before the sessions, a
complaint is lodged against the priest of Lureg and his catechist for
having

incited people to murder a certain Hindu.  These people really overshoot
the mark: if at least they had sense enough to accuse us of things that
have some grain of probability!

At Lureg, the Swami uses as catechist a certain H. Siddiqui, who is, or
was, a Muslim.  Years ago, he was daroga in the Jashpur State, which he
left very suddenly for reasons best known to himself.  This zealous
preacher of Hinduism, on one occasion, went to a Christian tola, and
using the methods his police carrier has made him familiar with,
re-converted several householders, securing their thumb impressions to
some sort of paper, by which they were supposed to renounce the
Christian faith and to profess, in all freedom, that they were Hindus. 
The next day they all recanted.

The gram panchayat of Lureg also seems zealous in the cause of
reconversion.  It offered Carolus, the Catholic pracharak, a salary of
Rs. 200 per month, plus a bicycle, if he would serve as Hindu pracharak.

\(4\) About the methods of the Arya Samaj it is not necessary to speak. 
The Committee should know them.

SOCIAL RELATIONS

25\. Have the relations between Christians and non-Christians, in your
district, deteriorated in any way since 1947? Do you apprehend any
breach of the peace because of this?

Answer: Relations between tribal non-Christians and tribal Christians
have always been cordial, and, on the whole, still are so, though
communal minded agitators have tried hard to sow discord.  Relations
between Hindus on the one side, and our priests and Christians on the
other side, always were and still are normal, though, here, the effects
of the unrestrained press campaign against us, and of the slanders of
some fanatics may at times be visible.

It is true that a very small knot of communalists is highly excited.  On
our part, there is no danger of breach of the peace.  Is there danger
lest the other side indulge in violence?  That is not for us to say.  We
believe it is the duty of Government to compel would be law-breakers to
keep the peace.

We wonder why the Committee do not ask for the reasons of such
deterioration.  These reasons seem to be:

\(1\) The violent anti-Christian propaganda of the Ram Rajya Parishad at
the time of the Janapada elections.  We think that, here, Mr. Deshpande
deserves blame. He has been rewarded by being made public prosecutor in
court cases against Christian priests.

\(2\) The-bitterness of the Arya Samaj in certain places.

\(3\) The abusive campaign and the slanders and lies spread by Swami
Ramanuj Saraswati.

\(4\) The violent press campaign against missionaries and Christians,
which appears to have the approval of the Madhya Pradesh Government.

\(5\) The utterances of certain Ministers on tour in these parts.  In
October 1953 a Madhya Pradesh Minister made a violent attack against
missionaries, in a speech at the Loyola High School, Kunkuri in the
presence of the Bishop.  And quite recently Shri Monloy, went out of his
way at a Kunkuri public meeting to say that the Dutch Ambassador had
been received by us with more honour than would have been shown to Mr.
Nehru.  And this was said after the Hitavada had retracted its lie about
the alleged visit of this ambassador.  And he publicly stated that it
was wrong that aboriginals should become converts to Christianity.

\(6\) The very appointment of your Committee, and this Committee’s
strange procedure, its method of calling for public accusations, which
are not sifted.

\(7\) This questionnaire, with its blatant anti-Christian, bias, calling
on every fanatic to pour forth his venom against those he dislikes.

26\. Have there been cases of social boycott by Christians against
non-Christians, or vice versa, in your District?

Answer: Christians are not in the habit of boycotting anyone.  And when
we are boycotted, we generally take it patiently.  But we find it
preposterous that the charge of boycotting should be levelled against
us, when the real boycotters ought to be well-known to the Committee.

27\. Are there any political parties, or other parties of a quasi
political and religious character in your district, whose office-bearers
are Christians?

Answer: There is only one party here of a quasi religious and political
character, and that is the Ram Rajya Parishad.  Surely you don’t expect
Christians in that party.

But we would like to know what harm there would be in Christians being
members, or even office-bearers, in a political party.  Are we citizens
of this land or are we not? Or do the members of this Committee share
the feelings of Swami Ramanuj Saraswati and of the ex-ruler of Surguja
who expressed their undiluted horror at the fact that, in far away
Travancore-Cochin, a Christian happened to be Chief Minister in the
State Congress Government! O horror!  A Christian Chief Minister in this
Bharat of ours!

28\. Are such office-bearers given directions and advice by foreign
missionaries?

Answer: Our priests do not meddle in politics.

29\. Do you know of instances of foreign missionaries taking part in
activities other than religious and social?

Answer: However hard you may try, and whatever insinuations you may
throw out, you will not prove a single case of interference in politics.

30\. What was the attitude of Government servants towards complaints
made by Christians against non-Christians and vice-versa? Do Government
servants harass Christians or non-Christians for following their
particular religion? State instances, if any.

Answer: Boko Sardar assaulted a Christian and threatened to kill him
unless there and then he turned Hindu.  The police refused even to write
the matter in the diary.

Boko Sardar desecrated a Christian village chapel by urinating in it. 
The matter was reported to the police-also to your Committee-but no
action has been taken.  The incident took place at Tangergaon.

Boko Sardar entered a Christian village chapel with a party of Hindus
and sang kirtans there.  This case, after much delay, has been taken up
by the police.

At present several trumped-up cases against priests and prominent
Christians are pending before the courts.

The rapidity with which the false charge against the Muskutri hospital
was taken up, and the efforts of the daroga to make the people accuse
the priest and the Sister, are edifying.

The frantic efforts of the Narayanpur daroga to make the actors of Lodma
(see answer to qst. 90), the owner of the Kunkuri buffalo, accuse the
priest are equally revealing.

A group of people approached Mr. V. Joshi, S.-D. O. of Jashpur to
complain against a patwari.  He asked: “Are you Christian?” The answer
was “Yes”.  Without more ado the case was dismissed.

On another occasion a group of people lodge a complaint before the same
person.  He orders the Christians to stand on one side and the
non-Christians on the other.  The Christians were the majority, and
without further enquiry their request is rejected.  Then the
non-Christians, together with one or two Christians, lodge the same
complaint, and this time it is entertained.

Mr. Naidu at Jashpurnagar had to enquire into a complaint about bribe
taking.  His statement begins thus.  The remarkable thing about this
case is that the three complainants are Christians…… And without any
proof this judicial-minded person concludes that the complaint has been
instigated by missionaries.

We have not the faintest doubt in our minds that the police are in
collusion with the fanatics that bring false accusations against
Christians.

We may still mention the ways of Mr. V. Joshi, S. D. O. A Father and two
Christians of Sanna are accused.  They are made to appear before him
twenty-two times, and the case has not yet been started: each time
“postponed”.  And these poor men have to travel a whole day to reach
Jashpurnagar, to stay one day there waiting during long hours, and then
to trudge it back for another day.  Is this criminal harassment or is it
not?

Another priest, similarly accused, had to appear thirty-four times.  Is
this harassment?

31\. What is the percentage of Christians and non-Christians in any
political organisation that you know in your district?

Answer: What on earth can this have to do with the terms of reference of
this Committee?

We, Christians, are citizens; we have the franchise, and we are entitled
to join any political party.  Isn’t there a Christian minister in the
Delhi Government at this moment? Was the first Finance Minister of free
India not a Christian?

But we are not so “simple” as not to see what the Committee are driving
at.

You are thinking of Jharkhand.  Then here are the facts :-

\(1\) In this district the Jharkhand party is not organised, and
certainly, we, Catholics, have nothing to do with it so far.

\(2\) However, loudly certain politicians may rave against Jharkhand
party, it is evident that, this is not an illegal party.  We insist that
we are not members of it; but, if we were members, no one could make
that a matter of reproach against us.  Did not the Chief Minister of
Madhya Pradesh, for reasons of his own, try to make the Scheduled Tribes
agitate for a Gondwana State?  How does that differ from Jharkhand ?

\(3\) Our Bishop has consistently forbidden all his priests to busy
themselves with politics; and that order has been, and is being, loyally
obeyed.

\(4\) But we, Catholic laymen of Jashpur, we desire to tell you this;
and we solemnly declare that, in speaking, thus, we are not prompted by
our priests:

Police oppression and harassment of Christians and of non-Christians
must ultimately drive us into opposition to Government.  There is a
limit even to the patience of Adivasis, Christians and non-Christians. 
People that have to endure what we endure must be tempted to seek relief
where it is offered.

And we are utterly tired of this parrot-like repetition of the slander
that our priests meddle in politics.  If a cat has nine lives, this
slander has ninety-nine, and more.  It is incomprehensible how people,
to whom we would give credit for honesty, will go on mouthing this piece
of calumny.

And, now, Swami Ramanuj Saraswati has found even better: we are storing
up ammunition in view of a future rising, and he knows where we are
hiding our stocks.  And he beseeches a supine Government to take action
and save the country before it is too late.

This slander is not in the questionnaire: it was invented after the
questionnaire had been circulated.  Otherwise……

32\. Have conversions to Christianity brought about any betterment in
the standards of living of the Scheduled Castes and of the Scheduled
Tribes?

Answer : The Committee might as well enquire whether irrigation has
contributed to the progress of agriculture.  If the committee are really
in doubt about the facts, let them come here and see; or let them read
the books of Sarat Chandra Roy about the Mundas, the Oraons and other
tribes.

But the questioner probably did have a purpose in proposing this query.
If we reply that Christianity has contributed enormously to our temporal
welfare-and that is a fact denied by no one-then we stand condemned as
rice-Christians, and the missionaries have offered us baits; if we say
that there has been no improvement (and that would be false) then
Christianity has failed.  And so we are wrong in any case.

33\. Have you noticed any improvement in the moral level of converts to
Christianity?

Answer: Is such a question really fair and relevant?

Yet, we will reply.  The first commandment of our Christian faith is
that we love God above all; and the second, like unto the first, that we
love the neighbour as ourselves.  We are taught that we are all God’s
children and, therefore, brothers; that we may not despise any man as
unclean or untouchable.  Our faith bids us not to steal, nor to lie, nor
bear false witness, nor oppress the weak, nor kill, nor harbour foul
thoughts, nor do unclean things.

This is our Christian moral code.  We are but frail human beings, and it
is possible that, at times, we fail to walk according to Our Divine
Lord’s precepts.  But that is our ideal.

We are not in the habit of comparing ourselves with our non-Christian
neighbours; nor do we ask ourselves whether, now, we are better than
when we walked in fear of spirits, and had not yet learnt God’s law God
alone shall judge us and our neighbours.

But we would be very curious to know what answer the police and certain
officials have returned to this question.  We expect that the police,
with sorrow, testifies that conversion to Christianity has caused grave
moral deterioration.  For, since we are Christians, we have received
some education, and we often refuse to pay bribes, and we dare assert
our rights.  Surely the police must find that we have grown very bad!

Will a little story in this connection interest the committee? A daroga
in tribal territory was fairly friendly with a Catholic priest.

One day the man of the law said: “Well, Father, real friends we can
never be.  Your presence here means to me a loss of Rs. 700 per month”.

We have more than a mere suspicion that the zeal of the police to get
our priests out of this district has something to do with their illegal
emoluments.  And many a petty “servant of the public” must feel the same
grievance against us.  Mere Adivasis daring to refuse bribes to them! 
How bad they have grown of late!

34\. Do you know any cases of missionaries destroying or desecrating
non-Christian places of worship or burial grounds.  Please state
specific instances, if any.

Answer: No, most emphatically. If we did such things the zeal of the
police would have some scope.  But the case of Boko Sardar, urinating in
the Catholic village chapel of Tangergaon, has been mentioned already;
also his entering into a village chapel to sing kirtan, and thus
exasperating the villagers.

Why do the Committee, by way of questioning, suggest that we are guilty
of this heinous offence? They might as well ask about all the other
crimes listed in the Criminal Code.

35\. What were the consequences of such acts in the relations between
Christians, and non-Christians?  Were such cases reported to the local
authorities?  What action was taken?

Answer: Before there could be consequences such acts should exist, and
they exist only in the imagination of slanderers.  Does the Committee
really believe that there may have been lack of zeal on the part of
zealots and of the police?

But when Boko Sardar desecrated a Christian chapel in a most outrageous
fashion, yes, then the police showed remarkable lack of zeal.

36\. What has been the attitude of Christian Missions to National
reconstruction efforts.  Have they welcomed, or co-operated with, the
work of organizations like the Harijan Seva Sangh and the Kasturba
Gandhi Memorial Trust?

Answer: The Committee appear truly hard up to discover proofs of our
lack of loyalty.  We live in a very jungly region and these
organisations have hardly penetrated to our district.  But we,
Christians are prepared to cooperate with any scheme that fosters the
public welfare.

Perhaps it will be urged that we are not co-operating with the Adivasi
Welfare Department.  The reason is obvious.  This Department, from the
very instant it was set up, declared a fierce war against us, trying to
kill our schools, specializing in false accusations, and acting, as is
well known, as a “Hindu Mission”.

37\. Have the Mission contributed, or encouraged their converts to
contribute, to national welfare schemes, or funds for relief in national
calamities.

Answer: Does the questioner really dare insinuate that Christians are
not interested in the national welfare?

May we ask: Who kept the Adivasis and the depressed classes down all
these centuries, and who helped them to rise out of their degradation? 
If the members of the Committee are sincere, they must confess that
Christianity has made an incalculable contribution to the welfare of the
lowly and of many other classes.

But nowadays, you have let loose on us a host of so-called welfare
workers.  We shall not condemn these men in a body; but we wish to point
out that they draw exceedingly fat salaries, and that they are well paid
for trying to uplift us.  And not seldom it seems to us that they
display more zeal in trying to destroy the good.

Our priests are not professional uplifters, and certainly they do not
come to us in a condescending manner; they have served us, and still do
serve us and they draw no salary.

We have heard of Ministers telling their Welfare staff that they must be
animated with the missionary spirit.  This appears to us an unsolicited
testimonial to the devotion of our priests and our nuns.

But yet, we are grateful to the Committee for asking this question,
though we smart under the insult it contains.  For we had cause to think
that no contribution from us to thin public welfare was acceptable with
the Government.

Early in 1954 our Bishop received from a charitable organisation a
considerable consignment of barrels of powdered milk. (And, by the way,
Swami Ramanuj.  Saraswati “revealed” in The Hitavada that these barrels
contained ammunition).  The Lord Bishop offered a number of barrels to
the Deputy Commissioner of Raigarh, the only condition attached being
“distribution among the needy without distinction of caste or creed”. 
The answer was a frigid refusal.

Truth compels us to add that the present Deputy Commissioner of Raigarh,
when offered a similar donation, gratefully accepted.

38\. Have Christian Missionaries taken over, or attempted to take over,
common lands, such as lands for cattle-grazing or cattle-resting places,
for purposes other than those for which they are meant?

Answer: No. And isn’t the police keeping its eyes open?  Or is the
question asked merely in order to insinuate a charge?

But we know of a case where a convent school had “encroached” on public
land.  Such encroachments are of daily occurrence in this district, and,
in this case, the thing had been done unwittingly.  The case came before
the magistrate, who imposed a fine, and, though, in such cases, the land
is usually granted to the encroaching party, refused the school
possession of the little plot.  The plea was that it was needed for
grazing, when every one knew perfectly that it was all rock and stone
and that not a blade of grass grew there.

39\. What are the Missionaries doing to identify themselves with the
Indian people?

Answer: Whatever be the intention of the questioner, we thank him for
this query.

Our priests and our nuns have come to our country for life and they do
not contemplate a return to the country where they were born.  They
live, work and die in our midst and hope to be buried in our soil.  They
look on themselves, and we look on them, as pars and parcel of the
Indian nation.  Practically all those that were eligible, have, at the
commencement of the Indian Constitution, acquired Indian citizenship. 
And they are loyal citizens, and we have never heard them refer to any
other country as theirs.

The Committee know, or easily could have known, all that, and they ask
what these men have done to identify themselves with the Indian people. 
This is an unwarranted insult to loyal men.

40\. Do converts to Christianity tend to form a distinct communal group,
indifferent or hostile to Indian traditions and culture, and with
affinity to foreign culture?

Answer: The “Suggestio Falsi” is patent, and the insult to us glaring. 
Converts to Christianity in this district are and remain aboriginals. 
We have nothing to do with foreign ways and culture.  We mean to remain
what we have been heretofore, but we certainly want to rise in the
social scale; we want to rid ourselves of oppression and oppressors; we
want to end our ignorance and poverty; we want to take our place in the
Indian nation and to make our contribution to its welfare and progress. 
We are not estranged and denationalized.  But it is a fact that certain
officials do make the attempt to deprive us of our right to call
ourselves aboriginals.  It is not we that tend to form a distinct group,
nay, not at all.

Some months ago the Sub-Divisional Officer of Police, Jashpurnagar,
visited Saraitoli, when he thought fit grievously to insult some of us. 
He said: “What for do you ape Europeans?  Why do you follow a European
religion?  The British are gone.  Why do you run after them?……”

One of those “simple” Adivasis stood up and answered: “Sir, you are a
very young man and your talk foolishly.  Who follows bilayti ways?  Do
we wear coat and pants as you do, and a topi too?  And a motor car?” The
great man looked profoundly mortified and answered not a word, may not,
even by an insult.  But, some days later, the speaker, who had humbled
him, was saddled with a lawsuit for threat of murder, no, not a threat
against the Sub-Divisional Officer, but against some other petty
official.  Was this a mere coincidence?

41\. Do converts to Christianity give up all their ancestral religious
and social customs and adopt new ones, or do they continue their old
practices, such as worship of gram devatas, and ancient marriage rites,
even after conversion to Christianity?

Answer: What has this to do with the matter in hand, and what is the
questioner bent on insinuating?

After conversion to Christianity we keep our social customs, as to food,
dress, mode of working and living, marriage customs, feasts, sports,
entertainment, songs and dances.  We do renounce worship of idols and of
so-called “bhuts”, and of gram devatas.  For, we believe in one true God
and Him alone do we adore.  And we would deem it a grievous sin, if,
knowing the one true God, we went and gave worship to idols, devatas,
and bhuts.

42\. Do you consider any of the activities of the Christian missionaries
to be detrimental to the interests of the nation?  If so, which, and
why?

Answer: It is our firm conviction that the activities of the Catholic
Church in our midst, and throughout this land, have been and are an
immense contribution to the public welfare.  Many are the great and good
men of this country, true Hindus, that have, time and again, borne this
testimony to the disinterested labours of our nuns and our priests.

Do you really regard the schools and colleges and hospitals and other
institutions, conducted by the Catholic Church in India, from Cape
Comorin to the Himalayas, as detrimental to the interests of the nation?

Of course, we propagate the Christian faith.  And you would fain make
that a crime, and brand it as “detrimental to the interests of the
nation”.  Such was not the opinion of the wise men that, some years ago,
sat in Delhi, and framed the Constitution of free India.  They said and
solemnly enacted, that every man in India had the right to profess,
practise and propagate his religion.

We, Adivasis, are convinced that we are fulfilling a duty imposed on us
by gratitude, when we declare that we owe an immense debt to the priests
and the nuns that have brought us education, the knowledge of our human
n

dignity and the consciousness of our human rights.  We thank them for
having enabled us to shake off the yoke not only of those that so long
had kept us in bondage, but also of the evil spirits, and for having
taught us to seek salvation in Jesus Christ.

MISSIONS

43-46: These questions call for no answer from us.

47\. What are the educational qualifications of the Missionaries, and
what was their station in life before joining the Mission?  What was
their income before, and what is it now?

Answer: Our priests are highly educated men, practically all of them
having a Ph. D. and a D. D. degree.  Very many of them have for years
been teaching in High Schools or lecturing in Colleges.  In the matter
of education they can stand up to any of your Government officers, even
the highest.

As to their social standing before they came to us, the only thing we
need say that they have dedicated their lives to the service of God and
it the neighbour from their youth.

As to their salaries, we may be causing astonishment to the members of
the Committee, certainly to the slanderers of our priests and nuns, when
we declare what is absolutely true, that our Fathers and religious
Sisters draw no salary. Theirs are dedicated lives and their service
does not look for reward in this world.

48\. This question needs no answer from us.

49\. Have the Indian Missionaries equal status and authority with the
foreign Missionaries?

Answer: In the Catholic Church we are all brothers and the notion of
colour bar and caste, as it prevails among Hindus, is utterly foreign
and distasteful to us.  To us Indian priests and European priests are
equally God’s ministers and we respect them equally.

But it does happen that we, aboriginals, and our aboriginal priests
also, do receive contumelious treatment from other Indians, who treat us
as inferior beings.  Such treatment is never meted out to us, nor to our
aboriginal priests, by the European Fathers.

50\. What is the organisation of the Missions?  Who has supreme
authority over them?

Answer: Supreme authority is in the hands of the Bishop, who is an
Indian citizen.  Of course, in matters of religion, he acknowledges the
authority of the Pope, who is the head of the Catholic Church throughout
the world.  There is no question of our depending on a Mission Board or
any such thing.

51-54: How are the missions financed (and a great deal more about income
and expenditure)?

Answer: Why does the Committee enquire about this matter? Government
seems to know, or pretends to know, since a Minister did make a
statement about the matter in Parliament, and quoted figures.  If he
knew the facts, the Committee need not ask us; if he did not know the
facts, what right did he have to make a statement?

In this district, people who do not wish us well, go about saying that
we received 22 crores.  Why not put the figure ten times higher?  Once
you grant your imagination free rein, why not let it fly to the highest
summits?

But, if our fellow Christians abroad are generous enough to help us, we
do not see why any one should resent that.  As to schools, and
hospitals, and other institutions of social welfare, all are welcome to
benefit by them, nor is any one solicited to become a Christian if he
desires to benefit by them.

55\. This is merely a repetition of question 19.

56\. Are regular reports published of the achievements of the Missions?
If so, please furnish copies of such reports since 1947.

Answer: We do not know about any such reports.

57\. What types of activities have the Missions undertaken in your
district, such as (a) religious propaganda, (b) running of institutions
like schools and hospitals, (c) other institutions?

Answer: Certainly, the Catholic Church carries on religious propaganda,
though we think that you do not understand that word in the meaning in
which we use it.  We do not beat the big drum, nor blow the trumpet, nor
organize morchas, nor shout slogans against other religions, nor indulge
in “force and fraud”, nor threaten “unconverted souls with eternal
damnation”.  But we do teach such as desire to be taught; we enlighten
the honest enquirer; and we labour to assist the poor and the lowly. 
There is no question of obstreperous proselytism.

The Catholic Church also runs schools and hospitals open to all.  But
the Madhya Pradesh Government has striven hard to annihilate our
schools; it has succeeded to a large extent in driving non-Christian
pupils out of our schools.

There are “Mutual Aid Societies”, which are really co-operative
societies, run according to Government rules.  And much else.

58.  Are there Mission Courts in your district?  If so what is their
constitution and rules of procedure?  What punishments do they award and
to whom?

Answer: There are no mission courts here.  But Christianity does not
want to uproot ancient customs, and so in our villages there are
panchayats, just as there were during centuries before we became
Christians.  Thee panchayats are conducted according to our tribal
rules, and do not pretend to deaf with grave offences.  In them
non-Christians sit with Christians, whenever the matter concerns us
both.

We are aware that Government officers are apt to feel jealous of our
tribal panchayats, and so we walk warily lest we land ourselves into
anything illegal.

These panchayats are with us a very ancient institution, but no stretch
of the most sanguine imagination, can they be called “mission courts”.

59\. Where do the Missions work in your districts?  Do they concentrate
on areas populated by the Scheduled Castes and Tribes?

Answer: The whole of this area is inhabited with Scheduled Tribes.

60.  Please state the location where the Missions are situated.  Since
when have they been functioning there, and what are the means of
communication to such places?  Are these means of communication
available the whole year round?

Answer: Let Government officials answer.

But we fail to see what means of communication have to do with the terms
of reference of the Committee.

Or must we hold the Committee responsible for an innuendo that these
wicked priests and nuns go and hide themselves in lonely spots, where
upright Government officials cannot reach, so that they may be at
liberty to pursue unhampered their nefarious designs against the safety
of India?

Or is there an allusion to the Committee’s trip to Muskutri, when, so we
are told, their bones were badly shaken in a jeep travelling over an
abominable road?  Was that our fault?

61\. Are there Government officials posted at such places?  Please give
their designations.  How frequently does a Government officer visit
these places in a year?

Answer: We do admire the gravity with which the question is asked.

Truly, the questioner does seem to fear for the safety of the country?

Alas, notwithstanding our lack of means of communication there are
police officers everywhere, and we are only too painfully aware of their
presence, as well as of the presence of other petty officials that
thrive on bribes.

Higher officers may, or may not, come.  Yet, the Committee may rest
assured that our priests and nuns are duly watched, their names
periodically taken down, (the father’s name not being omitted), and that
they have no opportunity to indulge in fatal machinations against the
safety of the Indian Republic.

Moreover, for some years now, the Government have at their service the
teachers and other officers of the Adivasi Welfare Department, and these
try hard to deserve their liberal salaries by displaying exemplary zeal
in reporting the supposed misdemeanors of priests, nuns, and Christians.

62\. Are there meetings of missionary workers held at periodical
intervals?  Are the proceedings of such meetings made known to members
of the general public?

Answer: We are not aware of any such meetings being held; but we are of
opinion that it would be perfectly reasonable and lawful to hold them. 
And, furthermore, we are of opinion that this question is asked simply
for the sake of insinuating that eve pursue unlawful designs.

We do not see what business “the members of the general public” would
have with the minutes of such meetings: not because there is anything to
hide, or because anything treasonable takes place (as it seems intended
to suggest), but because the “members of the general public” are
eminently uninterested in matters religious.

We do not think that, if such meetings did take place, our priests would
be likely to plot against the security of the State.  And Government
knows that very well.  For some years now it has watched them, tampered
with the privacy of their correspondence, spied on them, required
periodical police reports about them, and, so far nothing very
treasonable or dishonourable seems to have been discovered.

Or if there is question of meetings of subordinate mission workers, then
we can say that occasionally these men meet at the parish church, when
they take part in spiritual exercises for the upbuilding of their own
spiritual life.  No minutes of such meetings are kept, and we can assure
the Committee that no plotting against the State is indulged in on these
occasions.

63\. Are particular areas allotted to particular mission?  Or do they
encroach on one another’s sphere of influence?

Answer: As far as the Catholic Church is concerned, India is mapped out
into a number of “dioceses”.  At the head of each “diocese” there is a
Bishop, and he alone is responsible for religions matters in that area.

We know nothing about spheres of influence or about encroaching.

64\. Hive missionary activities increased or been intensified in your
district since 1947.  If so, how and to what extent?

Answer: We can only say that in Jashpur, in the time of the raja, we
were scowled upon; and in the other States we were not allowed to exist,
as the rajas denied us religious liberty.  They claimed ownership not
only of our bodies, but of our souls as well.

Since the time of merger the Madhya Pradesh Government has shown itself
consistently hostile to Christians, and frequently unfair.

65\. Have you come across cases of mass conversions?  If so, what were
the incentives and methods used?

Answer: We have come across one case of mass conversions.  It took place
at the 1951 Census.  Up till the moment of that Census there were in
India, and in particular in this district, many millions that professed
tribal religions.  During the night of the Census nearly all these
millions were converted to Hinduism.

As to the incentives: On the part of the converts there were no
incentives; they did not even know that they had been converted.

What were the incentives that moved the converters? Not religions zeal,
one would think.  But the Committee need no information from us on this
point.

The methods: No more than a stroke of the pen, or, stall we say, force,
undiluted force, political compulsion.

We have mentioned above the sixty converts of Swami Ramanuj and Boko
Sardar: sixty is not an enormous number, and, perhaps, the term “mass
conversion” does not apply, as there was question only of small groups. 
We remind the Committee of the methods used: terror, cajolements,
threats chiefly of loss of fields, promises of land.

But, of course, here it was not a question of conversion to the
Christian religion!

66\. What interest have missionaries and Indian Christians shown in the
work of the Government of India Boundary Commission?

Answer: Our priests have not shown any interest at all in this
Commission, because they stand aloof from politics.  As to us, Indian
Christians, we had as good a right as any one else to take an interest
in the work of that Commission and to put forward our claims.  But as a
matter of fact in this district, we have not bothered our beads about
it.

67\. Have the Missions taken part in Indian politics and elections? 
Have they supported any political party? If so, which, and since when?

Answer: Our priests, as we have told you to satiety, and as is proved to
the hilt, do not meddle with Indian politics.  That is not their
sphere.  However, such of them as have the franchise, have cast their
vote at-the polls, as was their right and their duty.  And no one has a
right to ask for whom they have voted.

We, laymen and women, have as good a right as any other citizen of India
to busy ourselves with politics.  Our priests have exhorted us to fulfil
our civic duty, but they have never asked us to adhere to one party
rather than to another.  The only direction we received from them was
not to join parties that pursue subversive or Godless ends.  And that in
our view, is not politics, but a matter of moral guidance.

68\. Do missionaries undertake such works as recruitment of labour for
the Assam Tea Gardens?  Do they receive any commission for this?  Do
they undertake remittances of salaries of labourers to their dependants?
If so, on what basis do they do this?

Answer: No labour for the Assam Tea Gardens is recruited by our
priests.  But, suppose such recruitment did take place, it would be
quite reasonable that our priests should help those that are compelled
to migrate, to find gardens where there are well treated.

But, up to a very recent date, the Mission, in virtue of an agreement
with the Government of India, recruited labour for the Andaman Islands. 
The Government did pay a small commission for every labourer recruited;
we believe that it amounted to one-third of the commission charged by
recruiting agencies.  This commission barely covered cost of recruiting
and forwarding to harbour.

The Fathers also undertook to remit salaries of labourers to their
families at home.  The money was sent from the Andamans to a Ranchi
Co-operative Bank, and thence to the several parishes.  No charge was
made for the trouble-at time considerable-of getting the cash to this
remote districts, and the dependants received the whole amount credited
to them at the source

From many tea gardens and other places people do send Money Orders to
their folk at home c/o the Father-in-Charge.  The reason is simple.  It
is widely believed (with what truth, the Committee may judge) that focal
postmasters have a habit of demanding a gratification for every Money
Order paid out.  It is also believed that postmaster refuse to make
payment, on the pretence that no money is available, until the
gratification is forthcoming. Therefore, the poor people prefer to send
their remittances c/o the Father-in-Charge, from whom the postmaster
dare not require a bribe.  In this manner, the dependants receive the
whole sum sent to them, and they have not to trudge to the P.O. over and
over again, nor to wait there for long weary hours.

The Committed will easily understand why certain people object to the
priest’s undertaking to act as intermediary in this matter.

HOSPITALS

We beg to point out that some of these questions about hospitals are
offensive in an extreme degree and are based on false accusations and
cruel slanders.

69\. Is there any mission hospital in your district? Of what kind is it?

Answer: There is one small hospital at Muskutri, and several small
dispensaries.

70\. Is admission open to all, or is there any criterion of income,
religion. etc., for admission?

Answer: Admission is open to all, without any criterion of income,
religion, etc., for admission.

How could such a criterion enter into any same person’s head?

71\. Is treatment in hospital used as a means of conversion?  Do you
know of cases of non-Christian patients being converted to Christianity
as the result of treatment in hospitals? If so, cite names and manner of
inducement offered.

Answer: Treatment in hospital is not used as a means of conversion, nor
do we know of any case where a person was converted in hospital.

But, if there happened to be cases, we do not see the reason why one
should be horrified.  No inducement need have been offered.  It is quite
normal that the self-sacrifice and dedicated life of our Sisters should
ret people thinking-

And we, once again, enter a protest against the consistent assumption of
the Questionnaire that every conversion is brought about by
“inducements”.  This is not only unjust, but nothing short of absurd.

We know of one slanderous accusation in this matter, which has been
mentioned in the answer to another question.

72\. Are patients obliged to take part in Christian prayers and other
religious exercises? Are favours shown to such as attend prayers? And
are there Christian pracharaks employed in the hospital?

Answer: Patients are NOT obliged, nor asked, to take part in Christian
prayers or religious exercises; no favours are shown to such as would
attend, and the idea of our using pracharaks to go and worry poor
patients is simply repugnant, and can have arisen only in a diseased
mind.

All these insinuations are based on lying propaganda and are gratuitous
insults cast at our heads.

73\. Please state instances, if any, where patients were not allowed to
read their own religious books, when they wanted to, on other than
medical grounds?  Are books of any particular religion distributed free
among patients?

Answer: Here, in most cases, patients are illiterate.  No patient has
ever been prevented from reading his own religious books.  Nor is any
literature distributed in the hospital.  But would it really be a crime
to give the patient a religious book, if he wanted to read it?

74\. Give the names and the nationalities of the members of the medical
staff.  What are their scales of pay? Since how long have they been
working in their present posts?

Answer: The Muskutri hospital is conducted by a religious Sister, who is
a trained nurse.  In at least two other dispensaries the Sister is a
trained nurse.

These are all Indians.

They are religious Sisters and draw no salary, but work for the poor
without seeking any emoluments.

Elsewhere, the priest may distribute simple remedies; he usually has
long experience and gives all the help he can to people that have no
access at all to medical relief. And there is no chance of professional
jealously being aroused: there are no doctors at all.

75\. Who constitute the Managing Body of the Hospital? State their
religion and nationality.

Answer: The institutions are too small to be burdened with a Managing
Body.

76\. Are any members of the staff prohibited from following their own
religion, because of their service, in hospital?

Answer: The question does not arise.  But suppose it did arise, then we
Catholics would answer that we deem it wrong, a grievous wrong, indeed,
to prevent any one from following his religion, if he sincerely believes
in it.  We grant to others what we demand for ourselves, that is freedom
to follow our conscientious belief.

77\. What medicines are Generally kept by the missionaries in their
smaller dispensaries? How many of these are licensed being poisonous? 
Who administers them?

Answer: Our priests and, nuns generally dispense very simple remedies,
often homoeopathic medicines.  There is no question of poisonous or
dangerous drugs.  This distribution of medicines is a boon, highly
valued by the people, - and not by Christians only, - in a district
where quacks abound and doctors are non-existent.

SCHOOLS

78\. What schools do the Missions run in your district?

Answer: There is one high school for boys, several middle schools for
boys and girls, respectively, and a goodly number of primary schools for
boys and girls.

79\. Is there any discrimination shown by Government officers in regard,
to Christian and non-Christian schools? Please state specific instances.

Answer: The discrimination shown by the Madhya Pradesh Government is
open and shameless.

Before the Jashpur State was merged into Madhya Pradesh, the Catholic
schools were nearly the only schools in existence, and received a small
measure of recognition from a Government that was neither enlightened
nor progressive.  It is due to our schools that a certain number of
Adivasis of Jashpur did receive a certain amount of education.

From the day of merger, the Madhya Pradesh Government declared a fierce
war on our schools.  All our Primary Schools lost their recognition and
none received a grant-in-aid.  The Adivasi Welfare Department tried to
open rival schools next to every Catholic school, at least in areas that
were not too inaccessible.  In these rival schools, teachers were paid
fabulous salaries, at least three times the amount paid, in our schools;
the pupils were charged no fees, received books and stationery free, and
also a daily meal into the bargain. And very severe pressure was put on
non-Christian parents to induce them to withdraw their children from our
schools.

When the Catholic schools applied for recognition and for grants-in-aid.
which, according to the Constitution of India, they are entitled to, the
Madhya Pradesh Government was deaf and dumb and deigned not to reply

After we had made representations to the Central Government, the State
Government remembered our existence and sent its inspectors.  These
reported that not one of our schools was fit for recognition, no, not a
single one.  Shall we be deemed guilty of rash judgment if we opine that
these inspectors were acting on orders, and had been instructed to
declare all our school below the mark, irrespective of the facts? And we
may add that, on several occasions, these inspectors showed themselves
positively ill-mannered.

To us it seems that the Madhya Pradesh Government, if it had had the
faintest desire at least to appear fair, would have been wise enough to
recognize, say, one or two of our schools.  The wholesale condemnation
seems to prove that the Government did not even feel the need of saving
appearances.

Ought we to be grateful for that much sincerity, or shall we call it a
shameless confession of discrimination?

In 1954, the Minister of Education refused to receive a deputation of
Christian citizens, who prayed for leave to lay their case before him. 
He refused to receive them.

And the Madhya Pradesh Government has, and generously uses, another
weapon to kill our schools.  In this State, the pupils of the fourth
class in the primary stage have to pass an examination; and failure in
this examination absolutely debars them from prosecuting their studies.

This examination is mostly oral, or with the he of slates, and is taken
by the inspectors, who have absolute authority in the matter of failing
or passing the of the candidates.  There is not the slightest shadow of
control.  In the case of pupils of the Catholic schools, some inspectors
do not even try to hide their hostility, and it has frequently happened
that they subject our children to grievous hardships by making them
travel uselessly and repeatedly to very distant examination centres, and
then refusing to take the examination.

These inspectors, well aware of the dispositions of Government towards
Catholic schools, fail our children at the rate of 80 or 90 per cent,
and the poor victims are not allowed to continue their education.  No
recognized school may admit them.

Are we not entitled to conclude that the Madhya Pradesh Government is
hostile to primary education amongst us, Adivasis? An inspector very
kindly informed us that “the gold of education was precious and meant
only for the few,”- of course, not for us!  On another occasion, this
man of learning informed us that Adivasis, when they get some learning,
turn rogues and liars.  Was he voicing the feelings of the Madhya
Pradesh Government, of which he was the servant?

Do our Ministers belong to, that class of Hindus, of whom Dr. Grigson,
I.C.S. (for long years in the service of the Central Provinces
Government, and a man well versed in tribal matters) said that they did
not wish the Tribals to grow in education, but desired them to stay as
they are, the humble servants of the “better classes”.

We would add that this fourth class examination exists only in this
State, and came in for very severe animadversion in the Report of the
All-India Education Commission.

And the members of the Committee blandly ask if there is discrimination.

Yes, there is, open and avowed, discrimination against Catholic schools.

80\. What is the strength of the Mission schools in your district.  How
many of the students are Christians and how many non-Christians?

Answer: The  figures can be secured from elsewhere.  We know that our
schools are open to all.  But the Adivasis Welfare Department has used
strong measures to drive all non-Christian pupils out of our schools. 
They have succeeded but not completely.

81\. Do you know cases of on-Christian students becoming Christians as a
result attendance in Christian schools? If so, how does it happen, with
the knowledge and consent of the parents, or otherwise?

Answer: We believe that there are few cases of non-Christians becoming
Christians whilst, or after, attending Christian schools.  Such converts
are never admitted to baptism, if they are minors, without the knowledge
and explicit permission of parents or guardians.

We desire to remind the Committee of the case of Alexius, a young man
that is now a college student.  At Arra-Jashpur, a complaint was laid
before the Committee in June that this lad had been converted in the
Gholeng Catholic school without his father’s leave.  The young man heard
of this, and the next day he walked many miles to Gholeng, where he
asked, and with some little trouble, obtained to be heard by the
Committee.

He protested against what had been said about him at Arra.

The Committee: “Is your father a Christian”?

Alexius: “No, my father is not a Christian”.

The Committee: “Did your father consent to your becoming a Christian?”

Alexius: “Yes, may father did consent”.

The Committee: “Can you prove that your father did consent?”

Alexius: “If he had not consented would he have carried on his own back
to Gholeng school the rice that paid for my fees?”

The Committee: “And what did the Fathers give you to become a Christian?
Surely, they gave you something.”

Alexius: “They gave me nothing”.

And do the members of the Committee remember, and is it set down in
their notes, that the youth turned round, and with bitter scorn said to
the crowd in the Oraon language: “These people ask me what I was paid to
become a Christian.  Do we sell our religion? Who of you knows where is
the bazaar where religion is bought and sold?

And this was not rehearsed.  There had been no time for rehearsing, but
this young man had just arrived to secure a hearing at she last moment. 
It was not a pretty piece of acting, but the indignant utterance of a
generous heart.

Yes, where is the bazaar where religion is bought and sold?

82\. What is the procedure of recording names of students in school
registers? Do you know of cases of students being shown as following a
religion other than the one to which they or their parents belonged at
the time of admission? Cite specific instances.

Answer: This question alludes to a calumny, started by hostile school
inspectors, who had to find fault.

Often a pupil may have, beside his Christian name, a village name like
Budhu, or Sani, or whatever it be.  There was a case (possibly more than
one. but very few in any event) where a pupil was entered in one book by
his Christian name and in another book by his village name.  The
inspector made a mountain out of a very small mistake, and saw all sorts
of sinister designs behind this formidable crime.

And even the Committee seem to take this poor little blunder extremely
seriously!

What interest could we have in making such faked entries, as are
suggested by the question? We can safely assert that there is not one
case where pupils were entered as Christians when they were not.

But we may inform the Committee that, in this district, it is generally
believed that, in Adibasi schools, the practice prevails of entering the
names of aboriginal pupils without their gotar.  Ram, or some other name
of the sort, is added to take the place of the gotar.  And this is taken
as proof that little Sani is an authentic Hindu.  Is he not called Sani
Ram?

Must we call this conversion of minors without the parents’ leave?

83\. What fees are charged in the school? What scholarships and
freeships are offered? Is the offer of a freeship used as an inducement
to students or their parents to change their religion?  Give specific
instances.

Answer: In Catholic primary schools, because the Madhya Pradesh
Government systematically refuses us all grants-in-aid, a small fee must
perforce be charged, and this is frequently paid in kind.

Some inspectors pretend that fees are illegal; then we call it a
contribution, freely given.  And that is what it really is.  For we
could send cur children to the Adivasi school, where no fees are
charged, and where substantial favours are offered.  But we prefer, out
of our poverty, to contribute something so that our children may be
brought up in our own faith.

We lack the means of giving scholarships and freeships, but yet our
schools do help the really indigent.  But we deny that such favours are
ever used to bribe pupils or parents into the Christian religion.

84\. Is religious instruction given in the school? If so, of what kind,
and is it compulsory?

Answer: Religious instruction, - of course, instruction in the Catholic
faith, - is given in cur schools, out of class hours, generally before
commencement of classes.  Attendance is not compulsory for
non-Christians, nor are these permitted to attend without the explicit
consent of their parents.

A case is on record of an inspector, visiting a Catholic school, asking
the teacher to give a class of religion.  He said that he wanted to see
how it was done.  The teacher complied with the request.

The inspector wrote in his report: “In this school religion is taught
during class hours”.

85\. What kind of moral instructions, if any, is given? Furnish copies
of moral instruction syllabus.

Answer: In Primary and Middle Schools there is no course of moral
instruction; but civics lessons are given according to the official
syllabus.  About the High School we do not know.

86.  Is any provision made for teaching religion other than Christianity
to non-Christian children?

Answer: We deny the implication of the question: no provision is made to
teach Christianity to non-Christian children.  As to teaching their own
religion to non-Christian children, we believe that parents and
guardians would not regard us as qualified to undertake that task.

87\. Are there non-Christians on the staff of the school? Is any
pressure brought to bear on the members of the staff to change their
religion? Do you know of any cases where discriminatory action was taken
against a member of the staff on religious grounds?

Answer: We are not aware of any non-Christians being on the staff of any
of our schools.  If there were any, no pressure would be put on them to
change their religion.  Such pressure is abhorrent to Christians.  It is
well known that in other places many non-Christians work on the staff of
Catholic schools and colleges, nor have we ever heard of such “pressure
or discriminatory action” as the questioner would attribute to us.

88\. What holidays are given in the school?

Answer: We observe the holidays prescribed by the code.

89\. Are days of national importance celebrated in the school? What kind
of celebrations are held?

Answer: National holidays are observed in our schools just as they are
in other schools, except that we may add an intercessory service, and
that, as a rule, our pupils know how to sing the national anthem
correctly.

90\. Are dramas or plays staged in the schools, which bring into
contempt non-Christian religions aria deities Give exact reports of such
performances, if actual copies of them cannot be had.

Answer: In our schools no dramas or plays are acted, which bring into
contempt, or even refer to, non-Christian religions or deities.  We deem
it wrong to cause pain to others, or to mock at their honest
convictions, even when we do not share those convictions.  It is not we
that organize processions to shout insults at the religion of others.

At times, religions plays are staged, which make no reference to
Hinduism or Islam; and we also may have dramas and plays of a
non-religious character.

We are not a little amused by the interest which the members of the
Committee display in our dramas, and by the serious view they take of
our entertainments.  We readily admit that we love play-acting.  It is
part of the fun of village life, and sometimes is the readiest way we
have of retaliating against official oppression.  The committee chooses
to put these “dramas” under the heading “schools”.  They refer much more
to our daily village life.

The committee would fain have copies of our plays, and possibly suspects
that that we dare not show such copies.  As the members of the committee
were informed at their Ginabahar meeting, in June, frequently these
copies do not exist, for the good reason that these plays spontaneously
arise out of village life, and it may very well be that the composers
(we cannot say, the writers) and actors are unable to read and write. 
In default of copies, the Questionnaire calls for “exact reports”.  We
shall oblige the questioner.

At Saraitoli, close to Sanna, the Catholics endured a great deal at the
hands of the police and other officials, and at last two of their chief
men were accused of attempted murder.  It seemed to be a question of
thoroughly cowing down the Christians.  The good men were arrested,
handcuffed-and ostentatiously paraded through the bazar when it was in
full swing.  This happened when they were led to prison at
Jashpurnagar.  They were cast ill jail and at first bail was refused,
and, indeed, it did take a great deal of trouble to have them bailed
out, after the poor men had stuck in the lockup for a day or two.

All this meant a great triumph for the police and for some other people.
Surely, this time the men of the Welfare Department had gained a great
victory, and the Christians would now eat humble pie.

The contrary happened.  The “Criminals” had hardly reached home (the
journey in police custody had lasted four days), before these happenings
had supplied the plot of a drama, that was being acted in the village,
and caused a huge amount of hilarity.  And the priest had not
“instigated” the thing; he was not even in the locality.

We hope we shall not be deemed very wicked for trying to bring the
upright police officers into contempt.  They make us pay dear enough for
the right of laughing at them.

The case of, the Lodma drama came before the Committee at their
Ginabahar hearing in June 1954.  Nothing very damaging seems to have
been revealed on that occasion.  Here are the true facts, some of which
were not placed before the Committee.

The play was wholly made up by the young men of the railway. The team
was: Don’t consult ojhas, and sokhas, and fortune-tellers, and don’t go
in for “muti puja” when you are sick. It was a simple affair,
interlarded with a few spicy allusions to recent village events. There
was plenty of fun and laughter, and not a soul was hurt.

But these simple youths had counted without the teacher of the Adibasi
school.  The Enquiry Committee, was in the offing, and this good teacher
had to fulfil his duty of accuser of priests and Christians.  Whether
the man had assisted at the play or not is not certain: certainly, he
had not been invited.

The teacher approached the daroga of Narainpur, who, filled with holy
zeal, immediately “instituted an enquiry.  Seven or eight young men were
summoned, kept under illegal restraint for the whole night, not being
permitted to leave the room, even to satisfy a call of nature (the
classical way of this daroga to extract confessions), and plied with
questions and threats.  One of the lads, called Simon, was struck by the
man of the law.  The Adibasi schoolmaster and another official of the
Welfare Department acted as assessors to the policeman.  Unhappily these
young men would not lie, nor “confess” that the wicked play had been
instigated by the Father.  They stuck to their copy right.

However, the Lodma offence was duly reported to the Committee at
Ginabahar, the manhandling, the threats and the illegal confinement
being carefully omitted.  The questionnaire seems to show that the
member of the committee were profoundly impressed.

91\. Is there a Mission hostel or boarding house in your district?  Is
admission open to all in them?  Are there fees charged?

Answer: In several Middle Schools and in the High Schools there are
hostels, mainly intended for Christians.  At times non-Christians apply
for admission.  Neither before nor after admission is any pressure put
on them to embrace the Christian faith.  Fees are charged on all equally
and are frequently paid in kind.

In the High School the non-Christian or Hindu boarders refuse to cat
with Christians and Muslims, and so they have their own mess
arrangements.

92\. Is attendance at religious exercises compulsory for the inmates of
these boarding houses?  Have there been any cases of children being
converted to Christianity by staying in such -boarding houses? Give
specific instances.

Answer: Attendance at religious exercises is not compulsory.

We believe that conversions are very few.  One case has been discussed
in the answer to question 81.

Remedies:

N.B.-This heading appears to suggest that there is something very wrong.
May we suggest to the committee that the disease affects those who
perhaps there is something wrong would deny freedom of conscience to all
those that do not share their opinion?

93\. Do you consider any of the activities of Christian Missions
objectionable? If so, which, and why?  What remedies have you to
suggest?

Answer: This question invites every fanatic to vent his anger.

Let that be.  Perhaps, in a free country, like ours, every man is
entitled to express his opinion and to formulate proposals for putting
the world in order.

But we beg to submit that this invitation to an excited public to level
charges against a class of men appears to savour of demagogy. 
Heretofore in India, we had tribunals and judges, who tried cases and
sifted evidence laid before them.  Here we have an Enquiry Committee,
vested with semi-judicial functions, calling on the public to lay
charges, and that too, after a virulent press campaign of abuse and
slander has excited communal passions.  To us this seems to be a
singularly strange way of doing justice.

Our answer to the question is that we do not consider the activities of
the Catholic Church in India as objectionable.  Nay, we consider that
they greatly contribute to the public welfare.  And, in this, we are at
one with the wisest and best men in the nation, who repeatedly have
borne witness to the services rendered by our priests and nuns to the
nation, and have expressed their admiration for the dedicated lives led
by these men and women.

It is only latterly that certain people have begun to call those
activities objectionable.  Why?  Because, so it is said, they are
anti-national, and destructive of Indian culture, and all that.  Every
Jack and Harry knows that this is the sheerest pretence.  Those that
shout loudest know perfectly that this is a false accusation.

What these people find objectionable is that there are converts to
Christianity.  This is truly the heart of the matter, as our worst
enemies, if they are sincere, will admit.  They have no other grievance
against us.

But then, are not the adherents of all religions converts, or were they
riot so at some time or other?  Even Hindus were not always Hindus the
way they are now.  And Sikhs, and Jains, and Buddhists became what they
are through conversion.  And in this free Republic, called Bharat, a man
has a right to choose his religion, that is to convert himself.  The law
explicitly says so.

You retort that Christians use unfair means: baits, force, fraud.  When
has any of these charges been proved?  And, if these charges could be
substantiated, then, still, would it be a case of the mote being in the
eye of the Christian, whilst the beam is in the eye of those that make
converts to Hinduism?  This we have abundantly shown in answer to your
questions.

You are scandalized because Christian converts are poor, ignorant,
having an income beneath Rs. 1,000 per annum, not having read up to the
Matriculation Christian Missionaries dare address themselves to the
“simple” Adivasi!

Well, we Adivasis, are not as simple as our Hindu friends want us to
be.  We contend that we are perfectly capable of choosing our religion. 
And no Hindu has a right to feel aggrieved if we choose to become
Christians so as to enjoy the fullness of our human rights, rather than
enter the Hindu fold, where we shall be made to occupy the lowest rung
in the social scale.

All this hullabaloo and fury about convent-making and proselytising is
nonsense.  Those very newspapers, that lash themselves into fits of holy
indignation against Christian converts, will report with delight and
approval cases of individual Christians, or groups of Christians, being
made Hindus.  For how many years have the Arya Samaj people specialized
in the work of reconversion?

The methods differ, you will say.  Indeed, they do, as we see so well in
our midst.  We have informed the Committee of the methods followed here
by Swami Ramanuj Saraswati, and Boko Sardar, and Shri R. K. Deshpande’s
Ram Rajya Parishad.  Their blatant lies, their threats of violence and
of loss of land are notorious. And these people, so unscrupulous in the
ways they use, parade their sanctimonious horror at the naughty methods
of Christians.

When these people come to us, Christian and non-Christian Adivasis, and
try to make us Hindus, then we are not the “simple” unsophisticated folk
that need protection against the “chalaki” tricks of Christian
preachers.  They pretend to have a right to come to us, to threaten us
to confiscate out fields; they may, with a good conscience, offer us fat
salaries if we consent to take the name of Ram: that is all perfectly
correct.  But, if we become Christians, then surely we must have been
allured by baits.

And your Census officials, with one stroke of the pen, may cause all the
aboriginals to forsake their ancestral religions and embrace Hinduism. 
That is fine.  It is not convert-making.  No, it is only telling lies.

Conversion to the Christian faith, you choose to regard as a crime;
conversion to Hinduism is praiseworthy.  And, in the latter case, you
obstinately refuse to examine into motives and methods.

Finally, what such people object to is the very existence of Christians
in India.

That is the problem which the members of the Committee have to face and
that is the situation to which they must find a remedy.  We wonder
whether they are really disposed to pander to the passions of the
fanatics, who, if they had the power, would forcibly wipe out the
Christians from the face of India.

94\. Does change of religion necessarily imply change of culture?

Answer: What on earth has this to do with the matter in hand?  Do the
members of the Committee really seek light on this point?  A sensible
answer to that query would demand that one first defines what is meant
by religion and what is meant by culture.  And again, is it correct to
identify Indian culture with Hindu culture?

To such as would identify religion and culture, a change of religion
evidently implies a change of culture.  If you contend that only one
that professes Hinduism (and by the way, what is Hinduism?) can be a
true Indian, then we confess that the millions of Christians, who
believe themselves Indians, and who are loyal to their country, stand
branded as aliens.

But, if, with the framers of the Constitution, you hold that in this
vast land there is room for many religions, if, with the present Prime
Minister of India, you hold that Hindus, and Muslims, and Christians,
and Sikhs, and all the rest, can be, and are, true sons of India, truly
part and parcel of the nation, then this question about religion and
culture has no sense, and ought not to appear in this Questionnaire.  In
fact, we think that it is a glaringly dishonest question, and seems
asked with a sinister purpose.

It is only a handful of fanatics, that pretend to believe that we,
Christians, are soaked in foreign culture.  Please come and see us in
our homes and tell us what is foreign about us.

Dr. Ambedkar, some years ago, was converted to Buddhism.  Has he changed
his culture, and is he no longer a true Indian?

95\. Do you think that, in a secular State, all religious teachings
should be eliminated in education?  Or have you any alternative to
sectarian religious teachings?

Answer: Amongst the many irrelevancies of this Questionnaire this
question stands out as a mountain peak.  Has this Committee been
appointed to redraft the Constitution of India, or to remodel the whole
educational system?

We must suppose that the Committee know the rules laid down in the
Constitution about religious instruction in schools.  We have no desire
to oblige the Committee by writing a neat dissertation on the necessity
of, or the harm done by, religious instruction in education.

We believe that it is wisely ordained by the law of the land that in
State institutions, supported by public funds, no religious instruction
shall be imposed. We also deem it a wise enactment, that in school,
receiving aid out of the public treasury, no pupil shall be constrained
to attend religious instruction of any particular creed.

In our own schools, which the Constitution gives us the right to
establish and to conduct, and against which the State is directed not to
discriminate (a direction openly flouted by the Madhya Pradesh
Government), we want that our own children shall be instructed in our
own religion.  And if non-Christians desire to attend these schools, we
shall make no effort to constrain or induce them to attend religious
instruction classes.

Whatever may be the answer, returned by “progressive” elements to this
question, and whatever may be the conclusions drawn by the Committee; we
declare that, as long as freedom prevails in India, we will see to it in
our own schools, our own religion shall be taught to our own children.

96\. Are not the consolations of religion aids to recovery of patients?
If so, would you cut out all religious practices from hospitals?  Have
you any alternative to Missionary propaganda in hospitals?

Answer: We absolutely deny that, with us, there is anything that can be
called “Missionary propaganda in hospitals”.  The alternative to that
mythical thing is to leave the patients free to seek solace where their
conscience finds it.  We are not in the habit of doing violence to
people’s conscience.

97\. The State being secular, has it any right to interfere with the
methods of propagation of any particular faith?  Do you think that, if
other religions showed the same zeal and enthusiasm as ace Christian
Missions, there would be unpleasant consequences?

Answer: The question is not only absurdly irrelevant, but its sinister
purpose is glaring.  Surely the Committee do not seek enlightenment on
these matters from an excited public!

No one in his senses denies that the State has a duty to maintain law
and order.  The State must so govern that, as far as possible, every
citizen can exercise those rights, which his very manhood and the laws
of the land confer on him.

As to the “methods of propagation of any particular faith”, we certainly
object very strongly to the methods employed in this district by Swami
Ramanuj Saraswati, Boke Sardar, the Police, certain minor officials,
many servants of the Adivasi Welfare Department, to propagate their
“particular faith”.

We raise no objection to the propagation of Hinduism, but we have the
gravest objections to the methods employed by Hindu propagandists, for
instance, false accusations, slander, abuse in the press and on the
platform, trumped un lad-suits, physical violence, vilification and
insults, deprivation of lands, and things of that sort.  We have no
objection if the State interferes with these methods; but it does not
seem inclined to do so; nay, some of these things are done by its very
servants.

We also object to the Government’s method of converting overnight
millions of followers of aboriginal religions to Hinduism, by a stroke
of the pen and without so much as “by your leave”.

If the Committee can bring us relief in these matters, we shall be
profoundly grateful.

No one denies that, whenever a method of propagating any religion
offends, against the law and morality, the State has a duty to
intervene.  But it is not true that the State has a right, still less a
duty, to intervene, whenever a bunch of intolerant people feel irritated
by the actions of other people, which are perfectly reasonable and
lawful.  And we challenge any one to show that the methods used by the
Catholic Church in our midst aw unlawful.

The last Portion of the question is truly astounding in its assumptions:
“Do you think that, if other religions showed the same zeal and
enthusiasm as Christian Missions, there would be unpleasant
consequences?”.

This is what we think.  If the preachers of other religions would come
to us as the priests and nuns of the Catholic Church come to us,
dedicating their whole lives to our service, drawing no salaries, living
in poverty in our midst, even in the remotest places, healing our
ailments, teaching our children, helping us in our spiritual and
temporal necessities, urging us to love God and to be kind to the
neighbour, reminding us that lying and stealing and oppression of the
poor are sinful in God’s sight; if the preachers of other religions
would come thus into our land, austere, humble, caste having neither
wife nor children, not shouting slogans, not slandering, nor abusing; if
they would come in that manner, as do our Catholic priests and nuns, no,
there would not he unpleasant consequences, nope at, all.  We heartily
invite them to come in that manner.

But who comes to us now, and in what manner?  We have named them in
these answers often, and these names leave a bitter taste in the mouth. 
These men do indeed display enthusiasm of a sort, not the selfless
enthusiasm of our priests and nuns; their mouths pour forth insults, and
slander and threats; they brandish the dagger, yes, in the literal
sense; they threaten us with the loss of our fields, and, in some cases,
the threat was executed; they shout slogans and bring false charges
against innocent people.

And you also have sent, amongst us, ostensibly to uplift us, but, as it
seems to us, to convert us to Hinduism, the servants of the Adivasi
Welfare Department.  Surely, they have not come to serve us out of pure
love for the neighbour, nor without seeking any earthly emoluments.  For
it is only too evident that they thrive on royal salaries, out of funds
set aside by Government for our welfare.  We do not accuse them of lack
of zeal or of enthusiasm.  For some of them display excessive zeal in
stirring up communal trouble, and they are enthusiastic in giving
evidence in the Courts against good people.

From such “uplifters” may the Lord deliver us, and may we never be
lifted to their level!

Indeed, when you send into our country people, who display zeal and
enthusiasm of that sort, then there ought to be unpleasant
consequences.  But who is to blame?  Is it the preachers of the
Christian faith, or the converters to Hinduism, or the would be
uplifters?

98\. Do you think that the different religions in the land can co-exist
peacefully, and co-operate in realizing a just order of society?  If so,
on what basis?

Answer: It is hard not to laugh when one hears the Committee gravely
asking such a question.  Are the Committee about to write a learned
treatise on the government of nations, or do they contemplate initiating
a revision of the Constitution, in such a way that only one religion
shall be tolerated in Bharat?

Can this be the purpose of this recondite question?  The Committee set
out to condemn the Missionaries, and they have discovered that all the
Christians in India are tarred with the same brush.  They are all
steeped in foreign culture.  They must all be suspected of disloyalty. 
They may be so many millions, they may have lived in India for
centuries, they may love their land and their nation…… They profess a
foreign religion! As if the Catholic faith could be foreign anywhere!

And we, in our simplicity-we are “simple” since we are Adivasis-we had
put faith in the declaration of so many Hindu leaders, saying that the
heart of Mother India is large enough to love all her children.

The Committee is not sure that different religions can co-exist in this
land, and co-operate peacefully towards the common welfare.  Again. we,
simple Adivasis, had allowed ourselves to be persuaded that the
civilized world had long since settled this point, and that all sane men
believed in freedom of conscience; we imagined that both East and West,
wherever men are free, “different religions did co-exist peacefully and
did co-operate in idealizing a just order of society”.

The Committee are not quite sure that this is possible, and their
conscience might perhaps bid them insist on the necessity of wiping out
Christianity.  At any rate, they want to be quite sure, and lest their
conscience prick them later, they crave for light and ask on what basis
such co-existence may be possible.

We humbly suggest that such a basis might be liberty, equality,
fraternity; equal rights for all and mutual tolerance, as is set forth
in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  Or, if you prefer, such a
basis would be the fulfilment of Christ’s precept that man love God
above all thing and the neighbour as himself.

This is what we, Christians, are trying to do.

99\. Do you wish to appear before the Committee to give further evidence
orally?

Answer: No., we do not wish to appear before the Committee.  And the
plain reason is that we do not believe in its impartiality.  The
Committee bears the responsibility of the Questionnaire, which is a
monumental proof of lack of impartiality.  Even a blind man can see that
this is not meant to be a series of questions, but rather a long list of
veiled accusations.  It bristles with subtle, and glaring, suggestions
and innuendos; it panders to the passions of intolerant fanatics.  It
assumes that the accused are guilty and calls on all the communalists to
lay further charges.

It seems impossible to exonerate the framer of these questions from
deliberate malice. He has done his best to gather into one long list of
so-called “questions” all the slanders (all but one), which bigotry has
ever invented against Christians and their priests.  This long
enumeration is nothing less than a most vigorous display of
mud-slinging. . The questioner well, knew that some of the mud will
slick.  Moreover, the Questionnaire invites all the communities to come
and sling more mud.

We regard this Questionnaire as a disgraceful document, and as a
dishonourable attempt at destroying the good name of honourable men and
women.  The disgrace and dishonour must redound on the Committee.

Moreover, from the very beginning, we have felt constrained to protest
against the composition of this Committee.  The question lay between
Christians and a very small, but extremely vocal; section of the Hindu
community.  Whereupon the Madhya Pradesh Government instituted a
Committee of Enquiry, consisting entirely of Hindus.  And one of these
is said to be an adherent of the Arya Samaj, a notoriously militant
anti-Christian body.  Later on, the name of a Christian was added to the
list of members, but we must declare that this person is unknown in
Christian circles, and certainly does not enjoy the confidence of the
community he is supposed to represent,

We have no desire to call into question the individual integrity of any
member of the Committee.  But surely, being composed as it is, it cannot
command our confidence.  Nor can we say that, during the hearings in
Jashpur, last June, every member of the Committee cared to hide his
anti-Christian bias.

These are the reasons why we do not wish to appear before the
Committee.  We do not have the faintest hope that further oral evidence
might induce the members to deviate from the course they seem bent on
following.  We feel that we stand condemned, even before we have been
heard.

100\. There is no question 100.

Why did the questioner not round off the number?

To our utter astonishment, there is one slander that is not alluded to. 
In this very exhaustive series of implied imputations, there is not a
word about, a matter, which, these days, has the power of rousing the
passions of but a few, viz., cow-killing.

Why are we not asked to “cite precise instances” of Christians and
Missionaries sacrilegiously slaying the sacred animal?  It is so easy to
accuse us of cow-slaughter.  The attempt was made at Kunkuri, as stated
in the course of our answers: only the daroga’s sacred zeal failed.  Why
not represent our priests as sneaking about the lanes and alleys of our
villages, brandishing the knife and threatening the life of the sacred
kine?

We feel it incumbent on us to enlighten the Committee about our attitude
in this matter.  We do not promote cow-slaughter, not because we worship
the cow, but because we have not the faintest desire to inflict pain on
our Hindu neighbours.  We, Adivasis, have no objection to beef-eating:
on the contrary, we rather relish it; but we are ready to abstain from
this little indulgence, because we are anxious to respect the beliefs
and the feelings of others,

As appendix to reply to question 24, I beg to submit to the Members of
the Enquiry Committee of few samples of the kind of scurrilous
literature against Christians and Missionaries, which is being
distributed free to all and sundry in the villages of this area.

Also a few extracts from the Hitavada.

If a Christian dared to public one-hundredth part of such stuff against
Hindus, he would be in jail by this time.  
 

<div align="right">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
