+++
title = "30 Replies submitted by Rev. Canon, R. A. Kurian, Nagpur"

+++
**Replies submitted by Rev. Canon, R. A. Kurian, Nagpur**

Name of Missionary: Rev. Canon R. A. Kurian.

Name of Mission: The Gondwana Mission (Nagpur Diocese).

Address: Cathedral House, Nagpur-1, Madhya Pradesh.

INTRODUCTORY

1\. I am sorry I do not have the figures of the total number of
Christians and non-Christians in the District of Mandla, nor the numbers
as divided as in Question 1. But the number of Christians belonging to
the Church of India is approximately 600.  This number has been static
for many years.

3\. The generation of converts has mostly passed away, leaving more than
500 of the remaining Christians (I speak only for my Church) as “Born
Christians”.

CONVERSIONS

4\. About 6 (Six).  We do not ask questions about their caste.

5\. If the desire for conversion is genuine, the party is admitted for
teaching the truths of Christianity.  This period may extend from six
months to two years, at the end of which period, if the party is found
to be sincere and knows the truths of religion according to the capacity
of the party, recommendation is made to the Bishop for Baptism.  If the
Bishop permits, and if the party publicly confesses the Faith which he
has in Jesus Christ as his Saviour and his resolve to follow Him till
death, he is baptized.

Conversion is an individual affair, though there may be many converting
themselves at the same time.

When the head of the family changes his faith, usually he comes with the
family.  If any individual member is unwilling to be baptized he or she,
of course, is not baptized, as baptism follows promises of faithfulness
to Christ on the part of converts.

6\. The Gondwana Mission is one of the Christian organisations in the
Mandla district.  Our work may result in conversions.  We proclaim the
Gospel of Christ to individuals or to groups as occasions arise.

7\. Such men or women are recruited as Pracharaks as have a good
knowledge of the Truths of Christianity and an ability to place them
before Christians or non-Christians.  It is also essential that they
should be men who have had a living personal experience of the Faith,
men who know that Jesus Christ has saved them from sin and death, and
are anxious to share their experience with their fellowmen.

Local men are preferred, but in the absence of that men from other
districts are welcome.

Their emoluments are very often less than that of Railway porters and
office peons, it may be claimed that they would earn more in other
departments if they chose to work there.

Monetary rewards are impossible.  A true Pracharak does not look for
rewards in this world.  He looks forward to hear the great “Well done”
from his Master, Jesus Christ.  A Pracharak who wins a person for Christ
and asks for reward will prove that he is not the man for the kind of
work he has undertaken to do.

8\. (a) No.  

\(b\) More staunch non-Christians get help in Mission hospitals than
possible converts.

\(c\) to (g) Converts or their children may get help as the “born
Christians” and their children when they are in trouble or need.  But
these are by no means advanced as baits.  A convert often stands to
lose.  Millions have given up their homes, nay their very lives for the
sake of Christ Who Himself is their Supreme Reward.

\(h\) Extolling Christianity: Extolling Christ rather.

Foreign culture: I do not see the connection between Christianity and
foreign culture.  Neither I nor my Pracharaks know more about foreign
culture than my non-Christian fellow countrymen.

\(i\) Extolling Jesus Christ: Yes, certainly.

Decrying non-Christian deities: No. Pracharaks are told not to do this,
because this will turn into enemies the very persons whom they are out
to win for Christ.

\(j\) The love of God revealed in the Death of Jesus Christ is the
primary message.  The Bible does speak of eternal damnation to those who
willfully reject Jesus Christ, whether they are Christians or
non-Christians.  But we want non-Christians to accept Jesus for the sake
of His love and not for fear of damnation.  This applies to “born
Christians” also.

\(k\) Political advantages are included among those the convert must be
prepared to give up.  “My kingdom is not of this world” said Jesus
Christ.  The Christian missionary is not after political power.  If
every Indian is to become a Christian except two, I shall be quite happy
to see one of them as the President and the other the Prime Minister of
India.  I want men to know Christ, that is all.

\(l\) Rather the opposite.

\(m\) A Christian missionary will not think of such a thing.

9\. Literate: One.

Well-to-do: None.

There are several under both these heads, who accept the Truths of
Christianity, but are not prepared to take the final step.

10\. We have to ensure this in every case, according to the
understanding capacity of the catechumen.  Christianity is a religion
not only of the intellectual but of the illiterate also.

The minimum understanding required is: God created the universe.  God
created man in His image, i.e. to share His love, purity, glory, and
immortality.  Man sinned and fell short of all these.  God had to deal
with the situation without sacrificing His eternal righteousness or His
eternal love.  Man had to be punished and saved at the same time.  God
became man in Jesus Christ and paid the price of man’s sin on the Cross,
and saved Him from eternal damnation.  God’s justice and His love met on
the Cross of Christ. It man believes in his heart that because Jesus
Christ has given His own life in the place of his, and leads a life
worthy of this great sacrifice, he is a Christian, i.e. one belonging to
Christ.  The Resurrection of Christ is surety for man’s eternal life
with Him in heaven, if he leads a life dedicated to Him, with the help
of God’s Holy Spirit.

11\. If there be any change at all, it will be that an Indian will be a
better Indian. A Christian has to be loyal to his country and
Government, even though he may be persecuted for his Faith.  The New
Testament was written when there was persecution unto death against the
Christians.  Foreign missionaries also work to make people Christians,
and not to make them English or American, in their loyalty.  There are
more non-Christians than Christians, who are western in their ways of
outlook and life.  Economic position and not religion is the factor
which underlies this.

12\. (a), (e) and (f) are possible places. (g) Certainly. (h) and (d)
rather unusual.  In colleges it may be possible where a Christian
student witnesses to his non-Christian brother about the love of God in
Jesus Christ.  The staff are not there for it.  The staff of a Christian
school may participate in preaching in places (a), (e) and (f).  It is a
matter of occasion: Two passengers in the train or bus may be talking
about religion in a friendly way.

13\. Sometimes hearers do resent.  Sometimes preachers are beaten or
stones thrown at them.  But they must be prepared to suffer for the One
who has given His life for them.

14\. I do not see the force of the word ‘such’ before ‘language’.  If it
means offensive to the hearers, he deserves the possible consequences,
whether foreign or native.

15\. Pracharaks are often respected in the locality.  They may be local
people or men from other districts.

They are called ‘fishers of men’ by Christ.  They have to be always
ready to seize opportunities to speak about Christ.  It is not only the
work of paid Pracharaks, but that of every Christian who has realised
the saving power of Christ.

16\. Dealt with under seven above.

17\. A proper Pracharak is given good knowledge of the Bible, and
something of Comparative Religion.  They are not sent to foreign
countries for training.  It is unnecessary.

18\. Normally a Pracharak may be expected to visit villages within a
radius of five miles from his residence.  He may report to a missionary,
but this is unusual unless the missionary also works as a pastor or
priest who is usually responsible for Pracharaks.  It will be a matter
for joy to the Church if a Pracharak is able to win some for Christ. 
But it is impossible to assess success or failure from the number of
converts, as there are many who accept the Message without even the
Pracharak knowing about it.

19\. The Bible and portions of the Bible are the basic books to be
distributed.  There are other tracts, and I shall gladly send some or
arrange to. We want more and more people to read them.

20\. Propagation is better word than propaganda.  We cannot preach Him
Who said “I am the Truth” by any method which cannot be acceptable to
Him.  Magic lanterns, films, loud speakers, etc., are used.

21\. It is very unchristian to refuse help at critical stages either to
school children or to patients.  One who is keen on wining souls for
Christ will show his love to them and give them active help in times of
emergencies, but not with the only motive of pressing for conversion.

22\. Fairs used to be held in the Mandla district many years ago.  One
Christian used to come to the other, for common meals, and revival
meetings. We cannot afford fairs on large-scale under our present
circumstances.

23\. Indian missionaries and Pracharaks have a right to make references
to the Central or State Governments in India, subject to law and order. 
Foreign missionaries have no right to make adverse remarks about an
Indian Government, in political matters.

24\. In the Mandla district, there are some non-Christian agencies
engaged in the work of re-conversion.  They are Van Vasi Seva Mandal and
the Arya Samajists.  I don’t think that they have met with any great
success. I don’t have any detailed knowledge of their methods.  The
policy of offering educational concessions only to non-Christian members
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes is in itself an inducement by a
Government supposed to be secular.

SOCIAL RELATIONS

25\. The relations between Christians and non-Christians in the Mandla
district has not deteriorated in any way since 1947.  On the other hand,
it has grown more and more cordial and friendly.

26\. Christian in Mandla have not boycotted non-Christians, nor the
non-Christians, the Christians.  Religion which stands between a man and
his fellowmen cannot be religion meant by God for his children.

27\. Christians are not office-bearers in any political or
quasi-political parties in Mandla.  As their non-Christian brethren,
Christians have every right to choose the parties to which they belong,
as long as they keep themselves away from such parties which deny the
existence of God or His supremacy, or parties whose policy is
destructive and obstructionist.  At the moment, we encourage our people
to give all their support to the Congress party because that party has a
leader in Pandit Nehru who has shown himself to have risen above
narrowness and fanaticism, and treats members of all religions alike.

28\. Indian Christians do not and will not receive instructions from any
foreigner, missionary or non-missionary, in the matter of politics.

29\. If any missionary takes part in political activities adverse to
India, he should be asked to return to his own country.  There should be
no general condemnation of foreign missionaries.

30\. On the whole, we have found Government servants quite impartial. 
Christians have lost many cases against non-Christians in the days of
British Government and also after the advent of freedom, Christians do
receive justice at the hands of non-Christian officers.  In the Mandla
district, we cannot complain of any harassment to Christians by
non-Christian officers.  Here and there, one gets cases occasionally, of
narrow bigotedness, but on the whole I have nothing but gratitude, for
the non-Christian officers.

31\. Christians, in Mandla, have not joined any political organisations
as such, but at the moment, as I have said above, they support the
Congress party in elections.

32\. Conversions to Christianity has certainly brought about betterment
in the standard of cleanliness and literacy, but their economic standard
is not above that of a non-Christian scheduled caste and scheduled
tribes.

33\. There is certainly an improvement in the moral level of converts to
Christianity, but living in the midst of society from which they are
separated only in religion, they do succumb to the pressure of the kind
of life which they see around them.

34\. I cannot think of missionaries destroying or desecrating
non-Christian places of worship or burial grounds.  The Bible condemns
acts of sacrilege.  If however, the whole village becomes Christian,
they themselves will either destroy or abandon their temples.

35\. It does not follow.

36\. Christians do always welcome and co-operate with National
reconstruction efforts.  If anybody is brought into being in order to
counteract Christians’ influence in Society, it is not fair to expect
Christian Missions to extend their co-operation there.  No other body
has done so much towards the uplift of the Harijans and other
down-trodden people of India as Christian Missions.

37\. This question does not arise in view of the fact that thousands of
drums of milk powder and millions of dollars and pounds have poured into
India, through the influence of Christian Missions not only in times of
National calamities but in normal times as well.

38\. Christian missionaries never take any land except by sanction of
proper authorities.

39\. The missionaries have done more to identify themselves with the
Indian people especially the depressed classes of society than the
Indians themselves. We cannot deny that a poor Indian sweeper feels more
at home with the foreign missionary who treats the sweeper as a
fellowman, than with such Indians, who treat the sweeper as an
untouchable.

40\. Converts to Christianity in the Central India do seem to form a
distinct cultural group, but in southern India they belong to the same
caste groups, which they jealously preserve, in matters of marriage. 
They don’t adopt any attitude of indifference or hostility to Indian
traditions and culture, except that they give up such traditions and
culture, which are definitely opposed to the teachings of Christianity. 
The ordinary Christian knows very little of foreign culture.  Foreign
culture as such is not taught to them.

41\. Before becoming a Christian, one has to give up his ancestral
religion, whatever it was; he cannot continue his old practices, such as
worship of Gram Devtas, but there is no objection to his copying old
ancestral customs in ancient marriage rites, provided there is no
compromise on religious grounds.

42\. The activities of Christian missionaries, cannot be detrimental to
the nation.  The christian missionary is not here to convert the Indian
into American or Swedish but to put before him the claims of Christ. 
Christianity is riot a religion belonging to any particular country or
countries.  In Christianity, one believes in one God and one Saviour,
Jesus Christ, who is Lord of the whole Universe.  The Christian cannot
believe that there is a separate God only for India.  If there is a God
at all, he is only one, for the whole Universe.

MISSIONS

43\. There are only two missions working in the Mandla district.  One is
the Prefecture Apostolic of Jabalpur, which is Roman Catholic. I have no
idea of the exact date from which they started work but they definitely
came after the Church Missionary Society started the work.  The Church
Missionary Society withdrew in 1939 and since then the Gondwana Mission
under the Diocese of Nagpur is working there, which belongs to the
Church of India.  A German Mission came in 1842, consisting of six
members.  Four of the six died during their first Monsoon in India and
the remaining died within a few years due to depleted health.  The CMS
came into the field in the year 1860 and did extremely good work.  The
Mandla district as a whole is quite fruitless from the point of view of
missionary work.

44\. As far as our Mission work is concerned, the CMS missionaries
withdrew in 1939 owing to war conditions.  In 1951, an English couple
came as agricultural missionaries, but they also had to leave within
less than a year because of ill health.

45\. We have a Church, and Mission compound with two bungalows and
out-houses occupied by Christian people.  One of the bungalows and a
school building have been let out on rent to the government and the
Mandla Municipality, respectively.  We have also quarters for workers
and fields and a primary school at Patpara.  The same is true of Deori
and Marpha.  At Ratanpur, we have a small church building, with some
land adjoining it. We have no liabilities except the care of the souls
of the few Christians there.

46\. All our missionaries are Indian.

47\. All missionaries are graduates.  They would have earned more in the
shape of money if they had chosen the work outside the Missions.

48\. None of our missionaries have bad foreign training.

49\. It does not arise, but the National Christian Council has told
missionary Societies in the West that missionaries who come to India
must be willing to work under Indian heads, except due to specialised
nature of work, a foreign missionary may have to act as head of the
Mission or department.

50\. Our Missions are under the Bishop of Nagpur who is an Indian, and
who in turn comes under the Metropolitan of the Church of India,
Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon, who also is an Indian.  There is no higher
authority and no foreign society over us.

51\. Our Mission is financed by the Nagpur Diocese which pays the
missionary.  We also get some local income through rents and income from
other property.  When the CMS withdrew, they gave the mission a grant
which has been diminishing year after year, and in a couple of years,
the diminishing grants will be no more.  We have regular budgets and
statements of accounts.  We are attaching the Annual Statement of
Accounts since 1947.

52\. Our accounts are audited every year.  Our auditors are Messrs. K.
K. Mankeshwar & Co., Auditors, Nagpur.  Our auditor is a Hindu as well
as out accountant, which fact never occurred to us before reading the
question 52 in the questionnaire.

53\. This will be known from the financial statements.

54\. Christian Missions have spent fabulous amount of money on
educational, medical and social uplift-work.  Such amounts are spent for
the purposes, for which they are meant.  Non-Christians work in
Christian institutions as professors, teachers and accountants, etc., as
paid workers.

55\. Please refer to No. 19.

56\. Regular reports are not published by our Mission-about the
achievements of the Mission.  Our achievements are not worth publishing.

57\. (a) Religious propagation (not propaganda).  
(b) Primary Schools and rural dispensary.

Results: Children are made literate and patients are helped to recover.

58\. The Church panchayats are constituted to try cases of immortality,
irregularity in marriage rules, apostasy, fights, etc.  The Parish
priest presides over these panchayats, which are composed of five or six
men and/or women who are communicant members of the Church.  Punishments
are awarded according to the seriousness of the crime and ranging from
warning to ex-communication.  Only the Bishop has the authority to
ex-communicate a person from the Church.

59\. Our Mission works in Mandla, Nainpur, Ratanpur, Deori.  Marpha and
in a few other places, where there are scattered Christian people. 
There has not been a conscious concentration on areas populated by the
scheduled castes and tribes, but Christian love has always tended to
take the missionary to these people, who are treated as out-castes and
untouchable by their fellow countrymen and fellow religionists.

60\. Means of communication are very poor in the Mandla district.  It
has taken me 26 hours to travel from Mandla to Marpha; a distance of 60
miles.  In the rainy weather, I have walked for miles together in
knee-deep mud to visit my people at Deori.  It also takes a walk through
slush for a mile to Ratanpur.  Nainpur is connected to Mandla by rail
and bus.  I have done a good deal of walking by night and day to visit
my scattered flock in outlying villages.  The missionary does not mind
travel-difficulties for the sake of Christ, who was crucified for him.

61\. There are government officials posted in outlying places.  Some of
them do very good work and understand and sympathise with the people,
among whom they have to work, but the missionary does much more.

62\. Missionary meetings are held now and then to prepare budgets and
check statements of accounts, to make decisions of administrative
nature.  This will be of no interest to the public.

63\. There is such a thing as principles of comitty.  It is not right
for one mission to encroach into the area of another.  But still there
are some who have no principles in this respect.  They deserve to be
sent back to their countries.

64\. Much to our regret, we had to curtail our activities owing to
financial difficulties, caused by the cessation of the CMS grants, but
we are doing all that we can, to stand on our own feet.

65\. We had no mass conversions in Mandla.

66\. I don’t think that missionaries bother themselves with the work of
the State Reorganisation Commission.  The interest shown by Indian
Christians in the work of the State Reorganisation Commission, cannot be
different from the interests shown by their non-Christian brethren. 
Religion has nothing to do with boundaries or States.

67\. Missions do not officially take part in Indian politics and
elections, but as individuals they have leanings according to their own
political consciousness. I myself have supported the Congress party in
elections.  There are Christian priests who always put on Khadi.  A
friend of mine, who is a priest, went to prison in the Nation’s struggle
for freedom. A Christian has not been less patriotic than anyone else.

68\. I don’t think any missionary will agree to undertake recruitment of
labour for tea gardens in Assam.

69\. We have at Patpara a rural dispensary.

70\. In Christian Hospitals, no discrimination is made between
Christians and non-Christians, or between rich or poor.

71\. Medical treatment is never used as a means or inducement to
conversion.  When patients are treated by Doctors and Nurses in the
spirit of Christian love, patients themselves see in the treatment given
to them the love of Christ and some are drawn towards Him.

72\. Patients are not obliged to take part in Christian prayers and
other religious exercises.  It is not unusual that patients are told of
the love of Christ in healing the sick and comforting the bereaved in
hospitals.

73\. Christian religious books may be distributed to patients who can
read and to those who care for them.  But no one is compelled to read
them.  It is impossible to make a person read anything against his own
will.

74\. The person who is in charge of our rural Dispensary is Rev. Itty
George, who makes use of Indian medicines also.  Ours is more a
First-aid-post than a place for treatment of serious diseases.  He has
joined the mission only last August.

75\. The Gondwana Mission Administrative Committee is the managing body
of the dispensary also.  The members are the Bishop of Nagpur, the Rev.
Canon R. A. Kurian, the Rev. D. R. Dilraj, the Rev. Itty George, Shri
Paul Rohitas, Shri S. P. Khalko and Sister Richael John.  They are all,
of course, Christians.

76\. We can never think of prohibiting any person following his or her
own religion.  Our non-Christian brethren working on the staff of the
hospitals, observe their own religion without let or hinderance.

77\. We use in our dispensaries such medicines as Quinine, Tincture
Iodine.  Boric Acid Powder and things like that.  We don't keep
poisonous drugs.  Mandla is within six miles from Patpara and for
emergencies we consult them or send our patients to them.  The Hindu
doctors there have been always a very great help to us.

78\. Our mission runs three primary schools.

79\. I have no complaint to make against Government officers showing
discrimination against us.  Some of them are very intimate personal
friends of mine, whose sympathy and help, I can never forget.

80\. The strength of our mission schools is about 55, 30, and 25
respectively.  The strength is predominantly non-Christian.

81\. This is impossible because our schools are only primary schools and
the children are too small in age to understand the differences between
religions.

82\. The procedure of recording the names of students in our school
registers is just the same as in any Government school.  It does not
profit us to show their religions in the registers as other than the
ones to which they belong.  It is altogether un-Christian to fake
registers like that.

83\. Our schools are free schools.

84\. No compulsory religious instruction is given in our schools because
of Government rules against such instruction, although we know that the
students lose tremendously by the absence of religious instruction.

85\. It is the responsibility of parents of non-Christian children to
make provision for the teaching of their religion to their children. 
When the Government has forbidden us to give Christian teaching, there
is ho point in our making provision for teaching non-Christian religions
to the students.

86\. Moral instruction such as don’t steal, don’t use bad words, don’t
fight, respect your father and mother, be of help and service to others,
is given.  We have no regular printed syllabus for moral instruction.

87\. There are no non-Christians on the staff of our schools.  If we
had, we would not think of bringing any pressure to bear on them.  The
whole business of conversion is wrongly conceived by the opponents of
Missions.  It is impossible for one person to convert another person, as
long as each person is in control of his own heart, even if he is put
behind prison bars.  It is for each person to decide whether he will
stick on to the religion to which he belongs or adopt another religion. 
This has been wisely provided for in the Constitution of India. 
Anything done either to convert a man against his will or to prevent a
man who wants to change his religion, from doing so is an outrage on
man's moral freedom.

88\. Such holidays as approved by Government and observed by people in
the locality are given in our schools.

89\. Days of National importance are certainly celebrated in our
schools.  We never forget that we are Indians and we celebrate our
national festivals just as enthusiastically as our non-Christian
brethren.

90\. Our minds don't work on these lines.  If we waste our time in
bringing into contempt non-Christian religions and deities, we shall
have no time left for exalting Christ in the eyes of the world.

91\. We have no hostels in the district,

92\. Attendance at religious exercises are not compulsory for inmates of
boarding houses, if they or their parents have objection to it. 
Conversion to Christianity is possible in such institutions where the
inmates are above 18 years of age.

REMEDIES

93\. The activities of Christian Missions in India have had a very
wholesome effect on our country.

94\. It all depends on what is meant by the word “culture”.  If the word
“culture” is meant to include religion also, which confusion is often
made, then change of religions necessarily implies change of “culture”. 
If “culture” is confined to its limits, outside religion, then there
need be no change of “culture”.  For instance, a Hindu becoming a
Christian, need not give up his taste for Indian music and Indian
architecture, and Indian made clothes.

95\. Religious teaching should be allowed in schools, subject to the
condition that a child is not forced to attend religious instruction of
a particular religion, if he or his parents, have objection to it. 
Also, a school run by an agency belonging to one particular religion,
should not be forced by Government to provide for the teaching of other
religions in their institutions.

96\. Faith and treatment go hand in hand, in the treatment of patients. 
A Christian doctor cannot think of using his knife on a patient, before
invoking the wisdom and help, of Christ, who to him, is source of all
help and healing, even though he cannot force the non-Christian patient
to pray to Christ.  Christ is as far from accepting an unwilling prayer
as a patient may be from offering it.  Prayer to Christ is impossible
without accepting him as God.  The whole business of “missionary
propaganda”, in hospitals, has been vastly exaggerated, simply because
the non-Christian brethren do not understand the way in which a
Christian missionary's mind works.

97\. The state being secular, it is not right to interfere with the
methods of propagation of any particular faith as long as such
propagation, does not infringe on the peace and tranquility and morality
of the land.  Instead of telling Christians (every christian is a
missionary) not to propagate their religion, it will be more reasonable
for supporters of other religions to place before the public the claims
of their religions, in a peaceful and orderly manner.  The important
point is that there should be no excitements over this business.  If man
thinks that he supports his God instead of vice versa, he will be only
testifying to the weakness of his own religion; and Government wanting
to support one particular religion, will have the same effect, namely,
of declaring to the world, that without support, that religion cannot
look after itself.

98\. I certainly think that the different religions in the land can
co-exist peacefully, and cooperate in realizing a just order of society,
if the right of the individual, either to hold on to his faith or to
give it up in favour of some other religion, is held sacrosanct.  When
the right of an individual is undermined, society loses its own
foundation.  Our country has produced a person like Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru, who has shown to us that one can rise above the differences
caused by religious affinities, in the service of the country.  There
are innumerable occasions, when Indians belonging to various religions
can work together.  Though they cannot see eye to eye in matters of
religion, there is nothing to prevent them from standing shoulder to
shoulder in the service of mother India.

99\. At the moment, I am at Nagpur and my address is Cathedral House,
Nagpur.  And if I am required to appear before the Committee, I shall be
glad to obey, if sufficient notice is given to me.  
 

<div align="right">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

**[](index.htm)**

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
