+++
title = "32 Replies submitted by Miss M. L. Merry, Khirkia R. S., Hoshangabad district, Madhya Pradesh INTRODUCTORY"

+++
**Replies submitted by Miss M. L. Merry, Khirkia R. S.,**  
**Hoshangabad district, Madhya Pradesh**

INTRODUCTORY

1\. Figures unknown.  One convert only was baptised from scheduled
castes (Balahi) since the work began.

2\. (No answer given.)

3\. Three out of four adult immigrants, representing two families, with
their children, now residing in the village.

4\. A real conversion is a heart-change matter.  Therefore, number known
only to God.  One convert only has been baptised from scheduled caste
(December 1950).  Conversion is necessarily an individual matter.

5\. He is the head of the family possessing secret faith for many years,
as caretaker on the compound.  Has proved very weak, harassed by fear.

6\. One English missionary lady, with an Indian couple, serving under
Central India Baptist Mission of U. S. A. (headquarter at Achalpur). 
Approach is made both individually and in groups.

7\. Generally, Christians of some experience (and training is desirable)
from some place where a Christian community has been established.  A
living wage is given without too much strain being necessary.  No
rewards.

8\. (a) to (g) No.

\(h\) to (j) Yes.  The Lord Jesus Christ is highly extolled, but foreign
culture is not.  Errors are pointed out.  Sometimes, regarding
non-Christian deities and sometimes a faithful warning must necessarily
be given about the future state of the unsaved.  This is part of the
Bible Message.

\(k\) to (m) No

9\. None.

10\. Yes. The one convert is illiterate, poor but is fully convinced in
his heart (but fears to witness).

11\. No.

12\. Yes.  In all these places preaching is generally done.

\(a\) It is the best place for me, personally.

13\. This is inevitable.  The false resists the truth, as truth resists
and exposes error.

14\. I am not clear what the words “such language” refer to.

15\. In this non-Christian area they are bound to be outsiders, and work
as named in No. (12) above.

16\. Very variable.  The spiritual experience of the Pracharak matters
most.  No. No.

17\. Bible School or Seminary (for degree) training is good, following a
heart experience of Christ and the “new birth” He brings.  Very, very
few who show sufficient zeal, sincerity, and have the necessary ability.

18\. Number varies, according to the ability of the Pracharak.  Here,
hitherto, he has worked alongside the missionary mostly.  Increasing
love, joy, peace in his own heart and the people’s.

19\. Chiefly the Bible, holding forth the Good News (Gospel) concerning
Lord Jesus Christ.  Very little distribution so far because most
contacts, unfortunately, are illiterate.

20\. Yes.

21\. No.

22\. Insufficient personnel, as yet, for this.

23\. Very occasionally, exhorting people to support the present
Government.

24\. Not known to me.

SOCIAL RELATIONS

25\. No.

26\. The convert is verified of this social boycott experience by his
Balabi community (Scheduled Caste).  Since a bitter experience in August
1952, he has never been the same.  Always “under a cloud”.

27 to 29. No.

30\. I suspect a kotwal leads the opposition in the above case, but
certain evidence, i.e., definite truth Dot clearly manifest as yet.

31\. None known.

32\. Yes.  This always follows spontaneously from within, if the
conversions are genuine, i.e., if a true change of heart has occurred.

33\. Yes, in genuine cases.  None in merely nominal Christians.

34\. No.

35\. (No answer given.)

36\. In full sympathy with most efforts, but aware that the world-wide
fundamental need is Jesus Christ in the heart.

37\. Yes.

38\. No.

39\. (No answer given.)

40\. In the past the caste system in India has driven in this way, i.e.,
the forming of distinct communal groups.  But it is undesirable.  True
converts will be lovers of all men, and themselves be better, truer,
holier, INDIANS, but God first not country.

41\. Many old practices disappear.

42\. No. Just the reverse.

MISSIONS

43\. 1918-39 - One missionary widow lady, English, independent, private
effort, apart from any organised mission.

1939-42. - Two younger successors, after her deceased, both single
ladies, English, private effort, no organisation.

1942-47. - One left alone after decease of co-worker.

1947-Present. - Entrance of this work into-Central India Baptist Mission
of U. S. A. (India Branch of “Conservative Baptist Foreign Mission
Society”-but “Conservative” relates to Christian doctrine without the
slightest connection with anything political).

44\. Not in Khirkia itself as yet, but yes, at Achalpur as headquarters
of the Mission and in some places around that area.

45\. One tiny bungalow and a few out-houses at Khirkia, and bungalows at
the out-stations above, plus leper colony at Kothara and a small new
hospital at Achalpur. (Get more information from headquarters.)

46\. No Indian missionaries but here at Khirkia, a humble evangelist and
his wife.  One foreign missionary lady (English).  There is a prospect
of a nurse (American) coming from Achalpur.

47\. Trained teacher.  Twelve years’ experience in England and four
years’ in Ceylon.  Income has ever been much less as a missionary than a
teacher.  For 12 years (1935-47) has worked without salary! “A work of
faith and a labour of love”.

48 and 49 (Answers not given.)

50\. Conservative Baptist Foreign Mission Society.  A Mission Board
consisting of some of the best clergymen in America.

51\. Free will offerings of Christians-individuals and congregations. 
Yes, regular, annual budgets and statement of accounts.  Inquire at
headquarters.  Each mission station sends quarterly statement to Field
Treasurer.  He sends annual report to U. S. A.

52\. Yes.  Auditing Committee appointed annually on the field and
special auditors in U. S. A.

53\. For Khirkia and district about Rs. 8,000 per annum as average.

54\. No.

55\. Very little distribution; working chiefly among illiterates, who,
as yet, have too little incentive to become literate.

56\. Yes.  Each missionary is asked to send eight to twelve brief
reports (about 600 words) per year (for praise to God and for prayer).

57\. (a) Visiting and preaching the Good News concerning the Saviour in
Khirkiyan and among some of the Kurkus.

\(b\) Very humble dispensary from 1918-45; then medical work declined
and touring for preaching increased.

\(c\) A tiny “Night School” in Balahi (scheduled castes) mohalla, in
rainy seasons, to try to encourage Khirkiyan youths to learn to read.
(Very hard going! Just a handful attended.)

58\. No.

59\. Yes.

60\. Headquarters at Achalpur.  Out-stations at Bhainsdehi, Dharni,
Chikalda, Morsi and Khirkia.

61\. None here at Khirkia.  Tahsildar visits from Harda.

62\. Yes. No. Full reports of minutes are sent to Mission Board. (Two or
three times a year.)

63\. Yes.  Not generally.

64\. About the same in Khirkia.  Increase and intensification are
desired, but more personnel needed. 

65\. No.

66\. No Christian community is here.

67\. Voted privately once-last General Elections-supported Congress.  Do
not keep up with politics-no time.

68\. I do not know.  All this seems outside the realm of missionary
work.

HOSPITALS

69\. One small new hospital at Achalpur since 1951.  One Leper Colony at
Kothara near Achalpur.

70\. It is open to all.  No partiality.

71\. Preaching and Christian witness occurs.  Very, very occasionally
conversions occur; no inducements.

72\. No. No. One evangelist.

73 to 77. Cannot answer.  Inquiry could lie made at Achalpur of Dr. Jack
Miner, departing soon for Canada and U. S. A.

SCHOOLS

78\. None.

79 to 92. I am unable to provide this information; not being in school
work.

REMEDIES

93 and 94. No.

95\. Yes.  The highest moral and ethical teaching should be given. 
Biographies of Great Souls (men, women and children) should be set
before the children-not merely national heroes but heroes of all
nations, who lived, served, suffered nobly for great causes and for the
benefit of others.  Children respond quickly to such inspiration and
example.

96\. Yes.  No. No.

97\. No. Without the living Christ, in the heart it is difficult to
produce the same zeal and enthusiasm.

98\. The only basis for such peaceful co-operative coexistence is true
patriotism, which is true enough to put love of truth first, even before
love of country.  A Red Cross nurse, murdered by Nazis during World War
II (Edith Cavell) said before she died “Patriotism is not enough”.  For
this reason the greeting "Jai Hind" somehow hurts me. It savours too
much like the “Hail, Hitler” cry in Germany before and during the war. 
“Jai Ishwar Ki” or “Jai sachchai Ki” would be better.  To me, the
highest and truest is “Jai, Masih Ki”.

“Blessings abound where’er He reigns,  
The prisoner leaps to loose his chains   
The weary find eternal rest.  
And all the sons of want are blest.”

99\. Would be ready, if required.

<div align="right">

Yours faithfully,  
MISS M. L. MERRY,

Khirkia R. S.,  
Hoshangabad (M. P.).

</div>

 

<div align="right">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

**[](index.htm)**

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
