+++
title = "34 Replies submitted by Umri Mission Hospital, Umri, via Yeotmal, Madhya Pradesh"

+++
**Replies submitted by Umri Mission Hospital, Umri, via Yeotmal, Madhya
Pradesh**

To-Secretary, Christian Missionary Activity Enquiry Committee, Nagpur,
Madhya Pradesh.

Dear Sir,

I wish to present a few statements in answer to the questionnaire your
office has circulated regarding the activities of missionaries.

69\. There is one Mission Hospital in the Yeotmal district.  It is a
general hospital known as Umri Mission Hospital.  It was started in July
1951.

79\. Admission is allowed to all depending only on limitation of
accommodations available and services available.  No criterion of the
patient’s religion is made to determine his admission.

71\. Treatment in the hospital is not used as a means of conversion. 
There have been instances of non-Christian patients being converted to
Christianity while in the hospital but it was at their own request and
not necessarily because of the treatment given.

Nathaniel is one such person who was converted.  He persistently
requested baptism for weeks before the Christian authorities (that is,
Indian preachers) would consent to baptism.  An Indian preacher finally
baptized him.  The reason for holding him off so long was fear that he
may have some ulterior motive.  Once the genuineness of his conversion
was ascertained baptism was allowed. O’karam is another case converted. 
He had had contact with Christians before coming to the hospital and was
interested in becoming a Christian.  While at the hospital he received
baptism.  In both cases the patients were charged for treatment and
receipts issued upon payment.

No inducements were offered of any kind to the patients who were
converted.  Only a desire for peace of heart and from sin in their lives
attracted them to become Christians.

72\. Patients are not required to take part in Christian prayers or
religious exercises.  Patients are never asked, if they have attended
prayers before treatment is given.  No Christian Pracharaks are at
present employed in the hospital.  One preacher from the local Christian
Church does visit the hospital.

73\. We know of no instance where patients were not allowed to read
their own religious books.  There is available in the hospital books and
literature of the Christian religion at the hospital but most of these
can only be had by purchasing them.

74\. Names and nationality of members of medical staff:\_  
 

[TABLE]

75\. The managing body of the hospital is known as the Board of
Directors.  At present they are all Americans (only 3 members) and are
all Christians. This body has now drafted a constitution for the
hospital which is being presented to the Mission for approval.  The
constitution allows for enlarging the Board of Directors and having some
Indian nationals as members.

76\. No members of the staff are prohibited from following their own
religion because of their service in the hospital.

77\. There are no established dispensaries under the control of this
particular mission outside of the hospital.  Several of the missionaries
dispense medicine under the direction of the medical superintendent of
the hospital.  These missionaries get instructed in the use of the
medicine allowed them.  They do not dispense any poisonous medicines.

<div align="right">

Sincerely yours,  
Dr. PAUL W. YARDY, M.D.,  
Medical Superintendent.

</div>

The 27th December 1954.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[](index.htm)**

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
