+++
title = "36 Replies submitted by Shri R. W. Scott, Secretary, National Christian Council"

+++
**Replies submitted by Shri R. W. Scott, Secretary, National Christian
Council**

To - The Secretary, Christian Missionaries Enquiry Committee,
Secretariat Building, Nagpur-1.

Dear Sirs,

In answer to the questionnaire I wish to submit the following.  May I
make one or two general comments before doing so.  First, it seems to me
that the tone, as well as the character, of some questions reflects the
attitude that the Christian position is weak and open to suspicion in
certain fundamental respects.  Such are questions 10 and 77.  In an
impartial investigation it would seem to be necessary to give those
against whom allegations have been made an opportunity of presenting
their case without having been judged in advance.  Secondly, I as a
missionary, who has spent half his life happily in India, have rejoiced
to see our Nation’s development away from religious and communal tension
towards a harmony and understanding of each other’s point of view in
vital matters of the mind and spirit. But I must confess to the
conclusion that the questionnaire is weighed against the Christian.
whether Indian or foreign.  There may be some extreme cases in view when
certain questions were framed but these can hardly be considered
normative.

The purpose of the enquiry is also to seek the truth concerning
allegations by the “missionaries” that “they are being harassed b
non-Christian people and local officials.” The questionnaire seems to
give no place for these allegations whether true or false.

In answer to certain questions may I suggest the following:

10\. Conversion can only result from religious conviction and appeals to
people of all Conditions of life.  It happens in the case of Christian
people themselves when they cease being nominal Christians to become
vitally aware of spiritual reality and the meaning of their faith
through a spiritual rebirth.  Conversion is not primarily a social or
cultural phenomenon but a spiritual and moral event.  It has many
consequences.  I know of many people who have experiences such a
conversion.

23\. Missionaries of non-Commonwealth countries before entering India
are required to take the following pledge:

> “I hereby further undertake to give all due obedience and respect to
> the lawfully constituted Government in whatever part of India I may be
> and while undertaking to abstain from participation in political
> affairs, it is my desire and purpose that my influence, in so far as
> it may be properly exerted in such matters, be exerted in loyal
> co-operation with the Government.”

If it is meant that missionaries and pracharaks make references to the
Governments of India or of foreign lands in their sermons and addresses
the answer is I know of none.

If it is meant in private conversation, there are of course discussions
in which missionaries also enter.  Speaking from a fairly broad
experience I say that the references to the Government of India are more
often than not far more favourable in such conversations than are
references to foreign governments.

It surely is not the purpose to prohibit free discussion and exchange of
opinion which is an essential part of a healthy democracy.

As for my own part I have many times spoken in high approval of the
progress of India since 1947 and likewise as an American citizen I have
many rimes spoken in disapproval of American foreign policy but I am
always concerned to see that there is a free and factual interchange of
opinion which increase international understanding and goodwill.

17.  In answer to the question, another may be asked.  What restriction
is there upon Christians as citizens of India taking part in political
activity?  I should think that this is a very highly desirable end so
long as that activity is directed towards the welfare of the Nation.

29\. I know of no foreign missionaries who are in any way taking part in
activities other than religious and social.

34\. No.

47\. Many missionaries have the highest educational qualifications
although some are not so well qualified.  There can be no generalization
about education, “station in life”, or income but it is certainly true
that a great number of missionaries would have considerably larger
income were they to give up this work to engage in work in their native
lands.

48\. Some of the Churches in India send selected Indian nationals abroad
for training but it is usually for such training as cannot yet be
provided in India.  These are selected for their general ability,
usefulness in the Church and willingness to render a sacrificial service
on their return for the welfare of their own people.

49\. Many Indian leaders have not only equal status and authority with
foreign missionaries but are heads of institutions and leaders in the
Churches under whom the missionaries serve.  This is an end which is
being urged increasingly among foreign missionaries and it has been
achieved with highly satisfactory results.

50\. Almost all of the larger established missions have turned over
their authority and control to Church organizations in India.  Some of
the more recent missions which do have established Churches have not yet
done 80.

63\. There is a plan by which missions do not encroach on one another’s
areas of work.  This is to avoid duplication.  Some few smaller missions
do not accept these arrangements called comity and do not observe them.

94\. A distinction must be made in speaking of culture as it is a very
general term.  There are national, cultural characteristics in India
which distinguish the Indian People from other nations and are native to
the people but there are also cultural characteristics of religious
groups and communities.  The two can hardly be said to be identical. 
When culture arises from religious faith it should not be imposed on
others who do not have that faith. A change of religion does not
necessarily imply a change of certain cultural characteristics.

99\. If the Committee wishes me to give further evidence orally I would
be quite ready to appear.

I hope that this consideration will be of some help to the Committee.

<div align="right">

Yours very sincerely,

R. W. SCOTT,  
Secretary, National Christian Council.

</div>

The 24th January 1955.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
