+++
title = "43 REPORT OF THE CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY ACTIVITIES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE MADHYA PRADESH VOLUME II PART B CORRESPONDENCE OF ROMAN CATHOLICS WITH THE COMMITTEE, THE STATE GOVERNMENT AND THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT"

+++
**REPORT OF THE CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY ACTIVITIES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE MADHYA
PRADESH**

**VOLUME II**

PART B

**CORRESPONDENCE OF ROMAN CATHOLICS WITH THE COMMITTEE, THE STATE
GOVERNMENT AND THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT**

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur. the 23rd April 1954, from Shri P.
Lobo. Advocate, Supreme Court, Civil Lines, Nagpur. to Shri B. P.
Pathak, Secretary to Government of Madhya Pradesh.  Nagpur**

A Government Communique, dated the 16th April 1954, has announced a
Six-man Inquiry Committee to probe into Christian Missionary Activities
in this State and you are to be its Secretary.

Under instructions from and on behalf of the Catholic Regional
Conference, I am to kindly inquire from you as to the following details
with regard to this Committee :-

> \(a\) its term of reference,  
> (b) its procedure,  
> (c) whether lawyers will be permitted and if cross-examination of wit.
> nesses allowed,  
> (d) whether Christian organizations in the State would be able to make
> depositions,  
> (e) whether the charges levelled against Tribal Christians by the
> Government of Madhya Pradesh would be inquired into, and   
> (f) under what provisions of law it has been constituted and its
> jurisdiction.

Kindly give me this information at an early date as I am going to
Pachmarhi.

Trusting this finds you well.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 2-S-CMEC. dated Nagpur, the 30th April 1954, from
Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee, Madhya Pradesh, to Shri P. Lobo, Advocate, Pachmarhi (M.
P.)**

With reference to your letter, dated the 23rd April 1954, I am desired
by the Committee to inform you that your letter has been forwarded to
the Government of Madhya Pradesh in the Political and Military
Department for disposal.  It is hoped that the Government will reply to
you concerning the various, points raised in your letter under
reference.

2\. The terms of reference are already contained in the Resolution of
Government, which has been referred to in your letter.  Regarding the
procedure, the Committee have not yet taken a decision, and I am desired
to inform you that when the question of procedure is settled, due
intimation to the public will be given.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 2/S-CMEC, dated Nagpur, the 30th April 1954, from
Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionaries Activity Enquiry
Committee, Madhya Pradesh, to Shri K. B. L. Seth, I.C.S., Chief
Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur**

I am desired by the Committee to forward herewith in original a letter
received by the Committee from Shri P. Lobo, Advocate, Supreme Court,
Nagpur, for such action as Government may consider necessary.  A copy of
my reply to Shri Lobo is also enclosed for information.  It is requested
that a copy of the reply, which Government may send to Shri Lobo, may
also be sent to the Committee in due course.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 1 874-815-V. dated Nagpur, the 14th May 1954, from
Shri B. N. Kunte, Additional Secretary, Political and Military
Department, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur, to Shri P. Lobo, Advocate,
Pachmarhi**

I am desired to refer to your letter, dated the 23rd April 1954,
addressed to Shri Pathak and to give below seriatim the details asked
for in paragraph 2 thereof with regard to the Committee appointed by
Government to enquire into the activities of Christian Missionaries:-

> \(a\) and (b) The terms of reference are already contained in this
> department resolution No. 318-716-V-Con, dated the 14th April 1954. 
> As regards the procedure as Shri Pathak has already informed you, due
> intimation to the public will be given as soon as the question of
> procedure is settled by the Committee.
>
> \(c\) The question whether lawyers will be permitted to appear and
> cross-examine witnesses is one of procedure, within the discretion of
> the Committed, and appropriate orders will be passed by it, if the
> question arises before it with due regard to the circumstances and
> requirements of the enquiry.
>
> \(d\) Christian organisations in the State will certainly be allowed
> to make deposition.
>
> \(e\) It is not clear to what charges reference has been made in
> this.  So far as Government are concerned, they have appointed the
> Committee on the basis of representations received to enquire into and
> report the facts.
>
> \(f\) Government have inherent powers to appoint a Committee to make
> enquiries on any matter to ascertain the factual position with a view
> to determine the action to be taken.  Persons in the know of facts
> relevant to the enquiry and willing to place such evidence before it
> will be free to do so.

------------------------------

*No. 1875-815-V, dated Nagpur, the 14th May 1954.*

**Copy forwarded to Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, The Christian
Missionaries Activity Enquiry Committee.  Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur, for
information with reference to his demi-official letter No. 2-S-S-CMEC,
dated the 30th April 1954.**

<div align="right">

B. N. KUNTE,  
*Addl.  Secy. to Govt., Madhya Pradesh,*  
*Political and Military Department.*

</div>

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 24th May 1954, from Shri G. X.
Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to the Secretary,
Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Madhya Pradesh
Secretariat, Nagpur**

With reference to your D. O. No. 1/S-CMEC, dated the 30th April 1954, to
my legal adviser Shri P. Lobo and D. O. No. 1874-815-V, dated the 14th
May 1954, from Mr. B. N. Kunte.  Secretary in the Political and Military
Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, I will be grateful if you will
kindly let me know whether you have received any written complaints
against Christian Missionaries and Christian Tribals into which
enquiries would be, instituted and whether copies thereof could be made
available to me,

I will be prepared to bring my own typist to copy these records, if
permitted to do so.  Kindly also let me know whether any charges are
payable for taking out these copies or whether any lump deposit has to
be made for this purpose. I would be very grateful for the favour of a
reply at the earliest possible date, say, at least a week before the
Committee proceeds on its projected tour.

------------------------------

**D.-O. No. 14/S-CMEC, dated Nagpur, the 29th May 1954, from Shri B. P.
Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionaries Activities Enquiry Committee,
Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur, to Shri G. X. Francis, President, Christian
Association, Nagpur**

Kindly refer to your letter, dated the 24th May 1954.

2\. Numerous representations from several individuals and organizations
have been received by the Committee.  There appears to be no objection
in granting copies thereof to you, but as the (2o-mmittee do not have an
independent office, it may not be possible to get copies of all such
documents ready in a short time. In these circumstances there is no
objection if a legal adviser or other representative is deputed by your
Committee to inspect those documents and to take down notes.  In due
course copies of documents to be specified by you will be supplied.  At
present it is not possible to intimate whether any charges would be
payable because the matter would be for Government to decide and a
reference to them is being made.  Your representative may inspect the
records in my office in the Secretariat at any time between 6-30 a.m.
and 11-30 a.m. on any working day.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 1st June 1954, from Shri G. X.
Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to Shri B. P. Pathak,
Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee,
Secretariat, Nagpur**

This is to thank you for your courtesy in allowing me today to examine
the allegations made against Christian Missionaries.

I and Mr. Polycarp Lobo will be accompanying the Enquiry Committee as
observers of the Catholic Regional Committee.

With kind regards.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Camp, Dharamjaigarh, the 6th June 1954,
from Shri G. X. Francis, President, Catholic Regional Committee, Camp,
Dharamjaigarh, to Dr. Bhavani Shankar Niyogi, Chairman, Christian
Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Camp, Dharamjaigarh**

It has been represented to this Committee that any representations made
by the Christian Tribals to the local or higher authorities, disclosing
their difficulties or grievances, invariably exposes the signatories, to
further harassments and persecutions by the executive officers. I have
quoted an instance of the kind in my 10-point Memorandum submitted to
the Prime Minister of India through the Chief Minister of Madhya
Pradesh, dated the 14th February 1954, and have adduced the
correspondence which has passed between me and Mr. Sunderlal Verma, then
Deputy Commissioner of Raigarh.  The Catholic Regional Committee is
convinced of the genuineness of these apprehensions.

2\. The Christian Tribals of Jashpur desire to, bring to your notice and
to the notice of your colleagues, all their complaints of the
harassments and persecutions, and the story of the discrimination
practised against them. They are, however, afraid of doing so, for fear
of being exposed to worse and immediate dangers.

3\. In the circumstances, I request that an assurance may kindly be
given that Christian men and women who will tender written or oral
evidence before your Committee will be protected from the effects of
executive vengeance and wrath.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter No. Ref.  BC-112-54, from the Members of the
Standing Committee of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, 20,
Miller’s Road, Bangalore-1, to Pandit Ravi Shankar Shukla, Chief
Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur**

Since representations addressed to you by the Bishops and the people of
Madhya Pradesh have not had the desired effect, we are addressing you
the enclosed Memorandum on behalf of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of
India in the fervent hope that it will receive the earnest and urgent
attention which we feel it deserves; and that it may help you to realise
how gravely disturbed the Christian community is over these recent
events.

All over the country, we have been asked by our own people and
well-wishers, drawn from every rank and creed, why no action is taken by
us to offset the campaign conducted against us and the disaffection
promoted between the communities by interested agencies.  We have always
stood for constitutional representation and have all along felt that in
a country, in which the Constitution guarantees justice to all
communities, a community like ours would receive due protection at the
hands of our own national Government, particularly when they have no
representation in the Legislature.

At the outset, we would like to point out that this Conference,
established in 1945, is composed of the Catholic Bishops of the whole of
India and heads of a few ecclesiastical units, the former, numbering 56,
and the letter 9. Of the 59 Archbishops and Bishops of India, 40 are
Indians.  These ecclesiastical authorities represent the entire Catholic
Church and the Catholic community of India in all matters affecting
religious and social interests.

One of the main objects of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India is
to defend and promote the rights and interests of the Catholic Church.

We shall be grateful if you will kindly communicate to the General
Secretary of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, His Grace Most
Rev. Tomas Pothacamury, Archbishop of Bangalore, the views of Government
on the memorandum.

Thanking you.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter No. Ref.  BC-111-54, dated the 15th June 1954,
from the members of the Standing Committee of the Catholic Bishops’
Conference of India, 20, Miller’s Road, Bangalore-1, to Pandit Ravi
Shankar Shukla, Chief Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur**

It is with deep concern that we have been watching the development of
events in the State of Madhya Pradesh.  Ever since the appointment of
the six-man Niyogi Committee, there has been an air of uneasiness all
over the land, and what pains us most is that the Christian community
has so suddenly become suspect and is being subjected to harassment
which goes ill with India’s traditional spirit of tolerance.

2\. From the terms of reference of the Niyogi Committee, we understand
that offence seems to be taken at the conversion work that is being
carried on by Christian Missionaries, particularly in certain parts of
the State.  We fall to understand, Sir, why a special committee should
have been constituted for the purpose of investigating into the
activities of the Christian Missionaries in this connection.

3\. It is not only Christians who are engaged in conversion work, but
also Hindu organisations, and other religious denominations.  There are
instances of even old converts being induced to renounce Christianity
and become Hindus.  The work of the Christian Missionaries has never
been, and is riot, a source of offence to non-Christians.  The
Christians do not constitute a political unit, but are part and parcel
of the general population and have always evinced a deep interest in the
welfare, culture and progress of their country.

4\. We understand that the intention of the Government is to arrive at
the truth through an impartial committee.  We are not averse to any
impartial and objective investigation, for we have nothing to fear and
nothing to hide.  But, with regard to this Committee, it looks as if the
complaining party has all the weightage of representation on the Inquiry
Committee, which is composed of five Hindus who may not understand the
aims and objectives of Christian Missionaries.  The only Christian
member who has been nominated has no representative status in the
Christian community.  We expected equal representation would be given to
Christians on the committee.

Viewed in its proper perspective, the present situation, particularly in
the Raigarh and Surguja districts, has deteriorated into a purely
communal affair. Things being such, it is very unfortunate that the
Government should have appointed on the panel of the Committee a
majority of personnel belonging to the communal party.

5\. There have been no reports of any disturbance, discontent and
antagonism between the Christian minority and the major elements of tile
population, except some misleading and unverified statements and reports
in the press why should the acceptance of Christianity by the
aboriginals offend the religious susceptibilities of non-Christians?
Reference has often been made to the system of mutual-aid societies that
has been built up in the tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh.  Rut what is
not commonly known is that these mutual-aid societies are the outcome of
the sacrifices of the people themselves under the wise inspiration and
guidance of the Christian Missionaries.  What has thus contributed to
the economic uplift of these poor Tribals is now being misconstrued as a
deliberate attempt to entice the ignorant Tribals into the Christian
fold by monetary inducements: when it ought to be realised that such a
practice is an effective measure of implementing the directives given in
the Constitution.

It is surely not unknown to you that the history of the Adivasi people
bears out clearly how they were exploited by the merciless hordes of
intruders who literally invade of their territories and endeavoured to
deprive them of all their land and belongings.  Under the British Regime
too, the Government, in order not to offend or antagonise the local
Rajas, did nothing for the amelioration of these down-trodden people. 
It was here that the Missionaries stepped in.  They championed the cause
of these unwanted sections, often at the risk of their lives.  It is
this spirit of devotedness and charity on their part that has endeared
them to the tribal peoples.

CATHOLIC BISHOPS’ CONFERENCE OF INDIA

6\. The Congress has been well-known for its anxiety to settle minority
problems with the consent of the minorities concerned.  We do not know
why this policy was not followed when the Inquiry Committee was
constituted.  The policy of the Government has been clearly laid down in
the Constitution which guarantees liberty of thought, expression, faith
and worship, and also freedom to profess, practise and propagate
religion.  This constitutional liberty should not be considered as an
abstract declaration, but a concrete reality, inspiring confidence in
religious minorities like Christians.  Freedom to, propagate religions
confers a right not only on the preacher, but also a corresponding
personal right on the listener to accept any religion he deems fit or
right. If the Missionary cannot propagate his religion, the logical
inference is the denial to every person in India of the right to
believe, accept and profess the religion of the truth of which he is
convinced.  The liberty guaranteed by the Constitution, namely, of
thought, speech and action, would  be futile, were the preacher
prevented from spreading the faith he believes in, and the community or
an individual denied she right and freedom to accept the Christian faith
or any other creed.  It is obvious, therefore, that obstacles should not
be placed in the presentation of Christian truths.  Any such restriction
would naturally rouse resentment and discontent in a body of people who
have been taught to respect authority and love and esteem their national
leaders, and would be a violation of Fundamental Rights.  In the light
of these considerations, we fail to understand why any community should
take offence at the exercise of our Constitutional Rights.

The right to preach and propagate religion cannot be denied to any
Missionary.  In their judgment on the appeals against the Bombay Public
Trusts Act, the Supreme Court declared emphatically that “Article 25 of
the Constitution guarantees to *every person and not merely to the
citizens of India,* the freedom of conscience and the right freely to
profess, practise and propagate religion”.

7\. The argument is often brought forward that the tribal is too
“illiterate” and “ignorant” to think and act for himself.  If this
argument has any force in the case of a tribal who wishes to embrace
Christianity, we fail to see why it should not have equal force in the
case of the hundreds who are daily being drawn towards other creeds.

Again, Sir, you are aware, that the Constitution has enfranchised all
these sections of the people: the inference is self-evident, viz., that
these tribals are capable of thinking for themselves and making their
choice in matters of national importance.

8\. In the present stage of India’s cultural development, while efforts
are being made to increase the percentage of literacy among our people,
it is very distressing to note that our Catholic Schools intended to
meet this national need among our tribals are being deprived of
recognition and help.

9\. With regard to the allegation that our Missionaries have
participated in political activities, our defence is that so far no
proofs have been adduced to show that they have failed to conform to the
instructions of the Holy See, which clearly forbid such participation. 
It is a matter of common knowledge that the work of the Missionaries
among Harijans and Adivasis has exercised a profound influence for the
better, transformed their minds and outlook, making of them worthy
citizens of India, ever loyal to their country.

10\. We, therefore, beg to submit that-

> \(i\) the Inquiry Committee should comprise of not only
> representatives of the major elements, but also of religious
> minorities, such as, Christians, Muslims and Parsis, and that the
> terms of reference be so widened as to include enquiry into the
> harassment of Christians;
>
> \(ii\) that the inquiry be conducted according to the Commissions of
> Enquiry Act of 1952;
>
> \(iii\) that every opportunity be given to the Missionaries concerned
> to answer the charges levelled against them; and
>
> \(iv\) that the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India be kept informed
> of the activities of the Inquiry Committee and their findings, as
> submitted to Government.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 14th June 1953, from the
Secretary to the Most. Rev. Dr. Eugene D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur, to
Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, Niyogi Commission, Nagpur**

I have the honour of forwarding you this enclosed letter at the request
of the Most Rev Dr. Engene D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur, for your kind
perusal.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 12th June 1954, from the Most
Rev. Dr. E. D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur, to Pandit Ravi Shankar
Shukla, Chief Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur.**

At the outset I cannot but express my disappointment at your reply to my
memorandum of 7th May.  In spite of repeated attempts to present our
case and our point of view we are sorry to say that Government has
always turned a deaf car to our requests.  The impression has somehow
grown that Government has its mind made up about Christians and
Christian Missionaries, and has therefore shut its doors to all further
representations on the matter.

From your letter of 14th May I gather that impartiality has been the
basis of Government’s selection of the six-man Niyogi-Commission.  “We
do not want any particular member to be on the Committee who would
advocate one cause or the other and instead of being a real judge would
become an advocate for a particular section of the people.” I feel it my
bounden duty, Sir, to inform you that on the basis of this very
principle which you have stated the Commission that has been appointed
by Government can hardly be classed as impartial.

No matter how indulgent a view one may take of the matter under
consideration one cannot escape the conclusion that it is at the moment
a communal affair and a communal dispute, between Hindus on one side and
Christians on the other.  Things being such I think you will agree with
me, Sir, that if a Commission appointed to inquire into this subject
under dispute be composed of personnel belonging predominantly to one
communal party it cannot but be labelled as partial and one-sided and
consequently can hardly be said to inspire the confidence of all
concerned.  This is actually the fundamental drawback of the composition
of the present Commission.

In a Government D.-O. No. 1874-815-V, dated the 14th May 1954, reference
is made to “inherent powers” which Government has “to appoint a
Committee to make inquiries on any matter to ascertain the factual
position with a view to determine the action to be taken.” May I be
allowed, Sir, to express my humble opinion on the matter.  There are
many things permissible for a man to do but all may not be expedient. I
personally feel that of all unwise things this is the most unwise step
on the part of the Government.  It is the propriety and political
expediency of the appointment of the Commission that I am here referring
to.  The question of the legality of the Commission is a delicate and
most disputed affair: the consensus of opinion I may incidentally inform
you is that Government has overstepped itself in this matter. Government
has contravened all rules of democratic procedure, the more so that its
action infringes certain fundamental rights granted to us by the
Constitution.

However, this may be it is not this matter that I wish to touch on
here.  What I wish to bring home to you, Sir, is that the appointment of
the Commission particularly at this juncture is hardly “meet and just”. 
The Commission can work no good, on the contrary it is bound to cause a
lot of harm and the sequence of events go but to corroborate this our
apprehension in the matter.

What Government and the public is interested in finding out is the
truth. There has been as the Gazette Notification of 14th May affirms, a
series of accusations against Christian Missionaries.  We, Sir, are
equally interested that the public come to know the truth.  We are not
afraid of it but what I wish to say is that the appointment of the
commission particularly on the lines in which it is now constituted is
hardly the correct way of going about things.  As the terms of reference
now stand they are, we must say, one-sided.  An enquiry is to be made
into things that have a religious import and bearing.  Consequently, we
feel that the only competent authority to investigate into such matters
is a set-up and machinery belonging to the religious community in
question.  And have we not repeatedly informed Government that we, in
she Catholic Church, have the adequate machinery to investigate into
such matters, and also adequately in our Code of Law to levy the
necessary sanctions.  This Government is surely aware that the Vatican
has its representative in the country, accredited to deal with all
affairs concerning the Catholics in the country.  And you yourself, Sir,
have met personally the most Rev. Dr. Martin Lucas, Apostolic
Internuncio for India, when he visited this State on 26th March.

Then is Government not aware of the existence of the Catholic Bishop’s
Conference of India, an organisation that is deeply interested in
maintaining the cordial relations that have always existed between the
Government and the Catholic Community.  We fail to understand why
reference cannot be made in this matter to one or other of these
channels.  We give Government the assurance that any reference made to
them will be dealt with expeditiously and in a manner befitting the
dignity of our status as a progressive democratic country.

In a democratic set-up a country’s prosperity depends on the harmonious
union and working together of all the members that constitute the
State.  Are you aware, Sir, that this is just what the appointment of
the Commission is undermining?  Needless to say it has shattered the
confidence chat was placed in the Government by us.  If at the outset of
things we sacrificed the privileges that were ours as a minority
community it was solely because we wished to throw in our lot with the
rest of our fellow-men and make common cause with them in the efforts to
build up the prosperity of our country.  Contrary to all our
expectations we find ourselves Literally thrown out on the high seas,
compelled to face alone and unarmed the fury of a rising tempest.

I am just returning, Sir, from a protracted tour of various sectors in
the State and I must admit frankly that what I have seen and heard has
pained me very much.  A commission is being appointed to investigate
into matters and is to make the Raigarh-Surguja district, the field of
its inquiries.  Is Government aware of the fact that in every sector of
our State the Christians are being harassed in every department of
life?  In the field of education we feel sorry to say that our
institutions are being discriminated against.  Inspectors and other
officials make no secret of their definite antagonism and bias against
our schools.  Why even a Minister of this State has been outspoken in
the matter in my own presence by his slashing criticism which I felt it
my bounden duty to question.  Christian students further are suffering
from many handicaps, particularly those belonging to scheduled castes
and tribes.  In every walk of life to be a Christian now means a
definite handicap to the individual and he is made to feel this by the
officials with whom he comes in contact.

Official harassment still continues unabated, police investigations
which we feel are unwarranted are being continued.  All manner of things
are being done to intimidate the Christian community and I must frankly
say it is driving us to a sense of frustration and desperation.  Are
these things, Sir, befitting a progressive State like ours?  Will the
commission be in a position to stem this growing tide of bitterness and
hatred and discrimination against the Christian Community?  Perhaps, I
feel, Sir, it will accentuate the problem.  One can hardly close one’s
eyes to the alarming proportions that the reaction against Christians
and Christian Missionaries is taking not only in this State but in the
whole country.  If the Christian Community feels’ alarmed, the general
public too, I may inform you, Sir, is also apprehensive of the good that
can accrue from the appointment of the Commission.

Government, I feel would be failing in its duty to this minority
community if it continues to thus turn a deaf ear to our representations
in this matter.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 4th July 1954, from Shri G. X.
Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to Shri B. P. Pathak,
Secretary, Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, the Civil
Secretariat, Nagpur**

It has been brought to my notice that Government has printed for private
circulation a booklet entitled “Belgian Jesuits in Udaipur”, and has
given a copy of it to each Member of the Enquiry Committee.  As we are
preparing the defence, this would be relevant material for us, and I
shall be grateful, if you will kindly let me have a copy of the
publication.

Kind regards.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 1236-XXX, dated Nagpur, the 8th July 1954, from Shri
M. S. Pandharkame, MA., LL.B., Assistant Secretary, Christian Missionary
Activities Enquiry Committee, Nagpur, to the President, Catholic
Regional Committee, Mohan Nagar, Nagpur**

I am directed to refer to your letter, dated the 4th July 1954,
requesting a copy of booklet entitled “Belgian Jesuits in Udaipur” and
to say that no such book has been got printed or circulated by
Government.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Camp Mungeli, the 20th July 1954, from
Shri G. X. Francis, President, Catholic Regional Committee, Camp
Mungeli, to the Chairman, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee, Nagpur**

This is the first time in the course of your exploratory tours, that I
have been compelled to write to you about the unfortunate trend of the
enquiry.

Heretofore, you have been calling people to tell the committee what they
knew about Missionary activities.  You will appreciate that Christian
organisations and the Christian people have fully co-operated with you
in your efforts to ascertain the truth behind the allegations and
counter-allegations.

On this tour, however, you have diverted from the procedure you followed
on the last tour and have permitted certain factional leaders to make
inflammatory political speeches against the Christian people.  This has
happened at Jagdishpur, at Mahasumund, at Bilaspur and at Takhatpur. 
This is most unfortunate, where there are restraining influences at
work.  I expect that the relations of the people will not, as the result
of these provocations, be very much affected.  But there is a limit to
patience and forbearance.

This morning, you allowed 43 minutes to Mr. Uttalwar, to make a speech
which had the effect of rousing the Hindus and Sathnamis against the
Christians of Takhatpur, on the ground that Christians had become so
denationalised and depraved that they would not fight for India in the
event of a war with America, and that by allowing conversions to
Christianity, the State was allowing the growth of traitors and fifth
columnists as had happened in Kashmir.

I have to record the protest of the Catholic Regional Committee, against
this new trend in the enquiry and as it is likely to have unfortunate
consequences in the peaceful relations now existing between Christians
and non-Christians, I feel it my duty to request you to kindly see your
way to check the tendency.

As this is a matter of urgent public importance, I am sending a copy to
the Government for information.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Camp Pendra Road. the 21st July 1954, from
Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee, to Shri G. X. Francis, President, Catholic Regional
Committee, Camp Pendra Road**

I am directed to refer to your letter, dated 20th July 1954, presented
to us at Camp Chandkhuri, district Bilaspur, and to observe as follows:

It has been repeatedly made clear by the Committee through press
statements, remarks by the Chairman at various meetings, and other means
that the Committee will conduct its enquiries “openly, impartially and
in a manner fair to all concerned”.  In our first tour of Raigarh and
Surguja districts, we followed the procedure of eliciting information
from all concerned, whether Christians or non-Christians, and we have
not departed from this procedure in our present tour.  In the terms of
reference one of the allegations which finds place is that the mission
institutions are utilised for extra-religious activities. 
Representations have been made to the Committee in which it has been
alleged that some of the mission institutions are being utilised for
political propaganda against the Government, the State and a spirit of
disloyalty to the country is being created.  It was on these points that
some of the speakers mentioned in your letter under reply, made
statements and cited instances.  As you know the mission workers were
also allowed to controvert them.  Speeches which were considered highly
inflammatory and objectionable by the non-Christian section of the
people present were, as you will, perhaps, remember, made even by
Christian speakers.  Although the Chairman as well as individual members
of the Committee have tried their level best to stop lectures being
delivered and they have repeatedly requested the speakers to confine
themselves to giving information relevant to the enquiry, it is not
clear on what basis you have made the allegation that the committee have
allowed sectional leaders to make inflammatory speeches of a political
nature.  The allegation appears to be without any foundation and I have
been requested to assure all concerned that the intention of the
Committee is not to create any sort of disruption or ill-feelings
amongst various sections of the people for which purpose the Chairman
makes it a point to advise the audience both at the commencement as well
as at the conclusion of the proceedings.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 4th August 1954, from Shri G.
X, Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to Shri B. P.
Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee,
the Secretary Nagpur**

Kindly refer to your demi-official letter, dated 21st July 1954, handed
over at Pendra Road, while the enquiry committee was on tour.

I should not have lodged my complaint, dated 20th July but for the alarm
experienced by all sections of the Christian people over the
consequences of fiery speeches made by communal leaders at the meetings
convened by the Enquiry Committee on, its second tour, and after giving
you specific instances, I had requested you to “kindly see your way to
check the tendency”.

The incredible tone of your side-tracking reply, apart from the
assurances it contains, hardly encourages the hope that the continued
co-operation of the Christian people in the labours of the enquiry
committee, will not expose them to the fury of communal passions.  This
is evident from your queer argument over an admitted fact.

You say -

> “Although the Chairman and individual members of the committee have
> tried their level best to stop lectures being delivered, and have
> repeatedly requested the speakers to confine themselves to giving
> information relevant to the enquiry, it is not clear on what basis you
> have made the allegation that the committee have allowed sectional
> leaders to make inflammatory speeches of a political nature.  The
> allegation appears to be without any foundation.”

Reading this paragraph, one would fancy that nothing had happened on the
second tour and the complaint lodged of the incident which took place at
Takhatpur, was false. I am compelled to recapitulate the following facts
which I had brought to your notice :-

> \(a\) That in the second tour, communal leaders, with the implicit or
> explicit permission of the committee made violent speeches which could
> have no other effect than that of rousing inter-communal passions.
>
> \(b\) That as a specific instance which took place at Takhatpur, on
> the 20th July, one man alone (his name being Uttalwar) made an
> inflammatory speech which lasted 43 minutes.
>
> \(c\) That in the course of the speech, Uttalwar had said that: 

> > “Christians had become so depraved and denationalised that they
> > would not fight for India in the event of a war with America, and
> > that by allowing conversions to Christianity, the State was allowing
> > the growth of traitors and fifth columnists as had happened in
> > Kashmir”.

From your argument reproduced above I could only deduce that you are
disowning the suggestion that the committee had *explicitly allowed*
such inflammatory speeches to be made.  Such a suggestion was far from
my mind, although a very legitimate criticism could have been levelled
that the committee helplessly heard lectures when it should have heard
oral evidence.

Two aspects of this very serious matter to which I solicit the earnest
consideration of the enquiry committee and the Government are-

> \(a\) whether Uttalwar did or did not make an inflammatory speech at
> Takhatpur, and
>
> \(b\) whether the subject-matter complained of was relevant to the
> enquiry.

You have not denied the fact that such a speech was made.  It is for the
enquiry committee and the Government to consider the propriety of such
speeches being made in the meetings of the enquiry committee.

As regards the relevance of the subject-matter to which I have taken
exception, you justify it on the ground that you had received
representations that “some of the mission institutions are being
utilised for political propaganda against the Government, the State, and
a spirit of disloyalty !o the country is being created”.  Here again, I
am afraid that you are outstripping the terms of reference given by
Government which requires you to enquire whether “the missions are
utilised directly or indirectly for the purposes of political or
extra-religious objectives”.

Now, Uttalwar’s references were to the denationalised character of the
Christian people whom he called “traitors and fifth columnists”.  This
has nothing to do with “political propaganda against the Government” or
with the utilisation of missions for “political or extra religious
objectives”.  I need not dwell on the platitude that ever citizen in a
democracy has a right to disagree with the Government, and that this is
a Fundamental Right under our Constitution.  Although Christians, by and
large, are of the Congress persuasion, still the right is there.  Unless
you agree with Uttalwar to deprive Christians of their rights of
Citizenship in a Free India, I must respectfully disagree with you in
admitting the relevance of his disparaging references to the
Indian-Christian people.  Traitors and Fifth Columnists, I humbly
submit, are not required to be discovered by you under the present
terms, of reference, nor is it possible for any enquiry committee to
discover them.  You will agree that their lives and fates are to be
determined by summary trials according to martial laws.

Finally, I am at a loss to understand your statement that highly
inflammatory speeches were made by Christians also.  I was with your
committee throughout your tours and took detailed notes, but never found
a single Christian making a speech, inflammatory or otherwise, even
remotely hurting the Hindus. I shall be glad if you will let me know the
name of the speaker as I am anxious that on the part of the Christians
there should be absolutely no provocation.

As on the previous occasion, I am sending copies of our correspondence
to Government.  I am also sending a copy of my letter to Dr. Niyogi.

I should gladly bear testimony to the gallant efforts made by the Chair
man, yourself and some other members of the committee to restrain the
speakers as you have said, but my complaint is that in spite of your
best efforts, the speakers held the field.  The burden of my complaint
is that the procedure of “allowing” fiery speeches is calculated to
create a situation which is fraught with grave danger to the Christian
minority.

Kind regards.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 1494-33-XXX-MR, dated Nagpur, the 4th August 1954,
from Shri K. B. L. Seth, Chief Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh,
Nagpur, to his Grace the most Rev. Thomas Pothacamury, Archbishop of
Bangalore, General Secretary, Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India,
Archbishops House, 20, Miller’s Road, Bangalore.**

I am desired to refer to your letters Nos.  BC-,111-54 and No.
BC-112-54, dated the 15th June 1954, to the Chief Minister, Madhya
Pradesh Government, on the subject of appointment of a committee to
enquire into Missionary activities, presided over by Dr. Bhawanishankar
Niyogi, and to make following observations:-

2\. The committee was appointed on the 14th April 1954, under Resolution
No. 318-716-V-Con, dated the 14th April 1954.  The object of appointing
the committee and the terms of reference were made clear in the
resolution itself.  Briefly, it may be 'Stated that it was found
necessary to appoint the Committee in consequence of complaints which
were received from non-Christians against the activities of certain
Missionaries and from Missionaries alleging harassment of Christians. 
These, complaints became so numerous that to ascertain the real facts in
an authoritative manner, it was considered necessary to appoint a
committee to go into the whole question, and to make a thorough
enquiry.  Subsequently, on the 3rd May 1954, a Press Note was issued in
consequence of certain criticism levelled against the composition of 
the committee.  The object of this was to allay any genuine
misapprehensions that may have existed in the minds of certain persons. 
I have no doubt that have seen the Government resolution and the Press
Note referred to above. Copies thereof, are, however; enclosed for your
information and ready reference.  It also be stated that certain
representatives of the Christian Community, including the Archbishop of
Nagpur and some other authoritative members of the Church, have seen the
Chief Secretary to the Government of Madhya Pradesh, from time to time
when the position was fully explained by the Chief Secretary to these
gentlemen.  Certain communications were addressed to the Chief Minister
also by Rev. D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur, Shri G. X. Francis,
President, Regional Catholic Council, Shri C. S. Kirkby, Founder
President of the Centenary Christian Association, Bombay, and others and
replies were duly sent to Rev. D’Souza and Shri Kirkby.  All this should
have dispelled the apprehensions, if any, regarding the constitution of
the committee or the attitude and policy of Government.

3\. Many of the statements made in your letter, under reply, refer to
matters which are the subject-matter of the enquiry, and you will
appreciate that it would neither be proper nor possible for Government
to say anything about them at this stage.  To act otherwise would be
tantamount to prejudicing a fair and objective enquiry.  I presume that
those matters would be raised before the committee by your
representatives and duly enquired into.

4\. In your letter you have raised again the question of personnel of
the committee which was dealt with in the Press Note of the 3rd May
1954.  Without going into the matter over again, it may be stated that
in selecting the personnel, Government’s sole purpose was to appoint men
of experience and standing in public life who would be expected to
approach the question in an impartial and objective manner and in short,
to act as judges rather than as advocates or partisans or even
representatives.  Government devoted much thought to the personnel of
the committee and took care to obtain the views of highly respected
authoritative persons belonging to the Christian Community.  The
committee is presided over by an ex-Chief Justice of the Nagpur High
Court, who after his retirement from the Bench also worked as Chairman
of the Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission for about six years. 
The manner in which the committee has conducted its proceedings, you
will, I hope, readily concede, disproves all doubts about the impartial
character of the enquiry.  It is understood that Shri G. X. Francis,
President of the Regional Catholic Committee, and Advocate P. Lobo, as a
representative of the Roman Catholic Missions, accompanied the committee
during its tours and were given access to all material placed before the
committee.  Christians were as free as persons belonging to any other
faith to place their case before the committee.  A more unexceptionable
enquiry is hard to conceive.  Government have no doubt that the
committee will make a thoroughly impartial enquiry and that nobody will
have any ground for complaint against them on this score.

5\. Of the points raised in paragraph 10 of your letter No. BC-111-54,
the first has already been answered in the foregoing paragraph.  As
regards the second, it may be stated that it is within the competence of
Government to appoint a committee to enquiry into any question of public
importance and that it was not necessary to constitute a commission
under the Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952.  The appointment of a
Commission under that Act would have served no more useful purpose. 
Constitution under the Act would have merely given certain powers to the
committee to obtain evidence; but as everybody is free to place whatever
relevant material he likes before the committee, this matter is of no
importance.  So far the committee has not found that it is hampered in
its work by the absence of these powers and it is always open to
Government to invest those powers on the committee, should it be found
necessary to do so in the interest of enquiry.

6\. As regards the third point, it has already been stated that the
committee has so far given every opportunity to the Christians and
Missionaries to answer the charges levelled against them and Government
have no doubt that this would continue to be done.

7\. The last point raised in your letter is not quite clear.  The
proceedings of the committee are regularly published in the press and
representatives of every community can appear before it.  It is open,
therefore, to your conference to keep itself fully informed about the
proceedings of the committee.

8\. Finally, Government hope that this clarification would remove all
doubts and misapprehensions from the minds of the Christians and
Missionaries.  Government wish to assure you, and through you, all the
Christians that they stand firmly by the principles and fundamental
liberties enshrined in the Constitution and have no desire whatsoever to
interfere with them.  They would give equal protection to all citizens
irrespective of their race, religion or community.  Government hope that
you and your Association will now persuade your fellow-religionists to
co-operate in the important work which the committee has undertaken and
that you would make special efforts, to see that no bitterness against
any community is created.

------------------------------

*No. 1495-33-XXX-M.R., dated Nagpur, the 4th August 1954.*

Copy, with a copy of the letter to which this is a reply, forwarded to
the Secretary, Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, for information.

<div align="right">

K.B.L. SETH,   
*Chief Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh.*

</div>

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 1718/46,XXX-MRN, dated Nagpur, the 3rd September
1954, from Shri J. K. Verma, Additional Secretary to Government, Madhya
Pradesh, Tribal Welfare Department, to Shri G. X. Francis, President,
Christian Association, Mohan Nagar Direct Road, Nagpur**

I am desired to refer to your letter, dated the 13th August 1954,
addressed to the Chief Secretary regarding-

> \(i\) enlargement of the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
> Committee to give parity of representation to Christians; and
>
> \(ii\) widening the terms of reference of the Committee so as to
> include enquiry into the harassment, discrimination and coercion
> practised on Tribal Christians.

2\. The State Government have examined both the points carefully.  They
consider that there is no necessity to enlarge the Committee in the
manner indicated in your letter under reference.  As regards the
widening of the terms of reference of the Committee, Government would
like to invite your attention to sub-paragraphs 3 and 4 of paragraph 1
of the Political and Military Department’s Resolution No.
318-716-V-Con., dated the 14th April 1954 (published on page 211, Part
I, of the “Madhya Pradesh Gazette”, dated the 16th April 1954), which
cover the point at issue.  No amendment to the terms of reference is
therefore, considered necessary by Government.

------------------------------

*No. 1719,146-XXX-MRN, dated Nagpur, the 3rd September 1954.*

Copy, with a copy of the letter to which it is a reply, is forwarded to
the Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Madhya
Pradesh, Nagpur, for information.

<div align="right">

J.K. VERMA,  
*Additional Secretary.*

</div>

----------------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated the 13th August 1954, from the Catholic
Regional Committee, Mohan Nagar, Nagpur, to the Chief Secretary**

Following the appointment of an Enquiry Committee to screen Christian
Missionary activities in this State, I had interviewed the Prime
Minister on the 12th May 1954 to put forth the Christian point of view.
I had pleaded *inter alia* that (i) the Committee be enlarged to give
parity of representation to Christians and (ii) that terms of reference
be so widened as to include enquiry into the harassment, discrimination
and coercion practised on Tribal Christians.  The Prime Minister
informed me that it was for the State Government to consider the first
request.  But as regards the second, he had promised to write to the
Chief Minister.  In reply to a, reminder, his Secretariat has informed
me under No. D/S-5325, dated the 3rd June 1954, that he has suggested to
the State Government to have as wide terms of reference as possible.  I
am enclosing a copy of that letter for your ready reference.  As I have
not seen any amendment in your gazette to your resolution No. 318/
716/V-CON, dated the 14th April 1954, nor any press statement on the
subject.  I shall be grateful if you will let me know what action has
been taken in the matter.  In the meantime, as you are no doubt aware,
the Committee has already conducted three tours without any official
instructions on the widened terms of reference.

------------------------------

**Copy of letter No. D/S-5325, dated the 3rd June 1954, from the Prime
Minister’s Secretariat, New Delhi, to Shri G. X. Francis, President,
Catholic Regional Committee, Nagpur**

With reference to your letter, dated the 25th May 1954, I am desired to
say that, as the Prime Minister told you, the Enquiry Committee
appointed by the Madhya Pradesh Government, is entirely a State matter,
and the Central Government does not interfere in such matters.  It has,
however, been suggested to the State Government to have as wide terms of
reference as possible.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 23rd September 1954, from Shri
G, X. Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to Shri B. P.
Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee,
The Secretariat, Nagpur**

Will you kindly refer to your office letter No. 1236-XXX, dated the 8th
July 1954, in which it has been stated that Government has not printed
or circulated any book entitled “Belgian Jesuits in Udaipur”?

I should not have reopened this correspondence but for the increasing
evidence that such a publication is under circulation, and that your
office has merely seized upon the inaccuracy of the title ascribed by me
to deny its publication.  The publication currently under circulation
even to the Members of the Enquiry Committee is reported to contain
extracts from, or references to the correspondence that passed between
Lt.-Col. A. S. Meek of the erstwhile Eastern States Agency and the then
Governor-General of India on the activities of the Belgian Jesuits in
the former State of Udaipur during the minority of the Rajah in what is
known as “The Meek Enquiry”.

I also understand that the “Hitavada,” of Nagpur has relied on this
publication for the sensational despatch featured under banner headlines
in its issue, dated the 25th June 1954.

In the circumstances, and in view of the assurance conveyed by the Chief
Secretary to the Government of Madhya Pradesh to His Grace, Dr. T.
Pothacamury, General Secretary of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of
India (in his demi-official letter No. 1494-33-XXX-MR, dated the 4th
August 1954, paragraph 6) that “the Committee has so far given every
opportunity to Christians and Missionaries to answer the charges
levelled against them, and the Government have no doubt that this would
continue to be done”, I request that you will kindly see your wav to let
me have a copy of the publication, whatever its title may be.

Kind regards.

------------------------------

**D.-O. No. 86, dated Nagpur, the 4th October 1954, from Shri B. P.
Pathak, Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee,
Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur, to Shri G. X. Francis, President, Catholic
Regional Committee, Nagpur**

Attention is invited to your letter, dated the 23rd September 1954,
regarding supply of a copy of a Government publication alleged to be in
connection with the activities of Belgian Jesuits in the former State of
Udaipur.

2\. From paragraph 3 of your letter under reply it appears that you
require the file containing letters which have been published in the
“Hitavada”.  It may be pointed out that important Government records are
generally printed, and, perhaps.  Government have preserved this record
also in a printed form.  Some records in possession of Government were
shown to the members of the Committee to acquaint themselves with the
problem under enquiry and the record in question was also perused by the
members.  So far as I am aware, the record is not published and is not
intended for circulation.  As the record does not belong to the
Committee, the question of supplying a copy to you does not arise.  If
necessary, you might approach Government for the same.

------------------------------

*No. 86, dated Nagpur, the 1st October 1954.*

Copy, together with a copy of the letter to which it is a reply,
forwarded to the Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Tribal Welfare
Department, Nagpur.

<div align="right">

B.P. PATHAK,  
*Secy., Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee,*  
*Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur.*

</div>

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 2004-47-XXX-MR, dated Nagpur, the 19th October 1954,
from Shri R. S. Shukla, Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Tribal
Welfare Department, Nagpur, to Shri B. P. Pathak, Secretary, Christian
Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Nagpur**

I am desired to enclose for the information of the Christian Missionary
Activities' Enquiry Committee, a copy of letter, dated the 12th August
1954 (without its enclosures), from Shri G. X. Francis, President,
Catholic Regional Committee, Nagpur, to the Chief Secretary.  Under
paragraph 4 of the Political and Military Department Resolution No.
318-716-V-Con., dated the 14th April 1954 the Christian Missionary
Activities Enquiry Committee has been authorised to frame its own
procedure for conducting the enquiry.  But no information has so far
been received by Government about the procedure finally adopted by the
Committee.  From Shri Francis’s letter, however, it appears that the
Committee holds public(?) meetings at the places they visit and that
people are allowed to deliver speeches.  Such a procedure is likely to
create ill-feelings amongst the various sections of the people in
general and may bring up other communal matters which may not fall
strictly within the scope of the terms of reference of the Committee.  I
am, therefore, to request that the Committee may frame its procedure in
such a manner that the Government, as the custodian of law and order,
are not put to any embarrassment.  The procedure finally adopted by the
Committee may also be intimated to Government.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 12th August 1954, from Shri G.
X. Francis, President, Christian Association, Nagpur, to Shri K. B. L.
Seth, I.C.S., Chief Secretary to Government of Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur**

*Second tour of the Niyogi Committee*

May I draw your attention to the subject noted above? I am sorry to have
had to strike a discordant note in the new trend of the enquiry which
the Committee deplores as much as I do. in enclosing a copy of the
correspondence that has passed between me and Shri B. P. Pathak; I have
to observe as follows:-

> \(a\) If this new trend is deplorable, there is no point in defending
> an indefensible action.
>
> \(b\) The consequences of inflammatory speeches being delivered by
> clever politicians and communal leaders at the meetings of the Enquiry
> Committee will ultimately go far beyond the purview of the present
> Enquiry Committee and embarrass the custodians of law and order, apart
> from the dangers to which the Christian minority would be exposed.
>
> \(c\) Already reports have reached me of the ghastly murder in the
> last week of July i954 of one of the Christian leaders of Lureg
> (Udaipur) whose case was discussed before the Committee in its first
> tour.

I should like to add that the Chairman and Secretary have done their
level best to keep the public within the limits laid down in the terms
of reference, but they have been outwitted by clever politicians.

I have brought this matter to your notice in the hope that you will take
steps to see that wittingly or unwittingly communal passions are not
roused against the Christian minority on the plea of the operations of
the Enquiry Committee.  Nothing more need be done beyond timely firmness
in handling delicate situations.  Perhaps a Press Note on the subject
will solve the problem.

Kind regards.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 153, dated Nagpur, the 8th November 1954, from Shri
M. S. Pandharkame, Assistant Secretary, Christian Missionary Activities
Enquiry Committee, Madhya Pradesh, to Shri R. S. Shukla, I.A.S..
Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Tribal Welfare Department,
Nagpur**

I am directed to refer to your demi-official letter No. 2003-47-XXX-MR.,
dated the 19th October 1954, enclosing a copy of Shri Francis’s letter,
dated the 12th August 1954, to Shri Pathak and to say that the Committee
has heard people in the several places visited by them to find out the
nature of their complaints.  Shri Francis in his letter referred to
above bears testimony to the efforts made by the Committee to prevent
meetings of Christian and non-Christian representatives from turning
into public meetings and, therefore, it is needless to dwell on this
point at any length.  I enclose a copy of Shri Pathak’s letter, dated
the 21st July 1954, to Shri Francis, which-indicates the procedure
followed by the Committee so far.  It will also indicate the inaccuracy
of Shri Francis’s allegations.

2\. A questionnaire is under preparation at present.  When replies to
the questionnaire are received, the final procedure for recording
evidence and conducting the enquiry will be laid down and communicated
to Government in due course.

------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 22nd January 1955, from the
Most Revd. Dr. Eugene D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur, to the Secretary
Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Secretariat Building,
Nagpur.**

The Catholic Bishops of Madhya Pradesh, on behalf of the Catholic
Community of Madhya Pradesh, beg to submit the following Memorandum
anent the recent Questionnaire issued by the Christian Missionary
Activities Enquiry Committee: -

1\. It is difficult to see how such a strange Questionnaire could be
issued by an impartial Committee.  A cursory perusal of the 99 questions
suffices to convince one of the basic mistrust on the part of those who
have framed it.  Its whole spirit is repugnant to the tenets of
toleration of our sovereign Democratic Republic.  To say the least, it
is an aspersion on the numerous Christians, who are rendering yeoman
service to the country in all walks of life.

2\. It is rather unfortunate that there are certain basic assumptions
that are underlying some of the questions, which are themselves
unwarranted and unproved, and which consequently vitiate the whole tenor
of the Questionnaire.  The following assumptions are illustrative but
not exhaustive:-

> \(a\) *It is assumed that illiterate persons are only sub-human
> beings, incapable of choosing and following a religion by conviction.
> -* The doctrine that only the literate and erudite can choose a
> religion and way of life belongs to a particular school of thought,
> possessed by an infinitesimal minority and opposed to the view of the
> overwhelming majority of the population of India.  This doctrine is
> opposed to the principle on which adult franchise has been based and
> therefore alien to the basic principles of our Constitution.  The
> assumption is also false and dangerous that the right and appreciation
> of religion is limited only to a few.
>
> \(b\) *It is assumed that Christians must have been compelled by
> force, fraud or monetary temptations. -* This assumption, we respect
> fully submit, begs the very question which the Committee has been
> called upon to investigate.  If there are definite allegations on
> record it is the duty of the Committee to go into these allegations
> and arrive at findings; we fail to see how any useful purpose will be
> served by calling in further and fresh allegations.  Throughout the
> exploratory tours of the Committee they have not comet across a single
> instance o f a specific allegation with details about force or fraud
> or monetary temptations in the case of conversion to Christianity. 
> What then is the purpose of this assumption in eliciting public
> information on a matter which has no grounds in the field of actual
> events?
>
> \(c\) *It is assumed that Christians are not and cannot be loyal
> citizens, of India, because they have changed their faith. -* This is
> a reflection on the entire Christian minority of ten million citizens
> of India.  We would respectfully point out that nowhere in the country
> have Christians been accused by their very worst opponents of being
> disloyal to the motherland.  We feel, therefore, compelled to record
> our most vehement protest against this aspersion on the Christian
> Community.
>
> \(d\) *It is assumed that Christian Missionaries have ulterior motives
> besides preaching the message of Christ. -* We respectfully submit
> that this is “the unkindest cut of all” as it damns the Missionary for
> a suspected motive against which he can only offer a bare denial.  The
> life of self-sacrifice and service that he brings to bear on his work
> is deliberately brushed aside and prejudiced in the eyes of the
> public.  In the absence of any evidence it is submitted that this
> assumption results in discrimination against Christian Missionaries.

3\. In the Resolution No. 318-716-V-Con. of the Madhya Pradesh
Government, dated the 14th April 1954, it has been stated “that
representations have been made to the Government from time to time”
about the activities of Christian Missionaries.  We are not aware of any
step whatsoever, that has been taken by the Enquiry Committee to
ascertain or collect what the representations were that were made prior
to 14th April 1954.  The Questionnaire, we feel, aims at collecting more
allegations instead of going into the allegations already on record.  It
is not known also whether answers submitted by persons or organisations
against Christian Missionary Activities would be submitted to the
scrutiny of the defence, or whether the defence would be afforded the
opportunity of cross-examining persons submitting reports under oath.

91 out of the 99 questions contained in the Questionnaire bear on the
activities of Christian Missionaries, Christian converts and Christian
Institutions, and oil most of these questions, the views and opinions of
the people are sought; it is felt that the opportunity is further
afforded for fresh out bursts of communal frenzy against Christians and
Christian Missionaries.  In paragraph 3 of the Resolution of the Madhya
Pradesh Government, dated the 14th April 1954, the Enquiry Committee has
been asked only to “enquire into the questions mentioned in the preamble
and to report to Government *What the facts are”*.  It is respectfully
submitted that an expression of opinions and views will not enable any
enquiry body to ascertain the facts in dispute or even to gauge the
actual situation.

Even the unbiased Questionnaire is notoriously unreliable as a method of
enquiry and is seldom used in scientific investigation without adequate
and suitable safeguards.  The collation and interpretation of answers
requires men with special training.

4\. Another feature of this Questionnaire, which is true also of the
enquiry in general, is that, starting as an enquiry into the activities
of Christian Missionaries, presumably in relation to those outside the
Christian community, it has become in some respects an enquiry into the
activities of the Christian Church as a whole.

Evidence of this unwarranted widening of the scope of the enquiry is to
be found in the nature of some of the questions. It would appear that
the whole community is on trial.  Fundamental Rights guaranteed to all
persons by the Constitution appear to be questioned. Neither the terms
of reference of the Committee nor the situation in the country justify
the singling out of the Christian community for such treatment or the
expectation that Christians should do such things which are not required
of others.

In spite of these drawbacks in the Questionnaire, we wish to place on
record certain observations regarding a few fundamental questions
touched on in the Questionnaire (*vide* Appendix).  We trust these
observations will help both Government as well as the Enquiry Committee,
to view things in their proper perspective.

Before we conclude, we, the Catholic Bishops of Madhya Pradesh, wish to
take this opportunity of expressing our disappointment at the whole
procedure of the Enquiry, as also our deep concern at the distressing
trend of events in the State during the recent months.  The Committee is
no doubt aware of the two foul murders of Christians that have taken
place in this State a few months ago.  These are only the outcome of
communal frenzy that bias been worked up by interested agencies. 
Whether this feeling of communal bitterness has been the aftermath of
the tours, it is left for the fair-mindedness of the members of the
Committee to decide.

The Questionnaire that has just been issued is an aspersion on the fair
name of the Christian community.  Apart from the insinuations contained
therein, the wording of some of the questions in this document is very
unfortunate; the questions are bound to invite malicious answers.  It
may interest the Committee to know that all sections of people in the
country, even outside the Christian fold, have been shocked on perusing
the Questionnaire.

We, therefore, respectfully submit, in view of all these circumstances,
that no useful purpose would be served by our continued co-operation and
contribution of the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee
appointed by the Government of Madhya Pradesh.

------------------------------

APPENDIX

**OBSERVATIONS AGAINST CERTAIN FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS**  
**TOUCHED ON IN THE QUESTIONNAIRE**

I. There is a prevailing misconception regarding conversions. 
Conversions are not effected by Missionaries.  It is the would-be
convert himself, who, by a personal act of free-will, chooses to adhere
to a given religion.

In the Catholic Church this freedom of choice is enjoined by law and
scrupulously adopted in practice.  “No adult may be baptised except with
his full knowledge and unless he expresses a wish to be baptised, has
been well instructed in religion and repents of his sins.” (Can. 752,
para. I.)

The utmost care is taken that the freedom of the convert is respected. 
No one is ever baptised except after a long course of religion,
instructions lasting for months and sometimes for years.  During that
period each one remains perfectly free to withdraw, and there have been
many cases of such withdrawals, i.e., of persons who freely underwent a
course of religious instruction, who withdrew before the time of
baptism.

Finally, before actually undergoing the ceremony of Baptism, each
individual is again asked: “Do you wish to be baptised?” If he answers
“No”, or expresses doubt, he will not be baptised.  To do otherwise
would be considered a sacrilege by every Catholic priest.

II\. In their eagerness to explain away conversions, some would ascribe
to the Missionary mean and unworthy motives, namely prestige, political
power, etc.  In reality, nothing will explain the life of a Missionary,
unless one realizes that it is inspired solely by the love of God, and
His Son, Jesus Christ, as well as by the love of men, Missionaries
believe that these two motives are inseparable, and that there cart be
no love for God without an active love for men, even to the sacrifice of
self: nor any love for men without a deep love for God.

This alone prompts them to spend their lives, often under very trying
circumstances, for the propagation of these ideals and thoughts which
inspire their lives and in which they find such light and strength.

Their ideal of the love of men for the sake of God explains also why
they serve the whole man, with not only the spiritual, but also the
economic and cultural needs.  All these needs are inseparable, and it is
useless to say that one loves one’s neighbour, if one lets him die of
hunger.  Besides, no spiritual or cultural life is possible without the
minimum of material comfort and security.  Hence, right from her very
earliest days, and long before any State, the Catholic Church has
interested herself in the lives of the poor and sick and down-trodden,
and has continued doing so throughout the centuries.  By taking interest
in their well-being, Missionaries do not buy converts. Conversions
without faith are as abhorent to Christian Missionaries as to any one
else.

But, if people see men devoting themselves selflessly and wholeheartedly
to their well-being and believe in these men and desire to adhere to a
religion in which they see such generous charity practised as well as
preached, are they not at liberty to do so?

III\. It is further argued that illiterate persons are not capable of
choosing a religion.

Religion is from God and necessarily connotes love and justice.  It is
evident, therefore, that religion is meant for all men and not for the
cultured few only.  In fact, it is the poor and the down-trodden who are
most in need of the consolations of religion.

Therefore, it must be possible, and experience has shown it is perfectly
possible for the unsophisticated to grasp the things of God.

We respectfully maintain that because the Adivasis or Backward Tribes
may be illiterate or down-trodden. they are not stupid or devoid of
common-sense.  The honesty and shrewdness in barter or money-dealings of
these is proverbial.  They often exhibit more commonsense than many who
have allowed themselves to be spoiled by modern civilisation. 
Illiterate persons may not be able to reach religious truths in the same
way as philosophers, but they are perfectly capable of seeing clearly
what is really good and thus, to judge its truth and decide whether or
not they ought to adopt a given religion.

The Indian Constitution considers all citizens as capable of enjoying
adult franchise and of judging the merits of the various parties, why
should this capacity be denied in the case of religion only?

IV\. It has repeatedly been said that Missionaries establish schools for
the sake of effecting conversions, or organise social works for the same
purpose.  It has always been our practice, in our Missions, to start
schools and social woks only when the people have been converted, and
sometimes very long after such conversions.  It is only when there are a
number of Catholics, whom Missionaries have the responsibility to
educate, that schools and social works are started for their benefit. 
These schools are open to every pupil, irrespective of creed or caste,
but no non-Catholic people is ever taught the Catholic religion without
his consent and with the free consent of his parents or guardians.

In conclusion, the only method consistently used by Catholic
Missionaries among Tribals and others has been to identify themselves
with them and live among them, and treat them as men endowed with
commonsense, and try to bring around their all-round social, cultural
and spiritual uplift, and after their conversion, if circumstances
permit it, to see to the educational and economic progress of the
Catholic community.

V. The other major accusation is that Missions are used directly or
indirectly for purposes of political or extra-religious activities.  It
is rather unfortunate that the insinuation that Missionaries are
dabbling in politics and have some political aims in view is so
persistently repeated in reports against Missionaries, that now it
appears to be taken for granted.

We respectfully maintain that Catholic Missionaries, on principle, are
absolutely forbidden from entering the political arena, and as a point
of fact, nowhere in the State have they used their Missions or
Missionaries for any political purposes.  The Enquiry Committee will,
perhaps, bear witness to the fact that whereas many general allegations
were made against the Missionaries on this point, while they were on
their tours, no specific instances were forthcoming substantiated by
facts.

In this connection, we give here the directives of the Plenary Council
of all the Catholic Bishops (held in January 1950)-

> “Let foreign Missionaries free from political bias, so speak and act
> with complete sincerity that the spiritual mission of their ministry
> in the country, and their interest in the welfare of the people is
> clear to all, as also their ardent desire for the good of the nation. 
> Let them foster above all the virtue of patriotism and due obedience
> to civil authorities.”

This, sir, is one of the many documents that contain solemn injunctions
for all Catholic Priests and Missionaries.  They are meant to be taken
as a safe norm of conduct.  “They are at the same time a proof that in
case of errors by Missionaries, we have the machinery for controlling
them without the intervention of the secular power.  Above all, these
documents do honour to the Church and her regard for non-Christian
civilizations; they disabuse our Hindu friends and national leaders of
any impression they may have that the Catholic Church is an unfriendly
institution.” - (*Cardinal Gracias, Archbishop of Bombay*.)

------------------------------

**Copy of D.O. letter, dated the February 1955, from the President,
Christian Association, Nagpur, to Dr. M. B. Niyogi, MA., LL.M., LL.D.,
Chairman, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Nagpur**

SUBJECT. - *Christian public opinion regarding Enquiry Committee.*

This Council is grateful to you for extending the time-limit up to the
15th February 1955 for the submission of this Memorandum.

2\. That a person of your rank, experience, scholarship and temperament
has been chosen to be the Chairman of this Committee, is a matter not
only of satisfaction but of hope to the Christians of this State. I have
therefore, been directed to rely upon your trained sense of justice and
fairplay to submit this Memorandum for consideration and necessary
action.  Having watched the trend of the enquiry and the sad and
unfortunate developments that have adversely affected the en ire Indian
Christian people of this State, this Council feels that the time has
arrived to seek your good offices in bringing to the notice of
Government our disappointment, sense of frustration, apprehensions and
our most anxious concern for our future.

*POINT No. I.*

**ENQUIRY INTO THE EXERCISE OF A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT**

3\. Our first grievance is that the Constitution having guaranteed the
Fundamental Right to profess, practise and propagate one’s religion, the
State of Madhya Pradesh should go back on this guarantee and order an
enquiry into the exercise of that right by only one section of its
citizens, who happen to be an infinite small minority.  Usually an
enquiry is conducted into definite matters of public importance, either
on the motion of the Legislature or when the executive is faced with
threats to, or actual breach of law and order.  In the present case,
*there was no directive from the legislature and none of the conditions
present which justified administrative intervention.*  The earliest
warnings from Government, therefore, came to the Christians as a
complete surprise.

4\. Greater shock was caused by the grounds on which executive action
against the exercise of this particular Fundamental Right was sought to
be based.  Speaking in the Lok Sabha on the 21st April 1953, Dr. K. N.
Katju said that foreign Christian Missionaries in the districts of
Raigarh and Surguja were engaged in *proselytising activities which were
offensive to non-Christian local population* (vide Appendix A).  This
statement enunciated for the first time since the dawn of Independence
the novel doctrine that the exercise of religious rights by minorities
is dependent on the sweet will and pleasure of the majority community.

5\. In all humility, but with a due sense of responsibility, this
Council would like to place on record that this interpretation which
interpolates a new condition for the exercise of Fundamental Rights, is
altogether untenable.  No Legislature would feel competent to legislate
on such matters.  It is, therefore, a matter of profound regret to the
Christian minority that the Executive of Madhya Pradesh has assumed to
itself the authority to interfere with the Fundamental Rights of the
Christians.

6\. This Council most respectfully submits that the Fundamental Right to
propagate religion is not limited by any other conditions save those
expressly mentioned in the Constitution.  None of these conditions
having been infringed, the unimpeachable Right vests in every Citizen,
whether Christian or Hindu or any other, *FREELY* to propagate his
Religion.  We feel deeply aggrieved that the executive action of Madhya
Pradesh in ordering an enquiry into our religious activities has
interfered with this inalienable right not only to propagate Religion,
but to do so *FREELY*.

*APPEAL*

7\. In the conviction that these constitutional guarantees of Religious
Freedom were adequate for a minority which had no other ambition,
Christians surrendered all their seats in the State Legislatures and in
Parliament, and appointed the Hindus to be the guardians of their rights
and interests.  It is, therefore, up to you, as a member of the majority
community, and up to the Ministers of the Madhya Pradesh Cabinet, to
redress the wrong that has been done to a loyal and voiceless minority,
and to convey such reassurances as the flagrant violation of the
Constitution now calls for.

*POINT No. II.*

**ONE-SIDED PERSONNEL OF THE ENQUIRY COMMITTEE**

8\. As an ex-Chief Justice you will appreciate the value of the dictum
that justice must not only be done, but must appear to be done.  In the
composition of the Enquiry Committee, this principle has been
scrupulously honoured in the breach, as will be clear from the
following:-

9\. There were two distinct communal parties to the dispute. 
Allegations made by one were repudiated by another.  In the
circumstances, a third party's adjudication should have been acceptable
to both.  This was precisely the proposal sponsored by this Council in
its Ranchi resolution, dated the 7th May 1953 (copy enclosed as Appendix
B), that a Committee of Enquiry be set up composed of Muslims and Parsis
with judicial experience to go into the allegations made by Dr. Katju. 
For reasons best known to itself, Government did not accept this
proposal.

10\. There were other courses open to Government for an impartial
assessment of the situation.  It is t matter of recent history that in
the case of an aggressive minority, the Congress was prepared to accept
the principle of parity as between two communities, though not between
two political parties.  In this case, when the complainants were given
representation on the Enquiry Committee, it was but fair that the
accused should also have been given equal representation.  It is much to
be regretted that this principle has not been followed.  It was also
open to Government to appoint on the Enquiry Committee all men of
judicial experience.  This would have ensured the application of
judicial processes to the evidence and the findings.  Even this has not
been done.  Finally, the legal and constitutional machinery was open to
Government to appoint a regular Commission of Inquiry under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.  Every well-wisher of the State
deplores that even the most unexceptionable course has not been
followed.

11\. Christians are aggrieved that notwithstanding the admission that
Hindus are the complainants and Christians are the accused, Government
has appointed on the Committee Eve Hindus and one unrepresentative
Christian.  It is a matter of common knowledge that Mr. S. K. George
holds some unorthodox views about the doctrines of Christianity and
about conversions.  On the very question on which he is required to
pronounce judgment, he has expressed himself openly in the columns of
the Nagpur Times, so that Christians feel confirmed in their original
suspicion that his selection was made merely because he was opposed to
conversions.  I leave it to you as a trained and experienced judge of
men and matters to decide whether on these facts Christians will not be
led to the conclusion that Government has deliberately set up a
one-party tribunal to ensure a verdict against them.

12\. There were two occasions when Christians could have been given some
representation, viz., when Seth Govind Das and then Mr. Kirtimant Rao
resigned their positions on the Enquiry Committee.  These hopes were
doomed to disappointment.

13\. In this connection may I bring to your notice that the Congress
had, in its negotiations with the Cabinet Mission, invoked, consecrated
and adopted the principle that in all minority problems and their
solutions, the consent of the minority concerned would be indispensable
for its validity, even in the State Legislatures. The Congress is
irrevocably committed to this principle, and this Council is convinced
that a review of the composition of the Enquiry Committee in the light
of Congress pledges and principles would lead Government to reconstitute
it.

*APPEAL*

14\. The Council has directed me to place the above facts before you,
and to request you to be pleased to use the weight of your influence
with the Government to point out the wrong that has been done to the
Christians of Madhya Pradesh.

*POINT No. III.*

**CLAP-TRAP TERMS OF REFERENCE WHICH ARE MISLEADING AND INADEQUATE**

Terms of reference to any enquiring body should have a bearing on the
situation to be explored.  There 'is no connection between the situation
described by Dr. Katju and the terms of reference given to the Enquiry
Committee.  Dr. Katju had specified the areas.  Now, the area of your
operation is unlimited.  Dr. Katju had pin-pointed foreign
Missionaries.  Now, foreigner, Indian and in fact the entire Indian
Christian community have been handed over to your Committee for
scrutiny.  Dr. Katju had accused foreign Christian Missionaries of
proselytisation.  Now, if your 99-Point Questionnaire correctly
interprets the terms of reference, the sum total of all the activities
of the Indian Christian community-social, educational, humanitarian,
cultural and political-come within the purview of your Committee’s
investigation.

15\. This Council has searched wherever it was possible for some
precedent or parallel to such an omnibus Committee in the annals of
British or Independent India.  These efforts have not borne any fruit. 
In no other Democracy of the world has Government sat in judgment over
the normal activities of minorities.  The executive action of the
Government of Madhya Pradesh, therefore, stands in a class by itself and
needs to justify the appointment of a one party Enquiry Committee with
omnibus terms of reference before the bar of world opinion.

16\. In chronological sequence, there are two sets of facts which call
for investigation:-

> \(a\) In some of the merged feudal States of Madhya Pradesh,
> Christianity had been banned.  The merger and integration not having
> brought the expected freedom and relief, Christians had complained to
> Government that they were the victims of harassments and
> discrimination. (Kindly see in this connection the Confidential
> Report, dated the 1st May 1949, submitted by Shri G. X. Francis,
> President Christian Association, Nagpur, to the Chief Secretary to
> Government, Central Provinces and Berar, the correspondence that
> passed between him and Shri Sunderlal Verma, Deputy Commissioner,
> Raigarh in June-October 1949 and the complaint addressed to the Prime;
> Minister by Shri P Lobo, Advocate, Nagpur.)
>
> \(b\) As a counterblast to Shri Lobo’s direct report, the local
> authorities appear to have prepared a counter report accusing Tribal
> Christians of all sorts of criminal offences and insinuating that
> foreign missionaries were exercising unhealthy influence on Tribals
> and suggesting that they were behind the agitation for Jharkhand.

17\. Relying on the correctness of these reports and without making any
enquiries, Dr. Katju appears to have made his observations against the
proselytising activities of foreign Missionaries in Raigarh and Surguja.

18\. This Council respectfully submits that if anything, the enquiry
should have started on these two sets of facts, and findings confined to
the issues therein raised.  By the terms of reference given to your
Committee, you are yet not precluded from conducting such an
investigation.  From the trend of the enquiry conducted so far, it is
evident that your committee proposes to bypass these original causes and
to confine its attention to subsequent developments which have *a
bearing on the attitude and feelings of Hindus towards Christian
missionaries and the conversion of Tribals to Christianity.*

19\. The bias italicised above, which has no validity in the terms of
reference given to your Committee, has found expression in an eagerness
to elicit public opinion on the question of reconverting these
Christians to Hinduism.  We submit that such interest in encouraging
conversions to one faith and discouraging conversions to another, is
outside the jurisdiction of Government or any Government agency, and
definitely gives a direction to public opinion which reflects on the
underlying purpose and impartiality of your Committee.  We regret this
for the sake of the fair name of Government and of your own.

20\. We regret also that whereas the accused have been named as
“Christian Missionaries” and “Missions”, and the victims have been named
as “illiterate aborigines and other backward people”, the complainants
have been comprehensively grouped as “Non-Christians”.  Who are these
“non-Christians”? Are they Muslims? Are they Tribals? Are they
Harijans?  This Council has verified that they are none of these.  The
“witnesses” who have so far appeared before the Enquiry Committee
indicate their high status in the caste commonwealth or their
subservience to local officialdom.  We submit, therefore, that by these
clap-traps, the ill-will of a few Hindu communalists and the sycophants
around the throne of the ex-Rajahs has been exaggerated as a State-wide
“agitation” against Christian Missionaries.

*APPEAL*

21\. With due deference and in all humility we beg you to turn your
judicial instincts and probity to unravel the causes behind the
transition of Dr. Katju’s definitiveness to the present indefinite
indications of your mission and the transformation of the antagonism of
a few caste Hindus into a Statewide agitation.

*POINT No. IV.*

**IGNORING ORIGINAL ALLEGATIONS AND COLLECTING FRESH EVIDENCE**

22\. Dr. Katju spoke of having received certain “Reports” on the
activities of foreign Christian Missionaries in Raigarh and Surguja. 
The terms of reference speak of Government having received
“representations from time to time”, and of “allegations”,
“counter-allegations” and “denials”. As these are referred to in the
Government's resolution, dated the 14th April 1954, it follows that all
these were on record before this date and influenced Government in
constituting the Enquiry Committee.  By the elementary principles of
jurisprudence, the defence was entitled to a knowledge of the charges
levelled at it.  Shri G. X. Francis, President of this Council, sought
information on this point, and the Secretary of the Enquiry Committee in
his D.-O. No. 14/S-C.MEC, dated the 29th May 1954, very courteously
promised facilities for examining the records.

23\. When Shri Francis appeared in person in the Secretariat on the 1st
June 1954. three files were given to him for examination.  In none of
these three files was there a single “representation”, or “allegation”,
or “counter-allegation” or “denial” which bore a date *anterior* to the
14th April 1954!  All the documents which these three files contained
were in reply to the Press Statement issued by the Enquiry Committee and
were, therefore, posterior to the date of its constitution.  This
Council most respectfully submits that by the very terms of reference,
all documents received by your Commission after the 14th April 1954,
save those which are in continuation, corroboration or refutation of
those received previously, should be expunged from your records as
irrelevant to or outside the scope of your enquiry.

24\. In this connection, in an interview with the Prime Minister of
India, Shri G. X. Francis had pleaded that by the term “In reference,
the enquiry would be altogether one-sided and the harassments and
discrimination, of which the Tribal Christians had complained, would not
be investigated. The Prime Minister was under the impression that the
enquiry should be conducted into both sides of the case, and when the
difference and distinction between Christian Tribals and Christian
Missionaries was established, he was convinced of the necessity of a
thorough investigation into both sides of the case.  He then wrote to
the Government of Madhya Pradesh to have as wide terms of reference as
possible.  It is much to be deplored that the State Government could not
see it, way to agree to the eminently reasonable proposal made by the
Prime Minister of India.  In D.-O. No. 1718/46-XXX-MR, dated the 3rd
September 1954, the Government of Madhya Pradesh informed Shri G. X.
Francis that “no amendment to the terms of reference was considered
necessary by the Government”.

25\. As a direct consequence of the above position, the Enquiry
Committee has been forced to stray into fresh fields and pastures new,
and to call for and collect *post litem motam* evidence against
Christians and Christian Missionaries.  This Council bees to emphasise
that this kind of evidence is bound to be ruled out of court by anybody
of judges, and it will, therefore, be the worst travesty of justice ever
perpetrated in India to base your findings on such material……… 
Christians will always harbour the grievance that on the evidence before
your Committee, such as it was before the 14th April 1954, you will have
had to exculpate all Christians and Christian Missionaries of the
charges levelled against them, and because some men are interested in
banging the Christians somehow, fresh evidence is sought to be gathered
against them.

*APPEAL*

26\. Christians seek justice, and have no doubt that an ex-Chief Justice
dispense it without fear or favour

*POINT NO. V*

**THE ENTIRE CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY SUSPECT AND ON TRIAL**

27\. Dr. Katju accused foreign Christian Missionaries of two particular
districts.

The Government of Madhya Pradesh has accused all Christian Missionaries,
whether Indian or foreign, throughout the State.

The Enquiry Committee has gone one step further and by its 99-point
Questionnaire has brought the entire Indian- Christian community under
suspicion and placed it on trial.

In the process of allowing things to broaden from precedent to precedent
scant courtesy appears to have been paid to the fortunes and fate of a
community of one crore of people, leave alone the respect due to
individual human rights.  I would most respectfully solicit your
attention to the hiatus thus revealed between the guarantees held out by
the Constitution and the actual treatment meted out to a Minority.

28\. The Enquiry Committee has elicited public opinion on the question
whether the Indian Christian’s cultural integrity and national loyalty
are not undermined by his religious convictions, practices and
affiliations.  The clear implications of such enquiries are that
Christianity turns its nationals into traitors and quislings, and cannot
be expected to coexist with other religions in the land in a peaceful
manner and co-operate in realising a just order of society.  To say the
least, Christians feel deeply hurt and insulted by such calculated
reflections and aspersions on their sense of Nationalism and
Patriotism.  They cannot help feeling that such reflections coming from
any individual or body of men would have exposed them to the charge of
libel and then to the punitive provisions of the laws of the land.  The
inference, therefore, cannot be resisted that the Enquiry Committee, by
questions reflecting on the nationalism and patriotism of Christians is
doing duty for rabid communalists who presume a sense of nationalism
exclusively for the majority community and deny it to other sections of
the citizens of India.

29\. It will perhaps not be out of place to remind you and your esteemed
colleagues that the Christian community has to its credit a record of
national service which no other community has so far equalled-in the
field of education, in social reform, in humanitarian work, in promoting
and achieving cultural integration and in national defence.  On the
Enquiry Committee if self the member who have received their education
in Christian schools and colleges should far outnumber those who owe
their education to institutions conducted by any other community.  You,
sir, who have made no secret of your indebtedness to Christian
education, can bear testimony whether Christianity is a denationalising
force.

30\. The consequence of suspecting a whole community of anti-national
tendencies and placing it on trial by a show of judicial procedure, is
to cut out all common grounds for discussions or negotiations which
might lead to mutual adjustments of differences, if any, and
establishment of harmonious relations.

*APPEAL*

31\. The Catholic Regional Council fervently hopes that you will see the
irreparable damage that is being done by isolating the Christians from
the stream of national life and making them appear in the eyes of their
fellow-countrymen as dangerous traitors who are unworthy to live in this
great and ancient country.  I leave it to you to do what you yet can to
undo the harm and damage that has been caused.

*POINT No. VI.*

**UNWARRANTED ASSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING QUESTIONNAIRE**

32\. The impartiality of the elaborate 99-point Questionnaire stands
vitiated by some utterly unwarranted assumptions of which the following
are illustrative:-

> \(a\) That Christianity is a denationalising force.
>
> \(b\) That the State which is secular is yet competent to legislate
> against the development of Christianity.
>
> \(c\) that the fate and fortunes of Indian Christians and of
> Christianity should be determined on the strength of prevailing Hindu
> public opinion.
>
> \(d\) That the leave and licence of the local “non-Christian”
> population should be the sole criterion for allowing conversions, to
> Christianity.
>
> \(e\) That foreign Governments, for their own ulterior imperialistic
> purposes, are interested in the growth of the Indian Christian
> community.
>
> \(f\) That in imitation of the Muslims who carved out the neighbouring
> State of Pakistan, the Christians of India may also demand a separate
> State.
>
> \(g\) That conversions are the result of material and monetary
> temptations offered by Missionaries.
>
> \(h\) That Indian Christians tend to form a distinct communal group,
> and are indifferent and hostile to Indian traditions and culture.

33\. I beg most respectful to submit that each and every one of these
assumptions is not only false, jut has no reference to the terms of
reference given to your committee.  By no stretch of language or
imagination could any of these terms be beaten into yielding
justification for any of the questions based on the above assumptions. 
According to the terms of reference, the duty of the Committee was
fourfold: *To report to Government what the facts* are on the questions-

> \(1\) Whether Christian.  Missionaries employ force, fraud or other
> monetary temptations in converting Tribals and backward people.
>
> \(2\) Whether Missions are utilised for political or extra-religious
> objectives.
>
> \(3\) Whether the repudiations of these allegations is correct.
>
> \(4\) Whether Missionaries have been harassed by non-Christians and
> officials.

You can see for yourself that your Committee was required to collect
*facts* on the four points above, and not to elicit opinions on certain
arbitrary assumptions.

34\. Even for the purpose of eliciting public opinion, you will concede
that, the questions addressed to the public should have some basis in
the “complaints”, “representations” and “allegations” said to have been
received by Government before the 14th April 1954.  Where are these
documents? There was not a single such incriminating document in any of
the three files that were produced for the inspection of the President
of this Council on the 1st June 1954.  In the circumstances, the
Christian community is entitled to ask how it is expected to interpret
questions which have no basis in. fact?

35\. With reference to these baseless assumptions and the questions
based thereon, I trust you will permit me to make some observations:-

> \(a\) The basic assumption. underlying the Questions is that
> conversions to Christianity are not and can never be a matter of
> conviction. It is even denied that relief from social disabilities and
> the aspiration to equal and fair treatment as human beings can be a
> legitimate motive for conversions to Christianity \[please see
> Question 8(e) and the latter part of 8 (g)\].  It is also assumed that
> the illiterate are not capable of religious convictions.  In many
> cases the mere unsupported opinion of the non-Christian is sought to
> convict the Christian as in the Question 11: “Do you think that
> conversion to Christianity adversely affects the national loyalty and
> outlook of converts?
>
> \(b\) Very many questions are asked which travel far beyond the terms
> of reference.  It is not understood what Questions 32 to 37, 39 to 41,
> 47 to 49, 75 and 77, and 94 to 98 have to do with the terms of
> reference.  Many of these questions are in the nature of *suppressio
> veri, suggestio falsi*.
>
> \(c\) Some questions revolve round such terms as “National loyalty”,
> “Indian Culture” and “Indian Traditions”.  It is not understood by
> what right or under what law can an enquiry be conducted into the
> national loyalty of a whole community.  Without stating what is meant
> by Indian Traditions, it is not understood what information is sought
> to be elicited on this subject.  As regards “Indian Culture”, the
> following quotation will indicate the just apprehensions of the Indian
> Christian community when questions are posed in one sense which the
> general public is bound to interpret in another:-
>
> “……In the name of Indian culture and tradition, certain things are
> done which are not in strict keeping with the ideal of a secular
> State.  Subtle attempts are made to ‘Hinduise’ Indian culture,
> forgetting that Indian culture is a composite thing, in the evolution
> of which Hinduism and Buddhism, Jainism and Sikkism, Christianity and
> Islam, as well as Western influences in general have played a part. 
> It is true that Hinduism is the majority religious community in India,
> and that the Hindu culture is the most influential element in Indian
> culture.  Yet, if words are to be used in their strict sense, Hindu
> culture and Indian culture should not be used synonymously.” (*Dr. E.
> Asirvatham’s Presidential Address, All-India Political Science
> Conference, 17th Session*.)

36\. This Council most respectfully submits that the Enquiry Committee
which has been called into existence for the purpose of finding out the
facts in the representations received by Government before the 14th
April 1954 is turning itself into a “fault-finding body”, and by its
arbitrary and unwarranted questions, inflamming communal passions
against the Christian minority in this State.  This may be an
unconscious process, but it cannot be denied that it is unfair, unjust
and unsecular.

*APPEAL*

37\. Through you, I beg most respectfully to appeal to the Congress
Government of the State, to review the position before it deteriorates
any further, and take such action as the circumstances call for, to stop
further damage to a loyal minority.

**UNDEFINED STATUS OF ENQUIRY COMMITTEE**

38\. Christians all over India, and particularly those in Madhya
Pradesh, have been anxious to know the exact status of the Enquiry
Committee appointed under Resolution No. 318-716-V-Con., dated the 14th
April 1954, No information whatsoever on this all important matter is
available either in the text of the Resolution or in any Press Note
issued by Government.  In the circumstances, this Council was left to
its own resources to discover the position.

39\. The only law under which a Commission or Committee of Enquiry can
be constituted is The Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952.  Under this Act,
certain conditions have to be fulfilled and certain procedures have to
be complied with before any such body can come legally into existence. 
As neither the conditions nor the procedural requirements seem to have
been fulfilled, this Council pointedly raised the matter with the
Government.  In D.O. No. 1874-815-V, dated the 14th May 1954, Government
replied to say that *“Government have inherent powers* to appoint a
Committee *to make enquiries on any matter to ascertain the factual
position”*.  This Council elicited *legal opinion on Government’s
statement,* and in the light thereof, I am directed to state as
follows:-

40\. In a Democracy, the will of the State means the will of the people
expressed through the Legislature.  The Legislative Assembly of Madhya
Pradesh has not voted for this Enquiry Committee, nor has the Governor
sanctioned it in exercise of the emergency powers vested in him under
the Constitution.  *Has the Executive any inherent powers over and above
those expressly provided for in the Constitution?* I beg leave to
discuss the proposition.

41\. Article 154 says that the executive power of the State shall be
vested in the Governor and exercised by him either directly or through
officers *in accordance with this Constitution*.  These words
emphatically restrict the powers of the executive to certain expressly
specified provisions contained in the Constitution.  In other words, no
power-explicit or implicit- not specifically provided for can be
exercised either by the Governor or by his Government.  *Such powers,*
if exercised, must therefore be regarded as autocratic and ultra vires
*of the Constitution*.  This view was emphasised by the Prime Minister
of India, when the undersigned interviewed him at Delhi, *on the 12th
May* 1954; when he said: “I am not a Grand Moghul.  I cannot do what I
like. I have to function within the limits of the Constitution”.  The
same observation would apply with equal, if not greater force, to the
executive actions of the Government of Madhya Pradesh.  It follows,
therefore, that the exercise of powers not traceable in the
Constitution, on the plea that they are inherent in a Government, must
lead from precedent to precedent and destroy the foundations of a
responsible Government.

42\. As no legal sanction is traceable for the institution of the
Enquiry Committee, it has to be inferred that The Christian Missionary
Activities Enquiry Committee of Madhya Pradesh is merely *an
unauthorised body set up by the Executive, to do what it liked and how
it liked and wherever it liked throughout the limits of Madhya Pradesh
in order to create fresh evidence against Christians and Christian
missionaries.*  You will appreciate that this AS a parlous state of
affairs, and Indian Christians are extremely apprehensive as to the ends
to which their evidence before this Committee will be put.

*APPEAL*

43\. The Catholic Regional Council most respectfully *solicits your
sympathetic consideration* to the issue raised herein and persuade
Government to legalise and regularise the position.

**MOUNTING REIGN OF REPRESSION RESULTING IN TWO MURDERS**

44\. The Catholic Regional Council, in its dated Memorandum, dated the
14th February 1954, to the Prime Minister of India addressed through the
Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, already listed the harassments and
persecutions to which the Tribal Christians of Jashpur have been
subjected.  These are briefly recapitulated for ready reference:-

> \(a\) That complaints were already an old story in 1949 that petty
> officials were harassing Christians, and that when the Deputy
> Commissioner of Raigarh asked that these complaints should be
> addressed to him, local officials got alarmed and intercepted a
> representation dated the 14th May 1949 signed by ten men.  All these
> ten men were subjected to torture and threats throughout the night of
> Saturday, the 4th June 1949.  When the undersigned informed the Deputy
> Commissioner about this nocturnal enquiry, he promptly replied to say
> that he had not received any complaints nor had he ordered any
> enquiry.  It later transpired that the enquiry was conducted by
> certain officials of the Forest Department.
>
> \(b\) That *harassments* were of a nature which it was impossible for
> any set of people to resist when-
>
> > \(i\) Government officials made it known through a whispering
> > campaign that their attitude was one of hostility to Christians,
> >
> > \(ii\) they were found associating with communalists in all plans
> > and plots against Christians,
> >
> > \(iii\) on the plea of making enquiries, they would call up
> > Christians over long distances and adjourn the dates of enquiry,
> >
> > \(iv\) they would call up Christians and abuse them for having
> > become Christians,
> >
> > \(v\) an insidious propaganda was set afoot that conversions to
> > Christianity would entail confiscation of their lands,
> >
> > \(vi\) false cases would be cooked up against Christians to make
> > them prove their innocence, and
> >
> > \(vii\) Christian Tribals were prevented from buying lands from
> > their fellow Tribals on the ground that they had forfeited his
> > right.
>
> \(c\) That the direction in which the wind has been blowing was
> indicated to the Christians by the selection and appointment of a well
> known and bitter communalist, Mr. R. K. Deshpande as Public Prosecutor
> in Jashpurnagar, and by entrusting all cases of Christians to him.  In
> the months following the statement made by Dr. Katju, several hundreds
> of Christians were caught hold of and coerced into giving their thumb
> impressions to documents of which they had no knowledge.
>
> \(d\) That in the wake of the tour of the Deputy Commissioner in
> May-June 1954 in the Jashpur Sub-Division, following the statement of
> Dr. Katju, a spate of criminal cases against Missionaries and leading
> Christians have been started, some successfully up to the stage of the
> Courts of Law, and some unsuccessfully.
>
> \(e\) The unsuccessful cases are more revealing than those which are
> *sub judice*.  One of the cases had come up before the Enquiry
> Committee with a complaint that Christians had staged a play which
> sought to ridicule the Hindu faith.  Apparently, the Enquiry Committee
> was *satisfied* that it was an improvised playlet which parodied the
> charlatanry of the village doctors.  Yet, the police have been
> harassing the actors to say that the playlet was either written or
> inspired by the Missionaries.  In another case, an aged buffalo was
> found near the Loyala High School at Kunkuri in a sick and hurt
> condition.  The school authorities sheltered and fed the animal and
> restored it to the owner when he arrived.  A few days after, the
> animal died.  Desperate efforts were made by the police to implicate
> the school authorities in an attempt at *“cow-killing”*.  In a third
> case, a woman was mauled by a bear or panther near Musgutri and was
> brought for treatment to the Mission Hospital.  Although there was no
> hope of her recovery, the Sisters treated the case, but the husband
> took her away and she died.  The police tried their level best to
> implicate the Sisters in the *crime of having neglected her treatment*
> because she refused to become a Catholic.  Such unsuccessful cases are
> many.
>
> \(f\) Now to crown the campaign harassment of Christians in the
> districts of Raigarh and Surguja, two foul murders have taken place,
> one in the Dharamjaigarh tahsil and the other in the Surguja
> district.  The peculiar feature of the former is that in the very
> first meeting of the Enquiry Committee at Dharamjaigarh, the
> undersigned had brought it to your notice that Christians were
> extremely nervous about tendering evidence before the Committee for
> fear of reprisals and further harassments, and therefore requested you
> for some assurance of protection.  At Lureg itself, where the murder
> took place, you were inclined to consider my request for an assurance
> when Shri G. S. Gupta intervened to say that no such assurance will be
> given.  Thereupon, you were pleased to state that my request would be
> forwarded to Government for orders. I have not yet heard from the
> Government.  The second murder was that of another Christian who was
> an accused in a criminal case and was acquitted by the Court.  He was
> done to death in open daylight.  Both cases have been brought to the
> notice of the- Government of Madhya Pradesh in a representation, dated
> the 30th November 1954, by His Grace, Dr. Eugene D’Souza, Archbishop
> of Nagpur.
>
> \(g\) *Desecration* of churches and chapels which took place in the
> Jashpur area absolutely astounded the citizens of India as an act of
> communal vandalism reminiscent of the days of Hindu-Muslim riots.  In
> spite of reports and representations, the police did nothing-the civil
> authorities did nothing even interpellations on the floor of the
> Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly did not elicit any reply.

To a judge of your eminence and experience, I need hardly point out
that, if certain undesirable effects in the public life of the country
are deplored, the underlying causes have to be appreciated.  In the
present case, the causes are there for the whole world to see, why in a
particular part of the State only one section of the citizens continued
to be harassed even after the integration of she feudal areas, and why
this *tempo of harassment increased after the Pronouncement of Dr.
Katju.*

*APPEAL*

45\. Whatever may be the grounds or justification for the present
Enquiry, you will appreciate that as the result of the outburst of
unrestrained  communalism, the Christian minority in one part of the
State finds itself exposed to grievous danger. I have therefore to
*appeal, to you to represent the present communal trends to the
Government* that may take such urgent action as the developments
culminating in the desecration of churches and murders of Christian
leaders, call for, and restore the spirit of tolerance for minorities
and the tone and temper of secularism which for the moment are
conspicuous by their absence in some parts of Madhya Pradesh,
particularly in the Tribal areas of Jashpur.

**GOVERNMENT'S PARTISAN ATTITUDE**

46\. This Council begs most respectfully to draw attention to the manner
in which a handful of *communal minded officers* can mishandle a
situation and involve Government in responsibility for their actions. 
This is rendered crystal clear from a review of the forces that were at
work, and the manner which administrative officers reacted to these
forces.

**PRE-INTEGRATION FORCES THAT CONTINUED INTO POST-INTEGRATION DAYS**

47\. The pre-Integration forces were the *Udaipur State Conversion Act,
the Raigarh State Conversion Act* and the *Surguja State Apostacy Act*. 
Under these Acts, Christianity was banned in these areas.  Integration
implied a complete change of condition, and to bring these feudal areas
in harmony with the laws prevailing in the rest of India needed the
services of secular-minded officers.  Unfortunately, such officers were
p6sted who had not the right concepts of a secular State and were in
sympathy with the elements which had engendered the pre-Integration
forces.  Consequently, a body of opinion was encouraged at the expense
of another, and the demon of Communalism raised its head, without the
knowledge of the authorities at Nagpur.  What followed, therefore, was
inevitable.

48\. When Christians complained of harassments and persecutions, the
*local authorities suppressed the complaints and started terrorising the
complainants.*  This is proved by the *nocturnal inquisition* held
without the knowledge of the Deputy Commissioner on the *4th June*
1949.  Even reports to the authorities at Nagpur did not seem to worry
the local officials who were ready to justify their actions by
white-washing the complaints.  This is proved by the explanations
offered on the Confidential Report, dated the 1st May 1949, submitted by
Shri G. X. Francis to the Chief Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh,
on the situation in Jashpur.

49\. The first *casus belli* appears to have been the report sent by
Shri P. Lobo, Advocate, Nagpur, to the Prime Minister of India, drawing
his attention to the harassments of Christians in the integrated Tribal
areas.  The fury of the local officials appears to have been roused to a
pitch which blinded them to the actual situation, and in a wild attempt
to defend themselves, they drew a completely distorted picture by
stringing together a very large number of false Allegations,
insinuations and innuendoes against the Tribal Christians and Christian
Missionaries in the districts of Raigarh and Surguja.  It is this Report
which appears to have misled Dr. Katju into transforming the persecuted
people as aggressors.

50\. All the developments since then have been moving in a vicious
circle.  As Dr. Katju had made a definite statement, every attempt was
being made to give it the secret of truth.  The appointment of the
Enquiry Committee also…… is as its…… aim.

51\. Meanwhile, things have happened in Jashpur which are incredible: -

> \(a\) The Tahsil Congress Committee of Jashpur, withdrew from
> contesting the elections to the Janapada Sabha, and gave the
> Christians no other alternative than to face the full blast of
> Communalism displayed by the Ram Raj Parishad.
>
> \(b\) The excesses committed by the Ram Raj Parishad were winked at by
> the local authorities.
>
> \(c\) Shri D. K. Mehta, Minister for industries, openly denounced
> conversions to Christians by characterising the process as “passing
> from one darkness to another”.
>
> \(d\) The vilest possible Press Propaganda has been let loose, in
> almost all the newspapers published in Madhya Pradesh, accusing
> Christian Missionaries or having brought several truck-loads of guns
> and ammunitions and concealing them in Mission compounds.
>
> \(e\) Having seen a *publication* in the hands of a member of the
> Enquiry Committee about the activities of Belgian Jesuits in Udaipur,
> the undersigned asked the Secretary of the Enquiry Committee to
> furnish a copy.  This was refused, and the very existence of such a
> publication was denied.  On the 25th July 1954, however, the
> *Hitavada* of Nagpur published a sensational account of what purported
> to be the correspondence between Lord Linlithgow and Col. A. S. Meek
> about the undesirable activities of Belgian Jesuits.  The aim of this
> publication was, without the least shadow of a doubt, to prejudice
> public opinion against the Christian Missionaries.  When the
> undersigned enquired about this story, the Enquiry Committee admitted
> that the newspaper publication was drawn from the files of
> Government.  How did these files reach the newspaper? The fact that
> Government has taken no action against the *Hitavada* for publishing
> confidential documents and that no press statement has been issued on
> the subject, carry their own eloquent commentary.
>
> \(f\) Not long ago, Shri B. A. Mandloi publicly distorted the visit of
> the Apostolic Internuncio as the visit of the Rajdoot of Holland.

*APPEAL*

52\. As these developments clearly indicate the *partisan attitude of
the highest authorities*, both locally and in the State, a suffering
minority cannot be expected to get a square deal.  In the circumstances,
this *Council begs you go discuss* the situation *with* our veteran and
venerable Congress Leader, *Pandit Ravi Shankar Shukla*, and devise ways
and means of restoring secularism, tolerance, and some kind of
protection to the Christians from the excesses indulged in by officials.

53\. In regard to the *future operations* of the Enquiry Committee
itself, Christians are profoundly agitated that with all the goodwill in
the world, *it will not be possible for the members* either individually
or collectively *to appraise the situation fairly*, on account of the
*natural limitations* on their ability to appreciate the Christian point
of view on the issues in dispute, on account of the *vague terms* of
reference given to them, and on account of the *undefined status* given
to the Committee.  You will admit that the Catholic Regional.  Council
did its level best to co-operate with the Enquiry Committee and deputed
two of its members to accompany the Committee in its exploratory tours. 
As the character of the Committee is still shrouded in doubts and fears,
and as Christians have been placed on the defence, I am directed most
respectfully to approach you for clarification of the following points:-

> \(A\) Has the Committee been appointed under the Commissions of
> Enquiry Act, 1952? If not, under what provisions of the Law has it
> been sanctioned?
>
> \(B\) In paragraph 4 of the Resolution, dated the 14th April 1954, it
> has been stated that “the Committee is authorised to frame its own
> procedure for conducting the enquiry”. This Council requests to be
> furnished with a statement of the procedure that has been framed.
>
> \(C\) A large mass of written and oral evidence was collected by the
> Committee during its tours since June 1954, and some of the materials
> appear to have been used in framing the 99-point Questionnaire.  As
> Christians are on the defence, this Council requests that it may
> kindly be informed whether-
>
> > \(i\) a copy of the evidence would be furnished to it for conducting
> > the defence,  
> > (ii) whether these statements and allegations would be subordinated
> > to the usual legal processes of cross-examination before they are
> > taken on record,  
> > (iii) whether issues would be framed,  
> > (iv) whether the defence would be allowed to make its submissions on
> > these issues, and  
> > (v) whether the findings of the Enquiry Committee would be
> > published.

54\. The Catholic Regional Council is grateful to you, your esteemed
Secretary and your honoured colleagues for the courtesy and kindness
extended to its representatives.

------------------------------

APPENDIX A

**DR. KATJU’S STATEMENT IN PARLIAMENT**

<div align="right">

*New Delhi, April 22.*

</div>

Dr. Kailas Nath Katju, Home Minister, said yesterday that it had been
made clear to all foreign Missionaries working in the country that if
they were engaged in social welfare work, medical work and education,
they were welcome, but if they indulged in proselytisation, it would be
undesirable.  That was the basic rule governing the Government’s
attitude.

Dr. Katju was replying in the House of the People to Mr. Gang, De, who
wanted to know if the Government had received any complaints from the
Madhya Pradesh Government or the local population that in many places in
Surguja and Bilaspur districts of Chhatisgarh, Adivasis were given
monetary temptation, sometimes threatened, and then converted to
Christianity, and that the temples of the Adivasis were being turned
into Churches.

Dr. Katju said that certain reports containing allegations to the effect
that foreign Missionaries working in the Surguja and Raigarh districts
of Madhya Pradesh were engaged in proselytising activities which
offended the feelings of the non-Christian local population, had been
received.  These reports, however, made no mention of any instances of
turning temples into Churches.

The Government were taking necessary steps to check objectionable
Missionary activities where they existed.  It was, however, not in the
public interest to divulge the details.

Dr. Katju said that first reports of such activities were received six
months ago.  He could not at present say about the number of
conversions.  Enquiry was being made and the matter was under
consideration.  The House should not press him too far, in the matter of
further information.

<div align="right">

**PRESS TRUST OF INDIA.**

</div>

------------------------------

APPENDIX B

**THE CATHOLIC REGIONAL COMMITTEE**

(*Representing Bihar, Orissa and Madhya Pradesh.*)

This Committee notes with serious regret that the immediate cause of the
“Reports” referred to by the Hon’ble Dr. Katju is neither the expansion
of Christianity in the Tribal areas nor the adoption of “objectionable”
Missionary methods of conversion, but the very representations submitted
from time to time regarding the persecutions, harassments and
discrimination to which Christian Oraons have been subjected in these
Tribal areas.  Instead of enquiring into or remedying these grievances,
the Government of Madhya Pradesh has chosen to send up a report
containing counter-allegations against these Christians.  Evidently,
this is an attempt to divert the attention of the Central Government
from the validity of the grievances of these Tribal Christians, and thus
screen the guilt and ignorance of local officials.  The reference to
Adivasi temples being converted into Christian churches is an example of
the utterly false nature of the allegations.  Adivasis have never had
any temples of any kind, and there can, therefore, be no question of
converting imaginary temples.

It has been a time-honoured principle of democratic administration not
to swallow at first sight sweeping allegations against a whole community
or class of people, but to subject them in the very first instance to
impartial enquiry of a quasi-judicial, if not judicial, character before
any action is taken.  It is much to be regretted that this
consideration, extended in the law court to the worst criminals, has
been denied to ten millions of Indian Christians who are law-abiding
citizens.

In stringing together all sorts of unverified allegations, distortions
of facts and indefensible insinuations about Christian Tribals and
Missionary activities in Surguja and Raigarh districts, the Government
of Madhya Pradesh has chosen to take sides against the Christian
minority, and as this report is the corner-stone of Dr. Katju’s
statement of policy which envisages an invasion over Fundamental Rights
\[Art. 25 (1) of the Constitution\], a *prima facie* would appear to
exist for an impartial judicial tribunal consisting of Parsi and Muslim
judges, to be set up by the Central Government for conducting an
enquiry.

This Committee, therefore, resolves-

> \(i\) that the Central and the Provincial Governments concerned be
> requested to allay unrest and apprehensions that have been created
> among all sections of the Christian people all over India by hurriedly
> made statements of responsible men, so that executive action may not
> be influenced by religious bias and result in discrimination on
> grounds of religion against Christians in any sphere of life.

<div align="right">

G. X. FRANCIS,  
*President,*  
*Catholic Regional Committee.*

</div>

RANCHI:  
*The 7th May 1953.*

---------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. letter, dated Nagpur, the 28th June 1955, from Shri G.
X. Francis, President, The Catholic Regional Council, Kamptee Road,
Nagpur, to Dr. M. B. Niyogi, M.A., LL.M., LL.D., Chairman, Christian
Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee, Nagpur**

The State Government’s Press Note, dated the 16th June 1955, lays down,
what purports to be, the future procedure your Committee will follow in
recording evidence of witnesses.  Since the appointment of your
Committee, I have been asking if any procedure had been laid down and
was invariably told that if the procedure was settled, due intimation
would be given to the public.  Even in the recent correspondence, dated
6th June 1955, between this Council and your Committee, I had raised the
question of procedure.  I suppose the “procedure” now announced is the
sequel to public agitation.

The Press Note says, that your Committee intends to follow “‘The USUAL
JUDICIAL METHODS’ of ascertaining the truth from the witnesses”, but
qualifies the intention by the significant statement: “As far As
Possible and Practicable”.  In the first place, I cannot follow whether
this is a declaration of your intentions or a statement of procedure.

Notwithstanding the Notice I served on the State Government for the
dissolution of your Committee on various grounds and without prejudice
to any of them, I have given anxious consideration to the “Judicial
Methods” now announced, in the hope that perhaps even at this late hour,
you will repair the wrong that you have done to Christians and Christian
Missionaries.

The “usual judicial Methods” are obviously those followed in Courts of
Law.  You should know that these are clearly set forth in elaborate
detail in the Code of Civil Procedure, in the Criminal Procedure Code
and in the Indian Evidence Act.  You also know that it is not open to
judges to make the slightest variation or departure from the set
procedure for fear of miscarriage of justice.  To say, therefore, that
you will follow “the usual Judicial Methods” and then qualify the
statement by adding that you will do so “as far as possible and
practicable”, is nothing short of a violent contradiction in terms
designed to mislead public opinion.  The contradiction was apparently
unavoidable because the plain meaning of your words is that you intend
to set aside all judicial methods and to follow your own arbitrary ways
in the further conduct of the enquiry.

Apart from the action of the State Government in accusing Christians and
not giving them any representation on the personnel of the Committee, we
found that you too have been adopting questionable methods extremely
prejudicial to us.  You cannot deny that all your “enquiry” so far has
been conducted without any procedure, and according to your whims and
fancies.  You cannot also deny that you have lent the platform of the
Enquiry Committee for violent anti-Christian speeches in which
Christians were described as *quislings and Traitors and Pandit Nehru
was accused of tolerating the Christians as he had tolerated Shaikh
Abdullah, in which it was stated that the Bible contained immoral
teachings, and that Christian Institutions were dens of immorality.* 
You cannot be unaware that the State Government had to intervene and
persuade you to expunge some of these outrageous statements which had
gone on your records.

The Press Note describes your future procedure as follows:-

> “Although it may not be possible or practicable to allow direct
> cross-examination of each witness by the innumerable parties concerned
> in the enquiry, the committee will permit authorised representatives
> of organisations or groups as may desire to put questions in the
> nature of cross-examination, to make requests the committee and to
> suggest questions to it which the committee may, in its discretion,
> like to elicit from the witnesses concerned.”
>
> Further. it is disclosed that-
>
> “If requests are made to the committee, it will permit lawyers on
> behalf of representative organisations to address it after the
> evidence has been recorded.”

The above laboriously constructed sentences indicate the following
procedure

> \(a\) That *Allegations* will be recorded as *evidence*.  
> (b) That the accused will not have the right to cross-examine
> *witnesses*.  
> (c) That so-called witnesses will be given the full protection of the
> committee from being exposed as false witnesses.  
> (d) That *Christians*, as the accused, will not be given the
> assistance of lawyers.  
> (e) That lawyers will be allowed to display their legal knowledge and
> elocutional skill *after the evidence has been recorded*.

Some unknown genius in the Publicity Department has had the humour to
describe the above procedure as “the usual judicial methods”.  As you
are engaged on more serious business than leg-pulling, and as your
proceedings are attracting all-India attention, you will see that
someone's enthusiasm has outrun his discretion in proclaiming this
unparalleled parody of judicial procedure as the usual *modus operandi*
of our Law Courts.  I cannot guess whom the Press Note is intended to
deceive.

In your committee's letter No. 546, dated the 3rd June 1955, it was
stated that “the committee propose to examine a few witnesses in further
conduct of the enquiry.  You are, therefore, requested to furnish
immediately a list of persons you desire to be heard by she committee.
*The specific points which the witnesses have to put forward may also be
stated very briefly against their names.” * This raises a question
fundamental to your enquiry.  If you are going to call people to make
further, fresh allegations, over and above all the wild allegations you
have heard all-round the year, what is your committee going to enquire
into?  Do you propose to examine the Allegations made before you, or to
record further fresh allegations and then examine them?

In either case, you will be travelling beyond your jurisdiction.  In the
Government’s Notification appointing your committee it was stated that-

> \(a\) representations had been made to Government from time to time
> that Christian Missionaries, either forcibly or through fraud and
> temptation of monetary or other gain, convert illiterate aboriginals
> and other backward people.
>
> \(b\) Christian Missions are being utilised for political or extra
> religious objectives, and
>
> \(c\) Christian Missionaries have alleged harassment by officials.

I shall require you in the name of justice and your own duty, to confine
yourself exclusively to these specific issues, and not to go about
collecting fresh allegations on any matter on which any person likes to
talk about.

With reference to the above, I have mentioned in my notice that when I
was granted inspection of your records on the 1st June 1954, I did not
find a single representation alleged to have been received by Government
before the appointment of your committee, complaining against Christian
Missionaries.  By the terms of our appointment, your business is to
confine your investigations and findings to these allegations, and
nothing more. If you did so, you clearly owe it to the public to make
known all these allegations, so that the men or organisations which have
made these allegations may be examined by you.

Further, you can hardly convince any sane man that the entire Christian
population of Madhya Pradesh has been indulging in the objectionable
activities mentioned in the Government's Notification.  A few may
possibly be brought under the accusation.  The question of public
importance is “Who are these Christians?”.  I would like to assure you
that my Council is equally anxious to pull these men into the lime light
and make them answer the accusations brought against them.  But the
question is “Who are these men?”.

You will concede that my Council extended its fullest co-operation to
you throughout last year although we were dissatisfied with the
personnel of your committee, your terms of reference, your modus
operandi, and your very appointment.  We did so, however, on the advice
of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, our Prime Minister, who suggested that we
should state our point of view before your committee and leave it to
public opinion to evaluate its findings.  This we have done, and there
is nothing more that we can do.

We now find that you have not disclosed the name or names of the
accused, the nature of the charges levelled against them, the name or
names of persons who have made the allegations, nor even the names of
the places where the objectionable activities are alleged to have
occurred, although your Committee has toured extensively and intensively
throughout the State of Madhya Pradesh at considerable expense to the
tax-payer.  Now, you again propose to conduct another State-wide tour to
examine “witnesses”.  Witnesses of what, where and whom?

All the foregoing reasons and circumstances clearly indicate that you
are groping in the dark as to the Christian Missionaries who are
supposed to have indulged in objectionable proselytising activities,
that you went about for light throughout Madhya Pradesh for a whole year
and still find yourself in the same darkness, that your “explorations”
merely resulted in waste of public money, and that by your activities in
the name of “enquiry”, you have increased the suspicion of all friendly
Hindus against Christians and disturbed harmonium relationship that
existed between the two sections of Indian citizens.  Not having
achieved anything in the pursuit of your legitimate objective, you now
propose to make confusion worse confounded by following a lawless
procedure which has no precedent or parallel in any democracy of the
world.  I would be faithless to the Constitution of India if I followed
you in your illegal perambulations and proceedings.  My Council,
therefore, feels compelled to inform you that no useful purpose would be
served by further co-operation with your committee.

I am releasing this letter to the Press as you have given India-wide
publicity to your novel “judicial methods”, and am sending a copy to the
leaders of the House and Opposition in the State Legislature and to the
President of the Indian National Congress for information.

---------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. 590, dated Nagpur, the 7th July 1955, from Shri M.
S. Pandharkame, M.A., LL.B., Assistant Secretary, Christian Missionary
Activities Enquiry Committee, Madhya Pradesh, to Shri G. X. Francis,
President, the Catholic Regional Council, Kamptee Road, Nagpur**

I am to acknowledge receipt of your letter, dated the 28th June 1955,
addressed to the Chairman, Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur, and to say that in view of the
deliberate misstatements contained therein and the lack of decorum or
decency displayed, the Chairman is of opinion that it does not merit any
serious consideration.

---------------------------------

**Copy of D.-O. No. Ref.BC-31-55, dated Bangalore-1, the 15th February
1955, from the Standing Committee of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of
India, Bangalore-1, to Pandit Ravi Shankar Shukla, Chief Minister,
Government of Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur.**  
 

**DIFFICULTIES CONFRONTING MISSIONARIES AND CHRISTIANS IN MADHYA
PRADESH**

You will recall the Memorandum the Standing Committee of the Catholic
Bishops’ Conference of India submitted to you on June 15, 1954 (Ref:
BC-111-54).  We pointed out therein our fears and apprehensions in
respect of the Inquiry committee and the harassment caused to Christian
Missionaries and people, chiefly in Tribal areas.

2\. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Madhya Pradesh, in his
reply, D.-O. No. 1494-33-XXX-M.R. dated August 4, 1954, addressed to the
General Secretary of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, assured
us and through us, “all the Christians that they stand firmly by the
principles and fundamental liberties enshrined in the Constitution and
have no desire whatsoever to interfere with them.  They would give equal
protection to all citizens irrespective of their race, religion or
community.  Government hope that you and your Association will now
persuade your fellow-religionists to -0-operate in the important work
which the Committee has undertaken and that you would make special
efforts to see that no bitterness against any community is created.”

3\. We have scrupulously avoided giving cause for any ill-feeling
between Christians and other communities, and have restrained our people
from any course which may embarass the Government.  But recent
happenings have accentuated our misgivings instead of allaying them. 
The tours and inquiry of the Committee seem only to have strengthened
and encouraged the suspicions, prejudices and distrust of the major
elements of the population, and of the Government, against a small and
loyal minority.  The constant questioning by the Committee and
Government officials about the activities-of Missionaries and Christians
have resulted in a wave of gloom and intimidation.  Communal tension has
reached such a pitch that two Christians were murdered in the Raigarh
and Surguja districts.

4\. We understand from reliable sources that inflamatory speeches were
made by the opponents of Christianity from the platform of' the Inquiry
Committee.  Protests were made by various Catholic representative bodies
in Madhya Pradesh, but these have gone unheeded.  The usual form of oath
for such investigations was not administered to the witnesses, nor an
opportunity afforded for cross-examination by our advocates.  The
Committee has no doubt been authorised to frame its own procedure.  We
should, however, like to submit that the elementary principles of
justice and enquiry demand that opportunities be given to the accused
for sifting the evidence and ascertaining the truth.  This is all the
more necessary in matters of such vital importance as the good name,
honesty and integrity of a particular section of the people.  What we
find very strange indeed is that one of the members of the Committee
published an article in newspapers against Christian Missionaries in
connection with the inquiry.

5\. Our attention has recently been called to a most prejudicial and
damaging 99-point Questionnaire (undated) issued by the Committee about
three months ago.  These relate to activities of Christian Missionaries,
the number of converts and Christian institutions in 1941, 1947,
1951-1954.  The Questionnaire is based on the assumption that
Missionaries make use of unlawful methods for converting poor and
illiterate people to Christianity.  The spirit of the Questionnaire, we
are sorry to note, is such as to discredit Christianity and Christians. 
The Committee has gone beyond the limits of the terms of reference and
violated the fundamental rights solemnly guaranteed by the
Constitution.  We cannot think of anything more ill-advised and more
harmful to the peaceful coexistence of different religions than a
Questionnaire based on unproved representation.

6\. The chief reasons for the attacks against Missionaries and their
work may be broadly classified as:

> \(i\) that foreign Missionaries are indulging in anti-national
> activities and encouraging separatist tendencies among Adivasis;
>
> \(ii\) that they are converting people by force, fraud and by offer of
> material inducements ; and
>
> \(iii\) that our schools are proselytizing agencies.

\(1\) The charge that foreign Missionaries are indulging in political
work is not true.  Their mission is to preach the Gospel of Christ, to
minister to the spiritual needs of Indian Christians, to educate youth,
to provide medical relief and to take care of the poor and the orphan. 
For centuries these works have been carried on by Catholic Missions
without offending the susceptibilities of the adherents of other
religions.

We hear that Missionaries are looked upon as agents of foreign
imperialism and disruptors of national unity.  Missionaries have no
political designs, nor do they ever make an attempt to denationalise the
converts.  Christians are second to none in their loyalty to the
country.  They do not form an alien community, but part and parcel of
the body politic.  Not even a single charge on this score could be
substantiated by facts on the platform of the Inquiry Committee.

2\. (a) The allegation that conversions are made by force, fraud or by
offer of material inducement cannot be levelled against our
Missionaries.  They derive no personal advantage by preaching the Gospel
of Christ.  Their only object is to spread the Christian teaching in
regard to God, man’s relations with his fellowmen and future life.  No
one can be converted against his will.  Every person is free to choose
his way of life according to his own lights and convictions.  Whoever
desires to embrace the Catholic faith has to undergo a course of
religious instruction and one can be received into the Church only when
one is convinced of the truths of Christianity and manifests a sincere
and persevering desire to accept the faith and practise it.  Conversion
is a personal act of free will.  Utmost care is exercised to respect the
freedom and the conscientious convictions of every individual.

\(b\) If Christian Missionaries are considered undesirable persons or
international schemers and agitators, parents belonging to all
communities and creeds would not be so eager to entrust the education of
their children to the care of Catholic Priests and Sisters.  There are a
million children, half of whom are non-Catholic in our institutions
throughout the country.  Governors and Ministers of State Governments
have expressed their admiration for the ideals which inspire the
Missionaries in their various charitable and educational works, and
above all, for their practical and immense service for the uplift of
poor classes and aboriginals.

3\. The refusal of recognition and denial of grant-in-aid to Adivasi
schools conducted by missions even in villages where the population is
wholly Christian is another instance of the discriminatory policy of the
Government.  Schools have been established in close proximity to the
existing Catholic schools, with the result that there has been a
duplication of effort in the field of education and financial loss. 
Christian parents have been subjected to great sufferings and
hardships.  Their children have been compelled to walk great
distances-10, 15, 20 miles and more-to sit for the entrance examination
for the fourth standard.  The situation is, thus, one which causes much
misery and disaffection among Catholics.  In one instance, a Missionary
and his witness had to trudge 30 miles on foot no less than 23 times. 
The case has not yet been taken up.  The new developments have only
tended to rouse communal tension, whereas there was harmony, peace and
good feeling among the Christians and non-Christians previously.

Schools were first started for Adivasis by Missionaries at great
sacrifice in men and money.  Their object is primarily the education of
Christian children.  Our schools have always been thrown open to
children of all classes and creeds.  The lurking suspicion that these
are instruments of conversion to the Christian faith is groundless.  Our
religion is not taught to non-Christians.

Already in October 1945, at a meeting of the Standing Committee of the
Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, held in Bangalore, the Bishops
declared categorically and emphatically that the “Catholic Church has
always respected and will always respect the religious convictions of
non-Catholic students.  She never has, and never will, impose her
teaching on them.”

7\. India is professedly a Secular Democratic Republic, in which all
religions have equal protection and equal toleration.  A Secular State
means that the State will not make any discrimination whatsoever on
grounds of religion.  Article 25 (1) of the Constitution guarantees to
all persons the freedom freely to profess, practise and propagate
religion.

8\. The present agitation against Missionaries is already disturbing
friendly relations between Christians and other communities, and has
further deepened the feeling of apprehension in the minds of Christians
as to their present security and future welfare.  Separatist tendencies
have never been encouraged among Adivasis.  Under the Article
guaranteeing the freedom of speech, expression, worship and of
association, referred to above, every community had the right to carry
on its efforts to spread its religion by legitimate and peaceful means.

9\. In the course of debates in the Constituent Assembly on December 6,
1948, on the Article relating to freedom of conscience and free
profession, practise and propagation of religion, Pandit Laxmi Kant
Maitra pointed out that “the Indian Christian Community was the most
inoffensive community in the whole country.” It is unfortunate that the
word “Propagate religion” should be associated only with the Christian
Community.  That right has been guaranteed and is, in fact, exercised by
every community.

10\. The Christian Community with full confidence in the sense of fair
play and justice of the majority community surrendered voluntarily the
privilege of separate representation, and even of reservation of seats. 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, appreciated this gesture so greatly that in
his historic resolution eliminating reservation of seats to minorities
from the Draft Constitution, he appealed to the minorities “to have
confidence in the majority community”.  He further exhorted the majority
community “to conduct itself in such a way as to win and retain the
confidence of minorities”.  Sardar Patel continued in his reply in the
Constituent Assembly on the resolution abolishing reservation of seats
that the “foundations were laid for a truly secular democratic State,
where everyone is equal in every way to everyone else.  May God give us
wisdom and courage to do the right thing to all manner of people as our
Constitution provides.”

11\. Mr. Frank Anthony called this an act of faith in the majority
community who “would have to behave towards others in a generous, fair
and just way”.  Pandit Nehru observed amidst cheers “Let us live up to
this faith.”  He further pronounced it as a “historic turn in our
destiny”.

12\. A sense of security and confidence was, thus, created in the minds
of all minorities, particularly the Christian community.  But the turn
of events during the last two or three years has come as a rude shock to
them.  Inquiry Committees have been constituted to investigate
representations made “that conversions are being made either forcibly or
through fraud”.

13\. We are not asking for any privilege or favours, but for truth and
justice.  We have the right to claim the same liberty as is given to
adherents of other faiths.  We, therefore, request you, Sir, to dispel
the disquiet and uneasiness prevailing among Christians in some parts of
Madhya Pradesh, and assure them that the Inquiry Committee and the
Government would respect the policy of religious freedom and tolerance
which has always characterised India and which has been solemnly
guaranteed in the Constitution.

14\. As Chief Minister of the State, interested in the well-being of all
classes and creeds of the great State of Madhya Pradesh, we appeal to
you to take effective steps to protect the rights and liberties of the
Christian minority.

Thanking you.  
 

**CATHOLIC BISHOPS’ CONFERENCE OF INDIA STATEMENT ISSUED BY THE STANDING
COMMITTEE**

<div align="right">

*Bangalore, February 16, 1955.*

</div>

The newly-elected Standing Committee of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference
of India met at Bangalore under the Chairmanship of His Eminence,
Valerian Cardinal Gracias, Archbishop of Bombay, from Friday, February
11th to Wednesday, February 16th, 1955.  The members present were-

> \(1\) His Grace Most Rev. Thomas Pothacamury, Archbishop of Bangalore,
> and General Secretary, Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India.  
> (2) His Grace Most Rev. Ferdinand Perier. S. J. Archbishop of
> Calcutta.  
> (3) His Grace Most Rev. Joseph Attipetty, Archbishop of Verapoly.  
> (4) His Grace Most Rev. Louis Mathias, S. D. B., Archbishop of
> Madras-Lylapore.  
> (5) His Grace Most Rev. Joseph Fernandes, Archbishop of Delhi-Simla.  
> (6) His Grace Most Rev. John Peter Leonard, S. J., Archbishop of
> Madurai.  
> (7) His Grace Most Rev. Joseph Mark Gopu, Archbishop of Hyderabad.  
> (8) His Grace Most Rev. Eugene D’Souza, Archbishop of Nagpur.  
> (9) His Grace Most Rev. R. Ambrose, Co-adjutor Archbishop of
> Pondicherry.  
> (10) His Lordship Rt. Rev. Mgr. William Bouter, Bishop of Nellore.  
> (11) His Lordship Rt. Rev. Mgr. Leonard K. Raymond.  Bishop of
> Allahabad.  
> (12) His Lordship Rt. Rev. Mgr. Mathew Kavukatt, Bishop of
> Changanacherry.  
> (13) His Lordship Rt. Rev. Mgr. Benedict Mar Gregorios, O. I. C.,
> Administrator-Apostolic of Trivandrum.

Surveying the present position of the Catholic community and assessing
the problems that confront it in the various spheres of the Church’s
activity, at the conclusion of their deliberations, the Standing
Committee have thought it opportune to issue the following statement:

Considering the rapid and extraordinary strides made in the country
since Independence, in the sphere of economic and social progress, and
the stress laid by our national leaders on the need of increasing the
pace, it is felt that yet greater practical interest should be evinced
by the Catholic community in the great schemes of economic and social
improvements initiated by the Central and State Government the promotion
of better living, education, community projects, national extension
blocks, medical relief, etc.  These measures are fully in conformity
with the spirit and traditions of service characteristic of our
Christian way of life.  In making our best endeavour to implement them,
we hope to attain greater effectiveness in promoting spiritual-happiness
and material progress in this ancient land which was among the earliest
to receive the light if Christianity and which is rich in the promise of
Christian achievement.  Particular attention is demanded of all lovers
of the country and its people towards the welfare and progress of life
in the villages; on which the future prosperity of the country
ultimately depends.

In spite of our difficulties, some of which are indeed grave, and not
easy of quick solution, notwithstanding the animus against foreign
Missionaries and the feelings of marked apprehension created in the
Christian community by the aggressiveness of some sectarian and militant
organisations it would be false to say that the Catholic community does
not enjoy freedom of religion or is regarded with suspicion or that it
finds itself in isolated unit.

We are heartened by the thought that frequently it has been acknowledged
throughout the country by the enlightened public and responsible
leaders, headed by the President of India and our Prime Minister, that
Christianity is an old and honoured religion of the land, that “Indian
Christians from a very considerable and important element in the
national community”, and that the Christian community and their culture
are an integral part of the Indian heritage.

For the conform and encouragement of our people and to enlist the
sympathy of our fellow countrymen, bearing in mind also the assurances
of our national leaders we are compelled by farce of circumstances to
state the following.  There are certain parts of India, according to
reliable reports received, where the communities and their pastors yet
continue to be subjected to various forms of vexatious treatment in
consequence of which the Christians are living in a state of fear and
insecurity.  This state of affairs prevails unfortunately in spite of
the frank and fearless indictment of communalism by the Prime Minister
and of his vehement denunciation of the aggressive attitude against
Christian Missionaries and of his noble appreciation of their work; in
spite of his severe warning that this kind of thin should be sternly
discouraged, and his declaration that minority religious communities
“are as much a part of India as anyone else”.  It must be added,
however, that, while opposition comes from certain quarters, the masses
of the people are appreciative of the selfless service of our
Missionaries both foreign and Indian.

Interested as we have always been to promote communal unity and
convinced that every community in the land should be allowed and
encouraged to pursue its normal life and that every community by its own
way of life contributes thereby to national peace and progress; eager as
we are that our country should maintain the international prestige which
it enjoys today, we fear that the distressing situation artificially
created by interested agencies are certainly not in the best interest of
our country’s life and its influence abroad.  India’s policy, which she
has followed consistently, namely, of enmity against none, but
friendliness towards all, will be all the more appreciated, both at home
and abroad, if effective steps are taken to ease the tension prevailing
in certain parts of the country.

As the spread of the Christian idea in the political, social and
economic thought of India is a duty which Catholic laymen owe not only
to their religion but to their country, and India needs all the help
that her children can give her, as our country needs to follow the
middle line between reaction and revolution in politics, between
capitalism and communism in economics, between westernisation and
primitivism in social life, the Catholic layman has the glorious
opportunity to bring the influence of justice and charity to bear on all
social relationships and to stand for the supremacy of the moral law in
all affairs of the State, national and international.  To this end, the
Standing Committee has thought it imperative to take the necessary steps
for communing in the course of the year a Lay Leaders’ Conference and to
encourage and support the Catholic Union of India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
