+++
title = "49 Oral Statements made before Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. JASHPUR (22-11-1955) No. 1"

+++
*Oral Statements made before Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee.*

JASHPUR

(22-11-1955)

**No. 1**

*Name*-Gustav.  
*Father’s name*-Simal Dular.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Age*-  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Jogbaila, Police Station Narayanpur.

I am a Christian.  I am a born Christian and belong to the Roman
Catholic Church.  From 1948 to 1952 I worked as a teacher in an Adiwasi
School run by the Tribal Welfare Department.  The local Christians
outcast me because I worked in that school.  When I lost my child, the
local Christians did not attend the funeral.  In the year 1952, I lost
my wife and when my father went to ask the local Christians to attend
the funeral they refused saying that I had been outcast because I had
worked in the Tribal Welfare Department Adiwasi School.  The dead body
of my wife was lying for 2 days.  I asked the village pracharak who is
the Mukhiya “leader” of the Christians to perform the funeral rites but
he declined saying that I had been outcast.  Ultimately, I had to send
word to some non-Christians in the neighbouring village Ghutmunda who
came and the funeral rites were performed.  The dead body was not
allowed to be buried in the Christian graveyard and I had to bury it at
some distance there from.  When they had outcast me, they had prevented
me from attending the Church.

There are 40 or 45 families of Christians in the village and 4 or 5
non-Christians.  There is a Church and a Padri lives there.  Ultimately,
I was forced to give up my teacher’s job and was admitted in the caste
after giving the customary feast. I had to incur about Rs. 60 or :Rs. 70
expenditure in providing one and half maunds of rice, and a goat and a
pig. I have not been given any alternate job.  I left the school last
year.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* I am a Christian even now and attend Church.  I was
outcast in the year 1951.  My wife died on Friday and the burial took
place on Sunday afternoon.  The place where my wife was buried was at a
distance of about half a mile from my house and I can show the spot to
the Committee, if they visit my village.  The land where she was buried
belongs to me.  The people of my community only asked me to give up the
Adiwasi School’s job and would not give me any other employment. I gave
the feast to the Christians, as it is a custom amongst Christians.  A
similar custom is followed amongst non-Christian Uraons also.  I do not
know anything about Jharkhand.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Kamiel Kerketta.  
*Father’s name*-Cora.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Age*-20.  
*Occupation*-cultivator.  
*Address*-Ghutmunda, Police Station Narayanpur, Jashpur tahsil.

I passed fourth Hindi standard from the Adiwasi school of the Tribal
Welfare Department at Ghutmunda and thereafter went to Kiradi Middle
School which is also run by the Tribal Welfare Department.  One day when
we were playing football in the evening, a foreign Missionary Padri of
Ginabahar passed by and talked to me saying that I should give up
attending the Tribal Welfare Department School and threatened to
ex-communicate me saying that I would not be allowed to join the prayers
in Church and that marriage and funeral ceremonies will not be performed
by them. I am a born Christian and my parents are also Christians.  I
had to give up the school then.  I started my cultivation.  I did not
join the Ginabahar Mission School, because I could not afford the
expenses being poor.  I was getting a stipend and feeding charges at
Kiradi School.  I was the only Christian student in Kiradi.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* I do not know the name of the foreign Missionary Padri
who had threatened me to leave the school. I was at one time a student
in the Ginabahar Mission School which I had left, because I could not
afford to pay the fees and rice.  The Father did not know me from
before.  When I was playing football I had worn a cross round my neck
from which he could have known that I was a Christian.  The necklace is
worn under the underwear.  I was wearing a underwear (*ganji*) while
playing football.  I am a Christian even at present. I have not been
ex-communicated.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Bahula.  
*Father’s name*-Gansu.  
*Caste*-Lohar.  
*Occupation*-Blacksmith.  
*Address*-Ameratoli.

Prior to one year I war, living in my village Siktatoli.  The majority
of inhabitants of the village are Christians.  A foreign Padri who had a
beard came to the village and told me that unless I became a Christian
the other Christians of the village would not give me work.  I refused
to become a Christian and therefore the Christians stopped giving me
work, would not allow me to fetch water from the well and otherwise
socially bycotted me.  I, therefore, had to leave the village and have
taken residence in another village.  They have now brought another
blacksmith who has promised to become a. Christian.  He has not so fat
been converted.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* It was about 2 years back that they brought another
blacksmith.  Siktatoli is my ancestral village where I lived since my
birth.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Stanishlans.  
*Father’s name*-Bahara Birsai.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Ameratoli.

I am a Christian.  There are about 28 or 30 Christian families in the
village and about 15 or 16 non-Christian families.  I attend Gholeng
Mission for prayers.  After prayers, the foreign Missionaries of
Gholeng, preach against Hindu religion and state that Adivasis and
Christians were still slaves and will be free only after they got
Jharkhand.  This preaching takes place sometimes in the Prayer Hall in
the Church and sometimes outside also.  I myself heard this type of
preaching.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* By Jharkhand is meant the rule of the Adivasis.  At
present it is Hindu Raj and not English Raj (to the question whether it
is a Indian Raj or English Raj).  When the Padri preaches like this I do
not like this as a Christian.  Sansari Uraons who are.  Hindus do not
make a demand of Jharkhand.  
 

**No. 5**

*Name*-Kunjbihari Sal.  
*Father’s name*-Galindarsai.  
*Caste*-Rautia.  
*Occupation*-Cultivator.  
*Address*-Deobora, Police Station Narayanpur.

About 2 years back in the month of Jeth, i.e., April-May, the Christians
of the village enacted a drama.  In that drama Boko Sardar’s part was
played by a Christian boy and Boko Sardar was shown asking Christians to
become reconverts to Hindus and the Christians flatly refused to become
Hindus.  The drama later proceeded to show Hindu deity of stones being
worshipped by boys playing the part of Hindus and being kicked and
insulted by those playing the part of Christians.  Also in that drama
was shown a *Hanuman* being worshipped by Hindus and ridiculed by
Christians.  I had myself seen the drama being performed, and I was
distressed to witness it.  The audience consisted mostly of Christians. 
As we were only five-six Hindus, we did not protest for fear of creating
a quarrel.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* There are about 16 or 17 families of Hindus in the
village and about 15 of Christians.  The drama was staged on a piece of
ground, about half-a-mile from the village.  It was staged at night
time.  Even now, there has been no quarrel in the village due to the
incident.  About 40 to 50 Christians residing in other villages had come
to see the drama.  I do not know whether any Minister had come to
Jashpur on mass-contact tour.  
 

**No. 6**

*Name*-Benidharsai.  
*Father’s name*-Janaksai.  
*Caste*-Raoutia.  
*Occupation*-  
*Age*-25.  
*Address*-Lodhma, Police Station Narayanpur.

About 2 years ago Christians of Lodhma and Ambachuwa villages had staged
a drama in our village.  It was arranged by the Christian pracharak of
Lodhma.  The first scene in the drama related to a criticism of the
Hindu custom of visiting religious places and in the second scene Sant
Tukdoji was shown as having visited Jashpur from Nagpur and swindling
money from villagers.

*To Shri Shinde-* The first scene started with a chorus, the words of
which I do not know, followed by a speech by the pracharak about Hindu
places of pilgrimage.  We were about 5 Hindus present and when we did
not like the scenes we left the place. There are about 40 families of
Hindus and 26 of Christians in my village.  Hindus of Lodhma do not
stage dramas.  
 

**No. 7**

*Name*-Bodaram.  
*Father’s name*-Temuram.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Age*-18.  
*Occupation*-Student.  
*Address*-Ara village in Jashpur tahsil.

I studied the primary classes in the Mission school at Patratoli.  When
I was in that school Father Bulkans and a pracharak came and told the
boys that the top-knot on my head and that of other Hindu students, viz,
Ituram, did not look nice and should be cut.  The boys surrounded me and
Ituram, and cut our *Chundhis*, i.e., top-knots.  We both failed in the
fourth standard but as they wanted to make us Christians, Father Bulkans
did not allow us to leave the school and promoted us to the fifth
standard.  I passed the fifth standard and then left the school because
they were asking me to become Christian and I was afraid that they will
some day make me a Christian.  I sought admission in the Tribal Welfare
School at Ara and when I demanded a certificate from Father Bulkans of
having passed the fourth primary standard he gave a letter to me
addressed to the teacher of the, Mission School asking the latter to
issue a certificate.  I gave that letter to the Tribal Welfare
Department School teacher and must be in their possession.  In the
Mission School my name was recorded as Boda Kunjur.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* My choti was cut about six years ago when I was in the
third standard.  Even now I do not keep choti because I do not like
it.  
 

**No. 8**

*Name*-Lallu.  
*Father’s name*-Joha.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Kesara, Police Station Jashpur.

I am Panch of the Kesra Adiwasi School.  This school is being run by the
Tribal Welfare Department.  It was once noted that six or seven boys of
village Kelakona were absent for about 3 months continuously. I and
others visited the village to make enquiries and asked the parents and
they said that the children were sent regularly and they were surprised
to know why they were not attending school.  I called the children and
asked them the reason.  They said that they had once met some Missionary
sisters who had told them not to go to the Adiwasi School where they
might encounter a ghost and instead go to Ghogra Mission School which
they were attending.  I do not know whether the boys told me about the
Sisters being Indians or foreigners.  The children further told me that
after joining the Ghogra School their *Chundhis* were cut.

*To Mr. Shinde.-* I studied up to the first Hindi standard privately and
can sign my name.  Kesra is 2 miles from Kelakona and Ghogra Mission
School is nearer than Kelakona.  I did not myself go to the Ghogra
School to verify the statement of the boys.  There were only 7 boys from
Kelakona in the Kesra School and they have left the school.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-Mangu.  
*Father’s name*-Baijnath.  
*Caste*-Chik.  
*Occupation*-Weaver.  
*Address*-Jokari, Police Station Narayanpur.

At village Bhandri there is a grain bank organised by the Ginabahtr
Mission authority. I had gone to take loan of rice from the bank but was
Fold that orders of the Saheb were not to give grain till I got my
choti, cut, even though I was willing to give usual subscription.  As I
did not agree to get my choti cut I was not given loan.

*To Shri Shinde.-* This happened about a year ago. I am slightly bald
for the last two to three years.  
 

**No. 10**

*Name*-Arjunsingh.  
*Father’s name*-Thakur Baldeosingh.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Jashpur.

I was a Member of the Jashpur Janpad Sabha, and also a member of the
District Congress Committee.  Sometime before 18th May 1953, villagers
of Karadiri Tigra had come to me and complained that they had been sent
to Andaman for working on the tea gardens by the Ambakona Mission
authorities, that they used to send money for their families through the
Mission authorities and had found on return that the money was not
handed over to their respective families and when they demanded it back
from the Mission authorities they were asked to become Christians first.
I advised them to make a complaint to the authorities.  On 18th May
1953, when I was going to Manora village, I met a foreign Missionary
whose name I do not know but who is popularly known as Paltania Saheb. 
He asked me why I was getting complaints from villagers for being sent
to authorities and he abused me. I had reported 'the matter to the
police.

*To Shri Shinde.-* The Father did not know me from before, but he knew
that I was a Janpad member and a Congress worker.  He had attended some
meetings of the Janpad Sabha where he had seen me. I was not acquainted
with the Father but I had known before the incident that he was a
Missionary.  The Missionaries act as recruiting agents for Andaman
labours. I do not know whether the Government has appointed them.  He
uttered abuses like Damn, bloody, Sala, etc.  No one else was present. 
The Police did make an enquiry but I do not know what action is taken. I
have not filed a complaint in court.  
 

**No. 11**

*Name*-Themni.  
*Father’s name*-Chitho.  
*Caste*-Uraon Hindu.  
*Address*-Timarla, Police Station Jashpur.

Uraons regard themselves as Hindus.  Timarla village has about 60
Christian and about 6 or 7 non-Christian families.  The Christians have
been telling me since long to become a Christian and on my refusal they
harass me by all means.  They forcibly cut my crops and tell me how long
I will remain without being a Christian because there are only 3 or 4
non-Christian families left in the village. I had reported the matter to
the Police and those Christians who had forcibly cut my crop were fined
by the Court but still they have not given up cutting my crops.  A
foreign Missionary also visits our village and tells us that our
Hinduism will not last more than two days and therefore we should become
Christians.

*To Shri Shinde.-* There are only Sansari Uraons and Christian Uraons. 
Sansari Uraons are Hindus. (To the question asked what is Hindu Dharma)
the witness replied that it is Sansari Hindu.  Timarla is my ancestral
village.  Besides removing our crops the Christians harass me in other
ways also as per example by not providing agricultural labour, and
instigating my labour to leave my service.  They are harassing me for
the last four years. I reported the mater once only.  The Christians in
the village are living there for a long time and I do not know when they
became Christians.  
 

**No. 12**

*Name*-Ramakant.  
*Father’s name*-Keshao Deshpande.  
*Caste*-Brahman.  
*Occupation*-Pleader.  
*Address*-Jashpur.

I am at Jashpurnagar since 1948. I came here in the capacity of District
Organiser under the Tribal Welfare Department and worked in this
capacity till 1952.  When I came here I was entrusted by the Government
the work of looking after the welfare of the Tribal and to organise
welfare activities.  One of the main activities was organising of
schools.  Then I head to organise Co-operative Societies and to do some
construction work like approach roads, wells, etc.  As soon as our
working was started here, I experienced a vehement opposition from the
Christian Missions working here and it seemed to me that they were not
in favour of Government starting welfare activities for the Tribal
people.  The Missions were Roman Catholics and Lutherans.  So far as the
activities were concerned, I found that the Missions claimed to have
about 80 schools of theirs but all of them unrecognised.  During the
State regime, about 33 schools of theirs were recognised by the State
organisation under certain conditions but later on even during the State
regime the State Administration found that the Missions had committed
some breach of conditions on account of this the very recognition of the
schools was withdrawn.  Except one Lutheran school, the other Roman
Catholic schools were 33 in number.  Even during the State regime, it
was detected by the Administration that the Missionaries were utilising
the schools for converting Tribal boys and girls. These are primary
boys.  Hence the State Administration enforced a condition that the
Missions should maintain a register showing how many students were
converted to Christianity and what material benefits were offered to
them.  During his verification by Mr. Menon, who was the last Diwan of
this State, he has stated in his report that the columns of conversion
and offering of material benefits were kept blank by the Missions though
hundreds of boys and girls were converted. I had to make intensive tours
for organising the activities of the Department. I had to encounter
bitter opposition from the Mission as soon as a school organised and
teachers started their work and number of reports were received by me in
which the teachers and the people of the villages had complained to me
that the Missions were instigating she Christian people of the village
even to assault the teachers and boys of the Welfare schools.  In some
cases actual assaults were made and in few cases reports were received. 
That the Christians instigated by the Missionaries forcibly trespassed
the school premises and started hooliganism.  So far as other activities
are concerned, I had to take the Cinema Operator with me to show
pictures to the people.  Everywhere I experienced that whenever a cinema
show was declared the Missions were taking precautions that, no
Christian of their fold would attend the show. I have seen personally
Missionaries and pracharaks standing on the roadside and dissuading
people from attending the functions of out Department.  Generally, I
have seen that it is the policy of the Mission not to permit any of
their adherents to participate even in the social functions of the
non-Christians.  There are specific instructions, as a matter of fact,
that Adivasi Schools or any school which is not Missionary is a school
of infields and that participation in the social function of the
non-Christians would amount to a sin.  In the appendix, which I have
attached to the answers to the Questionnaire of the Committee, I have
given documentary evidence, like magazines run by the Missions, in which
the instruction of Lord Bishop are published.  Then I found that
Missionaries are trying to control over all temporal affairs of the
adherents of the church including political.  Number of Christians have
told me that during prayer hours they are given political instructions. 
During the last General Elections I have personally seen foreign
Missionary belonging to the Roman Catholic Mission canvassing on behalf
of the Praja Socialist Party.  The paid pracharaks of the Mission I have
seen canvassing and working as polling agents.  Similarly, I have seen
the Lutheran Missionaries working for the Jharkhand party.  According to
my verification of the situation I am convinced that so far as the move
for Jharkhand is concerned the Catholics and Lutherans are one.  The
only difference lies in that the Catholics want to achieve the same goal
with their own policy.  The Catholics want to conceal their identity
with the Jharkhand movement.  The Catholic Missions have what they call
a Catholic Sabha which is an appendix of the Mission, the President of
this Catholic Sabha Shri Ignus Beck is the General Secretary of the
Jharkhand party.  Similarly, certain Catholic members of the Church like
Johan Ekka are the members of the local working committee of the
Jharkhand party.  That the Catholic Sabha of Ranchi and Jashpur are the
same.  The Archbishop of the Catholic Mission in Ranchi is the
Archbishop for Ambikapur and Raigarh.  The Missions have been trying to
gain a political control over the people of this place through whatever
agency they can.  Formerly, they tried to get this control through the
Congress organisation but finding that perhaps they could not get
control unless they had worked as sincere Congressmen for some years
they left the organisation and organised the Praja Socialist Party with
affiliation of theirs is only a make believe device but inside the
intention is the same, i.e., to organise politically the people for
Jharkhand movement.  Now perhaps finding that they could not well
succeed in their aim through the Praja Socialist Party they are trying
to take up the move of joining the Congress again.  In this area,
leaders of Jharkhand Party like Jaipalsingh and others come and address
meetings.  In one of the last meetings, Shri Jaipalsingh used a very
indecent language against our Chief Minister and our Prime Minister. 
People are always being provoked to oppose the Hindu community.  The
very working of the Missions begins from creating hatred in the mind of
the Adivasis against their own Hindu bretheren but belonging to other
sections of the Hindu social structure the Missionaries want the
non-Christian Aboriginals of this place to treat themselves as
non-Hindus and in this direction they always approach them for creating
this feeling in them.  So far as Christians are concerned, they want to
show that converts to Christianity are superior to the non-converted
Tribals of this place.  In this direction they have got a very skilfull
invention and that invention dates back about 50 to 60 years back that
they have designated non-Christian Tribals as Sansars.  By this they
want to impress on the Tribals that so long as they win remain
non-Christians, they will he only wordly people with no hope of
Salvation.  The Uraons have a deep-rooted pride in being called as
Uraons and despite the fact that they were converted they would not
compromise with this name.  Hence the Missions had to compromise and
while calling them as Christians they allowed them to call themselves as
Uraons also.  To encounter this difficulty though the Christian
community does not claim to have any sub-communities the Missions of
this place have permitted the converts to call themselves as Uraons. 
There is always an anxiety in the minds of the Missionaries to see that
the converts are nit excluded from the category of Tribals so that the
Uraon may feel that he is deprived of his Uraonship.  The Christian
Missions are anxious to have the recognition of their institution by the
Government not because they would gain any monetary advantages as such
but because they think that their activities would be safer under the
name of recognised schools by the Government.  The Missions have crores
of rupees with them and they do not depend for their existence on tiny
aids from the Government.

2\. In 1908, the Christian Missions started an association called
Christian Association, later on, in 1914, they merged this into another
organisation called Unnati Samaj.  Even though their whole aim was to
consolidate the Christian converts they found that the name Christian
Association was coming in their way and also in order to win the
sympathy of the non-Christian Tribals they termed it as “Unnati Samaj”.
In 1922, through the agency of this Samaj, the Missionaries started a
rebellion against the Raja of this place.  During this rebellion, one of
the Christian converts was declared to be belonging to the original
dynasty of the Kings of this place.  In that name the rebellion was
controlled with the aid of Military.  During the State regime the Raja
of this place having correctly smelt their mischief was strongly
protesting against their establishing the Missions here and there are
instances that the Missions have constructed churches encroaching upon
the Government lands.  Even now during the present Government, the
Missionaries are encroaching upon Government land and constructing
buildings.  For instance, the Loyola High School of Kunkuri is
constructed on the Government reserved forest land without sanction. 
Very recently, proceedings were started in the Court of Tahsildar, and
the Tahsildar passed an order that the land should be vacated.  The
Mission authorities have made a confession of this fact during the
proceedings.  They did not file any appeal against this order and when
the time of limitation of appeal got expired, i.e., about 4 months after
all of a sudden they filed a revision petition in the Court of the
Sub-Divisional Officer who pending hearing passed an order staying
execution of the Order of the Tahsildar. Similarly, in village Duldula,
the Missionaries have constructed a chapel on agricultural land
belonging to one Christian.  The agricultural land could not be diverted
for non-agricultural purposes without the sanction of the Deputy
Commissioner, having constructed this building and realising the
implications of this so late they have now presented an application
before the Tahsildar that permission be given for constructing a
building over this agricultural plot and the Court is given to
understand that no building is existing there despite the fact that the
building is there.  There were some cases where the Christians
instigated by the Missionaries have desecrated places of worship of
Hindus.  Similarly, there have been cases in the courts about forcible
conversions and I would request the Committee to send for the records. 
Certain Christians of this place have given me a copy of a printed
booklet published by the Catholic Sabha of Raigarh district in the form
of a reply to the Questionnaire of this Committee.  In this booklet,
they have used the most contemptuous language.  The persons, who handed
over this booklet to me have told me on their personal knowledge. 
Though a Catholic Missionary has declared that they are not
participating in the proceedings of the Committee all the same this
booklet is being circulated by them amongst the Tribal converts in order
to create a feelings of mistrust against the committee and the
Government.  Vernacular translations of this booklet are read out to the
Tribal people.

I have submitted a written statement in reply to the Questionnaire.  I
have also filed some 148 documents.

The idea of Jharkhand is on the lines of Pakistan.  To this end, the
Missionaries have been trying and before Pakistan was created they had
close associations with the Muslim League. I filed one issue of
Jharkhand in which it has been admitted by one of the leaders of
Jharkhand party that substantial financial aid was given by Mr.
Surhawarthy.  Similarly, Jaipalsingh in his own Presidential Address in
1939 has declared that all the Christian Missions are in the Jharkhand
movement and a document relating to this has also been filed. 
Similarly, the leaders of the Jharkhand party were in league with the
Momin rally of Bihar.  The “Abua Jharkhand”, which is the organ of the
Jharkhand party till one year back, was being published by the G.E.L.
Church Press of Ranchi.  The Session of 1947 of the Jharkhand party of
the Adivasi Mahasabha was held in the premises of G.E.L. Church, Ranchi.

The President of the G.E.L. Church is the General Secretary of the
Adivasi Mahasabha, of which Jharkhand party is a part.  More information
on the point may be found in the documents which I have filed with my
replies.  I am filing a copy of the Jharkhand news, dated the 1st
September 1946, edited by J.C. Haywert.

In 1936, the Catholic Sabha of Ranchi which had its branches in Jashpur
merged its identity with the Adivasi Mahasabha and this Adivasi
Mahasabha is thus an amalgamated picture of “Unnati Samaj” and Catholic
Sabha of the Catholic Mission.

While the schools buildings of the Adivasi Department were under
construction, the foreign Missionaries organised the Christian labourers
not to co-operate with the construction work and there was lot of
difficulty to be encountered to find labour.

The Forest Department, which was entrusted with this work of
construction, made reports of this to the Sub-Divisional Officer who
along with me on the 2nd November 1949 went to Tapkara.  The foreign
Missionaries of the Tapkara Mission were called by the Sub-Divisional
Officer and questioned about it.  During this talk those Missionaries
promised that after that they would allow the Christian labour to
co-operate in the construction work and this too when the Sub-Divisional
Officer had administered a strong snub to them.  During the Social
Education Camps, which were held at the instance of Government, the
Missionaries had debarred the Christian Tribals for Participating in
these camps and they were debarred from responding to the slogan “Jai
Hind”.  This I came to now during my tours when I questioned some of the
Christians as to why they were not saying “Jai Hind”.

*To Me. Shinde.-* I have not met Joel Lakra. I From their own papers I
say that Joel Lakra is the Secretary of the Adivasi Mahasabha. I have
not got any paper. Joel Lakra belongs to the Jharkhand party.  Till
about a year ago I had heard that he was Secretary of the Adivasi
Sabha.  I do not know whether he continues now.-That paper gave the
names of the office-bearers of the Adivasi Mahasabha and I read Joel
Lakra’s name as Secretary.  Before coming to Jashpur, I was practising
as a Pleader at Nagpur. I resigned the Tribal Welfare job in 1952 if my
own free-will. I belong to no political party.  The word “Jharkhand”
literally means land of the forest.  The word “Uroans” was originally
Omram.  The Uraons are worshipper of Ram.  When a Uraon calls himself a
Sansari he means that he is a Hindu. I do not know if the originators of
the “Unnati Samaj” movement were Rai Sahab Bandiram Uraon and Rungtu
Uraon.  But I know that the real sponsors are Missionaries.  I do not
know Rai Sahab Bandiram Uraon and Rungtu Uraon are Christians. 
Jaipalsingh came here about seven months back and stayed at the Gholeng
Mission. I was informed that he stayed here for two days. If I am told
by the counsel Shri Shinde that Jaipalsingh came to Jashpur on 29th May
1955 and stayed at the Rest House, all that I can say is that this may
be correct but my statement that about 7 or 8 months back Jaipalsingh
came and stayed at the Gholeng Mission, is correct.  The Uraons are
bound by the Hindu Law of Inheritance.  Some persons connected with the
Missions have told me that the Missions operating in the area maintain
records of con versions made. I have however not myself seen any such
record.  My information about the conversions in the schools is based on
my intensive tours as District Organiser, Tribal Welfare Department, and
enquiries made by me from innumerable villagers, parents and guardians. 
Although I cannot give the approximate total number of such conversions
I can assert that hundreds of such children have been converted.  The
process of conversions is initially performed by cutting the top-knots
followed by compulsory attendance at prayers and teachings of the Ten
Commandments. I do not know what other ceremonies were performed by the
Missionaries for further conversion.  Several parents told me that the
children were baptised.  “Baptism” is locally described by such
vernacular terms as *pavitra pani chhidk-snan karaya*.  The word
“Tribal” means a Hindu.  On conversion, a person would cease to be a
Tribal.  I have personally no occasion to be present at any meeting of
the Missionary where Hindu religion was being criticised.  The “Unnati
Samaj” started in 1914. I got this information from Gazetteer.  In 1922,
there was a rebellion against the Raja of Jashpur.  It was an open
rebellion with arms orgainised by the Christian at the instigation of
the Missionaries.  I have gathered this information from various reports
and other sources.  When the Ministers came to Jashpur on mass contact
tours I informed them the activities of Missionaries in this area.  When
I said yesterday that Jharkhand was being demanded on the lines of
Pakistan I was referring to their demand for a separate State,
independent of the Indian Union.  The Missionaries want to secure
political power through foreign aid and therefore have created this
demand for a separate independent state.  The Lutheran Mission in
Jashpur is controlled by foreign Missionaries.  Before its merger in
1936 with the Adivasi Mahasabha, the “Unnati Samaj” was working towards
the creation of a separate Independent State.  I do not know whether
they demanded Jharkhand.  Although in those days the British Government
was in power the demand of the “Unnati Samaj” was for a separate
independent State when India would get Independence.  This was similar
to the demand of the Muslim League for Pakistan.  Gharbandhu is the
official organ of the Gossner Evangelical Mission. (Shri Lakra admits). 
It is not my opinion that on changing the religion, person cease to be
an Indian.  
 

**No. 13**

(23-11-1955)

*Name*-Havla.  
*Father’s name*-Khakri.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Nimgaon, Police Station Jashpurnagar.

About a year back, I wanted to enlist myself as a labourer for Andaman
and, therefore, went to the Father of Gholeng Mission whose name I do
not know.  On being told that I was a Sansari Uraon, he refused to
enlist me saying that he would enlist only Christians and that, if I
wanted to go to Andaman, I should become a Christian.  My other two
companions Dhibru and Pandu became Christians and were sent, but as I
did not agree to become a Christian, I was not sent.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name*-Durga Misra.  
*Father’s name*-Narayan Misra.  
*Caste*-Brahmin.  
*Address*-Nimgaon (Jashpur).

About two months back, I had gone to the Gholang Mission to get
milk-powder which I was told was being supplied.  The Father told me
that milk and milk-powder was distributed only to Christians and not to
Hindus and, therefore, he declined to supply the milk-powder.

*To Shri A. B. Shinde.-* I have never tasted milk prepared out of
milk-powder.  Milk-powder is being distributed for about a year.  I do
not know whether other Hindus have been given milk-powder or not.  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-Patras Tapo.  
*Father’s name*-Sanichar.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Address*-Sitanga.

I am a pracharak of the Lutheran Mission since 1949. I am resident of
Jashpur since birth.  Our Mission has one Middle School and three
Primary Schools which have not yet been recognised by Government.  The
schools have not been recognised because they are Christian schools. 
Christian boys are not admitted in the Government High School,
Jashpurnagar.  If some are admitted, they are not given scholarships. 
There was no rebellion in Jashpur but since 1920 the Adivasis had been
complaining against the system of *bigar* for which they were being
harassed and beaten by the State officials and authorities.  When the
harassment grew to intense, several rayats assembled and went to the
Raja to make a complaint.  The Diwan was deputed to make enquiries, but
he too did not render justice.  Therefore, the Political Department
authorities at Raipur were approached.  Being enraged on account of this
move, the Raja and his men went to the villages and assaulted Adivasis. 
Several were killed and firing had to be resorted to.  Telegrams were
sent to the Political Agent who came to Jashpur and stopped harassment
by the State authorities.  The Raja was deposed and the State was taken
under superintendence.  In course of these assaults even the foreign
Missionaries were beaten by the Raja’s men.  One Missionary was killed
also.  By non-recognition I mean that students passing out of the Middle
School are not admitted in the Government School.  Primary and Middle
Schools examination of our schools are conducted at Jashpurnagar a long
with Government examination. I am not aware of the rules of Government
for recognition of Primary and Middle Schools.  Our schools were not
recognised daring the former State regime.  I do not know the rules of
Government regarding the grant of scholarships to Adivasi boys.

*To Shri R. K. Deshpande.-* I do not know how many Christian boys are
studying in the Government High School, Jashpur. I had brought my own
son last year for being admitted into the Government High School and the
headmaster said that there was no accommodation in the Government
Hostel.  Hence, I say that Christian boys are not admitted in the
schools.  He was admitted to the School and not to the Hostel.  Even now
he comes to attend the school from my village.  None of the Christian
students of the Government High Schools has told me that he is not
getting scholarship.  I was also one of the of rayats who complained
against harassment by the Raja.  Thousands persons had gone to the Raja
to make demands. I was prosecuted in a Court and sentenced to five
years’ imprisonment for taking part in the demand.  I was prosecuted and
convicted under section 124, Indian Penal Code, My appeal before the
Political Agent was rejected.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-Kairo.  
*Father’s name*-Bolo.  
*Caste*-Uraon.  
*Address*-Bhilwadi.

Once, when I had gone to witness the Christian *jalsa*, the pracharak of
the Mission asked me which side I had cast a vote.  On my reply that I
had cast my vote in the “Suraj Chhap” box, he caught hold of me and took
me inside the Girjaghar and tied me down with rope.  A few persons of
the village came there and got me rescued.  These persons asked the
pracharak as to why he had done this on which the pracharak said that he
had done this under the orders of the Father of the Mission, at
Gholeng.  I made a report of this to the Police, as a consequence of
which criminal proceedings were started and the pracharak was convicted
to pay a fine.  Prior to this incident, the White Father of the Gholeng
Mission had come to my village and had asked me to become Christian. 
When I replied to him that I would not become a Christian, he got
irritated and went away.

*To Shri Shinde.-*The foreign Missionary who visited my village had a
beard.  He was accompanied by another foreign Missionary.  There was no
Indian Missionary with them.  They first came to the house of the Panch
who is a Hindu and the Panch had called me and others to assemble.  It
was in presence of the Panch that the foreign Missionaries told me to
embrace Christianity.  On that occasion the foreign Missionaries neither
beat me nor threatened me to beat.  
 

**No. 17**

*Name*-Dubrajsikhar.  
*Father’s name*-Jitnathsikhar.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Ameratoli.

About two years back, the foreign Missionary of the Gholeng Mission
visited the house of one Padur Bhagat who was then seriously ill.  Padur
Bhagat requested the foreign Missionary to give him some medicine so
that he would he cured but the foreign Missionary told him that he would
not give him medicine till he became a Christian.  On this Padur Bhagat
in the hope that he could save his own life agreed to become Christian,
after his recovery.  But the Missionary insisted on his becoming a
Christian before treatment.  As a result, Padur Bhagat agreed to this
also and, in pursuance of this, the Missionary cut his *Chundhi* and
sprinkled some water.  After taking the medicine of the Missionary for
about four or five days, Padur Bhagat died.

*To Shri Shinde.-* I was present when the Father visited Padur Bhagat’s
Place. He did not repeat any *Mantra* loudly.  
 

**No. 18**

*Name*-Masat.  
*Father’s name*-Dashrath.  
*Address*-Jukari.

I am a Baiga of Jukari.  The Christian persons of my village defiled the
place of Hindu worship by cutting away the Sarana trees. I along with
other persons of the village were felt hurt on account of this act. I
have reported the matter to the Tahsildar.  These persons cut away the
trees after saying that they had already driven away our Gods and that
because we were worshipping ghosts.

*To Shri Shinde.-*In my village the greater number are Sansaris.  There
are 12 families of Christies in my village.  Cutting down of the
“Sarana” trees was done by the Christians of Kantara village.  The names
of the people who cut the trees are Chaitu, etc.  They cut the trees for
five hours.  
 

**No. 19**

*Name*-Sukhu.  
*Father’s name*-Tunia.  
*Caste*-Uraon Sansar.  
*Occupation*-Cultivation.  
*Address*-Sakardir.

In my village the majority are Christians.  Foreign Missionary, one day,
came and asked me to become a Christian telling me that I should fall in
line of the majority but I refused.  He said that I will see the
consequences in near future.  Then the Christians began to trouble me. 
They stopped the village blacksmith to do my work.  They also stopped me
taking water from their well.  Then, I had to bring water from a long
distance.

*To Shri Shinde.-* There are Sansaris about 10 and Christians about 20
families.  I am the only Uraon Hindu, while the other Hindus in village
are not Uraons.  Those Hindus are not baptised by Christians.  
 

**No. 20**

*Name*-Ramanuj Saraswati.  
*Guru’s name*-Jagat Guru Shankaracharya.

I have been working in this area for the last one and half years.  I am
the founder of the All-India Ganatantra Democratic Party.  It was a
political party.  In connection with the work of that party I had to
move in Chhota-Nagpur, Bihar and Orissa and coming in contact with
Missionaries and others.  Our political party included Christians as
well as Hindus.  While the foreign Missionaries profess to be
non-political, I found that they have some political aims.  At the last
General Elections, Pandit Jawaharlal’s visit to Ranchi was awaited. 
While all the parties wanted to welcome him the Jharkhand party declined
to welcome on the ground that the foreign Missionaries were opposed to
welcome him.  They even went to the length of disturbing the meeting
addressed by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.  The disturbance was mostly from
Christian members of the Jharkhand party.  The Christians who had not
joined in disturbing Pandit Jawaharlal’s meeting were excommunicated by
the Missionaries.  One of them was Eliajhar John. Those who were
excommunicated were Roman Catholics as well as Lutherans and they said
they were dependent on the foreign Mission and they could not go against
the Missionaries.  This was what the Christians generally said.  I learn
from Christians that the Missionaries wanted to increase the number of
Christians so that their case for separate state for Jharkhand, i.e.,
Issaisthan might become strong.  There were many Christians who did not
agree with this idea and they reverted to Hinduism.

I performed their Shudh ceremony and I have with me this record of large
number of Christians who were reconverted to Hinduism.  The Missionaries
oppose idol worship and ridicule the Hindu Gods. I hand over these two
pamphlets entitled, “Sevaka Samarthya” and “Muktika Marg”.  This kind of
preaching offends the sentiments of Hindus.  I have opened an Ashram at
Kunkuri.  The Missionaries of Tapkara and Kunkuri along with certain
Christians raised a dispute which is now pending in Court. I have opened
an Ayurvedic dispensary and a gymnasiums for physical culture and a
school is cinder construction.  This has provoked some Christians to
assault me and they assaulted me and the case is pending in Court.  The
buildings are erected on land purchased in the name of the Ashram. I
file “Jharkhand Geet” and also file “Catholic Teaching”.  Hundreds of
people have approached me with different complaints against the foreign
Missionaries.  Such complaints included inducements, harassment, cutting
of topknots, changing of names, abduction, etc.

*To Rev. Lakra.-* I have no objection to the Indian Christian Padri to
take part in politics, but only when his action or policy is
anti-national, I object to it.  I do not remember the name of the
Chairman of the Reception Committee organised to accord welcome for the
visit of Pandit Nehru to Ranchi.  I did not see you (Rev. Lakra).  I do
not know that you were the Chairman of the Reception Committee.  Among
the foreign Missionaries, there are Belgiums, Americans, and Germans and
Dutch.  They all behave in the same fashion.  
 

**No. 21**

*Name*-Rameshwar Pd.  Sharma.  
*Father’s name*-Ganpati Sharma.  
*Address*-Sanjari Balod, Durg district.

I came this side from Durg from Balod on 13th January 1955.  I wanted to
enquire into the reports which I had, viz., the movement for a separate
State called “Jharkhand” and the Missionary activities for mass
conversions. Prakasha Datta of Gass Memorial Hostel, Raipur, had given
me a letter of introduction addressed to Jagdish Tirkey who is Secretary
of the Jharkhand party at Jashpur.  When the States Reorganisation
Commission visited Ranchi I along with Jagdish Tirkey and several others
went there.  From January onwards I took-part in addressing meetings,
etc., and when I could secure the confidence of Jagdish Tirkey and
others of the Jharkhand party I was appointed a member of the Working
Committee of that party.  I have three letters in my possession signed
by Jagdish Tirkey, Secretary, in which my position as a member of the
Working Committee has been stated.  On the 29th May, Jaipalsingh visited
Jashpur.  He actually arrived on the night of 28th and stayed in the
bungalow of Gholeng Mission.  On the 29th, he came to Jashpur and stayed
in the rest-house.  To arrange reception to Shri Jaipalsingh I contacted
some Roman Catholic Christians but they said that unless their leader,
viz., the Father of Gholeng Mission directed them they would not take
part in the reception arrangement.  Accordingly, a day previous to the
arrival of Shri Jaipalsingh I met Father of Gholeng Mission at Gholeng
and requested him to direct the Catholics to join the reception.  Father
Verilas of the Gholeng Mission collected some people in the Church and
asked them to join the reception which was being arranged by us for Shri
Jaipalsingh.

I continued to work for the party and got more and more confidence of
the members.  About one and half months back I went to Ginabahar and
interviewed the Bishop Sevrin.  I had been to him to request him to lend
support to the Jharkhand party.  Although I had known that the foreign
Missionaries and other Catholics were secretly supporting the movement
for Jharkhand, I went to Bishop Sevrin to request him to extend his
support openly.  Bishop Sevrin told me that his policy was like that of
late Mr. Jinha when he claimed separation of Sindh from Bombay which
ultimately led to the creation of a separate State of Pakistan.  I told
him that further division of the country would not be tolerated by the
Government of India and that people could get Pakistan because of the
British Rule.  To this, Bishop Sevrin replied by saying that I was in
politics but a child and that I should not regard Christians and
Missionaries as having without support; that they have the support of
European nations, that the majority of independent nations were
Christians and that the United Nations Organisation also had a majority
of Christian nations.  When 13 foreigners were arrested in China, a
great hue-and-cry was raised in the U. N. O. I told Bishop Sevrin that
these days when every nation is working for peace any armed assistance
was out of the question.  To this, Bishop Sevrin replied saying that
history showed that whenever Christians wanted help it was forthcoming
and whatever type of help was required was available.  I asked Bishop
Sevrin pointedly whether he hoped that a further division of the country
on the lines of Pakistan would ever be possible.  To this, Bishop Sevrin
replied that having witnessed the Partition of 1947, such a doubt should
not have arisen.

When the Prime Minister of India Pandit Nehru had gone to Rome and met
the Pope, I had an occasion to talk to Father Bulkans.  In course of our
talk, Father Bulkans referred to the said visit and said that it was a
proof of the greatness of the Pope which necessitated a visit by Pandit
Nehru to him, otherwise India could never hope to secure foreign aid
from European nations for its development programme, nor would it get
milk-powder and ghee for distribution.

In course of our propaganda work wherever we went in the Jashpur area we
stayed in the Lutheran Churches, called meetings there and that gave
instructions to our local workers in those Churches.  The Roman
Catholics of Jashpur do not openly support the movement although
secretly they work for it.

*To Rev. Lakra.-* Nil.  
 

No. 22

(*Examined in camera*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
