+++
title = "57 Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. BULDANA 18-8-1955 No. 1"

+++
*Oral Statement made before the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry
Committee.*

BULDANA

18-8-1955

**No. 1**

*Name*-Shri Dinkar Laxman Kanade.  
*Age*-70 years.  
*Address*-Buldana.

In 1906 I left my Furguson College to work in the National High School
at Talegaon well-known as Samarth school. I was in the Inter class when
I left the college.  The school was abolished in 1910 by Government.  In
1910 I went to Wal to study Sanskrit literature according to the old
system.  I spent there five years.  I was then spreading the knowledge
of Vedant, Philosophy and reciting Geeta to the public.  During the
first war I travelled from Badrinath to Rameshwar. I was studying at
Benaras for six months, vedic literature.  After the first world war,
i.e., beginning of 1919 I went to America for study. I studied for four
years in the California University to study economics and sociology and
I got my M. A. Degree there. I fell ill with pleuracy.  I returned to
India in 1924.  In 1946 to 1948 I was Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly. I came to stay in Buldana in 1925 as the climatic conditions
were suitable to me.  Then I toured from Nagpur to Belgaum for lectures
in sociology, economics and political theory. I joined congress in 1930
and took part in all the congress movements.  I collected Rs. three lacs
in Buldana district to start a T. B. Sanitorium.  It is now Government’s
hospital.

The Nazerene Church Mission is working in Buldana district.  They were
conducting school and now they have started a High School at Chikhli. 
To my knowledge they do not do any medical work.  'They have no
independent orphanages but they have hostels attached to the
Anglo-Vernacular Schools.  I have heard Christian preachers both Indian
and foreign preaching in the towns as well as in the church. I
occasionally attend church services.  In the church they do not decry
Hindu or other religion.  They preach only.  But outside when they
preach in villages they criticise their customs and Gods.  They try to
describe the Gods as worshipped by the Hindus derisively referring to
their birth, their childhood and their life and contrasting them with
the life of Jesus.  In that way they try to impress the excellence of
Jesus. I had been to villages for the last 15 years but I have not heard
any preaching in villages because during this period I was a member of
the assembly and was also in jail.

I attended many churches for services in America.  There collections are
made in several churches and sometimes they observe weeks styled such as
China Week, India Week and the collections are made and this money is
sent to other nations for spreading the message of Jesus and preaching.

I have come in close contact with the Mission work in India carried on
not by Americans but also by other nations and I found that the
prevalence of overtly and distress in India and the caste system affords
a great deal of scope for the activities of Missionaries resulting in
conversions. I have seen Mission hospitals also.  Several of them are
doing good service.  I have seen such hospitals at Vellor, Miraj and Wai
conducted by Missionaries.  I was in the Vellor hospital and I found
those patients who were willing to join prayers in the church were
allowed to do but there was no compulsion on anybody to attend the
service.  In America the Government Universities do not give any
religious instruction in colleges, but in private Universities, there is
compulsory attendance on Sundays at Church services.  In our country, I
am of opinion that conversion should be registered after a declaration
made before Magistrate.  No man should be allowed to be converted unless
he attains the age of 18 or 21. I am further of opinion that Primary
education should not be in the hands of any religious body even
including Hindus.

*To Mr. Tiwari of Mungeli-*

I first came twice in Buldana in 1924 but I made permanent residence in
March 1926. I used to go on my lecturing tour. round the
Marathi-speaking part of the country.  I lectured on Geeta, Vedant and
Political subjects.  I cannot lecture on Vedant here. I never said
anything about Christianity in my lecture. I cannot say exactly, but it
is my impression that Nazerene Mission might be working for 25 years
before I came to Buldana. I cannot say when the school at Chikhli was
opened. I do not know of how many boys and girls learn in the Chikhli
Mission School.  I had visited the school.  I cannot tell the names of
teachers but they were some American Missionaries.  I had been there two
or three times, twice before 1940 and once in 1947.  My last visit may
be in 1947 or 1948.  After that I did not go.  Since then I cannot say
anything about how the school was conducted. I do not know whether any
boys in that school were converted to Christianity.  I cannot say
whether there was any conversion.  I must have heard the preaching of
Christians 15 or 20 times.  Before 1940 I heard preaching in Buldana,
Dhad and other villages.  I do not exactly remember the words which were
said against the Hindu Gods. I cannot say the particular village but
what I heard was that Krishna was a thief, etc.  Even now I hear sermons
in the church but there is no reference to any Hindu Gods or Goddesses
or any other religion. I cannot tell the names of preachers.  I never
made a report to police but I have been hearing their prachars.  The
church collections are sent from other countries to India.  I do not
know anything about Washim. I do not know about any hospitals in our
State.  There is no provision in the constitution about the declaration
before the magistrate.  I am in favour of anybody changing his religion
after he attains majority but not before it.  If this is not in the
constitution then I think it is a defect.  Shivaji Education Society is
not religious society.  They do often prayer to God but the prayers are
not compulsory.  
 

**No. 2**

*Name*-Subhaktibai Fernandis.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-35 years.  
*Address*-Teacher in Mission School, Chikhli.

I am a mistress in Mission School, Chikhli.  My pay is Rs. 95. I get my
pay out of the mission funds received from America. I receive my salary
through Principal James who is a foreigner.  I teach according to the
prescribed course.  There are three Hindu boys. I never induce them to
be Christians.  The Bible is taught after the school hours.  We do not
compel Hindu girls to attend the class.  There is no compulsion.  The
age of the girls ranges from six or seven to 12 to 13.  It is not true
that we entice Hindu boys with the promise of their marriage with
Christian girls.  Mr. James is a treasurer for the last two years.  I
have been in Chikhli for the last 14 years.  The foreign Missionaries do
not give money to me or any other person for the purpose of converting
any non-Christian.  The foreign Missionaries do not indulge in any
objectionable activities but they serve only.

*To Chairman-*

The school is primary and meant for Christians only, but some Hindu boys
are also admitted.  Now the form is “Christi Dharma Shikshan Dilyas
Mazhi Kahi Harkat Nahi”. I have no objection (the headmaster, Shri
Meshramkar also agrees) if the words are like this “Mazhya Mulas Kristi
Dharmache Shikshan Dyave”.  
 

**No. 3**

*Name*-Sayaji.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-65 years.  
*Address*--Mera, taluq Chikhli.

I became a convert from Mahar community at the age of 18 years.  The
preachers, both foreign and Indian, were spreading the message
“Suvarta”.  I was not offered any inducement of material gain.  As Mahar
I could not dine with the Brahmin.  They could not even allow me to come
near them.  We were not allowed to take water out of the well nor were
we allowed to enter the temples of Hindus.  We were treated like dogs or
other lower animals.  There were no schools and the higher classes would
not allow us in their schools.  When they told us about Jesus Christ and
his love for humanity we were impressed about Christianity and we
embraced Christianity.  Before I became a Christian I saw that the
Christians were praying to one God and that regarded each other equally
and I used to join them in their devotion.  I believed that Jesus Christ
was God.  I have 12 or 13 acres of land.  This was not given by the
Missionary as an inducement to become a Christian.  I purchased this
land from a Fakir.  Now there is perfect equality among all Christians. 
Even a Brahmin Christian has no objection to enter into marriage
connections with Harijan Christians.  The foreign Missionary visits our
village to preach in Church.  He comes from Chikhli. The Missionaries do
not offer any inducement nor try to create disaffection.  
 

**No. 4**

*Name*-Rambhau.  
*Father’s name*-Haribhau Patole.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-28 years.  
*Address*-Pipalgaon.

I became a convert to Christianity before 15 years from the Mang caste
No inducement was offered to me when I became a Christian of money or
any other material gain.  While I was Mang I was not allowed to enter
into social intercourse by the Hindu nor to enter the temples, nor to
even out of their wells they were not willing to draw water themselves
and give it to us lest they may be poluted.  We used to get dirty water
from puddles just as the animals do. I learnt up to third Marathi.  I
did not prosecute my study because I along with my caste students used
to be segregated from other students and no proper education was given. 
The Missionaries gave us instruction in Christian religion and told us
about the God and I was impressed by the preaching and I knew that there
was perfect sense of equality prevailing in the Christian religion.  I
am now a labourer in my village. I am employed by the Hindus and
others.  The Missionaries come to my village to preach in Church. 
Missionaries do not offer any inducement to people to become
Christians.  After convention there are now marriages performed between
members of Mang, Mahar or Maratha and no caste distinction is observed
in this respect.  
 

**No. 5**

*Name*-Shri Laxman Shrawan Bhatkar.  
*Address*-Chikhli.

I belong to Harijan caste of Mahar.  I have been a social worker for
nearly 35 years. I was trying to uplift my caste, i.e., Harijan people. 
For the last 35 years I have been conducting a hostel for the Harijans
at Chikhli.  It is mean for boys coming from the villages and for all
castes.  There is no school attached to this hostel.  In my hostel there
are Mangs, Mahars, Chamars and Marathas and Kunbis.  It is known as
Chokhamela Hostel.  There are 35 boys in the hostel.  There is no hostel
for girls.  The boys from my hostel do not go to Mission School but go
to Government and other schools.  Some boys from the Christian hostel
come to my hostel and I admit them if only they have rot been
converted.  About 10 or 15 boys had come to my hostel seeking
admission.  I did not admit them because they were Christians, saying
that the hostel was meant for Harijans only. I user to go round the
villages preaching to my caste people to improve their mode of living,
education and solving their difficulties, social or others.

In 1924 I remember that the Mahars who had embraced Christianity in
Mehkar taluq were reconverted to Hinduism.  I was M.L.A. from 1938 to
1942.  I am now M.P. and I was also a member of the Constituent
Assembly.

I have heard the preaching of Christian Missionaries, both foreign and
Indians.  Broadly it can be said that almost cent per cent of the
Christian converts are drawn from the Harijan caste.  It is because they
are ignorant and poor and they were ill-treated by the Hindus.  That
afforded the scope activities of Missionaries to propagate their
religion and convert these people.

It is well known that everyone has got a right to preach his religion
and he has got full freedom to do so but while doing so he should not
decry other religions.  As among the Hindus there are also differences
amongst the Christian such as Roman Catholics and Protestants.  Roman
Catholics worship idols whereas Protestants do not.  The Christians
believe that there is only one God and that he is superior to all other
Gods.  Even so it is wrong to attack any other religion because it has
many Gods.  Even among the Hindus some worship idols and some do not. 
To the best of my knowledge and experience there are very few people who
change their religion out of conviction.  As I have already said that
the Harijans are poor and ignorant they are naturally induced to become
Christians if they are offered the post of a preacher or teacher.  The
Mang caste was under surveillance under the Criminal Tribes Act. 
Generally they become converts in order to relieve themselves of the
harassment by the police, and the Mangs are even now trying for
exemption of the operation of the Criminal Tribes Act.

On the 14th of this month I happened to travel in the same compartment
with Mr. Torkelson, a Missionary.  In the course of our talk he admitted
that there are some exceptional cases of inducement but that is not
generally the rule.  But he said that he resented such methods.  The
grievances of the Harijan community as regards their ill-treatment and
other disabilities are now much less than what they were before.  That
may have checked conversion to some extent but there is a constant
propaganda going on behalf of Christianity, attacking the Hindu religion
and social customs and their object is only to secure conversion.  I
cannot say whether the rate of conversion has increased.  The activities
of Missionaries are confined mostly among the ignorant and poor people. 
The privileges which are given now to the Harijans are in many cases
enjoyed by the Harijan converts under guise of being Harijan.  Mr.
Wickey, Member of Parliament, who represents the aboriginal areas, also
complains that the privileges mostly go to the converted Christian
aboriginals.  Some Christian students do not disclose the fact of
conversion and utilise the scholarships awarded to the Harijans by the
Government of India for the Christian converts, suppressing the fact of
their conversion.  This practice ought to be stopped.  It is on account
of this that there may be a tendency on the part of Harijans to become
Christians.

To the best of my knowledge and information the caste distinctions are
observed in even Christian community.  I am of opinion that a Mang would
not inter-marry with Mahar.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I have been residing at Chikhli for the last 35 years.  The hostel at
Chikhli was established by the Depressed India Association.  The
president of that body is Pandharinath Sitaram Patil.  I am the Manager
of that body.  I do not admit Christians whether they are converts from
Mahar or from any other caste.  I know Rajkumari Amrit Kaur who is
Health Minister of Government of India.  I do say that the concessions
by the Government of India were given to Harijans and not to Christian
converts.  She had stated in the meeting of Indian Christians at Messi
Hall in New Delhi as follows:-

> (See Sawadhan, dated April 1955) A large number of Indian Christians
> belonged to poor classes.  Many of them appeared to experience
> difficulty in obtaining facilities like scholarships which were
> normally open to others.  It was, therefore, asked why there was not
> Christian on the Backward Classes Commission.  There was also the
> question of adequate representation in legislatures.  These rights
> could be fought for by nonviolent methods and the work would be easier
> if Christians remained united.

I did not read any reference to this in the newspaper nor have I heard
otherwise.

I am positive that the facilities in regard to scholarships were not
given to the Christians.  I am of opinion that poor Christians should
get aid in matters of education from the Central Government. I cannot
give the number of poor Christians in the Buldana district.  As Akola
and Buldana districts form my Constituency I must have toured over more
than 300 villages.  In these 300 villages there may be 10 or 15 villages
where Christians reside.  I might have met about 10 Christian converts,
since I became a Member of Parliament.  I enquired with 7 or 8
Christians as to the reason for change of religion.  They said that they
were poor and they were ill-treated by the Hindu society.  They did not
say, that they were offered any inducement.  I said that if they were
reverted to Hinduism they would get all facilities.  These 'people
belong to the village Mathla near Chikhli.  I cannot remember the other
villages from which Christians met me.  This is an incident of 2 or 3
years ago.  Primarily my work in the villages is in connection with the
Congress. I had gone to attend the marriage ceremonies. I had gone to
acquaint myself with the grievances of the people.  I go there to
address meetings.  I am M.P. since 1952. I had heard about the
Missionary activities even before 1952.  I do not remember that Dr.
Katju made any statement in Parliament.  There was a discussion in
Parliament on the report of Shri Shrikant, Commissioner of Scheduled
Castes.  There was no debate in Parliament on such matters like
Jharkhand.  Mostly I am present at all the Sessions. I was in favour of
this Committee which was appointed by the State Government because the
matter was not debated in the Parliament.  Under the Constitution some
special privileges should b given to Christians.  I do not know how many
Christians have been reconverted to Hindu religion. I have heard
Christian preaching up to two years ago.  In the course of their
preaching, they often indulge in attack on Ram and Krishna.  There is no
Arya Samaj in Chikhli.  I cannot say whether there is any Arya Samajist
in Parliament.  I have heard Arya Samajists.  They also preach Hindu
religion.  They do not worship any idols.  That is their religious
persuation.  I have read Satyarthprakash.  There is mention of Jesus
Christ in it.  It is said that He is not the son of God.  There is also
criticism of idol worship and idol worship is not true devotion of God. 
There are some references to Ramayan and Vedant.  It is the literates
who are able to judge about religion.  I cannot say that a man who
becomes a Christian as a result of ill-treatment or social injustice, is
incapable of judgment as to what is good.

I will be able to point out thousands who embraced Christianity that
they were poor.  I have known these facts for 35 years.  I know at least
500 out of these since 1947.  As I said already I met about 1 0 persons
out of 500 during the last 2 years.  I did not mention 1947 but what I
said was during the last 35 years I came across, from the facts that
most of the Christians are drawn from the poor Harijan class.  If
necessary I can prove this.  Mr. Torkelson is a Missionary at Delhi.  I
do not know to what Mission he belongs.  He himself gave me this
visiting card.  He was going to Poona.  He was talking to me in
English.  I failed in the XIth class.  I cannot speak English fluently
but I can follow it.  Now the rate of conversion is decreasing since the
disabilities on the Harijans are removed.  These concessions are being
given during the last 7 or 8 years.  I cannot mention the name of any
individual from whom I learnt that caste system is observed in Christian
religion.  I am of opinion that there should be inter-marriages.  
 

**No. 6**

*Name*-Hiralal Hanuman Pagare.   
*Age*-54 years.  
*Address*-Manubai, taluq Chikhli.

I am a born Christian.  I am a pastor in the Church of Manubai. I get
Rs. 85 as pay.  I get my pay from the treasurer, Shri Dongardive.  Up to
two years ago I used to preach and I used to say that I witnessed my
faith in Jesus and that he was the only Saviour.  No inducement is
offered to make one Christian.  We do not attack Hindu religion or other
religion.  Foreign Missionaries do not preach among the non-Christians
but come to Church to deliver sermon.  The Christian Missionaries do not
try to alienate the minds of the Indian Christians from their allegiance
to Government.  They want on the other hand to encourage us to be
patriotic, to wear India-made clothes and be loyal to our country.

*To Chairman-*

I have been a preacher for the last 25 years.  
 

**No. 7**

*Name*-Rev. Rassel Gophane.  
*Age*-34 years.  
*Address*-Bhipur (Nizam State).

I am pastor of the Church of Nazerene in my village.  I instruct my
congregation in the doctrines of Christian Church. I also preach to the
non-Christians.  I offer no inducement.  I do not refer to any other
religions, but tell them about the life of Jesus. I get Rs. 60 from the
treasurer, Shri Dongardive.  I believe strongly that no Christian
Missionary will ever offer any inducement to secure conversion.  It is
not true that the Missionaries spread disaffection amongst the people
against the Government.  I am pastor for ten years.

*To Chairman-*

By God, I mean Parameshwar although this word is a Hindu, still I think
that my God is a living God.  Hindus have a dead God.  I believe that
even after crucification Jesus Christ physically lived.  Jesus Christ
was the son of Jehovah sent by him.  
 

**No. 8**

*Name*-Onkar Shiorao Deshpande.  
*Age*-50 years.  
*Occupation*-School teacher in Mission School, Chikhli.  
*Address*-Chikhli.

I am a teacher in the Hindi Nazerene Mission School at Chikhli. I get
Rs. 114 including compensatory cost of living allowance per month.  I am
a Hindu Brahmin. I never became a Christian.  I know the foreign
Missionaries there, viz., Mr. James and Mr. Lee.  There are two or three
Hindu boys in the school.  No Missionary tells Hindu boys that they
should become Christians. I never saw any Christian Missionary talking
against the Government. I have been there since ten years. I believe
that they will not harm any Government.

*To Chairman-*

About 125 boys are Christians in Middle School and about five or six
boys are Hindus.  
 

**No. 9**

*Name*-Shri Ramchandra Anant Kanitkar.  
*Occupation*-Retired Advocate.  
*Address*-Buldana.

I was a member of the Local Legislative Council from 1923 to 1937 with a
break of four years.  I have been practising here for the last 35
years.  Now I have ceased practising.  I have never come in contact with
Christian Missionary like Mr. James or Mr. Lee.  In 1914, I was building
my house, a foreign Missionary came and criticised my building structure
for the Tulsi plant.

In my opinion registration of conversion should fall under the
expression Vital Statistics occurring in list 3 schedule 7.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I have not come in contact with foreign Missionary.  I have not visited
any school or institution.  Whatever I have said is correct.  
 

**No. 10**

*Name*-Shri V. K. Soman.  
*Address*-Mehkar.

About two years ago the Missionaries invited the people over the
loudspeaker to listen attentatively to what they were going to say. 
They said that the Hindus were idolators and that people should not be
led away by their Gods who are worshipped by the Hindus generally.  Such
a propaganda was going on for five or six days.  Then a complaint was
preferred to the police which resulted in stopping the propaganda.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

The loudspeakers were fixed in trees.  The tree is in middle of the
weekly market.  My house may be about 200 or 300 steps away.  This was
about 8 or 9 p.m. at night.  It is not true that I was ill two years
ago.  There was one American Missionary.  He attracted about 50 persons
on the spot. I went alone to the place.  I sat there for five or ten
minutes.  They were comparing Hindu and Christian religions but I cannot
give the particulars.  It is not possible to recollect at this time. 
What I clearly remember is that they were describing Hindus as idol
worshippers.  I did not go to make the report to the police but I was
told that a report was made.  I gave the advice as the people came to me
to make a report to Police.  It was on my advice that a report was made
to the Police. I do not know the name who at my instance reported the
matter. I do not remember the date, but it was 1953.  
 

**No. 11**

*Name*-Shri Luther Manmothe.  
*Age*-44 years.  
*Address*-Mehkar.

I am Christian by birth.  I know Shri Soman. I know him for the last 18
years.  It was not in 1953 but in 1951 that there was preaching done
through Missionary and through loudspeaker.  Mr. Greer was addressing
the people.  Mr. Greer was never in the habit of indulging in attack on
other religion.  This loudspeaker address was in the bazar. I read a
report about this incident ill “Maharashtra”.  What I read was that a
Missionary was preaching Christian religion with the aid of loudspeaker.

I am a pastor in Mehkar Church. I get Rs. 81 as pay per month from the
Church fund. I am there for four years.  From 1938 to 1943 I was at
Mehkar then I was transferred to other place and now I am again
transferred to Mehkar, for the last four years. I was at Washim for four
years.  I know Mr. Pathak who lives near Church at Washim.  He was
excommunicated from the congregation.  His conduct was found to be
objectionable.  I myself enquired into the matter as a pastor and I was
satisfied. I know Shrimati Subhaktibai. I saw Mangalsutra in the neck of
that lady.  Among the Christians Mangalsutra is worn after marriage.  It
is not true that in the Washim hospital the Mangalsutra is removed
before operation. I can say it from the instance of my wife. I was also
a pastor at Pusad, Washim and Chikhli. I never offered any inducement to
anybody for becoming a Christian.  At Pusad, I know Mrs. McWan who is a
Head Mistress of A. V. School.  I am sure, that she also does not induce
any body.  I was at Pusad from 1942-1946. Haribhau Yengad was pastor at
Pusad in 1951.  He is now at Washim.

It is not true that Shankar Ellaya, a boy was sought to be enticed by
the offer of a girl in marriage to become a Christian.  In our Church
there are not more than ten conversions since 1947.  From our Church, I
mean, the Nazerene Church which comprises Buldana, Chikhli and Mehkar.

Even those who are born Christians, are sinners at their birth.  I read
John’s Gospel.  St. John’s Gospel relates a story of one man who
approached Jesus and was told a man should be reborn to be able to enter
the kingdom of God.  The natural birth is purely physical but rebirth is
spiritual.  I underwent training in the Washim Bible School for three
years.  Whatever I learnt in that school I teach in my preaching.  In
the Bible school we never teach that our preacher should condemn other
religions.  Now the American Missionaries have announced to us that they
have already transferred the authority over the Church to the Indian
Christians and that they are prepared to leave India at any time they
are asked to do.

*To Chairman-*

The congregation of all the churches comprised in. the Nazerene Church
must be about 1,000.  
 

**No. 12**

*Name*-John Manikrao Meshramkar.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-43 years.  
*Address*-Chikhli.

I am Christian by birth.  I am Headmaster, Nazerene Mission Middle. 
School, Chikhli.  I know Mr. Deshpande since 1946.  He is a teacher in
our school.  It is not true that he has turned Christian.  There are 10
teachers in the middle and primary school.  There are nine Christian
teachers and one Hindu.  In the middle school there are 95 boys and
girls and in the primary school 102.  The boarders are 82 in the middle
school and 70 in the primary school.  In the middle school there are
three Hindu boys who also reside in boarding. Two Hindu boys come from
the neighbouring village.  If somebody were to tell us that the
Christians should have a separate state like Jharkhand we will resist to
him as we think that we are the Indian nationals.  
 

**No. 13**

*Name*-Paulus Ingle.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-38 years.  
*Address*-Undri.

I am a preacher.  I embraced Christianity in 1947. I am now preacher I
was Mahar before I became Christian.  I was a member of Gadge Maharaj
religious party and I used to go about preaching in his company and on
his behalf. I was with him reciting kirtan myself but once it so
happened, I came across the verse of St. John Gospel.  It said that God
sent his only begotton son to the world to wash off the sins of people. 
On reading that all my evil passions subsided and I experienced a peace
of mind.  I was never offered any inducement.  I do not preach against
Hindu religion but only preach Christian religion. I dislike condemning
other religion.

*To Chairman-*

I was baptised by Mr. Borde and I became a preacher after five years of
my Baptism.  I was trained in the Bible school at Washim.  
 

**No. 14**

*Name*-Namedeo Bapurao Jadhao.  
*Caste*-Christian.  
*Age*-40 years.  
*Address*-Shindkhed Raja.

I became a Christian from the Harijan caste. I have got 10 acres 30
gunthas of land from Government under Grow More Food Campaign.  It was
because I served in the Defence Force for six years. I embraced
Christianity in 1937 without any inducement given by the Missionary.  I
became a Christian having believed the word Jesus which is recorded in
John Gospel.  While I was Mahar I was not harassed by any Hindu but I
was not allowed to enter their temples nor was I allowed to draw water
from their well. I was ill-treated while I was in the school.

Missionaries are not doing anything adverse to Indian nation.

*To Chairman-*

(*Note*.-He is able to repeat “Lord’s prayer”).  
 

**No. 15**

*Name*-Rev. S. J. Bhujbal.  
*Address*-Buldana.

I am a District Evangelist. I have got 30 churches under my
jurisdiction.  They are situated in Pusad, Mehkar and Chikhli and other
taluqs.  The congregation is over 1,000 strong, and including children
the number may exceed even 2,000. I go to the churches and deliver
sermon.  The subject of the sermon is biblical such as birth of Christ,
death of Jesus, his second coming resurrection and generally
instructions as to how the congregation should maintain the level of
their christian life.  The church collection on the whole comes to about
Rs. 10,000 per year.  To them is added a subsidy received from the
mission fund.  The foreign missionaries preach in the church as well as
outside.  But generally they preach in the churches and rarely outside. 
There are 24 individuals in the Nazerene jurisdiction.  In our church
the hierarchy is General Superintendent at the top then District
Superintendent, pastors and evangelists.  The General Superintendents
are Americans.  The General Assembly is in America and they appoint
these General Superintendents.  The Home Board in America appoint the
General Superintendent and the District Superintendent is appointed by
the District Assembly in India.  There is no other area in India where
there is Nazarene church as in Basim where it has got its headquarters. 
Our church is affiliated to the National Christian Council. I have not
come across a book entitled “Bharatat Alele Preshit”.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I did rot induce anybody to become christian. There are about 50
preachers in all in our area.  They preach not only in villages but in
towns also.  They do not denounce Hindu religion.  
 

**No. 16**

*Name*-Shri Dhondu Shioram Borkar.  
*Address*-Eklara, taluq Chikhli.

I became a christian at the age of 25 from the mang caste.  A pracharak
by name Ingle used to visit my place and Kisan Yengad also used to come
to preach.  They used to come to my house saying that Jesus was the
saviour of humanity.  The questioned me as to what was the cause of my
poverty.  Then they asked me why I did not put my children into
schools.  I pleaded my inability to send my children to school on
account of my poverty and lack of resources.  Then they said that if I
became a christian they would take up the burden of educating their
children as orphans and that they would help me in my difficulties. 
Then I thought if these people are going to help me and get me out of my
difficulties, I should have no objection to follow their advice and
become a Christian.  Then as promised by them they gave education to my
children at Chikhli.  Then they also helped me off and on with money. 
Then on the day on which I was going to be baptised they presented to me
and my children cloth worth Rs. 18 or Rs. 20.  My daughter was educated
in the mission school at Chikhli up to the VIII standard.  One of my
sons read up to the VI standard and two girls up to the III standard. 
The, American Missionaries used to demand payment of fees for my
children studying in the school but the pastor used to assure me that
there may be remission of fees to some extent if I were to agree to pay
partial fees. I paid full fees for one of my daughter but half fees for
the rest.  After my daughter passed the VIII class then they began to
ask for fees and that in the higher classes it is hot possible to
educate the boys free.  As I was unable to pay the fees, they discharged
the children from the school.  On account of this I reverted to
Hinduism.  My brother also reverted to Hinduism with his family.  Nobody
called me here but as I knew that the commission was coming here I came.

*To Mr. Tiwari-*

I am a Hindu for the last five years. I did not like the christian
religion nor its mode of life.  Before I became a christian they used to
show me great affection but after I became a christian they behaved in
different manner.  My daughter is about 20 years and the son 17 or 18. 
If some muslim were to ask me to become a mohamedan offering the same
inducement as the christians did I shall not embrace Islam because of my
unhappy experience.

What is Hindu dharma? The witness asks Mr. Tiwari what is your religion?

He says unless Mr. Tiwari tells what christian religion is, I am not
bound to say what hindu religion is?

I am as poor as I was before. I work as a labour. I earn about Rs. 8 per
month. My children are not employed anywhere and my daughter is married.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
