+++
title = "126 \nSomanatha and Mahmud Somanatha and Mahmud"

+++
Source: http://www.flonnet.com/fl1608/16081210.htm  
(downloaded Apr. 2000)  
placed on the CU server as well, because sometimes the Frontline site
has problems  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FRONTLINE 16,8 (April 10-23, 1999)  
  


## Somanatha and Mahmud

Mahmud of Ghazni's raid on the Somanatha temple in 1026 did not create a
Hindu-Muslim dichotomy. Indeed a rigorous historical analysis of five
different narratives or representations of what happened yields
surprising new insights.

**ROMILA THAPAR**  


MAHMUD'S raid on the temple of Somanatha and the destruction of the idol
has become an event of immense significance in the writing of Indian
history since the last couple of centuries. According to some writers,
it has been seminal to antagonistic Hindu-Muslim relations over the last
thousand years. Yet a careful investigation of the representation of
this event and related matters in various sources of this thousand year
period suggests that this conventional view is in itself a
misrepresentation of the reading of the event in terms of Hindu-Muslim
relations.

In 1026, Mahmud of Ghazni raided the temple of Somanatha and broke the
idol. Reference is made to this in various sources, or reference is
omitted where one expects to find it. Some of the references contradict
each other. Some lead to our asking questions which do not conform to
what we have accepted so far in terms of the meaning and the aftermath
of the event. An event can get encrusted with interpretations from
century to century and this changes the perception of the event. As
historians, therefore, we have to be aware not just of the event and how
we look upon it today, but also the ways in which the event was
interpreted through the intervening centuries. An analysis of these
sources and the priorities in explanation stem, of course, from the
historian's interpretation.

I would like to place before you five representations of this and other
events at Somanatha, keeping in mind the historical question of how
Mahmud's raid was viewed. They cover a wide span and are major
representations. The five are the Turko-Persian chronicles, Jaina texts
of the period, Sanskrit inscriptions from Somanatha, the debate in the
British House of Commons, and what is often described as a nationalist
reading of the event.

Let me begin with a brief background to Somanatha itself. It is referred
to in the *Mahabharata* as Prabhas, and although it had no temple until
later, it was a place of pilgrimage.¹ As was common to many parts of the
subcontinent there were a variety of religious sects established in the
area - Buddhist, Jaina, Shaiva and Muslim. Some existed in succession
and some conjointly. The Shaiva temple, known as the Somanatha temple at
Prabhas, dates to about the 9th or 10th century A.D.² The Chaulukyas or
Solankis were the ruling dynasty in Gujarat during the 11th to 13th
centuries. Kathiawar was administered by lesser rajas, some of whom were
subordinates of the Chaulukyas.

SAURASHTRA was agriculturally fertile, but even more than that, its
prosperity came from trade, particularly maritime trade. The port at
Somanatha, known as Veraval, was one of the three major ports of
Gujarat. During this period western India had a conspicuously wealthy
trade with ports along the Arabian peninsula and the Persian Gulf.³ The
antecedents of this trade go back many centuries.

Arab raids on Sind were less indelible than the more permanent contacts
based on trade. Arab traders and shippers settled along the West coast
married locally and were ancestral to many communities existing to the
present. Some Arabs took employment with local rulers and Rashtrakuta
inscriptions speak of Tajika administrators and governors in the coastal
areas.⁴ The counterparts to these Arab traders were Indian merchants
based at Hormuz and at Ghazni, who, even after the 11th century, are
described as extremely prosperous.⁵

The trade focused on the importing of horses from West Asia and to a
lesser extent on wine, metal, textiles and spices. By far the most
lucrative was the trade in horses.⁶ And in this funds from temples
formed a sizable investment, according to some sources.⁷ Port towns such
as Somanatha-Veraval and Cambay derived a handsome income from this
trade, much of it doubtless being ploughed back to enlarge the profits.
Apart from trade, another source of local income was the large sums of
money collected in pilgrim taxes by the administration in Somanatha.
This was a fairly common source of revenue for the same is mentioned in
connection with the temple at Multan."⁸

WE are also told that the local rajas - the Chudasamas, Abhiras,
Yadhavas and others - attacked the pilgrims and looted them of their
donations intended for the Somanatha temple. In addition, there was
heavy piracy in the coastal areas indulged in by the local Chavda rajas
and a variety of sea brigands referred to as the Bawarij.⁹ As with many
areas generating wealth in earlier times, this part of Gujarat was also
subject to unrest and the Chaulukya administration spent much time and
energy policing attacks on pilgrims and traders.

Despite all this, trade flourished. Gujarat in this period experienced
what can perhaps be called a renaissance culture of the Jaina mercantile
community. Rich merchant families were in political office, controlled
state finances, were patrons of culture, were scholars of the highest
order, were liberal donors to the Jaina *sangha* and builders of
magnificent temples.

This is the backdrop, as it were, to the Somanatha temple which by many
accounts suffered a raid by Mahmud in 1026. There is one sober,
contemporary reference and this comes, not surprisingly, from Alberuni,
a central Asian scholar deeply interested in India, writing extensively
on what he observed and learnt. He tells us that there was a stone
fortress built about a hundred years before Mahmud's raid within which
the *lingam* was located, presumably to safeguard the wealth of the
temple. The idol was especially venerated by sailors and traders, not
surprising considering the importance of the port at Veraval, trading as
far as Zanzibar and China. He comments in a general way on the economic
devastation caused by the many raids of Mahmud. Alberuni also mentions
that Durlabha of Multan, presumably a mathematician, used a roundabout
way involving various eras to compute the year of the raid on Somanatha
as Shaka 947 (equivalent to A.D. 1025-26).¹⁰ The raid therefore was
known to local sources.

Not unexpectedly, the Turko-Persian chronicles indulge in elaborate
myth-making around the event, some of which I shall now relate. A major
poet of the eastern Islamic world, Farrukhi Sistani, who claims that he
accompanied Mahmud to Somanatha, provides a fascinating explanation for
the breaking of the idol.¹¹ This explanation has been largely dismissed
by modern historians as too fanciful, but it has a significance for the
assessment of iconoclasm. According to him, the idol was not of a Hindu
deity but of a pre-Islamic Arabian goddess. He tells us that the name
Somnat (as it was often written in Persian) is actually Su-manat, the
place of Manat. We know from the *Qur'an* that Lat, Uzza and Manat were
the three pre-Islamic goddesses widely worshipped,¹² and the destruction
of their shrines and images, it was said, had been ordered by the
Prophet Mohammad. Two were destroyed, but Manat was believed to have
been secreted away to Gujarat and installed in a place of worship.
According to some descriptions, Manat was an aniconic block of black
stone, so the form could be similar to a *lingam*. This story hovers
over many of the Turko-Persian accounts, some taking it seriously,
others being less emphatic and insisting instead that the icon was of a
Hindu deity.

THE identification of the Somanatha idol with that of Manat has little
historical credibility. There is no evidence to suggest that the temple
housed an image of Manat. Nevertheless, the story is significant to the
reconstruction of the aftermath of the event since it is closely tied to
the kind of legitimation which was being projected for Mahmud.

The link with Manat added to the acclaim for Mahmud. Not only was he the
prize iconoclast in breaking Hindu idols, but in destroying Manat he had
carried out what were said to be the very orders of the Prophet. He was
therefore doubly a champion of Islam.¹³ Other temples were raided by him
and their idols broken, but Somanatha receives special attention in all
the accounts of his activities. Writing of his victories to the
Caliphate, Mahmud presents them as major accomplishments in the cause of
Islam. And not surprisingly, Mahmud becomes the recipient of grandiose
titles. This establishes his legitimacy in the politics of the Islamic
world, a dimension which is overlooked by those who see his activities
only in the context of northern India.

BUT his legitimacy also derives from the fact that he was a Sunni and he
attacked Isma'ilis and Shias whom the Sunnis regarded as heretics.¹⁴ It
was ironic that the Isma'ilis attacked the temple of Multan and were, in
turn, attacked by Mahmud in the 11th century and their mosque was shut
down. The fear of the heretic was due to the popularity of heresies
against orthodox Islam and political hostility to the Caliphate in the
previous couple of centuries, none of which would be surprising given
that Islam in these areas was a relatively new religion.

Mahmud is said to have desecrated their places of worship at Multan and
Mansura. His claims to having killed 50,000 *kafirs* (infidels) is
matched by similar claims to his having killed 50,000 Muslim heretics.
The figure appears to be notional. Mahmud's attacks on the Hindus and on
the Shias and Isma'ilis was a religious crusade against the infidel and
the heretic.  
  


V.V.KRISHNAN  
![](16081211.jpg)**With the majestic Somanatha temple for backdrop,
Bharatiya Janata Party leader L. K. Advani begins his rath yatra on
September 25, 1990.**

  
But interestingly, there were also the places and peoples involved in
the highly profitable horse trade with the Arabs and the Gulf. Both the
Muslim heretics of Multan and the Hindu traders of Somanatha had
substantial commercial investments. Is it possible then that Mahmud, in
addition to religious iconoclasm, was also trying to terminate the
import of horses into India via Sind and Gujarat? This would have
curtailed the Arab monopoly over the trade. Given the fact that there
was a competitive horse trade with Afghanistan through north-western
India, which was crucial to the wealth of the state of Ghazni, Mahmud
may well have been combining iconoclasm with trying to obtain a
commercial advantage.¹⁵

In the subsequent and multiple accounts - and there are many in each
century - the contradictions and exaggerations increase. There is no
agreement on the form of the image. Some say that it is a *lingam*,
others reverse this and describe it as anthropomorphic - a human form.¹⁶
But even with this there is no consistency as to whether it is a female
Manat or a male Shiva. There seems to have been almost a lingering wish
that it might be Manat. Was the icon, if identified with Manat, more
important perhaps to Muslim sentiment?

THE anthropomorphic form encourages stories of the nose being knocked
off and the piercing of the belly from which jewels poured forth.¹⁷
Fantasising on the wealth of the temples evoked a vision of immense
opulence, and this has led a modern historian to describing the Turkish
invasions as a "gold-rush".¹⁸ One account states that the image
contained twenty *man* of jewels - one *man* weighing several kilograms;
another, that a gold chain weighing two hundred *man* kept the image in
place. Yet another describes the icon as made of iron with a magnet
placed above it, so that it would be suspended in space, an awesome
sight for the worshipper.¹⁹ The age of the temple is taken further and
further back in time until it is described as 30,000 years old. One
wonders if Somanatha was not becoming something of a fantasy in such
accounts.

MORE purposive writings of the 14th century are the chronicles of Barani
and Isami. Both were poets, one associated with the Delhi Sultanate and
the other with the Bahmani kingdom of the Deccan. Both project Mahmud as
the ideal Muslim hero, but somewhat differently. Barani states that his
writing is intended to educate Muslim rulers in their duties towards
Islam.²⁰ For him, religion and kingship are twins and the ruler needs to
know the religious ideals of kingship if he claims to be ruling on
behalf of God. Sultans must protect Islam through the *shar'ia* and
destroy both Muslim heretics and infidels. Mahmud is said to be the
ideal ruler because he did both.

Isami composes what he regards as an epic poem on the Muslim rulers of
India, on the lines of the famous Persian poet Firdausi's earlier epic
on the Persian kings, the *Shah-nama*. Isami argues that kingship
descended from God, first to the pre-Islamic rulers of Persia - in which
he includes Alexander of Macedon and the Sassanid kings - and
subsequently to the Sultans of India, with Mahmud establishing Muslim
rule in India.²¹ Interestingly the Arabs, who had both a political and
economic presence in the subcontinent prior to Mahmud, hardly figure in
this history. That there is a difference of perception in these
narratives is important to a historical assessment and requires further
investigation.

The role of Mahmud, it would seem, was also undergoing a change: from
being viewed merely as an iconoclast to also being projected as the
founder of an Islamic state in India, even if the latter statement was
not historically accurate. Presumably, given his status in Islamic
historiography, this was a form of indirectly legitimising the Sultans
in India. The appropriation of the pre-Islamic Persian rulers for
purposes of legitimacy suggests that there may have been an element of
doubt about the accepted role models of Muslim rulers. The Sultans in
India were not only ruling a society substantially of non-Muslims, but
even those who had converted to Islam were in large part following the
customary practices of their erstwhile caste, which were often not in
conformity with the *shar'ia*. Is there then a hint of an underlying
uncertainty, of a lack of confidence, in the insistence on taking
Islamic rule back to Mahmud, a champion of the Islamic world? Can we say
that these accounts had converted the event itself at Somanatha into
what some today would call an icon?

LET me turn now to the Jaina texts of this period. These, not
unexpectedly, associated a different set of concerns with the event, or
else they ignore it. The 11th century Jaina poet from the Paramara court
in Malwa, Dhanapala, a contemporary of Mahmud, briefly mentions Mahmud's
campaign in Gujarat and his raids on various places, including
Somanatha.²² He comments, however, at much greater length of Mahmud's
inability to damage the icons of Mahavira in Jaina temples for, as he
puts it, snakes cannot swallow Garuda nor can stars dim the light of the
sun. This for him is proof of the superior power of the Jaina images as
compared to the Shaiva.

In the early 12th century, another Jaina next informs us that the
Chaulukya king, angered by the *rakshasas*, the *daityas* and the
*asuras* who were destroying temples and disturbing the *rishis* and
*brahmanas*, campaigned against them.²³ One expects the list to include
the Turushkas (as the Turks were called) but instead mention is made of
the local rajas. The king is said to have made a pilgrimage to Somanatha
and found that the temple was old and disintegrating. He is said to have
stated that it was a disgrace that the local rajas were plundering the
pilgrims to Somanatha but could not keep the temple in good repair. This
is the same king who built at Cambay a mosque which was later destroyed
in a campaign against the Chaulukyas of Gujarat by the Paramaras of
Malwa. But the Paramara king also looted the Jaina and other temples
built under the patronage of the Chaulukyas.²⁴ It would seem that when
the temple was seen as a statement of power, it could become a target of
attack, irrespective of religious affiliations.

Various Jaina texts, giving the history of the famous Chaulukya king
Kumarapala, mention his connection with Somanatha. It is stated that he
wished to be immortalised.²⁵ So Hemachandra, his Jaina minister,
persuaded the king to replace the dilapidated wooden temple at Somanatha
with a new stone temple. The temple is clearly described as dilapidated
and not destroyed. When the new temple on the location of the old had
been completed, both Kumarapala and Hemachandra took part in the ritual
of consecration. Hemachandra wished to impress the king with the
spiritual powers of a Jaina *acharya*, so on his bidding Shiva, the
deity of the temple, appeared before the king. Kumarapala was so
overcome by this miracle that he converted to the Jaina faith. The focus
is again on the superior power of Jainism over Shaivism. The renovating
of the temple, which is also important, takes on the symbolism of
political legitimation for the king. It does seem curious that these
activities focussed on the Somanatha temple, yet no mention is made of
Mahmud, in spite of the raid having occurred in the previous couple of
centuries. The miracle is the central point in the connection with
Somanatha in these accounts.

SOME suggestion of an anguish over what may be indirect references to
the raids of Mahmud come from quite other Jaina sources and
interestingly these relate to the merchant community. In an anthology of
stories, one story refers to the merchant Javadi who quickly makes a
fortune in trade and then goes in search of a Jaina icon which had been
taken away to the land called Gajjana.²⁶ This is clearly Ghazna. The
ruler of Gajjana was a *Yavana* - a term by now used for those coming
from the West. The *Yavana* ruler was easily won over by the wealth
presented to him by Javadi. He allowed Javadi to search for the icon
and, when it was found, gave him permission to take it back. Not only
that but the *Yavana* worshipped the icon prior to its departure. The
second part of the narrative deals with the vicissitudes of having the
icon installed in Gujarat, but that is another story.

This is a reconciliation story with a certain element of wishful
thinking. The initial removal of the icon is hurtful and creates
anguish. Its return should ideally be through reconciling iconoclasts to
the worship of icons. There are other touching stories in which the
ruler of Gajjana or other Yavana kings are persuaded not to attack
Gujarat. But such stories are generally related as a demonstration of
the power of the Jaina *acharyas*.

The Jaina sources therefore underline their own ideology. Jaina temples
survive, Shaiva temples get destroyed. Shiva has abandoned his icons
unlike Mahavira who still resides in his icons and protects them.
Attacks are to be expected in the Kaliyuga since it is an age of evil.
Icons will be broken but wealthy Jaina merchants will restore the
temples and the icons will, invariably and miraculously, mend
themselves.

The third category of major narratives is constituted by the
inscriptions in Sanskrit from Somanatha itself, focussing on the temple
and its vicinity. The perspectives which these point to are again very
different from the earlier two. In the 12th century the Chaulukya king,
Kumarapala, issues an inscription. He appoints a governor to protect
Somanatha and the protection is against the piracy and the looting of
the local rajas.²⁷ A century later, the Chaulkyas are again protecting
the site, this time from attacks by the Malwa rajas.²⁸ The regular
complaint about local rajas looting pilgrims at Somanatha becomes a
continuing refrain in many inscriptions.

In 1169, an inscription records the appointment of the chief priest of
the Somanatha temple, Bhava Brihaspati.²⁹ He claims to have come from
Kannauj, from a family of Pashupata Shaiva *brahmanas* and, as the
inscriptions show, initiated a succession of powerful priests at the
Somanatha temple. He states that he was sent by Shiva himself to
rehabilitate the temple. This was required because it was an old
structure, much neglected by the officers and because temples in any
case deteriorate in the Kaliyuga. Bhava Brihaspati claims that it was he
who persuaded Kumarapala to replace the older wooden temple with a stone
temple.

AGAIN no mention is made of the raid of Mahmud. Was this out of
embarrassment that a powerful icon of Shiva had been desecrated? Or was
the looting of a temple not such an extraordinary event? The
Turko-Persian chronicles may well have been indulging in exaggeration.
Yet the looting of the pilgrims by the local rajas is repeatedly
mentioned. Was Kumarapala's renovation both an act of veneration for
Shiva and a seeking of legitimation? Was this, in a sense, an inversion
of Mahmud seeking legitimation through raiding the temple? Are these
then counter-points of legitimation in viewing the past?

In 1264, a long legal document was issued in the form of an inscription
with both a Sanskrit and an Arabic version and concerns the acquisition
of land and the building of a mosque by a trader from Hormuz.³⁰ The
Sanskrit version begins with the usual formulaic symbol - the *siddham*
- and continues with invoking Vishvanatha, a name for Shiva. But there
is also a suggestion that it was a rendering into Sanskrit of Allah, the
Lord of the Universe. We are told that Khoja Nuruddin Feruz, the son of
Khoja Abu Ibrahim of Hormuz, a commander of a ship, and evidently a
respected trader - as his title Khoja/Khwaja would indicate - acquired
land in Mahajanapali on the outskirts of the town of Somanatha to build
a mosque, which is referred to as a *dharmasthana*. The land was
acquired from the local raja, Sri Chada, son of Nanasimha, and reference
is also made to the governor of Kathiawar, Maladeva, and the
Chaulukya-Vaghela king, Arjunadeva.

THE acquisition of this land has the approval of two local bodies, the
*panchakula* and the association of the *jamatha*. The *panchakulas*
were powerful administrative and local committees, well-established
during this period, consisting of recognised authorities such as
priests, officers, merchants and local dignitaries. This particular
*panchakula* was headed by *purohita* Virabhadra, the Shaiva Pashupata
*acharya* most likely of the Somanatha temple, and among its members was
the merchant Abhayasimha. From other inscriptions it would seem that
Virabhadra was related to Bhava Brihaspati in a line of succession. The
witnesses to his agreement of granting land for the building of the
mosque are mentioned by name and described as the "the big men". They
were the *thakuras, ranakas*, rajas and merchants, many from the
Mahajanapali. Some of these dignitaries were functionaries of the
estates of the Somanatha and other temples. The land given for the
mosque in Mahajanapali was part of these estates.

THE other committee endorsing the agreement was the *jamatha*,
consisting of ship-owners, artisans, sailors and religious teachers,
probably from Hormuz. Also mentioned are the oil-millers, masons and
Musalmana horse-handlers, all referred to by what appear to be
occupational or caste names, such as *chunakara* and *ghamchika*. Were
these local converts to Islam? Since the *jamatha* was to ensure the
income from these endowments for the maintenance of the mosque, it was
necessary to indicate its membership.

The inscription lists the endowments for the mosque. These included two
large measures of land which were part of the temple property from
adjoining temples situated in Somanatha-*pattana*, land from a *matha*,
income from two shops in the vicinity, and an oil-mill. The measures of
land were bought from the *purohita* and the chief priests of the
temples and the sales were attested by the men of rank. The shops and
the oil-mill were purchased from the local people.

The tone and sentiment of the inscription is amicable and clearly the
settlement had been agreed to on all sides. The building of a
substantial mosque in association with some of the properties of the
Somanatha temple, not by a conqueror but by a trader through a legal
agreement, was obviously not objected to - neither by the local governor
and dignitaries nor by the priests, all of whom were party to the
decision. The mosque is thus closely linked to the erstwhile properties
and the functionaries of the Somanatha temple. This raises many
questions. Did this transaction, 200 or so years after the raid of
Mahmud, not interfere with the remembrance of the raid as handed down in
the minds of the priests and the local 'big men'? Were memories short or
was the event relatively unimportant?

Did the local people make a distinction between the Arab and West Asian
traders on the one hand, often referred to as Tajika, and the Turks or
Turushkas on the other? And were the former acceptable and the Turks
much less so? Clearly they were not all homogenised and identified as
Muslims, as we would do today. Should we not sift the reactions to the
event by examining the responses of particular social groups and
situations? Hormuz was crucial to the horse trade, therefore Nuruddin
was welcomed. Did the profits of trade overrule other considerations?
Were the temples and their administrators also investing in horse
trading and making handsome profits, even if the parties they were
trading with were Muslims and therefore of the same religion as Mahmud?

In the 15th century, a number of short inscriptions from Gujarat refer
to battles against the Turks. One very moving inscription in Sanskrit
comes from Somanatha itself.³¹ Although written in Sanskrit, it begins
with the Islamic formulaic blessing, *bismillah rahman-i-rahim*. It
gives details of the family of the Vohara/Bohra Farid and we know that
the Bohras were of Arab descent. We are told that the town of Somanatha
was attacked by the Turushkas, the Turks, and Vohara Farid who was the
son of Vohara Muhammad, joined in the defence of the town, fighting
against the Turushkas on behalf of the local ruler Brahmadeva. Farid was
killed and the inscription is a memorial to him.

It would seem from these sources that the aftermath of the raid of
Mahmud on the temple of Somanatha took the form of varying perceptions
of the event, and different from what we have assumed. There are no
simplistic explanations that would emerge from any or all of these
narratives. How then have we arrived today at the rather simplistic
historical theory that the raid of Mahmud created a trauma in the Hindu
consciousness which has been at the root of Hindu-Muslim relations ever
since? Or to put it in the words of K. M. Munshi: "For a thousand years
Mahmud's destruction of the shrine has been burnt into the collective
sub-conscious of the (Hindu) race as an unforgettable national
disaster."³²

INTERESTINGLY, what appears to be the earliest mention of a 'Hindu
trauma' in connection with Mahmud's raid on Somanatha comes from the
debate in the House of Commons in London in 1843 on the question of the
gates of the Somanatha temple.³³ In 1842, Lord Ellenborough issued his
famous 'Proclamation of the Gates' in which he ordered the British army
in Afghanistan to return via Ghazni and bring back to India the
sandalwood gates from the tomb of Mahmud. These were believed to have
been looted by Mahmud from Somanatha. It was claimed that the intention
was to return what was looted from India, an act which would symbolise
British control over Afghanistan despite their poor showing in the
Anglo-Afghan wars. It was also presented as an attempt to reverse Indian
subjugation to Afghanistan in the pre-British period. Was this an appeal
to Hindu sentiment, as some maintained?

The Proclamation raised a storm in the House of Commons and became a
major issue in the cross-fire between the Government and the Opposition.
The question was asked whether Ellenborough was catering to religious
prejudices by appeasing the Hindus or was he appealing to national
sympathies. It was defended by those who maintained that the gates were
a 'national trophy' and not a religious icon. In this connection, the
request of Ranjit Singh, the ruler of the Punjab, to the king of
Afghanistan, Shah Shujah, for the return of the gates, was quoted. But
on examining the letter making this request, it was discovered that
Ranjit Singh had confused the Somanatha temple with the Jagannatha
temple. It was also argued that no historian mentions the gates in the
various accounts of Mahmud's raid, therefore the story of the gates
could only be an invention of folk tradition.

The historians referred to were Gibbon, who wrote on the Roman empire,
Firdausi and Sa'adi, both Persian poets, and Firishta. The last of these
was the only one who, in the 17th century, had written on Indian
history. Firishta was well-known because Alexander Dow had translated
his history into English in the late-18th century. Firishta's account of
the sack of Somanatha was as fanciful as the earlier accounts, with
obvious exaggerations such as the huge size of the idol and the quantity
of jewels that poured out when Mahmud pierced its belly. Members of the
House of Commons were using their perceptions of Indian history as
ammunition in their own political and party hostilities.

Those critical of Ellenborough were fearful of the consequences: they
saw the fetching of the gates as supporting a native religion and that
too the monstrous Linga-ism as they called it; and they felt that its
political consequences would be violent indignation among the
Mohammadans. Those supporting Ellenborough in the House of Commons
argued equally vehemently that he was removing the feeling of
degradation from the minds of the Hindus. It would "... relieve that
country, which had been overrun by the Mohammadan conqueror, from the
painful feelings which had been rankling amongst the people for nearly a
thousand years." And that, "... the memory of the gates (has been)
preserved by the Hindus as a painful memorial of the most devastating
invasions that had ever desolated Hindustan."

Did this debate fan an anti-Muslim sentiment among Hindus in India,
which, judging from the earlier sources, had either not existed or been
marginal and localised? The absence in earlier times of an articulation
of a trauma remains enigmatic.

The gates were uprooted and brought back in triumph. But on arrival,
they were found to be of Egyptian workmanship and not associated in any
way with India. So they were placed in a store-room in the Agra Fort and
possibly by now have been eaten by white ants.

From this point on, the arguments of the debate in the House of Commons
come to be reflected in the writing on Somanatha. Mahmud's raid was made
the central point in Hindu-Muslim relations. K.M. Munshi led the demand
for the restoration of the Somanatha temple. His obsession with
restoring the glories of Hindu history began in a general way with his
writing historical novels, inspired by reading Walter Scott. But the
deeper imprint came from Bankim Chandra Chatterji's *Anandamatha*, as is
evident from his novel, *Jaya Somanatha*, published in 1927. And as one
historian, R. C. Majumdar, puts it, Bankim Chandra's nationalism was
Hindu rather than Indian. "This is made crystal clear from his other
writings which contain passionate outbursts against the subjugation of
India by the Muslims."³⁴ Munshi was concerned with restoring the Hindu
Aryan glory of the pre-Islamic past. Muslim rule was viewed as the major
disjuncture in Indian history. Munshi's comments often echo the
statements made in the House of Commons debate as is evident from his
book, *Somanatha: The Shrine Eternal*.

MUNSHI made the Somanatha temple the most important symbol of Muslim
iconoclasm in India. But prior to this, its significance appears to have
been largely regional. Consistent references to it as a symbol of Muslim
iconoclasm are to be found largely only in the Turko-Persian chronicles.
Possibly the fact that Munshi was himself from Gujarat may have had some
role in his projection of Somanatha. Prior to this, in other parts of
the country the symbols of iconoclasm, where they existed, were places
of local importance and knowledge of the raid on Somanatha was of
marginal interest.

On the rebuilding of the Somanatha temple in 1951, Munshi, by then a
Minister of the central government, had this to say: "... the collective
subconscious of India today is happier with the scheme of the
reconstruction of Somanatha, sponsored by the Government of India, than
with many other things we have done or are doing."³⁵ Nehru objected
strongly to the Government of India being associated with the project
and insisted on its being restored as a private venture.³⁶ That the
President of India, Rajendra Prasad was to perform the consecration
ceremony was unacceptable to him. This introduces a further dimension to
the reading of the event, involving the secular credentials of society
and state.

The received opinion is that events such as the raid on Somanatha
created what has been called two antagonistic categories of epic: the
'epic of conquest' and the 'counter-epic of resistance'.³⁷ It has also
been described as epitomising "the archetypal encounter of Islam with
Hindu idolatry."³⁸ We many well ask how and when did this dichotomy
crystallise? Did it emerge with modern historians reading too literally
from just one set of narratives, without juxtaposing these with the
other narratives? If narratives are read without being placed in a
historiographical context, the reading is, to put it mildly, incomplete
and therefore distorted. Firishta's version, for example, was repeated
endlessly in recent times, without considering its historiography:
neither was this done within the tradition of the Turko-Persian
chronicles nor in the context of other narratives which can be said to
impinge on the same event.

We continue to see such situations as a binary projection of Hindu and
Muslim. Yet what should be evident from the sources which I have
discussed is that there are multiple groups with varying agendas
involved in the way in which the event and Somanatha are represented.
There are differentiations in the attitudes of the Persian chronicles
towards the Arabs and the Turks. Within the Persian sources, the earlier
fantasy of Manat gradually gives way to a more political concern with
the legitimacy of Islamic rule in India through the Sultans. Was there,
on the part of the Persian chroniclers, a deliberate playing down of the
Arab intervention in India? And if this be so, can it be traced to the
confrontations between the Persians and the Arabs in the early history
of Islam? The hostility between the Bohras and the Turks, technically
both Muslims, may have also been part of this confrontation since the
Bohras were of Arab descent and probably saw themselves as among the
settled communities of Gujarat and saw the Turks as invaders.

Biographies and histories from Jaina authors, discussing matters
pertaining to the royal court and to the religion of the elite, focus on
attempts to show Mahavira in a better light than Shiva. The agenda
becomes that of the competing rivalry between the Jainas and the
Shaivas. But the sources which focus on a different social group, that
of the Jaina merchants, seem to be conciliatory towards the
confrontation with Mahmud, perhaps because the trading community would
have suffered heavy disruptions in periods of raids and campaigns.

FROM the Veraval inscription of 1264, cooperation in the building of the
mosque came from a range of social groups, from the most orthodox ritual
specialists to those wielding secular authority and from the highest
property holders to those with lesser property. Interestingly, the
members of the *jamatha* were Muslims from Hormuz and it would seem that
local Muslim participation was largely from occupations at the lower end
of the social scale. As such, their responsibility for the maintenance
of the mosque would have required the goodwill of the Somanatha elite.
Did the elite see themselves as patrons of a new kind of control over
property?

These relationships were not determined by the general category of what
have been called Hindu interests and Muslim interests. They varied in
accordance with more particular interests and these drew on identities
of ethnicity, religious sectarianism and social status.

I have tried to show how each set of narratives turns the focus of what
Somanatha symbolises: the occasion for the projection of an iconoclast
and champion of Islam; the assertion of the superiority of Jainism over
Shaivism; the inequities of the Kaliyuga; the centrality of the profits
of trade subordinating other considerations; colonial perceptions of
Indian society as having always been an antagonistic duality of Hindu
and Muslim; Hindu nationalism and the restoration of a particular view
of the past, contesting the secularising of modern Indian society. But
these are not discrete foci. Even when juxtaposed, a pattern emerges: a
pattern which requires that the understanding of the event should be
historically contextual, multi-faceted, and aware of the ideological
structures implicit in the narratives.

I would argue that Mahmud of Ghazni's raid on the Somanatha temple did
not create a dichotomy, because each of the many facets involved in the
perception of the event, consciously or subconsciously, was enveloped in
a multiplicity of other contexts as well. These direct our attention to
varying representations, both overt and hidden, and lead us to explore
the statements implicit in these representations. The assessment of
these facets may provide us with more sensitive insights into our
past.  
  


REFERENCES

1\. *Vana parvan* 13.14; 80.78; 86. 18-19; 119.1

2\. B. K. Thapar, 1951, 'The Temple at Somanatha: History by
Excavations,' in K. M. Munshi, *Somnath: The Shrine Eternal*, Bombay,
105-33; M. A. Dhaky and H. P. Sastri, 1974, *The Riddle of the Temple at
Somanatha*, Varanasi.

3\. V. K. Jain, 1990, *Trade and Traders in Western India*, Delhi.

4\. *Epigraphia Indica* XXXII, 47 ff.

5\. Muhammad Ulfi, 'Jami-ul-Hikayat,' in Eliot and Dowson, *The History
of India as Told by its own Historians*, II, 201. Wasa Abhira from
Anahilvada had property worth ten lakhs in Ghazni; impressive, even if
exaggerated.

6\. Abdullah Wassaf, *Tazjiyat-ul-Amsar*, in Eliot and Dowson, *The
History of India as Told by its own Historians*, III, 31 ff. Marco Polo
also comments on the wealth involved in the horse trade especially with
southern India. *Prabandhachintamani*, 14; Rajashekhara,
*Prabandhakosha*, Shantiniketan, 1935, 121.

7\. Abdullah Wassaf, Eliot and Dowson, op. cit. I, 69; Pehoa
Inscription, *Epigraphia Indica*, I. 184 ff.

8\. A. Wink, 1990, *Al-Hind*, Volume 1, Delhi, 173 ff; 184 ff; 187 ff.

9\. Alberuni in E. C. Sachau, 1964 (reprint), *Alberuni's India*, New
Delhi, I.208.

10\. Ibid., II.9-10, 54.

11\. F. Sistani in M. Nazim, 1931, *The Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud
of Ghazni*, Cambridge.

12\. *Quran*, 53. 19-20 G. Ryckmans, 1951, *Les Religions Arabes
Pre-Islamique*, Louvain.

13\. Nazim, op.cit.

14\. A. Wink, 1990, *Al-Hind*, I, Delhi, 184-89; 217-18.

15\. cf. Mohammad Habib, 1967, *Sultan Mahamud of Ghaznin*, Delhi.

16\. Ibn Attar quoted in Nazim, op. cit.; Ibn Asir in *Gazetteer of the
Bombay Presidency*, I, 523; Eliot and Dowson, II, 248 ff; 468 ff. al
Kazwini, Eliot and Dowson, I, 97 ff. Abdullah Wassaf, Eliot and Dowson,
III, 44 ff; IV. 181.

17\. Attar quoted in Nazim, op.cit., 221; Firishta in J. Briggs, 1966
(reprint), *History of the Rise of the Mohammadan Power in India*,
Calcutta.

18\. A. Wink, *Al-Hind*, Volume 2, 217.

19\. Zakariya al Kazvini, *Asarul-bilad*, Eliot and Dowson, op.cit., I,
97 ff.

20\. *Fatawa-yi-Jahandari* discussed in P. Hardy, 1997 (rep),
*Historians of Medieval India*, Delhi, 25 ff; 107 ff.

21\. *Futuh-al-Salatin* discussed in Hardy, op.cit., 107-8.

22\. *Satyapuriya-Mahavira-utsaha*, III.2. D. Sharma, 'Some New Light on
the Route of Mahamud of Ghazni's Raid on Somanatha: Multan to Somanatha
and Somanatha to Multan,' in B. P. Sinha (ed.), 1969, Dr. Satkari
Mookerji Felicitation Volume, Varanasi, 165-168.

23.Hemachandra, *Dvyashraya-kavya*, Indian Antiquary 1875, 4, 72 ff, 110
ff, 232 ff, 265 ff; Ibid., 1980, 9.; J. Klatt, 'Extracts from the
Historical Records of the Jainas', *Indian Antiquary* 1882, 11, 245-56;
A.F.R. Hoernle, Ibid. 1890, 19, 233-42.

24\. P. Bhatia, *The Paramaras*, Delhi, 1970, 141.

25\. Merutunga, *Prabandha-Chintamani*, C. H. Tawney (trans.), 1899,
Calcutta, IV, 129 ff. G. Buhler, 1936, *The Life of Hemachandracharya*,
Shantiniketan.

26\. *Nabhinandanoddhara*, discussed in P. Granoff, 1992, 'The
Householder as Shaman: Jaina Biographies of Temple Builders,' *East and
West*, 42, 2-4, 301-317.

27\. Praci Inscription, *Poona Orientalist*, 1937, 1.4.39-46.

28\. *Epigraphia Indica* II, 437 ff.

29\. Prabhaspattana Inscription, BPSI, 186.

30\. Somanathapattana Veraval Inscription, *Epigraphia Indica*, XXXIV,
141 ff.

31\. D.B. Disalkar, 'Inscriptions of Kathiawad,' *New Indian Antiquary*,
1939, I, 591.

32\. *Somanatha: The Shrine Eternal*, 89.

33\. *The United Kingdom House of Commons Debate*, 9 March 1943, on, The
Somnath (Prabhas Patan) Proclamation, Junagadh 1948. 584-602, 620,
630-32, 656, 674.

34\. *British Paramountcy and Indian Renaissance*, Part II, History and
Culture of the Indian People, 1965, Bombay, 478.

35\. Munshi, op.cit., 184.

36\. S. Gopal (ed.), 1994, *Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru*, Vol.
16, Part I, Delhi, 270 ff.

37\. Aziz Ahmed, 1963, 'Epic and Counter Epic in Medieval India,'
*Journal of the American Oriental Society*, 83, 470-76.

38\. Davis, op.cit. 93.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
*This is an edited version as published in Seminar, March 1999 (Number
475), of the second of two lectures given as the D. D. Kosambi Memorial
Lectures for 1999 at the University of Bombay. The author is grateful to
the Head of the Department of History for giving permission to publish
this version. The complete text of both lectures will be published by
the University of Bombay with the title, Narratives and the Making of
History.*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

