+++
title = "09 CHAPTER VII STRUGGLE FOR POWER AMONG SLAVE NOBLES"

+++
**CHAPTER VII**  
**STRUGGLE FOR POWER AMONG SLAVE NOBLES**

Abdulla Khan’s words were prophetic. The population of Indian Muslims
grew rapidly through enslavement. This rapid growth gave rise to new
problems. One was a tussle for power between foreign slave-Amirs and
Indian slaves some of whom also attained to the position of nobles. As
among the Turkish Amirs themselves, a bitter struggle for clout also
raged between foreign Turks and Indian Muslims. The Hindus resisted
enslavement and conversion. But once made Musalmans, they asserted their
claim to equality with foreign Muslims. Distinction between the two has
always been there and it is reflected in the writings of medieval
chroniclers like Minhaj and Barani and the observations of Europeans
like Bernier and Robert Orme.^([1](#1)) The Turks asserted that they
belonged to the blue blood and were founders of Muslim rule in India.
The India Muslims knew that the Turks were good fighters, but for
administrative work indigenous Muslims were better suited. To keep them
under control the sultans resorted to the time honoured policy of
playing the one against the other. On one occasion Sultan Iltutmish
dismissed thirty-three persons from service on account of their low
birth, or their Indian ancestry.^([2](#2)) On the other hand Sultan
Nasiruddin raised Indian-born Imad-ud-din Rayhan to the position of
Vakil-i-Dar (Custodian of the keys of Palace Gates) after dismissing the
all powerful foreign Turk Ghiyasuddin Balban. Minhaj Siraj’s description
of the situation shows how high the feelings ran between the foreign
Turkish and Indian ‘Julaha’ nobles. “The Maliks and servants of the
Sultan’s Court were all Turks of pure lineage” (*Turkan-i-pak*) writes
he, and Taziks of noble birth (*Tazikan-i-guzida was*). “Imad-ud-Din
Rayhan (who) was castrated and mutilated, and of the tribe of Hind, was
ruling over the heads of lords of high descent, and the whole of them
were loathing that state, and were unable to suffer any longer that
degradation.”^([3](#3)) The Turkish nobles rose in arms and the Sultan
was persuaded to order the dismissal of Rayhan and recall of Ulugh
Khan-i-Azam Balban (February, 1254). The language of Ziyauddin Barani is
not less vituperative. He was a staunch believer in the racial
superiority of the Turks and the baseness of Indian Muslims. He
recommended that “Teachers of every kind are to be sternly ordered not
to thrust precious stones down the throats of dogs… that is, to the
mean, the ignoble, the worthless… To the low-born they are to teach
nothing more than the rules about prayer, fasting, religious charity and
the Hajj pilgrimage along with some chapters of the Quran and some
doctrines of the faith… They (Indian Muslims) are not to be taught
reading and writing for plenty of disorders arise owing to the skill of
the low-born in knowledge… the low-born are capable only of vices… so
they are called low-born, worthless, plebeian, shameless and of dirty
birth.”

In this strife, the foreign slave-nobles had an edge over their Indian
counterparts. They were closer to the Sultan and had influence with him.
For most of them Indian-born Muslims were originally all slaves, “scum
captives taken in thousands by chance of war or purchased at a vile
price”. But like Turks they intrigued and maneuvred to rise to
power. Malik Kafur and Nasiruddin Khusrau even staked their claims to
the throne. In any case it took a few generations’ time for them to
reach the stature of foreign nobles.^([4](#4)) Muslim society tended to
be divided into ruling and other classes.

*Strife among nobles*

The attitude of ‘what art thou that I am not’ prevailed not only among
some individual nobles but among all nobles, foreigner and Indian, and
at all times. Besides the Turks, who were in majority but belonged to
many clans, there were Abyssinians, Afghans (of many clans and groups),
Tajiks, Persians and Mongols.^([5](#5)) All these sections had vested
interests as individuals and groups. All sections had among them
seasoned veterans, hardened by life’s tough experience. As their names
indicate, Malik Qabul Ulugh Khani, the Superintendent of the Grain
Market (*Shahna-i-Mandi*) under Alauddin Khalji, Muhammad Bihamad Khami,
the historian, Jahangir Quli Khan, the nobleman of Jahangir, and Murshid
Quli Khan, the Subedar of Bengal were all slave-nobles. No wonder,
intrigue and manoeuvering went on throughout, and tooth and claw, sword
and poison, were freely used to destroy rivals.^([6](#6))

In the beginning the number of the Turkish slaves was the largest.
Besides the Turks, slaves from many other tribes, ethnic groups and
countries also went on arriving in good numbers. Whether they were
captured, purchased or lured into the country because of the bright
prospects here, whether they were adventurers or were invited because
they possessed talent as administrators, musicians or poets, in whatever
capacity or through whatever channel they arrived, officially and
technically their position was that of slaves. Bondage was a condition
from which no one was exempt: including scholars and poets - Turks,
Arabs, Gauls, Jews, Persians and Ethiopians. There have been many
occasions to write about the Turkish slaves, their arrogance, their
jealousies, their intrigues and their services. Some other prominent
groups in medieval India were Afghans, Persians, and the Black slaves of
Africa - Abyssinians or Ethiopians. A word only may be said here about
each of these collectanea of ‘imported’ slaves, because we shall be
referring to them in various contexts again and again.

From the eleventh century onwards, the Afghans started coming into India
as soldiers of fortune in the armies of various invaders beginning with
Mahmud of Ghazni. Muhammad Ghauri in his last expedition brought ten
thousand Afghan horsemen with him.^([7](#7)) In the time of Sultan
Iltutmish, the Khwarizmi Prince Jalaluddin, fleeing before Chingiz Khan,
brought many Afghan soldiers with him. Some of these took service under
Iltutmish.^([8](#8)) Balban appointed thousands of Afghans for
garrisoning difficult outposts.^([9](#9)) Saiyyad Khizr Khan, because of
his unpopularity as Timur’s nominee and lack of support in Hindustan,
gave important assignments to men of Lodi, Sherwani, Niyazi, Jalwani and
many other tribes of Afghans from Roh.^([10](#10)) The Turkish sultans
considered the Afghans to be good soldiers, but men devoid of culture.
Their queer ideas of unbridled freedom, and their traditional attachment
to their tribal leaders were not conducive to discipline and
harmony. Sultan Bahlul Lodi handled his turbulent Afghan nobles with
studied tact; whenever he wrote a *farman* to his Amirs, he always
addressed them as “Masnad-i-Ali” (Your Exalted Lordship).^([11](#11))
When Sikandar Lodi made an attempt to show them their place, he had to
face hard opposition. His son and successor Ibrahim lost his throne
because of their intrigues, recalcitrance and disloyalty. All the same
till the coming of the Mughals, the Afghan rulers surrounded themselves
with their Afghan co-tribals and favoured them with important
appointments.

The Persians and Central Asians (Iranians and Turanians) were generally
appointed on higher posts in administration. Minhaj Siraj says that
people from Persia and adjoining countries came to India in various
capacities. Fakhr-ul-Mulk Isami, who had been Vazir at Baghdad for
thirty years but then had suffered some disappointment, arrived in
Hindustan and was appointed Wazir by Iltutmish. A great scholar of
Iltutmish’s reign was Amir Ruhani; he had come from Bukhara to Delhi
during the upheaval of Chingiz Khan. Qazi Hamiduddin Nagori had also
come from abroad. Muhammad Aufi, the author of the famous
*Jami-ul-Hikayat* had also come to Delhi during Iltutmish’s
reign.^([12](#12)) As noted earlier, because of the Mongol upheaval,
there arrived in the court of Iltutmish and Balban not less than forty
princes with their followers from Iraq, Khurasan, Mawaraun Nahr and
adjoining countries.^([13](#13)) These followers comprised masters of
pen and of sword, scholars and Mashaikh, historians and musicians. In
the royal procession of Sultan Balban 500 Sistani, Ghauri, Samarqandi
and Arab soldiers with drawn swords used to march by his side. Similar
was the case with other sultans of Delhi. All this indicates that a
large number of foreigners had come to India during the Sultanate
period. During the rule of the Mughals specially, they rose to heights
of glory. Bairam Khan who helped in the reestablishment of the Mughal
dynasty in India was a Persian. In the court of Jahangir and Shahjahan
Persian nobles wielded great influence because of the support of queens
like Nur Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal. The eminent position of Iranis and
Turanis ever remained well entrenched.

The fate and fortune of the black Africans was not that good. For a
general term they may be called Habshis or Abyssinians. A few, but only
a few, rose to high positions like Malik Yaqut the Personal Attendant of
Sultan Raziyah, but the contemptuous attitude of Turks towards him shows
the position of Africans in the early years of Muslim rule in India.
Later on some rose to become the Sharqi kings of Jaunpur and some kings
in Bengal and the Deccan. But the majority of them were treated as
lesser Muslims. Barbak Shah of Bengal (1460-74) maintained a large
number of Abyssinians as protectors of his throne. He recruited 8,000
Habshis and gave them high positions in his government.^([14](#14)) The
sultans of Gujarat and the Deccan also invited groups of Abyssinians and
gave them “positions of respect and trust.”^([15](#15)) Male and female
Abyssianian slaves were brought as presents for the
Mughals.^([16](#16)) Habshi women were employed as harem guards in Malwa
and other Muslim kingdoms. But the largest concentration of Habshis was
in the Deccan where they formed even powerful political
groups.^([17](#17)) The Quran and Sharia show no awareness of racial or
colour prejudice. In the early seventh century, neither slavery nor
bitter ethnic and national rivalries seemed to generate what the modern
world would define as racism. By the late seventh century, however,
blackness of skin was becoming a symbol that evoked distaste and
contempt. Bernard Lewis points to the overwhelming evidence that racial
slavery, as the modern world has come to know it, originated in medieval
Islamic societies. Light-skinned Arabs, Berbers and Persians invented
the long-distance slave trade that transported millions of sub-Saharan
captives either by camel caravans across the deserts or by slave ships
from East Africa to the Persian Gulf. Arabs led the way in classifying
the diverse peoples who lived from the Horn of Africa on the east to the
state of Ghana in the west as “blacks” - a single lowly group especially
submissive to slavery because, as the famous fourteenth century Arab
historian Ibn Khaldun put it, they “have little \[that is essentially\]
human and have attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb
animals”! Some Muslim writers ranked the Nubians and especially the
Ethiopians somewhat higher than the despised Zanj, a vague term applied
to the Bantu-speaking labourers imported from East Africa. In short,
medieval Muslims came to associate the most degrading forms of labour
with black slaves. In fact, the Arabic word for slave, ‘abd’, came to
mean only a black slave.^([18](#18))

*Black Slaves in India*

These slaves were brought to India in very large numbers. Their position
was generally that of inferior species. Sometimes they were not trusted.
A case in point is seen during Akbar’s conquest of Gujarat. After the
fall of Ahmedabad all officers of Sultan Mahmud Gujarati came to make
submission to Akbar. These included Aitmad Khan “the slave and Prime
Minister of Sultan Mahmud Guiarati”^([19](#19)) (who was originally a
Hindu slave),^([20](#20)) Mir Abu Turab, Saiyyad Ahmad Bukhari, Malik
Ashraf, Ulugh Khan Habshi, Jajhar Khan Habshi, and other amirs and
chiefs of Gujarat “too numerous to mention”. Abul Fazl writes that
Emperor Akbar desired to include the Habshis (Abyssinians) among the
royal slaves on the same terms as they had been slaves of Sultan
Mahmud. But Akbar’s officers were suspicious of them. Aitmad Khan too
became surety for all Gujarati slaves except the
Abyssinians.^([21](#21)) Therefore, for reasons of security, Akbar
ordered the headmen of the Habshis to be made over to the great officers
of the court.^([22](#22))

D.B. Davis in his *Slavery and Human Progress* attempts to estimate the
number of blacks that would have been sold as slaves and imported into
India. According to him “the importation of black slaves into Islamic
lands from Spain to India constituted a continuous large-scale migration
that in total numbers may well have surpassed, over a period of twelve
centuries, the African diaspora to the New World”.^([23](#23)) The
absence of a large population of black survivors can be explained by
their high mortality rate; by assimilation with other peoples; and by
the fact that many male slaves had been castrated. Even so in central
part of India and on the western coast, there are communities of blacks
who are descendants of African slaves. On some Western Coast Islands
also there live descendants of black slaves. The Jinjeera Island, so
called because of mispronunciation by Marathas of Jazeera meaning
island, or Zanzeera meaning land of Zanj or Blacks, is their main abode.
It is also called Habsan or the land of Africans or Habshis. In the
seventeenth century these islanders, called Sidis of Jinjeera, served as
admirals of the Mughals and were at constant war with the Marathas.

In short but broadly speaking, the foreign nobles consisted of Turks,
Arabs, Mughals, and Persians. The others were Hindustanis (Indian-born),
Deccanis, Blacks and Muwallads (offsprings of African fathers and Indian
mothers). In some measure foreign Muslim scorn for blacks is confirmed
by a similar attitude towards the brown Indians. Black slaves did not
get any education, so blacks came to be regarded as stupid. Amir Khusrau
talks of Hindus in a similar vein; Barani recommends that Indians should
not be given more than elementary education. Still compartmentalization
was not that complete. Instances of gratitude to a benefactor or
compromise with self-interest were not unknown, but were not frequent.
Party spirit too was stronger than patriotism. If the foreign Turks and
Persians felt superior and monopolised higher positions, a Black could
found a ruling kingdom at Jaunpur and a Hindu convert a ruling dynasty
in Gujarat. But all nobles, foreign or Indian, exerted in the cause of
Islam, undertook campaigns and captured captives. These captives were
employed on all kinds of government and private jobs.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Minhaj, 827-28; Barani, Tarikh, 38-39, *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*,
97, 98, also 47; Bernier, 209.  Orme, ‘Of the Moors of Indostan’ in *A
General Idea of the Government of Indian*.

[²](#2a) Barani, 38-39.

[³](#3a) Minhaj, 829.

[⁴](#4a) Bernier, 209; Titus, *Islam in India and Pakistan*, 117.

Here are a few examples. Bahadur Nahar was a converted Rajput from
Mewat. So also were Rai Daud of Jalandhar and Rai Kamaluddin Main of
Ludhiana. Similarly three brothers, Sarang Khan, Mallu Khan and Khandu
converted to Islam and rose to be nobles. Mallu Khan later became Mallu
Iqbal Khan and Khandu was entitled Adil Khan. Soon enough Mallu was
dropped and he became just Iqbal Khan, a pure Muslim, like of foreign
lineage. Iqbal Khan’s sons were Saifuddin and Khudadad. By now the
family had become *pucca* Muslim having dropped all Hindu appellations.
Therefore it was not harmed by Sultan Mahmud when settling the affairs
of Delhi after the upheaval of Timur. Mahmud sent the family of Iqbal
Khan to Kol (Aligarh) just as Sher Shah returned the consort of Humayun
to the Mughal because in both cases families of Muslims were involved.
Such examples of claiming pure Muslim (or foreign) lineage after a few
generations of conversion abound in medieval Indian history.

Yahiya, *Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi*, 175; Nizamuddin, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, I,
260. Also Yazdi, *Zafar Namait*, II, 116; Farishtah, I, 158; Lal,
*Twilight*, 21-22 and notes 52-53.

[⁵](#5a) Many more are mentioned by Fakhre Mudabbir in his
*Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin of Mubarak shah*.

[⁶](#6a) Barani 47-48.

[⁷](#7a) Niamatullah, *Makhzani-i-Afghana*. trs. N.B. Roy, 11.

[⁸](#8a) Olaf Caroe, *The Pathans*, 135.

[⁹](#9a) Barani, 57-58.

[¹⁰](#10a) Niamatullah’s *History of the Afghans*, 14.

[¹¹](#11a) Abdullah *Tarikh-i-Daudi*, 12-14; Rizqullah Mushtaqi,
*Waqiat-i-Mushtaqi*, 4 (a).

[¹²](#12a) Farishtah, I, 66-67.

[¹³](#13a) Minhaj, 598-99; Farishtah, I, 73.

[¹⁴](#14a) Barbosa, II, 147.

[¹⁵](#15a) Farishtah, II, 298; Lach, *Asia in the making of Europe*, I,
401-05.

[¹⁶](#16a) *Tuzuk*, I, 167.

[¹⁷](#17a) For details Lal, *Indian Muslims*, 50-61.

[¹⁸](#18a) Bernard Lewis, *Race and Slavery in the Middle East*, OUP,
1990. Also Koenraad Elst, *Indigenous Indians*, 378-81.

[¹⁹](#19a) Badaoni, II, 141.

[²⁰](#20a) *Ain*, II, 385.

[²¹](#21a) Nizamuddin, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, trs. E.D.,V, 342-43.

[²²](#22a) Abul Fazl, *Akbar Nama*, III, 10-11.

[²³](#23a) David Brion Davis, *Slavery and Human Progress*, Oxford,
1984, 45-56.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


