+++
title = "06 CHAPTER 6         The Trinity from Tannirpalli"

+++
CHAPTER 6  
The Trinity from Tannirpalli

The three names which have achieved celebrity in the Christian world, in
India as well as abroad, are those of Jules Monchanin, Henri Le Saux and
Bede Griffiths. All of them are associated with the Saccidananda Ashram
at Tannirpalli in the Tiruchirapalli district of Tamil Nadu. The first
two came from France and the third belongs to England. All three have
become known as Indian sages. Bede Griffiths is being hailed as a
*brahmavid*, a claim advanced rarely even by ancient Hindu rishis. A
brief survey of the sayings and doings of this trinity will help in
determining the truth about their drumbeating.

**Jules Monchanin**

He was born in France in 1895 and ordained a priest in the Catholic
Church in 1922. "He knew and deeply loved El Islam" and "visited North
Africa, Algeria and Morocco" where a Christian monastery "in a suburb of
Rabat, was trying to realize, in an integral contemplative life, the
blossoming of Islam in Christianity".[1](#1) It is not recorded when and
why he lost his love of El Islam. What we are told suddenly is that
"beyond all else, it was India that drew him". Perhaps he found the
Muslim countries too hostile to his work. Being in the same business,
Muslim missionaries have always been more than a match for their
Christian counterparts. So his imagination was fired when he came to
know of how "Francis Xavier was called to gather to Christ the India of
the Portuguese in the XVIth century, and de Nobili, a hundred years
later, the India of the Tamils".[2](#2)

He prepared himself for India "by a more thorough study of Sanskrit, of
the scriptures of Hindustan and her systems of philosophy" and "when he
was authorised by his Archbishop he entered the Society of Auxiliaries
to the Missions". He waited for an assignment in India till "he met an
Indian Jesuit of the Madura Mission" who put him in touch with the
Bishop of Trichinopoly.[3](#3) The Bishop invited him to India where he
reached in 1939. He was appointed an assistant priest in the parish of
Panneipatti.

In a letter written from Panneipatti on March 3,1940, he proclaimed: "I
have come to India for no other purpose than to awaken in a few souls
the desire (the passion) to raise up a Christian India... I think the
problem is of the same magnitude as the Christianisation, in former
times, of Greece... It will take centuries, sacrificed lives, and we
shall perhaps die before seeing any realizations."[4](#4) He flew on the
wings of his own fancy and continued: "A Christian India, completely
Indian and completely Christian, may be and will be something so
wonderful. To prepare it from afar, the sacrifice of our lives is not
too much to  
ask."[5](#5)

P.A. Antony, the Christian *tahsildar* of Kulittalai in Monchanin's
parish, was impressed by him. He thought of establishing Monchanin at
Kulitallai where "Brahmins, Vellalars, Naidus, Chettiars, all Hindus of
good caste form the greatest part of the population". Monchanin's
knowledge of Sanskrit, familiarity with Indian philosophers, Hindu
mystic poets and chaste Tamil "combined to assure him rare possibilities
of contact and influence". The *tahsildar* discussed the plan with
Monchanin and then proposed it to the Bishop. "The parish of Penneipatti
was divided, and the northern part skirting the Kavery, with a central
residence at Kulittalai, was put in charge of Father Monchanin."[6](#6)

A presbytery was planned for Monchanin near the existing church at
Kulitallai. He thought of calling it an ashram and wrote to a friend in
September, 1940 that "I shall write for you some short notes about our
ashram, an heralding image of the whole of India wholly transfigured
into the Dead and Risen Christ and the Spirit he sent".[7](#7) And again
in April, 1941: "The tahsildar is going to begin the work of the ashram
building (Bhakti Ashram, in Kulittalai). Two months (or three) will be
enough. I hope to be installed there for the parochial feast, St.
Christine, 24th July." Monchanin had coined a Hindu name for his
contrivance. But doubts assailed him. "I feel both hope and anxiety," he
confessed, "when I think of Kulittalai. I am wanting in so many things
to be a witness of the Risen One amidst Hindus."[8](#8)

He did not feel at ease even after he started living in the Bhakti
Ashram. "I am a strict vegetarian and I sleep on a mat. But am I truly
Indian? that is the question which torments me."[9](#9) He was dreaming
of "the definitive ashram" where "reclad in the ochre cloth of the Hindu
sannyasi" he could live "in the manner in which Upadhaya Brahmabandhav,
the great Bengali Christian, had presented the ideal to the Indian
Church some fifty year before".[10](#10)

He, however, did not live in the Bhakti Ashram except at brief
intervals. He went out again and again, visiting places and meeting
people. He delivered lectures on Hinduism. "A few days before the
independence of India Father Monchanin was staying in Tiruchi" when "the
Bishop gave him a letter to translate which he had received from
France". The letter was from another French missionary, Henri Le Saux,
seeking permission "to settle somewhere in the Tiruchi area and to lead
there, in some hermitage, the contemplative life in the pristine
traditions of Christian monasticism and the closest conformity to the
traditions of Indian sannyasa".[11](#11) The permission was given and
Henri Le Saux reached India in 1948. We have already seen how the two
joined together in setting up the Saccidanand Ashram at Tannirpalli.

In 1951, Monchanin contributed a section to *An Indian Benedictine
Ashram* which he had authored jointly with Henri Le Saux. The future
that he saw for India can be summarised, in his own words, as follows:
The spiritual society essentially set apart for the said end is Holy
Church, the Bride and the real Mystical Body of the Risen Christ. Christ
expects from every land and people an outburst of praise and love, which
they alone can offer him. India cannot be alien to this process of
assimilation by Christianity and transformation into it. She was for
centuries the foremost intellectual and spiritual leader of her
neighbouring countries, and even of the Far East. Is not India to Asia
what Greece was to Europe? Therefore the christianisation of Indian
civilisation is to all intents and purposes an historical undertaking
comparable to the christianisation of Greece. Besides, India has
received from the Almighty an uncommon gift, an unquenchable thirst for
what is spiritual. We may rightly think that such a marvellous seed was
not planted in vain by God in the Indian soul. Unfortunately, Indian
wisdom is tainted with erroneous tendencies, and looks as if it has not
yet found its own equilibrium. So was Greek wisdom before Greece humbly
received the Paschal message of the Risen Christ. India has to receive
humbly from the Church the sound and basic principles of true
contemplation, to keep them faithfully, to stamp them with her own seal,
and to develop through them along with the other members of the Church.
Should India fail in that task, we cannot understand, humanly speaking,
how the Mystical Body of Christ could reach its quantitative and
qualitative fullness in his *eschatological Advent*.[12](#12) The
trickster was certainly capable of coining some tall talk in terms of
that deceitful jargon which Christian theology has hammered out during
its long career.

Next year, he wrote another article, *The Christian Approach to
Hinduism*, in which he listed four obstacles which Christianity was
facing in India: 1) the hold of Hinduism due to a) the strength of
inherited traditions, and b) national pride in their philosophical and
spiritual lore; 2) the lack of attraction of Christianity because a)
Christianity is scarcely known, and b) owing to the foreign outlook of
Christianity, Hindus are, in general, very little attracted to it; 3)
the peculiar turn of mind of most Hindus in a) Logic, and b) Metaphysics
and Psychology; and 4) the common belief in the equality of all
religions. He concluded that "Too often the dialogue between Christian
and Hindu is a colloquy between deaf men".[13](#13)

He was all for a meeting (or dialogue as they call it these days)
between Hinduism and Christianity so that Hinduism could be purged of
its errors and perfected into Christianity. "It is the creation," he
wrote in a letter in January 1955, "which has to be rethought or rather
situated anew in the light of the revealed Christian mystery. In that
mystery, Hinduism (and especially Advaita) must die to rise up again
Christian. Any theory which does not take fully into account this
necessity constitutes a lack of loyalty both to Christianity-which we
cannot mutilate from its essence-and to Hinduism-from which we cannot
hide its fundamental errors and its essential divergence from
Christianity. Hinduism must renounce its equation 'atman-brahman' to
enter in Christ."[14](#14) In simple language, Hindus were to be asked
to renounce their *rishis* and run after a ruse.

He was, however, not able to achieve any noticeable advance towards this
momentous meeting between Hinduism and Christianity before he died in
1957. Missionaries who promote the myth of their great sacrifices
believe, and would like us to believe, that he died because the hard
life-eating vegetarian food and sleeping and sitting on the floor-he had
imposed upon himself in the service of the mission, told seriously on
his health. They are pretty good at manufacturing martyrs.

**Henri Le Saux**

He was born at St. Briac, a small town on the north coast of Brittany in
France and became a monk in the Benedictine monastery, Abbe of Sainte
Anne de Kerogonan. He came to India in 1948 on invitation from Jules
Monchanin. During 1949, he paid two visits to the Ramana Ashram at
Tiruvannamalai before preparing a plan for a Catholic ashram. The plan
was cleared by the Bishop of Tiruchirapalli and the ashram was formed in
1950. It was given a Latin name, Eremus Sanctissime Trinitatis
(Hermitage of the Most Holy Trinity). But to Hindus it was made known as
Saccidananda Ashram, Saccidananda of the Upanishads being presented as
an equivalent of the Christian Trinity. Both the founders had adopted
Hindu names. But Henri Le Saux alone succeeded in getting known as Swami
Abhishiktananda.

He shared in full Monchanin's fond hope that India could be annexed to
the Catholic Church by dressing up Christian dogmas in the language of
Hindu philosophy. Only his language was more sophisticated or, in other
words, less straight-forward than that of his elder colleague. The goal
was "the Christianisation and assuming into the Pleroma of the Risen
Lord that unrivalled thirst for the Absolute which threw and still
throws out to the world, in quest of 'salvation', crowds of *elect* in
the Hindu as well as in the Buddhist and Jain people".[15](#15) Hindus,
Buddhists and Jains could constitute only "crowds" for him. Christians
alone were a community.

He paid several more visits to the Ramana Ashram in 1952-53 and picked
up the Hindu mystic term," *guhâ* (cave of the heart)". It was in this
mystic corner that her tried, for the rest of his life, to stage a
meeting between what he called the "advaitic experience" and what was
known to him as the "Christian experience". He went out on a tour of
Northern India in March 1957 in search of some place where he could
carry out his own experiment in the "cave of the heart". But his trip
was cut short by Monchanin's illness. He had to rush back. After
Monchanin's death, he lived in the Saccidanand Ashram for some more
years. He had planned to divide his time between the South and the
North. But the pull of the North, particularly of the Himalayas, proved
stronger. He built a place for himself at Uttarkashi in Garhwal and left
the South for good in 1968. By now he had written several books and was
being hailed by the Catholic as well as many non-Catholic Christians as
a profound theologian and a mystic luminary. He was in great demand in
all sorts of seminars and conferences on the latest mission strategy of
holding a dialogue with Hinduism. So he could stay at Uttarkashi only
for short periods. He suffered a heart attack and died in 1973. He also,
we are told, had ruined his health by leading a hard life.

During his life, he was out "to show to our Hindu brethren that the
Christian experience does not fall short of the Vedanta, but that,
without in any way threatening the essential value of the Hindu
experience, it reveals within it even greater depths of the unfathomable
mystery of God".[16](#16) But in the plethora of his works, he never
explained what he meant by the "Christian experience". The only thing
that does become clear, as one plods through the pages, is that he never
arrived anywhere near the "Hindu experience" which he often described as
the "advaitic experience". In fact, it is highly doubtful whether, with
all his study of the Upanishads, he ever understood what *Advaita*
really means. His obstinate obsession with Jesus and the Church
prevented him from breaking the barrier. He was rather fond of the
phrase "cave of the heart", but he was not prepared to see there
anything except Jesus hanging on a gibbet. He remained chained to the
Church to the end of his days. He never learnt the elementary truth that
*Advaita* must remain a mere word for those who refuse to rise above
their mental fixations.

"A sinful refusal of Christ," he wrote towards the end of his
life,"-like that of Lucifer or the religious leaders who, according to
St. John knew truth but refused to submit to it-is inconceivable except
in the case of a man who is still 'on the way'. He might then refuse the
Lord in the name of an Advaita of his own conceiving, one which only
glorified his own ego and puffed him up with pride. Or it might happen
in the case of one who was a jnani or yogi in appearance. In such an
individual, far from his empirical self vanishing in the supreme self,
what has happened is that the ego of his phenomenal consciousness has
taken to itself the supreme and absolute character of the 'I' of the
real self. In fact, he has magnified himself after the fashion of the
devas in the Kena Upanishad-a temptation which many unfortunately fail
to resist."[17](#17) Here Hindus are asked to take lessons in *Advaita*
from a man whose sole occupation in life was torturing Upanishadic texts
into the dogmatic framework of a gross monolatry. It is difficult for a
Christian missionary to renounce the role of a teacher even on subjects
about which he knows next to nothing.

In the case of Henri Le Saux there was an added difficulty: he was a
poet. The flow of mellifluous phrases, particularly in his native
French, was mistaken by him for mystic experience. One has to read his
writings in order to see how he became a victim of his own
word-imageries and figures of speech. Silencing of the mind, which is a
sine qua non for spiritual experience according to all Hindu scriptures
on the subject, remained a discipline which he never learnt. Small
wonder that the man ended as a neurotic.

**Bede Griffiths**

Born in 1910 in an Anglican family, he became a Catholic in 1931 and was
ordained a priest in 1940. He lived as monk in Prinknash Abbey and
become Prior of Farnborough Abbey in England. He came to India as a
missionary in 1955 and lived for two years in Bangalore before he joined
Francis Mahieu to found the Kurisumala Ashram, a monastery of the Syrian
rite in Kerala. In 1968 he took over the Saccidanand Ashram after Henri
Le Saux left it for good. He was operating from there till his death in
May, 1993.

Bede Griffiths wrote several books between 1954 and 1983 - *The Golden
String* (1954), *Return to the Centre* (1978), *The Marriage of East and
West* (1982), *Christ in India* (1966), *The Cosmic Revelation, Vedanta
and Christian Faith* (1973). Another major book, *The Bhagvad Gita: A
Christian Reading*, is expected to be published soon. But the clearest
and most comprehensive statement of what he is trying to achieve is
contained in his *Christ in India: Essays Towards a Hindu-Christian
Dialogue*. This book was first published in England in 1966 under the
title *Christian Ashram*, and a simultaneous edition in the USA gave it
the name by which it is now known. A Christian publishing house in India
has reprinted it in 1984. In 'A New Introduction' which the author has
added to the Indian reprint, he say that "I have come, therefore, to see
that the Indian Church, in the words of the founder of our ashram, Jules
Monchanin, has to be neither Latin or Greek or Syrian but totally Indian
and totally Christian".[18](#18)

This book was published soon after the Second Vatican Council of the
Catholic Church had revised its view of non-Christian religions in a
declaration made on October 28, 1965. Till that date the Catholic Church
had held that all other religions were false and inspired by the Devil.
Now the Church started saying that it "rejects nothing of what is true
and holy in these religions" and that it "has a high regard for the
manner of life and conduct, the precepts and doctrines which, although
differing in many ways from her own teaching, nevertheless, often
reflect a ray of that truth which enlightens all men". This by itself
looked like a big concession. But in the next sentence the Council
restored the supremacy of Christ in whom "men find the fullness of the
religious life".[19](#19) This pronouncement from Rome endorsed the
Theology of Fulfillment which some Christian theologians in India and
elsewhere had been propounding at intervals but which the Church had not
recognised or recommended so far.

The "natural light" which Christian theologians, from Ziegenbalg
onwards, had discovered in Hinduism is an old theme in Christian
theology. Heathens, we are told, have had the benefit of a Cosmic
Revelation which preceded the Mosaic and the Christian Revelations. Bede
Griffiths has published a whole book by this name in 1983. The
derogatory terms-heathen, pagan, infidel and the rest-which were used to
describe a Hindu in earlier days have been dropped. He is to be called a
Cosmic Man henceforward. Many Hindus who are not conversant with
linguistic trickeries of Christian theology feel flattered. Bede
Griffiths takes full advantage of this Hindu ignorance. He flatters the
Hindus further by writing long passages in praise of their spiritual and
philosophical heritage. But his central point is the same as announced
by the Church, namely that Hinduism can find fulfilment only by
surrendering itself, body and soul, to the Catholic Church. That, in
brief, is the burden of all his books.

Before Bede Griffiths draws the inevitable conclusion, he makes two
fanatical and fantastic assertions. The first assertion is that Jesus
was, is and will remain the only manifestation of God in history. "What
we can say with certainty", he writes, "is that at all times and in all
places God (and that means Christ) is soliciting the heart and mind of
every man through his reason and conscience, and all alike, believers
and unbelievers, are to be judged by this hidden call and their response
to it."[20](#20) Again: "The resurrection of Christ is at once a
historical fact, which has changed the course of history, and also a
symbol of that ultimate truth in which human life and history can alone
find their true meaning."[21](#21) The second assertion is that the
Church is the body and bride of Christ destined to embrace the whole
world. "But we must add," he says, "that if Christ is present to all
men, then the Church is also present in all mankind. There is one
movement of the Church which is visible in history, which we can trace
in its progress from Jerusalem over the Graeco-Roman world, then over
Europe and America and now about to enter into vital contact with Asia
and Africa. But there is also a hidden movement of the Church going on
in the hearts of men drawing men to Christ without their knowing it, in
Hinduism, in Buddhism, in Islam, even in agnosticism and unbelief. It is
only at the last day that the full significance of this movement will be
revealed, but even now we can discern something of this hidden path of
grace in the other religions of the world."[22](#22)

The conclusion he draws from his assertions is quite safe. Bede
Griffiths is convinced that "a meeting must take place between the
different religions of the world".[23](#23) But he lays down a
condition. "For a Christian," he says, "the meeting of religions can
only take place in Christ."[24](#24) Monchanin and Henri Le Saux had
founded the Saccidananda Ashram in order "to lead India to the
fulfilment of its quest for the experience of God by showing that it
could be found in Christ".[25](#25) Now it is the turn of Bede Griffiths
"to show how Christ is, as it were, 'hidden' at the heart of
Hinduism"[26](#26), and how "Rama, Krishna, Siva, and the Buddha, all
the mysteries and sacraments in Buddhism and Hinduism, are types and
shadows of the mystery of Christ".[27](#27) Christ "is the fulfilment of
all that the imagination of the Indian soul sought to find in its gods
and heroes, in its temples and sacrifices".[28](#28) Christ is the 'goal
which Vedanta has been seeking".[29](#29) The time has come when
"Hinduism itself will be seen as a *Preparatio evangelica*, the path by
which the people of India have been led through the centuries of their
history to their fulfilment in Christ and his Church".[30](#30) *Quod
erat demonstrandum* !

A normal human mind is insulted when it is called upon to comment on
these pompous pronouncements. Proclaiming that Hinduism will find
fulfilment in Christianity, observes an amused reader of Bede Griffiths,
is tantamount to saying that the holy Ganga will get purified by being
poured into a puddle of hogwash. The puerile nonsense could have been
dismissed with contempt but for the backing it has from a formidable
apparatus which the mission has built in this country since the days of
the Portuguese pirates. We have seen how the myth of "comrade" Stalin
was sold for years on end by a well-oiled party machine. The Christian
mission is much older and far more experienced. It will go on selling
the myth of a "christ" Jesus till its apparatus is dispersed. That
process of dispersal has already gone a long way in the West and the
Church is now in a hurry to find a new hideout in the East. Will the
East give shelter to this array of the most abominable superstitions
which run roughshod over its own and superior spiritual tradition?

Incidentally, the trinity from Tannirpalli also consists of white men.
The mission is not yet confident that the coloured people can lead the
Ashram Movement, howsoever devoted they may be to the Christian dogmas.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *Swami Parama Arubi Anandam: A Memorial*, pp. 5-6

[2](#2a) Ibid., p. 7

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 9

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 202

[5](#5a) Ibid., P. 203

[6](#6a) Ibid., p. 14

[7](#7a) Ibid., p. 205

[8](#8a) Ibid., P. 207

[9](#9a) Ibid., p. 208

[10](#10a) Ibid., p. 14

[11](#11a) Ibid., P. 16

[12](#12a) Ibid., p. 159-170

[13](#13a) Ibid., P. 171-176

[14](#14a) Ibid., p. 222. His prescription has been discussed in some
depth by Ram Swarup in his 'Liberal' Christianity, included in *Hinduism
vis-a-vis Christianity and Islam*, a Voice of India publication.

[15](#15a) *A Benedictine Ashram*, p. 3

[16](#16a) *Hindu-Christian Meeting Point*, Delhi, 1976., p. 9

[17](#17a) Ibid., p. 99

[18](#18a) *Christ in India*, Bangalore, 1984, p. 8. This statement does
not square with the one he made to Swami Devananda in his letter of
August 31, 1987: "Of course, if I held the same view as Father Monchanin
you would be justified in suspacting me of deception."

[19](#19a) *Vatican Council II: Conciliar and Post-Conciliar Documents*,
Bombay, 1983, p. 668

[20](#20a) *Christ in India*, "(and that means Christ)" are Fr. Bede's
words and not an insertion, p. 196

[21](#21a) Ibid., p. 111

[22](#22a) Ibid., p. 177

[23](#23a) Ibid., pp. 14-15

[24](#24a) Ibid., p. 16

[25](#25a) Ibid., p. 63

[26](#26a) Ibid., P. 91

[27](#27a) Ibid., p. 100

[28](#28a) Ibid., P. 111

[29](#29a) Ibid., p. 170

[30](#30a) Ibid., p. 174

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
