+++
title = "07 3 Ghanîmah or Plunder in the Koran"

+++
**3**  
***Ghanîmah* or Plunder in the Koran**

To round off the theoretical discussion of *jihãd* I must pass on to the
doctrine of *ghanîmah* as explained in the Koran and the Hadis. We have
seen that the reward of a *mujãhid* in the hereafter is the highest
heaven. What is his reward on earth? It is ‘plunder’, or ‘spoils of
war’, or ‘war booty’, as the Arabic expression *ghanîmah* is variously
translated. Not many are prepared to believe that plunder can be
considered a meritorious or even desirable outcome of the highest duty
enjoined upon the followers of a religion. To remove their incredulity a
somewhat detailed discussion of the matter is necessary. It has to be
admitted that both the Koran and the Hadis declare this outcome of
*jihãd* as much inferior to the propagation of Islam as also to the
pleasures of Paradise to be earned by fighting with the infidels. But at
the same time these works have given detailed instructions on the mode
of distribution of plunder as also the laws regulating the distribution.
The legislation relating to this is first mentioned in the Koran itself.
The Hadis elaborates it and narrates the Prophet’s own plundering
activities. Last but not the least, the various schools of Islamic
jurisprudence codify the regulations in a systematic manner. I shall
come to the schools of jurisprudence in their proper place. Here I refer
to the relevant Koranic verses which will be supported by the relevant
*ahãdîs* in the next chapter. But first of all I must explain the word
*ghanîmah*.

As stated above, the technical meaning of *ghanîmah* is plunder or war
booty, and it includes all types of booty wrested from the unbeliever -
his goods, his land, his gold and silver, as also his wife and children.
But the literal meaning of the word seems to be ‘anything that enriches’
(the victor). Etymologically the word is derived from *‘ghanîm’*, enemy,
and means that which has been got from him. But in the technical
terminology of Islam, it has come to connote ‘loot’. The Hadis mentions
99 alternative names of Allah, *Al-Mughnî* being one of them. That name
in English means ‘Enricher’. *Mughnî* is a word obviously related to
*ghanîmah*. But it is doubtful if Allah is supposed to enrich his
devotees by loot alone. In other words, it is quite possible that
*ghanîmah* might well be an euphemism in its literal sense just as
*jihãd* (=effort, striving) is one. Islam has a large stock of such
euphemisms, including the world ‘Islam’ itself which is supposed to mean
‘peace’.^([1](#1)) But whatever euphemism lies hidden in the word
*ghanîmah*, technically it means ‘plunder in *jihãd’*, arid nothing
else.^([2](#2))

It should not surprise the reader to learn that quite a few Muslim
translators feel a sort of delicacy or diffidence in rendering the word
*ghanîmah* as ‘plunder’. Some of them use the expression ‘wealth gained
in war’, or some such circumlocution. But the more faithful English
versions everywhere render it as ‘plunder’, or use an equivalent
expression – ‘spoils’ being the most usual rendering. All such
expressions, however, mean ‘loot’, pure and simple. ‘Wealth gained in
war’ is a euphemism which conceals the real import of *ghanîmah*.

What are the injunctions regarding *ghanîmah* in the *Koran*? The eighth
chapter of the Koran is entitled *Anfãl*, meaning ‘surplus earning’ or
‘bonus’. The whole of this chapter relates to war booty which is the
‘bonus’ in question. The idea seems to be that the chief objective of
*jihãd* is Islamic expansion and the pleasures of the Paradise. Earning
of spoils is merely a surplus earning - an incidental incentive to the
*mujãhid’s* religious zeal, so to say.

\(a\) The first verse of *Sûrah Anfãl* says:

“They ask thee of the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of war belong to
Allah and the Messenger. So keep your duty to Allah.”

The obvious meaning of this verse is that plunder is an act of charity
issuing from Allah and his Prophet - no *mujãhid* should look upon it as
his own earning.

But verse forty-one of the same chapter says:

“And know that whatever ye take as spoils of war, lo! a fifth thereof is
for Allah and His Messenger and for the kinsmen and orphans and the
needy and the wayfarer.”

This verse raises a question as to the allotting of shares from the
plunder; as such, it indirectly recognises some share (i.e. four-fifths)
for the *mujãhids* as well.

The important thing about this one-fifth of the plunder is that Islamic
scholars call it the ‘holy one-fifth’. The technical expression for it
is *Khums*, otherwise spelt as *Khams*. According to the schools of
jurisprudence, this one-fifth is to proceed to the Muslim king’s
treasury when the Prophet is no more. A similar word is *Fai* which
stands for the whole plunder going to the Prophet (or the Sultan) if it
is obtained without regular warfare. *Jizyah* itself is a sort of Fai -
the Prophet or the Sultan being the sole owner of that gain.

\(b\) Who then is to own the remaining four-fifths of the plunder
obtained by a regular campaign? Should that be given away to the whole
body of Muslims? The Koran says: No Mussalman except the *mujãhid* is
entitled to any share of the four-fifths. Allah says clearly:

“Those who were left behind will say: When ye set forth to capture
booty, let us go with you. Say: Ye shall not go with us” (K 48/15).

Historically this verse refers to certain Arab tribes around Medina, who
had been called by the Prophet to join his expedition to Hudaibiyah (628
AD) but who chose to stay behind. They were to get no share of the
booty, enjoined Allah.

\(c\) Whether it be a bonus or Allah’s bounty to the believers who
engaged in *jihãd*, Allah’s pledge to lead the believers to adequate
plunder is also available in the Koran:

“Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance
unto thee (i.e. the Prophet) beneath the tree, and He knew what was in
their hearts and He sent down peace of reassurance on them, and hath
rewarded them with a near victory; and much booty they will capture” (K
48/18-19).

Historically this verse refers to the famous Pledge of the Tree which
the followers of the Prophet took at Hudaibiyah, when a rumour was
circulated that the Prophet’s emissary to the Meccans, his son-in-law
Othman (the future Caliph), had been killed by the latter. Allah’s
‘peace of reassurance’ was accompanied with intimation regarding
adequate plunder awaiting the faithful in near future.

\(d\) Such reward was not promised to Mussalmans of the Prophet’s time
alone. His followers for all time to come would continue to receive
booty:

“And other (gain) which ye have not been able to achieve, Allah will
compass it” (K 48/21).

In other words, plunder is every *mujãhid’s* birthright - it is a never
ceasing dispensation.

\(e\) Supposing that a *mujãhid* of tender conscience refuses to acquire
booty? Says Allah:

“Eat ye the spoils of war. They are lawful and pure” (K 8/69).^([3](#3))

This verse shows that Allah exonerates the plundering Mussalmans from
all misgivings arising from the prickings of conscience.

\(f\) The Koran is not given to circumstantial references to historical
events. But the plundering of the Jewish clan of Kuraizah supposed to
have been in league with the Meecans in the Battle of Ahzãb (627 AD) is
mentioned there in some detail:

“And (Allah) brought those of the people of Scripture who supported (the
Meccans) from their strongholds, and cast panic into their hearts. Some
ye slew and ye made captive some. And he caused you to inherit their
land and their houses and their wealth” (K 33/26-27).

Land, houses, wealth, captives! The nature of *ghanîmah* is made
explicit in this verse.

Of such plunder, the male population (chiefly children) are enslaved,
and the females inducted into the *mujãhids’* harems when not sold out
in the slave market. The Koran elaborates the right of the *mujãhid*
over captured kafir women.

“And all married women are (forbidden unto you) save those (captives)
whom your right hands possess” (K 4/24).

In this verse, the character of *ghanîmah* is explained with brutal
frankness. The captured kafir women, snatched from their husbands, can
be enjoyed with absolute impunity by the *mujãhids*. True, the Koran
does not spell out the nature of the indulgence. But its decree
regarding kafir women possessed by the *mujãhid’s* right hand is
obviously not one of honourable remarriage. It is nothing but forcible
concubinage. Lest there should be any doubt regarding the nature of the
indulgence, the Hadis adds its own tell-tale gloss upon this very verse.
I shall take up this gloss in the next chapter. Here a summary of the
contents of this chapter is in order.

In brief, the property of the infidel - his wealth, his women and
children -, all without exception, is lawful plunder for the *mujãhid*.
The merit of such plunder is indeed less than that of spreading Islam
and looking up to the pleasures of the other world, but the Koran has
given it due recognition. Not only that. It has explained the mode of
its disposal as between *mujãhid* and *mujãhid*, and also as between the
*mujãhid* and his commander. Not only that. It has, in unmistakable
language, pronounced the plunder ‘lawful’ and ‘pure’.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) This meaning is wrong. ‘Islam’ means ‘surrender’ to Allah by
his followers so that Allah could settle his score with non-Muslims,
vide Koran 3/19.

[²](#2a) In everyday Muslim parlance, the word *‘ghanîmat’* stands for
‘good fortune’, and sounds farthest from ‘plunder obtained in a
blood-thirsty war’. Even so, it retains the sense of ‘bounty’ or gain in
the normal course.

[³](#3a) This rendering is by Abdul Hamid Siddiqi.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
