+++
title = "20 Appendix IV Akbarx92s Attitude to Jihãd"

+++
**Appendix IV**

**Akbar’s Attitude to *Jihãd***

The story of how Akbar, the Mughal emperor, earned the title of ghãzî by
beheading the defenceless Himu on November 5, 1556, and its repudiation
by his court historians (Abul Fazl etc.) is a silent commentary on the
doctrine of *jihãd* by the one and the only Muslim potentate of medieval
times who had a wiser head on his shoulders. I give below the two
versions of the story - one from the pen of the Afghan historian Ahmad
Yadgar and the other from that of Badauni (who drew his material from
Nizamuddin’s *Tabaqãt-i-Akbarî*). I need only add that Nizamuddin, Abul
Fazl, and Faizi - all give the same fabricated version of the story.

According to Ahmad Yadgar, “By the decree of the Al-mighty an arrow
struck Himûn in the forehead… (His soldiers) saw how matters stood, and
he sustained a complete defeat. When Shãh Kulî Beg was told of what had
occurred, he came up to the elephant (of Himûn) and brought it into the
presence of Bairam Khãn. Bairam Khãn… caused Himûn to descend from the
elephant and took him before the young and fortunate prince and said,
‘As this is our first success, let your Highness’s own august hand smite
this infidel with the sword.’ The Prince, accordingly, struck him and
divided his head from his unclean body.”^([1](#1))

It has only to be remarked that modern historians accept this version
alone as the true story of how Akbar earned the title of *ghãzî*
(=slayer of infidels) after the Second Battle of Panipat. They do not
credit the story circulated by court historians like Nizamuddin and Abul
Fazl, which in due course was taken up by Abdul Kadir Badauni.

According to Badauni, “(Bairam Khan said): ‘This is your first war
(*ghãzd*), prove your sword on this infidel, for it will be a
meritorious deed.’ Akbar replied: ‘He is now no better than a dead man,
how am I to strike him? If he had sense and strength, I would try my
sword.’ Then in the presence of them all, the Khan as a warrior of the
faith, cut him down with the sword.”^([2](#2))

This version of the story is extremely interesting, and, as an
indication of Akbar’s mind at its maturity, is far more valuable than
the true story itself. The reader of the present work would understand
that in *jihãd* there is absolutely no room for chivalry to the fallen
enemy. In 627 AD the Banu Kuraizah in chains were cut off at the market
place of Medina with nauseating cruelty and little consideration for
norms of chivalry. The fourteen-year old Akbar, at the bidding of Bairam
Khan, had certainly cut off the head of the defenceless Himu in 1556,
confirming thereby the classical Islamic practice. But his court
historians knew enough of the Emperor’s mind at its maturity to realise
that this story would never do in a general history of his reign. They
‘paltered with the truth’ of history, or rather Akbar himself did so,
but they did reveal, as if in a flash, the aging emperor’s contempt for
the doctrine of *jihãd* and the glory of ghazihood that went with it.

But this is not all.  Besides his contempt for *jihãd*, Badauni’s
account contains an ideal of chivalry maturing in Akbar’s mind which was
little different from the Rajput ideal. That ideal again was the Hindu
ideal of chivalry par excellence, harking back to the heroic exploits
described in the Mahabharata. It has often been remarked that Akbar’s
brand of religious tolerance was more a matter of policy than
conviction; but the above account indicates how, with advancing years,
he inclined with his whole heart towards Hindu ideals and abhorred
Islamic teachings in the secret recesses of his being. No wonder,
Islamists have never forgiven him for such transparent indications of
downright apostasy.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) Elliott and Dowson, Vol. V, pp. 65-66. *Tãrîkh-i-Akbarî* of
Muhammad ‘Ãrif Qandhãrî also says that “The King struck Himu with his
sword and won the title of Ghazi” (English translation by Tanseem Ahmad,
Delhi, 1993, p. 74).

^([2](#2a)) Ibid., p. 253.  Akbar’s court historians have also
suppressed the fact that Akbar had viewed as *jihãd* his expedition to
Chittor in 1567-68 in which he had ordered the massacre of 30,000
Hindus, including non-combatants. The text of his *Fathnãma*, issued
from Muinuddin Chishti’s *dargah* at Ajmer in March 1568, was included
in *Munshãt-i-Namakîn* compiled in 1598 by Saiyid Abdul Qasim Khan, a
prominent noble who served under Akbar as well as Jahangir. The
*Fathnãma* cites the jihadic verses from the Koran, and refers to Hindus
as accursed infidels. It has been translated into English by Ishtiaq
Ahmed Zilli, and published in *Proceedings of the Indian History
Congress*, 1972 (pp. 350-61).  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
