+++
title = "125 Golden Age Hallucinations"

+++
Source:
http://www.outlookindia.com/full.asp?fodname=20010820&fname=Sanjay+%28F%29&sid=1  
(downloaded Mar. 2004)  
Because the OUTLOOK site, though free, requires a sign-in process that
many users find cumbersome, this article is presented here as well.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

OUTLOOK India Magazine, Aug. 20, 2001  


Golden Age Hallucinations  
Indian civilisation derives from no utopian ideal; it was founded on,
and as, a crossroads

SANJAY SUBRAHMANYAM  


Two radically different conceptions of India have informed discussions
amongst both academics and normal human beings in the past decade or so,
and it is the tension between these two conceptions that I wish to treat
here. On the one hand, we have the view that 'India' as we know it was
invented in the not-too-distant past, probably by the British, or
perhaps by Indians and Britons acting together in the period of colonial
rule. This is what we may call the constructivist approach, one that
from its academic origins has percolated to other parts of elite Indian
society which have willy-nilly absorbed the best and the worst of
post-modernist gobbledygook by now. There is of course some truth to the
notion that the idea of India altered significantly in the 19th and 20th
centuries, but one may legitimately doubt whether the whole thing was
made up in recent times as a sheer act of will.

The second view, which is radically opposed to the first, and which
today finds more extensive political expression than academic support,
is the idea that some very stable and autarchic notion of India has been
around for a very long time, indeed from the time when a classical
Indian civilisation put down its roots in the Indo-Gangetic plain.

This is a view that sees Indian society in terms of three (or
two-and-a-half) phases: a formative one, ending at the close of the
first millennium of the Christian era; a second phase of confusion and
decline that is roughly coterminous with Islamic rule, and then a
third—which may yet be incomplete—of resurgence and a return to the
roots. We can all identify the crudest versions of the latter view in
the writings of the ideologues of the rss or their Neanderthal
counterparts elsewhere, including rabble-rousing European journalists in
India, but the problem is that this view is far more widely shared than
one often suspects.

Some thoughts on 'India' as a term may be useful to set the stage. The
word itself derives, most of us know, from the medieval Arabic term
'Hind', which is itself a deformation of the far older and far more
limited 'Sind'. When one reads the Arabophone encyclopaedists and
geographers writing in medieval times, it soon becomes clear though that
they are quite ambiguous as to the limits of 'al-Hind'. Of the core
areas, there is little doubt: everyone includes the Indo-Gangetic plain
from the Punjab to Bengal. But the status of the peninsula is already
less clear, and we know that as late as the 15th and 16th centuries,
'Hind' and 'Hindustan' sometimes did not include the Deccan and areas
south of it. If this minimal view exists, there were also other writers
who thought in medieval times that Indonesia, Thailand, Cambodia and (in
a few odd cases) even Yemen all belonged to Hind. All in all, we have
three major geographical categories that stand out in these materials:
Hind, Sin (or China) and Ajam (the Persian-speaking area). The problem
was that the borders of the three were not unambiguous.

What of people in the Indian subcontinent? Did they have some definite
notions of the limits of their identity? Once again, matters are far
from clear. One measure could be the limits of the spread of Sanskrit or
of Brahmanic culture, but both of these take us far into Central Asia on
the one hand, and Southeast Asia on the other. Nor do the epics, and the
limits of their spread, prove particularly helpful. It is true that the
partisans of a theory of 'Greater India' wished in the 1930s and 1940s
to make grandiose claims on this basis for the extended limits of Indian
sovereignty, but such claims could be equally made then by India's
neighbours using very similar sorts of evidence.

It may nevertheless be useful to reflect a little bit on the 'Greater
India' thesis, and its corollary, namely the idea of the 'Indianisation'
of cultures elsewhere. At the heart of the matter is the notion that at
some distant point in the past, say about AD 500, the concept of 'Indian
civilisation' had already been perfected. Everything of any importance
was in place: social structure, philosophy, the major literary works.
Then, we can imagine the process of 'Indianisation' as the
transportation of these elements to distant lands such as Cambodia or
Champa, to be transplanted in more or less fertile soil.

But little in the history of Southeast Asia actually provides much
comfort to this view. At the same time, we must ask ourselves whether it
is really convincing to think of an Indian 'civilisation' that had been
perfected as long ago as the Gupta dynasty. Many writers in the 20th
century of course have held to this view. These include some of the
best-known Western Orientalists such as A. L. Basham or Madeleine
Biardeau. But the protagonists of this position also include writers
from V.S. Naipaul to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, whose Discovery of India
is quite remarkable from this point of view. The central idea here is of
India-as-civilisation, and it very soon becomes the same as a notion of
closed India. Indian civilisation is portrayed as self-sufficient and
homeostatic, and it can only export culture, but never really be
influenced by the outside save in a negative sense. Somewhat
paradoxically, in view of his later reputation as an apostle of
secularism, Nehru seems by and large to have accepted a very negative
view of Islam. This is why he portrays the situation in India after AD
1200 in negative terms, as the decline and atrophy of an already-perfect
civilisation. Writing more recently, Naipaul draws upon similar images,
adding to it a dash of the 'Clash of Civilisations' thesis: the
fault-line between Islam and Hinduism (which can be read as 'Indian
civilisation') passes for him through the heart of the subcontinent.

One of the examples that Naipaul chooses to illustrate his sad tale of
medieval decline is the fate of the imperial state of Vijayanagara in
the Deccan, portrayed by him as one of the last bastions of Hindu
civilisation that held out against the Muslim invader. Now, most
historians of Vijayanagara today would see matters rather differently.
They would point to the dependence of Vijayanagara on Muslim military
specialists and horse-traders, Portuguese firearms, and an imperial
ideology that was based not on ancient precepts but newly-formulated
sectarian ideas from the 14th and 15th centuries. In terms of court
ritual, fiscal structure and imperial style, Vijayanagara shares far
more with the Bahmani sultanate and its successors at Bijapur and
Golconda, than with the Pallavas and Cholas. Politically, the rulers of
Vijayanagara were as often allied to these sultanates as opposed to
them, while amongst their major rivals and enemies were the Gajapati
rulers of Orissa. In order to understand this, however, we need to see
India not as a civilisation but as a crossroads, as a space open to
external influences rather than a simple exporter of culture to its
neighbours.

Where did this misunderstanding arise, and since when has Vijayanagara
been seen as a Hindu kingdom struggling against Muslim enemies? One part
of the answer lies with the Portuguese in the 16th century. Looking for
help against the Muslim rulers of peninsular India, they thought the
'Gentile' kings of Vijayanagara were their natural friends.By the middle
years of the 16th century, they had partially given up this illusion,
but some parts of it persisted into the views of later writers,
including those from Holland and France. It may be useful at this point
to insist on one fact. It is clear that most of these writers were not
liars or prevaricators; they did not simply make up things about India.
What they did, however, was selectively read Indian society, and produce
an image of it that was often based on true elements, but which had been
shorn of their real context. Still, several centuries after the arrival
of Vasco da Gama on Indian shores, there was no single dominant idea of
India in writings by Westerners: several contradictory views existed
depending on whether one wrote from Madurai or Agra, whether one was
Protestant or Catholic, whether one knew Persian or Sanskrit, and so on.
However, by the late 18th and early 19th centuries, a new homogeneity
can be found in views of what India was. This picture, produced by
Western Orientalists and their Indian assistants, tended to focus on
Sanskrit as the true source of Indian culture (demoting Persian in the
process), and there was also a search for an Indian Golden Age. Minority
voices contested this view, but they were few and far between. Indian
popular culture was also largely set aside in favour of an obsession
with high culture.

It is remarkable that both Indian reformers and neo-traditionalists of
the 19th century bought into this view, and a strange complicity came to
exist between these two apparently opposed strands. The epoch from the
12th to the 18th centuries was portrayed in dark hues, and if some felt
Westernisation was the antidote to the malady, others proposed a return
to the real roots of Indian civilisation. But what was this pristine
culture to which a return was proposed? Carnatic music played on the
violin (an 18th-century import from Europe), or dances performed to the
texts of Kshetrayya that came precisely from this period! In north
India, ultra-purists insisted that Dhrupad should be favoured over
Khayal, and invented a bogus Vedic genealogy for the former, forgetting
that it was heavily influenced by Mughal court culture. As for
devotional religion such as we know it today in India, most of it is the
product of the period from the 14th century onwards, whether in
Maharashtra, Punjab or Bengal.

This takes me to an observation of the poet and literary critic Velcheru
Narayana Rao, who has often argued that all we have real access to in
our past is that part which goes back five or six centuries. Beyond
that, we have intellectual constructions and wishful thinking, but
little that exists in our everyday life that connects us instinctively
to things that are so distant from us in time. So, ancient India is not
a reality for us in the same way as medieval India, and it can never
achieve the same status. Further, this intermediate past is one which we
can only think through in terms of the idea of a crossroads, where not
only did regions and regional cultures influence one another, but things
came and went from far more distant lands, whether Europe, Central Asia,
Iran and the Ottoman empire, or Southeast Asia and East Africa. It will
do us no good to pretend that these processes of exchange were not
linked to violence. Empires were built, and cities sacked; religious
sites were desecrated, and political opponents were massacred. This was
the way it was in our part of the world, just as it was in medieval
Iran, the Germany of the Thirty Years' War, or the empire of the Incas.
But this is the only past we have, and we had best make as good a job as
we can with it.

To take the example of the Indian connection to Africa, this is one that
has been really neglected. On the one hand it is linked to the Indian
Ocean slave trade, since Africans were brought as slaves to serve in the
states of medieval India; but on the other, it is linked to the complex
history of western Indian merchant communities who profited from Africa
and the African trade. The point to be made is that it will simply not
do to always portray Indians and Indian society as victims of the greed
and depredations of others, while conveniently whitewashing those parts
of our own past that do not suit us today. In a similar vein, the
relations between Indian traders and moneylenders and peasants in
Central Asia were often exploitative ones, a fact that partly explains
the resentment against them in the early years of the 20th century.

Some of my Indian intellectual friends believe it is their task to use
history in order to demonstrate the illegitimacy of Indian nationalism.
This is not my view, nor do I believe that historians are really up to
this task. The point I wish to make instead is that we have by now come
to terms in surprising measure with a truly traumatic period in our
not-too-distant past, namely that of about two centuries of British
colonial rule. No one really questions the existence of key institutions
that the British left behind in India; there is no current proposal to
dismantle the railway network or blow up the city of Kolkata simply
because they were created under colonial rule. The same holds for the
status of the English language, which has if anything grown stronger in
India in the last three decades. But it would be truly bizarre if the
price to be paid for this acceptance of the legacy of colonial rule were
to be the transfer of nationalist resentment onto the earlier period, in
order to cast the blame for everything that is wrong with Indian society
today on medieval invaders from Central and West Asia. True, all
nationalisms seem to need negative stereotypes in order to shore up
their self-images. But a national culture that does not have the
confidence to declare that, like all other national cultures, it too is
a hybrid, a crossroads, a mixture of elements derived from chance
encounters and unforeseen consequences, can only take the path to
xenophobia and cultural paranoia. A last suggestion: if cultural
cleansing is to start in India, we might begin by returning the khaki
shorts to their place of origin.  


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Author of the critically-acclaimed *The Career and Legend of Vasco da
Gama*, Cambridge, Paris-based Sanjay Subrahmanyam's next book is *A
History of the World Between 1350-1715*.  
  

