+++
title = "114 Ideals of Islam"

+++
Source: Great Women of Modern India vol. 3: Sarojini Naidu, ed. by
Verinder Grover and Ranjana Arora (New Delhi: Deep & Deep Publications,
1993), pp. 51-56. The editors don't provide a date for this talk, but
probably it was given in December 1917. The whole speech is presented in
printed form as one gigantic paragraph; all paragraph breaks have been
imposed by FWP. Typos and other small errors have also been corrected,
and punctuation slightly adjusted in some places. All editorial
annotations in square brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ideals of Islam

by Sarojini Naidu

A talk given to the Young Men's Muslim Association, Madras, 1917

  
  

Even at the risk of being considered egotistical and conceited, I
acknowledge that whenever I go to a new city, I always look for my
special welcome from the Mussalmans of the place. Never have I been
disappointed or defrauded of my right. It is my right, because I come
from the premier Mussalman city \[=Hyderabad\] in India. The premier
Mussalman power in India \[=the Nizam of Hyderabad\] rules over the city
from which I come, and there the tradition of Islam has truly been
carried out for two hundred years, that tradition of democracy that
knows how out of its legislation to give equal rights and privileges to
all the communities whose destinies it controls. The first accents I
heard were in the tongue of Amir Kusru. All my early associations were
formed with the Mussalman men and Mussalman women of my city. My first
playmates were Mussalman children.

Though I stand side by side with you as a Kaffir, I am a comrade in all
your dreams. I stand beside you in your dreams and aspirations, because
the ideals of Islam are so essentially and supremely the progressive
human ideals that no human soul that loves progress can refuse
allegiance to those ideals. One has to look back to see how the vision
of tomorrow may be linked with the vision of the past; and therefore if,
in speaking of the ideals of Islam, I take you through a long journey
into the past, it is only that you may realise, what only the other day
it was my privilege to say to the young generation: that it is only in
her ideals that we find seeds of immortality, and that if there be today
vitality in the Muslim people, it is because the seed was sown into the
Desert, and the Desert blossomed with roses.

Come with me into the Desert where the sun is dazzling, where the people
are brave, simple, quick to revenge an insult, strong to defend honour.
What is it that the youngest of the religions has given to the world? Of
the old religions, some have died and some are still living. When we
come to the religion of the Desert, we find that wonderful adjustment
between the spiritual and the temporal, for it was the religion of Islam
that built up political empires. Comparatively modern, as measured by
the older civilisations, the civilisation of Islam is young indeed. What
does the golden age of Islam represent? What was lacking in the golden
age that the modern age has been able to evolve for itself? What was
lacking in the intellectual splendour and achievement, and what was
lacking in the political policies, in its colonising powers?

Brotherhood is the fundamental doctrine that Islam taught: --Brotherhood
of civic life, of intellectual life, of spiritual life in the sense of
leaving other religions and creeds free to offer their worship. This is
what we call modern toleration, the larger outlook, this is what we call
civilisation; this is what we call the real understanding of human
characteristics, the real understanding of those sources that bind human
hearts to one another.

Ancient Hindu India laid the foundation of her civilisation on the
position and responsibility of woman. In modern times, the legal status
given to woman is supposed to be a great test of civilisation. Islam,
coming centuries later than the Hindu religion, revealed the old world
truths in a new language through a new medium, and once more asserted
the abiding verity that gave woman her responsibility and her place in
the National life, by giving her not merely her honour due as wife and
mother, but as citizen responsible and able to administer her own
property, to defend her own property, because it was hers and she was
not dependent as mere goods and chattels on husband's and brother's
bounty.

\[The\] sense of justice is one of the most wonderful ideals of Islam,
because as I read the Koran, I find those dynamic principles of life:
not mystic, but practical ethics for the daily conduct of life, suited
to the whole world. We are fond of saying that we belong to a rational
age, that we belong to a practical age. If you belong to a practical and
rational age, what more shall you find than those codes of ethics laid
down so clearly for your daily conduct? How far-seeing was the wisdom
that laid down as religious law those great principles that tended to
conserve the Brotherhood that the religion taught!

What was the meaning of the Haj? Did it matter to God that thousands of
Mussalmans went to one place or another, since He is everywhere? No. The
meaning was that streams of pilgrims from various lands, speaking
various tongues, having various traditions and customs, should meet
together in one common place, and through one common association and
memory, to consolidate the Brotherhood that Islam preached.

The meaning of fast in Muslim religion is that man needs in his busy
life some moment to himself when his children might say, "We have set
apart this time to contemplate upon Him who is always with us, but we
forget that He is always with us."

When we look at the lego-religious \[*sic*\] law, what is laid down
there is the outcome of the prophetic vision that realises that
civilisation would tend more and more towards democracy. It was the
first religion that preached and practised democracy, for in the mosque
when \[from\] the minaret \[the call to prayer\] is sounded and the
worshippers are gathered together, the democracy of Islam is embodied
five times a day when the peasant and the king kneel side by side and
proclaim, "God alone is great."

I have been struck over and over again by this indivisible unity of
Islam that makes a man instinctively a brother. When you meet an
Egyptian, an Algerian, an Indian, and a Turk in London, what matters
that Egypt was the Motherland of one, and India the Motherland of
another? It was this great feeling of Brotherhood, this great sense of
human justice, that was the gift of Akbar's rule to India; because he
was not only Akbar the great Moghul but Akbar the great Mussalman: that
he realised that one might conquer a country, but that one must not
dishonour those whom one conquered. You may be a king, but your subjects
are co-parceners with you in the defence of the country. It was Akbar
who laid down the fruitful policy of unity, of that peace which is the
greeting of each other.

Salaam -- the National symbol of peace -- was the gift of Akbar to the
India over which he ruled. The intellectual thought that evolved out of
this sense of fundamental oneness found its beautiful expression in that
spiritual Sufism which is blood-kin to Vedantism. What is the teaching
of the Sufi doctrine, except the Vedanta which we Hindus inherited --
the love of mankind, the service to the world, ecstasy in which self is
annihilated into the universal life of humanity?

Go to the poetry of Islam. What is there so beautiful in all the wide
and manifold realms of literature as that immortal lyric \[poetry\] of
Hafiz, Rumi -- that in the language of man there too in his higher
manifestation the lyric genius of Islam, of India, has been not less
than the epic genius of India or of Europe. When we analyse the
evolution of that great literature, and when we find the two meeting
through one religion, we find indeed the inheritors of that dual culture
-- the blending of mysticism with the semetic \[=sign-based (?); Semitic
(?)\], dynamic, logical, practical power of life. There, the dreaming
and the action become united, because one religion has bound them, and
we in India are the richer for our Indian descent.

When we come to deal in its national aspect with the ideals of Islam,
having journeyed first into the Desert and found not the mirage but the
revelation, we must always come back home, for like a lark we must be
true to the kindred bonds of home; and the home of the Indian Mussalman
is in India. His endeavour, his destiny, his hope is bound up with the
endeavour, destiny, hope of India. How should the ideals of.lslam enrich
National life? What are the special qualities and gifts that Muslim
India has to contribute to united India?

I shall always recognise with pride that what the Hindu Mazzini gives to
India, that \[the\] Muslim Garibaldi gives to India, and they make a
perfect type to make an Indian patriot. We want the mystic power of
dreaming that is the special inheritance of the mystic Hindu; we want
the direct, fearless power of action which is the special gift of the
children of the sword. It is \[the\] spirit of the sword that we want to
be brought to this great land. We want that courage -- that a soldier
kept the sword swift in defence of the country, to revenge any insult to
the honour of manhood or womanhood that it defended. \[The\] young
Muslim is to put his contribution -- not the sword made of steel, but
the sword of the Islamic spirit which has been re-tempered in the older
fires of \[the\] Vedic cult; the sword of Muslim love dedicated to the
Service of Vedic India. That is going to be your contribution to the
India of tomorrow.

Your poet laureate Dr. Iqbal has done immense service that can never be
recompensed adequately, perhaps never even fully recognised by those in
other provinces who did not know the National awakening that is coming.
It was his patriotic songs that burst like the clarion call when there
was strife between two communities. What the poet has done, a poet's
race can do. What a Muslim poet can do, a young Islamite can do in
always sending out a clarion call, that cry for unity which has been the
one safeguard of Islam in the past and is coming to be the one hope of
Islam in the future, because Islam has recognised the fundamental duties
of Brotherhood.

Islamic Brotherhood must not confine the ideal of Brotherhood to those
alone that profess their creed, but must expand the interpretation of
that ideal of Brotherhood till every community within this land has
learnt the lesson that Muhammad was born to teach in the Desert 1300
years ago. We want to feel today, we who are not merely dreaming the New
India but shaping the New India with our hands; we want to be sure of
the other manifold substances that are going to mould the great vessel
which is to contain the elixir of the hope of the India of tomorrow,
what kinds of earth are going to be moulded into a shape to hold the
water of life to refresh and regenerate India.

That is the clay that came across the seas -- the clay from the Desert
to be mingled with the Vedic clay; not only the clay that came from
Persian Zoroastrians or from the European Christians in the shape of
this National life; but we want, more than all other clays to be mingled
with the Vedic clay, that clay which is the Desert clay of Islam,
because we feel that unless and until these two great elements are
blended together \[and\] unified, so that they can never be separated,
there can be no vessel of National life that can last for time and
centuries.

You who are young Muslims -- the hope of Muslim India -- I speak to you
and to you alone to-night, you who have yet to live your lives, and hold
the destinies to be co-trustees with your Hindu brethren. The
battle-ground of animosities has become the flower-garden of unity. They
in the north who are so eager to unite with the Hindus for National
unity are building it up day by day with great sacrifices. I want you,
young Muslims in the south, to take your share in that great work here,
and that unity will come when you too spend your energies in manifold
directions.

A group of young men who have the world before them have turned their
backs on personal gain, personal joy, and personal recognition, and made
themselves into a band of Muslim volunteers to bring the light of
education to their poor Muslim brethren. Nothing is so significant today
as the Sultania College, where groups of young men have dedicated their
lives on the fruitful principles of self-sacrifice which makes Fergusson
College the living heart of Maharashtra. I want you to make your
southern institution in Vaniyambadi the true centre where the ideal of
Islam is practised -- not only to teach the young Muslim of the south
the duty of prayer, but also to teach the duty of service to the
community.

Having already embodied the symbol of your ideals in the south, what
limit is there to the dream that you can realise within that centre?
What limit is there to the ideals of Islam that can be re-born over and
over again into a higher and wider life, because you dream true, you
dream fine, you dream in accordance with the right to dream what your
religion taught you, what your culture has given you, what your faith
entitles you in the future, what your strength empowers you to achieve?

Do not allow anyone to say to you that for the preservation of the
prestige of Islam, there must be separatism, sectional difference,
aloofness, division. Those are the teachings of those who have forgotten
the fundamental ideals of Islam. If you are true to your prophet, if
your are true to your land, listen to no voice except the voice within
your heart, as a great mystic poet has said, and remember that one of
the great duties of those who follow the ideals of Islam is to say to
yourself what Muhammad said to Himself: "I am a man even as other men."
There is summed up the entire ideal of Islam. I want you to print that
text upon your heart. When one who was building up a great religion said
to himself, "I am a man even as other men" -- what one man can do in the
Desert, shall not the manifold united heart of Islam be able to achieve
in this wonderful land?

Hindus and Muslims are martyrs for the same liberty, they dream the same
dream, they are the deliverers of the same India. We Hindus and Muslims
are \[=have\] set out together on the common journey, the common
pilgrimage to the combined Benares and Mecca of our lives, and that is
Indian unity. Our pilgrim race must carry that ultimate shrine some gift
worthy of the goal. The twin comradeship in the pilgrimage will bring
unity nearer and nearer to the hearts of the pilgrims, and when at last
the pilgrim streams, starting from different associations and creeds,
find themselves at the journey's end, even she to whom we go shall not
be able to say, "Was that my Hindu son, and that my Muslim daughter?" I
want you to revitalise all those ideals in Indian life by those things
that enriched the past as the special gift of Islam, so that we too with
you shall join in praising your God who is our God, and we \[shall\]
praise the compassionate Master of life, of time, of faith.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
