+++
title = "02 Preface"

+++
**Preface**

This is a slightly enlarged version of a small monograph I wrote in
Bengali on the important Islamic subject of *Jihãd fi Sabilillah* (war
in the way of Allah). *Jihãd* has five clear components, and a complete
understanding of the subject requires a discussion of each one of them.
Thus *jihãd* stands for (1) Forcible expansion of Islam; (2) Destruction
of infidels; (3) Establishment of *jizyah* on the subdued infidel
population; (4) Plunder in the form of properties wrested from infidels;
and (5) Plunder in the form of enslaved female and child population
acquired from the vanquished infidels. In the Bengali monograph I
discussed at length only the subject of plunder, which in Arabic is
known as *ghanîmah*. I discussed and explained the other divisions from
the text of the Koran alone, without illustrating them from the career
of the Prophet. In this enlarged version I have devoted separate
chapters to these divisions, highlighting the Prophet’s activities in
connection with each of them, and added some new appendices. It is my
hope that, though increasing the size but slightly, I have left out
nothing of real importance, and the theoretical aspects of this
important Islamic doctrine have been treated here in full. I have not
indeed described the numerous historical *jihãds* undertaken by Islamic
zealots over the centuries; but I have discussed two of the *ghazwahs*
(=jihadic campaigns) of the Prophet - his conquest of Mecca and his
destruction of the Jewish clan of Kuraizah; these two form part and
parcel of the theoretical apparatus of *jihãd*. The Prophet’s life and
works form the bedrock of Islamic theology and are known as Sunnah.
This, with Koranic sayings attributed to Allah and known by the Arabic
title *‘wahy’* (=revelation), are the final sources of Islam.

My ignorance of the Arabic language notwithstanding, I have tried to be
as accurate as possible, and depended on the best translations of the
Koran and the Hadis. The Koranic verses I have cited are mostly from
Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall’s well known translation, but I have not
failed to consult other reliable versions to ascertain Pickthall’s
faithfulness to the original. By all accounts, this faithfulness seems
to be of a very high order, and though I have detected one or two small
errors - not to mention his somewhat disconcerting affectation of an
archaic English style -, I have on the whole stuck to his version even
when alternative versions have seemed to render the meaning of the
original clearer. This is because Pickthall was an Englishman who became
a Mussalman by choice, and his rendering brings out his conscientious
orthodoxy at every page of his version.

As regards the Hadis,^([1](#1)) available English versions are by no
means numerous. I have used the English version of the second most
important collection, *Sahih Muslim*. This version is by Abdul Hamid
Saddiqi, a Pakistani scholar. For cross - checking I have used a Bengali
rendering of the important collection, *Mishkãt-ul-Masabîh*. This
rendering is by a Bangladeshi theologian, M. Aflatoon Kaisar. *Mishkãt*
is a compendium of various canonical collections including *ahãdîs*
(=traditions) not reckoned canonical but recognised as important source
materials to settle matters of dispute. On the whole, I have found that
Abdul Hamid Siddiqi’s version and that of Maulana Kaisar agree rather
closely.

I have quoted rather generously from Sir William Muir’s classic
biography of the Prophet and also the painstaking work of Professor D.
S. Margoliouth.

In India, critical studies of Islam are few and far between. Muslim
scholars have done important work in translating the canonical
literature, but they have shied away from critical studies of Islam for
obvious reasons. It is thanks to Shri Ram Swarup of Delhi giving a lead
that Islam has started being studied in India in a critical manner in
recent years. I could not use his pioneering study, *Understanding Islam
through Hadis*, as this work has been banned by the Delhi Administration
through a fiat which was aimed against nothing less than the freedom of
scholarship itself. But without Shri Ram Swarup’s guidance, I could not
have started looking for the Hadis collections and the invaluable stock
of information contained in them regarding the theory and practice of
*jihãd*. Warmest thanks are due to him, and I take this opportunity to
acknowledge my indebtedness to him.

Sita Ram Goel’s *The Calcutta Quran Petition* is a mine of information
regarding the historical *jihãds* that took place in medieval India. His
discussion of the theoretical aspects of *jihãd* is not large in volume,
but it has helped me in my research at every step as a sure guide.  
 

Calcutta,

<div align="right">

SUHAS MAJUMDAR 

</div>

June 20, 1994  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) In the book I have uniformly used the capital letter when
referring to the literature of the Prophet’s traditions as distinguished
from an individual tradition, *hadîs* (*pl. ahãdîs*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
