+++
title = "06 2 Jihãd in the Hadis"

+++
**2**  
***Jihãd* in the Hadis**

Before I discuss the contents of the Hadis literature, in so far as
those pertain to *jihãd*, I must tell the reader that only Sunni works
of Hadis have been published in translation and even those translations
are partial. The Koran is canonical scripture par excellence, and is
common to all sections of Muslims. But the Hadis of the Sunnis is not
the same as the Hadis of the Shias. Western scholars have studied most
of the religions of the world, but even they have not cared to render
the Hadis literature in English. The translations I have met are mostly
due to the ulema of Pakistan and Bangladesh. It seems there is hesitancy
even amongst the ulema in making the Hadis literature easily available
to infidels. At any rate, their enthusiasm for making the Koran
accessible to one and all is not matched by a similar effort towards
popularising the Hadis literature. This is perfectly understandable if
we consider the fact that the language used in the Hadis literature at
times borders on extreme coarseness and obscenity. It stands to reason
that the ulema would not want to display this portion of their religious
merchandise before the eyes of unsympathetic infidels.^([1](#1)) But
this very fact has rendered the work of scholarship difficult. One has
to be not only a competent Arabist but has also to run the gauntlet of
ulemaic apposition to secure authentic works of Hadis. The scholarly
searcher has to beware of the bowdlerised and severely edited works of
Hadis which would meet him at every step in his research. With this
warning, I would lead the reader to a brief discussion of the Hadis
literature of the Sunnis.

The *ahãdîs* accepted by the Sunnis as canonical have been collected in
as many as six works. These in Arabic are called *Sihah Sittah* which in
plain English means the ‘six authentics’. All these are considered
canonical, but the collections by (1) Imam Bukhãrî and (2) Imam Muslim
are supposed to be the most authentic of all. Those by (3) Tirmizî, (4)
Abu Dãu’d, (5) Abu Nasã’î and (6) Ibn Mãjah are the other four to make
up the six. Another popular collection is *Mishkãt-ul-Masabîh* (=niche
of lamp), which, besides containing *ahãdîs* from the authentic
collections, contains a few more which are held in high esteem among
Muslims without actually counting as canonical. Each of these
collections has a separate section devoted to the subject of *jihãd*. It
would require the labour of a German scholar to analyse all these
collections critically. Not for the present writer such Herculean
labour; the reader of this chapter must be content with citations from
Imam Muslim and Mishkãt alone.^([2](#2))

For a full understanding of a *hadîs*, it is important to have some
knowledge of its narrator. The Hadis of course records the Prophet’s
sayings and doings, but it does so through his Companions who, in
Arabic, are designated as *Sahãbah*. The Hadis in fact is a collection
of first-hand reports - those proceeding from certain Companions
regarding what they heard from the Prophet’s own lips or what they found
the Prophet doing at a certain juncture. Among these Companions, the
most famous was Ayesha, the Prophet’s child-wife and his favourite. The
other narrators include such names as Abu Hurairah, Jabir, Anas bin
Malik, Abu Sayeed, Abu Musa, the second Caliph Umar and a host of
others.

What does the Hadis say on the subject of *jihad*? The most important
piece of information it contains is that the Prophet, in course of his
ten years’ stay at Medina till his death, had engaged in as many as 82
*jihãds* of which 26 he commanded in person.^([3](#3)) These 26 *jihãds*
are called *ghazwahs* indicating that he became a *ghãzî* by slaying
kafirs and coming out victorious. The Hadis also tells us that most of
these *ghazwahs* were in the nature of raids or swooping down upon the
enemy without previous notice. The Hadis also gives details regarding
the vast wealth and the great number of men, women and children he
captured in these *ghazwahs*. Before we give some idea of this
*ghanîmah* (plunder), it is important to learn how the Koranic
Revelations regarding *jihãd* are confirmed by the Hadis.

\(1\) That *jihãd* is the greatest duty of a Muslim is described in the
Hadis without any scope for doubt or ambiguity. According to Imam
Muslim, “It has been narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah that the
Messenger of Allah said: One who died but did not fight in the way of
Allah nor did express any desire (or determination) for *Jihãd* died the
death of a hypocrite” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4696).

To get a clear understanding of this *hadîs* it is necessary, first of
all, to understand the meaning of the term ‘hypocrite’. The Arabic
*munãfiq* which is usually used for this term has a very specialised
meaning in the Koran. It refers to those people of Medina who, having
given shelter to the Prophet and his followers, had gradually grown
disenchanted with them because of their violence and the ruffianly
character, but did not dare rise in open rebellion against them. The
leader of this disaffected Medinese faction was Abdullah bin Ubayy, a
name cursed and reprobated in Islam for all time to come. The Koran
itself has cursed these so-called hypocrites with words of the harshest
denunciation and scorn. The Hadis has announced that their reward is the
lowest layer of hell - a whole layer below the one allotted to
idolaters.

With this background it is clear that the foregoing *hadîs* pronounces
the waging of *jihãd* as a Mussalman’s supreme duty, failing which he is
asked to cherish a fervent desire for it so that the terrible fate of a
*munãfiq* does not overtake him in the hereafter. In a word, the Hadis
declares even more uncompromisingly than the Koran itself that a
pacifist Mussalman is not a Mussalman at all.

\(2\) It is clear then that the *mujãhid’s* reward in the hereafter
should be superior to that of a non-combatant Muslim.  We have seen that
the Koran pronounces as much when it allots for a *mujãhid* a ‘greater
reward’ than that for a peace-loving believer. The extent of its
greatness is described in a *hadîs* as follows:

“It has been narrated on the authority of Abu Said Khudri that the
Messenger of Allah said to him (Abu Said): Whoever cheerfully accepts
Allah as his Lord, Islam as his religion and Muhammad as his Apostle, is
necessarily entitled to enter Paradise… (But) there is another act which
elevates the position of a man in Paradise to a grade one hundred
(higher), and the elevation between one grade and the other is equal to
the height of the heaven from the earth. Abu Said said: What is that
act? He replied: *Jihãd* in the way of Allah! *Jihãd* in the way of
Allah” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4645).

This *hadîs* clearly indicates that the difference between a pacifist
Mussalman and a *mujãhid* Mussalman is as great as the difference
between heave and earth - the pacifist’s reward rising to no higher than
earthly eminences.

\(3\) *Ahãdîs* that refer to the blood-soaked nature of *jihãd* are not
rare. No. 4549 of *Mishkãt* has the following:

“According to the venerable Abu Musa, Allah’s Messenger has said: The
portals of heaven lie under the shadow of the sword. On hearing this a
lean and emaciated man stood up and said: O Abu Musa, did you hear this
*hadîs* with your own ears? ‘Yes’, said Abu Musa, and then and there the
man went up to his companions and said: I bid you *salaam*. So saying he
broke the sheath of his sword and proceeded towards the enemies. He  
killed many with that sword and ultimately attained martyrdom
himself.”^([4](#4))

Clearly the sword is the Mussalman’s best passport to heaven. The
Prophet’s own conviction comes out with singular intensity in the
following *hadîs*. For those who want to set up Islam and its Prophet as
devoted to the cause of peace this *hadîs* bears reading and re-reading:

“It has been narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah who said: I heard
the Messenger of Allah say: I would not stay behind (when) an expedition
(for *Jihãd* was being mobilised) if it were (not) going to be too hard
upon the believers… By the Being in whose Hand is my life, I love that I
should be killed in the way of Allah; then I should be brought back to
life and be killed again in His way” (*Sahih Muslim*, No. 4631).

\(4\) Peace and Islam are in fact wholly at variance. The Prophet’s
withering contempt for religions of peace comes out in the following
*hadîs* with breath-taking intensity:

“Said the Venerable Abu Umama: On a certain occasion we went out with
the Prophet on a campaign.  One man among us was passing by a well
standing by the side of a field studded with green vegetation. The spot
roused in his mind a strange longing (for a life of seclusion, and he
thought): How glorious would it be if I could renounce the vanities of
the world and reside in this spot (for the rest of my days). He sought
the permission of Allah’s Messenger. Said His Highness: (Listen to me, O
man of little understanding): I was not sent down (by Allah) to preach
the religion of Jews and Christians. To keep oneself busy in the way of
Allah for a single morning or afternoon is better than the whole earth
and whatever (wealth) it possesses. And to get imprisoned in the field
of battle is better than being engaged in surplus prayers for as many as
60 whole years” (*Mishkãt*, No. 4489).^([5](#5))

This *hadîs* indicates that even the partial pacifism of Judaism and
Christianity was not acceptable to the Prophet of Islam. In an epoch
when the Christians propagated their religion with the sword, the
Prophet was not agreeable to even their theoretical pacifism.

\(5\) Quite a few *ahãdîs* bring out the fact that the pre-eminent aim
of jihãd is the expansion of Islam by war. We have already seen that
this is preached in the Koran itself. The following *hadîs* not only
reiterates the aim but also explains the sequence of objectives which a
*mujãhid* is supposed to strive for:

“Fight in the name of Allah and the way of Allah. Fight against those
who disbelieve in Allah… When you meet your enemies who are polytheists,
invite them to three courses of action… Invite them to (accept) Islam…
If they refuse to accept Islam, accept from them the *jizya*. If they
refuse to pay the tax, seek Allah’s help and fight them” (*Sahih
Muslim*, No. 4294).

It is only necessary to add that, in this *hadîs* at least, the sequence
does not seem to include *ghanîmah* (plunder). The triad of aims
discussed here seems to exclude plunder of infidel property and
enslavement of infidel population as aims of independent importance.
This gap, however, is adequately filled in other ahãdîs which will be
discussed in subsequent chapters.

\(6\) At this point it is important to understand the meaning of two
technical expressions related to *jihãd*. The expression *ghãzî* I have
already explained as standing for a victorious ‘slayer of infidels’. But
there is another expression, *shahîd* (witness), which means ‘the person
who attains martyrdom by offering evidence (*shahãdah*) to the truth of
Islam by fighting infidels’.

There are ahãdîs describing the best manner of shahãdah (evidence)
offered by a mujãhid who has become a martyr.

(A question arose as to) “what kind of martyrdom in jihãd is the best.
Said Allah’s Messenger: When a martyr sends (an infidel’s) blood
streaming, he should (before falling dead) cut off the feet of the horse
carrying (the said infidel)” (*Mishkãt*, No. 4530).^([6](#6))

This *hadîs* brings out the blood-lust of the *mujãhid* with perfect
candour. The translator commenting on this *hadîs* says: “‘Sending an
infidel’s blood streaming and wounding his mount’ - these two items
indicate the martyr’s seeking of death after delivering the finishing
stroke to his enemy. The emphasis here is on the *mujãhid’s* realisation
of his full remuneration in *jihãd* in life and property.” This analysis
needs no further comment.

The Hadis literature has many other things to say on *jihãd*. Summing up
the ones I have mentioned, one can say that it retains all the
injunctions of the Koran and in fact adds quite a few things more. (1)
That *jihãd* is the supreme duty of a Muslim is preached with greater
intensity in the Hadis in the light of the Prophet’s impassioned
utterances regarding what may be called his ‘aim of life’. (2) The
objectives of Islamic expansion, *jizyah* and infidel-slaughter are
enumerated in the Hadis *seriatim*, - the Koran does not mention such
sequence. (3) ‘The full realisation of a martyr’s remuneration in life
and property’ is explained in the Hadis with supreme emphasis - the
Koran lacks such candour, although the admonition for killing the
infidel and destroying him to the uttermost limit are implicit, and
sometimes explicit, in the Koran. (4) The relative pacifism of the Jews
and the Christians is emphatically rejected in the Hadis - the Koran is
silent on the subject.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Cf Muir, “As to the Hadith, I altogether fail to understand how
any translator can justify himself in rendering into English much that
is contained in the sections on marriage, purification. divorce, and
female slavery” (*The Life of Mahomet*, p. 334).

[²](#2a) The material of the Hadis literature is almost identical
whatever the collection. So the reader will not miss much by my failing
from German thoroughness.

[³](#3a) The number varies from narrator to narrator.

[⁴](#4a) Translated from a Bengali version of *Mishkãt*.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid.

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., *Mishkãt* has quoted this *hadîs* from the *Sahih*
Dãu’d.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
