+++
title = "05 Chapter Four In the Name of Religion Sita Ram Goel"

+++
Chapter Four  
**In the Name of Religion**  
Sita Ram Goel

We shall now take up the explanation provided by the theology of Islam
derived from the Quran and the Hadis.

Ibn Ishaq, the first biographer of the Prophet, devotes many pages to a
description of Arab polytheism at the time when Islam started taking
shape.  Every Arab household, he tells us, had an idol of some God or
Goddess.  He also gives the names of many idols which were housed in
sanctuaries maintained by different tribes across the Arab peninsula. 
The Ka‘ba at Mecca which housed 360 idols was only one of these
sanctuaries, though it was the most prestigious.  One of the idols in
the Ka’ba was named Allah.  Though it had some primacy over other idols,
it was far from being an exclusive deity.  Besides, there were many
sacred groves and places of pilgrimage visited by Arabs on special
occasions.

At the same time, Ibn Ishaq informs us that Monotheism was becoming an
attractive creed among some sections of the Arab elite.  It was the
creed of the Roman, Iranian and Abyssinian empires which inspired awe
and admiration among the Arabs at that time.  Many Jews and Christians
were present, individually or in communities, in the more important Arab
towns.  These People of the Book took great pride in their worship of
the one and only God and looked down upon the Arabs who had had no
Prophet, who possessed no Book and who worshipped stones and stocks. 
They aroused a sense of inferiority in the minds of those Arabs who came
in close contact with them but who were not equipped with an alternate
theology that could defend their own Gods and Goddesses.  Such Arabs
looked forward to the day when Arabia also would have a Prophet and a
Book of its own.

Those who have compared the Bible and the Quran know how close the two
are in spirit and language on the subject of idols and
idol-worshippers.  Like Jehovah of the Bible, Allah also advances his
claim to be the one and only God.  He denounces the *mushriks*
(idolaters) as the doubly damned category of *kafirs* (unbelievers) when
compared to the other category, the People of the Book.  The idols,
proclaims Allah while abrogating the so-called Satanic Verses, are mere
names invented by the ancestors of the Arabs.  They have neither eyes
nor ears nor hands nor feet and can, therefore, neither help nor harm. 
They cannot respond to prayers and will fail to save their worshippers
from bell on the Day of Judgement.  They will themselves burn in the
fire of hell together with those who worship them.  Meanwhile, they
render their worshippers napak (abominable) in the eyes of Allah.

In the early days of Islam, Muslims were too weak to practice iconoclasm
at Mecca.  They had to rest content with expressing their contempt for
idols.  Food which had first been offered to idols was spurned.  Names
which referred to some pagan God or Goddess were changed as soon as the
bearers entered the fold of Islam.  But the clarion call had come. 
“Herd them together,” said Allah, “those who commit transgression and
those whom they worship, and start them on the road to hellfire” (Quran,
37.22-23). The Prophet saw Amr bin Lubayy “dragging his intestines in
Fire.” Amr was a second century king, supposed to have brought idols
from Syria and set them up in Arabia.

Medina where Muslims were stronger witnessed some acts of iconoclasm
even before the Prophet migrated to that city.  Ibn Ishaq tells us how
the idol of Amr Ibnul-Jamuh was stolen at night by a group of Muslims
and thrown into a cesspit, again and again till Amr lost faith in it and
became a Muslim.  At nearby Quba, Sahl broke up the idols of his tribe
at night and took the pieces to a Muslim woman who used them as fuel.

The Prophet made iconoclasm a pious performance for all Muslims for all
time to come when he practised it himself on the very day he conquered
Mecca.  “When the Prophet,” writes Ibn Ishaq, “prayed the noon prayer on
the day of the conquest he ordered that all the idols which were round
the Ka‘ba should be collected and burnt with fire and broken up.” Citing
some other sources, the *Encyclopaedia of Islam* says, “Muhammad when he
entered Mecca as victor is stated to have struck them in the eyes with
the end of his bow before he had them dragged down and destroyed by
fire.” Pictorial representations of Ali standing on the shoulders of the
Prophet and tearing down the idol of Hubal from top of a Ka‘ba wall,
have been published by Shias.^([1](#1))

Soon after, expeditions were sent to other parts of Arabia for doing
what had been done at Mecca.  Idols were smashed and temples destroyed
or converted into mosques everywhere, Muslim poets vied with each other
to record the events in rapturous verse.  Fazal bin al-Mulawwih sang:

> Had you seen Muhammad and his troops,  
> The day the idols were smashed when he entered,  
> You would have seen God’s light become manifest,  
> In darkness covering the face of idolatry.

And Kab bin Malik:

> We foresook al-Lat, al-Uzza and Wudd  
> We stripped off their necklaces and earrings.

And al-Mustaughir Bin Rabia who was a warrior as well as a poet:

> I smashed Ruda so completely that  
> I left it a black ruin in a hollow.

“Growing Islam,” concludes the *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, “was from the
very beginning intent upon the destruction of all traces of pagan
idolatry and was so successful that the anti-quarians of the second and
third century of the Hadira could glean only very scanty details.  Some
of the idols were made use of for other purposes, as for example, the
idol Dhul-Kalasa… which was worshipped at Tabala, a place on the road
from Mekka to Yaman in the time of Ibn al-Kalbi (about 200 A.D.), was
used as a stepping stone under the door of the mosque at Tabala.  Other
stones which had been worshipped as idols were actually used as
corner-stones of the Ka‘ba.”

Muslim historians tell us on the authority of the Prophet that idolaters
of Arabia had set up idols in places which were meant to be mosques when
they were established for the first time by Abraham.  The mosque of
Ka‘ba, we are told, had been built by Abraham at the very centre of the
earth.^([2](#2))  Those who dismiss Rama as mythological gossip and deny
him a place of birth at Ayodhya may well enquire whether Abraham was a
historical person who actually presided over the building of the Ka‘ba.

It is, however, recorded history that the armies of Islam did everywhere
what had been done in Arabia, as they advanced into Iran, Khorasan,
Transoxiana, Seistan, Afghanistan and India.  Hundreds of thousands of
Fire Temples of the Zoroastrians, Buddhist monasteries and Hindu temples
disappeared or yielded place to mosques, ziarats and dargahs.  Modern
archaeology, has reconstructed what happened along the trail of Islamic
invasion of all these ancient lands.

Maulana Minhaj-us-Siraj, the thirteenth century historian, sums up the
theology of Islam vis-a-vis idols and idol-temples when he comes to
Mahmud of Ghazni in his *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*. “He was endowed,” he writes,
“with great virtues and vast abilities; and the same predominant star
was in the ascendant at his birth as appeared at the dawn of Islam
itself.  When Sultan Mahmud ascended the throne of sovereignty his
illustrious deeds became manifest unto all mankind within the pale of
Islam when he converted so many thousands of idol-temples into masjids
and captured many of the cities of Hindustan… He led an army to
Naharwala of Gujarat, and brought away Manat, the idol from Somnath, and
had it broken into four parts, one of which was cast before the centre
of the great masjid at Ghaznin, the second before the gateway of the
Sultan’s palace, and the third and fourth were sent to Makkah and
Madinah respectively.” Mahmud’s coins struck at Lahore in the seventh
year of his reign describe him as the “right hand of the Caliph” and
“the breaker of idols.”

This is the simple and straightforward explanation of why Islamic
invaders desecrated the idols of Hindu Gods and Goddesses, destroyed
Hindu temples and converted them into mosques.  It covers all facts,
completely and consistently, and leaves no loopholes.

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, May 21, 1989**

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) When Muhammad entered the Ka‘ba after his conquest of Mecca
by overwhelming force, he declared, “Truth has come and falsehood has
vanished” (*Sahih Muslim*, 4397).  Ram Swarup comments, “It takes more
than an invading army or crusaders or a demolition squad with
sledge-hammers to establish the domain of Truth… Similarly, it is not
that easy to get over ‘falsehood’… True spiritual demolition involves
the demolition of desire-gods and ego-gods, the demolition of the false
gods that reside in conceited theologies, in pretentious revelations and
fond belief…” (*Understanding Islam Through Hadis*, Voice of India,
Second Reprint, 1987, Pp. 115-16.)

^([2](#2a)) The Prophet of Islam gave not only a new, ‘religion’ to his
country-men but also a new history of Arabia, the same as the prophets
of Secularism have been doing in India since the days of Pandit Nehru’s
dominance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
