+++
title = "16 Ups and Downs with Malaysia"

+++



On 20 March 1966, eight months after separation, Tunku Abdul Rahman, the prime minister of Malaysia, visited Singapore. I called on him at Federation House near the Botanic Gardens. For three hours we talked, had a Chinese dinner, watched television and continued talking. The only other persons present that night were his wife and the Malaysian high commissioner, Jamal Abdul Latiff. It was the way the Tunku usually conducted business. He talked of many things besides the matters most on his mind.

The Tunku proposed that Singapore ministers join his ministers for golf in Cameron Highlands in April when he would be on leave after the installation of the Agong \(the king\). We would then get to know each other better and all the difficulties could be sorted out. He wanted to go back to the old easy, relaxed relationship to reduce tension between his non-Malays and Malays. I said that April would not be convenient; I had to go to London and Stockholm. Perhaps in June. Over dinner he made a veiled threat by reminding me casually that Singapore’s lifeline was with Malaysia, that Singapore had to work closely with it. He asked why we had stopped their unemployed from seeking jobs in Singapore. I explained that we could not have free migration to Singapore for jobs. He could not understand how this strained our economy; the same thing was happening in Kuala Lumpur. He had asked the Federal Industrial Development Agency to set up pioneer industries in Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh, Penang and Johor Bahru. These things were bound to happen because Singapore was a big city\! I patiently explained that unemployed Malaysians were not Singapore’s responsibility, that we had our own unemployed for whom we had to find jobs.

He complained about Chin Chye and Raja making speeches criticising Malaysia. I explained that those of my ministers who came from Malaya still reacted as Malayans, emotionally unable to detach themselves from the land of their birth and upbringing. They needed time to be reconciled to being Singaporeans in a separate and independent country. Showing annoyance and impatience, he said sharply, “They must do so very quickly because I will not stand for this. These people have got other ideas and motives. In Raja’s case, his loyalty may even be to India.” The Tunku was wrong. Raja had been totally loyal to Malaysia although he was born in Jaffna, Ceylon.

Before I took my leave at the front door, I said that we had to reach a new working relationship and cooperate for mutual benefit, hinting ever so gently that we could not go back to the happy old days when we were the supplicants seeking merger.

I had mixed feelings about this first encounter with the Tunku after separation. He still expected me to oblige him. But I was reassured that he appeared to be still in charge. I knew he wanted a quiet life, and did not like prolonged tensions or crises.

Malaysia’s leaders continued to treat us as though we were still in the early 1960s, seeking merger. For their convenience, we were out of their Parliament and their politics. Now, although Singapore was independent and sovereign, the Tunku believed that his one battalion in Singapore and his ability to cut off our water supply or close the Causeway to stop all trade and travel would compel us to comply. If he could do this just with his old-world aristocratic charm, so much the better.

In 1966 I was away for two months from April. Throughout this time, the Tunku, Razak and Ghazali sniped at Toh Chin Chye, then our deputy prime minister, and me because we appeared ready to restore ties with Indonesia before Malaysia did so. The Tunku threatened reprisals. Chin Chye, as acting prime minister, had welcomed Indonesia’s decision to recognise Singapore. Greatly upset, the Malaysian government issued this statement:

“Singapore’s decision to welcome Indonesia’s decision to recognise her clearly means that Singapore would have some sort of relation or intercourse with Indonesia and this would bring Indonesian nationals to Singapore. Clearly when this happens, it will endanger our security as Indonesia has repeatedly stated and is continuing to do so that she intends to intensify confrontation against Malaysia. Malaysia must therefore continue to take whatever measure she considers necessary to safeguard her interests and her security.”

Immediately after that, on 18 April, Dr Ismail, the Malaysian minister for home affairs, imposed with immediate effect entry controls for Singapore identity card holders crossing the Causeway.

When I met the Tunku after I returned from my visit to Britain and Eastern Europe, he grumbled to me about my journeys to these communist countries, that they would open embassies in Singapore and pose a threat to Malaysia. How could I have said I wanted to be good friends with China and Indonesia, he asked. I said that although my style was different from his, I did not intend to be eaten up by the communists. I recounted how we had refused permission for the crew of a Chinese ship docked in Singapore to land because the captain refused to sign an undertaking that they would not distribute their cultural revolution propaganda material. Radio Peking had attacked our immigration department. I explained that East European countries, excepting Romania, were taking the Soviet line which was opposed to China’s. Their neutrality or support would prevent us from becoming isolated, which could happen because Singapore was hosting British bases, anathema to the non-aligned countries.


Meanwhile, UMNO leaders continued to use the *Utusan Melayu*, the Jawi \(Arabic script\) newspaper circulating in both countries, to work up Malay sentiment against the “Chinese” government of Singapore. The *Utusan Melayu* reported that Ahmad Haji Taff, an UMNO leader in Singapore, one of Singapore’s two former senators to the federal senate, had demanded that our constitutional commission write into the Singapore constitution special rights for the Malays. These special rights were in the Malaysian constitution but had never applied to Singapore.

Our news division translated the *Utusan’s* inflammatory, racist statements into English, Chinese and Tamil, and reported them over radio and television and in the press. This hurt UMNO leaders with non-Malays both in Singapore and Malaysia. Ismail and Ghazali complained about this. It was subverting Malaysia, said Ismail, and there could be no economic cooperation until there was political disengagement. We should not interfere in their internal affairs as we were a separate sovereign and independent nation. Ghazali went a step further, claiming that Malaysia had a special relationship with Singapore. He was disappointed they were not informed of our trade agreements with Russia and other communist countries. \(Malaysia did not have any such agreements with communist countries.\) He thought these came within the ambit of our agreement with Malaysia for economic cooperation and defence, that neither side would take any steps or enter into any treaty or agreements which would jeopardise the other’s defence. I pointed out that he could not expect these courtesies without reciprocating them.

Ghazali also wanted us to wait until they had restored relations with Indonesia before we resumed barter trade with them. He insisted that we allow only big ships of over 200 tons into our main harbour and turn away all smaller vessels, especially sailing boats, on security grounds. Our Special Branch, now renamed Internal Security Department \(ISD\), had reported that the Malaysians themselves were openly doing barter trade on the west coast of Malaya, allowing small sailing craft from Sumatra to come into Johor and Malacca ports. To discuss the matter, Keng Swee asked for a meeting of the Combined Defence Council which had been set up after our independence. They fixed a date, but to his surprise the meeting was called off, because, the Malaysians claimed, we had accepted their proposal. We went ahead and designated Pulau Senang, an island at the southernmost point of Singapore, as a centre for Indonesian barter traders who came in their sailing ships from as far away as Sulawesi \(Celebes\). Razak objected strenuously. Their unilateral decision-making and overbearing demands made us resign from the Combined Defence Council.


An endless flotilla of small craft, some with outboard motors, others with sails, brought in Indonesian crude rubber, copra, charcoal and other produce. They departed with transistor radios, shirts, trousers, slippers, shoes, jackets and hats. Some even bought whole boxes of bread to take back. In August 1966, after Confrontation had officially ended in June, we cancelled all restrictions on barter trade. Indonesian small craft once again came to Telok Ayer Basin, one of Singapore’s oldest harbours.



The pressures following separation were relentless. There was never a dull moment in our relations with Malaysia. Despite our best efforts we could not reach agreement on retaining our common currency, and the two governments announced in August 1966 that from June 1967 we would issue separate currencies. So would Brunei, which had shared the common currency, a legacy of British rule. The Singapore International Chamber of Commerce, representing British companies, the Council of the Association of Banks in Malaysia and the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce were all worried by the uncertainty of a split and appealed to both governments to negotiate again to maintain a common currency.

Tan Siew Sin, the Malaysian finance minister, said the split would not mean the end of the world. He argued that the concessions he had made to accommodate Singapore involved a significant derogation of sovereignty on the part of Bank Negara Malaysia and ultimately the Malaysian government itself. Singapore, he said, was afraid Malaysia might not honour its undertaking to transfer the whole of Singapore’s assets and liabilities as shown in the books of the central bank, but this was merely a technical, not a fundamental, reason for the break. He implied that we lacked trust in their integrity. Indeed, Singapore’s reserves could not be protected simply by relying on trust.

We decided against setting up a central bank and continued with a currency board with 100 per cent backing in foreign exchange reserves for every dollar we issued. Lim Kim San, as finance minister, expressed confidence in the strength and stability of Singapore’s currency, which called for the tightest economic and social discipline. In Parliament Kim San explained that “a central bank is an easy way out for a finance minister who likes to juggle \[his figures\] when he has a deficit in his budget. I do not think we should put such a temptation before the finance minister in Singapore.” Tan Siew Sin responded, “If the central bank system is an inferior system, then it is clear that it is a mistake made by every industrialised country of the Western world and by every developing country. … Every independent country in the world has a central bank, or is in the process of establishing a central bank.” Later, in Parliament, Tan said that the currency split was for the best, because unlike the old days, a nation’s central bank was a powerful weapon for a finance minister in his monetary and fiscal policies.

Both finance ministers announced that they would keep their currencies pegged at two shillings and four pence to the dollar, or 0.290299 grammes of gold. They agreed on the “interchangeability” of the two currencies: accepting each other’s currency as customary tender and repatriating the currency in exchange for an equivalent amount in a convertible currency. Our two currencies continued with interchangeability from 1967 until May 1973, when it was terminated at Malaysia’s request. In January 1975 the Malaysian dollar, the ringgit, dropped marginally to S$0.9998. By 1980, it had depreciated sharply by five cents against the Singapore dollar, and by 1997 it was worth less than 50 Singapore cents. Malaysian finance ministers and central bankers had run looser fiscal and monetary policies than Singapore. Not spending more than we collect in revenue has been a guiding principle from which no Singapore finance minister has departed except in a recession.



After Singapore left Malaysia in 1965, the UMNO-controlled federal government pressed ahead with Malay as the sole national and official language, and changed its education policies to bring this about. Non-Malay resentment against these changes had been increasing, and the strident communal tones of UMNO leaders did not help to assuage such feelings. In 1968 a Malaysian government White Paper stated that communist subversion was being carried out in independent Chinese secondary schools. This added to the fears that they would be closed.

During their election campaign in April–May 1969, Alliance leaders made wild and groundless allegations that Singapore leaders had interfered in their politics. Tan Siew Sin, who was also the Malaysian Chinese Association \(MCA\) president, said he had “definite evidence” that the Democratic Action Party \(DAP\), formerly the PAP in Malaysia, was being financed by the PAP, if not the Singapore government. Raja, our foreign minister, registered Singapore’s concern with the Malaysian high commissioner, who agreed that these remarks were counterproductive. But two days later he reported that the Tunku supported Tan’s charges, claiming that, on the evidence available, they were true. The Tunku himself then pitched in at an election rally to say that Singapore’s PAP leaders were hoping to win over the government in Malaysia, and “knowing that they have no chance of winning the Chinese votes, they have no alternative but to split the Malays. So they are using the Pan Malaysian Islamic Party \(PMIP\) as their agent.” He said that the man who had provided the PMIP with funds had now been forbidden to re-enter Malaysia, but refused to disclose his identity.

I was away in London when these wild allegations were made. I wrote to Lim Kim San, our defence minister: “I am a little bewildered by the crazy allegations of the Tunku and Siew Sin about our supposed interference in their elections. I also wonder when all this will explode into racial strife and guerrilla warfare. We had better build up as fast as we can. I am sure the troubles will spill over to Singapore. By the time thousands of people are prepared to openly demonstrate against them in KL, and march through the streets in a funeral procession, then the future is grim indeed.” I was referring to the funeral of a Chinese youth shot and killed by police a few days earlier while he was in a group painting anti-government election slogans.

On polling day in Malaysia, 10 May, UMNO lost 8 out of the 59 seats they held. The DAP won 14 seats in urban constituencies including Kuala Lumpur, defeating the MCA, UMNO’s partner, in 13 of them. The DAP and Gerakan \(another non-communal party\) held a parade in Kuala Lumpur to celebrate their victory – they had won half the seats in the Selangor state assembly. The UMNO Malay Ultras’ response to this was to have a bigger parade organised by the Selangor *menteri besar* \(chief minister\), Harun Idris. A race riot followed on 13 May. The casualty pattern in Kuala Lumpur was similar to that in Singapore for the 1964 race riots when Singapore was under Kuala Lumpur’s control. Both Kuala Lumpur and Singapore were at that time predominantly Chinese-populated cities with a minority of Malays. Yet many more Chinese were killed by this Malay minority than Malays who were killed in retaliation. The official Kuala Lumpur casualty figures were: killed 143 Chinese, 25 Malays, 13 Indians, 15 others; wounded 439. This could not have been the case if the police and military were impartial. One foreign correspondent who witnessed the riots estimated the number killed at 800.

The next day the Malaysian king proclaimed a state of emergency and suspended Parliament. The government created a National Operations Council \(NOC\) with Razak as chairman to govern by decree to restore law and order. Officially the Tunku was no longer in charge. This NOC marked the end of the Tunku era, and these riots changed the nature of Malaysian society. From then on Malaysia became openly a Malay-dominated society.

The riots in Kuala Lumpur had caused widespread alarm among both Chinese and Malays in Singapore, as both felt that the racial troubles would inevitably spill into Singapore. Malaysian Chinese who had fled to Singapore recounted stories of brutalities inflicted on their relatives there. As news spread of Malaysian Malay atrocities and of the bias of the Malaysian armed forces in dealing with the situation, there was anger and alarm. I was away in America, speaking to students in Yale, when I read news of these riots. Within days of the Kuala Lumpur riots, there were attacks on Malays by Chinese in Singapore. This senseless retaliation against innocent Malays was stopped by strong police action, troop deployment and the prosecution of several attackers caught in the act. They were subsequently charged and convicted.

Four months after the riots, I called on the Tunku at his high commissioner’s residence in Singapore. He looked depressed, showing the effects of a harrowing experience. He had been openly attacked in a widely circulated letter by Dr Mahathir Mohamad \(later the prime minister, then a member of UMNO’s central executive council\) for having sold out the country to the Chinese. I sensed he wanted Singapore to be friendly and to influence the Chinese in Malaysia not to be hostile to the UMNO leaders. I wrote this note to my colleagues: “What worries me is not whether our supporting the Tunku would lose us our non-Malay ground, but whether it would not in fact lose the Tunku his Malay ground, and so hasten his retirement.”

Kim San met Razak in Kuala Lumpur a week later and reported that this time there was “no trace of the former big brother attitude. They are willing to receive advice if tactfully given without a show of upmanship. … It would be worth our while to prop them up for a little longer in what way we can.” We were fearful that the Tunku and all his moderates would be displaced by real Ultras. Malaysia’s international standing dropped precipitously, and Razak was defensive. Ironically, relations between Singapore and Malaysia improved. He needed us to help keep the Chinese in Malaysia reassured and quiescent. Our influence from Malaysia days still prevailed.

After separation, the practice of having one newspaper put out by the same editorial staff selling in both Singapore and Malaysia had continued. But after the May 1969 race riots in Kuala Lumpur, the *Utusan Melayu* became even more pro-Malay and openly hostile towards the Singapore government, belittling our efforts to help Singapore Malays. To stop it from propagating racist sentiments in Singapore, we changed the regulations to require that all newspapers must be both produced and have their editorial boards in Singapore before they could qualify for a licence to print and sell here. The *Utusan Melayu* closed its Singapore office and stopped circulating. Soon thereafter, newspapers published in one territory could not be imported and sold in the other. It has remained so to this day. Both governments recognised that there were such fundamental differences of policy on race, language and culture that what was orthodoxy in Singapore was sedition in Malaysia and vice versa.

By Malaysia’s National Day, 31 August 1970, the Tunku was sufficiently weakened to announce his intention to give up his prime ministership. I felt sad for him. It was not the way to bow out after 15 years, first as chief minister, then prime minister, during which he had done much to bring Malaysia’s different races together and had presided over much economic and social progress. He deserved to go out with more glory. The 1969 race riots had destroyed his dream of the happy Malaysia he had tried so hard to achieve. I was personally fond of him. He was a gentleman – an old-world gentleman with his own code of honour. He never let his close friends down. Although he did not include me among them, I continued to meet him whenever he came to Singapore for the horse races or when I visited Penang where he had retired. The last time was in Penang a year before he died in 1990. He looked frail, but when I took my leave, he saw me to the front porch and held himself up to have the press photograph us as he sent me off.

Razak, who took over as prime minister in September 1970, was a different leader from the Tunku. He did not have the Tunku’s warm personality or his large and commanding presence. By comparison he appeared less decisive. Razak had been my contemporary at Raffles College from 1940 to 1942. He was the son of a Pahang chieftain. In their hierarchical society, he was much respected by the Malay students. Of medium build, with a fair, round face and hair slicked down, he looked a quiet, studious man. He was bright and hardworking. He was also a good hockey player, but ill at ease with people unless he knew them well. During Malaysia, when we were competing for the same votes, he eyed me with suspicion and unease. He probably considered me a danger to Malay dominance and political supremacy. He preferred to deal with Keng Swee with whom he was comfortable. Razak did not consider Keng Swee a rival competing for votes. Once Singapore was out of Malaysia, Razak was more at ease with me. I was no longer a competitor for votes.

He and other UMNO Malay leaders rejected the Tunku’s approach to Chinese businessmen as out-of-date. Having experienced total power, both political and military, they were now completely open about their economic policies that favoured the bumiputra \(sons of the soil – indigenous Malays\) in every sector. They implemented the New Economic Policy “to eradicate poverty” and to have “greater equality in the ownership of wealth”. Malays were by regulation and administration to own 30 per cent of all private capital by the year 1990, the Chinese and Indian population were to own 40 per cent and the foreign owners \(mostly British\) were to be reduced to 30 per cent. Razak also announced a national ideology, the *Rukunegara*, that people of all races should advance together towards a just and progressive society through belief in God, loyalty to king and country, upholding the constitution and the rule of law and the promotion of moral discipline, tolerance and mutual respect. It was August 1970, more than a year after the race riots, before they lifted all remaining curfews and allowed political activities to resume. But sedition had assumed an extended meaning to include any challenge to the *Rukunegara* and Malay dominance.

Razak was preoccupied with getting the country back to normal after the trauma of the riots, and with fleshing out his New Economic Policy, so we had a relatively trouble-free few years. However, from time to time we had problems over both trivial and important matters. Singapore had an anti-long hair campaign in 1971 as we did not want our young to adopt the hippie look. Men with long hair were attended to last at government counters and at all entry points – airport, port and Causeway. Three youths, two Malays and a Chinese, were picked up at the Orchard Road car-park and interrogated as suspected secret society members. They were detained for 16 hours, had their hair cut by a police barber, and released. They turned out to be Malaysians. The *Utusan Melayu* played up the story which caused a minor storm. The government apologised for the incident. In the meantime substantial disputes were brewing over our port and the splitting of assets of our joint currency board and our joint airline.

Soon after separation, Tan Siew Sin had reportedly threatened to bypass Singapore and develop Malaysia’s Port Swettenham \(later called Port Kelang\) and Penang, describing the 40 per cent of Malaysia’s trade which went through Singapore as a “relic of the colonial past”. Malaysia subsequently took a series of measures to reduce the import and export of goods through Singapore. The Johor Malay Chamber of Commerce in August 1972 called on the federal government to abolish train services to Singapore as soon as Johor’s port at Pasir Gudang, near Johor Bahru, was ready. Malaysia announced in October 1972 that from 1973 all goods shipped from one part of Malaysia to another had to be consigned from their own ports in order to qualify for exemption from import tax on arrival. If these goods came through the port of Singapore, they had to pay import tax. They also banned timber exports to Singapore, badly affecting our plywood factories and sawmills. After a period of disruption, we were able to source timber from Indonesia.

As Hon Sui Sen, then our finance minister, the most patient and reasonable of my colleagues, wrote to me, “The Malaysian attitude on economic cooperation is one of envy and disdain. They believe that Singapore cannot survive without Malaysia and that our prosperity is completely dependent upon them. Nevertheless, they are irritated and annoyed by the fact that despite our size and vulnerability, we have progressed beyond their expectations.”

We discovered in the late 1960s that the Malaysians had formed an “S” committee to coordinate Malaysian policies on problems with Singapore. Its chairman was the head of the Malaysian civil service and its members included the secretaries-general of the ministries of defence, foreign affairs and home affairs. We also learnt that they had coopted, from time to time, former PAP pro-communist ex-detainees including Sandra Woodhull and James Puthucheary to help them read the thinking behind our policies. When we first heard of it, the “S” committee had sinister overtones. But we had little trouble reading their motives; they wanted to choke our economic growth wherever their economy gave them leverage over ours. Much later, when Malaysia was under Prime Minister Hussein Onn and our relations were more relaxed, I proposed an inter-governmental committee to resolve bilateral issues. Tengku Rithaudeen, his foreign minister, told me on 13 May 1980, at a meeting in Sri Temasek, that they already had an “S” committee to study problems with Singapore. By October 1986 the “S” committee had widened its focus to include bilateral relations with Indonesia, Thailand and Brunei, and was renamed the Foreign Relations Committee \(FRC\). After that the Malaysians spoke openly to our officials about the FRC and its role in managing bilateral relations. The cloak-and-dagger approach of the “S” committee was abandoned.

The only Malaysian minister who was not prejudiced against Singapore was Deputy Prime Minister Tun Dr Ismail. When he visited Singapore in April 1971 on the excuse of inspecting our housing programmes, we had a good talk. He wanted more cooperation. He told the press that differences of opinion should not obstruct greater cooperation between us. At his urging, our state trading agency, Intraco, signed an agreement in 1971 to cooperate with Pernas, its Malaysian counterpart, in third country trade. Not much trade came out of this: Ismail’s lone voice could not prevail against the other UMNO leaders.

To mark improving bilateral relations, I made my first official visit to Malaysia in March 1972, accompanied by Sui Sen. We discussed and settled the disposition of the currency board’s surplus funds and residual assets. We negotiated in a businesslike way. The difficulty with Razak, however, was that every now and then he would change his mind and reopen an item already agreed upon.

Razak returned the visit in 1973. He wanted to terminate the interchangeability of our two currencies. I agreed. The Malaysia-Singapore Stock Exchange was also split in May 1973 into the Stock Exchange of Singapore and the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. Each kept its prevailing listing of Singapore and Malaysian stocks. Razak was happy with the current state of relations. Publicly, relations were not so close as to embarrass him with his Malay base, nor were they in such a state of acrimony as to upset his Chinese support. Razak said he anticipated troubles for both Singapore and Malaysia from the uncertainties in Thailand and Indochina, and so we should not add to our difficulties by creating problems between ourselves. I agreed. He was uneasy and concerned about his Chinese support in Malaysia and the lack of support for the MCA in the next election and asked if I could help. I had no reply. An increase in commodity prices had given him greater confidence and eased his sense of resentment at our doing better than them.

Razak invited me for a return visit. Relations were equable and stayed that way for the next three years, with quiet cooperation and few serious disagreements. Then I learnt that Razak had leukaemia. He flew to London frequently for treatment. In newspaper photographs and on television he appeared visibly thinner by the month. When he died in January 1976, I paid my respects at his home in Kuala Lumpur.



Hussein Onn succeeded Razak as prime minister. He was a practising lawyer in 1968 when Prime Minister Razak brought him into active politics. They were brothers-in-law, married to two sisters.

Hussein did not look the typical Malay. He had a Turkish grandmother, spoke with a strong voice and was unusually fair for a Malay. He wore glasses, had curly hair and was taller and broader-built than Razak. He was very careful in his work. At formal meetings, he would have his brief before him with important passages neatly underlined in colour, and would go through his brief methodically. He did not believe in trusting only to his memory. He was open and direct when he dealt with me, coming straight to the point, unlike Razak. I liked him. He was of the same age as Razak and me. His father, Dato Onn bin Jaafar, had been the *menteri besar* of Johor and the first leader of UMNO, which was formed shortly after the British returned in 1945 and promulgated the Malayan Union.

Hussein set out to make a fresh start. A few weeks after Razak’s funeral, he visited Singapore, saying he wanted to establish good personal relations and be able to discuss and overcome bilateral problems. We had a one-on-one meeting. I told him my fears of Malay communists and their sympathisers penetrating Malaysia’s mass media and their radical Malay student and trade union leadership. We talked freely and frankly about the Malay communist infiltration of his media, including the activities of Samad Ismail, an MCP member from his time in Singapore in the 1950s, and his group. When Razak was prime minister, Samad had worked his way into UMNO and become a powerful figure in the *New* *Straits Times* and *Berita Harian*, building up a coterie of supporters. Hussein agreed this was a danger but said that the communists and student radicals could not be arrested without upsetting the Malay ground. Later, in June 1976, the ISD arrested one of Samad’s disciples in Singapore, Hussein Jahidin, a *Berita Harian* editor. He implicated Samad and several other Malay journalists in Kuala Lumpur as pro-communists. The Malaysian Special Branch arrested Samad and his Kuala Lumpur group. Hussein Onn had had the courage to act against a pro-communist Malay intelligentsia although this was likely to cost him some support.

Hussein had fond memories of Singapore. He had studied at Telok Kurau English School in 1933–34, the years when I was also a student there. He was a little diffident at the beginning and was happy that I treated him with respect. I was impressed by his integrity and his good intentions. I took up his invitation to visit Malaysia in December 1976, when he briefed me on his internal security and Thai border problems. We also discussed economic cooperation.

Our relations had started off on a good footing but unfortunately he was influenced by the anti-Singapore feelings of Johor UMNO leaders, especially the *menteri besar*, Othman Saat, the most important UMNO leader in Hussein’s home state. Othman injected his visceral dislike for Singapore into Hussein, who repeated to me Othman’s complaints: we had caused a shortage of workers in their factories by attracting their workers to work in Singapore for more pay; Johor Bahru shopkeepers lost business because of competition from Woodlands New Town on our side of the Causeway. \(In the 1990s, when one Singapore dollar was worth more than two ringgit, they complained that Singaporeans flocked to their shops causing prices to rise for their locals.\)

The most absurd allegation of the *menteri besar* repeated by Hussein was that pig waste from our farms was polluting the straits between Johor and Singapore. And for good measure, that land reclamation on our northern coast had caused flooding in their southern coastal villages in the Tebrau area. I carefully explained that land reclamation on Singapore’s northern coastline could not cause flooding in Johor; hydrologically this was impossible. And the pig waste pollution could not have come from Singapore because all our run-offs were trapped in rivers that had been dammed to form estuarine reservoirs with strict anti-pollution measures for the water to be potable. He accepted my explanations.

Despite amicable relations with Hussein, the Malaysians continued to take a series of actions which they thought would slow down our economy. First the Johor state government banned the export of sand and turf. Then the federal government ruled that from 1977, all exports from Johor to East Malaysia must be shipped through Pasir Gudang port, not through Singapore. From 1980, they limited the carriage of all domestic cargo between Malaysian ports to their own vessels. They carried out these policies although their people had to pay the increased costs. Johor leaders convinced Hussein that we were out to harm Johor and prevent its economic progress. They even persuaded Hussein to tell the press in January 1979 that he was considering stopping the railway in Johor and not Singapore, in order to develop Pasir Gudang as a port.

One incident which added to this bitterness occurred in December 1976 after our general election. ISD officers found that Leong Mun Kwai, the secretary-general of the People’s Front and an opposition candidate, had made defamatory remarks against me in the election that month because he had been paid to do so by the Malaysian Special Branch. We put him on television to admit this. He was convicted for criminal defamation and sentenced to 18 months in prison. Leong told the ISD that UMNO leader Senu Abdul Rahman, the former Malaysian minister of culture, youth and sports, had personally told Leong to try to destroy my reputation.

On economic cooperation, I said we were moving away from simple manufacture into higher value-added products with more machines. We were also moving more into services – repairing of aircraft, working with computers and so on. We would be happy if our factories, short of labour in Singapore, relocated to Johor. Nor did we want to block the growth of their port in Pasir Gudang.

Although he was influenced by his Johor UMNO leaders to be suspicious of Singapore, I found Hussein fair-minded. He wanted to do right by his country and by those who dealt with him. He was not as quick as Razak but was thorough, careful and did not have second thoughts after a decision. He weighed his words carefully.

In 1981 Hussein flew to London for a medical checkup. He was diagnosed as having heart trouble and resigned soon after. He went back to law and died in 1990. He had won my respect as a man of integrity. Sitting at the top of an UMNO machine that was based on money politics, Hussein was completely honest. He tried to clean up corruption, especially in the states. He authorised the prosecution in November 1975 against the *menteri besar* of Selangor, Datuk Harun Idris. Harun was convicted and imprisoned for four years. But Hussein could not widen his purge in the face of resistance from other UMNO state leaders.



In Parliament in Kuala Lumpur in May 1965, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, as MP for Kota Star Selatan in Kedah, warned me of the consequences of challenging Malay rule. He denounced the PAP as

“pro-Chinese, communist-oriented and positively anti-Malay. … In some police stations, Chinese is the official language, and statements are taken in Chinese. … In industry, the PAP policy is to encourage Malays to become labourers only, but Malays were not given facilities to invest as well. … It is, of course, necessary to emphasise that there are two types of Chinese – those who appreciate the need for all communities to be equally well-off and these are the MCA supporters to be found mainly where Chinese have for generations lived and worked amidst the Malays and other indigenous people, and the insular, selfish and arrogant type, of which Mr Lee is a good example. This latter type live in a purely Chinese environment where Malays only exist at syce level. … They have never known Malay rule and could not bear the idea that the people that they have so long kept under their heels should now be in a position to rule them.”

At a time when UMNO was demanding my detention and burning my effigy, these words were ominous. My riposte was that we had agreed to the constitution of Malaysia which provided for Malaysian, not Malay, rule. This was no light-hearted exchange in the ordinary cut-and-thrust of debate. He meant that I did not know my proper place in Malaysia.

In his autobiography, serialised by the *Nihon Keizai Shimbun* in 1995, he said that his “father’s blood line has supposedly been traced back to Kerala State in India”. His mother was a Malay born in Kedah. But he identified himself totally as a Malay and was determined in wanting to uplift the Malays.

When Hussein Onn appointed him as his deputy prime minister and minister for education I decided to hold out my hand in friendly cooperation for the future, regardless of our profound differences in the past. Through Devan Nair, who knew him well from his years in the Malaysian Parliament, I invited Mahathir to Singapore in 1978. I expected Mahathir to succeed Hussein as prime minister and wanted to put our old antagonism behind us. I knew he was a fierce and dogged fighter. I had seen the way he had fought the Tunku when the Tunku was at the height of his power. He had been expelled from UMNO but that did not deter him from carrying on the fight. I was not unwilling to clash with him when we were in Malaysia, but feuding between two sovereign states was different. I initiated this dialogue to clear away the debris of the past.

He accepted the invitation and followed up with several subsequent visits. We had long and frank exchanges of several hours each to clear the air surrounding our suspicions of each other.

He was direct and asked what we were building the SAF \(Singapore Armed Forces\) for. I replied equally directly that we feared that at some time or other there could be a random act of madness like cutting off our water supplies, which they had publicly threatened whenever there were differences between us. We had not wanted separation. It had been thrust upon us. The Separation Agreement with Malaysia was a part of the terms on which we left and had been deposited in the United Nations. In this agreement, the Malaysian government had guaranteed our water supply. If this was breached, we would go to the UN Security Council. If water shortage became urgent, in an emergency, we would have to go in, forcibly if need be, to repair damaged pipes and machinery and restore the water flow. I was putting my cards on the table. He denied that any such precipitate action would happen. I said I believed that he would not do this, but we had to be prepared for all contingencies.

Mahathir was candid about his deep anti-Singapore feelings. He recounted how, as a medical student in Singapore, he had directed a Chinese taxi driver to the home of a lady friend, but had been taken to the servants’ quarters of this house. It was an insult he did not forget. Singapore Chinese, he said, looked down upon the Malays.

He wanted me to cut off my links with Malaysia’s Chinese leaders, in particular the DAP leaders. He undertook not to interfere with Singapore’s Malays. I said we would live and let live, that I had not kept up contact with the DAP. He said clearly that he accepted an independent Singapore and had no intention of undermining it. My reply was that on this basis we could build a relationship of trust and confidence. So long as we believed they wanted to do us in, we would always be distrustful, reading sinister motives into every ambiguous move.

He was different from his predecessors. The Tunku, Razak and Hussein Onn were from the aristocracy or the traditional ruling families associated with the sultans. Like me, Mahathir is a commoner – a trained professional doctor and a self-made politician. I believed I had satisfied him that I was not interested in outmanoeuvring him, that I wanted a businesslike relationship. It was as well I initiated this dialogue and developed a working relationship. Had we carried our old antagonisms into the future, both countries would have suffered.


As prime minister, he visited Singapore in December 1981. He had advanced the time for peninsular Malaysia by half an hour so as to have one time zone for West and East Malaysia. I said Singapore would do likewise for the convenience of everyone. This put him in a good mood. He explained that he had had to educate his Malaysian officials to get them to reverse their opposition to Singapore Airlines flying to Penang. Subsequently, hotels in Penang were full and both airlines had profitable loads, benefiting from cooperation. He had asked his ministers and officers to learn from Singapore. No other Malaysian prime minister or minister had ever publicly said they had anything to learn from Singapore; Mahathir did not suffer from this inhibition. This open-minded attitude of learning from anyone whose success he wanted to duplicate in Malaysia distinguished him from his predecessors.

During our one-on-one meeting, he said people in Johor were jealous of Singapore. He advised me to lessen the envy by socialising at an official level. I said his foreign ministry, Wisma Putra, had objected to such fraternising. He said he would tell them this was his proposal. This was a significant change of policy. In a matter-of-fact way, Mahathir said that there was resentment among Malaysia’s Malays against Singapore as a prosperous Chinese city, just as they resented the Chinese in the Malaysian towns. But the people at the top in Kuala Lumpur understood this problem.

I expressed my hope to establish sound and steady relations so that our problems would not be blown out of proportion. He wanted an open and frank relationship, one that would be fair and equitable. He had ordered the lifting of the ban on the export of construction materials to Singapore. It was not being announced, but he had told the Johor authorities that this was a federal matter in which they could not interfere.

We then joined our officials and ministers. On Malaysia’s claim to Pedra Branca, a small rocky island Singapore had owned for more than 100 years and where it had built a lighthouse, he said both parties should sit down and sort it out. We could exchange papers and settle the issue. I agreed. On the Straits of Johor, he wanted the Thalweg line \(the line along the deepest channel between the two shores\) to be fixed and not to shift with the shifting of the channel. I agreed. I requested the return of a military camp they were occupying and the acquisition of a portion of Malayan Railway land at Tanjong Pagar Station for an expressway extension. He agreed. After dinner, he said with satisfaction, “Nearly all bilateral issues have been resolved.” I replied, “Let’s keep it like that.” It was a good first meeting. We had established a relationship.

Shortly after, our high commission in Kuala Lumpur reported a perceptible improvement in attitudes among Malaysian ministers, MPs and civil servants towards Singapore. They were willing to learn from Singapore and were open about it. They praised Changi Airport and hoped that Subang would be half as good. There were increased visits to Singapore to study our productivity, urban planning and other matters.

I visited Mahathir in Kuala Lumpur the following year, in 1982. In a two-hour one-on-one meeting, we moved from just solving bilateral problems to negotiating new areas of cooperation. On the Five-Power Defence Agreement \(FPDA\) and the Integrated Air Defence System, Mahathir said they would counterbalance the Soviet bases in Vietnam. I told him we were buying four American E2C Hawkeye surveillance aircraft to give advance warning of any aerial attack on Singapore. Together we briefed our ministers and officials on items we had agreed upon, including Malaysia’s affirmation that they would honour the 1962 Water Agreement to provide 250 million gallons per day to Singapore.

The meeting was decidedly warmer than the last. Mahathir’s approach to Singapore was more pragmatic. At a press conference, I said there had been a meeting of minds, that we were on the same wavelength. Improved relations spread to warmer personal relations between officers of our armed forces where previously there had been almost no interaction.

The thaw did not last long. Antipathy for and envy of Singapore always tempted Malay leaders to seek popularity with their Malay grass roots by hitting out at Singapore. Worse, the Malaysian government resumed taking actions that hurt Singapore. In January 1984 they imposed a RM100 levy on all goods vehicles leaving Malaysia for Singapore.

I asked Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Musa Hitam in Singapore two months later why they took action which would discourage the relocation of industries from Singapore to Malaysia by Japanese and American MNCs. These MNCs had set up electronic assembly plants in Johor to have the products sent to Singapore for more complex operations. The RM100 levy was a signal that such a relocation was not favoured. Musa replied it was part of a learning process. He believed someone had suggested this as an easy way to get revenue but they would discover the wider implications. But Musa had no influence over Mahathir’s policy. Instead of cancelling the levy they increased it to RM200 to discourage the use of Singapore’s port.

In October that year Malaysia reduced its import duty on a variety of foodstuffs, mostly from China, provided they were imported direct from the country of origin into Malaysia. We told their finance minister, Daim Zainuddin, that this violated GATT rules, and that we would have to report it. He amended their policy to exempt duty on goods imported via sea and airports but not via a land route, like the Causeway. It was clear that the measure was aimed against Singapore.

In 1986 our ministry of foreign affairs announced that Israeli President Chaim Herzog was to make a state visit that November on the invitation of our president. There was an outcry in Malaysia, with demonstration rallies and protests outside our high commission in Kuala Lumpur, in their states and at the Causeway. They protested officially. Daim, who was close to Mahathir, told our high commissioner that the visit was an insult to Malaysia and the Muslims. He said that although Mahathir had said in Parliament that they would not interfere in another country’s affairs, privately he was very unhappy. I told our high commissioner to explain that we had announced the visit and could not cancel it without damage to ourselves. Mahathir recalled the Malaysian high commissioner in Singapore for the duration of President Herzog’s visit, saying that relations with Singapore were no longer as good, but that ties were far from tense.

From time to time, whenever the Malaysians wanted things their way, even on matters strictly within our domestic rights, relations with Malaysia were strained. What they wanted is called in the Malay language an *abang-adik* \(big brother-little brother\) relationship, with little brother giving way graciously. When non-vital interests were at stake, we were prepared to humour *abang*, but not when *adik* had legitimate interests to defend, as in the next issue that arose – Malays in the SAF in Singapore.


In February 1987 my son Loong, then minister for trade and industry and second minister for defence, answered a question on Malays in the SAF at a constituency function. Our Malays were asking MPs why we did not have Malay national servicemen in sensitive key positions in the SAF like the air force or armoured units. The cabinet had decided to take the matter into the open. Loong said that in the event of a conflict, the SAF did not want any of its soldiers to be put in a difficult position where his loyalty to the nation might conflict with his emotions and his religion. We did not want any soldier to feel he was not fighting for a just cause, or worse, that his side might not be in the right. In time, as our national identity became more developed, this would be less of a problem. The Malaysian media read this as implying that Malaysia was the enemy. An unending stream of critical articles ensued.

The Malaysian foreign minister, Rais Yatim, raised this speech with our foreign minister. Malaysia, he said, was a “glasshouse” in the matter, because its own Chinese were represented only to a small extent in the armed forces and in the top echelons of the civil service. This, he added, was clearly understood and accepted by the MCA, that Malaysian policies were based on Malay dominance. Therefore Malaysia could not be critical of Singapore on this issue. However, airing these problems publicly created internal pressures on UMNO leaders to respond, because it was difficult for Malay Malaysians not to associate themselves with Malay Singaporeans. But we had never criticised their policy of having a Malaydominant armed forces.

Later, in October 1987, I met Mahathir at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Vancouver. He said that all the things he had wanted to do in cooperation with me had gone wrong. They started to go wrong with the Herzog visit, then came the issue of Malays in the SAF. In April 1987 two assault boats with four SAF personnel entered a small creek, Sungei Melayu, opposite Singapore – Malaysian territorial waters – by mistake for 20 minutes. Malaysia delivered a verbal protest. They were suspected of spying. I apologised for their mistake but pointed out that they could not have been spying as they were in uniform. Mahathir said he could not come to Singapore to see me because the atmosphere had gone sour. He suggested that we should have a few Malay pilots to show Malays in Malaysia that we trusted our Singapore Malays and that we did not consider Malaysia to be our enemy. He said all governments had to fudge; Malaysia regularly denied discriminating against the Chinese in the Malaysian armed forces. Singapore should also deny publicly our policies on Malays in the SAF. For good Singapore-Malaysia relations, he advised that we should conduct ourselves in a manner that would not make the Malays in Malaysia unhappy about Malays in Singapore.

That meeting, however, helped to restore some personal rapport. He had also asked me to help in the development of Langkawi, an island off the coast of Kedah, as a tourist resort by getting Singapore Airlines to fly in passengers. SIA launched a three-day package in Japan and Australia, but without success. I told him Langkawi could not compete with Penang and the Thai island of Phuket near by because it did not have the infrastructure. He asked me to discuss the problems with Daim.

Daim Zainuddin is his close aide and long-standing friend from his home state, Kedah. He has a quick mind, is good at figures and decisive, and had been successful in business before he became finance minister. As finance minister, Daim initiated the policies that moved Malaysia from state-owned enterprises into profit-oriented private enterprise corporations. Without his active intervention, Malaysia’s conversion to free-market policies might not have been so broad and so successful. Daim was a shrewd deal-maker who honoured his agreements.



Before I stepped down as prime minister in 1990, I tried to clear the decks for my successor. Drug traffickers travelling on the Malayan Railway from Johor Bahru to Singapore had been able to toss drugs out of train windows to accomplices waiting at prearranged points. I had therefore told Mahathir in 1989 that we intended to move our customs and immigration from Tanjong Pagar Station in the south to Woodlands at our end of the Causeway, to make checks at the point of entry. I anticipated that when this move was completed, passengers would disembark at Woodlands and take our MRT trains, buses or taxis into town. Malaysians would be unhappy because, under the law, the land would revert to Singapore when it was no longer being used for the railway. I therefore proposed to Mahathir that we should redevelop this railway land jointly. Mahathir designated Daim Zainuddin to settle the terms with me. After several months of negotiations, we finally agreed that there would be joint development of three main parcels of land at Tanjong Pagar, Kranji and Woodlands. Malaysia’s share would be 60 per cent, Singapore’s 40 per cent. The Points of Agreement \(POA\) was signed on 27 November 1990, a day before I stepped down. As it turned out, I did not succeed in handing over my office to Goh Chok Tong with a clean slate. Three years after the agreement was signed, Daim wrote to me to say Mahathir thought it was unfair because it did not include a piece of railway land at Bukit Timah for joint development. I replied that the agreement was fair in that I had given Malaysia 60 per cent instead of a 50 per cent share of the three parcels of land. It was a deal done between him and me, and it was difficult for Prime Minister Goh to have it reopened.

Before, during and after Malaysia, the Malaysians have taken one step after another to restrict Singapore’s access to their economy. They imposed taxes and made laws and regulations to reduce or cut off their use of our ports, airports and other services, especially financial services. They directed their banks and other borrowers not to raise loans from foreign banks in Singapore but to use foreign banks which had branches either in Kuala Lumpur or Labuan, a tax haven they had set up on an island off Sabah. They forced us to become more competitive.

After 1990 I refrained from official dealings with all Asean governments, including Malaysia, so as not to cross lines with Prime Minister Goh. Unfortunately, for a hearing in chambers in a defamation suit in January 1997, I swore in an affidavit that Johor Bahru was “notorious for shootings, muggings and car-jackings”. This caused a furore in Malaysia when made public by the defendant who had absconded to Johor.

The Malaysian government angrily demanded a retraction and an apology. I apologised unreservedly. They were not satisfied and wanted my statement withdrawn from the court document. I saw no point in refusing. I had been careless and put myself offside. In a signed statement, I repeated my unreserved apology and stated that I had instructed my lawyer to have “the offending words removed from the record”. The Malaysian cabinet met and announced they had accepted my apology. We noticed, however, that they cut off all bilateral contacts and in effect froze ties. Mahathir also said that Singapore always made things difficult, as in the case of the dispute over railway land. The barrage of protests and denunciations continued for several months, and as in the past reached a crescendo in threats to cut off our water supplies.

From 1992 our customs and immigration consulted and negotiated with Malayan Railway \(KTM\) and Malaysian immigration and customs to move their railway line to meet our CIQ \(customs, immigration and quarantine\) post in Woodlands. Prime Minister Mahathir, in April 1992, confirmed this when he wrote to Prime Minister Goh, “In fact, we feel that it would be more convenient for both countries to have the same checkpoint in Woodlands.” However, the Malaysians wrote officially in June 1997 that they had changed their minds and had decided to retain their CIQ at Tanjong Pagar. Singapore replied in July 1997 that they could not remain at Tanjong Pagar because it would create serious operational problems for both countries: people would be cleared by their immigration as having entered Malaysia before leaving Singapore. Furthermore, Malaysian officials, operating in our territory without the presence of Singapore officials to lend them authority, had no power to act.

In last-minute negotiations in July 1998, Malaysian foreign ministry officials claimed for the first time that Malaysia had a legal right to have their customs and immigration at Tanjong Pagar. We gave them three months to put up their written legal arguments for proper consideration. When the time came, they asked for an extension to December 1998.

Prime Minister Mahathir did not make it any easier by the public comments he made while he was in Namibia. Shown by Malaysian journalists the reports of earlier letters and documents that his officials had written to our officials, agreeing that Malaysia’s CIQ would move to Woodlands, he said, referring to the POA, “In our opinion it is not enough for an international agreement to be signed by just two officials. Such agreements have to be approved by the heads of government and ratified by the cabinet and Parliament” \(as reported in Malaysian newspapers on 28 July 1998\). This was an unusual view of the law. Mahathir added that Malaysia would not shift its CIQ from Tanjong Pagar to Woodlands, that “That’s our stand and we will stick to it.” After the dispute became public, Jayakumar, our minister for foreign affairs, in a statement in Parliament in July 1998 recounted the exchanges between the two governments.

Older UMNO leaders have not forgotten the intense campaign of vituperation and intimidation they mounted against me in mid-1965. They had attacked me then for advocating a Malaysian Malaysia, burnt my effigy and demanded my arrest. That was at a time when they controlled the police and army. I could not afford to give in. They then decided to get Singapore out of Malaysia. This barrage could not have been for my education. My younger colleagues knew the fireworks were intended for them. But they knew what would happen to their political standing if they wobbled. When MPs asked questions, Prime Minister Goh and Foreign Minister Jayakumar set out the facts on the railway land in Parliament, including the agreement and subsequent letters between Daim and me. Goh disclosed that he had told Mahathir the POA was a formal agreement and he could not vary its terms. However, within a framework of wider cooperation, which included the long-term supply of water, he could vary the POA. In the robust debate that followed, a younger generation of MPs stood up to be counted. Community leaders also made it clear that they were not impressed by Malaysia’s methods of making friends and influencing neighbours.

While these exchanges were being traded, I launched the first volume of my memoirs, *The Singapore Story*, on 16 September 1998, my 75th birthday. For two Sundays before its launch, Singapore’s newspapers carried excerpts of my description of events leading to Singapore’s separation from Malaysia. This angered Malaysian leaders. A thunderous barrage of criticisms and attacks arose from them and their media, that I was “insensitive” to their economic difficulties, choosing a time of economic troubles to publish my memoirs. I had also hurt the feelings of the children of the principal actors of the 1960s, in particular Najib Abdul Razak, Tun Razak’s son who was minister for education, and Syed Hamid Albar, Syed Ja’afar Albar’s son who was minister for defence. They denied the truth of my account of events. Questioned at a press conference, I said I had checked and verified my facts, that my words were carefully chosen, and that I staked my reputation on the truth of what I had written. Two days after that, on 18 September, their minister for defence banned the RSAF from flying over their airspace with immediate effect. The Malaysians had decided to make it difficult for our planes to reach our training areas in the South China Sea after taking off from Singapore airfields.

The dynamics of Singapore-Malaysia relations have not changed fundamentally since our separation on 9 August 1965. Malaysia asked us to leave because we stood for a Malaysian Malaysia and they for a Malay-dominated Malaysia. A multiracial society of equal citizens was unacceptable to the UMNO leaders of Malaysia in 1965 and remained unacceptable in 1999. In May that year Malaysian opposition leader, Lim Kit Siang, revived the concept of a Malaysian Malaysia. Mahathir reacted sharply to say it was a threat to their \(Malay\) identity, because Malaysia was previously called *Tanah Melayu* \(Malay land\). Two months later \(*Straits Times*, 30 July 1999\) he said that if Malaysia were forced to adopt a system of meritocracy as advocated by the West, it would terminate the process implemented by the government to bridge the gap among the races. The government, through the New Economic Policy, had provided assistance to Malays in the fields of business and education, and many of them now held important positions, for example as professors and vice-chancellors. He said, “If it is abolished, I am sure that the Malays and the bumiputras will become manual workers and will not be able to hold high positions they are holding today. … Many bumiputras will lose their jobs, their children will not be able to go to universities and will not be able to become professors and lecturers.” He also lamented that Malay students shunned science-based courses in favour of Malay and religious studies.

Mahathir was determined to redress the economic balance between the races. When the financial crisis struck, many Malay entrepreneurs were badly hurt because they had over-borrowed during the boom in the stock and property markets. Only Mahathir had the courage to tell his Malays:

“In the past, the country had wasted a lot of resources training unqualified individuals. We had not taken into account the capabilities of those given opportunities or exposed them to enough experiences. Because of this, many of our efforts have failed and there was wastage. Although there were successes, they did not meet the investments put in. … In the previous two policies – the National Economic Council Policy and New Development Policy – the focus had been to churn out local bumiputra businessmen. Now we want to mould world-class entrepreneurs.” \(*Straits Times*, 6 August 1999\)

In October 1999 Mahathir called on the Associated Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry in Malaysia to assist bumiputras to make up the loss in their share of national wealth after the economic crisis because many bumiputra companies were saddled with debts. “Bumiputra businessmen suffered greater losses because they were new in the field and had huge loans to service, forcing some of them to sell their companies to Chinese businessmen out of desperation.” \(*Star*, 13 October 1999\) “We not only need to help these businessmen, but also create and groom a fresh corps of bumiputra businessmen, and for this, we are asking for the cooperation of the Chinese Chambers of Commerce.” \(*Straits Times*, 13 October 1999\) The group’s president, Datuk Lim Guan Teik, replied, “I think it is fair, as citizens of a multiracial country, that the strong should help the weaker.” \(*Straits Times*, 13 October 1999\)



At separation, the Tunku did not expect us to succeed. He tried to use three levers to impose his will on Singapore: the military, the economy and water. We countered the military leverage by building up the SAF. We overcame their economic hold by leapfrogging them and the region to link up with the industrial countries. As for water, we have alternatives – our own reservoirs provide about 40 per cent of our domestic consumption, and with modern technology for desalination, reverse osmosis and recycling of used water, we can manage.

To speak of Singapore-Malaysia problems as “historical baggage” is to miss the point. If it had been only “historical baggage”, then after more than 30 years as two independent states, our relations should have stabilised. But the root cause of the recurring problems in Singapore-Malaysia relations is our diametrically different approaches to the problems facing our two multiracial societies.

Singapore set out to become a multiracial society of equal citizens, where opportunities are equal and a person’s contribution is recognised and rewarded on merit regardless of race, language, culture or religion. In spite of our meagre natural resources, we succeeded, and our policies have benefited all our citizens, including our Malays. We have a growing middle class of professionals, executives and businessmen, including Malays, who have developed a strong competitive spirit and take pride in being what they are on their own merit. Each time we are rated as the best airline in Asia, the No. 1 airport, the No. 1 container port, it reminds Singaporeans what a cohesive meritocratic multiracial society can achieve, better than if we were a Chinese-dominated one and lacked solidarity. This was not what Malaysia’s leaders thought would happen when they asked us to leave in 1965.

When UMNO politicians use coded language like “special relationship” or “historic links” or “being insensitive”, they are signalling that they want Singapore to be obliging and accommodating, and not to stand on its legal rights. Malaysia’s ethnic Chinese and Indian ministers have told our ministers that we are too legalistic and do not know how to deal with UMNO leaders; that if we are tactful and trust the Malay leaders’ words, these leaders can be most responsive. This overlooks the difference between our responsibilities to our different electorates. Singaporeans expect their government to represent their interests in a partnership of equal and independent states.

Hence the Singapore-Malaysia relationship will continue to have its ups and downs. Singaporeans need to take these gyrations with equanimity, neither euphoric when relations are good nor despondent when relations turn bad. We need steady nerves, stamina and patience, while quietly standing up for our rights.



Malaysia had tried to industrialise through import substitution but without success. They saw how with investments from MNCs we succeeded. Daim encouraged Mahathir to privatise their inefficient state-owned enterprises and invite foreign investments; he changed policies and succeeded. Mahathir wanted Malaysia to excel, with a better airport and container port, a bigger financial centre and a “Multi-media Super Corridor”. He has built up-to-date container wharves at Port Kelang and a new super airport 75 kilometres south of Kuala Lumpur. This made us re-examine our competitiveness, improve our infrastructure and work smarter to increase our productivity. Suddenly a calamitous financial crisis hit all countries in the region and decimated currencies, stock markets and property values. The crisis will eventually work itself out and economic growth will resume.

Despite my differences with him, I made more progress solving bilateral problems with Mahathir in the nine years he was prime minister, from 1981 to 1990, when I stepped down, than in the previous 12 years with Tun Razak and Hussein Onn as prime ministers. He had the decisiveness and political support to override grass-roots prejudices to advance his country’s interests. He had pushed the Malays towards science and technology and away from obscurantism. He had the courage to say in public that a lady doctor using a pencil to examine a male patient \(which the Muslim religious leaders wanted\) was not the way to treat patients. Even at the height of his unpopularity during the Anwar-led unrest, the people, particularly Malaysian Chinese and Indians, knew they had no better alternative to Mahathir leading UMNO and the National Front. He had educated younger Malays, opened up their minds with the vision of a future based on science and technology, especially computers and the Internet, which his Multi-media Super Corridor symbolised. The majority of the Malays and all the Chinese and Indians in Malaysia want this future, not a turn towards extreme Islamic practices.

My view appeared to be contradicted by the results of the November 1999 general election, when Mahathir won with a two-thirds majority of the seats but lost the Kelantan and Terengganu state governments to the PAS and some 20 incumbent UMNO MPs. I am not sure if this was caused by a shift towards a more Islamic society. The losses were accentuated by the dismissal in September 1998 of Anwar Ibrahim, his deputy prime minister and protégé of 17 years. Arrested three weeks later under the Internal Security Act, he was brought to court after two weeks with a black eye, charged with corruption and sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. Then he was also convicted for sodomy and sentenced to a further nine years. This change in the relationship between the two men, both held in high esteem, was too sudden. The unsavoury disclosures that followed alienated many Malays, especially the young. Anwar’s wife was able to contest and win election to Anwar’s seat in Parliament.

When naming his new cabinet, Mahathir said this would be his last term. He has the time to put in place a successor capable of realising his vision of Malaysia in the year 2020 as a modern, high-tech nation.



Three decades after separation, the close ties of families and friends still bind the two peoples. At the end of the day, however deep-seated the differences between the two, both sides know that if they lash out at each other without restraint, there is a risk of unscrambling the interracial harmony that holds each country’s multiracial society together. Malaysia needs multiracial tolerance as much as Singapore does. A younger generation of leaders will soon be in charge in both countries. Free from the personal traumas of the past, they can make a fresh start at a practical, working relationship.




