+++
title = "17 Indonesia: From Foe to Friend"

+++



When Indonesia faced separatist rebellions in 1957, Western arms dealers arrived in Singapore to sell weapons to rebels in Sumatra and Sulawesi. The Indonesian consul-general, Lieutenant-General Jatikusomo, met me in 1958 when I was an opposition leader. I assured him that if we became the government, these arms dealers would be expelled. When the PAP won the 1959 general election I kept this promise, and Jatikusomo – a dapper, intelligent, courteous and active Javanese aristocrat – proposed that I consolidate our relationship with Jakarta with an official visit. I agreed.

In August 1960 my delegation and I were taken to the Merdeka Palace, once the residence of the Dutch governor-general, to meet President Sukarno. He wore a smart beige beribboned uniform and carried a field marshal’s baton or swagger stick. It was a stifling, warm and humid Jakarta morning, but neither fans nor air-conditioning were allowed in the palace; he disliked them. I could see sweat coming through his shirt onto the jacket of his uniform. I was in a lounge suit like the rest of my party, and was also sweating copiously.

He was an outstanding orator and mobiliser of people, a charismatic leader. Once, in February 1959, when I was driving from Singapore to Fraser’s Hill, a seven-hour drive, I had listened to a broadcast as he addressed several hundred thousand Indonesians in central Java. I had tuned in at 8:30 am, then lost him for long periods because radio reception in a moving car was erratic. But three hours later, when I was in Malacca, he was still in full flow – a beautiful voice, so expressive that he had the crowds roaring and shouting with him. I had therefore looked forward to meeting the great man in person.

Sukarno did most of the talking for some 20 minutes. He spoke in Bahasa Indonesia, which is similar to Malay. He asked, “How big is your population?” “One and a half million,” I replied. He had 100 million. “How many cars do you have?” “About 10,000,” I said. Jakarta had 50,000. I was puzzled but readily conceded that he occupied first place in Southeast Asia in terms of size. Then he expounded his political system of “guided democracy”. The Indonesian people wanted to revolutionise everything, including their economy and culture: Western democracy was “not very suitable” for them. He had said this in so many speeches before; I was disappointed by the insubstantial conversation.

The Dutch had not left many trained Indonesian administrators and professionals; there were few institutions that could carry the country forward, and three and half years of Japanese occupation had wrecked whatever administration there was. Then the fighting between the Indonesian nationalists and the Dutch, which recurred intermittently between 1945 and 1949, when the Dutch finally conceded independence, had further damaged the economy and weakened the infrastructure. Nationalisation of foreign enterprises and a nationalistic economic policy under Sukarno discouraged foreign trade and investments and impoverished this vast, sprawling republic.

We stayed at the Hotel des Indes in Jakarta, the equivalent of Raffles Hotel in Singapore. Alas, when it rained the roof leaked and as a matter of routine the staff immediately produced basins and pails to catch the dripping water. When I unthinkingly pulled the door of my bedroom to close it, not realising that it had been latched to the wall, the plaster came away with the catch for the latch. When I came back that afternoon, the damage had been repaired – with a piece of paper that had been pasted over it and whitewashed.

When I asked Lee Khoon Choy, then parliamentary secretary at the ministry of culture, to buy me a few Indonesian-English and English-Indonesian dictionaries, they cost less than two dollars each. Many shops were nearly stripped of dictionaries by members of my Singapore party who bought them for friends learning Malay. The Indonesian rupiah was in a parlous state as a result of inflation.

From Jakarta we drove in a motorcade with motorcycle escorts to Bogor, formerly the summer resort of the Dutch governor-general, and then on to Bandung. From there we flew to Jogjakarta, an ancient capital in central Java, in the president’s personal twin-propeller aircraft, a gift from the government of the Soviet Union, bigger than the commercial DC-3 I had flown in. The clock above the aisle had stopped, shaking my confidence in Russian technology and Indonesian maintenance. If that could happen to a clock on the presidential plane, what about moving engine parts?

Before my departure I issued a joint statement with Prime Minister Djuanda on trade and cultural matters. We had had several talks since he received me at Jakarta airport. He was an excellent man – able, highly educated, realistic and resigned to the difficulties of his country. We had spoken for hours, sometimes in Bahasa Indonesia. During one exchange over dinner I remarked that Indonesia was blessed with very fertile soil, a favourable climate and abundant resources. He looked at me sadly and said, “God is for us, but we are against ourselves.” I felt I could do business with a man of such honesty and sincerity. I left feeling that we had become friends. I could speak Malay and was to him more like an Indonesian *peranakan* \(a local-born Chinese\), not a *totok*, a Chinese-speaking Chinese recent immigrant who was less assimilated.

But as economic conditions deteriorated, Sukarno embarked on more foreign adventures. To support his diplomacy with the Afro-Asian world he had a sharp if opportunistic foreign minister in Dr Subandrio. During 1963 Subandrio often saw me in Singapore, whenever he was in transit. As the formation of Malaysia became imminent, he began talking in arrogant terms. Sitting beside me on a settee in my office at City Hall one morning, he tapped my knee and waved his hand at the window to say, “Look at all the tall buildings in Singapore. They are all built with Indonesian money, stolen from Indonesians through smuggling. But never mind, one day Indonesia will come here and look after this country and put this right.” By “smuggling”, Subandrio was referring to exports through Singapore by their own merchants who evaded Indonesian taxes and foreign exchange requirements. I understood his feelings, having seen for myself the deplorable conditions of life in Jakarta, where people washed themselves, their clothes and their rice, and performed their natural functions in its *kali* or canals, in public; I did not dismiss his aspirations to take over Singapore as idle talk.



When we became independent in 1965, Indonesia was in “Confrontation” against Singapore and Malaysia. President Sukarno and Dr Subandrio tried to exploit Singapore-Malaysia difficulties by offering Singapore the bait of immediate recognition on conditions that would have affronted and angered Malaysia. A turning point came several weeks later, on 30 September, with Gestapu, the Indonesian acronym for *Gerakan September Tiga Puluh* \(movement of September 30\), when General Suharto, leading the special forces, put down an attempted coup by their communists. With the support of troops under loyal commanders in the army, navy, air force and police, Suharto warned the rebel military forces at the palace and at a radio and communication centre to surrender peacefully. Daunted by the show of force, the rebel forces fled. It was the end of the coup.

At the time we did not realise how momentous this failed coup was, because we were too preoccupied with the gruesome murder of several senior Indonesian generals and the killing that followed of thousands \(estimated at half a million\), some of them ethnic Chinese, the alleged supporters of the communists. Suharto played it out slowly and subtly, like an Indonesian *wayang kulit*, a performance with puppets shown in silhouette as shadows on the screen. So carefully was this shadow play choreographed, so gradual the moves to strip Sukarno of authority, for some time we did not see that power had already shifted away from Sukarno to Suharto. For more than six months, Suharto did not oust the president, but acted in his name to keep up appearances as he quietly gathered the levers of power in his hands, removing Sukarno’s supporters and weakening his position. Adam Malik, the new foreign minister, did not show any switch in policy. In March 1966 Sukarno signed a presidential decree that gave General Suharto power to take all necessary steps to guarantee security and preserve stability. I was still not sure that Sukarno was out, such was his charismatic hold on his people. It was only a year later, in February 1967, that Suharto was formally elected acting president by the national assembly.

By June 1966 Suharto was sufficiently entrenched to end Confrontation simultaneously with Singapore and Malaysia. Bilateral relations took some time to normalise. The Indonesians sent economic fact-finding missions to Singapore immediately in June and July 1966, more for public relations than for substance. In August we reciprocated with a trade mission. There was some psychological movement forward in a so-called “$150 million handshake” when Singapore undertook to provide this initial sum in private commercial credit to Indonesian traders and allowed Bank Negara Indonesia, a state-owned bank, to reopen in Singapore. We agreed to resume two-way trade on a non-discriminatory basis. They reopened all Indonesian ports to our ships. They promised that after they had made amendments to their laws, they would let our banks open Indonesian branches, but none were allowed to open until the 1990s. \(Those that did open were unlucky. Within six years, by 1997, they were mired in Indonesia’s financial crisis and the loans they had extended were at risk.\)

There were underlying obstacles to the restoration of relations: misconceptions on politics, security and economics, disagreements over maritime boundaries, sea passage and the policing of bilateral trade. What they called “smuggling” was perfectly legal in Singapore because we were a free port. We could not act as their customs officers. We did not fully understand them and took a long time to learn to navigate our way through the labyrinths of their administration.

For some years there was no warmth in our relations and progress was slow. They had a tendency to adopt a big brother attitude. In March 1968 Adam Malik, speaking to the Indonesian community in Singapore, disclosed that he had assured me Indonesia was ready to protect Singapore against the communists after the British withdrew in 1971: “We shall protect them \(200 million people of Asean\) even if the threat comes from Genghis Khan.” \(Asean, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations had been formed in August 1967 in Bangkok with Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand as members.\) The language of the joint communique issued at the end of his visit was more diplomatic: “to strengthen existing ties on the basis of equality and mutual respect and non-interference in the domestic affairs of each other”.

A few months later, in mid-October 1968, relations plunged disastrously when we hanged two Indonesian marine commandos sentenced to death for killing three persons when they exploded a bomb in 1964 at the Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank branch in Orchard Road. The Indonesian reaction was more violent than we had anticipated. A group of 400 uniformed students sacked our embassy in Jakarta and the ambassador’s residence. Indonesian troops guarding the embassy were conveniently absent. Foreign Minister Adam Malik appealed for calm, saying he had no wish to retaliate against Singapore\!

There were popular calls for a total shipping and trade boycott and a review of bilateral relations. For five minutes, telecommunication services to Singapore were suspended. Student mobs also sacked the two remaining Singapore diplomatic residences. The passions aroused spilled over into anti-Chinese riots against their own citizens of Chinese origin, in Surabaya in central Java and Djambi in Sumatra.

By the end of October, however, matters seemed to cool down when Adam Malik warned that cutting off trade with Singapore would only harm Indonesia. He referred to the poor condition of their own port facilities and said, “We should think of our minimal ability.” He expressed the hope that quarrels would not harm intra-Asean harmony, and said that the international image of Indonesia would suffer. There was a partial lifting of the shipping ban, and by early November all curbs had been lifted. At the end of November a three-man Indonesian parliamentary delegation visited Singapore with a mandate to bury the hatchet.

The chill in relations thawed only very gradually. In July 1970 we sent Lee Khoon Choy as ambassador to Jakarta. K.C., as his friends called him, was a good linguist, fluent in Bahasa Indonesia and interested in Indonesian arts and culture. He worked hard and successfully, befriending the top Indonesian generals who were Suharto’s closest aides. They wanted to understand us and found him a friendly and well-connected interpreter. Gradually he established personal understanding and gained their confidence.

That September, at the Non-Aligned Summit in Lusaka, I met Suharto for the first time as we assembled for the meeting. Then I called on him at his villa to spend half an hour on pleasantries and to discuss the approach to be taken on Cambodia and Vietnam. He asked for my views on US involvement in Vietnam and was a good listener. An American withdrawal, I said, would have grave implications for stability in the region. A communist victory in Vietnam and Cambodia was likely to lead to changes in Thailand which had a traditional policy of adjustment to and accommodation of new forces. He agreed with me. We found we shared some common views about developments and dangers in the region. It was a fair start for half an hour.

A major step forward was made when Major-General Sudjono Hoemardani visited me in April 1971. He believed in the supernatural and was one of Suharto’s confidants on spiritual and mystical matters. When faced with big decisions, K.C. reported, Suharto would go to a special cave with Hoemardani to meditate before making up his mind. We discussed nothing significant for one hour in Bahasa Indonesia, but his note-taker told K.C. that he was extremely satisfied with the meeting. Hoemardani had expected me to be “tough, snobbish and arrogant” but instead found me “friendly, outspoken and kind”.

A year later, in March 1972, K.C. arranged for Lieutenant-General Soemitro, chief of the national security command, to drop in quietly without his ambassador’s knowledge. He did not want his foreign affairs ministry to know of his secret mission for the president. Soemitro, who spoke English, went straight to the point. Suharto wanted to clear doubts about Singapore’s stand on certain problems and to hear from me personally.

He stated the Indonesian view on the Straits of Malacca, that the littoral states should have control over it. I said it had been international waters for centuries and that was the basis for Singapore’s survival. We would go along with Indonesia and Malaysia on measures recommended by international bodies for its safety and security. But we would not want to be involved in any action to take control of the Straits or levy toll that could lead to conflict with the Russians, Japanese and other big maritime nations. Soemitro replied that Indonesia would take measures to exert its sovereignty over the Straits, that if the Russians tried to get tough, Indonesia would not hesitate to have a confrontation. I must have looked unconvinced for he added in a serious tone that the Russians could try to occupy Indonesia and they would not succeed.

A month later Suharto sent General Panggabean, his most senior minister and general in charge of defence and security affairs, to see me. He was a bluff, direct-speaking Sumatran Batak, his manner different from Suharto’s quiet central Javanese ways.

He said Indonesia had wasted precious time that should have been put into economic development. Now the armed forces had to be subservient to the overall economic development of the country. He wanted Singapore, as the economically more advanced country, to complement their needs. I assured him we had a vested interest in seeing Indonesia develop.

They invited Keng Swee to Indonesia in October 1972, knowing he was my closest colleague. He found them less suspicious after my meetings with their three top generals. Further, regular intelligence contacts between S.R. Nathan, our head of intelligence, and his Indonesian counterpart, Lieutenant-General Sutupo Juwono, had convinced them that we shared their views on the big issues.



The stage was now set for my visit, scheduled for May 1973. It had been carefully prepared. K.C., quoting the Indonesian generals, reported “a serious emotional obstacle to sincere friendship”. If there was to be genuine friendship with President Suharto, the episode over the hanging of the two marines had to be closed with a diplomatic gesture that addressed “Javanese beliefs in souls and clear conscience”. They proposed that during the official wreath-laying at the Kalibata Heroes Cemetery, after paying my respects to the slain generals of the 1965 coup, I go to the graves of the two marines and scatter flowers on them. K.C. thought this the key to an improvement in relations because the Indonesian generals placed great store by this gesture. I agreed.

When I arrived on the morning of 25 May, I was greeted by a full-scale guard of honour of the army, navy, air force and police, who were lined up for inspection, and a 19-gun salute. It signalled that a new page was to be turned. An editorial in one of their newspapers commented, “A long time seems to have been needed to take the one-hour flight from Singapore to Jakarta, after various visits to the UK, US, Europe, Japan and Taiwan. Only after having roamed the world does Lee Kuan Yew come to Indonesia for an official visit.” The editor was right. I had first to demonstrate that Singapore could survive without living off the economies of Indonesia and Malaysia. We were not parasites dependent only on our neighbours. We were linking ourselves to the industrial countries, making ourselves useful to them, manufacturing their products with their technology, exporting them worldwide. We had changed the survival equation.

The decisive meeting was with Suharto, one-on-one, what he called *empat mata* \(four eyes\). Just the two of us, without interpreters or note-takers, we could speak frankly. My Malay was adequate for the purpose. Although I did not speak elegant Bahasa Indonesia, I understood him and could make myself understood. We talked for more than one hour.

Suharto made clear his determination to get Indonesia moving after 20 years of neglect. He said he appreciated that Singapore could assist in this Herculean task of rebuilding Indonesia and recognised the quality of the Singapore leadership. He gave me the impression that he was likely to treat us correctly, even cordially, based on a realistic assessment of the relative strengths and weaknesses of our two countries.

On my part, politely and tactfully, I made it clear that we expected to be part of Southeast Asia as of right, not on sufferance. We could not yield on fundamental interests like free passage through the Straits of Malacca. Economic cooperation must be on the basis of a fair quid pro quo, not the kind of relationship Indonesian leaders had with their Chinese *cukong*. \(These “compradores” had to pander to the needs of their patrons in return for franchises or licences on which they would become wealthy.\) I said that at the heart of the relationship, the question was whether we trusted each other’s long-term intentions.

He made clear that Indonesia had no claims to Singapore or Malaysia and claimed only those territories that had belonged to the Dutch East Indies. He was determined to concentrate on the development of Indonesia, not on foreign adventures. Most important of all, he distrusted the communists, especially Chinese communists, who had been the cause of much trouble in Indonesia. I said the Chinese communists were out to destroy us through their proxy, the Malayan Communist Party. I was determined that they should not succeed. I did not want China’s influence to extend to Southeast Asia. That was the bull point with him. He accepted my good faith on this.

I saw in him a careful, thoughtful man, the exact opposite of Sukarno. He was no extrovert. He did not set out to impress people with his oratory or his medals, although he had many. He maintained a humble, friendly appearance, but was clearly a tough-minded man who would brook no opposition to what he set out to do. I liked him and felt that I could get on with him.

A year later, in August 1974, Suharto returned my visit. At the airport I reciprocated the welcome he had given me in Jakarta with a 21-gun salute and a 400-man guard of honour from the army, navy, air force and police. The highlight of his visit was an exchange of documents of ratification relating to Singapore-Indonesia territorial sea boundaries. Once again the key meeting was *empat mata* with Suharto. He made his points in Bahasa Indonesia, without notes. He was so intent on expressing what was on his mind that two interruptions for tea and cakes irritated him. First was the “archipelago concept”. Indonesia, like several other island nations, claimed territorial jurisdiction over all waters between its islands. Asean members must show solidarity and unity in support. Then he gave an assessment of Indonesia’s economic prospects and difficulties.

I replied that Singapore’s predominant interest in the archipelago concept was freedom of passage. We were a part of Southeast Asia. We had been expelled from Malaysia. We had to create a new basis for our livelihood, and this required maritime lifelines to America, Japan and Western Europe. Any impediment to free navigation would destroy us. Therefore we could support the archipelago concept provided there was a public declaration by Indonesia on the traditional freedom of navigation. We made no claims to oil or other mineral resources on the sea-bed.

He asked for my views on the war in Vietnam. I said the outlook had turned pessimistic since we met a year ago. Nixon had resigned and whatever President Ford might want, the US Congress was determined to slash aid to Vietnam and Cambodia by half. I doubted that these two regimes would last. He appeared sad at my bleak assessment.

I feared that instability in Thailand, after Vietnam and Cambodia became communist, would cause deep problems for Malaysia and Singapore. Singapore might be more than 75 per cent Chinese but we were a part of Southeast Asia. I would not allow China or Russia to make use of us. He was clearly reassured by this.

The next day, addressing over 1,000 Indonesian nationals at his embassy, he said in the presence of the press that because of Indonesia’s limited expertise his government was seeking technical help and investment capital from everywhere, including Singapore. By publicly accepting Singapore as an equal, independent state, one with a contribution to make to Indonesia’s development, he had signalled a major change in attitude towards Singapore.

After the fall of Phnom Penh and Saigon, I met Suharto in September 1975 in Bali. The communists were on the ascendant and the tide looked like flowing over the rest of Southeast Asia. Razak had visited Beijing in May 1974 and established diplomatic relations. Malaysia had recognised the Khmer Rouge government in Phnom Penh immediately after they captured it. With disappointment in his voice, Suharto said he had told Razak of Indonesia’s bad experiences with Beijing, referring to China’s support for the Indonesian Communist Party’s attempted coup in September 1965. He had said the same to Thai Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj in Jakarta. Then Kukrit visited Beijing in June 1975, two months after the fall of Saigon, and established diplomatic relations. Suharto saw things getting worse in Malaysia and in Thailand. If Asean continued such disparate policies, each rushing on its own to give recognition to the new communist government in Vietnam and to the Khmer Rouge, he believed the will to stand up to the communists would be lost. He noted that Singapore and Indonesia held similar views and found themselves akin temperamentally. We were not overreacting by courting Indochina, or making flamboyant speeches as President Marcos had done recently in Beijing, praising that communist regime.

Although the security of Asean was uppermost in our minds, we agreed that Asean should emphasise cooperation in the economic and political field, and play down security. We would quietly cooperate, especially on intelligence. Indonesia and Singapore should consolidate their respective capabilities and wait for a more propitious time for Asean economic cooperation. He did not mention East Timor, which Indonesia was to occupy two weeks later. It was a good meeting. When faced with sudden reverses in the region, our reactions were similar.

But three months later, because Singapore abstained in a vote at the United Nations on Indonesia’s occupation of East Timor, a second chill descended on our relations. Other Asean members had voted with Indonesia. Indonesia’s army leaders boycotted our receptions in Jakarta for Singapore Armed Forces Day and National Day. Our counsellor in Jakarta reported that several generals said Suharto had been more angered than over the hanging of the two marines.

A year passed before personal rapport was reestablished when Suharto visited Singapore, unofficially, on 29 November 1976. I said Singapore would not put obstacles in the way of Indonesia’s day-to-day relations with Timor; we accepted Timor as a part of Indonesia, but we could not publicly endorse its invasion and occupation. He accepted my position that if we had voted with Indonesia we would have sent the world a wrong signal about our own security.

What pleased him was an unrelated matter; I agreed to provide him, unofficially, with our trade statistics to help them curtail “smuggling”, but asked that they should not be made public. He wanted these trade figures to be published. I explained that as our statistical classifications were different from theirs, publication would cause more misunderstanding. Suharto was confident he could manage the Indonesian press.

Finally he agreed to examine the long-term implications of publication before taking this step. Next we agreed on a submarine telecommunication link between Singapore and Jakarta, with the technical details to be worked out by officials.

Although our meeting went well, our ambassador in Jakarta, Rahim Ishak, warned that Indonesians, both the leaders and the people, viewed Singapore as Chinese. He said Indonesian attitudes to Singapore were inextricably tied up with their feelings towards their Indonesian ethnic Chinese. Singapore, he warned, would be a convenient whipping boy whenever there was discontent in Indonesia. This proved to be prophetic when Indonesia went into crisis in 1998–99.



It was our good fortune that the character, temperament and objectives of President Suharto allowed me to develop good personal relations with him. He is a quiet man, courteous and punctilious on form and protocol. His character is in keeping with the way he carefully probed and assessed my position before my visit to Jakarta. After our second meeting, we had confidence in each other. As we met over the years, I found him to be a man of his word. He made few promises, but delivered whatever he had promised. His forte was his consistency. He is three years older than me, broad-faced, broad-nosed, with a somewhat taciturn expression until he got to know one, when he would smile frequently and easily. He enjoys his food, especially desserts, but made an effort to control his weight through walking and golf. Although he speaks calmly and softly, he becomes quite animated once he gets going on an important subject. He is not an intellectual, but he had the ability to select able economists and administrators to be his ministers. He chose Berkeley-educated economists like Professor Dr Widjojo Nitisastro and Ali Wardhana, who opened up Indonesia to foreign trade and investments and gradually made it one of the successful emerging economies.

Our friendship overcame the many prejudices between Singaporeans of Chinese descent and Indonesians. Throughout the 1970s and ’80s we met almost every year to keep in touch, exchange views and discuss matters that cropped up. I would explain that language and culture were difficult emotional issues I had to handle sensitively. English was our common language, but the “Speak Mandarin” campaign was necessary because Chinese in Singapore spoke more than seven different dialects. Similarly, Singaporeans of Malayan and Indonesian origin had given up Javanese, Boyanese and Sundanese and were using only Malay. As for cheering for the Chinese badminton team against Indonesia, it was the stupidity of vociferous pro-China groups who had even booed their own Singapore ping-pong players when they played against players from China, the world champions. He accepted my view that over the long term the Chinese in Singapore would become Singaporean in outlook.



Suharto wanted to develop Batam, an island 20 kilometres south of Singapore and two-thirds its size, into a second Singapore. He proposed in 1976 that I help Indonesia to develop Batam. The infrastructure was inadequate and it had only a small population of fishermen. He sent his newly appointed adviser on technology, Dr B.J. Habibie, to see me. Habibie’s mission was to develop Batam. I encouraged him to use Singapore as the dynamo, but explained that Batam needed the infrastructure of roads, water, power and telecommunications, and the removal of administrative bottlenecks. If Habibie could get the Indonesian economic and trade ministers to finance this project, I promised to make the passage of goods and people between Batam and Singapore free of red tape so Batam could plug itself into Singapore’s economic power grid.

It took some years for the Indonesian press to recognise that investments in Batam had to be made by businessmen who would assess for themselves what was feasible and profitable. In Indonesia all major projects were the result of government investments, whether steel mills, petrochemicals or cement plants. I had to explain repeatedly that the Singapore government could facilitate the movement of capital, material and personnel between Singapore and Batam, and could encourage but not direct our entrepreneurs to invest.

I tried to persuade Suharto to allow 100 per cent foreign equity ownership of investments in Batam when their products were entirely for export. When we met in October 1989, Suharto said he would allow firms producing entirely for export to have 100 per cent foreign equity ownership for the initial five years, but after that they would have to divest a part of it to Indonesians. It was not as attractive as what Singapore offered but enough to draw some factories in Singapore that were feeling the pressure of our higher costs to move to Batam. One of our government-linked companies, Singapore Technologies Industrial Corporation, formed a joint venture with an Indonesian group to develop a 500-hectare industrial park in Batam and actively promoted it among MNCs as well as our own industrialists. It turned out a success. By November 1999 the park had generated US$1.5 billion of investments, employing over 74,000 Indonesians. It had continued growing in spite of the financial crisis that struck Indonesia in 1997. This led to cooperation on the neighbouring islands of Bintan and Karimun. Then Suharto proposed we channel our seven million annual tourists into Indonesia. Tourism cooperation spread throughout Indonesia with our airlines getting the right to fly to tourist destinations which we jointly developed.

As with most things, there was a negative side. Many of our Indonesian partners were ethnic Chinese, creating an undercurrent of resentment. We set out to find pribumi \(indigenous\) Indonesian partners. It was difficult because their successful entrepreneurs were ethnic Chinese, but we did manage to have joint ventures with several pribumi.

At all our meetings, Suharto and I would always make time to meet *empat mata*, when we could have uninhibited free-ranging discussions, and I would test out ideas which he could reject without any embarrassment. This made for rapport and confidence. I had assured him that we would not establish diplomatic relations with China until Indonesia had done so. So before Singapore exchanged commercial offices with China, I met him personally to explain that this was an exchange of commercial representation to facilitate trade and did not amount to diplomatic representation. He accepted this.

By the mid-1980s, the Indonesians had swung around to the view that, far from being a supporter of China, we had in fact consistently stood up for our interests as Southeast Asians. Our economic relations had also improved. Indonesia had opened up all its ports to all ships and relaxed its rules for import and export. They no longer harboured suspicions of “smuggling” to Singapore. \(Of course there were new complaints, that Indonesian traders were smuggling, from Singapore into Indonesia, electronic and other consumer durables to avoid paying high import duties. But this was an Indonesian customs problem for which we could not be blamed.\) Also, Singapore’s role as middleman for Indonesia’s trade with China had ceased to be an issue because Indonesia had opened direct trade with China.

Good relations at the top between Suharto and me led Benny Moerdani, the Indonesian minister for defence and security in the 1980s, to propose and implement the development of the joint Siabu Air Weapons Range, near the Sumatran town of Pekan Baru, for use by our two air forces. It was officially opened by the two chiefs of defence forces in 1989, marking a milestone in our defence relations.

When I met Suharto at the funeral of Emperor Hirohito in Tokyo in February 1989, he informed me of a development that would lead Indonesia to restore diplomatic relations with China: China was prepared to state clearly and publicly that it would not interfere in Indonesia’s internal affairs, either at party-to-party or government-to-government level. After Indonesia restored diplomatic ties with China in August 1990, Singapore did likewise when I visited Beijing that October.

A few days before I resigned as prime minister, I met Suharto when in Tokyo for the installation of Emperor Akihito in November 1990. His wife, Ibu Tien, was incredulous that I wanted to stand down when I was fit and healthy and three years younger than her husband. I explained that Singapore had never had a change in prime minister, and that it was better for me to leave at a time of my own choosing, when conditions were most favourable.

Our bilateral relations over the years from 1965 depended first on getting the measure of each other and learning to coexist. There were always problems to overcome, but we could resolve them, or work around them or set them aside, to be resolved later. In retrospect, an Indonesian president with a character and temperament more like Sukarno’s would have been difficult to get close to and work with. Then the history of this period would have been different for Indonesia, and probably for the whole of Southeast Asia.

Suharto’s wife died in April 1996. When my wife and I called on him that November, he looked bereft and forlorn. By June 1997, when we next saw him in Jakarta, he had regained his composure, but there was a significant change. His children had got closer to him. When we met Suharto’s daughters at a royal wedding in Brunei on 18 August 1996, they were loaded with jewellery. Choo remarked to our ambassador’s wife that she had not noticed this before. The ambassador’s wife, who knew them well, having spent years in Jakarta in her husband’s previous posting, said that when their mother was alive she had restrained them, but after her death that restraint had gone, and they were showing off their jewels.



No one expected the Indonesian rupiah crisis. When the Thai central bank stopped defending the Thai baht on 2 July 1997, the contagion spread to all currencies of the region as panic swept fund managers into a sellout of the region’s shares and currencies. Wisely the Indonesian finance minister called upon the International Monetary Fund \(IMF\) for help. Before he settled with the IMF at the end of October 1997, President Suharto, through an emissary, asked Prime Minister Goh for support to improve his bargaining position with the IMF. Goh discussed this with Finance Minister Richard Hu and me before taking it to the cabinet. We were fairly confident that the Indonesian economy was in better health than Thailand’s. They had no big deficits either in their current account or budget, a modest reported foreign debt and low inflation. So we agreed to support them up to US$5 billion, but only after Indonesia had exhausted some US$20 billion of loans from the IMF, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and their own reserves. Singapore also promised to intervene in the foreign exchange market to support the rupiah once Indonesia had reached agreement with the IMF. The IMF package for Indonesia amounted to US$40 billion. Japan also agreed to support Indonesia up to US$5 billion. Immediately after the agreement with the IMF was signed, the central banks of Indonesia, Japan and Singapore, working in consultation, intervened to raise the value of the rupiah from 3,600 to 3,200 to the US dollar. Before the crisis the rupiah had been 2,500 to the US dollar.

This improvement was undermined when President Suharto reinstated some of the 14 major infrastructure projects that had been cancelled as agreed with the IMF. They included a power station in which his eldest daughter, Siti Hardiyanti Rukmana \(Tutut\), had an interest. Also, one of the 16 insolvent banks that had been closed \(it was owned by the president’s son\) was allowed to be revived under a different name. The market reacted by selling off the rupiah. These 16 banks were only a small part of a much larger problem: there were over 200 banks, many of them small, poorly managed and inadequately supervised. Further, contrary to the agreement with the IMF, the monetary policy was eased. To add to the loss of confidence, the president of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce announced that President Suharto had agreed to use the US$5 billion fund from Singapore to make low interest loans available to indigenous companies suffering from the credit squeeze. Worse, Suharto became unwell in December 1997 after the exhaustion of his overseas travels.

Alarmed at the rapid decline of the value of the rupiah, I told our ambassador in Jakarta to ask Tutut if she could meet me in Singapore to convey my views to her father. I had last seen her in June 1997 when I called on her father in Jakarta. Prime Minister Goh and I met her in Singapore at the Istana Villa on Christmas Day, 1997. We explained the grave situation for Indonesia if confidence was not restored, first in her father’s health and next in his willingness to implement the IMF conditions. I strongly urged her and her siblings to understand that international fund managers in Jakarta had focused on the economic privileges the president’s children were enjoying; during this period of crisis, it was best if they withdrew completely from the market and did not engage in any new projects. I asked her point-blank whether she could get this message understood by her siblings. She answered with equal frankness that she could not. To make sure she understood the implications of market analysts’ daily reports, I sent her through our ambassador in Jakarta a copy of the daily collection of important reports. To judge from the actions of the Suharto children, it had no effect on them.

On 6 January 1998 President Suharto delivered the Indonesian budget, which had not been discussed with the IMF and did not meet targets earlier agreed in the IMF package. In the next two days the Indonesian rupiah dropped from 7,500 to 10,000 to the US dollar because both the IMF deputy managing director, Stanley Fischer, and the US deputy secretary for the treasury, Lawrence Summers, had criticised the budget as not being in accordance with the IMF terms. At 9:00 pm on 8 January I heard over the radio that in a frenzy of panic buying, crowds in Jakarta had cleaned out all shops and supermarkets to get rid of their melting rupiah and to stock up. I phoned our ambassador in Jakarta who confirmed the news, adding that a supermarket had been burnt down, and the rupiah was trading in the streets at a low of 11,500 to the US dollar.

I alerted Prime Minister Goh, who immediately sent a message to the US State Department and the IMF, suggesting that they issue statements to restore calm in the markets or risk disorder the following day. A few hours later, at 7:00 am Singapore time, President Clinton phoned Prime Minister Goh to discuss the latest situation and then spoke to President Suharto. Clinton announced that he was sending Summers to help sort out the problems. Meanwhile, Fischer issued a statement that the reaction was excessive. This flurry of activity held out hopes of a possible solution and stopped what would have ended in riots and disorder. On 15 January President Suharto himself signed a second IMF package stipulating more reforms.

On 9 January 1998, a few days before that second agreement, Suharto’s second daughter, Siti Hediati Hariyadi Prabowo \(Titiek\), the wife of Major-General Prabowo Subianto, commander of Kopassus \(their red beret forces for special operations\), saw me in Singapore. She came with her father’s knowledge; she wanted our help to raise US dollar bonds in Singapore. An international banker had said the dollars raised would help stabilise the rupiah. I said that in the present crisis atmosphere, when the market had doubts about the rupiah, the failure of a bond issue would cause a further loss of confidence. Then she complained of rumours from Singapore that had weakened the rupiah, and added that our bankers were encouraging Indonesians to park their money here. Could we stop it? I explained that this would be totally ineffective since Indonesians could get their money out of Indonesia to anywhere in the world by a touch of the computer key. Moreover, rumours could not affect the rupiah if the fundamentals were strong. To restore market confidence, her father had to be seen to implement the IMF reforms. If he felt that some conditions were impractical or too harsh, then he could invite a person like Paul Volcker, the former US Federal Reserve chairman, to be their adviser. The IMF was likely to listen seriously to arguments from Volcker. That message got through – a banker told me later that Volcker did go to Jakarta, but after meeting Suharto left without becoming an adviser.

Suharto’s problems had been compounded by the increasing intrusion of his children into all lucrative contracts and monopolies. The IMF targeted several of them for dismantling, including the clove monopoly and a national car monopoly run by his son Tommy, the power station contract to his daughter Tutut, and banking licences to other sons, to name just a few. Suharto could not understand why the IMF wanted to interfere with his internal affairs. In fact these monopolies and concessions had become major issues with the fund managers. Also, his top technocrats saw Indonesia’s financial crisis as an opportunity to dismantle practices that had weakened the economy and increased dissatisfaction. Most of all, the IMF was aware that the US Congress would not vote for more funds to replenish its coffers if it did not stop these practices.

The crucial factor that affected the outcome was America’s view, which Summers expressed to my prime minister and me on 11 January 1998 in Singapore, on his way to Indonesia. What was needed, he said, was a “discontinuity” in the way Suharto conducted his government. The privileges for his family and friends had to stop. There should be a level playing field. I pointed out that it was best to have continuity for no successor president could be as strong as Suharto to enforce the tough conditions the IMF required. So we should help Suharto implement IMF conditions and work towards the optimum outcome, namely get the president to appoint a vice-president who would restore the confidence of the market in the future of post-Suharto Indonesia. This view was not shared by the Clinton administration. They were adamant on the need for democracy and an end to corruption and human rights violations. The Cold War was over. They saw no reason to “mollycoddle” Suharto \(Clinton’s words in his 1992 campaign\).

Two months later, in March 1998, former US Vice-President Walter Mondale carried a message from Clinton to Suharto. He then met Prime Minister Goh and me in Singapore on his way home. After comparing notes on Suharto’s likely course of action on reforms, Mondale tossed this question at me: “You knew Marcos. Was he a hero or a crook? How does Suharto compare to Marcos? Is Suharto a patriot or a crook?” I felt Mondale was making up his mind on Suharto’s motivations before submitting his recommendations to his president. I answered that Marcos might have started off as a hero but ended up as a crook. Suharto was different. His heroes were not Washington or Jefferson or Madison, but the sultans of Solo in central Java. Suharto’s wife had been a minor princess of that royal family. As the president of Indonesia, he was a mega-sultan of a mega-country. Suharto believed his children were entitled to be as privileged as the princes and princesses of the sultans of Solo. He did not feel any embarrassment at giving them these privileges, because it was his right as a mega-sultan. He saw himself as a patriot. I would not classify Suharto as a crook.

Prime Minister Goh visited Suharto three times, in October 1997 and January and February 1998, to explain that Indonesia’s economy was in serious crisis and he had to take IMF reforms seriously or the market would sell off his currency and stocks and cause a collapse. When he came back from his final meeting in February 1998 he told me that Suharto acted as if he was under siege, believing that the West wanted him out. Goh had expressed concern to Suharto that if economic conditions worsened, there would be food shortages, social unrest and a loss of confidence in Indonesia. The president would then face grave difficulties. Hence it was important to stabilise the economy with IMF support. Suharto’s response was a confident assertion that the army was fully behind him. Goh hinted that there could be circumstances in which the people would be so hungry that the soldiers would not shoot. Suharto dismissed this possibility. He was sadly out of touch. At that time, one Indonesian general had said \(this was reported in March by the US ambassador to ours\), “If the students were a thousand, they will be clobbered. If they were 10,000, ABRI will try to control the crowd. But if they were 100,000, ABRI will join the ranks of the students.”

Several further actions that President Suharto took caused Indonesia’s currency and stocks to slide downwards in spite of his signing a second IMF agreement in January 1998. Later that month, news in the Indonesian press of the president’s criteria for the post of vice-president led people to believe that B.J. Habibie was the favoured candidate. He was known for high-cost, high-tech projects like the building of aeroplanes. Several foreign leaders were worried by this and went to see Suharto, quietly, to advise against such a choice. They included the former Australian prime minister, Paul Keating, whom Suharto considered a good friend, Prime Minister Goh and Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. Daim Zainuddin, economic adviser to the Malaysian government, wrote to me at the end of January 1998 to ask me to see Suharto and persuade him against this appointment of Habibie because the president’s ministers had said that Suharto needed to be advised by his neighbours. I could not go to Jakarta in the middle of a crisis and be seen to interfere. Instead I took a calculated risk and, in a speech on 7 February in Singapore, cautioned, “The market was disturbed by his \(President Suharto’s\) criteria for the vice-president that required a mastery of science and technology, announced shortly after the second IMF agreement. … If the market is uncomfortable with whoever is the eventual vice-president, the rupiah would weaken again.” Although I had not referred to him by name, Habibie’s supporters attacked me for this statement.

When Suharto proceeded with the appointment, fund managers and foreign exchange dealers reacted as expected. They sold the rupiah short, and it skidded to 17,000 rupiah to the US dollar, dragging down the regional currencies and stock markets.



In early February 1998 Bambang, the president’s son, brought Steve Hanke, an American economics professor from Johns Hopkins University, to meet Suharto to advise him that the simple answer to the low exchange value of the rupiah was to install a currency board. While he publicly toyed with the currency board idea, the rupiah seesawed. The market was losing confidence in a president hitherto well regarded for his experience and judgement.

Suharto’s last major military and ministerial appointments in February and March 1998 were the most disastrous misjudgements of his life. He appointed B.J. Habibie as vice-president because, as he said 48 hours before he resigned, nobody would want Habibie as president. Suharto believed that no one in Indonesia and no foreign power would conspire to remove him if they knew Habibie would then be president. His golfing partner, Bob Hasan, a timber baron, was made minister for trade and industry and his daughter Tutut, minister for social welfare. Nearly all the others appointed as ministers were loyalists either to him or his children. The most grievous error of all was his balancing act in appointing General Wiranto as chief of the armed forces while promoting his son-in-law Prabowo Subianto to be lieutenant-general and chief of Kostrad \(the Strategic Forces\). He knew that Prabowo was bright and ambitious, but impetuous and rash.

I had met Prabowo at two lunches in Jakarta, in 1996 and 1997. He was quick but inappropriate in his outspokenness. On 7 February 1998 he saw me and Prime Minister Goh separately in Singapore to deliver a strange message, that the Chinese in Indonesia were at risk because in any trouble – riots – they would be hurt as a minority, and Sofyan Wanandi, a well-known successful Indonesian Chinese businessman active in politics, was in grave danger as a “double minority”, a Chinese and a Catholic. Sofyan had said to him and several other generals that President Suharto had to step down. When I expressed my disbelief, Prabowo insisted Sofyan did say this, and that the Chinese Catholics were a danger to themselves. Both the prime minister and I puzzled over why he should want to tell us this about Sofyan when it was patently unlikely that any Indonesian would tell the president’s son-in-law that the president should be forced to step down. We wondered if he was preparing us for something that would happen soon to Sofyan and other Chinese Indonesian businessmen.

On 9 May 1998 Admiral William Owens, a recently retired vice-chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, saw me in Singapore. He told me of the strange statements Prabowo had made when they met in Jakarta the day before. Over lunch, in the presence of his two young aides, both lieutenant-colonels, one a doctor, Prabowo said in effect that “the old man may not last nine months, maybe he’ll die”. In a happy mood, celebrating his promotion to three stars and head of Kostrad, he joked about talk going around that he himself might attempt a coup. Owens said that although Prabowo had known him for two years, he was nonetheless a foreigner. I said Prabowo had a reckless streak in him.

For several months from January 1998, student protests were confined to their campuses where faculty members and former ministers and generals openly addressed them to add their voices to the demand for reforms. To show he was in complete control, Suharto left ostentatiously in the middle of a crisis, on 9 May 1998, to attend a conference in Cairo. Inevitably the students took their demonstrations to the streets and after several clashes with riot police, on 12 May six students of Trisakti University were shot as they retreated into their campus. The outrage that followed led to a complete collapse of law and order as police and soldiers surrendered the city to mobs that rampaged, looted and burnt ethnic Chinese shops and homes and raped their women. It was general knowledge that the rioting was engineered by Prabowo’s men. He wanted to show up Wiranto as incompetent, so that on Suharto’s return from Cairo, he \(Prabowo\) would be made chief of the armed forces. By the time he returned from Cairo on 15 May, Suharto’s position was lost.

One after another, the closest and most loyal of his aides and ministers deserted him after his most obedient of subordinates, Harmoko, whom he had appointed Speaker of the national assembly, publicly demanded his resignation. The drama ended on 21 May at 9:00 am when Suharto appeared on television to announce his resignation and B.J. Habibie was sworn in as president.

What started as an economic problem needing an IMF rescue had ended in the overthrow of the president. It was an immense personal tragedy for a leader who had turned an impoverished Indonesia of 1965 into an emerging tiger economy, educated his people and built the infrastructure for Indonesia’s continued development. At this crucial moment, the man who had been so good at judging and choosing his aides had chosen the wrong men for key positions. His mistakes proved disastrous for him and his country.

Suharto never contemplated exile. The fortunes he and his family had were invested in Indonesia. The American journalist who had reported in *Forbes* magazine that the Suharto family had US$42 billion of assets, told me in New York in October 1998 that the bulk of it was in Indonesia. After the Indonesian meltdown, he estimated them to be worth a mere US$4 billion. Unlike Marcos of the Philippines, Suharto did not spirit his wealth outside his country in readiness for a quick exit. He remained in Jakarta. After 32 years as the president, he was not about to run away. I did not understand why his children needed to be so rich. But for their excesses he would have had a different place in Indonesia’s history.

General Benny Moerdani, his trusted, loyal and long-serving head of the armed forces intelligence agency and later commander-in-chief of the armed forces, told me in the late 1980s that he had advised Suharto to rein in his children’s endless demands for more business privileges. Had he listened to Moerdani, Suharto would not have had this tragic end. I watched a telecast of his resignation. He deserved a more graceful exit. Suharto had concentrated his energies on stability and the economy. His policies created the conditions for strong economic growth from the 1970s to the 1990s in all Asean countries. They were golden years for Southeast Asia.



Although a president by accident, Habibie believed it was his destiny to rule Indonesia. He is highly intelligent, but mercurial and voluble. In the *Asian Wall Street Journal* \(4 August 1998\) he described his working style as “parallel processing on 10 to 20 issues”, comparing himself to a computer. He also complained that when he took office on 21 May 1998 he received congratulations from many nations by the next day, but Singapore did not send theirs until “almost June, very late. \[Singapore had sent its congratulations on 25 May.\] It’s OK with me, but there are 211 million people \[in Indonesia\]. Look at the map. All the green \[area\] is Indonesia. And that red dot is Singapore. Look at that.” A few days later Prime Minister Goh responded in his National Day Rally speech that Singapore had only the resources of three million people and there were limits to what “a little red dot” like Singapore could do for its neighbours.


We knew Habibie well because he had been in charge of Batam’s cooperation with Singapore. He was against the Chinese Indonesians and by extension against Singapore with its Chinese majority. He wanted to treat us as he did his Chinese Indonesian *cukong*, to be pressured and milked. This would change the basis upon which Suharto and I had cooperated as equal, independent states to an *abang-adik* \(big brother and little brother\) relationship. But privately, Habibie sent repeated messages to the prime minister to visit him in Jakarta and also invited Loong \(the deputy prime minister\) and his wife for dinner. He wanted Singapore’s leaders to be seen to support him, in the belief, we were told, that Chinese Indonesian business leaders would then have confidence in him and invest. We did not see how that would result from such visits.

Two days after his reported outburst, he gave an 80-minute lecture to Teo Chee Hean, our minister for education and second minister for defence. Teo had delivered humanitarian aid to Jakarta, to General Wiranto, the Indonesian armed forces commander. In Teo’s words:

“Habibie was animated, his arms waving about as the expression on his face and the tone of his voice changed rapidly. He could hardly sit still, sounding passionate and looking agitated. Habibie alternated between highlighting his achievements, his special qualities, and making thinly veiled threats against Singapore. He recounted that he had lived for 25 years in Europe, from the age of 18, and had acquired values such as ‘democracy and human rights’.

“Habibie wanted Singapore to know its place and realise its vulnerability. So he proceeded to point out how ‘Singapore lies inside \(Indonesia\)’. Jumping up from his seat to dash over to the map on the wall, he stretched out both arms to emphasise the green expanse of Indonesia surrounding the ‘red dot’ that was Singapore.”

On the night of 27 January 1999, as I was leaving for Davos, I was startled to hear the news on radio that Habibie had decided East Timor would be given the right to choose between full autonomy and independence. It was a sudden reversal of a policy Indonesia had strenuously upheld since 1976, that the incorporation of East Timor into Indonesia was irreversible.

In Davos I met Stanley Roth, the shrewd, constantly travelling and indefatigable US assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. We agreed that Habibie’s offer, once made, had permanently changed the equation, and independence for East Timor could be expected. Roth’s dry comment was that prime ministers should not be so free in writing letters, especially to a president like Habibie. \(Both of us had read reports that Habibie’s decision had been triggered off by a letter from Australian Prime Minister John Howard, proposing a referendum for the East Timorese to decide their future.\)

Shortly after this announcement on East Timor, on 4 February 1999, Mah Bow Tan, our minister for communications, called on Habibie who recounted how the Australian ambassador had informed him of the “New Caledonia” approach: to organise a referendum and be prepared to grant independence after a 15-year period of preparation. Habibie had told the Australian ambassador that Indonesia was not prepared for this approach. It had gained nothing in terms of natural resources, human resources or gold from East Timor, and the Australians did not have the right to insist that Indonesia grant autonomy or the right of self-determination to East Timor.

“The world doesn’t understand and always character-assassinates us,” Habibie said to Mah. He was “fed up and tired” of this and had asked his cabinet to study the possibility of releasing East Timor – give them a choice, autonomy or independence. Should they refuse to accept autonomy but at the same time seek Indonesian help to prepare for independence, then he would have to say “sorry”. He was not prepared to be East Timor’s “rich uncle”. He had asked the ambassador to convey this to Australian Prime Minister John Howard. Hence the letter from Howard to him in January 1999 had contained Habibie’s ideas on East Timor. When he received it, he had immediately scribbled at the sides of the relevant paragraphs commending the idea to his cabinet. Thus was set in motion a chain of events that marked a turning point in the history of Indonesia.

I had confirmation of the manner in which he decided on East Timor when I met Ginandjar Kartasasmita, the able Indonesian coordinating minister for economic affairs, on an aircraft from Singapore to Zurich, the night of the announcement. We were seated across the aisle from each other, both headed for the World Economic Forum in Davos, and got into an hour-long discussion of economic and political developments in Indonesia. But uppermost on his mind was East Timor. He recounted how the decision had been taken after the matter was raised for the first time in cabinet only that afternoon, based on Habibie’s memo. The discussion lasted two hours after which all ministers including General Wiranto, the defence minister, agreed to the president’s proposal. He asked with a trace of anxiety in his voice if it would have other consequences for Indonesia. I replied diplomatically that I could not say for sure but that it was a most significant policy change.

Habibie’s advisers had believed this offer of autonomy or independence to East Timor would win him financial support from the IMF and the World Bank, and acclaim in the United States and the European Union as a democrat and a reformer. This would help his re-election. In fact he had agitated his generals, many of whom had spent years pacifying East Timor. Ginandjar told Prime Minister Goh in Auckland during an APEC \(Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation\) meeting in August that they had made a mistake in February 1999 in arming the militias. The intention had been to “persuade” the East Timorese not to vote for independence. When the East Timorese did so by an overwhelming majority of 80 per cent out of nearly 99 per cent of votes cast, East Timor was torched and devastated, ostensibly by the militias. Habibie’s standing as an Indonesian nationalist was damaged, and the reputation of the Indonesian armed forces and the government suffered.

To help Habibie win re-election, his team of advisers had presented him as a reformer who wanted a break with the past. He released political detainees. He allowed over 50 political parties to be registered instead of the three under Suharto. He also met the press frequently and spoke freely, too freely. His choreographers reined him in and put him on a tight leash, stopping him from ad-libbing. He needed money to get support. Officials expected major changes after the elections. Fearful of being transferred out to jobs with fewer opportunities for bribes, they made the most of this interregnum. There was more corruption at all levels than during the worst of the Suharto years. The opportunities for graft were immense because many banks and large companies were insolvent and depended on government rescue schemes, opening them to pressure. One of these was Bank Bali where some US$70 million had been siphoned off by Habibie’s closest associates. The IMF and the World Bank withheld funds for Indonesia until a thorough audit had been made and the wrongdoers punished. Habibie blocked the publication of the auditor’s report on the grounds that it breached Indonesia’s banking secrecy rules. The Indonesian media reported that the money had been traced to members of his family.


Nevertheless, for his presidential bid he mobilised all the support his Muslim reputation and presidential patronage could muster. He had aides who put a spin on his wobbly performance. He refused to give up in spite of pressure from the media, leaders of opposition political parties and his own Golkar party. He said he was not a coward. He would only withdraw when he was rejected by the MPR \(People’s Consultative Assembly\). He was. In the early hours of 20 October the MPR rejected his accountability speech by 355 votes to 322. Those familiar with wheeling and dealing in Indonesian politics told me that they had never seen so much money pass to so many MPR representatives in so short a time. Habibie gave up the fight.



Habibie’s withdrawal from the contest led to dramatic last-minute changes in alliances that affected the fortunes of the two main contenders for the presidency, Abdurrahman Wahid, or Gus Dur \(elder brother Dur\) as his followers affectionately called him, and Megawati Sukarnoputri. Gus Dur is the leader of the Nahdlatul Ulama, a traditional rural-based Muslim organisation with 30 million members. His PKB \(National Awakening Party\) had won 12.6 per cent of the votes in the June election. Megawati, daughter of President Sukarno, led the PDI-P \(Indonesian Democratic Party-Struggle\) at tumultuous mass rallies to win the largest single block of 34 per cent of the votes, beating Habibie \(Golkar\) by a wide margin. However, in the People’s Consultative Assembly of 695 \(of whom 200 were not elected by the electorate\), at 4:00 pm on 20 October, Gus Dur was declared the president, winning by 373 against Megawati’s 313 votes. Frenetic political manoeuvring began and ended only at 3:00 pm the following day when the assembly started to vote for the vice-president. Three candidates, Akbar Tanjung of Golkar, Wiranto, chief of the Indonesian armed forces, the TNI \(Tentera Nasional Indonesia\), and Hamzah Haz of the Islamic coalition had entered the contest. Megawati was reluctant to stand, fearing another humiliation. Gus Dur spent much time to persuade her and finally assured her of the support of enough parties to win. He needed her as vice-president to establish his legitimacy as president. Meanwhile, violence and arson had broken out in several cities in Java and Bali where she had won nearly all the votes.

Fortuitously Stanley Roth was in Singapore at that time to address a meeting of the World Economic Forum. He met Prime Minister Goh and me at 8:00 pm, hours after Gus Dur had been elected president. We were as convinced as he was that Indonesia could not avoid bloodshed and more turmoil if Megawati was cheated of the vice-presidency by political chicanery in the People’s Consultative Assembly. Both sides resolved to do what we could to let the key Indonesian players know the effect on international investor confidence if this should happen.

On 22 October the *Jakarta Post* reported that the US secretary of state, Madeleine Albright \(then in Africa\), had phoned Gus Dur early the day before to “convey Washington’s view” that Megawati should be elected vice-president. Megawati won convincingly by over 396 votes to 284. That saved Indonesia from a second round of disorder.

The end result was the best in the circumstances. Gus Dur, the new president, had lost his eyesight. He had suffered two strokes in 1998, but was sufficiently alert and nimble on 20 October to move swiftly to maximise his chances. After Habibie’s accountability speech had been rejected by the People’s Consultative Assembly, Gus Dur garnered most of the pro-Muslim votes that would have gone to Habibie. Within a week of his election he quickly appointed a cabinet for national reconciliation in which all major political parties and the armed forces were represented. It may not be the most efficient government because of the wide power sharing, but it may help to heal the wounds self-inflicted in 17 months of bloody clashes: pribumi against Chinese, Muslims against Christians, Dyaks and Malays against Madurese, Acehnese separatists against the Indonesian military. Gus Dur and Megawati have two daunting tasks: to repair the social fabric of Indonesian society and restart the economy.

During the Suharto era, to avoid misunderstanding with the president or his aides, we did not meet Indonesian opposition leaders. Unlike the Americans and West Europeans, we did not cultivate Suharto’s opponents – Megawati Sukarnoputri, Amien Rais or even Gus Dur. Our close ties were with Suharto’s ministers and the TNI. They, especially Ali Alatas, the foreign minister, and General Wiranto, the defence minister and TNI commander, helped to stabilise bilateral relations during Habibie’s presidency. However, between January and April 1999, S.R. Nathan, then director of the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies \(IDSS\), later, from September 1999, our president, invited Indonesian political party leaders to address his institute, with full local and international media coverage. During their visits, Singapore ministers met the speakers at lunches and dinners to understand their position and establish rapport. In this way, we got to know Gus Dur \(later president\), Megawati Sukarnoputri \(later vice-president\), Amien Rais \(later chairman of the People’s Consultative Assembly\) and Marzuki Darusman of Golkar \(later attorney-general in Gus Dur’s cabinet\).

This had angered Habibie and his aides who publicly expressed displeasure at our interfering in their internal affairs. IDSS pointed out that it had invited Golkar representatives to speak; Marzuki Darusman had done so, and IDSS had repeatedly invited Golkar’s chairman, Akbar Tanjung, who had not been able to come. This did not placate Dr Dewi Fortuna Anwar, Habibie’s foreign policy adviser. She accused Singapore of being pro-Megawati.

I had met Gus Dur in Jakarta in 1997 when he addressed a private meeting where he explained the role of Islam in Indonesia and assured investors that it was not of the Middle East variety. He was a good speaker, fluent in English, well-read in Arabic and highly intelligent. It did not occur to me then that he would become president and inherit Suharto’s Indonesia after a Habibie interregnum.

The night he was sworn in as president, both Prime Minister Goh and I sent him our congratulations. We did not want any doubts about our support for their new president.

Soon after his election, he summoned all Asean ambassadors to inform them that he would visit all the Asean states beginning with Singapore. Addressing our ambassador, Edward Lee, he said pointedly, “Indonesia wants good relations with Singapore and hopes Singapore will support its recovery.” He went on to explain his vision of the future: China, India and Indonesia, three of the world’s most populous countries, would come together; Japan and Singapore would provide financial and technological support. Then Asia would be less dependent on the West.

Before he came to Singapore, his foreign minister, Dr Alwi Shihab, an able and practical man who had been a businessman and also a visiting professor of divinity at an American college, called on Edward Lee at the Singapore embassy to demonstrate that Indonesia was not taking a big brother attitude but wanted sincere cooperation. Edward Lee assured him that Singapore would help, but that there were limits to the financial and technological capabilities of three million Singaporeans. Singapore did not have the resources of America or Japan to restart the Indonesian economy. Alwi Shihab told him that we could act as a catalyst to bring back confidence to Indonesia. Hence my first meeting with Gus Dur as president of Indonesia was warm and constructive.

Prime Minister Goh met President Gus Dur at the airport on 6 November 1999, and had good discussions before and during lunch. Then, before a packed audience of 500 businessmen and diplomats, Gus Dur gave an impressive display of his political grasp and the skills expected of the new president of Indonesia in an era of greater openness and accountability. When I called on him, he invited me to be a member of his international advisory council for Indonesia’s economic recovery, an honour I could not refuse. He talked of ethical standards and clean government. I said if he expected his ministers to be honest, they had to be paid so that they could live up to their status without corruption. His coordinating minister for economy, finance and industry, Kwik Kian Gie, who was present, told George Yeo, our minister-in-attendance, that he had just discussed this sensitive issue with his president, sensitive because they could afford this only for top people, not across the board.

We had an *empat mata* meeting for an unrestrained discussion. His vitality in spite of his age, two strokes and a hectic morning was reassuring. His sense of humour was never absent. His demeanour was that of a president in complete command of the situation. The Muslim parties that had elected him would become more realistic by having to deal with the problems and through interaction with him. They would not be the same after five years. He wanted the prime minister and me to receive his vice-president, Megawati, and help her gain as much experience as possible. He said he had a good relationship with General Wiranto, and a clear view of how the military’s role should gradually evolve. He knew that there were many incompatibles in the cabinet, especially in the finance and economics sectors. These problems would be sorted out. He was determined to make the government coherent and consistent.

His sense of humour was matched by a realistic appreciation of self. He joked, “The first president of Indonesia \[Sukarno\] was crazy about women; the second president \[Suharto\] was crazy about money; the third president \[Habibie\] was just crazy.” His daughter who accompanied him asked, “What about the fourth president?” Without missing a beat, he said, “*Wayang*” \(a performance, theatre\). In one word, he summed up his role in Indonesia. He was confident he could play the part of president of Indonesia in the new era of openness to the media and the NGOs \(non-government organisations\) that wanted *reformasi* and *democrasi*.

However, Indonesia has undergone a sea change. Power is no longer centralised in the hands of a president backed by an all-powerful ABRI. The election had thrown up a large number of small Islamic parties but together they did not form the majority. Megawati’s party won 34 per cent of the votes, the largest single bloc. Amien Rais, leader of a Muslim party with 7 per cent of the votes, skilfully cobbled together a coalition of Muslim parties into a “Middle Axis” that made deals with other groups and won him the speakership of the People’s Consultative Assembly against Megawati’s candidate. The Middle Axis also blocked Megawati from the presidency by voting for Gus Dur, a traditional Muslim leader of central and east Java. Although a Muslim cleric, Gus Dur is acceptable to the nationalists because he has always stood for the separation of religion \(including Islam\) from the state. However, he was elected president only because of the votes of Muslims in the Middle Axis. Suharto had kept Islam in check until the late 1980s when he started to cultivate the Muslims to counter ABRI’s influence. Habibie, as president, actively nurtured and helped them mobilise support for his re-election. Having entered the corridors of power, political Islam is now a major force in Indonesia and will remain so. The challenge for Indonesia is how to maintain a balance that will enable its people of diverse races and religions to unite as one nation based on the credo of their founding father, President Sukarno, *Bhinneka Tunggal Ika* \(unity in diversity\), enshrined in their national crest.




