+++
title = "19 Vietnam, Myanmar and Cambodia: Coming to Terms with the Modern World"

+++



On 29 October 1977 a Vietnamese DC3, an old Dakota, was hijacked while on an internal flight and made to fly to Singapore. We could not stop it from landing at Seletar Air Base. We allowed the Vietnamese to send a new crew to fly the plane back with the old crew and the other passengers, after we had refuelled and refurbished it. We prosecuted the hijackers who were convicted and sentenced to 14 years’ jail.

Vietnam never paid for the supplies but instead sent us a stream of warnings to return the hijackers or face the consequences. We had to stand firm and not allow ourselves to be intimidated or there would be no end of problems. Singapore’s relations with Vietnam, which was reunified in 1975, had started with a stand-off.

The Vietnamese cunningly exploited the fears and desires of the countries of Asean that wanted to befriend them. They talked tough over their radio and newspapers. I found their leaders insufferable. They were filled with their own importance, and prided themselves as the Prussians of Southeast Asia. True, they had suffered, taken all the punishment that American technology had inflicted on them, and through sheer endurance plus their skilful propaganda, exploiting the American media, defeated the Americans. They were confident they could beat any other power in the world, even China, if it interfered with Vietnam. For us, the puny states of Southeast Asia, they had nothing but contempt. They declared they would establish diplomatic relations with member states of Asean individually, and refused to deal with Asean as a group. Their newspapers criticised the existence of US military bases in the Philippines and Thailand and spoke of collusive relations between China and Singapore.

By 1976 deepening disagreements with China made them despatch diplomatic missions to Asean. Their deputy foreign minister, Phan Hien, brought a message of peace when he visited the countries of the region. At first he excluded Singapore from his visits, but changed his plans and came in July 1976. He said Vietnam was non-interventionist in other countries’ affairs. He drew a distinction between the people and the government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The people of Vietnam supported the just cause of the peoples of Southeast Asia fighting for independence, meaning the communist insurgency. The government wanted to establish bilateral relations with these countries. I pointed out that this diplomatic sophistry could not erase questions in our minds that this dual track was interference. Referring to Soviet support for Vietnam, I said great powers knew it was dangerous to clash directly with each other so they used third countries to expand their influence. Differences between Asean countries were resolved within Asean so neither the United States nor the Soviet Union could exploit them.

A year later Prime Minister Pham Van Dong also did not at first include Singapore in his proposed visits to the region, probably to make us feel insecure. We were unmoved; they could not as yet do us harm. He came on 16 October 1978. I found him arrogant and objectionable. The Vietnamese were excellent stage managers. Phan Hien had come first to show the sweet smiling face of communist Vietnam. Now Pham Van Dong, an old man of 72, showed that he was tough as nails. In discussions lasting two and a half hours, we dispensed with courtesies and euphemisms. Indeed, our forthright conversation had started in the car journey from the airport.

I began by welcoming Vietnam’s desire to work together with us for peace, stability and prosperity, but listening to Radio Hanoi and reading *Nhan Dan*, their newspaper, gave me reservations. They were unfriendly, even threatening. Dong declared Vietnam was a socialist country and he a communist. His doctrine was Marxism-Leninism. He had come to Singapore to speak as the prime minister of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Vietnam had to contribute to the cause of revolution and peace in Southeast Asia and the world. This should not be of concern to Singapore. Vietnam was a country of 50 million people, a brave nation, intelligent and rich in natural resources. Both the United States and Japan had told the Vietnamese that their country would become economically a strong country, and that they, the United States and Japan, would need economic and trade relations with it.

After this confident opening, in answer to my questions he claimed that Beijing had instigated 140,000 to 150,000 ethnic Chinese in the north to leave Vietnam and return to China across the border. They could not understand why. The root cause was China’s policy towards Vietnam after Vietnam’s victory over the Americans. China had continued its expansionist policy against Vietnam. Beijing had made use of Khmer leaders to launch attacks into Vietnamese territory to commit atrocious crimes. China had caused the Hoa people to leave through a campaign launched by their embassy in Hanoi to train those who returned in order to send them back to Vietnam. The overseas Chinese had always been attached to their fatherland, feelings that were genuine and respectable. Beijing had exploited such sentiments.

I asked whether China would have the same policy in Singapore if it had an embassy here. He did not think it would because it did not want to bring back all the overseas Chinese. It was better to leave them where they were, to use them as instruments. Looking at me pointedly, he said that ethnic Chinese everywhere would support China, just as ethnic Vietnamese abroad would support Vietnam.

Then he turned to economic relations, with the astonishing news that Singapore could contribute to Vietnam’s reconstruction. When I gently remonstrated that we must get some return for our goods and services, he bluntly said Vietnam’s economy was not developed and the possibilities for trade were limited. That night, as I walked with him to dinner, he again said Vietnam could not trade but needed help; Singapore had benefited from the Vietnam War, selling the Americans war material, hence it was our duty to help them. I was dumbfounded by this arrogant and belligerent attitude.

As we drove along the waterfront the next day he saw the many ships at anchor. Once again he charged that we had profited immeasurably from the Vietnam War and developed Singapore at their expense so it was our duty to help them. I was incredulous. I could not understand how we were under an obligation to help them because they had been impoverished by a war we had not caused and in which we had played no part. I said the main war materials we supplied to US forces in Vietnam were POL \(petrol, oil and lubricants\) from American and British oil companies. The profits to Singapore were negligible. He looked sceptical. I said we were prepared to trade but not to give aid. He was not pleased. We parted civil but cold.

Twelve years later, in 1990, in Davos for a World Economic Forum meeting, Vo Van Kiet, the first vice-chairman of the council of ministers of Vietnam, asked to see me. He hoped we would set aside outstanding differences and cooperate. I regretted that so much time had been lost in their occupation of Cambodia since December 1978. Until that conflict was resolved there could be no government-to-government ties. Kiet said there were great opportunities and he had granted over 100 investment licences to foreign companies. I replied that whether there were 100 or 1,000 licences, Vietnam’s economy could not take off until the United States signalled the World Bank to extend soft loans for its rehabilitation and the big US banks decided that Vietnam was an acceptable risk. But once Vietnamese troops were out of Cambodia, we would resume where we had left off in 1978.

In October 1991 Vietnam and all parties signed agreements in Paris for a comprehensive political settlement. A week later, Vo Van Kiet, now the prime minister, visited Singapore. Although I was no longer prime minister, we met when I attended a dinner for him given by my successor, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. As the dinner was breaking up, he rose, walked up to me, held my arms in a semi-communist embrace, and asked whether I would help Vietnam. I asked, how? By becoming their economic adviser. I was speechless. I had been the target of their virulent attacks since their occupation of Cambodia. Recovering from my surprise, I said that my experience had been confined to a city state, that I had no experience of a big country like Vietnam with a population of 60 million people, a country devastated by many years of war and working a communist system that had to be transformed into a market system. He persisted and followed up in two letters.

After an exchange of letters, I agreed to visit them, not as an adviser, but to brainstorm ideas on their change to a free-market economy. It was a totally different relationship when I went to Hanoi in April 1992. In an ornately decorated conference chamber, with Ho Chi Minh’s bust as the centrepiece, I spent a whole day with Vo Van Kiet and his team of ministers and top officials. They had five questions, starting with what commodities Vietnam should focus on in its modernisation, in what markets and with what partners. I replied that the questions themselves disclosed a mindset that came from long years of central planning, because they assumed there would be specific commodities, markets or partners that could bring about a transformation for them. I suggested that they study the process through which Taiwan and South Korea had transformed themselves from agricultural into newly industrialising economies. A good strategy, I said, would be to use South Vietnam, especially Ho Chi Minh City \(formerly Saigon\), as the dynamo to get growth going for the whole country. Communism had prevailed in the north for 40 years, but for only 16 years in the south. People in the south were familiar with a free-market economy and could easily revert to working the old system. The best catalyst would be their émigrés – Vietnamese refugees who had left after 1975 and done well in business in America, Western Europe and Australasia. Invite them to return and kick-start the economy in the south, since they would want to help their families and friends.

Kiet seemed attracted to the suggestion. He himself was from the south, but other, more senior leaders wanted development to be spread equally, north and south. Unstated were their apprehensions that these émigrés would return with subversive ideas or with links to foreign agencies like the CIA. After decades of fighting a hide-and-seek guerrilla war, they were suspicious of everyone.

Kiet flew to Ho Chi Minh City from Hanoi for a final meeting with me. He asked me to return every year, saying I had been a real friend because I had given honest and sincere advice, although sometimes it was painful to hear. I promised to return within two years. In the meantime, I would send a task force to study their infrastructure short-comings and make recommendations on their seaport, airport, roads, bridges, telecoms and power supply.

Our officers believed the Vietnamese wanted me to be associated with them to get closer to Asean and be more secure vis-à-vis China. Singapore had been Vietnam’s most vocal opponent. If they normalised relations with us, foreign investors would have greater confidence. We decided to put the past behind us and help them as best we could to adjust to the market economy and become compatible partners in Asean.

In Hanoi I asked to call on Pham Van Dong. Although he had retired, he received me at their seat of government, a 1920s stone building which had been the office of the French governors. He met me at the main door at the top of a flight of stairs. Obviously infirm, he stood erect with great effort, then walked unsteadily to his chair some distance away. They had switched off the air-conditioning because he could not stand the cold. He was frail but spoke with great firmness and determination. He recalled our meeting in Singapore, and said the past was over; Vietnam was opening a new page. He thanked me for my friendship in coming to help them. He sounded bitter and chastened. I remembered the haughty and arrogant leader who came to Singapore in 1978. Seeing how tough he was in defeat, I was thankful that Deng Xiaoping had punished the Vietnamese. They would have been unbearable as the victorious Prussians of Southeast Asia.

The Vietnamese leaders were an impressive group. Kiet was soft-spoken, but his record as a communist underground fighter belied his gentle ways. They were formidable opponents who had great determination and fighting spirit.

In my note to the cabinet I described Vietnam’s terrible state, although it was six years after their opening up. In 1975 Ho Chi Minh City could vie with Bangkok; now \(in 1992\) it lagged more than 20 years behind. I felt that for the time being the people had lost confidence in their leaders, and the leaders had lost confidence in their system. However, they were an energetic and intelligent people, Confucianist at the grass roots. I believed they would bounce back in 20 to 30 years. Every meeting had started and ended punctually. Their leaders were serious men.

Both Kiet and the ex-general secretary of the Communist Party, Nguyen Van Linh, whom I met in Ho Chi Minh City, separately said they had to re-educate their cadres on the market economy and free themselves from wrong Marxist thoughts. A foreign banker in Ho Chi Minh City told me that because of their grievous brain drain, they suffered from a dearth of trained talent. They regarded all foreigners as potential enemies whose activities their Vietnamese employees had to report. He believed they wanted to prepare for the next war.

They were still very communist in their ways. Kiet was noncommittal after the discussions we held in the morning and afternoon of the first day. Immediately after these two meetings, I was taken to meet the Communist Party general secretary, Do Muoi, who had been briefed on the contents of the two discussions in the 20 minutes that elapsed from my parting with the prime minister. Kiet must have got the nod after my meeting with Do Muoi because that night, in his dinner speech, he picked up a point I had made, on which he had earlier been noncommittal, that Vietnam should not have too many international airports and seaports, but should concentrate on building one big international airport and one big international seaport so that they could be included in the world network of airports and seaports.

We discussed their loss-incurring state-owned enterprises \(SOEs\). They wanted to privatise them or sell them off to the workers and others. I explained that this method would not provide them with what was critical – efficient management. Singapore Airlines was 100 per cent government-owned, but it was efficient and profitable because it had to compete against international airlines. We did not subsidise it; if it was not profitable, it would have to close down. I recommended that they privatise their SOEs by bringing in foreign corporations to get an injection of management expertise and foreign capital for new technology. A change in the management system was essential. They needed to work with foreigners to learn on the job. Privatising within the country by selling to their own people could not bring about this result.

An infrastructure task force we sent in September 1992 submitted a report which was adopted by the Vietnamese government. We set aside a US$10 million Indochina Assistance Fund for technical training of their officials.

Do Muoi visited Singapore in October 1993. He was astonished at the high quality of buildings and infrastructure. When he visited NTUC Fairprice supermarkets he was impressed by the variety and abundance of consumer goods available for our workers, just as Russian Prime Minister Ryzhkov had been in 1990. When I returned his visit a month later, I discovered from his officials that he had instructed their agencies to learn from Singapore and wherever possible to accord preference to projects proposed by Singapore investors. However, in spite of the many agreements signed, our investors found they were not being implemented. Junior officials used them to extract better offers from other businessmen.

Do Muoi was the most important man in Vietnam. Of heavy build, with a big face, broad nose, dark complexion and straight hair parted at the side and combed straight towards the two sides, he looked neat and tidy. He wore the Vietnamese version of a Mao suit, unlike Kiet who dressed in lounge suits. He was not as reform-minded as Kiet, but neither was he as conservative as the president, General Le Duc Anh. He was the balancer and arbiter between the two wings of the party.

He told me he had been given two of my books when he was in Singapore. He had the book of my speeches translated from Chinese into Vietnamese, read them all, underlined the key parts on economics, and sent them to all his important cadres and ministers to read. He slept little, from midnight to 3:00 am, exercised for half an hour, and read until 7:30 am before he started work. Our embassy staff reported that my book of speeches translated into Vietnamese was on sale. They had not heard of copyright.

When he asked how he could increase the flow of investments, I suggested they should abandon the habits they learnt in guerrilla warfare. Development projects for the south which had been approved by the Ho Chi Minh authority had to be approved again in the north by Hanoi officials who knew little about conditions there. It was time-wasting. Next, projects approved by the government in Hanoi were often blocked by local authorities because of the supremacy of the local commander-in-charge, a legacy from their guerrilla days.

He spoke with sorrow about Vietnam’s unhappy past – 1,000 years spent fighting China, another 100 years fighting French colonialism and imperialism, then fighting for independence after World War II. They have had to fight the Japanese, the French, the Americans and later the Pol Pot clique. He did not mention China’s attack in 1979. For 140 years the Vietnamese had successfully waged wars to liberate their country. Their war wounds were deep, their industries weak, their technology backward, their infrastructure deplorable. I sympathised with him, saying that the war was a tragedy for both the United States and Vietnam. He sighed and said Vietnam would have been a developed, modern country like Singapore had it not been for the war.

I reassured him that eventually Vietnam could do better than Singapore. There was no reason why the present peace and stability should not last for a long time, for the lesson East Asia had learnt from the last 40 years was that war did not pay. In two big wars, in Korea and Vietnam, and in the guerrilla war in Cambodia, there had been no victors, only victims. Do Muoi sadly agreed.

In fact, the Vietnamese had made progress. As a result of more contacts with foreigners and greater information on the market economy, ministers and officials had a better understanding of the workings of the free market. Greater street activity, more shops, foreign businessmen, hotels – these were all signs of prosperity in Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.

On another visit, in March 1995, First Deputy Prime Minister Phan Van Khai led the discussions on economic reforms. He was reputed to want to move forward faster. Our investors had run into a thicket of problems. I told Khai that if he wanted to attract investors, he must make the early ones welcome. They should be helped to succeed after they had fixed their assets to Vietnam’s soil. To treat investors with fixed assets in Vietnam as captives was the surest way to drive others away. Their officials dealt with investors as they had dealt with American soldiers, as enemies to be led into ambush and destroyed. Instead investors should be treated as valued friends who needed guidance through the maze of their bureaucracy with its landmines and other traps.

I gave some examples of the difficulties our investors had faced. One Singapore property developer was building a hotel in Hanoi. Some 30 households around the site complained of noise and vibration nuisance. He agreed to pay each household compensation of US$48 per month. Once this was agreed, another 200 householders demanded payment. The developer decided to use a different method to bore in the piles without noise or vibrations. He was not allowed to do this because his licence was for the old equipment.

Next, Singapore Telecom had a joint-venture agreement for a radio-paging service with Ho Chi Minh Post and Telecoms on a one-year trial basis, after which they could apply for a 10-year licence. After Singapore Telecom had spent US$1 million to get the system started, Ho Chi Minh Post and Telecoms proposed to buy it from them. I told Prime Minister Kiet that the sum involved was just a million dollars, but the principle was important. If they reneged on the agreement, they would lose the confidence of the Singapore business community. Kiet must have intervened to get the project through, but not without further changes to the original agreement and several outstanding issues still unresolved.

Feedback from foreign investors showed that my message did get through for Vietnamese officials became more helpful. The CEO of a large German company who visited Singapore after Vietnam told me that they had provided him with a guide. I smiled in satisfaction.

The top leaders continued to be fearful of the social ills that followed the opening up of Vietnam, and also of losing political control, and slowed down liberalisation. Unlike China, where most of the mayors and provincial governors were young, tertiary-educated men, the top men in charge of Vietnam’s cities and provinces were all former guerrilla commanders. They were aghast at what had happened in Moscow and the Soviet Union, and they did not approve of the social evils that had infected China’s coastal cities. This was not what they had fought for.

In 1993 I had suggested to Kiet and his team that they promote these guerrilla veterans to important advisory positions and allow younger men, preferably those with exposure to the West, to take day-to-day charge. They needed to have men who understood the market economy and could relate to foreign investors. But the veterans who had fought and won the war were in charge and wanted to build the country their way. When a younger generation takes over, I believe Vietnam’s economy will advance faster. Important leadership changes in September 1997 saw Vice-Premier Phan Van Khai become prime minister in place of Kiet and Vice-Premier Tran Duc Luong replace General Le Duc Ahn as president. These were steps towards a younger generation, more widely travelled and exposed to the real world, who would know only too well how far behind Vietnam was compared to its neighbours.

In November 1997 I visited Ho Chi Minh City where I met the rising mayor and secretary of the Ho Chi Minh City party committee, Truong Tan Sang. The country was in “holding” mode. Our investors in Ho Chi Minh City and foreign bankers were aghast at the latest prohibition: no remittances out from Vietnamese Dong into foreign currency. How were they to meet their foreign debts, bank overdrafts, interest payments due for loans they had taken out in banks overseas for their investments in Vietnam? How could they carry on business? The ministry of trade and industry had been strongly against this move which they knew must discourage investors, but could do nothing. The Vietnamese central bank and ministry of finance were alarmed by the currency crisis that had hit the region and worried about their low foreign exchange reserves.

In Hanoi I explained to Phan Van Khai why such sudden changes were damaging. Many other things had also gone wrong. Singapore Telecom had settled its paging business only to run into trouble over its mobile phone business. Vietnamese Telecoms did not want to issue the licence although they had promised one. The Vietnamese wanted to run it themselves. I pointed out that Singapore had to follow the trend in the developed world in privatising its telecoms, which had to meet international competition. The only way to meet the fiercest competition was to operate as a private-sector company with foreign partners bringing in the latest technology. He understood, as did Tran Duc Luong, with whom I covered the same ground.

Once again I was taken to see Do Muoi. It was, as on previous occasions, a good discussion. But I fear its impact will again be limited. The Vietnamese will take some time to shake off their communist straitjackets and move freely and flexibly. Once they have done this, I have little doubt they can make the grade. The skill with which they used Soviet weapons and improvised to overcome critical shortages during the war, and the accomplishments of Vietnamese refugees in America and France are reminders of their formidable qualities.



My first visit to Rangoon \(Yangon\) was in April 1962. Prime Minister U Nu of Burma \(as Myanmar was called before 1989\) had asked General Ne Win to take over in 1958 because his elected government could not contain the insurgencies and rebellions of the many minority groups. After 18 months of military rule, a general election was held. When U Nu’s party was returned, Ne Win handed back power. But soon U Nu was in difficulties again, and Ne Win seized power in March 1962, just before my visit.

Unlike Colombo, which I visited in 1956, Rangoon seemed dilapidated and run-down. It had been under Japanese occupation, and although spared the worst when the British fought their way back from Bengal, the damage had been considerable. Ne Win received Choo and me warmly at his house. I was disconcerted to see it ringed with guns and tanks. Obviously he took no chances. My visit was to counter the propaganda of Indonesia’s President Sukarno that Malaysia was a neo-colonialist plot. Over lunch, Ne Win listened to my explanations, but was not attentive. He was preoccupied with maintaining law and order, keeping down insurrections and holding Burma together.

He lived in a medium-sized bungalow in the suburbs. He was friendly, as was his wife, Khin May Than \(Kitty\), a former nurse and a vivacious lady. Both were English-speaking and intelligent. Burma was one of the better-endowed countries of Southeast Asia, a rice and food exporter before the war. However, the democratic system of government did not work. The people were not of one race, speaking one language. The British had brought together into one country a whole host of different races occupying different parts of this mountainous country.

“The Burmese way to socialism” was Ne Win’s motto for the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma. His policy was simple: achieve self-reliance and get rid of the Indians and Chinese who had come into Burma with the British. The Chinese had started to leave even under U Nu, many settling in Thailand and Singapore. The larger number were the Indians, whom the British had recruited into the government service. They were slowly squeezed out.

My next visit to Rangoon was in May 1965, after attending a conference for Asian socialists in Bombay. Ne Win liked that part of my speech where I had said, “If we approach Asian problems of poverty and underdevelopment through the rosy spectacles of the Western European socialists we are sure to fail.” I did not realise at that time how determined he was to be self-sufficient, to have little to do with the outside world and to return to a romantic, idyllic past when Burma was rich and self-sufficient.

My one unforgettable conversation during that visit was with the butler at the Strand Hotel – an Indian in his late 50s, with greying hair and beard. He brought in breakfast looking forlorn and dejected, and said in English, “Sir, this is my last day, I shall not be here tomorrow.” He did not know whether his Burmese assistant would be able to serve me the same breakfast: British-style tea with milk and sugar, toast and scrambled eggs. I asked why he wanted to leave. He replied, “I have to leave. I was born and have lived here all my life, but the government wants all Indians to leave. I cannot take with me more than a small sum of money and my personal belongings.” Where was he going? “India.” Did he have relatives there? “No.” His grandparents had been brought in by the British but the government wanted to send him back. He was right about my breakfast. The next day the tray was not as neat nor the toast as crisp.

That afternoon, Ne Win played golf with me at the former British Rangoon Golf Club. It was an extraordinary game. On both sides of every fairway and surrounding us, the four players, were troops with guns, facing outwards. When not swinging a club Ne Win wore a steel helmet. I hesitated to ask why. His minister, one of the players, murmured something about an assassination threat.

When Ne Win visited Singapore in 1968 and played golf, he was not security-conscious and did not wear a steel helmet. When he next came, in 1974, I suggested we should coordinate our policies to get the United States, China and the Soviet Union to maintain a presence in the region, so as to have some power balance. He was not in the least interested, preferring to leave these matters to the superpowers.

I last visited Rangoon in January 1986. Ne Win’s new wife was a doctor, well-educated and much younger than Kitty, who had died. Ne Win had an excellent recall of events that happened 15–30 years ago. Over dinner, I found that despite Burma’s 20 years of economic stagnation, he was as distrustful of foreign powers as ever. He spoke of being locked in a “battle of wits” against elements outside Burma who wanted to make as much as they could at the expense of his country.

It was sad to see Rangoon worse than it had been since my 1965 visit. There were no new roads or buildings. Everything was in disrepair and there were potholes in the main roads. The few cars were of 1950 or ’60 vintage. There was nothing any of his ministers could do, given his policies. The English newspaper was a single-leaf, four-page tabloid. The Burmese paper was slightly less skimpy. The people in attendance at their famous Shwe Dagon pagoda looked shabby and poor. From my car, the shops looked empty.

When his prime minister, Maung Maung Kha, visited Singapore in September 1986, I tried to interest him in tourism, telling him of an article I had read in the *Singapore American* \(a publication of our American community\), in which two teachers from the American School described their visit to Rangoon, Mandalay and Pagan. They had hitchhiked for part of the journey and found it a fascinating adventure. I suggested that he open up Burma, build hotels and get safe aircraft to fly from Rangoon to Mandalay and Pagan. He would get large numbers of tourists and considerable revenue. He listened quietly but said little. Nothing happened. Ne Win did not want foreigners in Burma.

Only in 1993, when Lieutenant-General Khin Nyunt, one of their key leaders, saw me in Singapore did I find a leader who was responsive, probably because Ne Win had had a change of heart. Ne Win must have told him that I was an old friend because he listened quietly as I explained that Myanmar had to adjust to the post-Cold War world, open up its economy and develop the whole country. I pointed to China and Vietnam, two examples of former closed countries that were developing their tourism and inviting foreign investors to create jobs and wealth.

Khin Nyunt was then in charge of intelligence and the strongman of the junta or SLORC \(State Law and Order Restoration Council\). I asked him to reconsider his policy towards Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of Burma’s hero and first prime minister, Aung San. She had married an Englishman but had returned to Myanmar to lead a movement against the military government. They could not lock her up forever; she would be a continuing embarrassment to their government.

Myanmar had to improve the lives of the people, coopt capable people with experience abroad into the government. A government of military officers could never get the economy going. I suggested he should make it possible for Singapore to engage and help Myanmar economically. Singapore could defend its position internationally, if this engagement was to help Myanmar return to normalcy, not to maintain the present system. My note-taker, a ministry of foreign affairs desk officer for Myanmar, was fearful that he would react strongly and was surprised when, at the end of the discussion, he thanked me for my “valuable opinion”.

When General Than Shwe, the Myanmar prime minister and chairman of SLORC, visited Singapore in June 1995, I suggested that he visit Indonesia to learn how it had changed from a military leadership, with General Suharto in charge, to an elected presidency. The Indonesian constitution gave the army a direct role in government, with representation in the legislature under a system called *dwi-fungsi* \(two functions\). The Indonesian army had a constitutional role in ensuring the security and integrity of the country. Elections for the president and the legislature were held every five years. Myanmar had to go in that direction if it wanted to be like the other countries in Southeast Asia.

I had called on Ne Win when he visited Singapore for medical treatment a year earlier, in 1994. He talked about his peace and serenity of mind through his practice of meditation. For two years after he withdrew from government in 1988, he had been in torment, fretting and worrying about what was going on in the country. Then in 1990 he began to read about meditation. He now spent many hours each day, in the morning, afternoon and evening, in silent meditation. He certainly looked much better than the sickly person I had met in Rangoon in 1986.

He was in Singapore again in 1997 to see his doctors. At the age of 86, he looked even better than on his last visit. This time he spoke only about meditation, giving me advice on how I could improve my meditation. I asked if he did not worry about the sickness of his loved ones, like children and grandchildren. Yes he did, but he could control, reduce and forget these sufferings through meditation. Did he not worry when his old generals asked for his advice? No, he replied; when they did this, he told them never to talk about their work because he had retired from the troubles of this world. However, diplomats told me he commanded respect and authority within the military and could still wield influence.

The West, especially the United States, believed that economic sanctions could force the government to hand power to Aung San Suu Kyi, who had won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. I did not think this was likely. The army has been Myanmar’s only instrument of government since Ne Win took power in 1962. The military leaders can be persuaded to share power and gradually civilianise the government. But unless the United States or the United Nations is prepared to send in armed forces to hold the country together, as it is doing in Bosnia, Myanmar without the army would be ungovernable. The West is impatient with Asean’s constructive engagement and was puzzled when its leaders admitted Myanmar as a member in July 1997. But what better way is there to have the country develop, open up and gradually change? In Cambodia a UN force that supervised elections could not install the winner into government because the *de facto* government under Hun Sen controlled the army, the police and the administration.

The generals will eventually have to adjust and change to a form of government more like their Asean neighbours’. This will come about sooner if their contacts with the international community increase.



I prefer to remember Cambodia as that oasis of peace and prosperity in the war-torn Indochina of the 1960s. Choo and I made our first visit to Phnom Penh, its capital, in 1962. Prince Norodom Sihanouk personally greeted us at the airport and had dancers in traditional costume scatter flower petals on the red carpet as we walked to the car after I had inspected a guard of honour. Phnom Penh was like a French provincial town, quiet and peaceful with wide boulevards reminiscent of the Champs Élysées in Paris lined with trees and flanked by side roads also shaded by trees. There was even a monumental archway, a Khmer version of the Arc de Triomphe, at the centre of a major crossroads, the Place de I’Indépendance. We stayed at the Palais du Gouvernement, formerly the residence of the French governor-general, by the Mekong River. Sihanouk himself lived in the old palace. He entertained us to dinner in grand style, then flew us in his personal Russian aircraft to see Angkor Wat.

Sihanouk was an extraordinary personality, highly intelligent and full of energy and *joie de vivre*. He had the airs and graces of an educated French gentleman, with all the accompanying gestures and mannerisms, and spoke English the French way. Medium in height, a little rotund, he had a broad face with flared nostrils like the stone carvings on the temples around Angkor Wat. He was an excellent host who made each visit a memorable and enjoyable occasion. His banquets of French *haute cuisine*, with the best French wines and beautiful cutlery to match, were a treat. I remember going to his palace in the provincial capital of Batambang, driving up to a raised entrance typical of driveways in French chateaux. As we arrived, short Cambodian guards, looking dwarfed by their thigh-high gleaming black Napoleonic boots with helmets to match, saluted with glinting swords. The reception and banquet halls were luxuriously furnished and air-conditioned. There was a Western and a Cambodian orchestra. Foreign diplomats were in attendance. It was a royal occasion.

The prince was mercurial, hypersensitive to criticism. He would answer every press article that was in any way critical. Politics for him was the press and publicity. When he was overthrown in the 1970 coup he said that he sought refuge in Beijing because he feared for his life. I believe that had he returned to Cambodia then, no soldier would have dared to shoot him on arrival at the airport. He was their god-king. He had kept Cambodia an oasis of peace and plenty in a troubled, war-ravaged Indochina by maintaining a precarious balance between the communists and the West. He sought the friendship and protection of the Chinese while he kept his ties with the West through France. When he stayed in Beijing instead of returning to defy the coup-makers, the old Cambodia was destroyed.

I met him again when he came to Singapore in September 1981 for talks on forming a coalition with the Khmer Rouge. It was a changed Sihanouk. He had gone back to Phnom Penh and been a captive of the Khmer Rouge. He had been through a harrowing time; many of his children and grandchildren had been killed by Pol Pot, and he himself was in fear for his life. The old bouncy Sihanouk had been destroyed. His laughter, the high-pitched shrill voice when he got excited, his gestures – all were more muted. He was a living tragedy, a symbol of what had happened to his country and his people. The Chinese had rescued him just before the Vietnamese captured Phnom Penh at the beginning of 1979. He appeared before the UN Security Council to speak against the Vietnamese invasion, and he became the international symbol of Cambodian resistance. For a long time he was unforgiving and adamant against a coalition government with the Khmer Rouge.

After the Khmer Rouge occupied Phnom Penh, the Cambodians, or Kampucheans as they called themselves during Pol Pot’s regime, were not active in the region. A senior minister, Ieng Sary, visited me in March 1977. He was soft-spoken, round-faced and chubby; he looked the softest, kindest person, one who would look after babies tenderly. He was the brother-in-law and trusted aide of the infamous Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader who had slaughtered from one to two million Cambodians out of a population of seven million, including most of the educated, Cambodia’s brightest and best. He made no reference to this genocide and I decided against questioning him. He was bound to deny, as their Khmer Rouge broadcasts did, that it ever took place. Ieng Sary was realistic. He wanted trade – barter trade. He needed spare parts for factories, pumps for irrigation and outboard motors for their fishing boats. In exchange he offered fish from the Tonle Sap, Cambodia’s famous inland lake which flooded every year and produced excellent fish. The barter trade did not flourish \(they had problems with logistics\), so we had little trade or anything else to do with them.

Relations between Vietnam and Cambodia deteriorated with border clashes. Vietnam attacked Cambodia in 1978 and captured it in January 1979. Thereafter, Cambodia existed in my consciousness only through our activities in and out of the UN to garner votes to block the Vietnamese puppet government from taking over Cambodia’s UN seat, and through our support for Cambodian resistance forces operating from the Thai-Cambodian border.

Sihanouk’s son, Prince Ranariddh, I had met several times between 1981 and 1991. His father had placed him in charge of the royalist forces near the Thai border with Cambodia. Ranariddh resembled his father in voice, mannerisms, facial expression and body language. He was darker-complexioned and smaller, more equable in temperament and less swayed by the mood of the moment, but otherwise much in the same mould. He had his father’s fluency in French and had taught law in Lyon University before he took over the leadership of the royalist forces.

When I inspected their training camp in northeast Thailand in the 1980s I noted that it was not well organised and lacked military spirit. It was the best Ranariddh could do because, like him, his generals and officers spent more time in Bangkok than in the camp. As we were supporting them with weapons and radio equipment, I felt disappointed. After the 1991 settlement, the big aid donors took over. Ranariddh became the first prime minister \(with Hun Sen as second prime minister\) when his party won the 1993 UN-organised election. When we met in Singapore that August, I warned him that the coalition was a precarious arrangement. The military, police and administration belonged to Hun Sen. If he wanted to survive, Ranariddh had to win over a part of Hun Sen’s army and police officers and some of the provincial governors. Being called the first prime minister and having his man appointed defence minister were of little value when the officers and troops were loyal to Hun Sen. He probably did not take my words to heart. He might have believed that his royal blood would assure him the support of the people, that he would be irreplaceable.

I met Hun Sen in Singapore in December that same year. He was a totally different character, a tough survivor of the Khmer Rouge, a prime minister appointed by the Vietnamese in the 1980s but agile enough to distance himself from them and be acceptable to the Americans and West Europeans. He left an impression of strength and ruthlessness. He understood power, that it came from the barrel of the gun, which he was determined to hold. Once the Khmer Rouge were on the decline, and Ranariddh could no longer team up with them to challenge him, Hun Sen ousted him in 1997 and took complete control, while remaining nominally second prime minister. Sihanouk had become king again after the 1993 election, but his poor health and frequent absences from Cambodia for cancer treatment in Beijing had taken him out of the cockpit of power now occupied completely by Hun Sen and his army.

Cambodia is like a porcelain vase that has been smashed into myriads of shards. To put them together will be a slow and laborious task. As with all mended porcelain, it cannot withstand much pressure. Pol Pot had killed 90 per cent of Cambodia’s intelligentsia and trained personnel. The country now lacks a coherent administration. The people have been accustomed to lawless conditions for so long that they are no longer law-abiding. Only the gun is feared.

The people of Cambodia are the losers. The country is crushed, its educated class decimated, its economy devastated. Hun Sen’s coup caused Cambodia’s admission into Asean to be postponed. It was eventually admitted in April 1999 because no country wanted to spend US$2 billion for another UN operation to hold fair elections. Cambodia had had 27 years of war since Lon Nol’s 1970 coup. Its present leaders are the products of bitter, relentless struggles in which opponents were either eliminated or neutralised. They are utterly merciless and ruthless, without humane feelings. History has been cruel to the Cambodians.




