+++
title = "20 Asean-Unpromising Start, Promising Future"

+++



Asean was formed in August 1967 amid great uncertainty in the region. In a low-key ceremony, the foreign ministers of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand met in Bangkok to sign the declaration. The war in Vietnam was spreading into Cambodia and the region was caught up in communist insurgencies. I did not set great store by the lofty aims of the group: to accelerate economic growth, social progress and cultural development; to promote peace and stability; to collaborate in agriculture and industry and expand trade. The unspoken objective was to gain strength through solidarity ahead of the power vacuum that would come with an impending British and later a possible US withdrawal. Indonesia wanted to reassure Malaysia and Singapore that, with the end of the Sukarno era, its intentions were peaceful and it had abandoned Sukarno’s aggressive policies. Thailand wanted to associate itself with its non-communist neighbours who were members of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Philippines wanted a forum to push its claim to North Borneo. Singapore sought the understanding and support of its neighbours in enhancing stability and security in the region.

It took ten years before we developed cohesion and direction in our activities, time for the leaders and officials to get to know and take the measure of each other. We had a common enemy – the communist threat in guerrilla insurgencies, backed by North Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union. We needed stability and growth to counter and deny the communists the social and economic conditions for revolutions. America and the West were prepared to help us.

The role of President Suharto was crucial for the success of Asean. After some false starts by pushy Indonesian officials, Suharto moderated the approach to one diametrically different from India’s vis-à-vis the member countries of SAARC \(South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation\). Under Suharto, Indonesia did not act like a hegemon. It did not insist on its point of view but took into consideration the policies and interests of the other members. This made it possible for the others to accept Indonesia as first among equals.

While Asean’s declared objectives were economic, social and cultural, all knew that progress in economic cooperation would be slow. We were banding together more for political objectives, stability and security. Asean succeeded in creating a sense of stability and security, but as expected, initially there was little tangible progress. When I addressed the fifth ministerial meeting of Asean foreign ministers in Singapore in April 1972, I drew attention to the gap between the large number of projects proposed and the few actually implemented. Each year there were 100 to 200 recommendations but only 10 to 20 were implemented.

The fall of Saigon to the communists in April 1975 increased our sense of the danger from subversion and insurgency. Asean had to undertake economic development more effectively to reduce domestic discontent. At a bilateral meeting with Suharto in Bali in September 1975, I tried to persuade him to agree to set economic targets for Asean at its first summit, which Indonesia would host, and to go for a trade liberalisation policy, starting with a 10 per cent reduction by member countries of tariffs on selected items and leading eventually to a free trade area. I thought he was sympathetic. To make the summit a success, we agreed to concentrate on issues that would show solidarity and put aside those which would divide us.

Ali Moertopo, Suharto’s close aide, later told K.C. Lee, our ambassador, that after the president met me, his technocrats had advised him against free trade. These words conjured fears of a free-for-all competition in which Indonesia would become a dumping ground for the goods of other Asean countries, jeopardising its chances of industrialisation.

Politically, the Asean summit in February 1976 in Bali was a success. Asean had shown solidarity at a time of great uncertainty. For Indonesia, the host, there was a bonus. Held in the wake of the crisis caused by its occupation of East Timor, it improved President Suharto’s international position. However, Suharto was not at ease at these formal summit meetings. He spoke only Bahasa Indonesia and could not engage in a free exchange in English. He preferred bilateral meetings. Then he would speak with animation and vigour in Bahasa Indonesia and, in the late 1980s, use English words and phrases to get his ideas across. The next summit was the following year, 1977, in Kuala Lumpur. Again I could see he was not comfortable, so the next one was not held until 10 years later, in Manila. By the time it was Singapore’s turn to host a summit in 1992, I was no longer prime minister and did not attend.

We did not succeed in lowering tariffs between ourselves, but regular and frequent meetings led to easy personal and working relations between Asean ministers and officials. This helped them to solve bilateral problems informally before they became the subjects of third party notes. Officials and ministers evolved a style of working which made it possible for disputes to be muted if not resolved, and for a more cooperative attitude to take hold. They played golf at their meetings. Between golf swings, they would test out their ideas and proposals, which could be turned down with less contention than at a formal meeting. They would also hold singing sessions after their dinners; it was obligatory for each minister to belt out one of his country’s popular ditties. Singapore ministers were self-conscious and awkward. They did not do this at home. The Filipinos, Thais and Indonesians were naturals, singing being a necessary part of their electioneering. To Western diplomats, such activities may appear inane. In fact they break the ice between people who, although close geographic neighbours, are strangers because they had been kept apart from each other for over a century by different colonial spheres of influence. Through these regular consultations and meetings, where business and recreation were equally important on the official agenda, habits of cooperation and compromise evolved. Asean officials tried to avoid confrontation, seeking consensus as the ideal. Where consensus was not possible, they settled for a compromise or a promise of cooperation.

When Asean had to deal with the developed countries, cooperation came naturally. We learnt the value of political coordination when negotiating with Americans, Europeans in the European Economic Community and Japanese. On their part, these industrial countries preferred to deal with us as a group. They wanted to encourage Asean for its rational and moderate position in international forums that led to practical outcomes. They wanted other regional groupings of developing countries to adopt Asean’s pragmatic approach.

One example of Asean’s value to its members was when Australia tried to change its civil aviation rules. In October 1978 it announced its new Australian International Civil Aviation Policy \(ICAP\) under which only Qantas and British Airways could carry passengers point-to-point between Australia and Britain and at super-cheap fares. Airlines of intermediate stops, such as Singapore and the other Asean capitals, were excluded. Passengers were prevented by these special fares from making stopovers en route. The Australians also planned to reduce the capacity of the airlines of the intermediate Asean countries and cut the frequency of Singapore Airlines’ flights between Singapore and both Australia and Britain. They wanted to disallow Thai International from taking passengers from Singapore, an intermediate point, on to Australia. The Australians wanted to discuss the issue only bilaterally with each affected country, but Asean economic ministers took a common stand against this. To thwart them, our Asean partners asked for time to consider the long-term implications of these changes which would cut out Asean airlines from the trunk route business and leave us with stunted regional airlines. Then we sorted out our divergent interests to present a united position.

I concluded that Boeing 747s flying from Australia to Europe would need to stop either in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur or Bangkok en route to London. Jakarta was too close to Australia, and Colombo too far; both stops were not economic. We set out to keep the Malaysians and the Thais on our side. I instructed our officials to make enough concessions to the Malaysians and Thais so that they would join us in the fight.

I wrote to Thai Prime Minister General Kriangsak in January 1979 that Australia’s move was “blatantly protectionist”, that they wanted to exploit our differences by offering different inducements and threats. He supported me. My relations with General Kriangsak were close. And we gave enough concessions to Malaysian Airlines for Malaysia to stay united in Asean.

At first the Australians nearly succeeded in isolating Singapore and dividing the Asean countries, playing one against the other. But Asean solidarity hardened after a meeting when the Australian secretary for transport spoke in tough terms to Asean civil aviation officials. This was reported to Dr Mahathir, then Malaysia’s deputy prime minister and minister for trade and industry. He was still angry over a visit to Australia with his prime minister, Tun Razak, during which they had been harassed by protesters. Mahathir stiffened Malaysia’s stand against the Australians. From a bilateral dispute between Singapore and Australia, the ICAP issue escalated into an Asean vs Australia fight. Harsh words were traded in the press. Annoyed with the offhand attitudes of the Australian officials, the Indonesians threatened to deny their airspace to Australian aircraft if they insisted on ICAP. The Australian foreign minister, Andrew Peacock, visited Singapore to defuse the issue. Australia agreed to let Singapore Airlines retain its capacity and routing into Australia and allowed the other Asean airlines to increase their capacities. It was a lesson on the benefits of solidarity.



One problem that was to test Asean’s solidarity from 1978 to 1991 was Vietnam’s occupation of Cambodia. After the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia on 25 December 1978, Raja as foreign minister took the initiative to convene a special meeting of Asean foreign ministers in Bangkok on 12 January 1979. In a joint statement, they deplored the invasion and called for the withdrawal of all foreign forces in Cambodia. When the Vietnamese were advancing in Cambodia towards its border with Thailand, the situation became dangerous. However, the Chinese punitive expedition against Vietnam in February 1979 stabilised the position. The question then was how to prevent the Heng Samrin regime, installed in Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese, from dislodging Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge government from its seat in the United Nations. Their genocide of their own people had caused worldwide abhorrence and revulsion against the Khmer Rouge. But if we wanted to keep the Vietnamese from getting international recognition for their puppet regime, we had no choice but to support the Khmer Rouge government.

Raja was a born crusader; the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia provided him with a cause that stirred his idealism. He wrote powerful short memos, which we circulated to non-aligned countries, detailing how the big bullying Vietnamese, the Prussians of Southeast Asia, had pulverised and oppressed the weak and gentle Cambodians, one-tenth their size. A pleasant personality, neither arrogant nor meek, Raja was friendly, warm and obviously sincere. His efforts made it easier for Tommy Koh in New York and ambassadors and officials from other countries to rally the votes against Vietnam at the UN and other international gatherings. Best of all, he did this without upsetting Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, the Indonesian foreign minister, who was under orders from his president not to isolate Vietnam. Suharto wanted a strong Vietnam to block any southward expansion of China. Raja and Tengku Rithauddeen, Malaysia’s foreign minister, together persuaded Mochtar at least not to oppose the Thai policy and weaken the unity of Asean. The isolation of Vietnam was a decade-long saga in which Raja played a significant role.

Unexpectedly, a year later, on 24 December 1979, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan. It was a turning point; as President Carter said, the scales had fallen from his eyes. The US government became more anti-Soviet and anti-Vietnam. It also changed the attitudes of our two Muslim neighbours, Indonesia and Malaysia. Both President Suharto and Prime Minister Mahathir stiffened their positions against the Soviet Union. They were suspicious of Soviet aims and their use of Vietnam. India was isolated as the only Asian country recognising the Heng Samrin regime.

Our intelligence reports, confirmed by the Thais, showed that the Vietnamese occupation army of 170,000 were controlling all Cambodia’s population centres and most of its countryside. The Heng Samrin regime’s forces, some 30,000, were plagued by low morale and desertions. We were encouraged by reports of increasing popular resistance to Vietnamese occupation. The Khmer Rouge forces had withdrawn to the mountainous regions in the west, near the Thai border. Non-communist resistance groups, which had been fighting the Khmer Rouge under commanders loyal to the old Lon Nol government, had coalesced to fight the Vietnamese. Our officials worked hard to get Sihanouk and Son Sann, Sihanouk’s former prime minister, to form a coalition government with the Khmer Rouge, but both feared and hated the Khmer Rouge.

Son Sann’s relationship with Sihanouk was that of commoner and prince. At a meeting with his followers in Singapore in 1981, Son Sann was told by one of our officials that Sihanouk wanted to see them immediately. His whole delegation became nervous, overawed, and could not refuse to attend, even though Sihanouk no longer wielded any authority.

It took another year before Sihanouk and Son Sann were persuaded by the Chinese, Thais and us to meet in Kuala Lumpur to sign a formal agreement for a Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea \(CGDK\). The Thais and Chinese persuaded the three parties to agree that Prince Sihanouk be the president, Khieu Samphan the vice-president and Son Sann the prime minister of the CGDK. I urged them to sign it in Kuala Lumpur, not in Beijing, because that would have made it appear a Chinese-sponsored coalition which would not receive wide support in the UN. I thought it important for the Vietnamese to see that Asean was united in support of the CGDK, that this was not just a Thai-Singapore project. Ghazali Shafie, the capable Malaysian foreign minister, was eager to take an active role. I was able to persuade Prime Minister Mahathir to support it. Once the agreement to form the CGDK had been signed in Kuala Lumpur, the Indonesians could not disavow it without risking their isolation in Asean. Sure enough, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja now agreed that Asean must support the non-communist third force.

Sihanouk’s forte was in propaganda and diplomatic manoeuvring. The real power players were the Khmer Rouge leaders. Once they had broken out of their isolation as international outcasts by having Sihanouk and Son Sann associated with them in the coalition government, they built up their strength. The Chinese kept them well supplied with weapons and money. They also had income from their control of the gem mines and timber logging business along the border with Thailand.

For the Vietnamese the formation of this coalition government was bad news. They reacted with venom, describing it as “a monster conceived by Chinese expansionism and US imperialism”. The Vietnamese foreign minister had repeatedly declared that the situation in Cambodia was irreversible and non-negotiable. The Chinese challenged it and the United States helped to oppose it. As we had hoped, international support for the coalition government increased, and any prospect of recognition for the Vietnamese puppet regime of Heng Samrin vanished.

The Vietnamese had been admired by Third World countries as great heroes after they defeated the Americans in 1975 and captured Saigon. Now they were defying world opinion, bullying a small neighbour and becoming international villains. They were embroiled in a guerrilla war which, like the Americans in Vietnam, they could not win. They were to be bogged down in Cambodia for a further seven years until they withdrew in September 1989, but continued to be politically involved until the Paris Peace Accord in October 1991. We spent three years laboriously smoothing out differences between the Cambodians and sorting out the positions of China, Thailand and Singapore, in order to bring along Malaysia and Indonesia and satisfy the Americans that they were not supporting the Khmer Rouge’s return to power.

Raja and I worked hard to ensure that the United States remained interested in the region. Whether it was President Carter with Secretary Cyrus Vance, or President Reagan with Secretary George Shultz, I found them reluctant to play a major role. They did not want to be involved in another guerrilla war on the Asian mainland. We managed to persuade them to give modest aid, at first non-lethal, and later some lethal, to the two non-communist resistance forces. But the Americans did help to gather votes in the UN against the Vietnamese.

Tommy Koh, our permanent representative at the UN, played a key role in lobbying and rallying votes. At the UN general assembly in 1982, Sihanouk as president of the newly formed coalition government appealed to UN members to restore Cambodia’s independence and sovereignty. They responded by voting for Democratic Kampuchea with a bigger margin, a total of 105 member states. By gathering more votes in the UN each year, we made the Vietnamese feel their growing isolation.

Deng Xiaoping deterred any assault against Thailand by attacking Vietnam in February 1979. The price was paid in Chinese blood. Zhao Ziyang spelt out to me in Beijing in 1980 that by its “counter-action in self-defence” against Vietnam in 1979, China had forced Vietnam to station 60 per cent of its best troops along the Sino-Vietnam border. If these men had been free to fight in Cambodia, he said, the next international conference would have been about a peaceful settlement of Thailand’s problem with Vietnam, not Cambodia’s. But Zhao tacitly acknowledged that China alone could not resolve the Cambodian problem. It needed the United States and Asean to muster international support.

In Washington in June 1981, at a one-on-one meeting with President Reagan, I spoke of the Soviets making trouble for Southeast Asia. I assured him that Deng Xiaoping had said that China did not want satellite states around it and was prepared to accept whoever won in a free vote in Cambodia. This helped to win Reagan’s support. He was absolutely against the Vietnamese and their puppet regime.

When I proposed to John Holdridge, the assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific, in November 1981 in Singapore, that whoever won in a UN-supervised election could be allowed to take over Cambodia, and that Heng Samrin could possibly win, he interjected with vehemence, “I am not sure that that is acceptable. They are too committed to the Soviets.” His expression, tone and manner left me with no doubt that a Heng Samrin victory was as unacceptable to the Americans as to the Chinese. In August 1982 officials from the US State Department and the CIA told our mission that the United States would fund the non-communist resistance group in Cambodia by a total of US$4 million for non-lethal aid – food and medicine – to supplement Asean’s efforts. It was a small beginning but an important breakthrough. The Reagan administration was getting over its Vietnam withdrawal syndrome and was prepared, in a subsidiary role, to support the non-communist resistance. This encouraged Malaysia to supply training and uniforms. Singapore gave the first few hundreds of several batches of AK-47 automatic rifles, hand grenades, ammunition and communications equipment.

With help from Britain, we employed British technicians and journalists to teach 14 Cambodians from the KPNLF to broadcast on short-wave radio from Singapore, and later to run a medium-wave station near the Thai border. They learnt how to operate 25kw mobile Japanese transmitters. Together with the Thais and Malaysians, Singapore trained the guerrilla fighters. In 1983–84, for the first time, resistance forces spearheaded by the Khmer Rouge continued on the offensive well into the dry season instead of retreating into Thailand.

Meeting Secretary of State George Shultz in Singapore in July 1984, I urged a reconsideration of US policy of small, limited amounts of aid; the current US policy would result in maximum benefits to China. We were providing the Khmer Rouge and China with political support which they could not muster on their own. Chinese military aid had ensured that the Khmer Rouge remained the strongest force. The United States should invest in the non-communists to help them build up to their maximum potential, especially after they had shown promise of fighting capability and were enjoying more support among the Cambodian people than the Khmer Rouge. Shultz agreed it was worth a try, but pointed out that US aid had to be sustainable. Unless the amounts were modest, it would be difficult to get yearly votes in Congress. He knew the sentiments in the US Congress.

Shultz was right; the US Congress would not support a significant aid programme. Our representative on the Thai-Malaysian-Singapore-US group that met regularly in Bangkok to coordinate our programme estimated that the United States dispensed a total of about US$150 million in covert and overt aid to the non-communist groups, Singapore US$55 million, Malaysia US$10 million and Thailand a few million in training, ammunition, food and operational funds. This was dwarfed by China who spent some US$100 million on the non-communist forces of Son Sann and Sihanouk and ten times that amount on the Khmer Rouge.

As it turned out, the Soviet Union was bleeding from the war in Afghanistan and its massive aid to Vietnam, Ethiopia, Angola and Cuba. By the late 1980s Soviet aid had stopped and Vietnam was in economic difficulties; it had an inflation rate of above 1,000 per cent in 1988 and a food crisis. It had to get out of Cambodia. The Vietnamese old guard gave way to leaders who wanted to settle the Cambodian issue with China and open up their economy to save it from collapse. In July 1988 they unilaterally announced their withdrawal of 50,000 troops from Cambodia.

US Congressman Stephen Solarz, in charge of Asia Pacific affairs in the House foreign relations committee, met me in Singapore and floated the proposal of a UN force to fill the power vacuum and hold elections. I encouraged him to pursue it. When Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans took up the proposal formally, Singapore and the other Asean members supported it. After the final agreement was signed in Paris on 23 October 1991, the UN despatched an advance peacekeeping force, followed by the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia \(UNTAC\). Sihanouk returned to Phnom Penh in November 1991 from Beijing, escorted by Hun Sen who had succeeded Heng Samrin.

UNTAC was the largest and most costly UN peacekeeping mission to date – over US$2 billion for a contingent of 20,000 civilians and soldiers. It held elections successfully in May 1993. Sihanouk’s party, led by his son, Prince Ranariddh, won the most seats, 58 against the 51 seats won by Hun Sen. But the Americans had changed their position on the Vietnamese puppet government: they must have been satisfied that Hun Sen wanted to be independent from Vietnam and were prepared to let him achieve power. The UN did not have the strength or will to install Ranariddh in power. It would have required disarming Hun Sen’s troops and fighting the Khmer Rouge. So the UN brokered a compromise which made Ranariddh the nominal first prime minister, but left real power in the hands of the second prime minister, Hun Sen, who was in charge of the army, the police and the administration.

UNTAC began to leave by November 1993, its limited mission of holding elections with minimum loss of lives accomplished. Thereafter Singapore became just an observer of the Cambodian drama. The big powers were dealing directly with each other to resolve the issue. China was the only country that had given support to the Khmer Rouge. Premier Li Peng told me in Beijing in October 1990 that although the Khmer Rouge had made mistakes in the past, they had also made contributions. In other words, they deserved a place in government. But once the Soviets agreed with the Americans to end the war in Vietnam by stopping their military aid, especially oil supplies, China’s influence on the outcome diminished.

With the Vietnamese out of Cambodia, Asean solidarity weakened. Thai Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan wanted to seize the economic opportunities in Vietnam’s rehabilitation through trade and investments. He overrode his foreign minister, Siddhi Savetsila, who said it was not yet time to make concessions. When Thailand shifted its position, the Indonesians also moved. They wanted a strong Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia as a bloc to check any southward thrust of China’s influence.

Singapore had sent a police contingent to help UNTAC. During the conflict few countries gave aid to the non-communist forces. We did, and our contribution in arms, ammunition and equipment, plus political and diplomatic efforts on their behalf, helped to bring about the final outcome. But we knew the limits of our influence and went along with the UN solution for an interim government and fair elections. Both these objectives were more or less achieved. Hun Sen, his army, police and administrators remained in firm control. Prince Ranariddh and his FUNCINPEC \(the royalist National United Front\) ministers provided Hun Sen and the former pro-Vietnam communists with the international respectability they needed to get aid. The Khmer Rouge lost out completely, so great was the international revulsion against Pol Pot for his genocidal crimes. Vietnam failed to make Cambodia its satellite despite paying a heavy price for 13 years.

We had spent much time and resources to thwart the Vietnamese in Cambodia because it was in our interests that aggression be seen not to pay. Indeed, Indonesia’s costly experience in East Timor underlines this lesson. Twenty-four years after occupying it, Indonesia had to withdraw after the UN-supervised referendum in September 1999.



By the mid-1980s Asean had established itself as a rational Third World grouping and was becoming the most dynamic region of the developing world. By opening up their economies to trade and foreign investments as recommended by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the countries of Asean achieved 6–8 per cent economic growth yearly for more than a decade. Their economic dynamism made them attractive as economic and political partners. Regular dialogue started with the Australians and New Zealanders, followed by the Japanese, Americans and West Europeans. As Asean grew into a coherent organisation with a common voice on major issues, more countries wanted to join as its dialogue partners at its annual meetings to discuss political and economic issues.

The common threat of communism in North Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union had made for solidarity in Asean. After the collapse of communism, Asean needed a new common objective that could unite the group. By their fourth summit in Singapore in January 1992, Asean countries were ready to promote a free trade area. Singapore had long urged a greater emphasis on economic cooperation to supplement political cooperation. Our efforts had not been successful. Suggestions from Singapore for greater economic cooperation were regarded with suspicion by other Asean countries. As we had a more advanced economy, open to the world and almost totally free of both tariff and non-tariff barriers, they feared that we would benefit disproportionately.

In the late 1980s, after China and later India opened up and attracted huge investments, Asean leaders changed their views. The prime minister of Thailand in 1992, Anand Panyarachun, had been a successful businessman after being head of the Thai foreign ministry. He understood the economics of trade and investment in an interdependent world. To avoid lingering suspicions about Singapore’s motives, I advised Prime Minister Goh to get Anand to take the lead to push for an Asean Free-Trade Area \(AFTA\). Anand did so successfully, and the Asean summit in Singapore agreed to establish AFTA by 2008. The date was later brought forward to 2003 by the Asean economic ministers.

AFTA marked a major milestone in Asean’s evolution. Asean’s goal was to manage relationships between members who still jealously guarded their sovereignty, and to help resolve political problems before they erupted into conflict. AFTA will lead to a greater integration of the economies of Southeast Asia.

At the 1992 summit in Singapore, Asean leaders decided that its annual post-ministerial conferences should be a forum for political and security matters. This led to annual meetings of the Asean Regional Forum \(ARF\) with Asean’s dialogue partners \(the United States, Japan, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Republic of Korea and the European Union\) together with China, Russia and India. It enabled potential adversaries to discuss in a non-combative atmosphere sensitive disputes like the competing claims to the Spratly islets. It was a change in policy from excluding to including major powers to discuss security issues in the region.

Meanwhile, Asean has to digest its enlarged membership. Vietnam was admitted into Asean in 1995, Myanmar and Laos in 1997, and Cambodia in 1999. The four have some way to go to reach the level of development of the old members, and to gain acceptability as dialogue partners of the United States and the European Union.




