+++
title = "22 Inside the Commonwealth Club"

+++



When we became independent I assumed that Singapore would be a member of the Commonwealth. The British government was supportive, and the Tunku was keen to sponsor us. I did not know that Pakistan had initially opposed our admission; it had considered Malaysia too pro-India in the India-Pakistan conflict over Kashmir. Arnold Smith, the secretary-general of the Commonwealth, in his memoirs wrote that Pakistan’s antagonism against Malaysia was carried over to the Singapore government which had shown sympathy for India. But Smith persuaded Pakistan to abstain and not object to Singapore’s admission. In October 1965 Singapore was admitted as the 22nd member of the Commonwealth. This membership was valuable. For a newly independent country, it provided links to a network of governments whose institutions were similar and whose leaders and officials shared a common background. They were all English-speaking governments, with British civil administration practices and legal, judicial and educational systems.

Soon after we joined, the prime minister of Nigeria, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, called a conference of Commonwealth prime ministers for 11 January 1966 in Lagos, to discuss Rhodesia’s Unilateral Declaration of Independence. Rhodesia was then a self-governing colony with a white minority of 225,000 in control of 4 million black Africans. I decided to go.

On the BOAC \(British Overseas Airways Corporation\) plane making the seven-hour flight from London to Lagos were several other prime ministers and presidents of the smaller Commonwealth countries. We made conversation. A memorable fellow passenger was Archbishop Makarios, president of Cyprus. He wore silken black robes with a tall black hat as archbishop of the Greek Orthodox Church. Once on board, he removed his robes and hat and looked a totally different person, a smallish bald man with a moustache and a mass of a beard. He sat across the aisle from me, so I had a good view of him. I watched, fascinated, as he dressed and tidied up when the plane taxied to the terminal. He diligently and carefully combed his moustache and beard. He stood up to put on his black robes over his white clothes, then his gold chain with a big medallion, and then carefully placed his hat on his head. An aide brushed him down to remove any white flecks from his flowing black robes, and handed him his archbishop’s staff; only then was His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios finally ready to descend the steps in proper style for the waiting cameras. No politician could have been more PR-conscious. The other prime ministers held back and allowed him to take precedence – he was not only president, he was also archbishop.

We were greeted, inspected a guard of honour in turn and then whisked into Lagos. It looked like a city under siege. Police and soldiers lined the route to the Federal Palace Hotel. Barbed wire and troops surrounded it. No leader left the hotel throughout the two-day conference.

The night before the meeting, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, whom I had visited two years ago, gave us a banquet in the hotel. Raja and I were seated opposite a hefty Nigerian, Chief Festus, their finance minister. The conversation is still fresh in my mind. He was going to retire soon, he said. He had done enough for his country and now had to look after his business, a shoe factory. As finance minister, he had imposed a tax on imported shoes so that Nigeria could make shoes. Raja and I were incredulous. Chief Festus had a good appetite that showed in his rotund figure, elegantly camouflaged in colourful Nigerian robes with gold ornamentation and a splendid cap. I went to bed that night convinced that they were a different people playing to a different set of rules.

When the meeting opened on 11 January, Prime Minister Abubakar spoke. He was a tall, lean and dignified figure with a slow, measured delivery. He looked every inch a chief, a figure of quiet authority, in the flowing robes of the Hausas from northern Nigeria. He had summoned this conference urgently to discuss the unlawful declaration of independence by Rhodesia, which called for action from the British. The vice-president of Zambia, Reuben Kamanga, spoke next, and then Harold Wilson. It was clear Wilson was not able and not going to use force against Ian Smith’s illegal independent regime. It would be politically costly in British popular support, and would also cause economic damage to Rhodesia and the surrounding African countries.

On the second day I spoke. I had no prepared script, just a few headings and jottings I had noted down as Prime Minister Abubakar and the others spoke. I took a broad philosophical approach. Three hundred years ago, the British set out to occupy North America, Australia and New Zealand and to colonise much of Asia and Africa. They settled in the more desirable regions of Asia and Africa as conquerors and masters. But in 1966 a British prime minister was talking on equal terms with heads of government of former colonial territories. It was a continually evolving relationship. Sir Albert Margai, prime minister of Sierra Leone, had said that only an African could feel passionately and be concerned about Rhodesia. I could not agree with him that only Africans should be concerned with this problem. We were all interested parties and concerned. Singapore was closely associated with Britain in defence. If Britain were to be branded as a supporter of Ian Smith’s illegal seizure of power, my position would become difficult.

I disagreed with Dr Milton Obote, prime minister of Uganda, that Britain had been reluctant to bring the Europeans in Rhodesia to heel or to have the UN impose sanctions because of a diabolical British plot to give Ian Smith time to consolidate his regime. It was unhelpful to talk in terms of racist divisions between white settlers and immigrants. Like the peoples in Canada, Australia and New Zealand, I was a settler. If all immigrants were racists, then the world was in for a difficult time. We had two alternative solutions to problems created by migrations that had taken place all around the world: either to accept that all men had equal rights, or to return to the rule of the strong over the weak. For coloured peoples of the world to demand retribution for past wrongs was not the answer to man’s survival. In Africa, the nub of the problem was not Rhodesia but race relations in South Africa.

I did not believe that Britain was reluctant to end the Smith regime because its survival would threaten the standing of the West with all non-European peoples. Wilson was faced with the problem of going against domestic opinion if he used force to crush a puny minority. I believed the British government was in earnest and its reluctance to bring the issue to the United Nations was because it did not want 130 members of the UN to decide what happened in Rhodesia after Mr Smith had been brought down. Britain had to buy time for its economic interests in South Africa and Rhodesia, and there was the need to preserve the Rhodesian economy in the interests of Africans as well as Europeans. When the problems of South Africa were resolved, the wider problem remained of how different races could learn to live together in a world shrunk by technological changes.

I sympathised with the Africans, but I also saw the difficulties a British prime minister faced if he had to send British troops to quell a rebellion of British settlers who had been fully self-governing for decades since 1923. The question now was to make progress on the method and the time for achieving majority rule for Rhodesia.

One advantage of these Commonwealth leaders’ meetings was that however big or small your country, when you did intervene, you were judged on your merits. Many read prepared speeches. I responded to what had just been said, and from notes. I spoke sincerely and expressed my thoughts without the euphemisms of a prepared text. This was my maiden speech at a Commonwealth prime ministers’ conference and I could sense that my colleagues around the table responded favourably.

Wilson later wrote in his memoirs that “It was hard-hitting, though somewhat repetitive, as one African leader after another sought to prove how much more African he was than his neighbour. From Asia, Cyprus, the Caribbean, the message of condemnation was the same. Then Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore spoke – an off-the-cuff unprepared speech of some forty minutes at a level of sophistication rarely achieved in any of the Commonwealth conferences which I attended.”

My attendance at Lagos consolidated my friendship with Harold Wilson. I had been helpful to the Africans and not unhelpful to the British. Wilson congratulated me outside the conference room and said he hoped I would attend other Commonwealth conferences. He needed a foil for difficult leaders who made long and biting speeches. The conference ended two days later after appointing two committees to review the effect of sanctions and the special needs of Zambia that required Commonwealth support.

When we left for our next stop, Accra, the capital of Ghana, there was more security along the route to the airport as tension had increased in Lagos in the four days since we arrived.

Three days after we arrived in Accra, we were told by our hosts that there had been a bloody coup in Lagos. Prime Minister Abubakar had been assassinated and so had Chief Festus. An Ibo army major from eastern Nigeria, where oil was being discovered, led the coup which killed many Hausa Muslims from northern Nigeria. The major said “he wanted to get rid of rotten and corrupt ministers and political parties”. This coup put Major-General J.T.U. Aguiyi-Irons into power, but it was to be followed by many other coups.

Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana’s president, did not rejoice at the news. He himself had had a narrow escape about two years ago, just before I visited him in January 1964. By 1966 “Osagyefo” \(Redeemer\), as Nkrumah was called, had recovered enough of his bounce to give me dinner with some of his senior ministers and a bright young vice-chancellor of his university. This man, Abraham, was only about 30 years old, had taken a First in Classics in Oxford and was a fellow of All Souls’ College. Nkrumah was very proud of him. I was impressed, but wondered why a country so dependent on agriculture should have its brightest and best do Classics – Latin and Greek.

On our arrival at Accra, the person who came up the aircraft to greet me was Krobo Edusei, the minister for presidential affairs. He had gained notoriety as a corrupt minister who had bought himself a golden bedstead, a story much publicised in the world press. Nkrumah defused the scandal by restricting Krobo’s portfolio to looking after government hospitality. On my second night in Accra, he took me to a nightclub in Accra. He proudly announced that he was the owner and that all VIPs would enjoy their evenings there.

We travelled by car to the High Volta dam, some three hours of travel. On the road to the dam our convoy was led by a car with loudspeakers playing music with an African beat; the lyrics had the refrain, in English, “work is beautiful”. Little toddlers would appear from their huts off the road, swaying naturally to the rhythm as they made their way to the roadside to wave to us. I was fascinated to see how lithe and double-jointed they were.

I was the second guest to be entertained on a beautiful yacht that had been imported fully assembled from Miami. They told me it had been transported by rail and floated on the lake. Accompanying us on board were Krobo Edusei and Ghana’s minister for foreign affairs, Alex Quaison Sackey, a well educated and well-spoken man. When we were cruising on the lake, having cocktails and canapés on deck, Raja asked Krobo who had made his beautiful safari suit. Krobo replied, “My tailor shop in Kumasi. You must visit it one day and I will make a suit for you like mine.” He then spoke of his other activities. He used to be a 30 bob \(US$4\) a week postal clerk; now he had two sons educated in Geneva, Switzerland. A man, he said, must have ambition. Quaison Sackey, a sophisticate who had been president of the UN General Assembly, looked most unhappy and uncomfortable. He valiantly tried to steer the conversation away from Krobo, but Krobo was not to be deterred and we were regaled with one hilarious tale after another. I wondered what would happen to these two countries. They were then the brightest hopes of Africa, the first two to get their independence, Ghana in 1957, followed shortly by Nigeria.

One month later, on 24 February, as Nkrumah was being welcomed with a 21-gun salute in Beijing, China, an army coup took place in Accra. People danced in the streets as the army leaders arrested leading members of Nkrumah’s government. Alex Quaison Sackey and Krobo Edusei were with Nkrumah in Beijing. When they returned to Accra, they were placed under protective custody. My fears for the people of Ghana were not misplaced. Notwithstanding their rich cocoa plantations, gold mines and High Volta dam which could generate enormous amounts of power, Ghana’s economy sank into disrepair and has not recovered the early promise it held out at independence in 1957.

The news I read saddened me. I never visited Ghana again. Two decades later, in the 1980s, Quaison Sackey saw me in Singapore. He had been arrested and released in one of the innumerable coups. He wanted to purchase palm oil on credit from Singapore, on behalf of the Nigerian government which promised to pay after they had held their elections. I said that was a private business deal he had to strike. He picked up a living by using his contacts with African leaders of neighbouring states. Ghana, he said, was in a mess. I asked after the bright young vice-chancellor, Abraham. Quaison Sackey reported that he had entered a monastery in California. I felt sad. If their brightest and best gave up the fight and sought refuge in a monastery, not in Africa but in California, the road to recovery would be long and difficult.

I was not optimistic about Africa. In less than 10 years after independence in 1957, Nigeria had had a coup and Ghana a failed coup. I thought their tribal loyalties were stronger than their sense of common nationhood. This was especially so in Nigeria, where there was a deep cleavage between the Muslim Hausa northerners and the Christian and pagan southerners. As in Malaysia, the British had handed power, especially the army and police, to the Muslims. In Ghana, without this north-south divide, the problem was less acute, but there were still clear tribal divisions. Unlike India, Ghana did not have long years of training and tutelage in the methods and discipline of modern government.



The next conference was in London in September 1966, when I got to know many prime ministers who had not attended the special conference in Lagos. In the two weeks there I consolidated Singapore’s position with the British public and maintained my already good relations with Wilson and his key ministers, and with Conservative party leaders.

The Rhodesia question again dominated the whole conference \(as it did every conference until its settlement in 1979 at the Lusaka meeting\). African leaders felt strongly for their fellow Africans in Rhodesia. They also wanted to establish their African credentials with their own people. Moreover, focusing on the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in Rhodesia took their people’s minds off their own urgent economic and social difficulties. Of the white leaders, Lester Pearson of Canada was by far the most liberal in his instincts and sympathetic to the cause of the Africans and the underprivileged.

I spoke of the problems in Southeast Asia. I said that Vietnam was a clash of two rival ideologies, each determined not to give in, knowing that the whole region would be lost if one side yielded to the other. Harold Holt, the Australian prime minister, showed discomfort when I said Australian and New Zealand armies were in South Vietnam not purely to safeguard democracy and Vietnamese freedom: they were defending their own strategic interests. He quickly recovered his balance and accepted my point when I added that their interests included my survival. I took an independent position to establish my credentials so as not to be seen as a puppet of the British, Australians or New Zealanders whose troops were defending Singapore. I said frankly that an American withdrawal would be disastrous for all in the region, including Singapore. My language made my views acceptable, although the prevailing sentiments of African leaders were against American intervention. Singapore’s standing with Africans and Asian leaders also improved.

At the next meeting, in January 1969, also in London, Wilson as chairman asked me to open the discussion on Commonwealth cooperation. I prefaced my remarks with a criticism of niggardly Western help for developing countries, then went on to explain the deeper reasons for their failure. To rally their people in their quest for freedom, the first-generation anti-colonial nationalist leaders had held out visions of prosperity which they could not realise. A population explosion had increased the burden on resources. Inter-ethnic peace, which had been enforced by the colonial overlord, was difficult to maintain after independence with power in the hands of an ethnic majority. The elite who had commanded popular support before independence had to demonstrate their continuing legitimacy, and in competing against other parties, they had been unable to resist the temptation of appeals to ethnic, linguistic and religious loyalties. The countries suffered as their ethnic minorities, mostly Indians in Africa, were squeezed out by rioting or legislation. Often they were the shopkeepers who had acted as village bankers, since they knew who was and who was not credit-worthy. This role of village banker could not be filled by their own native administrators, the US Peace Corps or British Voluntary Service officers. The layer of trained men was too thin and new states reverted back to type as soft societies without the firm hand of an overlord and a strong framework of administration. Corruption set in and became a way of life. Military coups made things worse. But most of all, most governments had favoured economic planning and controls which stifled free enterprise. Fortunately, Malaysia and Singapore had not and so continued to make progress. In his book *The Labour Government 1964–1970*, Harold Wilson wrote that I described “with brutal realism the economic problems of newly-emancipated countries. … By common consent, one of the most remarkable essays in interpretation of the post-imperial world any one of us had heard.”

Wilson had proposed to alternate the biennial conferences between London and a Commonwealth country. He was keen to hold the next one in Singapore. The other leaders agreed. I was happy to host it. It would be good for Singapore to have world attention focused on it. With two years to prepare, it could be an occasion for Singapore to gain recognition as an oasis of efficiency and rationality in the Third World.



Our Commonwealth guests arrived in January 1971 in a clean and green Singapore with friendly, warm, efficient and courteous service. The hotels, shops, taxis and restaurants put forth their best efforts. All was neat and orderly. The families of the pro-communist political detainees staged an anti-government demonstration outside the NTUC Conference Hall, where the meeting was being held. When the police quietly dispersed them, there were murmurs of disapproval from the British press, that we should have allowed them to carry on. The officers responsible for the delegates’ security thought otherwise.

Ted Heath had announced soon after he became prime minister that Britain would resume arms sales to South Africa which had been suspended by the Labour government. This provoked a fierce reaction from black African leaders, many of whom threatened to break up the Commonwealth if Britain persisted. Soon after Heath arrived in Singapore, he agreed with me and announced that Britain would be happy to have the arms for South Africa issue treated as a separate item on the agenda. After two sessions restricted to leaders only, we agreed to a study group to consider the question of the supply of maritime arms and to report its findings to the secretary-general.

Heath was not comfortable in that Third World multiracial setting. It was his first experience of such a gathering. The African leaders set out to make him feel isolated. A little shy and guarded, he was different from Harold Wilson with his pipe-puffing bonhomie. Heath appeared stiff and ill at ease, spoke with a strong Oxford accent and bristled when provoked. Fortunately, he knew me well and was confident that I would ensure him a fair hearing.

I called on Sir Seretse Khama, president of Botswana, as the first speaker. I knew him to be moderate, level-headed and thoughtful. He was the son of the chief of Botswana and had married an Englishwoman when he was up at Oxford. The South African government had successfully pressured the British government to block his succession to the chieftainship for many years because his black-white marriage made a mockery of their ban on black-white sex. He said Britain must be the arbiter of its own national interest, but the decision to sell arms could only damage the Commonwealth. It was a quiet and cogent speech.

Julius Nyerere, president of Tanzania, pitched his argument on a high moral plane, that South Africa was out of the Commonwealth because its ideology was inconsistent with a multiracial Commonwealth. He asked “earnestly” that Britain should not help South Africa and force African countries to react. He was unexpectedly brief. He had sized up Heath and decided it was best not to preach to him. Nyerere was the African leader I most respected. He struck me as honest and sincere. He handed over power to a successor in a constitutional manner and Tanzania never descended into the chaos of Uganda.

President Hastings Banda of Malawi said no African leader was going to leave and wreck the Commonwealth. Force would not succeed; the freedom fighters had tried since 1964 and achieved nothing. In place of force, isolation and boycott, he called for contact and dialogue between the blacks and whites. African leaders displayed open contempt for him, but he appeared completely unmoved. I tried to check his rhetorical exuberance but once in full flow he was not to be stopped. He was quite a character, with his sunglasses even indoors and at night, and his buxom young African lady companion. He looked old but spoke with vigour, waving his fly whisk to emphasise his points, but he might as well have waved a red flag at angry bulls. I was not sure whether Heath was embarrassed or delighted.

Heath made a reasoned reply. The sale of maritime equipment to South Africa was essentially a matter of defence policy, nothing to do with apartheid. Britain depended on the free movement of goods and the freedom of the seas. Half its oil supplies and a quarter of its trade passed through the sea route around the Cape. The Soviet Union posed a maritime threat. \(On 16 January, four days before Heath spoke on arms to South Africa, two Soviet warships, a cruiser and a destroyer, had ostentatiously sailed past Singapore around two in the afternoon from the South China Sea towards the Indian Ocean.\)

A dramatic intervention was provided by President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia. He warned that Britain’s national interest lay not only in South Africa or the Indian Ocean, but in many parts of Africa. As he recounted cruelties Africans had suffered at the hands of white settlers, he suddenly sobbed and pressed his eyes with a white handkerchief held at one corner by his fingers. Those who saw this for the first time found it a moving experience. But he was to repeat it frequently, at almost every Commonwealth meeting whenever the subject of white domination over Africans came up. It became a familiar music hall act.

Uganda’s president, Milton Obote, was different from Kaunda or Nyerere. There was deep hatred and venom when he spoke on Rhodesia, Namibia and South Africa. I felt something sinister in his expression and the glint in his eyes. During a conference break, Obote was told that General Idi Amin had taken over his country in a coup. He looked dejected. His predicament underlined the precariousness of so many African governments.

The last speaker on South Africa was the prime minister of Fiji, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara. A strapping, handsome six-foot-six, he looked the rugger player he was. It was unrealistic to expect the British prime minister to state that his government would not now sell arms to South Africa. To stop the sale of arms was like peeling off the outer skin of the onion. The next skin would be the sale of arms by the French, then by the Italians. On that reasonable note, we adjourned at 4:00 am.

I remembered how the communists in the trade unions would keep me sitting for long hours on hard wooden backless benches. Then, after all my exhausted non-communist supporters had left and we were in the minority, they would take the vote. The Commonwealth leaders were seated in comfortable armchairs, but the thermostat was malfunctioning and the air-conditioning was too cold in the early hours of the morning. To adjourn would mean everybody getting renewed energy, building up more steam for ever longer speeches. I decided to carry on and everyone stayed. All speakers from Africa had the satisfaction of being heard; no leader was stopped from saying his piece meant for home consumption.

When discussions resumed a few hours later “on the security of the Indian Ocean”, the African leaders were all absent and the work was soon done. Except for a few brief quiet periods when I got some other prime minister to take the chair, I had to sit through all 13 sessions from 14 January to 22 January. It was punishing to have to listen to repetitious speeches made at a tangent to each other. Since then, I have sympathised with the chairmen of international conferences where delegates come with prepared speeches, determined to say their piece regardless of what had already been said.

Although the conference did cover all items on the agenda, the press concentrated mainly on the controversy over arms for South Africa.

Privately, over drinks, Heath expressed his disappointment at the public airing of many confidential or secret exchanges between heads of government. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau agreed, regretting that the African leaders tended to adopt UN diplomatese. I said this was inevitable when Third World leaders were influencing each other at so many international conferences where rhetoric and hyperbole were standard fare. I added that all first generation independence leaders were charismatic speakers, but their administrations seldom followed up with the implementation.

As chairman, I gained insights into the backstage operations of a Commonwealth conference. It was the informal, bilateral and small caucus sessions between key leaders which determined the outcome of the conference. Arnold Smith, who in 1962 had given me dinner in Moscow when he was Canada’s ambassador, had been secretary-general of the Commonwealth for more than five years. He had intimate knowledge of the personalities and positions of the leaders attending. Together we told the African leaders privately that they could never expect Ted Heath to climb down publicly. We convened two sessions, restricted to leaders, to endorse compromises Smith had brokered. The formal resolutions in the full conference were settled at these smaller meetings. At the end of the meeting, after all the histrionics, the secretary-general got the Third World leaders to understand that the guts of the Commonwealth were in economic, social and cultural cooperation, and that depended on funding mainly from the developed old Commonwealth – Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Commonwealth cooperation would end if the donors found the cost-benefit ratio unfavourable. With tact and skill, Smith persuaded the Africans and Asians not to push issues to breaking point. Sonny Ramphal, the Guyanan foreign minister who took over from Smith in 1975, showed even greater skill in letting Third World leaders have their rhetoric while he kept the road show going by making sure the cost-benefit equation continued to engage the donors.



Rhodesia and apartheid occupied much time at every conference. For most of them, unless I looked up the minutes, I would not remember the issues of the day that agitated the leaders at that time. But I have carried unforgettable vignettes of meetings and conversations from each conference. At Ottawa in 1973 I remember the chairman, Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, a French Canadian who was completely and expressively bilingual. He told me he had an Irish mother and a French father. Trudeau had a sharp mind and a sharp tongue to match. I watched his press conference with admiration. As he switched from English to French, his facial expressions and gestures became French. He was a truly bilingual, bicultural Canadian. He had much sympathy for underdogs and was always willing to lend them a hand, but could be quite tough about cutting Canadian scholarships for Singapore students once he decided we could afford to pay.

Another person I remember from the Ottawa meeting was Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the hero who had opposed Pakistan and led East Pakistan to independence as Bangladesh. He arrived in style at Ottawa in his own aircraft. When I landed, I saw a parked Boeing 707 with “Bangladesh” emblazoned on it. When I left, it was still standing on the same spot, idle for eight days, getting obsolescent without earning anything. As I left the hotel for the airport, two huge vans were being loaded with packages for the Bangladeshi aircraft. At the conference Mujibur Rahman had made a pitch for aid to his country. Any public relations firm would have advised him not to leave his special aircraft standing for eight whole days on the parking apron. The fashion of the time was for leaders of the bigger Third World countries to travel in their own aircraft. All leaders were equal at the conference table, but those from heavyweight countries showed that they were more equal by arriving in big private jets, the British in their VC 10’s and Comets, and the Canadians in Boeings. The Australians joined this select group in 1979, after Malcolm Fraser’s government purchased a Boeing 707 for the Royal Australian Air Force. Those African presidents whose countries were then better off, like Kenya and Nigeria, also had special aircraft. I wondered why they did not set out to impress the world that they were poor and in dire need of assistance. Our permanent representative at the UN in New York explained that the poorer the country, the bigger the Cadillacs they hired for their leaders. So I made a virtue of arriving by ordinary commercial aircraft, and thus helped preserve Singapore’s Third World status for many years. However, by the mid-1990s the World Bank refused to heed our pleas not to reclassify us as a “High Income Developing Country”, giving no Brownie points for my frugal travel habits. We lost all the concessions that were given to developing countries.

At Kingston, Jamaica, in April 1975, Prime Minister Michael Manley, a light-skinned West Indian, presided with panache and spoke with great eloquence. But I found his views quixotic. He advocated a “redistribution of the world’s wealth”. His country was a well-endowed island of 2,000 square miles, with several mountains in the centre, where coffee and other subtropical crops were grown. They had beautiful holiday resorts built by Americans as winter homes. Theirs was a relaxed culture. The people were full of song and dance, spoke eloquently, danced vigorously and drank copiously. Hard work they had left behind with slavery.

One Sunday afternoon, when Choo and I walked out of the barbed wired enclosure around the hotels used for the conference to see the city on foot, a passing car came to a halt with the driver shouting, “Mr Lee, Mr Lee, wait for me.” A Chinese Jamaican, speaking Caribbean English, came up. “You mustn’t forget us. We are having a very difficult time.” He gave me his card. He was a real estate agent. Many professionals and businessmen had left for America and Canada and had given him their homes and offices to sell. He had seen me on Jamaican television and was anxious to speak to me. Chinese, Indians and even black Jamaican professionals felt there was no future under the left-wing socialist government of Michael Manley. The policies of the government were ruinous. I asked what he was going to do. He was not a professional so he could not leave or he would. But when all these big houses had been sold and there was not much real estate business to do, he might yet go. I wished him luck and cut the meeting short. I noticed the black Jamaican security officers covering me turning aggressive in their body language. Thereafter, I read the news of Jamaica with greater understanding.

To honour the queen’s silver jubilee, we met in London in July 1977. It was a different relationship. Britain’s economy was no longer as strong; indeed, Denis Healey had called in the IMF in 1976 to help Britain out of some difficulty. I remember standing in line behind Archbishop Makarios of Cyprus as Choo and I waited to sign the visitors’ book at 10 Downing Street, before going through the back garden to watch the queen’s birthday parade. His Beatitude did not use the pen proffered by a British warrant-officer. He took out his own pen, signed and walked away. As I signed, I said to the soldier, “The Archbishop signed in red.” “Red as his hands were bloody,” replied the warrant-officer who had served in Cyprus during those bloody years when the British army had to keep down the Cypriot nationalists who were determined to get the British out and have *enosis* \(union\) with Greece.

In 1979 I made my third visit to Lusaka. The first, in 1964, was during my African tour of 17 capitals, and the second, in 1970, was for the Non-Aligned Summit. Since 1970 Zambia’s economy had declined. We were entertained at State House, where I had stayed in 1964 as the house guest of the last governor. It had lost its bloom. There were fewer deer and exotic birds in the grounds, and the big house itself did not have that spick-and-span look of British colonial government houses. We were housed in the same chalets as in 1970, dotted around the conference hall which had been built for them by Yugoslavia, a fellow member of the Non-Aligned Movement. The conference hall and chalets had not been much used since 1970 and showed it, but had just been refurbished and furnished at great expense, with furniture flown from Spain.

The catering at the chalet where we stayed was a disaster. They had trained young students as cooks. Our cook’s total repertoire was bacon and eggs or just soft-boiled eggs for breakfast, steak for lunch, and steak for dinner. There was plenty of liquor and wines, far more than we needed.

Everything was in short supply. The shops were empty. Imported toiletries were absent and there was little by way of local substitutes. Choo saw women queuing for essentials. The only souvenir she could buy was a malachite egg, to remind us that Zambia was a single-commodity economy, copper, and its price had not kept up with the prices of oil and other imports. They had no foreign exchange, and their currency was rapidly depreciating. Prime Minister Kenneth Kaunda’s major preoccupation was politics, black versus white politics, not the economics of growth for Zambia. He remained as president until the 1990s when, to his credit, he conducted a fair election and lost. After Kaunda left, the lot of Zambians did not improve much.

My most memorable encounter at the Melbourne conference in October 1981 was with an Indian in the coffee room. We were the only two seeking refreshments. I asked if he was with the Indian delegation. No, he was the leader of the delegation for Uganda, representing President Milton Obote, who could not come. I was surprised \(Indians had been persecuted by Idi Amin for a decade and had fled Uganda\) and asked if he had returned to Uganda. No, his family had settled in London and he was the Ugandan High Commissioner in London. He had left during Idi Amin’s rule. I asked what had happened to the Speaker of the Ugandan Parliament who in January 1964 had given me and my delegation a reception at Parliament House, Kampala. He was a Sikh with a turban, proud of his stone-faced Parliament House. By coincidence, the former Speaker was coming to Melbourne to meet him the next day. He had been forced to leave Uganda and had settled in Darwin, where he became a magistrate. I was sad. Uganda could have done with more such people, and not just as Speakers, to give dynamism to the Ugandan economy as the Sikhs have done in many other countries, including Singapore. He had been a casualty of the 1971 coup when Idi Amin deposed Milton Obote while he was in Singapore.

In Delhi two years later I was seated next to Mrs Obote at the queen’s dinner. She gave me another facet of the Ugandan tragedy while recounting how in the 1971 coup she with her three children had escaped from Kampala to Nairobi. They were sent back. They escaped again and spent years in exile in Dar-es-Salaam. She returned to Uganda in 1980, a year after Idi Amin was deposed. Milton Obote, now president again, was a much sadder and more subdued man. I caught a glimpse of the magnitude of the Ugandan disaster from my conversation with his wife. She had discovered that the people had changed, no longer willing to work for what they needed. After nine years of brutalities, lawlessness and viciousness under Idi Amin, people simply grabbed what they wanted. They had lost all the habits that made for civilised living. I was to remember this when our police contingent in the UN force reported on their experiences in Cambodia in 1991–93. If anything, Cambodia was worse after 20 years of chaos.

That November 1983 Mrs Thatcher discussed the question of Hong Kong. Deng Xiaoping had been adamant on Hong Kong’s return. She had tried to persuade him to allow an extension of the lease. He made it clear that that was completely unacceptable; China must resume sovereignty in 1997. What were my views? She had raised the matter because the governor had told her that Hong Kong leases in the New Territories were running out. I asked how far she was willing to go to press her view, given that the survival of a British Hong Kong depended upon China’s attitude. She did not have a ready answer. I thought it unlikely the Chinese would agree to an extension of the lease as too much national prestige was at stake. In the case of Macau the Portuguese simply carried on their administration without raising the matter with Beijing. She said the governor had told her he had no legal authority to extend the leases beyond 1997, so she had raised it.

Before I left Delhi, I gave my view that she had few cards in her hands. The best course would be to put the ball in the Chinese court, to tell Deng that Hong Kong could survive and prosper only if China wanted it to. The colony of Hong Kong, the island itself and Kowloon peninsula could not survive without the New Territories which was on leasehold. Hence it was not practical to adopt the legal position that Britain could continue to hold the colony minus the New Territories; far better to get terms for Hong Kong that would enable it to continue to prosper as it was doing, but under China’s flag.

I had looked forward to the meeting in Nassau, Bahamas in October 1985. It was the playground of wealthy Americans. Then I read in the British papers how drugs had spread throughout the Bahamas, and violent crime was rampant. The London *Sunday Times* reported that Prime Minister Sir Lynden Pindling was involved. No libel action followed. For the queen’s dinner on the royal yacht *Britannia*, Pindling offered all leaders a boat ride from our hotels to the *Britannia*. I decided to go by road. Near the wharf where the royal yacht was berthed, we passed a crowd of demonstrators with placards denouncing Pindling; several said “Chief is a Thief”. The chief and his other guests took much longer by boat than we did by car. Either because the sea was choppy or the boat was slow, they kept the queen waiting for over an hour. She was usually gracious and restrained in her comments, but was not accustomed to being kept waiting. She said to me that the dishes would be overcooked. The main dish was, but the dessert was excellent.

I had lunch one day with President Junius Jayewardene of Sri Lanka and the chief justice of the Bahamas. The chief justice spoke of the widespread cocaine habit in the country and of the vast fortunes made by those in the drug network. Smugglers flew into the Bahamas from South America in small aircraft. With the connivance of customs and other officials, the drugs were taken by air and sea to the US mainland. In transit, enough slipped through to the local population to ruin many a family. High government ministers had been involved. When I left Nassau, I had lost my last illusion of an island paradise anywhere in the world.



My last conference was in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. Like the previous meeting in Vancouver, October 1987, it was uneventful and there were no “hot” issues. I spent one long evening on Langkawi island, during the “retreat” \(an informal gathering of the conference members at some resort\), chatting with Prime Minister Bhutto and her husband Asif Zadari, learning about Pakistani politics and culture. She had youthful good looks, a fair complexion and a finely chiselled, photogenic face. He was an ebullient and outgoing wheeler-dealer, with no inhibitions in telling me that he was ready to consider any deal in anything – cutting a good deal was what life was about for him. He was in the fruit and other export business, in real estate and everything else. I promised to introduce him to some fruit importers to buy his mangoes, which I did when he visited Singapore accompanying his wife to some meeting in 1995. He was a likeable rogue. But I never thought him capable of murdering her brother, a charge made by the Pakistani government after she was thrown out of office by the president.

That was my last Commonwealth conference as I was preparing to step down as prime minister in 1990. The first conference in 1962 was in a different age with a different set of leaders. The Commonwealth was then a relatively small club, with deep and strong bonds of history and kinship between Britain and the old dominions. They still had close economic and political links with the newly independent countries, all still enjoying Commonwealth tariff preferences, with Britain as their main trading partner. When Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, a man of empire from the generation that had fought on the Western front in World War I, initiated Britain’s entry into Europe, the old white dominions were aghast. They felt abandoned after having fought alongside Britain in two world wars. Sir Robert Menzies, the Australian prime minister, in a powerful intervention demolished Macmillan’s assurances that there would be continuing close ties with the Commonwealth after Britain joined the European Economic Community.

“I run a federation. I know how federations work,” he said. They were either centripetal, in which case the states would come closer and closer together as in Australia, or they were centrifugal, with the states moving further and further apart until they eventually broke away. They were never static. There could be no other dynamic at work in such groupings. If Britain joined the EEC, its ties with the Commonwealth would weaken and atrophy. Looking back over the past 40 years, I have been reminded how prophetic Menzies was.

Britain and the Europeans have got closer together. Even the old Commonwealth countries, kith and kin notwithstanding, no longer share those deep emotional bonds of the 1960s. Their destinies have gone their different ways in their separate continents. Twenty-five years later, in 1998, the British were still divided over whether to be in one currency, the Euro, and \(what many fear and do not want\) a federal supra-national government of Europe.

Already in 1989, with over 40 leaders, there was no longer that sense of shared values. It was a club whose members came and went unexpectedly with the vagaries of elections or coups, with no time to bid farewell. There was an ephemeral quality in most of the hot topics of the day – the New International Economic Order, North-South dialogue, South-South cooperation, Rhodesia, apartheid – they are part of history. Nevertheless each conference served a purpose. A leader could highlight certain points directly with other leaders and put the wrong party on the defensive, as happened when India supported the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. Face to face, Mrs Gandhi could not, and to her credit, did not defend India’s position. This made an impression on the other leaders and influenced their stand on this problem. There was value in attending these conferences. But I had attended too many and it was time to move on.



During Commonwealth conferences every head of government would be granted an audience with the queen as head of the Commonwealth. The only exception was the 1971 conference in Singapore, when for some reason the Heath government decided that the queen would not attend. I had first called on her in September 1966. She was amazingly good at putting her guests at ease without seeming to do so, a social skill perfected by training and experience. She was gracious, friendly and genuinely interested in Singapore because her uncle, Lord Louis Mountbatten, had told her of his time here as Allied commander-in-chief, South East Asia Command.

When I saw her in London in January 1969, she said she was sorry the British had decided to withdraw from Singapore. She looked sad to see an important chapter of Britain’s history come to an end. She visited Singapore in 1972 to make up for the visit she did not make in 1971. I made sure she saw all the places Lord Mountbatten had told her about, including the City Hall Chamber where he had taken the surrender of the Japanese, the Istana where he had stayed and the Kranji Commonwealth War Cemetery. Surprisingly huge crowds gathered on the roadsides waiting to see her pass by. They surged forward to surround her whenever she got out from the car. Her assistant private secretary, Philip Moore, who had been the UK deputy high commissioner to Singapore in the 1960s, asked me not to have the security officers hold the crowds back as they were friendly. The queen was completely at ease, happy and relaxed.

To commemorate her visit, the queen made me a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George \(GCMG\). Earlier, Harold Wilson as prime minister had recommended me for the Companion of Honour \(CH\) in the 1970 New Year’s honours list. It was not usual for such a high decoration to be awarded to a young man of 47. Before I was 50, I had received two British honours much prized by those brought up in Britain’s former empire. Long years of association had nurtured certain values. I have received honours from President Nasser of Egypt, Emperor Hirohito of Japan, President Suharto of Indonesia, President Park Chung Hee of Korea and Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia among others. They do not carry the same emotional connotation. I did not think it appropriate to use the title “Sir” that went with the GCMG, but was happy to have received two coveted British trophies, even though they no longer opened doors with the British as they used to in the days of empire.




