+++
title = "23 New Bonds with Britain"

+++



On 24 September 1975, the Gordon Highlanders’ drums and pipes struck up in final farewell as the HMS *Mermaid* pulled out of Sembawang Naval Base. It was a mere 2,500-tonne frigate – a tiny component of the Royal Navy warships and aircraft carriers that once were based there. The last of the British troops left soon after. Their departure marked the end of 150 years of British political and military influence in the region.

The economic strength of the United States, Japan, Germany and the European Economic Community prevailed over the region. This meant we had to build up our links with these other powers from scratch. For me personally, it was a difficult adjustment. After a lifetime of close association, I had come to know British society and its leaders well. Listening to the BBC World Service and reading British newspapers had become a habit. I had a network of friends and acquaintances in both the Labour and Conservative parties. It was easy to make contact and have a meeting of minds. After their pull-out I had to learn about and get to know American leaders and the different style and standards of their media, and to gain some understanding of American society, which was so much bigger and more diverse. Doing this with the Japanese; French and Germans was even more difficult because we neither spoke their languages nor understood their customs.

Although old ties with Britain continued even as we widened our links and established relations with these important new centres of wealth and power, it was nevertheless sad to see Britain’s gradual economic displacement by Japan, Germany and France. Time and again, its recovery was slowed down by industrial action of unions driven by class antagonism and not merely economic injustice. I believe one great obstacle to Britain’s adjustment to its post-imperial condition was its class-conscious society. It was slow to shed class distinctions. Without empire, Britain needed a meritocracy to retain its position as the leading nation of Europe, not a ruling class which distinguished itself from the working class by its accent, social manners and habits, old boy network, clubs and old school ties. Akio Morita was chairman of Sony in 1991 when he told me that Sony found it hard to get engineers in its British factories to go to the production line. Japanese engineers start from the bottom so as to fraternise with and understand the men who would be working under them. British engineers, he said, preferred their own private rooms. Aware of these shortcomings, Mrs Thatcher as prime minister downgraded class and promoted meritocracy. John Major, her successor, spoke of a “classless” Britain. Prime Minister Tony Blair’s New Labour wants Britain to be rid of class consciousness.

What was worse, welfarism introduced by the Labour Party in the 1940s, and sustained by the Conservatives in a bipartisan consensus, had blunted the people’s motivation to exert themselves and excel, at the expense of the economy. Most leaders in both main parties, and even in the Liberal Party, were aware of the debilitating effects of welfarism. But no one tackled this problem until Margaret Thatcher became prime minister.

As Britain’s worldwide influence shrank, so did the worldview of its younger parliamentarians and ministers. Some old friends, British commanders who had fought in the last world war and had served in Singapore defending us against Sukarno’s Confrontation, compared the old generation British leaders to oak trees with wide-spreading branches and deep roots. They described their younger leaders as “bonsai oak”, recognisably oak trees, but miniaturised, because their root area had shrunk.

Adjusting to a different power position was difficult for Britain. It was the Conservative Party led by Margaret Thatcher, followed by John Major, that reversed the downward trend. British entrepreneurs became more self-confident and spearheaded their revival in Southeast Asia, including Singapore. The Labour Party returned to power in the 1997 election, committed to the same economic principles of the free market. It wants to cut down the government’s share of total GDP \(gross domestic product\), encourage exports, and promote trade and investments abroad to create jobs in Britain. The triumph of Margaret Thatcher and the Conservative Party was in turning around the attitudes of the British people. This forced the Labour Party to change from Old to New Labour.



Habits and ties long established do not change easily. Our students continue to go to Britain to seek higher education. As Singapore’s middle class expanded, they sent their children to Britain for their tertiary education. By the 1990s some 5,000 Singapore students were studying in British universities and polytechnics. Oxbridge graduates still dominate the elite in Singapore. The pulls of history are responsible for this cultural lag, a delayed response to changed circumstances. After the British withdrew their forces the only power in East Asia was America. We needed to have some of our best students educated there to understand them, and to network with future leaders in their centres of excellence. Even by the 1990s the number of our students in the United States was only two-thirds that in Britain.

History has locked us into the British educational system. Our professions are affiliated and geared to Britain’s professional institutions: doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers – the lot. Professional ties endure across all echelons of our society. In some sections, however, such as medicine, because the United States spends some 14 per cent of its GDP on health, more than twice what Britain does, American doctors and hospitals have excelled. We have gradually forged ties with American institutions. But our basic training in medicine is still British. So too with the other professions.

During the Thatcher years of the 1980s, Singapore-British trade grew significantly. When she freed capital movements, British investments in Singapore increased. They were of a different nature – in high value-added products such as pharmaceuticals, electronics and aerospace. By the 1990s Britain was again one of our major investors, the fourth largest after the United States, Japan and Holland. Singapore investments overseas went primarily into Southeast Asia, but a significant number of our private entrepreneurs have invested in Britain, especially in tourism. One of our major companies bought a chain of hotels in Britain and our Government Investment Corporation bought into another chain of over 100 hotels, confident that the British tourist industry would continue to grow, notwithstanding the problems created by IRA bombings. Singapore’s main link with Europe is still London. We have more daily flights to London than to other capitals in Europe.

When the British announced the withdrawal of their forces in 1968, there were gloomy articles, including one in the *Illustrated London News* that compared it to the retreat of the Roman legions from Britain as the Dark Ages descended over Europe. But the analogy was false. Modern communications and transportation have brought more Britons to Singapore than in colonial times. The British community now is smaller only than the American and Japanese communities. There are more British schools in Singapore now, to cater for the children of some 10,000 British families, than when we were their colony. Hundreds of Britons now come to Singapore on their own to work as engineers, architects and technicians – no longer on expatriate terms and living in exclusive areas, but on local terms and living in the same apartments as Singaporeans. Singapore salaries have reached the levels of Britain’s. Many British banking and financial institutions have set up branches in Singapore as it became one of the major international financial centres. The whole economic and political landscape has altered beyond recognition.

In 1982 the City of London made me a Freeman of the City of London, an honour which, as a former British subject, I appreciated. I was impressed to see how thorough they were about the guest list. They had invited all the British ministers and governors who had had dealings with me over Singapore. And I was asked to list the personal friends I wanted to have present. So I had the joy of having former prime ministers, secretaries of state, commanders-in-chief, the last governor of Singapore and my many personal British friends, all there in the Guildhall to share that moment. Among them were Harold Macmillan, Jim Callaghan, Harold Wilson, Alec Douglas-Home, Alan Lennox-Boyd and Duncan Sandys. It was an occasion for nostalgia. In responding to the address at the ceremony, I said,

“When I was a schoolboy 50 years ago in Singapore, my teachers held this truth to be self-evident, that London was the centre of the world. It was the centre of high finance and banking, as well as of the arts, the theatre, the centre of literature, of music, of culture. It was the centre of gravity of the world, … as indeed it was in September 1939 when a British government decided to honour an obligation to the Polish nation, a year after it had glossed over an undertaking to the Czech nation. Thus was World War II triggered off, and the world irrevocably changed …”

Part of the ceremony, a drive from Westminster to the Guildhall in a horse-drawn carriage, was cancelled because a rail strike had caused traffic congestion. Industrial problems continued to bedevil Britain. Margaret Thatcher’s clash with the miners’ union was yet to come.



My long years in office and our historical ties with Britain gave me opportunities to know successive British prime ministers from Harold Macmillan to Tony Blair.

Harold Macmillan was of my father’s generation, an Edwardian grandee in appearance and manner with a deceptively languid air and a lofty approach to young colonials like me. Sir Alec Douglas-Home was the nicest of them all – a real gentleman whose manner on television belied the shrewd geopolitical thinker he was. He might have counted with matchsticks as he candidly admitted, but he had more solid sense than many cerebral ministers on both front benches.


The most politically skilful of them was Harold Wilson. It was my good fortune that we were friends before he became prime minister. I was able to persuade him to remain east of Suez for a few years longer. Those few years made a difference because a residual British presence stayed on in Singapore until mid-1975. This gave us time to sort out our relations with Indonesia without making precipitate moves we might later regret. I personally owed much to Wilson for his staunch support when we were in Malaysia and after, as I have recounted earlier in my memoirs. The problems he faced in Britain were deep-seated – lowered levels of education and skills, lower productivity because unions were not cooperating with management. The Labour Party of the 1960s and ’70s was dominated by the trade unions and could not tackle these basic issues, hence Wilson was seen as going for quick fixes. To keep the party behind him, he had to zigzag, making him appear wily and devious.

In marked contrast, I found Ted Heath reliable and steadfast. I first knew him as Macmillan’s minister in charge of negotiating Britain’s entry into Europe and had lobbied him to protect Singapore’s position. We became friends during his time as leader of the opposition after Wilson won the 1964 election. Often when I was in London, he would have me to lunch at his flat in Albany to talk about Britain, Europe, America and the Commonwealth. He rated Europe more important than America and the Commonwealth in Britain’s future. Once he had decided on a policy, he did not lightly change his mind, and he believed in Europe before he was prime minister. If I were asked to choose one person from among the British prime ministers and ministers whom I knew to accompany me on a dangerous mission, I would choose Ted Heath. He would stay to the end to accomplish what he had set out to do. Unfortunately, he lacked the ability to enthuse and move a people. One on one, he would get animated, but on television he would appear wooden, a tremendous disadvantage in the age of electronic media. We have remained good friends, meeting occasionally in London, in Singapore and at international forums like Davos.



When Jim Callaghan spoke to the Cambridge University Labour Club in 1948 I was in the student audience. He was introduced as an ex-chief petty officer in the Royal Navy who had become a junior minister. He spoke confidently and well. I got to know him in the mid-1950s when attending constitutional talks in London, and kept in touch over the years. Because he became prime minister unexpectedly and rather late in life when Wilson resigned in March 1976, he did not have his own political agenda. Indeed, Britain was in such dire economic circumstances that the IMF had to be brought in. So the agenda was set for him.

I had appealed to Jim Callaghan when he was prime minister to allow Brunei, whose foreign affairs Britain still controlled, to permit our Singapore Armed Forces to train in their jungles. The British foreign and Commonwealth office had held up this decision to avoid involvement in our sensitive defence relations with Malaysia. I argued that Britain would soon not be in charge and we would be able to get this jungle training school anyway. Why not allow it while Britain was in charge so that it would be part of the political landscape when Brunei became independent? He agreed and we established our jungle training school in late 1976.

Faced with interminable economic problems including unemployment, Callaghan’s Labour government became protectionist. In April 1977 George Thomson, by then a life peer and no longer a minister, came as Callaghan’s personal envoy to ask if I intended to raise bilateral issues with British leaders during the Commonwealth conference in June. I said it would not be appropriate to raise bilateral complaints at the queen’s silver jubilee celebrations, but protested that the British had persuaded the Germans to get the EEC to block the entry of Singapore-made pocket calculators and monochrome television sets. There had been no prior discussions with us. I pointed out that our pocket calculators were sophisticated models made with high-level American technology, well ahead of British technology. Stopping imports from Singapore would mean Britons paying more for the same items from America. So also with monochrome television sets built by Japanese companies in Singapore. Later the trade barriers were lifted because they did not in fact preserve British jobs.

Callaghan once asked me, “What kind of people are these Japanese? They work like ants, they keep increasing their exports but do not import.” He held the Westerner’s stereotype of them, forged by inhuman Japanese behaviour during World War II. He did not understand them. He did not see Japanese investments, as Mrs Thatcher later did, as a way to reindustrialise Britain. He was more interested in the Africans, Indians and other members of the Commonwealth. His worldview was focused on king and empire. During the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting \(CHOGM\), he gave African leaders every opportunity to air their views, especially on Rhodesia and South Africa’s apartheid. He was the typical British Labour Party leader with a working-class background, whose instincts were to stand up for the downtrodden and the oppressed. However, he was also hard-headed when it came to tough decisions like getting his Labour government to implement rigorous IMF conditions attached to its rescue package for the sterling crisis.

Callaghan’s strength was his “steady as she goes” approach to problems. He did not look for fancy solutions. He had deep loyalties to the trade unions, yet his government was brought down by the unions.



Margaret Thatcher sat next to me at a dinner in 10 Downing Street in October 1970 when Ted Heath was prime minister. She was then minister for education, and we talked about the loss to Britain when it replaced grammar schools with “comprehensives” \(mixed ability schools\). The bright students lost out without any corresponding gains by the others.

When she was leader of the opposition, I asked George Thomas, then Speaker of the House of Commons, what he thought of her. In his Welsh lilt, he said, “She has great passion for Britain and would do the right things for Britain. She wants to turn the country around and I believe she is the only one with the will to do it.” And when I asked Jim Callaghan, who was then prime minister, what he thought of her, his answer was, “She is the one with trousers on the front bench.” These views from a Labour Speaker and a Labour prime minister reinforced my own that she was indeed a “conviction politician”.

When Thatcher won the election in May 1979, I cheered for her. She was for free competition in a free market. During her years in opposition, I met her in London and on the several visits she made to Singapore, usually on her way to Australia and New Zealand. In June 1979, a month after she became prime minister, I had an hour’s discussion with her before lunch at 10 Downing Street. She was brimming with ideas. In July 1980 she wrote as leader of the Conservative Party to invite me to be its guest speaker, the first ever from the Commonwealth, at the party conference in Brighton that October. I replied that I could not accept the honour because of my long association with the Labour Party, one that went back to my student days in the Britain of the 1940s.

She was an intense person, full of determination and drive, confident that she could implement her domestic economic policy, but under no illusion about the difficulties she would face from the unions. So when the coal miners’ strike began in March 1984, I felt she would take the fight to the finish. But I did not expect such nastiness in the clashes between the strikers and the police to last for a whole year. Her predecessors would not have toughed it out.

In April 1985 Mrs Thatcher paid us an official visit. At dinner, I congratulated her for trimming the excesses of the welfare state:

“For nearly four decades since the war, successive British governments seemed to assume that the creation of wealth came about naturally, and that what needed government attention and ingenuity was the redistribution of wealth. So governments devised ingenious ways to transfer incomes from the successful to the less successful. In this climate, it requires a prime minister with very strong nerves to tell voters the truth, that creators of wealth are precious members of a society who deserve honour plus the right to keep a better part of their rewards … We have used to advantage what Britain left behind: the English language, the legal system, parliamentary government and impartial administration. However, we have studiously avoided the practices of the welfare state. We saw how a great people reduced themselves to mediocrity by levelling down.”

Mrs Thatcher responded graciously in similar vein: “I like to think that once you learnt it from Britain. And now we are relearning it from you. … Talent, initiative, adventure, endeavour, risk, confidence, vigour have made Singapore an example to other nations of success – an example whose clear message is that you can’t enjoy the fruits of effort without first making the effort.”

The next day several pro-Labour British papers carried an outburst from Labour shadow health minister Frank Dobson: “Mr Lee should keep his stupid mouth closed.” A Labour MP, Allen Adams, added, “If we are going to take his state as a model, the country would be going back to 1870 when people worked in sweatshops around the clock for virtually nothing.” This was the stereotypical Old Labour, minds that had not kept up with developments. In 1985 Singapore’s per capita GDP was US$6,500 as against Britain’s US$8,200. By 1995 Singapore’s per capita GDP of US$26,000 had surpassed Britain’s US$19,700. Our worker earned more than the British worker. He also owned his own home and had more savings \(in his Central Provident Fund and POSBank accounts\) than the British worker.

When Mrs Thatcher resigned in November 1990, she sent me this farewell letter:

“How unexpected life can be: who would have imagined that we should both leave the highest office in our respective countries on almost the same day, after so many years of working together. But as I leave, I just wanted to say how enormously I have benefited from our association and admired all that you stood for. One thing surely cannot be in doubt: Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings will be much duller without either of us present\!”

I had more dealings with Margaret Thatcher than with other British prime ministers because she was in power for three terms. Of all the prime ministers, I thought she offered the best hope for Britain. Her strengths were her passionate belief in her country and her iron will to turn it around. She was convinced that free enterprise and the free market led to a free society. Her basic political instincts were sound though she tended to be too self-confident and self-righteous. Her disadvantage, in a class-conscious Britain, was her background as “the grocer’s daughter”. It was a pity that the British establishment still laboured under these prejudices. By the time she left office Britons had become less class-ridden.

However, Thatcher could provoke great antipathy from the prime ministers of the old white dominions. At the Bahamas Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in 1985, both the Canadian and Australian prime ministers, Brian Mulroney and Bob Hawke, badgered and pressed her to agree to economic sanctions against South Africa. All the opening speeches at the conference except hers attacked South Africa’s apartheid. Thatcher alone stood against imposition of further sanctions on Pretoria, calling instead for a dialogue. I respected her strength to withstand this isolation. She refused to be browbeaten and bludgeoned into submission. Unfortunately, she was on the wrong side of history.

John Major was chancellor of the exchequer when he accompanied Margaret Thatcher to the CHOGM in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. I met him again at 10 Downing Street in May 1996. He had a tough assignment. Margaret Thatcher had thrown her weight behind his election as Conservative Party leader and prime minister and expected him to stick to her policies on Europe. Her influence in the party made life difficult for him. The media too did not give him much of a grace period, writing him off within months. And so, although the economy was doing well, it did not help him against New Labour in May 1997.



I was struck by the youthful energy of Tony Blair when I first met him in London in May 1995, when he was leader of the opposition. He was a year younger than my son, Loong. Jonathan Powell, his chief of staff, took notes and followed up. Blair wanted to know the factors that made the difference between East Asia’s high sustained growth and Britain and Europe’s more sluggish rates. I suggested that he visit East Asia before the election and see its tremendous transformation. After he took office he would be insulated by protocol.

The following January he visited Japan, Australia, then Singapore, where he met our trade union leaders and saw the benefits they had obtained for union members. He was interested in our individualised old-age pension accounts – the Central Provident Fund \(CPF\), which also provided funds for home ownership and medical services. He made no secret of his deep Christian beliefs which made him a socialist or, as he added when I looked askance, a social democrat. He was candid enough to repeat “or a social democrat”, something Old Labour scorned. His “New Labour” was not a pose. He asked me what the prospects were for a successful Labour government. I said he would have a difficult time, once Labour was in government, getting Old Labour to accept his policy. The Labour Party was much older than he was and would not change so easily.

A few days after Blair’s visit, Chris Smith, the shadow minister for social security, came to study our system, and a few months later, Peter Mandelson, a close aid of Tony Blair, came to look at our Medisave, health insurance and other functions of Singapore’s CPF. Blair struck me as a serious politician wanting to learn about the developments in East Asia and the reasons they were successful. When we met again in London that autumn, there was an endless flow of questions over dinner.

The studied humility with which he presented himself and his party after his stupendous election victory in May 1997 was a tribute to his self-discipline. I watched the television coverage of his victory speech and his walk to 10 Downing Street. It reflected well on his team. I was in London a month after he won. We talked for an hour, and again wasted no time on pleasantries. He was focused on the tasks he had set for his government in his election promises. He was on overdrive, but not unduly elated at having been thrust into power at such a young age. We talked about China and the approaching handover of Hong Kong at the end of June. He was pragmatic in not wanting to rake over the coals Chris Patten had fired. Instead he was looking ahead to the longer-term future of Sino-British ties. As I expected, he attended the handover ceremony and had talks with President Jiang Zemin.

A year later, May 1998, when we again met at No. 10, he was all focused on the pressing issues, especially the Northern Ireland peace talks. He found time to discuss a range of other subjects, but not bilateral problems because there were none. Our circumstances had changed; Singapore was no longer as involved with Britain in matters of defence and security as with the United States, Australia and New Zealand. My generation was Anglocentric, my son’s generation is more focused on America. Loong and his contemporaries have to understand the United States. They have trained in US military institutions and done postgraduate studies in colleges like Harvard and Stanford. I lived under Pax Britannica; Loong’s generation has to cope under Pax Americana.




