+++
title = "24 Ties with Australia and New Zealand"

+++



Japan’s sudden invasion in December 1941 dramatically changed Australia’s memories of Singapore. Some 18,000 of its troops with no combat experience, together with 70,000 British and Indians, had to fight without adequate air cover against a battle-hardened Japanese Imperial Army. By the time Singapore fell in February 1942 about 2,000 Australians had been killed, over 1,000 wounded and some 15,000 captured.

More than one-third of the prisoners of war died from malnutrition, disease and ill-treatment, especially along the infamous Burma Railway. Many gravestones stand at the Kranji Commonwealth War Cemetery in Singapore, mute testimony to their sacrifice for king and country. The capture of thousands of their soldiers by the Japanese Imperial Army in Singapore will forever be seared into Australia’s national memory, a disaster second only to Gallipoli. But Singapore is nearer home and strategically more relevant to Australia. Hence, after World War II, Australia continued its old links with Britain and its troops returned to Singapore to help put down communist insurgency in Malaya.


An Australian contingent was stationed in Malaya until Britain announced its withdrawal from east of Suez. I urged Australia’s Prime Minister John Gorton to stay on in Malaya. While in London in January 1969 for a Commonwealth prime ministers’ conference, Gorton held a preliminary meeting with British Defence Minister Denis Healey, New Zealand Prime Minister Keith Holyoake, the Tunku and myself to discuss new defence arrangements for Malaysia and Singapore. Gorton was highly strung. His fidgeting and voice showed he was not keen to take on this responsibility, which he knew would fall mainly on Australian shoulders as the British would be phasing themselves out of the region.

We agreed to postpone the decision to our next meeting, in Canberra that June. But in May violent communal riots broke out in Kuala Lumpur, jeopardising Australia’s continued participation in defence arrangements for Malaysia and Singapore. I have described earlier how this was resolved. Gorton’s doubts notwithstanding, we agreed on the Five-Power Defence Arrangement \(FPDA\) by an exchange of letters in December 1971. His more stout-hearted defence minister, Malcolm Fraser, was against any backing off as a result of communal riots in Kuala Lumpur. In the end Gorton decided to withdraw his forces from Malaya before 1971 and move them to Singapore. The Australians feared their capabilities might not be adequate for the responsibilities. They knew that only a small contingent from New Zealand would remain with them in Singapore. Their only source of comfort in a crisis was the United States, through ANZUS, the Australia, New Zealand, US treaty.

From the beginning, we had close rapport with both the Australian and New Zealand governments because there was a convergence of views on regional security; the Vietnam War was getting difficult. I had easy relations with Harold Holt and his successors, John Gorton and William McMahon. In 1972 Labor governments came into power in both New Zealand and Australia. Prime Minister Norman Kirk had a sturdy approach to security issues and did not change New Zealand’s defence position. But Australia’s prime minister, Gough Whitlam, was uneasy about his country’s defence commitments both in Vietnam and in Malaya/Singapore. He decided soon after he won the 1972 election to withdraw his troops in Singapore from the FPDA.

In the 1970s, when we first asked Australia for permission to use their training areas for military exercises, they were not forthcoming. New Zealand, on the other hand, readily agreed. Australia changed its policy in 1980, allowing us to have land exercises, and in 1981, air force training at an RAAF base. When Paul Keating was Australia’s Labor prime minister in the early 1990s, he went further and allowed expansion of Singapore Armed Forces training in Australia. John Howard’s Liberal-National coalition government has continued this policy. Australia’s geo-strategic goals are similar to Singapore’s. We both view a US military presence in the region as vital for maintaining the balance of power in the Asia Pacific region and good for security and stability, without which the rapid economic growth of the region would not have taken place. Viewed against this larger backdrop, our differences over trade and other matters were insignificant.



I spent years trying to persuade Malcolm Fraser to open up Australia’s economy to competition and become part of the region. I had explained to him and his minister for foreign affairs, Andrew Peacock, that they had made Australia an important player in the region through their active involvement in defence and security and their aid programmes. But their protectionist economic policies cut them off from these growing economies which could not export simple manufactures to Australia because of quotas and high tariffs. Intellectually they accepted my arguments; politically Fraser did not have the strength to oppose his unions or his manufacturers, both of whom wanted protection.

At the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional \(Asia/Pacific\) Meeting \(CHOGRM\) in 1980 in New Delhi, Fraser was crusading against the European Economic Community’s \(EEC\) protectionist policies which shut off Australian agricultural exports. I cautioned him that he would gather little support from the developing countries because they saw Australia resorting to the same policies to protect its own industries that had lost their comparative advantage. Furthermore, Australia would become increasingly irrelevant to Asean countries because when they had to decide on major policies, Australia did not appear on their balance sheets.

Succeeding Australian governments have brought their country closer to Asia. Paul Keating, who became prime minister after Bob Hawke, was convinced that economically Australia needed to plug into Asia, and personally pushed a closer-to-Asia policy. With a good mind, a strong grasp of economics and geopolitical sense, he had served as treasurer \(finance minister\) for many years under Bob Hawke. But what he could do as a Labor Party prime minister was limited by the powerful influence of the Australian trade unions over his party.

One other minister who made a special effort to get closer to Asia was Gareth Evans. He had a sharp mind and, when challenged, a sharper tongue, but a good heart. As foreign minister under Hawke and Keating, Evans implemented a radical change in foreign policy. He set out to make Australia a part of the action in Asia, and so share in its economic growth. He did not want Australia to remain just an exporter of raw materials to Japan while the Japanese made cars and electronic products in Australia with Japanese technology. Evans developed close personal relations with the Asean foreign ministers. This must have been quite an effort because of their totally different habits. In Asean serious differences were often resolved not across a table but in between hitting a golf ball. So he chased the golf ball with them.

In the early years of Hawke’s Labor government, I thought his Asia policy was yet another public relations effort. When Keating also pursued this policy, I concluded this was a major policy shift. The Australians had revised their assumptions and assessments. They might have been an offshoot of Britain and Europe, but their future was more with Asia. They saw that the economies most complementary with theirs were those in East Asia. These countries – Japan, South Korea, China, Taiwan and Asean – would need Australia’s agricultural products and minerals and would also find its wide-open spaces, golf courses, resorts and beaches great for holidays. America, although a powerful ally for political and security reasons, would compete against Australia as an exporter of agricultural products.

At a conference in Sydney organised by the *Australian Financial Review* in April 1994, Gareth Evans, the minister for foreign affairs, invited me to speak candidly about Australia. I took him at his word. Australia, I said, was “a lucky country with an embarrassment of riches”. Australia had high consumption, low savings, low competitiveness, high current account deficit and high debt, with most of its exports in minerals and agricultural products. I believed more reform was unavoidable if the Australians wanted to complete the restructuring of their economy and compete.

The *Financial Review* editors who had invited me gave much publicity to my frank comments. But the tabloids were indignant. They were part of the problem. The country’s popular media, including a TV series produced by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in 1991, had portrayed the economic achievements of East Asia as “a Third World hell-hole of sweatshops, sex tourism and repressive regimes”. They completely ignored the reality that an increasing number of Taiwanese, after studying and working in the United States, were bringing home American technology and knowledge to build their own Silicon Valley in Taiwan.

I replied to their media at the Australian National Press Club in Canberra. They had failed to inform Australians about the transformation of a region of nearly two billion people from agricultural backwardness to industrial and high-tech societies. These countries, including China, were producing millions of engineers and scientists. R&D in Japan had enabled the Japanese to launch satellites into space and to probe the mysteries of genetic engineering. These developments went unreported in Australia. The American media, on the other hand, had publicised the industrialisation and high growth in East Asia. Although Australian academics were well-informed, the people were not. Their ignorance made it difficult for any Australian government to gain popular support for changes in its policy on economic direction and immigration.



Whether Australia’s destiny is tied to Asia’s suddenly came to the fore with the crisis in East Timor. It was triggered off on 27 January 1999 when Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas made a dramatic announcement after a cabinet meeting chaired by President Habibie that there would be a “popular consultation” for the people of East Timor to determine whether to accept special autonomy or become independent. That public statement changed the fate of East Timor, with long-term consequences for Indonesia and Australia. Both Alexander Downer, the Australian foreign minister, and Prime Minister John Howard were known to have easy relations with President Habibie. Unlike Suharto, Habibie spoke English and was open to persuasion, especially on East Timor.

Australia’s leaders wanted to be rid of the thorn of East Timor that bedevilled Australia-Indonesia relations. They had suggested the “New Caledonia solution” to Habibie. \(There the French had offered a referendum in 1998 for either continued association with France, or independence after a 15-year period of preparation.\) The president had recounted to Mah Bow Tan \(see chapter 17\) how the Australian ambassador, John McCarthy, had discussed the New Caledonia solution with him. Habibie had told McCarthy that he would not agree to East Timor having a 15-year transition to independence, with Indonesian economic support during this period. If they rejected autonomy, they would be out on their own. Indonesia was not going to play “rich uncle”. Habibie said Howard subsequently sent him a letter that contained Habibie’s ideas, whereupon he scribbled a memo to his key ministers on 21 January 1999, asking them to study whether it was wise for the MPR \(People’s Consultative Assembly\) to decide on letting East Timor respectfully separate itself from the Republic of Indonesia. He attached Howard’s letter which emphasised that East Timorese opinion was insisting on an act of self-determination. It took Habibie less than a week to decide on the choice of autonomy or independence for East Timor. In May an agreement was signed in New York between Indonesia, Portugal and the UN to provide for a ballot on 8 August 1999. In June the UN Security Council adopted a resolution establishing UNAMET \(UN Assistance Mission to East Timor\).

But in February 1999, soon after Ali Alatas’s startling announcement, the Indonesians began to arm the pro-integration militias. Killings and intimidation of those favouring independence became daily occurrences. Despite all the difficulties, UNAMET conducted a ballot on 30 August, when almost all voted. When the result was announced on 4 September that nearly 80 per cent had voted for independence, hell broke loose. The country was systematically devastated and its population uprooted: 250,000 were moved to West Timor, the rest fled into the hills.

Under tremendous international pressure for a week, Habibie finally invited international peacekeepers to restore order. The UN Security Council adopted a resolution authorising the deployment of a multinational force to East Timor \(InterFET\). Inevitably, it had to be led by Australia; the nearest base for InterFET was Darwin. Australians learnt yet again how emotional their Indonesian neighbours were.

Publicly, the Indonesians stated their preference for Asean troops. Privately, lower levels of the TNI disagreed, hinting there could be casualties. The US secretary for defence announced that he would send only a communications and logistics support group, not combat troops. Australia had to lead the pack. Fearful of being seen as an army of 4,000 white troops supported by 1,000 mainly white New Zealanders, Australia sought Asian support, primarily from the countries of Asean. At an APEC meeting in Auckland in September, Prime Minister John Howard asked Singapore to participate and Prime Minister Goh agreed. So Singapore committed itself to providing a medical team, military observers, liaison officers, logistics support and two LSTs \(Landing Ship Tanks\) – 270 men from a population of three million.

The day after the UN Security Council authorised InterFet, the Singapore Armed Forces \(SAF\) team arrived in Darwin. Our SAF mission commander, Colonel Neo Kian Hong, flew into Dili with the InterFET commander, Major-General Peter Cosgrove, to meet the Indonesian Restoration Operations Command in East Timor. And when the first wave of InterFET forces arrived in Dili on 20 September, there was a Singapore face in Cosgrove’s team.

The *Bulletin* \(an Australian weekly\) of 28 September 1999 reported, “The Howard Doctrine – the PM himself embraces the term – sees Australia acting in a sort of ‘deputy’ peacekeeping capacity in our region to the global policeman role of the US.” This *Bulletin* report drew an immediate retort from the Malaysian deputy prime minister, Abdullah Badawi: “There is no need for any country to play a role as leader, commander or deputy. They \[Australians\] are not sensitive to our feeling.” A Thai foreign ministry official phrased it more diplomatically, that it was not appropriate for the Australians to appoint themselves as the deputy of the Americans in protecting security in the region. The issue subsided after Howard said in Parliament that Australia was not playing the role of a deputy for the United States or any other country, that the word “deputy” was coined by the *Bulletin*’s correspondent.

To add heat to the controversy, while attending a UN General Assembly meeting in New York, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir criticised Australian troops as “rather heavy-handed” in the way they had pointed guns at the heads of suspected militiamen. He added, “Indonesia had been pouring in a lot of money into East Timor and the international community should allow Indonesia to practise democracy and show the East Timorese they can gain from being integrated with Indonesia.” East Timorese leader Jose Ramos-Horta, joint Nobel Prize winner with Bishop Carlos Belo, responded that Malaysia had “an extremely poor record in upholding human rights in East Timor. No one would cooperate with the Malaysian commander. There could be even total civil disobedience.”

Ramos-Horta wanted to scotch an earlier proposal by the UN secretary-general to put a Malaysian in command of the UN peacekeeping force that would replace InterFET in January 2000. He added, “East Timor doesn’t want to be part of Asean. We want to be part of the South Pacific Forum.” East Timorese leaders had concluded that Australia was the most reliable of their neighbours.

Australia had been drawn into the East Timor conflict. In World War II, Australian troops fighting the Japanese there were helped by the local population who were then brutally punished by the Japanese. To add to Australia’s sense of guilt, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam had during several meetings with Suharto acquiesced in his intention to occupy and annexe East Timor. \(Indonesians say Whitlam encouraged Suharto.\) At the UN in 1976 Australia had voted for Indonesia in the resolution on East Timor. Singapore had abstained. When repression followed the occupation in 1975, East Timorese resistance fighters based themselves in Australia. For 24 years, this issue had simmered away.

When Paul Keating met me in September 1999, he predicted that Australia would be drawn into a prolonged conflict with Indonesia. He added that Howard’s letter to Habibie would undo the good relations with Indonesia that he had painstakingly built up, culminating in the security pact he had signed with Suharto in 1995. As he had foreseen, the Indonesians tore it up on 16 September 1999, the day after the UN Security Council approved InterFET.

East Timor developments were driven by the Australian media and popular sentiment, by the Portuguese government getting the European Union to pressure Indonesia at every international gathering, and by the US media, NGOs and congressional aides. They were constantly barking and nipping at Indonesia’s heels, making it an issue that dogged Indonesia at every international forum. Habibie thought he could be rid of this burden by his proposal. But neither Australia, the European Union nor the United States had asked for or wanted an independent East Timor. Habibie did not realise that he would never be forgiven by Indonesian nationalists for offering a ballot that could only lead to independence.

Whether or not it was wise to have proposed self-determination for East Timor, Australia did right in leading InterFET into East Timor to put a stop to the inhumanity being perpetrated. While no Asian leader voiced support for Australia as it led InterFET troops into East Timor, all knew that Australia was saving an ugly situation from getting worse. It was an operation costly in political and economic terms for Australia, a task no country in the region would have undertaken. If Australia had not acted after the part it had played leading to the vote for independence, it would have earned its neighbours’ contempt. As it turned out, the quiet and firm manner in which Major-General Cosgrove commanded InterFET troops won the respect of many leaders in the region. As expected, Indonesian crowds demonstrated daily outside the Australian embassy in Jakarta. Australian nationals working in various towns of Indonesia had to be evacuated.

I had watched with fascination as the East Timor crisis developed. Howard and Downer based their policy on Habibie’s responses. Habibie wanted to persuade the Indonesian people to re-elect him as their president by showing that international leaders like John Howard thought highly of him as a democrat and a reformer. The Australian leaders had overlooked the powerful forces that Habibie had to contend with: the more than 5,000 graves of Indonesian soldiers in East Timor; the large coffee and other plantations that had been parcelled out to previous serving TNI officers; the fear of TNI senior officers that East Timor’s independence could aggravate separatist movements in Aceh and other provinces. Habibie was not in a position to give up East Timor without serious repercussions.

I had expected the militias to try to influence the votes by fair means or foul. But I never imagined they would systematically devastate the country in the two weeks between the announcement of the referendum results and the arrival of InterFET forces. It did not make sense for the TNI to allow them to do this, but then many things that did not make sense had happened, which is why Singapore, like the others in Asean, had stayed out of the East Timor issue.

When Abdurrahman Wahid was a candidate for president, he said on 13 October that Australia had been “pissing in our face” and proposed freezing relations. Ten days after his election as president, he said, “If Australia needs to be accepted by a nation of 210 million people, we will receive \[them\] with an open heart. If they want to separate from us, it’s okay.” The Australian ambassador had been hard at work to moderate the rhetoric, but it will be some time before relations return to what they were before this crisis.

The Australians have had a baptism of fire in an Asian crisis. Prime Minister John Howard may not have understood the danger of dealing with a transitional president like Habibie, but when the defining moment came, he acted as a prime minister of Australia should. With strong support from the Australian media and public, he sent his troops to lead InterFET forces into East Timor, despite threats by the militias to inflict casualties on the Australians. These events confirmed the obvious, that Australia’s destiny is linked more to Asia than to Britain or Europe.



My first meeting with Gough Whitlam after he became prime minister was at the 1973 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting \(CHOGM\) in Ottawa. Whitlam was handsome and very conscious of his good looks. He was quick-witted but also quick-tempered and impulsive in his repartees. He proudly told the assembled leaders that he had changed Australia’s restrictive immigration policy and would not require Asians educated in Australian universities to leave after their graduation. I took him to task over this “new look policy”, pointing out that he only accepted skilled and professional Asians and that this created a serious brain-drain for Singapore and his other poor Asian neighbours. He was furious.

He also announced in dramatic fashion his change of direction to be a “good neighbour” in the region and a “good friend” of the Afro-Asian countries. I challenged his claims and cited examples like his quota restrictions on the import of shirts into Australia and on traffic rights for Singapore Airlines. He took this as a personal slight and his exchanges became acerbic. He was a new boy whereas I had old friends around the table in Britain’s Ted Heath, Canada’s Pierre Trudeau, Norman Kirk of New Zealand, Julius Nyerere of Tanzania and Errol Barrow of Barbados. They spoke up to support my point of view. One result was that Prime Minister Norman Kirk of New Zealand emerged as the representative voice of the South Pacific supported by Western Samoa, Tonga and Fiji.

Whitlam then attacked me publicly to say that Singapore had a large ethnic Chinese population and therefore Soviet ships would not come to Singapore. The Soviet Union immediately diverted four Soviet feeder ships to Singapore for repairs to test whether we were Chinese or Singaporean. I replied that he should not provoke the Soviets again, for the next time they would send a missile destroyer or a nuclear submarine.

When I returned to Singapore from Tokyo I learnt that an Australian representative at the UN had asked the UN high commissioner for refugees to get us to allow some 8,000 Vietnamese refugees who had arrived in many boats to disembark in Singapore on humanitarian grounds. The following day, 24 May 1973, I summoned the Australian high commissioner to tell him that this was a most unfriendly act. Once they landed, we would never be able to get them to leave. He explained that out of the 8,000 boat people, the Australians were prepared to take about 65 who had been educated in Australia. Only by disembarking them could he sort out the 65 or 100 that Australia would accept. I asked what would happen to the balance of the 8,000 who would have disembarked and would refuse to go back to the ships. He mumbled a vague reply. I said his action showed that his present government was unfriendly to Singapore. At a reception in Canberra, his prime minister had unjustly ticked off the No. 2 in our high commission for this refugee problem. Far from Whitlam being the aggrieved party, I was prepared to expose his moves and show him up as a sham white Afro-Asian. The Australian high commissioner was sweating with discomfiture. The refugees were not allowed to land. We accepted 150 fishermen and their families. The rest sailed on to Indonesia, some to Australia.

It was a time of considerable stress for both Australia and Singapore or these exchanges would not have been traded between friends. The American withdrawal from Vietnam and the exodus of Vietnamese boat people were traumatic events. It was a relief when their governor-general removed Whitlam for some alleged constitutional irregularities in November 1975 and appointed Malcolm Fraser to form a caretaker government to hold a general election, which Fraser won handsomely.



Malcolm Fraser was huge even for an Australian. I came to know him well when he was Gorton’s defence minister. When we met in Kuala Lumpur at the funeral of Tun Razak in mid-January 1976, I took the opportunity to discuss with him the deployment of Australian forces in peninsular Malaysia and Singapore. He said there was no question of pulling out. He decided to leave his Mirage squadrons and Orion aircraft in Butterworth. I felt reassured by his hard-headed approach to security and stability, and his determination not to give things away.

With my encouragement, Fraser saw Prime Minister Mahathir in 1982. Mahathir said that the Vietnamese foreign minister, Nguyen Co Thach, had declared openly that he would provide bases for Soviet forces in Vietnam if necessary, and it would be foolish for Malaysia to dismantle its bases for foreign countries. It was perfectly acceptable to Malaysia if the Australians wished to stay, but if they wanted to leave there was nothing Malaysia could do about it. Fraser was satisfied and left his planes at Butterworth.

Fraser had conservative views but was never able to undo the damage Whitlam had done in less than three years by precipitately bringing in the welfarism that has burdened Australian budgets ever since. We became and remained friends, although I disagreed with his protectionist economic policies. He was reluctant to open up an economy that cosseted its workers at the expense of its consumers. Eventually Labor governments in the late 1980s and ’90s had to face the difficult task of gradually opening up the country to imports and abandoning uneconomic industries.



When the Australian Labor Party won the general election in March 1983, I was apprehensive that the troubles we had had with Whitlam would resurface. But Bob Hawke was a completely different personality from Whitlam, and the Labor leadership had learnt from the excesses of the Whitlam years. Hawke had his heart in the right place and wanted to do the right thing, but every time he took something away from the workers in one sector, he gave it back in subsidies in some other sector. He was Australia’s second longest serving prime minister. He presented himself and his arguments well and was always conscious of how he would appear on television.

He withdrew one of the two Mirage squadrons, but deferred decision on the second squadron. In March 1984 he decided to run down the remaining Mirage squadron gradually between 1986 and 1988. I was able to persuade him to keep rotational deployments of his F18s from Darwin totalling 16 weeks a year. This arrangement has continued to the present. By staying on in Butterworth until 1988, the Australians added to the security of Malaysia and Singapore, giving us more than 30 years of stability and growth. After the race riots in Singapore in 1964 and in Kuala Lumpur in 1969, the Australians had been apprehensive about getting involved in clashes between Singapore and Malaysia, or in conflicts between Indonesia and Malaysia or Singapore. By 1988 the Australians had revised their defence assessment; they now considered that the risks of such catastrophes were not high and saw strategic and political value in staying engaged in the region through the Five-Power Defence Agreement.

Looking back, their prime minister who most impressed me was Bob Menzies. Perhaps it was because I was a younger man and more impressionable. I watched his virtuoso performance at the Commonwealth prime ministers’ meeting in September 1962 in London. He had a commanding presence, a strong booming voice coming from a large head on a big, broad figure, hair turning white, bristling eyebrows and an expressive ruddy face. He exuded the confidence and authority of a generation that had been loyal to king and empire. When, despite his best efforts to dissuade it, Britain decided to join the Common Market, he knew that the world had changed irrevocably, that sentiments and ties of kinship could not displace the realities of geopolitics and geo-economics in the post-imperial world.

Another impressive Australian leader was Paul Hasluck, the external affairs minister \(1964–69\) who later became governor-general \(1969–74\). He was quiet, soft-spoken, observant, well-read and well-briefed. I met him on my first visit to Australia in 1965 when he was in Menzies’s cabinet. When Singapore was facing Indonesian Confrontation and, after that, British withdrawal, I met him frequently. He steered Australia’s foreign policy with a steady hand and a deft touch. He did not want to abandon Malaysia and Singapore but was careful not to upset the Indonesians or make them feel that “they were being ganged up against”, as he said frankly to me. His values, stressing the importance of family, education and hard work, were those of the pre-war generation before Australia came to regard itself as the “lucky country”.



Like Australia, New Zealand’s links with Singapore were through Britain. Because they are further away from Asia, New Zealanders did not feel so threatened during World War II by the possibility of Japanese invasion and were less suspicious of Asians. They took their share of Vietnamese refugees and were less nervous about boat people pouring onto their shores. This attitude was to undergo a change by the 1990s after they had experienced more Asian immigration.

On my first visit to New Zealand in April 1965, I was surprised to see how British they were in their habits and manners. I stayed in small hotels where maids still wore aprons, as British maids did just after the war, and brought in “morning tea” before breakfast. Their accent was nearer to British accents. There was more courtesy and reserve, less of the Australian backslapping mateyness. The country was green, in contrast to brown and dusty Australia. For many years, the younger sons of the gentry who did not inherit their fathers’ estates in England went out to own huge farms in New Zealand, rearing sheep and cattle and growing wheat for the mother country. It was a gracious way of life that gave them a high standard of living. New Zealand developed an advanced system of welfare benefits that gave the people one of the best standards of living and a high quality of life before World War II. After the war, with high prices for food because of shortages, they became wealthy.

They held on to this agriculture-based society for longer than was wise. The Australians industrialised; they did not. So their bright and ambitious young men left in large numbers for Australia, Britain and America. In the 1980s New Zealand set out on a different course to develop an economy that would offer opportunities for the talented so they need not emigrate. They also brought in well-educated Asian immigrants, and they began to market the natural beauty of their countryside, promoting tourism on a large scale. It was a belated effort to compete.

One of their longer-serving prime ministers was Keith Holyoake. I first met him when he arrived at Singapore airport in 1964, when we were in Malaysia. He was a stout man with a strong, deep voice resonating from a barrel of a chest. He was down to earth and had no pretensions. He was a farmer and proud of it. He did not pretend to be an intellectual, but had the common touch, which must have been one reason why he won four successive elections and was prime minister from 1960 to 1972. I liked him and respected his integrity. Under pressure, I found him steady and unflappable.

After Britain’s Commonwealth secretary, George Thomson, saw me in Singapore in 1967 to tell me of Wilson’s decision to withdraw their forces, I phoned Holyoake. It was November, New Zealand’s summer. He said he did not think the British would change their minds: he had already tried. He wished me luck in my attempt to get more time and ended the conversation saying, “I am in my holiday home by Lake Taupo. It’s a sunny day, beautiful and peaceful. You must come and take a holiday here. It’ll be a break from your work.” He had a different sense of danger, way down in the South Pacific. Years later, I took up his invitation. Huka Lodge near Lake Taupo was indeed tranquil.

When Norman Kirk became New Zealand’s Labour prime minister, we met at the 1973 Ottawa Commonwealth conference. He stood out as sincere, straight-speaking, not given to persiflage. On his way back to New Zealand in December 1973, he visited me. We sat on the front lawn of Sri Temasek one evening before dusk, exchanging thoughts on the future. The Vietnam War looked like coming to an unhappy close. I asked how he, from outside the region, saw Singapore and its prospects for stability and growth, and where the dangers would come from. His reply was direct and pithy. New Zealand was “the odd man out”, rich, white, democratic. Singapore was “the odd man in”, a completely Western city and democratic in the centre of Southeast Asia, yet different and unique. Its success was its danger; Singapore had become exposed.

We got on well. I was sad when he died a few months later, in August 1974. Twenty-plus years after he said this, when Australia and New Zealand wanted to join the Asia side of the Asia Europe Meeting \(ASEM\) of heads of government in Bangkok in 1996, Prime Minister Mahathir objected, saying they were not a part of Asia. It was his visceral reaction, one not shared by most of the other leaders. I believe before too long the logic of geography and economics will prevail against old prejudices, and Australia and New Zealand will be included in ASEM.

Robert Muldoon won the election in December 1975 and remained prime minister until 1984. He was stout, with a big bald head, pugnacious face and a combative temperament to match. He stood up to and freely traded verbal punches with his Australian counterparts, Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke, to remind them that Australia could not take New Zealand for granted.

He wanted to separate sports from politics, and strenuously defended New Zealand’s All Blacks rugby team for playing in South Africa and receiving a South African rugby team in New Zealand. To his surprise, there were violent protests against them in New Zealand. Over the next few years I watched him discover at Commonwealth meetings that New Zealand would be isolated if he continued his policy. So, after a strenuous defence of his position at the 1977 CHOGM in London, he agreed to a declaration boycotting South Africa in sports because of apartheid. It was not worth the fight. He did not hide his sentiments. In 1979 he was one of the few at the Lusaka CHOGM who sympathised with Mrs Thatcher’s stand on Rhodesia and South Africa. But he saw sooner than Mrs Thatcher that the tide of history was against white domination of Africa. Unlike Whitlam, Muldoon never postured as a white Afro-Asian. Instead he focused his time and resources on the South Pacific islands. He was a chartered accountant with a mind that could master details and crunch numbers. His analysis of economic problems sounded tough-minded but he was soft when it came to policy implementation. When farm prices fell, he maintained price supports for his farmers. When the manufacturing sector faced problems, he gave them more protection.

It was left to his Labour Party successor, David Lange, to begin the difficult process of trimming down subsidies, causing enormous pain to those who had been cosseted. Lange was an unusual character of medium height but considerable girth. He had an easy-going manner, a quick mind and a good memory. Soon after he won the 1984 election he visited me in Singapore on his way to Africa to increase trade with them. I expressed my doubts whether this was likely. He chided me for being a sceptic but later conceded that I was right. He had a good sense of humour and an infectious laugh.

When the Australians announced in 1972 that they would withdraw their battalion from Malaysia in 1973, the New Zealanders decided to remain and did so for another 17 years until 1989. Their sturdier nature earned them the nickname “Gurkhas of the South Pacific”. However, New Zealanders underwent a sea change in July 1984 when they elected Lange and his Labour Party. His party decided they did not want a nuclear Pacific and took a strong anti-nuclear stand. They were prepared to jeopardise their ANZUS treaty with the United States by refusing to allow any nuclear-powered ship or any ship carrying nuclear weapons to sail through New Zealand waters or dock in its ports, in effect blocking off the US Navy. It was an astonishing reversal of their traditional attitudes. In October that year, when I met Lange in Singapore, I told him that nuclear warships frequently passed through the Straits of Malacca and the Straits of Singapore, that we recognised the risks of nuclear accident but the US naval presence in the region had given us 30 years of stability. He remained unconvinced. For him and his party, a non-nuclear world was the only way to a secure future.

In Canberra in 1986 Bob Hawke asked me to convince Lange that their long-term interests were best served by ANZUS. When I visited Wellington, I again argued with Lange that his anti-nuclear policy was overcautious, but did not change his mind. Jim Bolger, then the opposition leader, however, agreed with me that small countries like Singapore and New Zealand would have room to manoeuvre and make progress only if the United States continued to maintain the world balance. He added, “New Zealand’s anti-nuclear stand would only hasten its disintegration.” But when he became prime minister in November 1990, public opinion made it impossible for him to reverse this policy. New Zealanders had decided to opt out of the troubles of the world, for the time being.

As Labour prime minister, Lange instinctively felt he had to champion the underdog. But on economic reforms and opening up the economy to market forces, he could be persuaded because his finance minister, Roger Douglas, was a convinced free-market man and carried his prime minister with him during his first term of office. However, during his second term, Lange, under pressure from his cabinet and party colleagues, backed away from the more unpopular reforms. This delay prolonged the agony for New Zealand farmers, manufacturers and consumers.

In December 1984 Lange announced, without any prior consultation, the cancellation of Singapore’s General Scheme of Preferences \(GSP\) status for our exports. In doing so, New Zealand had moved sooner than America and the European Community. When our foreign minister explained to him that while our loss through the cancellation of GSP in New Zealand would be marginal, we would suffer grievously if the Americans or Europeans followed them and did the same, Lange accepted the argument and restored our GSP status.

Without a large store of gold, diamonds, coal, uranium and other minerals that provide Australians with a comfortable living, New Zealanders did not have the “lucky country” mindset. When the price of their food exports fell in the 1980s, Lange and Douglas reduced price supports for farmers and made New Zealand more competitive. It was to the great credit of Prime Minister Jim Bolger that when his National Party returned to power in 1990 he continued these liberalisation policies.

I never had any dispute with the New Zealand leaders, not even Bob Muldoon, who could be aggressive and heated in arguments. In my experience the New Zealanders can be depended on to honour their undertakings.




