+++
title = "26 Following Britain into Europe"

+++



My views of the Europeans had been much influenced by British attitudes of the 1950s and ’60s. The Europeans seemed different and somewhat strange, not as cohesive as nations nor as constitutional-minded as the British: the French were prone to riots and revolutions and the overturning of constitutions; the Germans tended to use force to settle disputes. But once Harold Macmillan as prime minister made his bid in 1962 to join the European Economic Community \(EEC, now the European Union\) and was rebuffed, I believed it was only a matter of time before a second application or a third would succeed. After Britain announced its withdrawal from east of Suez in 1968, Prime Minister Harold Wilson made an overture to President Charles de Gaulle. Again it failed, but it underlined how important Europe had become for Britain.

Britain wanted to join to get out of its recurring economic difficulty of slow growth compared to the faster growth of Germany, France, the Benelux countries and even Italy – all members of the EEC. It was clear that the larger market spurred growth. I wanted to build ties with this new Europe and not have Singapore shut out when Britain joined.

As with most bureaucratic organisations, statements of principle from the top are no assurance of a smooth relationship. I encountered protectionist policies of “Fortress Europe” in the 1970s over our exports. In October 1977 I went to Brussels to see the president of the European Commission, Roy Jenkins, with whom I had kept in touch since the 1960s when he was British chancellor of the exchequer. I had written to him earlier that their application to Singapore of GSP rules \(the General Scheme of Preferences which gave developing countries limited import duty-free entry\) had caused problems for our exports of electronic calculators, umbrellas, projectors and plywood. Recently, even fresh orchids were meeting objections from Dutch and Italian flower growers. I added that I had expected problems with textiles and umbrellas but not with electronic calculators and fresh orchids. Jenkins was sympathetic and promised to look into this, but he could do nothing about the umbrellas. It seemed they were produced in President Giscard d’Estaing’s constituency.

With the other commissioners, I discussed how to avoid manufacturing those products that the EEC countries would find sensitive because of persistent high unemployment. I discovered to my dismay that the list was unlimited. Any member country with any influence on Brussels, feeling the slightest pain, could appeal to Brussels for protection and would invariably get it. Yet the EEC denied it was the most protectionist of all the trading blocs. I cited the experience of Philips and Siemens, two of the best-known European MNCs; they had found it more difficult to export their Singapore-made electronic products to Europe than to America and Asia.

I raised two matters: first, that “graduation” leading to the removal of GSP benefits should not be applied prematurely to Singapore; and second, that selective safeguards blocking imports were unlikely to be effective in solving EEC problems. I tried to convince Jenkins, as president of the EEC, that he should formalise the promising EEC-Asean relationship in an agreement for economic cooperation, and that a visit by him to the countries of Asean would put the imprimatur of the commission on this goal. Instead, he sent Viscount Davignon, the commissioner of industrial affairs. Jenkins was not fond of travelling to the East, whose prospects he did not rate highly. Finally, with the help of the German foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Asean succeeded in getting the EEC to sign an agreement in 1980 for a Joint Cooperation Committee to promote and review activities. Asean countries, however, still faced endless protectionist problems with this multi-member organisation. Its agricultural subsidies and tariffs worked against palm oil exports; its health and safety regulation on rubber products and eco-labelling and other forms of labour and environmental standards effectively checked Asean exports. As for Singapore, in 1986, as part of its review of the GSP privileges, the EEC imposed a quota on Singapore ball bearings.

European MNCs were less agile and dynamic than the Americans and Japanese. They were missing the opportunities for global integrated production, manufacturing different components of a product in different countries. That was the situation in the 1980s and it was still largely true in the 1990s.



To establish ties with the French who were the moving spirit behind the EEC, I arranged in May 1969 to meet President de Gaulle whom I had long admired as a great leader. Just before the visit, French students took to the streets and demanded constitutional reforms and more university places, in fact challenging de Gaulle’s legitimacy. The visit was postponed. De Gaulle called a referendum, lost it and retired. I never got to meet this stern, tall, unbending man who had restored French pride in themselves and their country, and whose autobiography impressed me even in an English translation.

Instead I met his successor, Georges Pompidou, in September 1970. He was friendly and jovial, a man who enjoyed an exchange with a visitor from a strange faraway place called Singapore. He emphasised that France was more than just high fashion in clothes, exotic perfumes and great wines. He wanted French quality chemicals, high-tech machinery, engineering and aircraft to be the image the world had of 1970s France. He had a philosophical bent and engaged me for 20 minutes on Asian attitudes towards gold. Would it still be highly priced and treasured if it became no more than a commodity and no longer a backing for currency? I was strongly of the opinion that it would. Over the millennia, historical experience of devastation and famine caused by drought, floods, wars and other calamities had taught the Chinese people the value of gold, indestructible, immutable and fungible. The three-and-a-half year Japanese occupation of Singapore was a recent reminder. I told him that with one *tahil* \(slightly more than one ounce\) of gold, regardless of hyperinflation, you could feed a family for a month as well as buy medicine and other essentials. My account seemed to confirm his own beliefs. I said it was a primeval instinct in man. His interpreter, Prince Andronikov, a French Russian émigré, translated this as *primitif*. I protested, “No, primeval, going back to earliest times.” The interpreter looked coldly at me to say, “Yes, in French primeval is *primitif.”* I felt duly chastened.

Valéry Giscard d’Estaing was elected president in May 1974, succeeding Pompidou. I was in Paris on a private visit but he received me within a few days of his election. It was a good meeting for over an hour at the Élysée Palace. Unlike Pompidou, who knew English but insisted on speaking in French, President Giscard used English. Tall, with a long patrician face, a bald high dome of a skull, he spoke with a strong French accent, choosing his words carefully and with great precision.

He was very French in his approach, cerebral, logical and systematic: why did Singapore develop and not the others, what was missing in the others? I could only tell him what I thought were three primary reasons: first, stability and cohesion in society; second, a cultural drive to achieve and a thrifty, hardworking people always investing in the future, with high savings for a rainy day and for the next generation; third, a great reverence for education and knowledge. He was not satisfied that that was the complete answer.

Giscard’s prime minister, Jacques Chirac, had a totally different set of interests. He did not spend time on philosophical discussion about what was happening in Asia but wanted to know what more could be done between France and Singapore. I tried to interest him not just in Singapore but in the wider region, using Singapore as the stepping stone. It took another ten years, under a different president and after several prime ministers, before I convinced the French government and entrepreneurs that Southeast Asia was a promising part of the world to invest in.

Raymond Barre succeeded Jacques Chirac as prime minister in August 1976. Barre, a rotund man of medium height, was a professor of economics and a sympathetic listener. He favoured the establishment of French joint ventures and investments abroad. He supported my proposal to develop Singapore into a technological servicing centre and said that France could cooperate with us in sales and services in the region. He proposed a five-year Singapore-France bilateral cooperation agreement on trade, investments, technical assistance and cultural cooperation with specific set targets. He was practical and systematic in tackling problems, keen on results. But his French industrialists were not ready for this enterprise. I spoke to a group of them in the French National Employers’ Federation \(CNPF\). At the end of an hour’s discussion, their spokesman told the press that investors were aware of the opportunities in Singapore but many appeared disinclined to get up and go “as it is too far away and English-speaking”, adding that France could not be everywhere as it was concentrating on Africa. Indeed, the French were focused on Francophone Africa. Even in Asia, they were drawn towards Vietnam, believing it would still be French-speaking and French-inclined. It was not until the mid-1980s, when a socialist President Mitterrand and his Gaullist prime minister, Jacques Chirac, both decided that Africa was not as ready for development as Asia, that my efforts came to fruition.

In July 1981, on my way to London to attend the wedding of Prince Charles, I stopped in Paris hoping to meet the newly elected president, François Mitterrand. But the Quai d’Orsay, the French foreign office, was starchy and did not approve of a stopover visit. The president was busy, but as he also was going to the wedding, he would meet me in London at the residence of their ambassador. To soften the rebuff, Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy gave me lunch.

At my departure from Paris, I was driven at speed through heavy traffic, escorted by police outriders from my hotel to Charles de Gaulle Airport. It was a beautiful summer’s day. The expressways lined with trees and embankments covered with creepers were a glorious sight. Charles de Gaulle Airport was modern and efficiently laid out. Then I arrived in Heathrow, all higgledy-piggledy; a labyrinth of roadways took me from plane to VIP lounge, then out to scruffy streets with roundabouts and grass verges unkempt and overgrown with weeds, on to my Knightsbridge hotel. The contrast between Paris and London was stark.

My mind went back to my first visit to Paris in June 1948 with Choo. It was a scruffy, down-at-heel, post-occupation city, a poor relation compared to bomb-scarred but neat and tidy London, a city of confident people, proud of their record of standing up to the Nazis and saving mankind from tyranny. I remembered also the chaos in Paris in May 1958 just before Charles de Gaulle came back as president to form the Fifth Republic. Through his culture minister, Malraux, he cleaned up Paris, scrubbed the soot from the buildings and made it a city of lights. They restored French pride and injected fresh hope, while London muddled on as the British economy stumbled from one crisis to the next. I believed there were advantages in revolutionary change as against Britain’s slow and gradual constitutional evolution. The British held endless meetings over new airports around London including Stansted and Gatwick, all leading to nothing, as planning authorities were stymied by local interests determined to preserve their amenities at the price of the nation’s progress. Even after the Thatcher years, Heathrow still stands as an ancient monument to symbolise a lack of dare and dash.

Of the French leaders I met, the most perceptive in assessing political trends and the nature of different societies was President Mitterrand. He talked about the threat posed by the aggressive intervention of Soviet forces in Afghanistan. He conceded the Soviets had had successes in Vietnam and the Middle East, particularly Syria, but its influence everywhere else had declined. They had given a lot of arms but had few friends. He was confident that, united, the West had the ability to restore the general balance of power.

During his first two years as president, with Pierre Mauroy as prime minister, Mitterrand followed standard socialist policies. He lowered interest rates, expanded credit to mop up unemployment and nationalised several major industries and banks. The French economy suffered. Old as he was, in his 70s, Mitterrand’s ideology was not set in stone. He changed his prime minister and pursued more conventional economic policies to control money supply and inflation, and restored steady if unspectacular growth. One achievement of his 14 years as president was to educate the French socialists and make them a party of government.

We had a more substantial discussion for over an hour in September 1986 when his Concorde made a refuelling stop at Changi Airport. Protocol did not require me to meet him, but I had found him a serious man. His was a *tour d’horizon*. With great insight, Mitterrand said that the Soviet empire was in such a state that one mere accident would be enough to split central Europe from the Soviet Union, that Soviet control was based on a balance of power which had been in its favour. However, history had shown that the balance always shifted and the ideological power of the Soviet Union was beginning to decline. A third generation of communists believed that they could benefit from the experience of the Western world, and this was causing weaknesses in the Soviet system.

He wholeheartedly agreed with me that Europe would be a much stronger force in international affairs if it could speak in one voice. This was his great ambition – a Europe of 320 million with great technological capabilities. He believed English and French could serve as common languages in Europe, with French equally powerful. But the unification had to be a slow process. If it were a question of survival, Europe would undoubtedly be totally united. On the other hand, Europe would always resist being swallowed by the American civilisation; it would fight to maintain its distinct European identity. Americanisation, with its fast foods, pop music and movies, was invading the basic European lifestyles.

He asked about the Cambodian situation, which he said appeared frozen. I disagreed with his view because there was now cause for optimism. Communism had been checked in the region, having reached its peak when North Vietnam captured Saigon. Since then, the emptiness of the communist system, Vietnam’s invasion and occupation of Cambodia and its own grinding poverty had destroyed the image of idealism that communism had hitherto projected. Mitterrand was surprised to learn that living standards in Vietnam were so dreadfully low that, as I told him, they were happy to get food parcels from relatives in America and France. The Vietnamese, I said, had made a grievous strategic error in fighting China. By continuing its occupation of Cambodia, Vietnam had to forego economic growth while the Asean countries were forging ahead. Vietnam was already one generation behind Asean, and by the time they found a solution to their Cambodian burden they would be lagging by two generations.

I met Mitterrand again on an official visit in May 1990. He came out to the steps of the Élysée to greet me, an honour our ambassador noted. He again expressed surprise at the failure of the Vietnamese who were “courageous, imaginative and resourceful people”. I added that the Vietnamese knew that they were able and could see that the Thais who were less hardworking and less organised were the more successful, that it was their system that was at fault. To put right the system, they would need a generation change at the top. Could there be a grass-roots movement in Vietnam to overthrow the system as had happened in Eastern Europe? I did not think so, because Vietnam had a long-established tradition of emperors and strong leaders.

Mitterrand returned to the subject of the collapse of the Soviet empire and with uncanny prescience predicted the re-emergence of “all sorts of nationalistic forces that had long been suppressed”.

One able French prime minister was Edouard Balladur who led a Gaullist government that cohabited with socialist President Mitterrand. We had met on several previous occasions. His diplomatic adviser had been ambassador in Singapore and a friend, so I knew Balladur was a man of considerable ability. I was surprised, therefore, that he had some strange theories about trade. In his office, with note-takers, he expounded his theory that liberalisation for free trade could take place only between countries of similar social and economic structures, otherwise the differences could lead to distortions and unfair competition. He gave as example the French textile industry which would be lost in another 10–15 years because of competition from China, Taiwan and South Korea. I disagreed with him and argued that protection of any country’s industry was no longer possible except at great cost. Companies were global in reach, an irreversible result of progress in technology, especially in global communications. Firms sourced material from one country, used labour from another, set up production plants in a third and marketed their products in a fourth.

Although he agreed with my views in general, he could not but take a protectionist position, because of fears over the loss of jobs whenever companies relocated their production plants out of France. He agreed that economic competition should be honest and fair, adding that Japanese car manufacturers did not compete fairly as they possessed certain advantages. I found this an eccentric and odd explanation from a man of undoubted intellect.



A similar view was put to me by Jacques Chirac when, as mayor of Paris, he met me in Singapore at the end of 1993. He had read the speech I made at the Asahi Forum that October when he was in Tokyo. He found my proposition that Europe was protectionist absurd. Europe was the most open market in the world with the lowest tariffs. The real protectionists, he argued, were Japan and the United States. It was unfair to blame France or the European Commission for blocking the Uruguay Round negotiations because it refused to give up Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy. I countered that if there were no free trade, then the world must prepare for another war. The Chinese had built their ancient empire because they needed to establish order over a wide expanse of territory and its many peoples so that goods and services could be exchanged freely within their empire. When all parts of the globe were carved up into various empires as before World War II, war resulted from competition for more raw materials, more markets and more wealth.

We next discussed French agriculture and the Uruguay Round. I had listened to a BBC programme on the plight of the French farmers and how the French countryside had suffered. But this was part and parcel of the technological revolution. French farmers could not be protected forever and ever to keep their way of life unchanged. Chirac retorted that France needed to protect its agriculture, but he wanted me to know that he shared my views on free trade. For its own long-term interest there was no way other than free trade, hence France was the least protectionist.

I quoted former GATT Director-General Arthur Dunkel as an expert witness that France was protectionist. The then director-general, Peter Sutherland, also said so. Chirac interjected to say that he had no confidence in Sutherland. I said the EEC president, Jacques Delors, had confidence in Sutherland, to which Chirac promptly replied that he had no confidence in Delors as well\!

Chirac said we could not convince each other, so it was best if we agreed to disagree. In the end he did move the position of Balladur’s government so that a settlement was reached on the Uruguay Round. Since we first met in 1974, Chirac and I had become friends and could talk freely and frankly to each other without giving or taking offence.



I was struck by the deep interest both Chirac and the German chancellor, Helmut Kohl, had in China and East Asia. I discussed this with Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong and suggested that he launch an initiative for regular meetings between leaders of the European Union \(EU\) and East Asia. The Americans had regular meetings with East Asia through APEC, and with the EU through many organisations. But the EU and East Asia had no formal meetings that could foster trade, investments and cultural exchanges. Goh took it up with French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, and the first Asia-Europe meeting of leaders was held in Bangkok in February 1996. Visiting Asian countries on their way to or after that meeting, many European leaders discovered the extent of the East Asian industrial transformation, and decided on biennial meetings of EU and East Asian leaders.



My first encounter with Germans was at Frankfurt airport in April 1956. The British Overseas Airways Corporation “Argonaut” had stopped in Rome where I heard mellifluous if languid announcements over the loudspeakers as Italian porters trundled baggage leisurely. On arrival at Frankfurt a few hours later I felt the air appreciably cooler and crisper, as if to match the peremptory *Achtung-Achtung* over the loudspeakers, followed by instructions that were compelling and insistent as German porters briskly went about their business. It reminded me of the difference between the German and Italian armies described in despatches from the battle fronts of World War II. I had read them in reports carried by Allied news agencies when I was editing their cables during the Japanese occupation.



I visited Willy Brandt in Bonn in September 1970 when he was the German chancellor. We had met earlier in Brussels, in 1964, during the centennial of the Socialist International. After my speech at that meeting, he came up and sympathised with me over the communal riots in Singapore that had been organised by supporters of the central government out to intimidate the Chinese. He invited me to visit him. I likened Singapore to a West Berlin without the advantage of the Federal Republic of Germany to back it. As a former mayor of West Berlin he understood my predicament. He was the most sympathetic of all European leaders to Singapore’s plight. I tried to convince him not to write off Southeast Asia because I was confident we would overcome the communist insurgencies threatening so many countries in the region. Brandt was attractive – tall and broad-framed, with a friendly, handsome face and a good voice. He was more visceral than cerebral in his reactions. Perhaps he allowed his heart to rule his head. He was a good old-fashioned socialist, always in favour of equalising opportunities and rewards.

Helmut Schmidt, who took over from Brandt in 1974, was clearheaded and tough-minded, with definite views on all key issues. He had contempt for the equivocation on East-West issues of developing countries’ leaders who were afraid to criticise the Soviet Union. Having been defence minister, then finance minister, as chancellor he had a thorough grasp of economic, defence and strategic issues.

He and his wife Loki visited Singapore in October 1978. In the three days they spent here, we had the measure of each other and found much common ground. When we recorded a television interview for a German television station, the interlocutor was surprised that we seemed to think and talk alike on so many issues.

I proposed to Schmidt that he set up a German-Singapore Institute to run courses on advanced manufacturing and information technology, to help German businesses set up in the region. He agreed. The institute turned out to be of great benefit to German investors who were able to recruit technicians trained up to German standards. Later Singapore became host for the training of other Third World workers at this institute.

After my visit to Bonn and Berlin the following autumn, I wrote in a note to the cabinet:

“Berlin looked more prosperous than in 1970, my last visit. But it lacked the relaxed and free spirit of Bonn. The communists have a choker on the people of West Berlin. They stifled the vibrancy of life, not enough to give cause for protest, or to make newspaper headlines, but enough of a constant and nagging pressure to remind Germans generally that they have hostages in West Berlin. As I passed the Russian war memorial with their guards standing like statues, I was reminded that they were suppliers of weapons which were causing so much suffering in Indochina and threatening Thailand. Without the flow of these weapons, there would be no Vietnamese troops in Cambodia nor Cambodian refugees in Thailand. … Our saving grace is that their system is so damnably inefficient in providing the goods and services the people want. Regimentation has left their people shabbier in spirit and poorer in everything, except the capacity to make war. This inferiority, over time, will become increasingly clear to everyone including their own people. If the West does not give the Soviets any opportunity to exploit their military superiority, their system will be under profound stress by the 1990s.”

So it turned out.

I next met Schmidt in Bonn in January 1980, after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. I was with a group of leaders, including Henry Kissinger, Ted Heath and George Shultz, for a free-ranging discussion. We were unanimous that the Soviet Union had to be resisted at all costs and the Afghan people supported.

Schmidt stepped down from office in 1982 because his Social Democrat Party \(SPD\) would not support the policies he thought necessary to restore financial discipline. He remained active, writing in *Die Zeit*, a newspaper, and chairing conferences of the InterAction Council, a group of former world leaders who met annually to discuss long-term world problems in a totally dispassionate and non-partisan manner. I became a member of his group after I stood down from office in 1990.

Schmidt’s successor, Helmut Kohl, was a giant of a man, probably the largest and tallest leader in the world then. On my visit to Bonn in May 1990 he was eloquent on German reunification, then about to happen. It had to happen, he said, and in the context of European unity. He was confident and optimistic that he could manage the costs and problems of reunification. He dismissed any suggestion of a “Fortress Europe”. Germany would not condone protectionism and he was confident the German industry would be able to compete against the Japanese.

I expressed concern that German reunification would consume so much resources, energy and manpower that there would be little left over for the Asia Pacific region. He assured me that he would not lose interest in East Asia. He was most conscious that a reunified Germany, with some 20 million East Germans added to 60 million West Germans, would raise fears among its neighbours. He said that everybody wanted a united Germany to remain in NATO, and although their motives for wanting this were not always “friendly”, the end result was positive: “European unity and German unity are two sides of the same medallion.”

He had equally strong views on China. There were many *dummkoepfe* \(blockheads\) in the Federal Republic of Germany who wanted to isolate China because of Tiananmen. It was the wrong approach. He agreed with Singapore’s policy of engaging China. China wanted a foot in Europe, particularly in Germany which had the highest number of Chinese students in Europe, and they would be the future modernisers of China.

Unlike the French, German industries and banks had been active in Singapore and the region from the early 1970s, long before Chancellor Kohl developed a personal interest. After the Dutch, the Germans were the largest single European investor in Singapore, and our largest European trading partner. Kohl visited Singapore in February 1993, two and a half years after German reunification. He admitted the cost of integrating East Germany was more than he had expected. Nevertheless he was accompanied by over 40 top German industrialists. I urged him not to leave East Asia to the Americans and the Japanese. Germany, Kohl said, was essentially outward-looking. He wanted more economic and cultural links with the area. He invited me to visit Germany to keep in touch. He wanted Singapore and German entrepreneurs to invest together in China, Vietnam and other East Asian markets. \(I visited him in May 1994 to keep him abreast of events.\) He also spoke of Russia, that the European Union was not treating the leaders in Moscow with the respect that was due. The Russians were a proud people and felt belittled and slighted by this. If the correct approach was not maintained, he was convinced Russian nationalists and militarists would get back into power and “the whole cycle would start again”.

In November 1995 Kohl visited Singapore again and repeated his concern over Russia. His European partners did not understand that Russia was crucial to peace in Europe. They had to help Russia become stronger and more democratic and not go back to dictatorship and expansionism. Europe would need Russia as a balance against China. For these reasons, Germany was Russia’s top aid donor with US$52 billion in 1989, more than half of all international assistance. He despaired of the Americans. They were becoming inward-looking. The Republicans were “as bad if not worse”. No Republican candidate had been to Europe during a presidential election year as they had done in the years of the Cold War.

He wanted my personal assessment to check against his official reports on China, Japan, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and the Philippines, and I gave him frank answers with no varnish. When I said that such and such a country was a hopeless case, he would concur to say he would not invest there. He was hard-headed and our assessments often matched.

In June 1996 Kohl took Choo and me over the Rhine in a helicopter to visit Speyer, with its splendid 11th century cathedral, in his home state, Rhineland-Palatinate, in the heart of Europe. He had brought Mitterrand, Gorbachev, Thatcher and others on this sentimental journey to the wine district of the Rhineland. His wife joined us at his favourite restaurant, Deidesheim Hof, where we tried some of his favourite dishes. During dinner he regaled me with stories of his encounters with East Asian leaders he liked and some whom he found prickly. He found Suharto an unassuming man and they became close friends. Before he became chancellor, he had visited Suharto at his home. As he waited in the hall admiring fish in an aquarium, a man wearing a sweater and a sarong came out; together they watched the fish and then got into conversation. The German ambassador who accompanied Kohl did not take notice of him. Only after some time did Kohl realise this was the president himself. Suharto invited him to stay for lunch and they spent four hours together. On another occasion, Suharto took him to his farm to see his cattle, after which Kohl arranged for a German stud bull to be sent. The next time he met Suharto, the president shook his hand and said the bull had done a first-class job.

Kohl showed that he placed little weight on form and much on substance when we travelled around Speyer, all of us, not in Mercedes limousines, but in a Volkswagen people mover. When I gave him lunch in Singapore, he arrived in a tour coach, in order, he told me, to have a better and more comfortable view of the city.

Helmut Schmidt and Helmut Kohl were not the best of friends and the German media were intrigued that I got along well with both. When they asked me, I replied it was my business to get on with whoever was the leader of Germany, that I did not take sides. Kohl was often unfavourably compared with Schmidt, his immediate predecessor. Schmidt is an intellectual, always tossing out interesting ideas which he expounded with trenchant force and clarity in *Die Zeit* after he retired as chancellor. Kohl, on the other hand, has been described by the media as dull and uninspiring. This led many to underestimate him. When he first came to power, no one expected him to become the longest-serving German chancellor since Bismarck. When I got to know him better, beneath the outward bulk and apparent clumsiness I discovered a good mind with keen political instinct. He was a strong character, resolute and consistent in pursuing his objectives. His great vision enabled him to come to terms with Germany’s past and he was determined that the past would never again be repeated. Hence his single-minded pursuit of the European Monetary Union \(EMU\) which he referred to as a question of war and peace. He believed the Euro would make the process of European integration irreversible.

Kohl lost the election in September 1998. He will go down in history as a great German who reunified Germany and as a greater European who wanted Germany as part of a supranational Europe to avoid the disastrous European wars of the last century. He consolidated Franco-German ties and set the Euro for a successful launch on 1 January 1999, despite much scepticism and opposition. The Euro weakened against the US dollar in its first year, but if it eventually succeeds, Kohl’s contribution to European unity will have been historic. His admission that he had managed secret donations to his party that should have been declared cannot diminish his contribution to Germany and the European Union.



French leaders impressed me by the quality of their intellect and political analysis. They had a greater ability than the Germans to project themselves onto the world stage, making use of the resources of the Germans in the European Community. A reunited Germany would challenge this arrangement. But Chancellor Kohl knew too well the fears that could be aroused if Germany appeared to throw its weight.

One serious obstacle to European cohesion and unity is the absence of a common language. Schmidt spoke to Giscard in English and told me they could establish a close rapport. Mitterrand and Chirac communicated with Kohl through an interpreter. I have always found it difficult to feel the texture of another person’s mind when an interpreter stood in between. Schmidt, Giscard and Chirac all spoke to me in English and I could feel the grain of their thinking better than with Mitterrand and Kohl, who spoke through interpreters. When I had to wait for interpreters to tell me what they said, it was more difficult to read their body language. When a person speaks in English, even if it is not grammatical or idiomatic, I get the feel of the way his mind works. His pauses and hesitations in the middle of a sentence sometimes change the nuance of a sentence; an interpreter would have smoothed out these pauses and given me the substance without the wrinkles that would indicate his reservations. Until the Europeans settle on a common language, they cannot equal the uniformity and the benefits of scale that America enjoys. Every EU country teaches English as the second language. None is prepared to give up its language for English or any other language. EU engineers and managers will therefore not be so easily interchangeable as Americans when working on major projects.

French aspirations to have their language as one of the leading languages of international diplomacy have had to yield to pragmatism. By the late 1980s French speakers at international conferences began to speak in English for greater impact on the international audience. With the Internet, the supremacy of the English language can be ignored only at a heavy price. It is common in the 1990s to listen to French and German CEOs having discussions in English.




