+++
title = "27 The Soviet Union: An Empire Implodes"

+++



I was in Jesselton \(now Kota Kinabalu\) near the jungles of British North Borneo for a court case when news broke in October 1957 that the Russians had sent a sputnik into space. It was a spectacular demonstration of the superiority of Soviet technology. I took the challenge of the communist system seriously. The Soviets were aggressive everywhere in Asia, and together with communist China were fuelling guerrilla insurrections. They loomed even larger in my mind after they sent the first man into space in April 1961. It lent credence to their claim that history was on their side.

I was curious to know what they were like as a people and took the opportunity to visit Moscow in September 1962 after a Commonwealth conference in London. I was given the standard official tour of Moscow including a night at the Bolshoi, where I watched Stravinsky on his first return to Russia conducting the orchestra for the ballet *Petrushka*. The officials insulated me from people in the streets, shops and hotels and I met no one other than themselves.

My lasting impression of Moscow and its officials is one of drabness and dourness. There was a *bábushka*, exactly as I had read in books – a big, fat lady sitting outside the lift on my floor of the National Hotel \(their best, where Stravinsky was also staying\), doing little else. They served me an enormous breakfast – caviar, smoked sturgeon, slabs of ham and meat, an assortment of bread, butter, coffee, tea, vodka and cognac – on a table covered with a dark velvet tablecloth. When I returned that night from the ballet, the food was still uncleared. And as I had been warned, the bathtub and washbasin had no stoppers. I had brought a solid rubber ball expressly for this purpose. It did not work for the washbasin but fortunately did for the bathtub. The Chaika car \(a medium-size saloon\) was dreadful. The officer who took me around was from the ministry of culture in charge of Southeast Asia, and the highest official I got to see was deputy foreign minister Kuznetsov. In Moscow I had the impression of menace in the air, but that was perhaps my imagination.

That the Soviets were a great power was a reality. I therefore encouraged my elder son Loong to study Russian, reasoning that since he was keen on mathematics, he could then read the publications of many excellent Russian mathematicians. I thought Russia was going to be a powerful influence in the lives of my children. Loong spent five years studying the language with a Czech émigré professor teaching at our Nanyang University, followed by a Tass correspondent and then a succession of young Russians who were studying Chinese there. Finally a British diplomat taught him Russian for the O level examination, for which he got a distinction.

Singapore established full diplomatic relations with Russia in 1968 but contacts were minimal. They had nothing we wanted to buy except the catch of their fishing fleet that trawled the Indian and Pacific Oceans. They formed a joint venture with one of our companies to can their fish, and also repaired their vessels in our dockyards and took on provisions. The Soviets, however, were interested in Singapore because of its strategic location. This point was brought home to me during an enforced stopover in Moscow in January 1969.

Choo and I were on our way to London, flying on Scandinavian Airlines System via Bangkok, Tashkent and Copenhagen, when the pilot announced that the plane was unable to land at Tashkent because of weather conditions and had to land instead in Moscow. The weather looked fair as we flew over Tashkent. Waiting on the tarmac of Moscow airport were their foreign ministry officials with Ilia Ivanovich Safronov, the Russian ambassador-designate to Singapore. It was a freezing night. Choo slipped and nearly fell on the icy tarmac, quite unprepared for these conditions. My secretary shivered with the cold but warmed up in the VIP room with cognac. What they wanted from this elaborate exercise was for me to meet the man coming to Singapore as their first ambassador. It was also a simple way to impress upon me their size, their might and their reach. Safronov, who spoke Mandarin, had served in China and his duty obviously was to make a close study of the potential influence that China could muster in Singapore. Soon after he arrived in Singapore, he brought me an invitation from Prime Minister Aleksei Nikolayevich Kosygin to visit the Soviet Union.

In September 1970 I arrived in Moscow past midnight on an Aeroflot flight from Cairo, to be welcomed by a guard of honour of tall Russian guardsmen under floodlights. They moved like robots and shouted back in unison when I was prompted to say “Hello” to them in Russian. The inspection of the guard of honour ended with the men marching past close to me in an intimidating show of aggressiveness and strength. It was designed to impress, and I was impressed.

I called on a corpulent President Nikolai Podgorny at the Kremlin for discussions and lunch. He spoke of improving cultural and economic relations. A nondescript character, he left no impression on me. The next day, they flew us to Sochi then drove us from their guest dacha over two miles of a hilly road by the Black Sea to a large holiday home in Pitsunda, where a serious-looking but not unfriendly prime minister greeted us. Kosygin proudly showed us the facilities of his resort dacha, in particular his heated indoor pool with a large sliding door which worked at the press of a button. I spent some two hours talking with him before dinner.

Kosygin showed keen interest in the circumstances under which we had separated from Malaysia. He asked “whether Singapore had in fact made serious efforts to live together in the Federation”. I assured him we had tried our best but that there was a fundamental difference in our political beliefs on communal issues and policies. He asked if he was right to assume that the idea of federation with Malaysia had not been abandoned. I referred to ties of geography and family between the two countries, but after the Kuala Lumpur May 1969 race riots, I did not think it was productive to talk about rejoining the Federation. The leaders there were suspicious of Singapore. He then asked about the support enjoyed by the communists \(i.e., Maoists\) in Singapore. I said this peaked at about 33 per cent in 1961–62 and was now probably 15 per cent.

It was clear to me from his body language and his questions on the influence of Beijing on our Chinese-educated that he did not think an independent Singapore was in the Soviet interest. He referred pointedly to our military repair facilities used by US aircraft and ships, and also the rest and recreation visits of US servicemen from Vietnam. I countered that our repair facilities were open to all on a commercial basis. He was interested in using our dockyards and, with an eye to the former British naval facilities, said he hoped to expand bilateral relations in the political and economic fields. He was prepared to send all types of vessels, including Soviet warships, for repairs. His deputy minister for foreign trade would visit Singapore to assess the prospects of enhancing trade.

He struck me as a man of some subtlety and gravitas. He did not raise the Soviet proposal for an Asian collective security system that President Podgorny had put to me in Moscow. Since I had shown no enthusiasm, Kosygin simply said that they were both a European and an Asian country, and naturally interested in what went on in Southeast Asia, although some chose to deny them the right to be Asians.

A foreign affairs officer who accompanied me, a China specialist, Mikhail S. Kapitsa, did most of the talking and probing throughout my visit. Soviet hospitality was overwhelming. On the aircraft from Moscow to Sochi, they served caviar, smoked sturgeon, vodka and cognac soon after breakfast. When I said that British habits made me drink only tea in the morning, the liquor and food were removed. Their minister who accompanied us said he was also a tea drinker and sang its praises.

I was impressed by the huge war memorial at Volgograd \(Stalingrad during World War II\) to commemorate their heroic defence of the city under siege. As a cable editor in Japanese-occupied Singapore, I had read war correspondents’ despatches during that long battle in 1943–44. Magnificent wall bas-reliefs commemorated the many acts of bravery of Russian troops and civilians during the siege. Nearly as memorable were their war memorial and cemetery at Leningrad \(now St Petersburg\). These were a brave, tough and enduring people who had absorbed the heavy punishment the German Wehrmacht had inflicted, turned the tables on their enemy, and finally driven them all the way back to Berlin.

Friendly and hospitable though they were, Choo and I suspected that our rooms were bugged. After dinner on our first night in Moscow, she said in our bedroom at the guest dacha, “Strange, they paid so much attention to me. They must think I have a great deal of influence over you. They gave very little attention to Raja.” The next day, Rajaratnam, my foreign minister, received much more and Choo much less attention from our hosts. It was so obvious that I wondered if they wanted us to know they were eavesdropping. For the rest of the trip, even in the toilet, I felt that they were monitoring my thoughts.

After 1970 we had no more high-level contacts except for four visits from Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister N.P. Firyubin to Singapore between 1974 and 1980. I chided him for not supporting Asean when even mainland China had voiced its support. They were suspicious of Asean as an anti-Soviet pro-US organisation. Firyubin was highly intelligent and pleasant to talk to, but had no power to decide policy. When we met for the last time in April 1980, he tried to burnish the poor reputation of the Soviets after their support for Vietnam’s occupation of Cambodia and their own invasion of Afghanistan. He said the Soviet Union wanted détente with the rest of the world and referred to the recent visits of Vietnamese leaders to Southeast Asian capitals as an indication of their new mood for peace. Vietnam was willing to discuss the establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and prosperity. The Soviet Union supported this and would do everything to maintain peace, security and mutual trust. I was blunt in contradicting his views. If they wanted peace, they should get Vietnam to reverse its aggression in Cambodia, which had alarmed all the other countries in Southeast Asia. I emphasised that the Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 had made all countries in Southeast Asia fearful of Soviet intentions.

We also discovered around this time that our cypher officer in Moscow had been compromised by a Russian woman and had handed her the embassy’s decoded messages. They must have done this routinely for all embassies, whether friend or foe. What they hoped to learn from reading our communications with our embassy puzzled me, for all we wanted was to stay out of trouble with them.

After Vietnam invaded Cambodia, Russian propaganda had turned hostile against Singapore, speaking of 25 million Chinese who lived outside the People’s Republic of China as China’s proxies, a dangerous Fifth Column in their countries of residence. I reminded Firyubin that the Soviet Union had an embassy in Singapore but China did not, that he knew I disapproved of the Chinese government’s attempts to appeal to overseas Chinese in the region over the heads of Southeast Asian governments. However, Vietnam’s aggression and occupation of Cambodia had succeeded in stifling fears the Thais and others had of China. The Soviet Union had to make a fundamental decision to change its policy. The less trouble it created in Southeast Asia, the fewer the opportunities for China to get closer to these countries.

After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, we joined the boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics, froze the cultural exchange programme and deferred all visits by their economic delegations. We also denied repair facilities and even bunkering to their naval and auxiliary vessels in our civilian dockyards, and overflight and technical stopover facilities for Soviet aircraft flying to Indonesia.

Relations remained frozen for nearly a decade until Gorbachev introduced glasnost and perestroika. When Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov visited Singapore in February 1990 he represented a different government and country. He had none of the self-confidence and swagger of a leader of a big power. He had approached Deputy Prime Minister Ong Teng Cheong for a $50 million loan to buy Singapore consumer goods. I did not agree and told Ong Teng Cheong not to respond. By the time the prime minister of the Soviet Union had to approach tiny Singapore for a $50 million loan, they must have exhausted their credit with all the big countries. A sovereign debt from the Soviet Union was worthless.

He was taken to an NTUC-owned “Fairprice” supermarket. When I gave him dinner that night at the Istana, he expressed his amazement that our workers could afford the wide variety he saw of meats, fruits and vegetables imported from all over the world. That the Soviet Union was suffering from food shortages at the time brought this subject to the forefront of his thoughts.

Ryzhkov was pleasantly soft-spoken and friendly. He admitted that Stalin’s imposition of the command economy and the isolation of the Soviet Union under conditions of autarchy had done damage. His government had since made a turnaround. They had now seen how closely interrelated the world had become and had decided to get intensively involved in international economic relations irrespective of the country’s system.

He invited me to visit the Soviet Union, which I did in September that year. This time, the welcoming ceremony at Moscow airport was very different. Their guard of honour was no longer of uniformly tall six-foot-three guardsmen. They were a mixed lot of the tall, short and medium, and the bandsmen were similarly an odd mix. The clockwork military precision was missing. They no longer bothered to create that sense of awe in their visitors.

Ryzhkov was late for his meeting with me and apologised profusely. He had been held up in the Supreme Soviet trying to find a compromise between two divergent sets of proposals for a transition of the Soviet economy to an open-market system. He displayed a total loss of confidence in their system and bewilderment at how to get into a market system. He said his government had watched Singapore with great interest because they were now embarking on a transition to a market economy and were attracted by the remarkable changes in Singapore. They were also studying the experiences of many countries to extract the positive elements of how others had managed their economy. I thought how disastrous it was for a huge country like the Soviet Union to be talking of learning about the market economy from other countries at this late stage of disintegration.

My meeting with President Mikhail Gorbachev was postponed several times because he was caught up in a series of intense discussions on the next step into a market economy. Soviet protocol officers were apologetic, but I told my ambassador not to worry. We were witnessing the end of an empire. I had the advantage of having seen an earlier one, the collapse of the British Empire in February 1942 as the Japanese captured us. I was taken to his office at the Kremlin when he broke away from one of the interminable meetings to meet me for half an hour. All formalities were put aside as we met in a small group, he with only his *chef de cabinet* and one interpreter, and I with only my deputy prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, and my foreign minister, Wong Kan Seng.

He was uncertain what his next steps should be to solve almost insoluble problems. I thought to myself that he had made a fatal mistake going for glasnost \(openness\) before perestroika \(restructuring\), that Deng Xiaoping had been wiser doing it the other way around. Gorbachev looked composed, calm and sincere when he said that each nation was unique and no country must dominate another militarily. He said the Soviet Union was engaged in perestroika, grappling with the question of choice, the choice of political and economic reform, and how it should proceed. The Soviet Union had begun its perestroika in 1917 but that had not worked out the way it was supposed to. Now he was trying all over again. He understood that Singapore’s perestroika had started many years ago. He valued the development of bilateral relations.

It was a miracle, I said, that the transformation of the Soviet Union was so peaceful. If he could get through the next three to five years without violence, he would have scored a great triumph. I complimented him for not using military might to solve his problems since otherwise it would have been disastrous for the world. He replied that no matter what stage of economic or cultural development a country was in, no one could say which was first-rate and which was second-rate because each nation was unique in its own way.

As we walked out of the Kremlin, I marvelled that such a decent man could reach the top of so evil a system. A lesser leader would have sought to resolve the problems of the Soviet Union by using its huge military capabilities, which would have caused untold damage to the rest of the world. It was a stroke of good fortune for the United States and indeed the world.

In my discussions with China’s leaders I discovered their totally different view of Gorbachev as a superpower leader who had listened to the siren calls of his enemies. He should have been on guard when his enemies’ media praised him. Instead, he followed their exhortations and by glasnost \(openness\) brought about the disintegration of his country, exactly what his foes wanted. Therefore, when the American media referred to Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji as China’s Gorbachev, Zhu quickly distanced himself from anything that might be seen to be like Gorbachev. The accolade he or any Chinese leader preferred was to be seen as a Deng Xiaoping with his socialist realism, that cats of whatever colour all caught mice. Few Chinese, leaders or ordinary people, commiserated with Gorbachev when he was repudiated by his own people with less than one per cent voting for him in the 1996 Russian presidential election. They saw him as having dismantled the Soviet empire in a way the CIA would have been proud to have done.

The Soviet Union’s disintegration did not affect Singapore as we had few economic links with it. The first sign of its system breaking down was when the visits of its fishing fleet became irregular. Ships’ captains were selling their fish elsewhere, sometimes on the high seas, to pay their crew and the dockyards that repaired their vessels cheaper than we could. Central control from Moscow had broken down. Aeroflot, the Soviet airline, was in similar difficulties. It did not have the hard currency to pay for aviation fuel and had to beg for petty cash from Moscow Narodny Bank’s branch in Singapore to pay for fuel to fly back to Moscow.

Despite this growing chaos Aeroflot brought in plane-loads of Russian tourists who shopped for electronic goods they could sell at several times their cost once past Moscow customs. They were profitable excursions for these freelance traders. Soon more Russian women than men arrived. Word had got around that all they needed was their air ticket and taxi fare to our hotels where male clients would provide them with the resources to pay for the electronic goods to take home at the end of their short stay. Our ambassador in Moscow was a moral man who disapproved of this and approached the Soviet interior ministry to get them not to issue passports to such women. But the flow of these enterprising young Russian women amateurs continued.

When I visited the Soviet Union that September of 1970 and met Premier Kosygin at his holiday dacha on the Black Sea, the Soviet leaders were expansive and assertive, confident that the future belonged to them. To watch this massive, tightly controlled empire shudder, become ungovernable and then break up was an awesome spectacle. Something like this must have happened to China in the last decades of the Qing dynasty. The difference is that Russia still has nuclear capability, an ultimate deterrent against any predator out to dismember it. And anyone who believes that the Russians are finished as a powerful people should remember the nuclear and space scientists, chess grandmasters and Olympic champions they nurtured despite a crippling centrally planned economy. Unlike their communist system, the Russians are not a people to be consigned to the dustbin of history.




