+++
title = "28 America: The Anti-Communist Anchorman"

+++



In late August 1965, within days of the trauma of separation from Malaysia, I was suddenly faced with a personal problem. Choo had a worrying medical condition that required surgery. Her gynaecologist, Dr Benjamin Sheares, recommended an American specialist who was the best man in this field. I tried to get him to come but could not persuade him to do so. He wanted Choo to go to Switzerland where he was going for some other engagement. I enlisted the help of the US consul-general and, through him, the US government. They were unhelpful; either they could not or would not help. I approached the British to get their top specialist named by Sheares. He agreed and immediately flew to Singapore, expressing understanding for my not wanting her to travel abroad when I could not leave Singapore. This incident reinforced my gut feeling that I would find it difficult to work with the Americans whom I did not know as well as the British.

I was angry and under stress. In a television interview with foreign correspondents a few days later, I fired a broadside at the Americans. I expressed my unhappiness that the US government had not been able to help in persuading an American medical specialist to come to Singapore to treat someone dear to me. Then I disclosed publicly for the first time the story of how, four years earlier, a CIA agent had tried to bribe an officer of our Special Branch \(our internal intelligence agency\).

In 1961 the CIA offered this officer a fantastic salary and guaranteed that if his activities were discovered or he got into trouble, they would remove him and his family to America and his future was assured. Their proposition was so attractive that the officer took three days to consider it before deciding he had to tell his chief, Richard Corridon, about it. Corridon immediately reported to me and I told him to lay a trap. He did and caught three Americans red-handed in a flat in Orange Grove Road as they were about to administer a polygraph lie-detector test on our Special Branch officer to check his honesty. One was a member of the US consulate here and claimed diplomatic immunity; two were CIA officers, one based in Bangkok, the other in Kuala Lumpur. They were caught with enough evidence to send them to jail for 12 years. The American consul-general, who knew nothing about it, resigned.

After discussing the matter with Keng Swee, Chin Chye, Raja and Pang Boon, I told the British commissioner, Lord Selkirk, that we would release these men and their stupidity would not be made public if the Americans gave a hundred million US dollars to the Singapore government for economic development. They offered US$1 million, not to the Singapore government, but to the PAP – an unbelievable insult. The Americans had been buying and selling so many leaders in Vietnam and elsewhere that they believed they could buy and sell leaders everywhere. We had to release the American who had diplomatic immunity but we held the two CIA officers on detention orders for one year under Emergency Regulations. At Selkirk’s repeated urgings, we released them a month later with a warning never to do this again. We hoped the warning would be heeded, but feared it would not.

In response to this public disclosure, the US State Department denied that any bribe had been offered, and deplored my statement as “unfortunate, unhelpful and simply playing into the hands of the Indonesians”. “The Americans stupidly denied the undeniable,” I replied, releasing details and a letter dated 15 April 1961 signed by Dean Rusk:

“Dear Prime Minister:

I am deeply distressed to learn that certain officials of the United States government have been found by your government to have been engaged in improper activities in Singapore. I want you to know that I regret very much that this unfortunate incident has occurred to mar the friendly relations that exist between our governments. The new administration takes a very serious view of this matter and intends to review the activities of these officials for disciplinary action.

Sincerely yours,  
\(Sgd Dean Rusk\)”

My attitude in 1961 to America and Americans was summed up in my instructions to Corridon: “Investigate this matter thoroughly, every aspect of it. Leave nothing unturned until you get to the heart of the matter. But remember all the time that we are not dealing with an enemy, but the bloody stupidity of a friend.”

Besides venting my anger on the Americans for being unhelpful, my objective in exposing this incident that August 1965 was to signal to the West that if the British pulled out, there would be no American bases in Singapore, but we would “go along with Australia and New Zealand”. I wanted the British to remain. I was fearful that after our sudden separation from Malaysia, Britain would want to withdraw as soon as Indonesian Confrontation ended.

I viewed Americans with mixed feelings. I admired their can-do approach but shared the view of the British establishment of the time that the Americans were bright and brash, that they had enormous wealth but often misused it. It was not true that all it needed to fix a problem was to bring resources to bear on it. Many American leaders believed that racial, religious and linguistic hatreds, rivalries, hostilities and feuds down the millennia could be solved if sufficient resources were expended on them. \(Some still do. Hence their efforts to build peaceful, multiracial, multireligious societies in Bosnia and Kosovo.\)


Their methods of countering communism in Asia did not impress me. They were unprincipled in their dealings with Ngo Dinh Diem, South Vietnam’s nationalist leader, backing him until he refused to do America’s bidding, then looking the other way when Diem’s generals assassinated him. They meant well but were heavy-handed and lacked a sense of history. I also feared they would consider all ethnic Chinese likely communist supporters because China was communist.

But America was the only country with the strength and determination to stem this relentless tide of history and reverse the erosion of people’s will to resist the communists. So I wanted the British, Australians and New Zealanders to be a buffer. Life would be difficult if Singapore were to become like Saigon or Manila. By themselves, the British in Malaysia and Singapore could not have blocked the communist advance into Southeast Asia. It was the Americans who stopped the Chinese and Vietnamese communists from spreading guerrilla insurgency into Cambodia and Thailand. The United States supported President Sukarno in Indonesia until the communists attempted a coup in September 1965. It was an irreplaceable backstop against further communist expansion.

I was relieved the Americans were prepared to oppose communists wherever they threatened and whatever the cost. Because Americans were resolutely anti-communist and prepared to confront them, Nehru, Nasser and Sukarno could afford to be non-aligned. This was a comfortable posture and one I had adopted without at first realising that it was a luxury paid for by Americans. Without them out front, together with the British, Europeans, Australians and New Zealanders, checking the Russian and Chinese communists, Singapore could not have been critical of China or Russia.

I had made clear my support of American intervention in Vietnam. In May 1965, while Singapore was still in Malaysia, I spoke to a left-wing audience at an Asian Socialist Leaders’ Conference in Bombay. At a time when Indians were neutral and critical of American action in Vietnam, I told them that “As Asians we must uphold the right of the Vietnamese people to self-determination and to be free from any hint of European domination. As democratic socialists we must insist that the South Vietnamese have the right not to be pressured through armed might and organised terror and finally overwhelmed by communism. So we must seek a formula that will first make it possible for the South Vietnamese to recover their freedom of choice, which at the moment is limited to either communist capture or perpetual American military operations.”

In many speeches I had emphasised that the governments of Southeast Asia must use the time the Americans were buying for us by their intervention in Vietnam to solve the problems of poverty, unemployment and inequity in our societies. Unknown to me, the US assistant secretary for East Asia, William Bundy, had read my speeches. We met for the first time in my office in March 1966. He assured me that the United States intended to play a quiet role and did not wish to maintain a military presence in Malaysia. They had been drawn into Vietnam deeper than intended and were not anxious to get involved elsewhere in East Asia.

The Americans wanted the British to stay in Malaysia for historical reasons, and because of a “division of labour”. They would leave the major running of policy to the British, who were the only European power able to do it. If Malaysia turned to them for economic help, they would be happy to help but would take a low posture.

I asked about US reactions to a hypothetical communist-inspired communal conflict between Singapore and Malaysia. He insisted that they would not like to get involved. I stressed that they should not view the entire Chinese diaspora as some monolithic group steered by the communists on the mainland. If American policy treated all Chinese in Southeast Asia as potential mainland Chinese agents, they would have no alternative but to become Chinese chauvinists. Asked about Vietnam, I said the will to resist was the critical factor. This was absent. The people of South Vietnam must be persuaded that there was a reasonable prospect that they could win the fight.

Early in 1966 we agreed that American troops serving in Vietnam could come to Singapore for their rest and recreation. The first batch of 100 arrived in March 1966 and stayed for five days in a rental apartment block in a suburban area. They flew in from Saigon three times a week in civilian chartered Pan American flights. About 20,000 came in a year, 7 per cent of the total number of tourists of that time. The financial benefits were small. It was a quiet way of showing support for America’s effort in Vietnam.

Bundy saw me again in March 1967. I felt I could trust him; he was open and straight-talking. He was not out to impress anyone and was careless about his clothes – I noticed that he wore torn socks. But he had an air of quiet confidence. He knew I had been pressing the British to stay. That was also American policy. He assured me that the United States would continue to slog it out in Vietnam, that the results were heartening: 20,000 Vietcong had defected. He was confident that the Republicans, then out of government, had no alternative. The problems might become messy but President Johnson was very determined and would not give up because the United States was convinced their action in Vietnam was a major contribution to stability in Southeast Asia.

Bundy invited me for an informal visit to Washington in the late autumn, away from the crush of visitors around the annual opening of the UN session. I would have a chance to meet and talk with the people who made their policies, and those in the wider circle who were part of their establishment. I said that while the British were running down their bases in Singapore, my visit to America would look like I was scared.

In July 1967 he wrote to me and referred to reports from London that I might have made “a real dent amongst the Labour Party MPs who did not have an adequate understanding of the facts of life in Southeast Asia”. He also welcomed my brief but forthright reference in a BBC television interview to the critical importance of what the Americans were doing in Vietnam. America was getting such bad press that they were relieved when someone not a client state stood up to voice support for their unpopular policy. He proposed an official visit. Raja was unhappy at having to announce so soon after the British defence White Paper had been published that I would visit Washington. It would show that we were nervous. I decided to go. Bill Bundy must have had a reason for wanting me to go to Washington that year.

I had not been to America except in 1962, to appear before the UN decolonisation committee in New York. Singapore did not have a mission in Washington until that year, 1967. So I cast around for a crash course on the thinking and mood in Washington and the major personalities. I drew on the British, Australian and New Zealand high commissioners. I wrote to Louis Heren, a good friend since the 1950s who was then the London *Times* correspondent in Washington. Of all the briefings, his was the most valuable. He wrote, “For a superpower such as the United States, all countries except the Soviet Union and China are small. You will not mind my saying that in comparison Singapore is a tiddler. Outside the State Department’s bureau for East Asian and Pacific affairs, very little attention is paid to it.” He was reassuring, however, that I had a “reputation for being a sane, rational and steady sort of bloke”, mainly because of my position on Vietnam. The fuss over the CIA incident had been largely forgotten. “The problem in America was three-dimensional: the administration, Congress, and the press. The latter two tend to react in simple East-West terms. Are you a Commie or are you with the US? The administration is very different. Heaven knows there are enough simpletons in it, but there are also first-rate men. The obvious ones below cabinet level are William Bundy and Robert Barnett, one of Bundy’s deputies, an acknowledged China expert, Walt Rostow, the president’s special assistant for national security affairs.” Other people I should look out for were Averell Harriman, ambassador-at large, and Mike Mansfield, the majority leader in the senate, “well-informed and quietly influential”.

He gave a thumbnail sketch of Johnson, the best I read before seeing the president. “A strange man, devious, manipulating, and occasionally ruthless. Having said that, I must admit to being one of his few if qualified admirers. He has fire in his belly, in the old Biblical sense. He wants to do well by his country, especially the poor and the Negroes. … Rusk and McNamara you can trust. Both are honest and rather nice men, good in the old-fashioned sense of the word.”



In October 1967 I flew to Kennedy Airport, New York, and then on to Williamsburg, where I stayed in one of those restored homes with antique furniture of the time when Williamsburg was the capital of Virginia. Choo and I were taken on a sightseeing tour of Williamsburg in a horse carriage with a black coachman dressed in period costume. It was historical Disneyland. The following day, we flew by helicopter to the White House. The protocol officer had asked me to shake President Johnson’s left hand because his right hand was bandaged. When I landed on the White House lawn for a full state welcome with guard of honour, I shook Johnson’s left hand like a good Boy Scout.

Johnson used superlatives, describing me as “a patriot, a brilliant political leader, and a statesman of the new Asia”, and Singapore as “a bright example of what can be accomplished, not only in Asia but in Africa and Latin America – wherever men work for a life of freedom and dignity”. I was embarrassed by the extravagant praise, most un-British. In response, I obliquely endorsed what he was doing in Vietnam but asked whether Americans believed that their progeny would inherit the brave new world if they did not persevere \(in Vietnam\).

Immediately after the welcoming ceremony, Johnson had a one-on-one session with me. He was a tall, huge Texan with a booming voice. I felt dwarfed standing by his side. He was moody and troubled, but wanted to hear my views. He was relieved to find someone from Southeast Asia and near Vietnam who understood, sympathised and quietly supported what he was doing to contain the communists and prevent them capturing South Vietnam and causing more mischief beyond Vietnam.

Johnson was very direct. Was the war winnable? Was he doing right? I told him he was doing right but the war was not winnable in a military sense. He could prevent the communists from winning. This would allow a Vietnamese leadership to emerge around which the people would rally. It would be a victory because that government would have the support of the people and it would be non-communist. I had no doubts that in a free vote the people would vote against the communists. He was cheered, if momentarily.


At dinner in the White House that night Johnson replied to my question on American staying power, “Yes, America has the resolution and the restraint to see this struggle through in Vietnam. … I cannot put it more clearly or with more confidence. You have a phrase in your part of the world that puts our determination well. You call it ‘riding the tiger’. You rode the tiger. We shall.”

After dinner, a few senators took me out to the upstairs porch overlooking the White House lawn. A tall, pale, lean Mike Mansfield, a Democrat from Montana and senate majority leader, asked me a direct question: did I think the assassination of Diem did good or harm? It did harm, I said. There was no one to replace him who was more able to lead. There could have been other ways to get Diem to change his policy or his method of ruling. Bumping him off had produced instability, and worse, uncertainty as to whether any leader who stood up for Vietnam and refused to follow American advice could survive. He pursed his lips and said, yes, it was bad. He asked what the solutions were. I told him there were no easy ones, no quick shoot-outs at high noon. It was going to be a long, hard slog, unglamorous. Just to slog it out and prevent the communists from winning while a South Vietnamese leadership emerged – that would be victory enough. It meant a long stay. I could see from his face that Americans would find that difficult.

Dean Rusk, the secretary of state, was a quiet, thoughtful man, looking more an academic than a politician. I told him I hoped the next American president would win his election in a way that would convince Hanoi that the American people had the patience and resolve to see the war through. If America disengaged, the tide would go against all non-communist countries. Thailand would change sides and Malaysia would be put through the mincing machine of guerrilla insurgency. After that, with fraternal communist parties in control, the communists would cut our throats in Singapore. The Chinese army would not have to march into Southeast Asia.

Vice-President Hubert Humphrey spoke with little reservation. He was convinced that apart from a minority who were either hawks or doves, 70–80 per cent of the senate supported the president’s Vietnam policy. The opposition was from a generation of Americans who had grown up 22 years after the Second World War. They had not known war or real economic hardship. They were the hard core of opposition in the universities. It was important that people like me, who were non-aligned and known to be politically independent, should speak up and stop the erosion of public opinion in the United States. His fear was that unless people like me could help keep the carpet under Johnson’s feet, he would be beaten in America, not Vietnam. Humphrey was a likeable man and politically shrewd, but I doubted his toughness.

Robert McNamara, the defence secretary, was bright-eyed, eager and full of energy. He thought American and Singapore objectives were exactly the same; we both wanted the British to stay in Singapore. The American people did not want to see the United States standing alone. He said Britain’s purchase of F-111s showed its very strong ties with the United States and its intention to fulfil British commitments in Southeast Asia. This was October 1967, one month before Britain devalued the pound and decided to abandon east of Suez.

With both the House foreign affairs committee and the senate foreign relations committee, the main topic was Vietnam. I gave them answers which brought little relief to their concerns. They wanted to hear answers which could be executed within a year or less, before the next presidential election. I offered no such solutions.

At Harvard I spoke to some students and also met Professor Richard Neustadt, director of the Institute of Politics in Harvard and a specialist on the American presidency. I had asked Bill Bundy if it was possible for me to spend a short sabbatical to get to know Americans and their system. I felt I had to understand them. They had different strengths and weaknesses from the British. Theirs was a vast continent. They had no single tightly knit group of decision-makers all clustered around either Washington or New York as the British had in London. American decision-makers were scattered over 50 states, each with differing interests and different pulls. Bundy arranged for me to meet Neustadt, who promised to tailor a course for me at the Institute of Politics for one term in the fall of 1968.

I was on the go every day, talking endlessly to the media and to different groups – the Asia Society, the Council of Foreign Relations in New York, students in Harvard and in St Louis, the Foreign Relations Council in Chicago, and the press and television in Los Angeles. Even in Honolulu, where I stayed as the house guest of the commander-in-chief, Pacific, I had to talk. Only at the resort of Mauna Kea on the big island of Hawaii could I relax, play golf the whole day and watch the manta ray at night after dinner.

Reports from our missions in Washington, Canberra and Wellington were good, but Keng Swee and Raja were disturbed that I sounded too pro-American, defending Johnson’s intervention in Vietnam. This might alienate our grass-roots Chinese-speaking base. They advised me to move back to a more neutral position. When I returned to Singapore, I discussed this with them and changed my language to a more critical stance, but still gave clear support to the American presence in Vietnam. I was convinced that to knock US policy in Vietnam would hurt President Johnson and cause damage to his position in America. I was not prepared to do what was against Singapore’s interest.

My 10-day visit left me with some strong impressions. As I told my cabinet colleagues, our relationship with the United States was superficial, unlike our relationship with Britain. The Americans thought in terms of numbers and size. In Southeast Asia, Malaysians and Singaporeans were nothing compared to the Indonesians.

Events moved unexpectedly and decisively after my return. The British devalued the pound and in January 1968 announced early withdrawal – by 1971. Two weeks later, the North Vietnamese launched their Tet \(New Year\) offensive. They surged into more than a hundred cities and towns, including Saigon. The American public was shaken by television reports of this offensive. In fact, the Vietnamese offensive was a failure, but the media convinced Americans that it was an unmitigated disaster for them and that the war was lost. Two months later, on 31 March, Johnson announced, “I shall not seek and I will not accept the nomination of my party as president.” From then on it was a despondent America hanging on grimly, waiting for a new president to seek a not dishonourable withdrawal from Vietnam.

From October to December 1968, as planned, I took a short sabbatical in the University of British Columbia \(UBC\) and Harvard and left Goh Keng Swee in charge. I spent several weeks at UBC. From their faculty club, where I was a guest, I watched the US presidential election campaign on television. After Nixon won, I flew from Vancouver to Ottawa to meet Pierre Trudeau, who had become prime minister earlier that year. Then on to Boston and Harvard where I was a visiting fellow at the Institute of Politics, which was attached to the John F. Kennedy School of Government.

At Harvard’s Eliot House, where I stayed with some 200 students and 10 fellows, I had an immersion course on American culture. Neustadt had arranged for me a wide exposure to American scholars in various fields, mainly American government and politics, development economics, motivation and productivity. It was a full programme of morning discussions with one group, a working lunch with another, an afternoon seminar, and social dinners at night with distinguished scholars. At the annual Harvard vs Yale football match I had a taste of American youthful exuberance complete with pom-pom waving cheerleaders. The efficiency of the arrangements was impressive. A graduate student attached to me chased up materials or arranged any meetings I wanted in addition to what had been fixed. The Secret Service caused quite a disruption to the normal life of Eliot House, parking their centre of operations in the senior common room to give me 24-hour security. I dined in hall with the students, fellows and the Master, Alan Heimert. I was struck by the easy informality between teachers and students. The students were extremely bright; one teacher confessed that it could be quite unnerving to argue with some of them.

The academics in Cambridge, Massachusetts were different from those in Cambridge, England. British dons of the 1940s to ’60s were happy to be in their ivory tower, separated from the hurly-burly of London and Westminster. American professors, on the other hand, increased their stature by being associated with the government. In the Kennedy administration many of the professors would take the Boston-New York-Washington shuttle. The forte of British academics of that period was in rigorous study of the past, not of the present or the future, which involved conjecture. They did not have the direct interaction with business and industry which the Harvard Business School provided. The Americans, unlike the British, did not confine themselves to a critical examination of the past. Investigating the present to predict the future is a strength of American scholarship. Their think-tanks have made futurology a respectable subject under the title “futuristic studies”.

My greatest benefit was not more knowledge but the contacts and friendships I made with scholars who were not only knowledgeable about contemporary affairs but also had access to the nerve centres of American government and business. I was a curiosity in Harvard, an Asian politician taking time off to recharge his batteries and seek knowledge in academia at the age of 45, after ten years in office. They readily hosted dinners for me to meet interesting people including economist John Kenneth Galbraith, Japan specialist and former US ambassador to Japan Edwin Reischauer, China specialist John Fairbank, MIT political science teacher Lucien Pye, who had done research on guerrilla communism in Malaya in the 1950s, and MIT’s Paul Samuelson, famous for his economics textbook, who explained to me why Americans still kept low value-added industries like textiles. My most valuable discussions were with Ray Vernon of the Harvard Business School. He gave me such practical insights into the workings of the contemporary economies of Hong Kong and Taiwan that I returned every few years to learn more from him.

I found many other fresh ideas and picked the brains of other highly intelligent people who were not always right. They were too politically correct. Harvard was determinedly liberal. No scholar was prepared to say or admit that there were any inherent differences between races or cultures or religions. They held that human beings were equal and a society only needed correct economic policies and institutions of government to succeed. They were so bright I found it difficult to believe that they sincerely held these views they felt compelled to espouse.

Harvard faculty members I met across a dinner table were sharp, witty and stimulating, even though I did not always agree with them. Galbraith had the most acerbic tongue of all. At one dinner, I met Henry Kissinger. It was pure serendipity that at that dinner where many liberal Americans voiced strong criticisms of the Vietnam War, I took the contrary view and explained that America’s stand was crucial for the future of a non-communist Southeast Asia. Kissinger was circumspect in his choice of words to justify American intervention. Surrounded by doves, he was careful not to appear a hawk. Speaking slowly in his heavy German-accented English, he gave me the impression of a man who was not going to be swept along by the mood of the moment. Shortly afterwards Nixon’s office announced that Kissinger would be the national security adviser. By then he had left Harvard. Before I flew home that December, I met him in New York to encourage him to stay the course in Vietnam, and said that preventing the communists from winning was within America’s capability.


I wanted to call on President Johnson. Bill Bundy was surprised that I wanted to see a lame duck president and not the president-elect. I said Nixon needed time to sort out his staff and agenda and I could come back after he had settled into his job. It was a forlorn and melancholy Johnson I met. He said he had put everything he had into Vietnam. His two sons-in-law were in the armed forces and both had served in Vietnam. No man could do more. I left a disconsolate Lyndon Johnson.



My next visit to America was in 1969. I called on President Nixon on 12 May. He had met me in Singapore in April 1967 when on a tour of Southeast Asia to prepare himself for the presidential election the following year. He was a serious thinker, knowledgeable about Asia and the world. He always wanted the big picture. For over an hour in my office, I answered his questions. The Cultural Revolution was then at its height. He asked me what I thought was going on. I said that the only direct knowledge we had was from debriefing our older folk whom we allowed to visit their relatives in Guangdong and Fujian provinces in southeast coastal China. As far as we could make out, Mao wanted to remake China. Like the first Chinese emperor, Qinshihuang, who had burnt all the books of the time to wipe out what had gone before, Mao wanted to erase the old China and paint a new one. But Mao was painting on an old Chinese picture imbedded in mosaic; the rains would come, Mao’s paint would be washed off, and the mosaic would reappear. Mao had only one lifetime and did not have the time or power to erase over 4,000 years of Chinese history, tradition, culture and literature. Even if all the books were burnt, the proverbs and sayings would survive in the folk memory of the people. Mao was doomed to fail. \(Years later, in his retirement, Nixon quoted what I had said in a book. He also quoted me on the Japanese, that they had the drive and the ability to be more than just makers and sellers of transistor radios. Only then did I learn that, like me, Nixon had the habit of making notes after a serious discussion.\)

Asked about US-China enmity, I said there was no natural or abiding source of enmity between China and the United States. China’s natural enemy was the Soviet Union with whom it shared a 4,000-mile boundary which had been shifted to China’s disadvantage only in the last 100 years. There were old scores to settle. The boundary between America and China was an artificial one drawn on water across the Straits of Taiwan. It was ephemeral and would pass with time.

When we met in Washington in 1969, Nixon again questioned me on China. I gave him basically the same replies. I did not know then that his mind was already focused on China to improve America’s position vis-à-vis the Soviet Union.

The subject which took the most time was Vietnam. America, he said, was a large, rich, powerful nation engaged in a guerrilla war with Vietnam, a poor country, underdeveloped and with practically no technology. Billions of American dollars had been spent on the war which had cost 32,600 American dead and 200,000 casualties. This had nearly exhausted the patience of the American people and members of Congress. Pressures were mounting daily for an American pull-out as soon as possible. But he had to consider the effects of the pull-out on the South Vietnamese people, government and military, on Vietnam’s neighbours in Southeast Asia, on America’s allies, including Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, South Korea and Thailand, and on the world in general. The issue was the credibility of American promises. Despite pressure from American public opinion in Congress, he had to ensure the best solution to the problem. I sensed that he wanted to end the Vietnam War because of domestic opposition, but was not about to be the first American president to lose a war. He wanted an honourable exit.

I expressed my amazement at the Americans’ loss of confidence. A precipitate ending of the Vietnam War would have dangerous and unpredictable consequences not just in Vietnam but also in neighbouring countries, especially Thailand, which had totally committed itself in support of the United States. Any withdrawal should be purposeful and gradual so that South Vietnamese soldiers could take on more of the war – they must be pushed to take on their share of the fighting. The solution was to get a group of committed South Vietnamese leaders to tackle their problems with the dedication and sense of purpose the Vietcong displayed. The aim should be for South Vietnam to be like South Korea, where some 30,000 to 50,000 American soldiers were stationed to enable the South Korean armed forces to increase their capability year by year. For such a withdrawal to succeed, Hanoi and the Vietcong had to get the message that America had all the time in the world for a slow, deliberate withdrawal and the president would not be pressured into a hasty and calamitous pull-out. Hanoi was fighting the war in Washington and was helped unwittingly by many in Congress, egged on by the media. The US role should be to help the South Vietnamese fight for themselves, so that if they fought and lost the United States could not be held responsible, provided they had been given enough time and equipment; in other words, to Vietnamise the war. He showed interest. The scheduled half-hour meeting went on for one and a quarter hours. He wanted reasons to believe that he could get out in a way that would not mean a defeat. I believed it was possible. That cheered him.

When I next met Nixon on 5 November 1970, he appeared fatigued after a strenuous mid-term election campaign. He went over the Vietnam options. Then he turned to China. I suggested that he open America’s doors and windows to China and begin trade on non-strategic goods. When two-thirds of the UN members supported China’s admission, the United States should not be seen to be blocking it. America should not be discouraged by Mao’s negative attitude. I repeated, the United States had no common frontier with China as the Russians had.

At a separate meeting in the White House annexe, Henry Kissinger asked me about the proposed Russian use of the dockyard at the naval base in Singapore. As I expected, he had heard from Ted Heath of Kosygin’s interest in the use of the naval base after the British left. I had earlier told Heath this to encourage him not to leave the naval base in a hurry. I assured Kissinger that I would not take a decision without first informing the British and him. The Russian move had given me a card to play. I hoped the Americans would encourage the Australians to remain in Singapore. I was comfortable with Britain, Australia, New Zealand and Malaysia in the Five-Power Defence Arrangement. I orbited around Australia and New Zealand and they orbited around the United States – a happy situation for Singapore. “And for the US,” Kissinger added. I said that because Singapore did not receive US aid, I could speak as an objective, non-aligned voice from Southeast Asia. Kissinger agreed that this was best for both of us.

Meanwhile, Kissinger had contacted the leaders in Beijing through the Pakistanis. He secretly visited Beijing in 1971 to prepare for Nixon’s visit in February 1972. When Nixon announced it in January 1972, it astonished the world. I was uneasy that he should have done this without first telling any of his Asian allies, neither the Japanese nor the government of the Republic of China, their other ally in Taiwan. That visit was indeed “a week that changed the world”, as Nixon said.



The war situation in Vietnam appeared unpromising when I next visited America, in April 1973. Casualties continued with no victory in sight, and the US Congress was pressing the administration to disengage totally from Southeast Asia. Choo and I had lunch with Robert McNamara, then World Bank president, and his wife at their home in Georgetown. Looking grave, McNamara said there were disturbing reports that Nixon was involved in the cover-up of Watergate and things might get very difficult. I had a premonition of trouble ahead, both for Nixon and for Southeast Asia.

When I arrived at the White House on the morning of 10 April, the president was at the front porch to greet me. He was warm and friendly and went out of his way to show his appreciation for my consistent public backing of his lonely position on Vietnam and Cambodia. For photo opportunities, he strolled with me in the White House rose garden and talked of the roses and the crab-apple trees in full bloom. Inside the White House, Nixon said he did not see China as an immediate threat; it would be a force to reckon with only in 10 or 15 years when its nuclear programme had matured. He asked about Vietnam and the ceasefire terms under which the United States had promised aid to reconstruct North Vietnam. I replied that it was the best possible arrangement in the circumstances. It was right to woo the North Vietnamese away from dependence on Russia and China. If America did not give any aid for reconstruction, the North Vietnamese would become more dependent on Russia and China.

In spite of his many preoccupations so soon after his re-election as president and with Watergate brewing, Nixon gave a White House dinner in my honour. There is a ritual at White House dinners which makes for presidential grandeur. Choo and I walked down the staircase of the White House with the president and his wife accompanied by several ADCs resplendent in bemedalled uniforms and gold aiguillettes. We paused at the landing as a fanfare of trumpets drew everyone’s attention. A hush fell as we walked down the final flight of stairs with the assembled guests looking up at us. Then we lined up – the president, Mrs Nixon, myself and Choo – to receive the guests. It was the same ritual as when Lyndon Johnson gave me dinner in 1967. But Nixon’s style was different. He shook every hand with enthusiasm and the appropriate greeting: “Glad to see you again.” “How nice to see you.” “How good of you.” In between he would insert a few words of praise or comment on a particular guest as I shook hands with him. In the midst of all this he said in an aside, “Never use the wrong expression, like ‘How do you do.’ You may have met the man before. It will show you did not recognise him and he will be offended. Always use a neutral phrase like ‘How nice to see you.’ ‘How good to see you.’ ‘It is good to see you.’ And if you recognise him, ‘Ah, it is a long time since we last met. How good to see you again.’ ” He was a professional but had little small talk and never told jokes, unlike Ronald Reagan whose conversation was rich with such social lubricants.

Marshall Green, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, asked for my views on America’s China initiatives, meaning Nixon’s visit to China in February 1972. I said they could not be faulted except for the element of surprise. If it had been done with less surprise, the favourable results would have been even better. The surprise factor had planted apprehension in Japanese and Southeast Asian minds that big powers were prone to sudden policy switches which could leave them on the wrong side.

Green explained that the Japanese had great difficulty in keeping secrets; they said so themselves. He stressed that the new relationship with China had not changed America’s policy towards any other nation in the area. Taiwan had been concerned at the outset. But it was now clear that the United States was maintaining its treaty commitments. South Korea had also been worried but now realised that their relationship with the United States had not been altered at all. In short, normalisation of relations with the People’s Republic of China had been taken at no one’s expense. The end result was more stability for all in Asia.

Increased contact with Western civilisation and technology, I said, was bound to have an effect on China. Its present isolation could not be sustained. For example, because of the total insulation of the Chinese people from the outside world, their ping-pong team that visited Singapore was unwilling to talk of anything but ping-pong. I believed once the Chinese economy was past the “line of barest necessities”, they would face the problems the Soviets now had. The Chinese people would want choices in the products available to them, and with choices they would lose their egalitarian fervour.

Green assured me that the United States fully intended to continue to play an important stabilising role in Asia. “We will keep our forces in the area and we will meet our treaty commitments.” I was reminded of Harold Wilson and Denis Healey’s earlier assurances that Britain would stay in Singapore. I consoled myself with the thought that because America, unlike Britain, had never depended on a colonial empire to be a world power, it would not be under the same economic pressure to withdraw from Asia.

When Nixon resigned on 9 August 1974 to avoid impeachment for Watergate, I feared for South Vietnam. As one of his last acts as president, Nixon had signed into law a bill that imposed a ceiling of US$1 billion on American military aid to South Vietnam for the next 11 months. Within days of his resignation, the House of Representatives voted to trim it to US$700 million. The axe was falling and the neck on the chopping block was President Thieu’s.

On 25 April 1975 Thieu left Saigon. On 29 April, as North Vietnamese troops were advancing into the city, an American helicopter took off from the embassy roof, a moment captured in that indelible photograph of panic-stricken South Vietnamese scrambling to get to the departing helicopter. The next day, North Vietnamese tanks drove up to the presidential palace and ceremonially knocked its gates down.

Although American intervention failed in Vietnam, it bought time for the rest of Southeast Asia. In 1965, when the US military moved massively into South Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia and the Philippines faced internal threats from armed communist insurgencies and the communist underground was still active in Singapore. Indonesia, in the throes of a failed communist coup, was waging *konfrontasi*, an undeclared war against Malaysia and Singapore. The Philippines was claiming Sabah in East Malaysia. Standards of living were low and economic growth slow. America’s action enabled non-communist Southeast Asia to put their own houses in order. By 1975 they were in better shape to stand up to the communists. Had there been no US intervention, the will of these countries to resist them would have melted and Southeast Asia would most likely have gone communist. The prosperous emerging market economies of Asean were nurtured during the Vietnam War years.

In the weeks before Saigon fell, a huge armada of small boats and ships packed with refugees set out across the South China Sea, many headed for Singapore. Quite a few of them were armed. Keng Swee, acting as prime minister, sent an urgent report to me in Washington that the number of refugees had reached several thousands in nearly a hundred boats. He wanted an immediate policy decision. I signalled that we should refuse them landing and get them to move on to countries with more space to receive them. A massive exercise started on 6 May. The Singapore Armed Forces repaired, refitted, refuelled, reprovisioned and sent out to sea a total of 64 vessels carrying more than 8,000 refugees. Many of the captains of these vessels had deliberately disabled their engines to avoid being sent off.

As this operation was taking place, I called on President Gerald Ford at noon on 8 May 1975, eight days after the fall of Saigon. Kissinger, as secretary of state, was with him. Ford looked troubled but not despondent. He asked for the region’s reaction to the fall of Vietnam. I had been in Bangkok in April, just before Saigon fell. The Thais were nervous, as were people in Indonesia. Suharto was quietly and firmly in control. I said congressional intervention to stop the bombing of the communists had contributed to the fall of South Vietnam. If Watergate had not happened and the bombing had continued, the South Vietnamese forces would not have lost heart and the outcome could have been different. Once the bombings stopped and aid was significantly reduced, the fate of the South Vietnamese government was sealed.

Ford asked where America should go from there. I said it was best to let the dust settle and watch how events unfolded in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. I believed the Pathet Lao would take over Laos and come under Vietnamese control. In Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge was engaged in killing thousands of anti-communists. \(I did not know then how indiscriminately they would kill, including all who were educated or were not part of their peasant revolution.\) Thailand would get the People’s Republic of China on its side as an insurance against invasion by the Vietnamese communists. Kissinger asked whether the PRC would help the Thais. I thought it would. I suggested it was best to keep cool and watch how events evolved. If at the next election a president like McGovern were to be elected and gave in to the communists, the situation could become hopeless.

Ford had been portrayed as a bumbler and stumbler, an American football player who had injured his head too many times. I found him a shrewd man with common sense who knew how to size up the people he had to deal with. He was genuinely friendly with an easy informality. After dinner, when I asked to be excused to go to the toilet, he insisted on bringing me to his private quarters. So up the lift we went, followed by his Secret Service bodyguards. There, in a vast private bathroom, was a whole array of exercise equipment, the latest of body-building and keep-fit instruments, and all his toiletries and shaving gadgets spread over the washbasins. I could not imagine any European, Japanese or Third World leader bringing me to his private bathroom to freshen up. He was just a friendly man, happy to have me as his guest and grateful that there was one person from Southeast Asia who spoke up for America as its stocks went down with the hasty evacuation of Saigon. He was not out to impress me, but he did – as a solid, dependable man.







May 1999. President Jacques Chirac greeting me at the door of the Elysée Palace, Paris. *\(Reuters\)*





November 1990. President Francois Mitterand at the door of the Elysée Palace, Paris. *\(SPH\)*





Welcoming German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt in October 1978. *\(SPH\)*





May 1990. With German Chancellor Kohl at welcoming ceremony in Bonn. *\(LKY\)*







September 1990. Goh Chok Tong, Wong Kan Seng and me meeting a harassed President Mikhail Gorbachev in the Kremlin. *\(SPH/Straits Times\)*







1969. In the white House with President Richard Nixon and his National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger. Accompanying me is our ambassador E.S. Monteiro. *\(LKY\)*







August 1982. Meeting with friends President Ronald Reagan and US Secretary of State George Shultz. *\(White House\)*







April 1989. Visiting US aircraft carrier USS *Ranger* in Singapore harbour. *\(SPH\)*





October 1985. Addressing joint session of US Congress on free trade. Behind me, Vice-President George Bush and Speaker Tip O’Neill. *\(SPH/Straits Times\)*




