+++
title = "29 Strategic: Accord with the United States"

+++



When President Jimmy Carter took over from Gerald Ford, there was an abrupt change of emphasis in US foreign and defence policies. He was more interested in Africa than Asia. To the dismay of America’s friends and allies in Asia, he announced that there would be a rundown of US troops in Korea. Carter believed Americans were tired after the Vietnam War and wanted to forget Asia. He concentrated on the reconciliation of black and white Americans. He also saw his role as a builder of bridges across the great divide between the whites and the blacks in southern Africa. His emphasis was on human rights, not defence and security. Asean leaders braced themselves for four difficult years as they waited to see what he would actually do.

When I met him in October 1977 he had budgeted his time meticulously. There would be a 5-minute photo opportunity, then a 10-minute tête-à-tête followed by a 45-minute discussion between the two delegations. He kept to this schedule almost to the second. What astounded me was the subject he raised during the 10-minute tête-à-tête – why did Singapore want high-tech weapons like I-Hawk \(Improved Hawk\) ground-to-air missiles? It was not an item in my brief. No previous president had ever queried me on our modest purchases of weapons, let alone defensive ones. High on Carter’s agenda was the stopping of arms proliferation, especially high-tech weapons, and I-Hawk was considered high-tech for Southeast Asia. I said that Singapore was a very compact urban target which had to be thickly defended. Our Bloodhound missiles were out of date, but if he had difficulty selling I-Hawks to us, I would buy British Rapier missiles; it was not a matter of great importance. To cut the matter short, I said we would not apply to buy them. Two years later, they sold us I-Hawk missiles after the US ambassador in Singapore, a former Democratic governor of North Dakota and a Carter supporter, intervened with the White House.

The official delegations met for 45 minutes and finished to the second. He had a laundry list which he pulled out from his shirt-pocket some 15 minutes before the end to check if he had covered all the items. Without re-reading the minutes of the meeting, I would have had no recollection of what we discussed. They were all inconsequential matters. His predecessors, Johnson, Nixon and Ford, had always covered the broad picture: how did Asia look – Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, then the communist countries of China and Vietnam, then US allies Thailand and the Philippines.

Carter did not raise these subjects. Nevertheless, I decided to give him a broad-brush picture of how important America was for the stability and growth of the region, and how it should not lose its focus as this might weaken the confidence of non-communist countries who were its friends. I am not sure I made any impression. Had I not met Richard Holbrooke, assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific, earlier in May in Singapore, I doubt if I would have had a meeting with Carter. Holbrooke wanted someone from the region to get him to concentrate on Asia, and thought I could be that someone.

When I was leaving, he gave me a green leather-bound copy of his campaign autobiography, *Why not the Best?* He had already inscribed it, “To my good friend Lee Kuan Yew. Jimmy Carter.” I was flattered but surprised by my elevation to “good friend” even before he had met me. This must have been standard practice during his election campaign.

I scanned his book, hoping to get some light. I did. He was from the Bible belt, a born-again Christian. Two items stick in my mind. His father had given him a coin on his way to Sunday school. He came back and put two coins on the dressing table. When his father discovered this, he was given a whipping. He never stole again\! I was puzzled how this helped him win his campaign. The other part I recall from his book was when Admiral Rickover interviewed him for duty on a nuclear submarine. Rickover asked him what his position was in his class at Annapolis Naval Academy. He proudly said 59th. Rickover asked, “Did you do your best?” He replied, “Yes, Sir,” then changed it to “No, Sir, I didn’t always do my best.” Rickover said, “Why not?” Carter said he was shaken. Hence the title of his book, *Why not the Best?* And Carter set out to live by this motto. One day, I saw him on television staggering at the end of a marathon race, near exhaustion and collapse. He was driven by this ambition to do his best, regardless of his physical condition at that time.

I met him again briefly in October 1978. Vice-President Walter Mondale received me and Carter dropped by for a photo opportunity. We did not have much of an exchange; he was still not interested in Asia. It was fortunate that his advisers persuaded him not to withdraw US troops from Korea.

His great achievement was to get Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin to settle their war. I was amazed that he had memorised every disputed well, hedge and border between the two countries. I thought of the Shell appraisal system – helicopter quality, seeing the broad picture and having the ability to focus on relevant details. Carter focused on every detail.

Three major events in 1979 concentrated Carter’s mind on Asia towards the end of his term of office. First, Deng Xiaoping visited him in late January to establish diplomatic relations and alerted him on China’s intention to punish Vietnam for occupying Cambodia. Second, Carter advised the Shah of Iran to leave his country in the face of a popular revolt. Instead of a democratic human rights government, the ayatollahs took over in February. Third, on 24 December, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in support of a communist regime unable to sustain itself. Carter was so shocked that he said, “The scales fell off my eyes.” He had not seen the Soviet regime for what it was. He had embraced Brezhnev at Vienna in 1979 after signing the SALT treaty and had believed that the Soviet leaders were reasonable people who would respond to sincere gestures of peace.

Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, was a reassuring figure at the power centre. He had a broad strategic mind and saw the value of China in the overall balance against the Soviet Union and as a check on Vietnam from becoming too much of a tool of the Soviets. He could put his views forcefully across in any forum, but was wise enough to carry out his president’s foreign policy, not his own. Aid from the United States and many Muslim nations poured arms, money and fighters into Afghanistan to strengthen the resistance groups that eventually bogged down the forces of the mighty Soviet Union.

Holbrooke was able to moderate Carter’s early impulses to cut US commitments in Asia, especially in Korea where he wanted to pull out 40,000 US troops after losses in Vietnam. As I wrote to Holbrooke in December 1980 before he left his post, “… During a period when many in the Administration, in Congress, and in the media wanted to forget Southeast Asia, you worked ceaselessly to rebuild and to restore confidence in US strength and purposes. The future appears less in jeopardy than it did in 1977 when we first met.”



Carter was a good, God-fearing man, perhaps too good to be president. Americans voted for him on the rebound after the excesses of Watergate. But after four years of pious musings about America’s malaise, they were ready to embrace Ronald Reagan whose bright and upbeat view of Americans and their future was to carry them forward in good spirits for two presidential terms. Reagan was a man of simple, straightforward ideas, a strong and successful leader. He turned out to be good for America and the world. It was as well that in November 1980 Americans voted for a Hollywood actor instead of a peanut farmer.

I first met him when, as governor of California, he visited Singapore in October 1971. He had a letter of introduction from President Nixon. California was Nixon’s home state and Reagan must have played a key role in Nixon’s election. In a 30-minute discussion before lunch, I found him a man of strong convictions, resolutely anti-communist. He talked about the Vietnam War and Soviet trouble-making all over the world. At lunch for him and his wife, young son and personal aide, Mike Deaver, he kept the conversation on the Soviet peril. He was so interested that he wanted to continue the discussion after lunch. His wife and son left and I took him back to my office where we spent another hour on strategic issues relating to the Soviet Union and China. Some of his views were startling and vivid. He said that during the Berlin blockade, the United States should not have flown supplies in but should have confronted the Russians with tanks and demanded that the road to Berlin be open, as required in the Four-Power Agreement. If they did not open the road, then war. I was taken aback by his black-and-white approach.

Ten years later, in March 1981, former President Gerald Ford visited Singapore to tell me that President Reagan, who had been inaugurated that January, wanted to meet me, and soon. I received a second message to ask if I could go in June, and I did. When I arrived at the White House about noon on June 19, Reagan was at the porch of his office wing and received me warmly. We had a one-on-one meeting for 20 minutes before lunch. He wanted to talk about Taiwan and China.

I told Reagan that it was in America’s interest to have a Taiwan which was successful to provide a constant contrast to conditions on the mainland. This would have far-reaching and worldwide impact through the media and VIPs who visited both sides. He then asked me whether President Chiang Ching-kuo needed new generation aircraft. Chiang was pressing for them at a sensitive time in Reagan’s presidency. Reagan had been highly critical of the People’s Republic of China \(PRC\) during his election campaign and had made known his staunch support for Taiwan. I knew that any sudden switch of policy would be difficult for him. However, to allow sales to Taiwan of new generation aircraft would up the stakes with China. I gave him my opinion that there was no immediate threat to Taiwan from the mainland, and that Taiwan’s present F-5s were adequate. China was not increasing its armaments. Deng Xiaoping wanted more consumer goods for his people who were demoralised and starved of creature comforts after a decade of the Cultural Revolution. Taiwan’s aircraft would need to be upgraded later, not immediately.

His key advisers joined us for lunch: Caspar Weinberger from defence, Bill Casey from the CIA, Jim Baker, his chief-of-staff, Mike Deaver, and Richard Allen, his national security adviser. The key subject was China – China vis-à-vis Taiwan and China vis-à-vis the Soviet Union.

He asked about the PRC overture to the Soviet Union on their common border problems immediately after Secretary of State Alexander Haig had visited Beijing. In my view this move by the Chinese was to give notice to the United States that they should not be taken for granted. I did not, however, believe that the PRC and the Soviet Union could make much headway given their deep and abiding conflict of interests. Both were communist evangelists, each manoeuvring against the other to win Third World support. Furthermore, Deng had to accommodate those around him who did not want to get too close to America. I believed Deng was quite set on his policy, which was low priority for military spending and high priority for consumer goods the people needed.

Referring to the unrest in Poland, Reagan said the Russians must be worried about being overextended. I said they were prepared to let the economy go down to preserve their “empire which extended across Eurasia”. Reagan’s ears pricked up at the word “empire”. He told Richard Allen to use that word more frequently when describing the Soviet domain. Reagan’s next speech referred to the “evil empire” of the Soviets.

In the last 10 minutes, in a one-on-one discussion after lunch, he asked me to convey a message to President Chiang not to press him at that moment for high-tech weapons as it was a difficult time for him. He asked me to assure Chiang that he would not let him down. Reagan knew that I was close to Chiang and would help to soften the disappointment his message would cause. I met Chiang a few days later to give him Reagan’s message that the time was inappropriate for Taiwan’s purchase of high-tech weapons like aircraft. Chiang asked me why his good friend Reagan could not be more helpful. I hazarded a guess that America needed the PRC to maintain a global balance of forces against the Soviet Union. As the West Europeans and Japanese were not willing to spend on armaments as decisively as America wanted, Reagan was considering whether to upgrade China’s military capabilities with small injections of technology, which with China’s huge manpower would mean added pressure on the Soviet Union. Chiang nodded his agreement. He accepted that Reagan had a valid reason, and asked me to tell him, “I understand you.” Chiang was satisfied. He trusted Reagan.

Like Chiang, Reagan went by his gut instincts. He either trusted you or he did not. He was also a man of deep and abiding loyalties, both to his friends and to his cause. His advisers, including his first secretary of state, Al Haig, had told him of the importance of communist China in the grand strategy against the Soviet Union. He accepted this analysis but was not comfortable with the Chinese communists. He had inherited a relationship with China he knew he had to maintain.

I left Washington feeling more confident than when Carter was president. Reagan had a natural optimism that infused all those around him with the same “can do” spirit. He looked at the sunny side of every issue and was prepared to stand up for his beliefs. More important, he was able to carry the American people with him, often in spite of the media. When I wrote to thank him for the lunch, Reagan’s reply was substantive. One paragraph read: “I want \(US\) relations with Peking to improve and will work hard to achieve this, but not at the expense of our old friends on Taiwan. Nor do I want you, our partners in Southeast Asia, to view our association with Peking as taking precedence over our relations with you.” When his administration announced its decision on US arms sales to Taiwan, it did not include the sale of advanced fighter aircraft on the grounds that “no military need for such aircraft exists”.

Ten months later, in April 1982, Vice-President George Bush saw me in Singapore before going to China. He wanted my views on how to approach the PRC-Taiwan issue. I said the issues were so complex that I was sure the Chinese did not believe they could be resolved by his visit. What was important was for the forms to be observed. The PRC would have studied Reagan’s character and views thoroughly. They knew of his many trips to Taiwan and of his friendship with President Chiang Ching-kuo. Because Reagan was what he was, for the Chinese, form was as important as substance. They knew they could not get Taiwan back for a long time. However, the principle that Taiwan is a part of China should not be challenged or there would be trouble. I was sure that Deng needed America – he had visited America in January 1979 to settle normalisation because he needed America on China’s side, or at least to be neutral in any conflict with the Soviet Union. Deng also knew that he was dealing with a tough-minded leader in Reagan.

Bush asked whether there was domestic opposition in China to the PRC’s relationship with the United States. I believed China’s relationship with America had received the imprimatur of Mao himself, so few would openly oppose having good relations with America. Deng had not only normalised relations but gone one step further by opening up the country. This would have important long-term consequences. The leaders’ sons were studying in the United States, as were many other Chinese. There would be a brain drain, maybe 20 per cent or more, but those who returned would come back with fresh ideas. The Chinese knew they were running a risk in opening up, so the decision they had taken was significant. They were prepared to have the students come back with radical ideas, carrying with them the germs of change. A difficult problem was that as a presidential candidate Reagan had made strong statements in support of Taiwan. And he had repeated them even after George Bush went to Beijing in August 1980 to tell the Chinese they should understand and respect the US position, that it had to move gradually on Taiwan. Yet I believed the Chinese placed great importance on fidelity. They knew that people who betrayed their friends would also betray them. They would be surprised if the United States were to give way if they pushed on Taiwan. What they wanted from the United States was a reaffirmation of the principle that there was one China. Bush assured me that Reagan was not going to set the clock back by having two separate states and two ambassadors.

I suggested that the United States invite Premier Zhao Ziyang to visit Washington and then President Reagan visit Beijing to put his position in the way Bush had expressed it. The Americans should convince Beijing of their one China policy. The way to do this was for Reagan to meet and convince Deng that that was America’s basic position. Bush agreed as Reagan could say what he meant in a convincing way. There was much common ground between China and the United States, Bush added. Reagan was “paranoid and uptight about the Soviet Union” and events in Poland and Afghanistan had reinforced this. Reagan did not like communism but saw the strategic value of a relationship with China.

By my next visit to Washington in July 1982, George Shultz had succeeded Al Haig as secretary of state. I knew Shultz when he was secretary of the treasury under President Nixon in the early 1970s and we had become friends. Haig had gone all out to forge a “strategic consensus” against the Soviet Union and had agreed to reduce arms sales to Taiwan gradually. Shultz had to settle the form of words that would spell out this promise. He tossed a few questions at me. I said there was little value in leaving Taiwan militarily naked and at China’s mercy in order to use China’s weight against the Soviet Union. China would be against the Soviets anyway. Shultz had a more sober assessment of China’s value in the balance against the Soviets. He implemented a much more calibrated and measured policy that did not require the United States to abandon its obligations to an old ally.

Again, Reagan took me aside before lunch for a one-on-one discussion with no note-takers. He discussed China and Taiwan, and China and the Soviet Union. I said he did not have to sell out the Taiwanese, even though he needed China against the Soviet Union. The two objectives were not irreconcilable. They could be managed and contained.

He knew that I had met the top Chinese leaders both on the mainland and in Taiwan. He also knew I was anti-communist but a realist. So he tested his ideas on me. I told him to put the Taiwan issue aside as a dispute which could not be resolved for the time being and should be left for the next generation, as Deng had suggested to the Japanese regarding their dispute over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. I suggested Reagan should explain to Beijing that he had been a very old friend of Taiwan and could not simply write them off. He asked if he should visit China. He was personally reluctant to go and felt he would be obliged to visit Taiwan on the same trip if he did decide to go. I was astounded to hear this. I advised against a visit to Taiwan, especially on the same trip. As I had earlier said to Bush, Reagan should first invite either Premier Zhao Ziyang or General Secretary Hu Yaobang to Washington before he visited China. After one or both of them had visited the United States, a return visit by him would be an appropriate response.

Reagan later wrote to say, “Our private talk before lunch on 21 July was of great benefit to me. I have come to expect wise counsel and advice from you and that is just what I received on that occasion. Your frankness and candour really proved the strength of our friendship which I value so highly.”

In early 1984 Premier Zhao visited Washington and stressed that China wanted closer economic relations. In May Reagan visited China. Soon after that, Paul Wolfowitz, assistant to Shultz, came to Singapore to brief me on Reagan’s visit and to discuss certain aspects of the visit the Americans had found difficult to understand. It had been a good trip with real progress made in the economic field. Reagan had not yielded on global issues when the Chinese disagreed with him. Deng had emphasised that Taiwan was a knot in US-PRC relations that had to be untied. I said it was good that Deng had had an opportunity to get a feel of Ronald Reagan. The Chinese would have realised that they had to live with Reagan, not just for one but for two terms. Indeed, Reagan did win a second term.

After Reagan’s re-election, Shultz proposed that I make an official visit to Washington in early October 1985. I found Reagan in good form. He looked youthful, with a good head of hair and a strong voice none the worse after four years in office and a bullet through his chest that had narrowly missed his heart. Reagan did not have a mind for detail. Indeed, he made clear that he did not want to be bothered with details which could confuse the big picture. His strengths were constancy and tenacity of purpose. He knew what he wanted and set out to achieve them by surrounding himself with able men who shared his thinking and were successful in their chosen fields. And he exuded confidence and optimism. The eight years of the Reagan presidency were good years for America and the world. His “Star Wars” programme confronted President Gorbachev and the Soviet Union with a challenge they could not hope to meet. That helped to dismantle the Soviet Union.

As before, in a one-on-one meeting, he sought my views on China and Taiwan. He said he had been walking a careful line between the PRC and Taiwan. He had made clear to the PRC that the United States would not walk away from Taiwan: “The US was a friend of both and would remain in that position.” Then he asked me to persuade President Chiang to have Taiwan remain in the Asian Development Bank \(ADB\) after its designation was changed to “Taipei, China” when the PRC was admitted to the ADB. Chiang had wanted to withdraw from the ADB, and Congress had threatened to withhold American contributions if Taiwan was “expelled”. Later, I had a difficult time in Taipei putting Reagan’s case to Chiang but in the end good sense prevailed. In January 1986 the PRC became an ADB member and Taiwan was renamed “Taipei, China”.

Reagan had observed during his visit to China the previous year that the Chinese had begun to recognise that they must give opportunities to their people to create a better life. I said this was a tribute to what the United States had achieved in Taiwan through the free flow of capital, technology, expertise, goods and services. I was certain Deng had read of the tremendous economic development of Taiwan and must have wondered how people whom he regarded as a gang of “effete, corrupt and useless bandits” were able to make the grade. Deng must have thought that the United States had helped these “bandits” with capital, technology and know-how and he would dearly like to have this formula passed on to China. Deng knew America could be invaluable for China’s modernisation.

During my official visit, I was given the honour of addressing a joint session of the US Congress. The legislators of the world’s most powerful nation gave time to a leader of a tiny island. Tommy Koh, our ambassador, reported that both Reagan and Shultz had encouraged Speaker Tip O’Neill to invite me. I spoke on an issue then at the top of the American agenda – protectionism to safeguard jobs and check growing US trade deficits with newly emerging economies of East Asia. In 20 minutes, I described how the issue of free trade was really the question of war or peace for the world.

Nations wax and wane. I argued that if a nation on the rise, with an excess of energy, was not allowed to export its goods and services, its only alternative would be to expand and capture territory, incorporate the population and integrate it to make for a bigger economic unit. That was why nations had empires which they controlled as one trading bloc. It was a time-honoured way for growth. The world had moved away from that after the end of World War II in 1945. GATT, the IMF, the World Bank and new rules made possible a prosperous and dynamic Germany in spite of large numbers of Germans returning from the East into a shrunken land area. So also with the Japanese, who had to leave Korea, China, Taiwan and Southeast Asia and be packed into a few Japanese islands. The Germans and the Japanese were able to stay within their boundaries and grow through trade and investments. They cooperated and competed with other nations and were able to prosper and flourish without wars. But if trade in goods and services was blocked, then China would revert to its historical solution of small warring states conquering one another to gain control of more territory and people until they became one colossal continental empire. This tight, logical exposition may have convinced the legislators intellectually, but many found it emotionally difficult to accept.

Another problem Reagan raised during our discussions was the Philippines. President Marcos had been in difficulties ever since exiled opposition leader Benigno Aquino was shot and killed at Manila Airport on his return from the United States in August 1983. Marcos had been Reagan’s good friend and political supporter. When Shultz earlier discussed the matter with me I said Marcos was now the problem, not the solution. He asked me to speak frankly to Reagan who was most unhappy at the prospect of abandoning an old friend. So as gently as I could, I described to Reagan how Marcos had changed from the young anti-communist crusader of the 1960s to become a self-indulgent ageing ruler who allowed his wife and cronies to clean out the country through ingenious monopolies and put the government heavily in debt. The credit ratings of the Philippines and his government had plummeted. Reagan was most unhappy to hear my assessment. I suggested the problem was how to find a neat and graceful way for Marcos to leave and have a new government installed which could begin to clean up the mess. He decided to send an emissary to express US concern to Marcos at the deteriorating situation.

The Philippines blew up on 15 February 1986 after the Marcos re-election as president was challenged as fraudulent. The American ambassador, Stapleton Roy, was instructed to seek my views. I said that the United States had to deal with Marcos whether he was constitutionally installed or not, but should not alienate the bulk of the Filipino people, many of whom had voted for Mrs Aquino. I said America should not accept a fraudulent election but should put pressure on Marcos, not for a showdown but for fresh elections. Mrs Aquino should be kept “mobilised and in a dynamic state” because she was a “force for good”. She should not be allowed to despair.

The next day, 16 February, Mrs Aquino claimed victory and announced a programme of nationwide non-violent protest to bring down the Marcos regime. In a joint move, the Philippines’ five Asean neighbours issued similar statements to express their concern over the critical situation in the Philippines which could lead to bloodshed and civil war, and called for a peaceful resolution.

I told Ambassador Roy that Marcos should know the door was open for him to leave. If he felt he had no place to go to, he might fight it out. On 25 February Roy told me his government agreed with my views and asked whether I would be willing to undertake the task of coordinating an Asean approach to offer Marcos asylum. Raja, our foreign minister, said it would be difficult to get all five Asean members to agree. I immediately sent Marcos, through our ambassador in Manila, an invitation to come to Singapore. It was an offer that, if accepted, would help diffuse the dangerous situation that then prevailed. At the same time, Reagan sent a private message to him not to use force and said he had arranged for him, his relatives and associates to be given asylum in Hawaii. Marcos accepted asylum in Hawaii in preference to Singapore. That same day, 25 February, Mrs Aquino was sworn in as the new president of the Philippines.

A few days after he arrived in Honolulu, Marcos had his baggage, which included cases of new peso banknotes, inspected by American customs. He sensed trouble and sent me a message that he wanted to come to Singapore. Mrs Aquino, who had already taken over as president, objected. Marcos stayed on in Hawaii to face multiple lawsuits.



One problem the United States had with President Aquino was the renewal of the lease for the US military bases in the Philippines. She had taken a strong anti-bases stand, hoping to get more concessions. This was to rebound on her. When she finally came to an agreement with the United States, the Philippine senate rejected it; the senators said that the US bases diminished their sense of nationhood.

Senator Richard Lugar, the senior Republican leader in the senate foreign relations committee with special interest in defence, visited me in Singapore in January 1989 after discussions with President Aquino in Manila. He asked whether we could help if the United States had to leave Subic Bay. I said we could offer the use of our base facilities but warned that the whole of Singapore was smaller than what the United States had in Subic. We did not have the space to accommodate US servicemen. I urged him to have US bases remain in the Philippines, adding that Singapore would publicly offer the United States the use of our bases if that would make the Philippine government feel less isolated internationally and more willing to allow US bases to stay.

Our ambassador in Manila raised this question with the Philippine foreign secretary, Raul Manglapus, who said he would welcome such a public statement. I asked our minister of state for foreign affairs, George Yeo, to state publicly in August 1989 that we would be willing to give US forces increased use of our bases. After this statement, Manglapus replied that “Singapore must be singled out and appreciated for its forthright position”. Later, President Aquino told me my stand was helpful.

Malaysia and Indonesia were unenthusiastic. The Malaysian defence minister, Rithauddeen, said that Singapore should not jeopardise the status quo by allowing an increase of foreign forces in the region. The Indonesian foreign minister, Ali Alatas, hoped Singapore would continue to support the idea of a nuclear weapons-free zone in Southeast Asia, adding that Indonesia would oppose the offer if it amounted to a new base.

At a televised National Day Rally on 20 August 1989, I said that there would not be any new bases with large numbers of US troops. Singapore did not have the space. We were offering access to our existing bases which would remain under the control of the Singapore government; they would not become American bases. I, too, was in favour of a nuclear weapons-free zone and of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, proposed by Indonesia and Malaysia respectively. But if oil and gas were found in the Spratlys, it would not be such a zone of peace. Earlier that August I had met both President Suharto and Prime Minister Mahathir in Brunei and clarified the size and nature of my offer.

The US government took up the offer. While in Tokyo for the installation of Emperor Akihito, I signed the MOU with Vice-President Dan Quayle on 13 November 1990, two weeks before I resigned as prime minister. It turned out to be of more value than either the United States or Singapore had foreseen. When the Americans left their bases in the Philippines in September 1991 Singapore’s facilities gave US forces a toehold in Southeast Asia.

Regional perceptions of the value of American access to Singapore facilities underwent a sea change after China published maps in 1992 that included the Spratlys as part of China. Three Asean countries \(Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines\) had also claimed these islands. That November Ali Alatas said that Indonesia had no difficulty in seeing the merits of US access to Singapore’s military facilities.



I first met George Bush in June 1981 when he was vice-president to Reagan. Our excellent relations did not change when he became president. I knew him as an exceptionally warm and friendly man. Back in 1982, when he knew I was travelling to Washington to meet Reagan, he invited me to stay with him at Kennebunkport, Maine, where he was holidaying for the summer. I thanked him but declined because I was meeting my daughter Ling, then in Boston working at the Massachusetts General Hospital. He sent back a message to bring her along and clearly meant it. So we all stayed the weekend with him. Ling and I went jogging with him together with his Secret Service squad. We talked freely on politics and generally had a relaxed time. Barbara Bush was as friendly as her husband – outgoing, hospitable and warm, with no pretensions. Like him, she was genuinely happy to have friends stay with them for a long weekend and made us feel welcome.

After Iraq invaded and occupied Kuwait in 1990, to build up their forces in the Gulf, the United States had to move half a million men to the Gulf area swiftly. The MOU had not yet been signed but we allowed US aircraft and naval vessels carrying men and material across the Pacific to transit through Singapore. We also sent a medical team to Saudi Arabia to show our support for this action in the Gulf. Indonesia and Malaysia stayed neutral. Their Muslim majorities wanted solidarity with and sympathy for Saddam Hussein and the Iraqis.

I visited President Bush in the White House on 21 January 1991 as Operation Desert Storm was moving towards its spectacular conclusion with American, British and French forces encircling Iraqi forces. We spent the evening in his private quarters with Brent Scowcroft, his national security adviser, discussing the broader Arab-Israeli situation. I congratulated him on his success in marshalling the broad coalition of forces in support of this operation, including the Arab states of Egypt, Syria, Morocco and the Gulf. I cautioned, however, that the Muslim world had rallied to Saddam Hussein even though he was in the wrong. The Israelis kept building more settlements on the West Bank, and this had inflamed Arab and Muslim opinion. America’s allies and friends were alarmed. Somewhere down the road there would be an explosion. I urged America’s public support for a Middle East solution fair to both Palestinians and Israelis, to show that it was not supporting the Israelis, whether they were right or wrong.

We next met when Bush visited Singapore in January 1992 on his way to Australia and Japan. His problems with China had increased after Tiananmen on 4 June 1989. It was election year and he was under pressure, including from liberals in his own Republican Party. To maintain his China policy, he needed concessions from China in areas such as the release of detained Tiananmen protest leaders, nuclear proliferation, long-range missiles and trade. He was facing increasing difficulty in upholding his veto on Congress’s resolution to withdraw China’s Most Favoured Nation \(MFN\) status. As President Yang Shangkun was coming to Singapore, Bush wanted me to ask him to take unilateral action in releasing prisoners to show conciliation.

I saw President Yang two days later and conveyed the message. Yang said US pressure on human rights was an excuse to impose on China its political system and its values of freedom and democracy. This was not acceptable.

When Bush lost the election to Bill Clinton that November, I felt we were in for a change of attitudes and styles. Clinton had promised “an America that will not coddle tyrants, from Baghdad to Beijing”. Many of Clinton’s supporters acted as if China was a Third World aid recipient country amenable to diplomatic and economic pressure. Life was not going to be easy for China or for America.




