+++
title = "30 America’s New Agenda"

+++



Singapore’s relationship with the United States falls neatly into two parts – during and after the Cold War. When the Soviet Union posed a threat to America and the world, we had good relations with both the Democrat and Republican administrations from Johnson in the 1960s to Bush in the 1990s. Our strategic interests coincided completely. The United States was against the Soviet Union and communist China. So were we. Furthermore, we were strongly in support of a US military presence in East Asia.

The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 marked the beginning of the end of the Cold War, but the effects of this geopolitical change were felt only in the Clinton presidency from 1993. With the arrival of an anti-Vietnam War generation in the White House, human rights and democracy, which had been subsidiary issues, became all-important. The US government supported a Russian federation under President Yeltsin that said it wanted to democratise. It spoke of Russia as its friend and ally, and of China as its potential adversary. We were not at odds with the United States over Russia, whatever our doubts about its democratic future. But we distanced ourselves from its hostile rhetoric against China. We feared that talking and acting as if China was an enemy would make it into one. We did not want this to happen; no country in Southeast Asia wanted to go out of its way to make China an enemy. This was a time when America wanted to scale down its presence in Southeast Asia, and Singapore was no longer as useful as before.

Many Americans thought that with the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union, China’s communist system would not endure, and that it was America’s moral duty to bring about its end. There were two approaches: one favoured by President Bush, to encourage gradual change through a process of constructive engagement; the other favoured by the US Congress, to impose sanctions and apply political and economic pressure for human rights and political reform. Bush imposed some sanctions on China after Tiananmen, but was soon under pressure to deny MFN \(Most Favoured Nation\) status for Chinese goods imported into America. Congress passed resolutions to deny MFN to China until it improved its human rights performance. Bush vetoed them, and this became an annual ritual that has persisted.


The promotion of democracy and human rights has always been a part of US foreign policy. But during the Cold War, a shared strategic interest in resisting communist expansion in Southeast Asia set the tone in bilateral relations. Singapore had its differences with the Carter administration over democracy and human rights, and with the Reagan and Bush administrations on issues of press freedom, but these differences were not pursued in a confrontational and aggressive manner.

For example, Patricia Derian, assistant secretary of state for humanitarian affairs and human rights in the Carter administration, met me in January 1978 to urge the abolition of detention without trial. I told her the law had been challenged by the opposition at every election and each time an overwhelming majority of the electorate had voted for us and for the law. Singapore was a Confucianist society which placed the interests of the community above those of the individual. My primary responsibility was the wellbeing of the people. I had to deal with communist subversives, against whom it was not possible to get witnesses to testify in open court. If I followed her prescription, Singapore would come to grief. What could the United States do to rescue Singapore more than they were doing for the boat people of South Vietnam, who were then sailing out into the perils of pirates and the weather in the South China Sea? If the United States would give Singapore the status of a Puerto Rico and underwrite Singapore’s future, I would follow her prescription. Then the United States would have to pick up the pieces if Singapore failed. Derian was so stressed that she asked if she could smoke, in spite of having been told by her ambassador that I was allergic to it. As she could not bear her deprivation any longer, I took pity on her and brought her upstairs to an open veranda where she relieved her frustrations with long puffs on her cigarettes. It did not improve her arguments. Twenty years later, Ambassador John Holdridge, who had been present at our 1978 meeting, wrote in his memoirs,

“Lee Kuan Yew, whom I heard on several occasions describe himself as ‘the last Victorian’, certainly was and is a staunch Confucianist as well. He and his followers have attempted to inculcate Singapore’s younger generation with Confucian virtues. Derian, on the other hand, is a veteran of the civil rights movement in the American South, with its frequent clashes between civil rights demonstrators and local authorities, a struggle that epitomised the ‘rights of man’ beliefs inherent in the US Constitution. She completely dismissed Lee’s view that the wellbeing of society takes precedence over individual rights and that detainees in Singapore only needed to forswear violence to be released. The two talked past each other for the better part of two hours and never came to a meeting of the minds.”

Because we shared overriding strategic concerns, this disagreement was not brought into the open.

Another instance was in June 1988 when we asked for a US embassy diplomat to be removed for interfering in Singapore’s domestic politics. He had instigated a former solicitor-general to recruit disaffected lawyers to contest the coming elections with him against the PAP, and had arranged for the lawyer to meet his superior officer in the State Department in Washington, who gave him an assurance that he would get asylum if he needed it. The State Department denied these allegations and in retaliation asked for a newly arrived Singapore diplomat to be withdrawn. In a debate in Parliament, I proposed that the matter be resolved by a competent neutral international committee of three experts. If this committee found that what the US diplomat had done was legitimate diplomatic activity, the Singapore government would withdraw its protest and apologise. The State Department spokesman welcomed my reaffirmation that Singapore wanted to put an end to the dispute, but remained silent on my proposal. No more was made of this.

The issues that Americans put at the top of their agenda in the 1990s were human rights and democracy, and Western versus Eastern values. The Japanese were being pressed by the Americans to link their aid programmes to recipient countries’ democracy and human rights record. The *Asahi Shimbun*, a liberal, anti-war, pro-democracy Japanese newspaper, invited me to a forum in Tokyo in May 1991 to discuss the subjects of human rights and democracy with prominent Japanese and American opinion formulators. I said it was 50 years since the British and French first gave independence with Western-type constitutions to over 40 former British colonies and 25 former French colonies. Unfortunately, both in Asia and Africa the results have been poor. Even America had not succeeded in leaving a successful democracy in the Philippines, a former colony it freed in 1945 after 50 years’ tutelage. I suggested that a people must have reached a high level of education and economic development, must have a sizeable middle class, and life must no longer be a fight for basic survival, before that society could work such a democratic political system.

The following year the *Asahi Shimbun* forum again discussed democracy and human rights, and their effect on economic development. I said that since different societies had developed separately for thousands of years in disparate ways, their ideals and norms were bound to be different. Therefore it was not possible to insist that American or European standards of human rights of the late 20th century be imposed universally. However, with satellite television, it had become increasingly difficult for any government to hide its cruelties to its own people. Slowly but inevitably, the community of nations would find a balance between non-interference in another country’s internal affairs and the moral right to insist on more civilised and humane treatment by all governments of their own peoples. But as societies became more open, there would be convergence towards a common world standard of what was acceptable. Inhuman, cruel or barbaric methods would be condemned. \(In the case of Kosovo some six years later, although NATO and a large majority of the UN could not accept Yugoslav President Milosevic’s barbarism against the Albanian Kosovars, there was no unanimity that this was sufficient ground for intervention without the sanction of the UN Security Council. Russia, China and India, representing 40 per cent of humanity, condemned the bombing of Serbia by NATO in 1999.\)

One interview I gave to the respected American journal, *Foreign Affairs*, was published in February 1994, causing a minor stir among Americans interested in the Asian versus Western values debate. In my answers, I avoided using the term “Asian values”, of which there are many different kinds, and instead referred to Confucian values, the values that prevail in the cultures of China, Korea, Japan and Vietnam, countries that used the Chinese script and had been influenced by Confucian literature. There are also some 20 million ethnic Chinese among the peoples of Southeast Asia whose Confucian values are not the same as Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist values of South and Southeast Asia.

There is no Asian model as such, but there are fundamental differences between East Asian Confucian and Western liberal societies. Confucian societies believe that the individual exists in the context of the family, extended family, friends and wider society, and that the government cannot and should not take over the role of the family. Many in the West believe that the government is capable of fulfilling the obligations of the family when it fails, as with single mothers. East Asians shy away from this approach. Singapore depends on the strength and influence of the family to keep society orderly and maintain a culture of thrift, hard work, filial piety and respect for elders and for scholarship and learning. These values make for a productive people and help economic growth.

I stressed that freedom could only exist in an orderly state, not when there was continuous contention or anarchy. In Eastern societies the main objective was to have a well-ordered society so that everyone could enjoy his freedom to the maximum. Parts of contemporary American society were totally unacceptable to Asians because they represented a breakdown of civil society with guns, drugs, violent crime, vagrancy and vulgar public behaviour. America should not foist its system indiscriminately on other societies where it would not work.

Man needs a moral sense of right and wrong. There is such a thing as evil, and men are not evil just because they are victims of society. I said in *Foreign Affairs* that many of the social problems in the United States were the result of the erosion of the moral underpinnings of society and the diminution of personal responsibility. Some American liberal intellectuals had developed the theory that their society had advanced to a stage where everyone would be better off if they were allowed to do their own thing. This encouraged Americans to abandon a moral or ethical basis for society.

During the Cold War, this interview would have passed unnoticed as an intellectual discourse. Without the solidarity forged out of our common opposition to communism, my views brought into the open the deep differences between American and Asian attitudes to crime and punishment, and the role of government.

Some Americans believe that I formed these opinions only after China became economically buoyant following its open-door policies. In fact they arose from my experiences in the early 1950s when I discovered the cultural gulf between the Chinese-educated and the English-educated in Singapore. A people steeped in Chinese values had more discipline, were more courteous, and respectful to elders. The result was a more orderly society. When these values were diluted by an English education, the result was less vigour and discipline and more casual behaviour. Worse, the English-educated generally lacked self-confidence because they were not speaking their own native language. The dramatic confrontations between the communist-led Chinese middle school students and my own government brought home these substantial differences in culture and ideals, represented in two different value systems.

American liberal academics began to criticise us for our attitudes to the Western press circulating in Singapore. We were not following their pattern for development and progress, that as a country developed its free-market economy and enjoyed prosperity, it should become more like America, democratic and free, with no restrictions on the press. Because we do not comply with their norms, American liberals will not accept that our government, which Singaporeans have repeatedly voted for, can be good.

No critic has been able to fault the Singapore government for corruption, nepotism or immorality. For many years in the 1990s, business risk-assessment organisations such as Political and Economic Risk Consultancy based in Hong Kong have rated Singapore as the least corrupt country in Asia; Transparency International based in Berlin rated Singapore as the seventh least corrupt in the world, ahead of Britain, Germany and the United States. Singapore was and is different from the banana republics that they usually label “authoritarian”. To show their disapproval the American press describes Singapore as “antiseptically clean”. A Singapore that is efficient is called “soullessly efficient”.

Harvard political science professor, Samuel Huntington, in an address in Taipei in August 1995, contrasted the Singapore model with the democratic model in Taiwan. He quoted a *New York Times* headline which summed up the difference between “clean and mean” Singapore and “filthy and free” Taiwan. He concluded, “The freedom and creativity that President Lee has introduced here in Taiwan will survive him. The honesty and efficiency that Senior Minister Lee has brought to Singapore are likely to follow him to his grave. In some circumstances, authoritarianism may do well in the short term, but experience clearly shows that only democracy produces good government over the long haul.”

Americans and Europeans were justifiably triumphant and exultant after their success in helping to dissolve the Soviet Union by pressing for human rights and democracy under the Helsinki Accords. But they were unrealistic in hoping to repeat the process in China. Unlike the Russians, the Chinese did not accept the cultural norms of the West as superior and to be emulated.

One evening over dinner in Singapore in March 1992, former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt asked me whether China could become democratic and observe human rights like the West. Choo, who sat next to Schmidt, laughed outright at the idea of 1.2 billion Chinese, 30 per cent of them illiterate, voting for a president. Schmidt noted this was her spontaneous reaction to the absurdity of it. I replied that China’s history of over 4,000 years was one of dynastic rulers, interspersed with anarchy, foreign conquerors, warlords and dictators. The Chinese people had never experienced a government based on counting heads instead of chopping off heads. Any evolution towards representative government would be gradual. Nearly all Third World countries were former colonies that, after decades of colonial rule without either elections or democracy, received democratic constitutions fashioned after those of their former rulers. But the British, French, Belgian, Portuguese, Dutch and US democratic institutions had taken 200 years to evolve.

History teaches us that liberal democracy needs economic development, literacy, a growing middle class and political institutions that support free speech and human rights. It needs a civic society resting on shared values that make people with different and conflicting views willing to cooperate with each other. In a civic society, between the family and state, there are whole series of institutions to which citizens belong, voluntary associations to promote specific common interests, religious institutions, trade unions, professional organisations and other self-help bodies.

Democracy works where the people have that culture of accommodation and tolerance which makes a minority accept the majority’s right to have its way until the next election, and wait patiently and peacefully for its turn to become the government by persuading more voters to support its views. Where democracy was implanted in a people whose tradition had been to fight to the bitter end, as in South Korea, it has not worked well. South Koreans battle it out on the streets regardless of whether they have a military dictator or a democratically elected president in charge. Brawls in the Legislative Yuan of Taiwan, plus physical clashes in the streets, are reflections of their different cultures. People will evolve their own more or less representative forms of government, suited to their customs and culture.

In 1994, soon after the fall of the Soviet Union, when Americans were in a confident mood, they tried to bring instant democracy to Haiti by reinstalling an ousted elected president. Five years later, the Americans quietly slipped out of Haiti and privately admitted defeat. Writing in the *New York Times*, American author Bob Shacochis asked, “What went wrong? Setting aside for the moment the culpability of the Haitian leadership, Washington’s policymakers might acknowledge that *in vitro* democratisation is a risky procedure. Haitian democracy, born prematurely, will not survive without a genuine multiparty system, which won’t exist without a secure middle class, which can’t evolve without a viable economy, which won’t exist without credible leadership strong and wise enough to wrench the country out of its tailspin.” Because the American administration did not publicly acknowledge this failure and its reasons, this will not be the last time it makes this mistake.

At our discussion in March 1992, I had emphasised to Schmidt that it was different with human rights; technology had brought the peoples of the world into a global village, all watching the same atrocities on television as they happened. Because all peoples and governments want the respect and esteem of others, they must gradually move away from behaviour that made them disreputable. The next time Schmidt was in China, I noted that he pressed for universal standards of human rights, not of democracy. Later, Schmidt wrote in his newspaper *Die Zeit* that China could not become an instant democracy, but that the West should press for its human rights to become acceptable.

The interest of America, the West and even Japan in democracy and human rights for Asia springs from their concern over the outcome in China, not in Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong or Singapore. America wanted these East Asian “tigers” to be examples to China of free societies that had prosperous economies because of democratic political institutions. The *New York Times*, in the article Huntington quoted in 1995, had pointed out that Taiwan and Singapore were the two most successful Chinese societies in 5,000 years of Chinese civilisation, and that one or the other was likely to be the model for the future of mainland China. This is not the case. China will chart its own way forward. It will select and incorporate those features and methods of government that it finds valuable and compatible with its own vision of its future. The Chinese people have a deep and abiding fear of *luan* \(chaos\). Because of their country’s immense size, their leaders are extra-cautious, and will carefully test, adjust and adapt before incorporating new features into their system.

The fight between the United States and China over human rights and democracy focused on Hong Kong’s return from Britain to China. The United States has economic leverage on China through Hong Kong. If it is not satisfied that Hong Kong is administered separately from China, it can cut off the separate export quotas and other benefits to Hong Kong. The fate of six million Hong Kongers will not affect America or the world. But the destiny of 1,200 million Chinese in China \(likely to become 1,500 million by the year 2030\) will determine the balance of forces in the world. Americans have joined issue with China over Hong Kong’s “democracy” more to influence the future of China than that of Hong Kong. Similarly, American liberals criticise Singapore not because they are concerned about democracy and human rights for our three million people but because they believe we are setting the wrong example for China.

From 1993 to 1997 Clinton’s policy on China underwent a sea change. This was the result of a crisis caused by China’s missile exercises in the Straits of Taiwan in March 1996 and the United States’ response of sending two aircraft carrier groups to the waters east of Taiwan. This stand-off led to a re-examination of positions by both China and the United States. After intense discussions between their top security officials, relations stabilised. President Jiang Zemin made a successful state visit to Washington in October 1997, and President Clinton made a return visit to Beijing in June 1998 when he was agreeably surprised to find Jiang ready to reciprocate their live TV press conference in Washington. When he arrived in Hong Kong on his way out, he said President Jiang Zemin was “a man of extraordinary intellect, very high energy, a lot of vigour. He has a quality that is profoundly important at this moment of our history: he has a good imagination. He has a vision, he can visualise a future that is different from the present.”

Yet within months, this warmth turned cold as the Cox Report of the Senate committee investigating the loss of nuclear missile secrets blamed it on Chinese espionage. Leaks of the Cox Report created such a hostile mood in Congress that President Clinton did not seize the offer to close a WTO deal with Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji in Washington in April 1999. Within two weeks, in May, American bombs hit the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, a tragic error. Relations turned sour. This roller-coaster relationship between the world’s most powerful and the world’s potentially next most powerful nation is unsettling to all in Asia.

US-China relations took a promising turn in November 1999 when they agreed on the terms for China’s entry into the World Trade Organisation. China’s entry will greatly increase its economic links, based on a framework of set rules, with the United States and other member countries. This will lead to mutually beneficial relationships.



From time to time American administrations can be difficult to deal with, as during President Clinton’s first term \(1993–96\). After the Michael Fay incident, Singapore suddenly became persona non grata because we were not following the American liberal prescription for how to become a democratic and developed country. But our relations warmed up again after the currency crisis in July 1997. The United States found us a useful interlocutor. Singapore was the only country in the region where the rule of law and sturdy banking regulations with rigorous supervision had enabled it to withstand a massive capital outflow from the area. At an APEC meeting in Vancouver in November 1997 President Clinton accepted Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong’s proposal for a special meeting of the affected countries and G7 members to discuss the economic crisis and help them put their banking systems right and restore investor confidence. The first meeting of G22 finance ministers was held in Washington in April 1998.

As the crisis worsened in Indonesia, there were close consultations between key US Treasury and State Department officials and ours as we tried to halt the meltdown of the Indonesian rupiah. President Clinton phoned Prime Minister Goh before he sent out Deputy Treasury Secretary Larry Summers to see President Suharto in January 1998. In March 1998 Clinton sent former Vice-President Mondale as his personal representative to explain the gravity of the situation to Suharto. Their efforts failed because Suharto never understood how vulnerable Indonesia had become after he opened up its capital account and allowed Indonesian companies to borrow some US$80 billion from foreign banks.

In the middle of this financial crisis, Singapore further liberalised its financial sector. What we did was out of our own convictions, but it coincided with the IMF and US Treasury prescription on how to develop a financial free market. We were commended by the Americans as an example of a free, unfettered economy.

There will be ups and downs in Singapore’s relationship with the United States because we cannot always follow their formula and act as their model for progress. Singapore is a densely populated, tiny island located in a turbulent region, and it cannot be governed like America. However, these are small differences compared to the value of US presence in Asia, which has ensured security and stability and made economic growth possible. America accelerated this growth by opening up its markets to exports from non-communist countries. If Japan had won the war, we would have been enslaved. If the United States had not entered World War II and the British had continued as the major power in Asia, Singapore and the region would not have industrialised so easily. Britain did not allow its colonies to get ahead industrially.

When China entered the Korean War, threatening peace and stability in East Asia, the Americans fought North Korean and Chinese forces to a standstill at the 38th parallel. They helped to rebuild Japan with aid and investments, and made possible the industrialisation of South Korea and Taiwan. The United States expended blood and treasure in Vietnam from 1965 to 1975 and checked the spread of communism. American companies came to Southeast Asia to set up repair facilities to support the US forces in Vietnam. Then they built manufacturing plants unrelated to the Vietnam War, and exported their products to America. This triggered off the industrialisation of Southeast Asia, including Singapore.

America’s generosity of spirit grew out of an innate optimism that it could give and still have more to give. Unfortunately this spirit weakened in the late 1980s because of trade and budget deficits. To correct the deficits, America demanded that Japan and the other NIEs open up their markets, revalue their currencies upwards, import more American products and pay royalties for intellectual property.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Americans have become as dogmatic and evangelical as the communists were. They want to promote democracy and human rights everywhere, except where it would hurt themselves as in the oil-rich Arabian peninsula. Even so, the United States is still the most benign of all the great powers, certainly less heavy-handed than any emerging great power. Hence, whatever the differences and frictions, all non-communist countries in East Asia prefer America to be the dominant weight in the power balance of the region.



My reservations in the 1960s about dealing directly with Americans were because they acted as if their wealth could solve all problems. Many of their officials then were brash and inexperienced, but I found them easier to work with than I expected. I did not need interpreters to understand them. They too could read me easily. Had I made my speeches only in Chinese or Malay, Bill Bundy, the assistant secretary of state for East Asia, would not have read them and initiated the relationship with successive administrations that began with my meeting with President Johnson in October 1967. I was fortunate in getting on with most of the US presidents and their principal aides, especially their secretaries of state. Several have kept up our friendship even after they left office. Working together for shared objectives, we learnt to trust each other and became good friends.

America’s political process, however, can be unnerving for its friends. Within 25 years I have seen impeachment proceedings started against two American presidents – Nixon in 1974 and Clinton in 1999. Fortunately, no great harm was done to the state of the union. Just as great a source of anxiety is the speed at which policies in Washington change with changes in the principal players. It makes for unpredictable relationships. According to friendly diplomats in Washington, these new faces bring fresh ideas and act as a “flushing mechanism” to prevent the consolidation and fossilisation of a ruling elite. I believe only a wealthy and solidly established nation like America can roll with such a system.

Notwithstanding the openness of the American political process, no country knows how America will react to a crisis in its part of the world. Were I a Bosnian or a Kosovar, I would never have believed that Americans would involve themselves in the Balkans. But they did get involved, not to defend America’s fundamental national interests, but to uphold human rights and put an end to crimes against humanity committed by a sovereign government against its own nationals. Is such a policy sustainable? And applicable worldwide? In Rwanda, Africa, it was not. Hence American friends keep reminding me that their foreign policy is often driven not by considerations of strategic national interest, but by their media.

In spite of many mistakes and shortcomings America has succeeded, and spectacularly so. In the 1970s and ’80s, its industries were going down as against Japanese and German industries, but they came back with unexpected vigour in the 1990s. American corporations lead the world in the use of computers and information technology. They have exploited the digital revolution to restructure and flatten their organisations, and increased productivity to previously unheard of levels while keeping inflation low, increasing profits and staying ahead of the Europeans and Japanese in competitiveness. Their strength is in their talent, nurtured in their universities, think-tanks, and in the R&D laboratories of their MNCs. And they attract some of the brightest minds from the world over, including many from India and China, to new, high-growth sectors like Silicon Valley. No European or Asian nation can attract and absorb foreign talent so effortlessly. This gives America a valuable advantage, like having a magnet to draw in the best and brightest from the world.

It has taken some time for Europeans to acknowledge the superiority of the American free-market economy, especially its corporate philosophy of concentrating on rates of return on equity. American executives are driven by their ceaseless search for increased shareholder value through higher productivity and competitiveness. The cost of this high performance-high reward system is an American society more divided than European or Japanese society. These two societies do not have the equivalent of the American underclass. European corporate culture puts much importance on social unity and harmony. German companies have trade union representatives on their management boards. But they pay a price in lower rates of return on capital and poorer shareholder value. The Japanese have life-long employment and place high value on loyalty to and from their employees. The drawback is over-manning and loss of competitive edge.

However, in the 1990s many European companies have listed themselves on the New York Stock Exchange. This requires them to focus on quarterly returns and shareholder value. Acceptance of American standards of corporate governance is the accolade Europeans have paid to Americans.

As long as its economy leads the world, and America stays ahead in innovation and technology, neither the European Union nor Japan nor China can displace the United States from its present pre-eminent position.




