+++
title = "33 Korea: At the Crossroads"

+++



I did not have happy memories of the Koreans because the first ones I met were in Japanese uniform. They were one of two groups of auxiliaries the Japanese brought to Singapore, the other being Taiwanese. The Koreans were the toughs and as heavy-handed as the Japanese soldiers. The Taiwanese were used as interpreters, speaking Hokkien, Singapore’s major Chinese dialect.

After the war, Korea’s economic dynamism overrode my past prejudices. I visited the country in October 1979 when President Park Chung Hee received me in his official residence, the Blue House. Park was an ascetic-looking man, small and wiry with a sharp face and a narrow nose. He had been chosen and trained as a military officer by the Japanese. He must have been among the best of his generation.

He wanted close relations with Asean and hoped I would help. He said the prospects of peace in the Korean peninsula were not good. The South did not want another war, placing peace first and reunification second. The North wanted to reunify by force. I asked if the American commitment would go beyond 1981, the date President Carter had announced for the withdrawal of US forces. He replied that Carter’s Defence Secretary Brown had promised security after 1981 and had stated publicly that the security of Korea was vital to the United States. I said Carter’s 1976 election pledge to withdraw troops from Korea was popular with Americans; if it again became popular, Carter could change. He agreed, saying he was uneasy over US policy which was affected by four-year election cycles.

He had no small talk at dinner that night. His daughter, in her 20s and English-speaking, kept the conversation flowing. Park said his training was that of a military officer, and his job was to take the advice and recommendations of the experts whom he had appointed as ministers and top officials, and decide policy.

His prime minister, Choi Kyu Hah, was an able man, Japanese-educated. Choi’s wife was equally intelligent and well-educated in Japanese. She and her husband still read Japanese novels and newspapers. The Korean intelligentsia, like the Taiwanese, were as much influenced by the Japanese as I was by the British. Park had been in power for 18 years and had got the economy thriving with a disciplined and united people, all of whom were determined to achieve economic modernisation. Following Japanese practice, he jealously protected his domestic market and exported aggressively. He encouraged, even forced Koreans to save, denying them luxuries like colour television sets which they were exporting in increasing numbers. I was impressed by his strong will and grim resolve for Korea to succeed. Without Park, Korea might never have made it as an industrialised nation. Five days after I left Korea, Park was assassinated by his closest aide, the chief of intelligence. According to the government, it was part of a plot to seize power. Their press reported that the intelligence chief had feared being replaced after Park criticised him for his failure in handling unrest when students and workers fought police in Pusan.

My visit confirmed my assessment that the Korean people were tough and capable of enduring great hardships. Successive invaders had swept across the steppes of central Asia and come to a halt in the peninsula. Koreans are of Mongolian stock with distinctive facial and physical features, easily distinguishable from the Japanese or Chinese. They were proud of their history and took me to Kyongju, their ancient cultural centre where the tombs of Shilla dynasty kings had yielded elaborate artefacts of gold and precious stones.

Their hatred for the Japanese was intense. Thirty-five years of merciless Japanese suppression of any rebellious activity had left deep scars on their soul. They remembered the Japanese invasions over the last 500 years, each of which they repelled. Even among the most Japanised of the Korean elite, including Prime Minister Choi and his wife, both completely at home in Japanese language, literature and culture, there was an underlying antipathy towards their former rulers. The Japanese were hard on the Koreans because they resisted colonisation and domination. They had also resisted Chinese overlordship for a thousand years, but they did not have that same deep antipathy for the Chinese. They had adopted the Chinese script and with it had imbibed the teachings of Confucius.

Korean students in American universities have shown that they are as bright as the Japanese or Chinese. But although physically Koreans are hardier, they cannot equal the Japanese in cohesiveness and dedication to their companies. Korean workers and unions were quiescent as long as there was martial law. When it was lifted, the unions became militant with go-slows, sit-ins and strikes. They demanded more pay and better conditions regardless of what was happening to their export markets. Korean employers and unions never achieved the cooperative relationship that Japanese companies and their unions enjoy. Japanese unions never damaged their companies’ competitive position however sharp their disputes with their employers over who got what.

The Koreans are a fearsome people. When they riot, they are as organised and nearly as disciplined as the riot police who confront them, policemen who resemble gladiators in their helmets with plastic visors and plastic shields. When their workers and students fight in the streets with these policemen, they look like soldiers at war. Their strikers squat on the ground to listen to speeches and pump fists into the air rhythmically. They are an intense people not given to compromise, and when they oppose authority, they do so with vigour and violence.



I made two more visits to South Korea in the 1980s to meet Presidents Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo. President Kim Young Sam and I met in Singapore in 1996. All four Korean leaders, from Park to Kim, were deeply concerned over their country’s geopolitical vulnerability, caught between three huge and powerful neighbours, China, Russia and Japan.

When I met Chun in Seoul in 1986, I was struck by his preoccupation with and fear of North Korea. I found this strange. Their population was twice that of the North. They were immensely richer and had access to better military equipment from America. The traumatic experience of the communist invasion must have left deep scars and an abiding fear of the ferocity of their northern brethren. The Korean foreign ministers I met all spoke with awe of the military might and prowess of the North, despite its parlous economy.

Another issue which dominated my discussions with South Korea’s leaders was trade and investments between the newly industrialising economies \(NIEs\), which included South Korea and Singapore, and the developed countries of Europe and America. With President Chun in 1986 I raised my concern at the growing protectionist sentiments in America and Europe. If we, the NIEs, did not open up our markets to reciprocate the free access we had to America and Europe, they would find it unbearable and protectionism would grow. He agreed that the NIEs should liberalise. Korea was doing so in a systematic and steady way, to be completed in two years. I pointed out that after his liberalisation, Korea’s tariffs would still be high at 16 to 20 per cent. Chun’s response was that Korea was not a rich country. It had a per capita income of only US$2,000, less than Singapore’s, and it had a debt of US$46.5 billion besides the burden of defence.

When I spoke to their four major business associations over lunch in Seoul in 1986, I found them most reluctant to open up their markets. Two years later, at lunch with the same four associations, I discussed the need to increase their imports, urging that they and other NIEs should discuss with the industrial nations in the OECD \(Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development\) ways to narrow trade imbalances. This time they were more receptive, realising that their position was not tenable in the longer run.

During Chun’s presidency, massive demonstrations and riots brought Seoul to a standstill from time to time. Towards the end of his term, they were endemic. Roh, as his key aide, moved skilfully to lower tensions and gathered support to run and win the next presidential election.

Roh Tae Woo was a quiet and serious man. When we first met in July 1986, he was a minister in Chun’s cabinet. He spoke highly of Singapore’s clean government. His president had tried to eliminate corruption but had found this not easy. How had we tackled it? I explained our system: first, good intelligence; next, an impersonal, not a subjective approach; third, solid backing from the top for anti-corruption investigation and prosecution. As his Democratic Justice Party \(DJP\) was not a communist party, I said he could not dispense with the existing bureaucracy and start afresh, but had to use it. He could slowly ease out older senior officials and bring in younger men who were untainted, and ensure they maintained high standards. They should be paid well. I emphasised, however, that unless the top leaders were beyond reproach, and the higher echelons cleaned up before the lower, it would be a waste of time.

I next met Roh in 1988 when he was president. He asked how I had stayed in power for so long, winning successive elections. Because, I replied, people knew I did not lie and was sincere in advancing their interests. Ordinary people could not follow the intricacies of an economic or a political problem so they learnt whom to trust. To win such trust, I never said anything which I did not believe in, and people slowly recognised that I was honest and sincere. This was my most powerful asset. It was also US President Reagan’s strength. He had good speechwriters. He worked on their drafts, using their ideas but putting them into his own words. He did not allow himself to be “voiced over” by his speechwriters, so when he delivered a speech, he came across as a man of sincerity and conviction. I advised Roh not to compete with Kim Dae Jung in making powerful speeches. Roh had shown the people that he could keep cool in a crisis with massive riots and disorder before the election, and had shown humility. These were assets he should build on.

Roh had coopted Kim Young Sam, one of the two major opposition leaders, into his party. This enabled Kim to become the first elected civilian president in 1992. He made cleaning up corruption his major campaign issue. He sacked three cabinet ministers within weeks of their appointment for various corrupt practices, removed several senior judges, and sacked and imprisoned a number of senior military officers. The army acquiesced. Several Korean television and newspaper groups visited Singapore to do documentaries and articles on our anti-corruption law and enforcement system.

In 1996 I met President Kim Young Sam when he visited Singapore. A dapper, well-dressed man, he proudly told me that he jogged many kilometres every morning. He said that we shared common values like the importance of the family unit and a social network to support the family. I added that our most important common interest was the strategic importance of the US presence in Asia.

The situation in the North had changed dramatically. Kim described the leaders of North Korea as crazy and capable of irrational acts. They had an armed force of 1.1 million men but their weapons were outdated, supply lines weak and logistics vulnerable.

Kim had said when he took office that he would not reopen old issues. But as domestic pressures increased, he reversed his position in late 1995 and got the national assembly to pass a special law to lift the statute of limitations for the 1979 coup and for murder, sedition, corruption and other crimes related to the 1980 Kwangju massacre, when the military had killed several hundred civilian protestors. His two predecessors were arrested and charged. I was startled to see them on television brought to court in remand prison clothes, handcuffed and humiliated. Chun was sentenced to death and Roh to 22 years and 6 months in prison for their role in the 1979 coup and 1980 Kwangju killings. Both were also fined for taking bribes during their presidential terms. On appeal, these sentences were later reduced to life sentence for Chun and 17 years for Roh.

Soon after, President Kim Young Sam himself was engulfed in a huge corruption scandal when a large chaebol \(conglomerate\), the Hanbo Group, collapsed, owing billions of dollars to several government-controlled banks. Kim’s son was prosecuted for taking some US$7 million and sentenced to three years’ jail, with a fine of US$1.5 million. The opposition alleged that Kim himself had received bribes from the Hanbo Group and that he had grossly exceeded the legal spending limits for his election. President Kim made a public apology on television, but refused to disclose details. The standing of the incumbent president and his ruling party collapsed after the widely publicised scandals of corruption and mismanagement of the economy. Because of the ensuing economic crisis, South Korea required the assistance of the IMF.

In December 1997 Kim Dae Jung, a veteran opposition leader standing for the fourth time, won the presidential election. He had forged an electoral alliance with Kim Jong Pil, the first Korean Central Intelligence Agency \(KCIA\) chief who had once ordered his capture.

As a prominent dissident, Kim Dae Jung had spent many years in the United States and become an advocate of the universal application of human rights and democracy regardless of cultural values. As an opposition leader, he had written an article in the magazine *Foreign Affairs* in response to my interview with the editor, Fareed Zakaria. He did not agree that history and culture made for different attitudes of a people and different norms of government. *Foreign Affairs* invited me to reply. I chose not to. The difference in our views cannot be resolved by argument. It will be settled by history, by the way events will develop in the next 50 years. It takes more than one generation for the political, economic, social and cultural implications of policies to work themselves out. It is a process of attrition, of social Darwinism.

As the president-elect, Kim Dae Jung agreed to Kim Young Sam’s pardon of the two former presidents then serving long terms of imprisonment for treason, bribery and, in the case of Chun, murder. They were freed in December 1997 and attended the presidential swearing-in ceremony in February 1998. After his swearing-in, President Kim Dae Jung shook hands with Chun and Roh, a gesture of “reconciliation and harmony” in Korean society, as the presidential spokesman put it. It was staged before a crowd of 40,000. Whether this political theatre restored the people’s confidence in their system of government is open to question.

South Korea’s political institutions would have suffered less damage if, like Mandela’s government in South Africa, they had closed all past accounts. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa forgave all those who had committed atrocities during the apartheid regime if they declared their previous wrongdoings. While it might not have achieved reconciliation, the commission did not worsen the divide.

Their trials not only destroyed Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo, they also diminished the men who had helped to create modern Korea, leaving the people cynical and disillusioned with all authority. It will be some time before Koreans regain their esteem for their leaders. Chun and Roh had played by Korean standards of their time, and by those rules they were not villains. Pressured by American public opinion against having another military man as successor, Roh had allowed power to go into the hands of Kim Young Sam. These events have sent the wrong signals to military leaders in charge of other countries, that it is dangerous to hand over power to civilian politicians who seek popular support.

In 1999 I attended a meeting in Seoul as a member of the International Advisory Council \(IAC\) to the Federation of Korean Industries. At a forum on 22 October, IAC members had a discussion with the leaders of Korean chaebols. These chaebols are Korean versions of Japanese zaibatsus. In every major industry where zaibatsus have been successful, chaebols followed to compete with cheaper labour and lower costs. Like the Japanese, they went for market share, ignoring cash flow and the bottom line. As in Japan, the whole Korean domestic economy, especially the high savings of their workers, provided the base for chaebols to get capital at low interest rates and target specific industries.

With the end of the Cold War, the external situation changed. Like Japan, Korea had to open its domestic and especially its financial markets. Their chaebols had borrowed about US$150 billion in foreign currency for rapid industrial expansion in Korea and abroad – in China, former communist countries in eastern Europe, the Russian Republic and the central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union. These investments were not based on expected returns on equity but on aggressive expansion to capture market share. When they were unable to repay the interest due, towards the end of 1997 the Korean currency, the won, collapsed. The IMF came to their rescue. Three weeks later, Kim Dae Jung won his election as president.

I told the chaebol chiefs that Korea was at a crossroad. They could not continue with the old paradigm based on the Japanese model, because the Japanese themselves had hit the wall. Korea and Japan were now part of an integrated global economic and financial system, and would have to abide by the rules that the United States and the European Union had settled for the IMF, World Bank and WTO. This required them to be as competitive in their investments, with the eye on the bottom line, as any American or European corporation. The question was how to get from where they were to where they must be if they were to be competitive. Chaebols had grown into widespreading conglomerates. Now they should concentrate on what they had done best and make those their core businesses, hiving off their non-core businesses. Next, they needed managers who had entrepreneurial drive if their businesses were to thrive.

The chaebol leaders were pleased that I thought Confucianist culture had not caused their collapse but that their weakness was their informal system of doing business and their disregard for the rate of return on equity and the bottom line. This was made worse by their not having open, transparent systems, level playing fields and standard international accounting practices. Hong Kong and Singapore, both Confucianist societies, had withstood the financial storm because both had British systems of law, business methods that were transparent, accounting practices of international standard, open tenders and binding contracts negotiated on level playing fields, and bank loans made at arm’s length. Korea had to adopt these practices. Korean business practice followed that of the Japanese, based more on informal relations and less on formal rules and the law. The chaebol leaders understood the need for such restructuring but were reluctant to give up family control of the corporate empires they had built up in the last four decades, and hand over the destinies of their constituent companies to managers who had been accustomed to leaving the entrepreneurial decisions to the founders.

After the IAC meeting I called on President Kim Dae Jung at the Blue House. In his mid-70s, he was broad-built and above average in height for a Korean of his generation. He walked slowly with a limp, the result of an injury sustained from an attempt on his life in 1971, reportedly by KCIA agents. He had a serious, even solemn, expression, until he broke into the occasional smile. He posed a series of issues, starting with North-South relations. Methodically, he went through the items he had in mind. He wanted a critique of his policies, beginning with his “sunshine policy”. The aims of this policy were: first, to prevent war by maintaining a strong deterrent stance; second, to reunify the two without damaging or threatening the North Korean regime; third, to create an environment in which the two could cooperate in economics and business at the private level.

I said it made sense to help North Koreans change from within by transferring technology, management and knowhow and encouraging them to develop. North Korea could raise its standard of living and be less of a burden on the South. However, this must be accompanied by more people-to-people contact, particularly exchanges between think-tanks, universities and opinion formulators, to change their mental outlook.

He then asked for my assessment of Chinese-North Korean relations. I did not believe the chemistry between old leaders like Deng Xiaoping and Kim II Sung existed between Jiang Zemin and Kim Jong Il. The older generation had fought together as comrades in arms in the Korean War. The present generation of leaders did not share that camaraderie. It was not in China’s interest to have war and disorder in the Korean peninsula. What China wanted was a status quo that would enable trade with and investments from the South to continue. Neither was it in China’s interest to have the two Koreas reunited. Then China would lose the North Korean card against the United States and South Korea. Kim had thought through his problems; he simply wanted my confirmation or contradiction of his views.

Kim impressed me by his stand on East Timor. The recent crisis and the Internet age, he said, had brought northeast and southeast Asia closer together. Although East Timor was geographically far from South Korea, the conflict had indirectly affected them. It would be better if all countries in Asia could cooperate as one, on a bigger scale. That was why he had decided to send combat troops \(a battalion of 420\) to East Timor, even though his opposition in the national assembly was against it. He had another reason: in 1950, 16 countries came to South Korea’s aid and hundreds of thousands died in the Korean War. South Korea would have failed in its responsibilities if it did not help the UN in East Timor. Making northeast and southeast Asia one region, I believed, was a matter of time. The two subregional economies were increasingly intertwined.

The Korean media had expected us to discuss our differing views on Asian \(i.e., Confucianist\) values, and on democracy and human rights. I told them the subject was not discussed; we were both in our late 70s and unlikely to change our views. History will decide who had a better reading of Confucian culture.

In Kim I found a man who had been tempered through many a crisis. He had learnt to control his emotions in order to achieve his higher purposes. He had been captured by the KCIA when he was in Japan and tortured, and would probably have been killed but for the intervention of the Americans. Yet in order to win the election in 1997 he formed an alliance with a former KCIA director, Kim Jong Pil, and made him his prime minister when he won the election.



A significant reason for South Korea’s present political, economic and social difficulties was that the transition from martial law to free-for-all democratic politics had been too sudden. They had no established tradition of law enforcement to control public assemblies or rules to regulate trade unions and require them to hold secret ballots before going on strike or taking industrial action. In Singapore, when we took office in 1959, the British had left us a whole set of subsidiary legislation for minor offences, so when Emergency rule ended there were other means to keep public protests from going beyond tolerable limits and upsetting law and order. If the Koreans had democratised more gradually and had first put in place the necessary legislation to modulate demonstrations and protests, the people might have been less prone to excesses in their protests, especially the angry confrontations of workers and students with the police.

It will take some time to renew the social contract between leaders and people. They need to restore people’s confidence that there will be fair play between the successful and the less successful, between the better and the lesser educated, between management and labour. In their dash for rapid growth, successive presidents allowed a policy that favoured high rewards for industrialists, managers and engineers as against workers, widening the wealth gap as their GDP rose. Once restored in a new social contract, Koreans will forge ahead with vigour again. They are a dynamic, industrious, resolute and able people. Their intense culture makes them achievement-oriented.



After several false starts, the North and South Korean presidents finally met at a summit in Pyongyang on 13 June 2000. The live telecast of their meetings astonished South Koreans. The much-maligned North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, demonstrated warmth, humour and friendliness. A wave of euphoria swept South Koreans. Even the most sceptical were impressed. But doubts remain. Was this not the man who ordered the assassination of South Korean ministers at a wreath-laying ceremony in Rangoon in 1983 and the bombing of a South Korean airliner in 1987?

Within days, US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright visited Beijing and Seoul. In Seoul, she said US forces would remain in Korea. But if the thaw continues, she must expect the North to press for their withdrawal and the South to agitate in support. And if North Korea stops its missile development, it will remove the need for America’s national missile defence system which is to guard against a missile attack by a “rogue” state like North Korea, not China.

I met President Jiang Zemin in Beijing on the afternoon of that Korean summit. He was in high spirits, recounting with pleasure the handshake of the two leaders he had watched on television. Jiang had much to be satisfied about, Kim Jong Il having made a rare visit to Beijing to discuss the matter with him a fortnight before the event.




