+++
title = "36 China: The Dragon with a Long Tail"

+++



No foreign country other than Britain has had a greater influence on Singapore’s political development than China, the ancestral homeland of three-quarters of our people. The Singapore-China relationship has been long, complex and unequal. From the founding of Singapore in 1819 until 1867, Qing dynasty China did not recognise the existence of the overseas Chinese. This changed in the 1870s when China set up consulates in Nanyang \(the South Seas\), then under the colonial control of the British, French and Dutch. These consulates, including one in Singapore, were intended not so much to protect the Chinese as to harness their loyalty to China by promoting Chinese culture and education, and to obtain their financial support.

In the 1920s the Chinese Communist Party \(CCP\) sent an agent to Singapore to build up a communist movement in Nanyang. When the communists held a secret meeting in Singapore in 1930 to found the Malayan Communist Party \(MCP\), Ho Chi Minh, the legendary Vietnamese communist leader, was present. The rivalries and conflicts between the Kuomintang Nationalist Party \(KMT\) and the CCP in China extended to their supporters in Singapore and Malaya. During the war both the KMT and CCP fought against the Japanese in China. Because of their stronger anti-Japanese resistance activities, the CCP enjoyed greater support from Chinese workers and farmers.

The rise of communist China in 1949 inspired an intense patriotic pride that surged through the Chinese-educated community in anticipation of the emergence of a powerful China, one that would banish their sense of humiliation and subjugation at the hands of the British and other Europeans. On the other hand, it aroused deep-seated fears among Malays, Indians, English-educated Chinese and a minority of the Chinese-educated who supported the KMT. In 1949 both the KMT and the CCP were proscribed in Singapore, but the division of the community between the two remained.

The People’s Republic of China \(PRC\) aimed to increase the loyalty of the overseas Chinese to Beijing. In 1949 it formed the Overseas Chinese Affairs Commission and began radio broadcasts. It supported Chinese education overseas and encouraged the Nanyang Chinese to send home to China their sons for education and remittances for their relatives. It also appealed to qualified doctors, engineers and teachers to return and help rebuild the motherland. It was a subversive challenge to the colonial governments and to the newly independent governments of Southeast Asia in Indonesia and, later, Malaya. Radio Beijing, the *People’s Daily* and the *Beijing Review* regularly denounced Malaysia as a neo-colonialist plot to persecute people of Chinese descent.

The Tunku and other Malay leaders feared Beijing’s influence over the MCP and over the bulk of their Chinese-speaking population. When in 1963 Zhou Enlai wrote to me a letter similar to that addressed to many other heads of government, calling for the removal and destruction of nuclear weapons, I gave him a bland reply that such a solution would be welcomed by all. This was while we were a self-governing colony and not a state in Malaysia. When my letter to Zhou was made public by China in 1964, after we were in Malaysia, the Tunku publicly reprimanded me for having “entered into direct correspondence with a government which Malaysia does not recognise and which has proved by word and deed to be hostile to Malaysia”.

In January 1965 Premier Zhou Enlai had condemned the formation of Malaysia in a speech to an Indonesian delegation in Beijing. After independence, we had no diplomatic contact with the PRC. Indeed, up to 1970 Beijing did not recognise the existence of an independent Singapore. PRC broadcasts and publications referred to Singapore as “a part of Malaya”. Malaysia, too, did not exist because it was “a neo-colonialist plot”. Their propaganda regularly condemned “Singapore authorities” for their “criminal armed suppression of Singapore people”. In 1966 the All China Federation of Trade Unions sent a telegram to left-wing unions in Singapore expressing the indignation of Chinese workers at the “barbarous acts of suppression of the workers perpetrated by the Singapore authorities who are tailing behind US and British imperialism”. I was attacked by name in 1968 when Radio Beijing reported Lee Kuan Yew as a “running dog of US and British imperialism”.

When the Cultural Revolution in China was at its height, we used to confiscate large quantities of Chinese stamps bearing “Thoughts of Mao” imported by some Chinese-language bookshops, and also thousands of copies of Mao’s little red book brought in by Chinese seamen who wanted to distribute them. Even the Singapore branch of the Bank of China joined in this madness and gave out Cultural Revolution propaganda pamphlets to customers at their counters. We arrested and prosecuted our own citizens who indulged in this frenzy, but left Chinese nationals alone to keep open the trade with China.

In late 1970 Beijing quietly changed its stance towards Singapore. In those capitals where we were represented, our heads of mission were invited to China’s national day receptions. China’s priority then was to get as many governments as possible to close ranks against the Soviet Union and check the expansion of its influence into Southeast Asia. The Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and border clashes between Chinese and Russian forces across the Amur River in 1969 had rendered China’s revolutionary antics dangerous. They were weakening China’s capability to resist Soviet aggression.

By 1971 China stopped public attacks on the Singapore government. That year, the Bank of China’s branch in Singapore hoisted the Singapore flag on our national day, something it had not done before. Trade between our two countries had always been in their favour. Singapore then was China’s second biggest foreign exchange earner after Hong Kong. We were not concerned over this adverse balance of trade because we were an entrepôt economy. But we required all Singapore Chinese firms that dealt with China to be registered with a government agency that controlled trade with communist countries. Thus a franchise from the Chinese side had to be matched with a permit from the Singapore government.

The first contact came through “ping-pong diplomacy” in 1971. We allowed a Singapore ping-pong team to accept an invitation to play at the Afro-Asia Table Tennis Friendship Games in Beijing. A few months later, a second delegation went for the Asian Table Tennis Union. We then accepted a Chinese offer to send their ping-pong team for a friendly visit to Singapore the following year, a few months after President Nixon had been to China. We had refused two previous offers, one of a troupe of acrobats, the other a Beijing trade mission. Raja as foreign minister thought a third rebuff would be unnecessarily offensive. During the friendly ping-pong matches I was angered when a large part of the audience jeered at the home team and shouted slogans in praise of Mao. I publicly castigated these infantile left-wingers as Singapore’s “mini-Maos”.

The PRC had also altered its position towards the overseas Chinese. Malaysian Prime Minister Razak had sent a delegation to Beijing in May 1974, a year before the fall of Saigon. After its return the Malaysian government sent us an *aide-mémoire* on their discussions. The leader of their delegation had posed two questions to Premier Zhou Enlai: first, on their policy towards the overseas Chinese; second, on their support for the MCP. Zhou replied that the term “overseas Chinese” was not accurate as many had already taken up citizenship of their countries of residence. They were conservative by nature and had become a great problem in the PRC’s relations with these countries. The “new China” had a new revolutionary policy towards the “so-called overseas Chinese”. It had dissolved the Overseas Chinese Affairs Commission to discourage Chinese overseas thinking of returning to China. China would not interfere if any country with a Chinese population abolished Chinese newspapers and Chinese schools. As for the MCP, the question had to be “viewed from an historical perspective”. The PRC had always supported “liberation movements” to free themselves from colonial oppression. But only support from inside the country, and not support from the PRC, could make such a movement succeed. Therefore, if countries of Southeast Asia and China had a forward-looking view, relations could be improved and they could have diplomatic relations.

Since 1969 China had required overseas Chinese who visited China to apply for visas, where previously they had been allowed free entry. They had decided it was not possible to have their cake and eat it. If they wanted normal diplomatic relations with the countries of Southeast Asia that had Chinese populations, they had to give up their principle of *jus sanguinis* \(the law of the blood\), that any person descended from a Chinese father was automatically a Chinese national.

In October 1971 our permanent representative at the United Nations, when voting for the admission of the PRC, said, “There is one China and that Taiwan is a part of China … It follows therefore that the Taiwan question is an internal matter to be settled by the Chinese peoples including those of Taiwan.” But we still did not have official exchanges with the PRC. After the Malaysian government established relations with the PRC in May 1974, I thought it was time for Singapore to initiate formal contacts with the PRC government. I agreed to Raja’s visiting China in March 1975.

We believed that uppermost in Chinese minds was Singapore’s relations with their bitter adversary, the Soviet Union. Qiao Guanhua, the Chinese deputy foreign minister, had met Raja in October 1974 at the UN, and asked about Russian ships repaired in Singapore. Raja explained that we did not discriminate against any country that wanted to have its ships repaired; we were an open port. But he assured Qiao that we would not allow Singapore to be used for subversive activities against neighbouring countries, and our neighbours included China. Raja repeated this position to Zhou Enlai when they met, adding that as our neighbours were hypersensitive over Singapore’s Chinese majority, we would establish diplomatic relations with China only after Indonesia had done so. We had to avoid any suspicion that Singapore was influenced by kinship ties with China. Premier Zhou said China respected Singapore as an independent state. We had a more compelling reason which they might have guessed; we wanted to first weed out communist subversives in our Chinese middle schools and Nanyang University. We also needed time to reduce the number of those born in China and vulnerable to chauvinist appeals who were in positions of influence in various associations including the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. We had seen how susceptible the China-born were to pulls of sentiment and blood.

Premier Zhou sent me an invitation to visit China through Thailand’s Premier Kukrit Pramoj who visited Beijing in June 1975. I did not respond. In September 1975, when I was visiting the Shah in Teheran, his prime minister, Hoveida, also conveyed Premier Zhou’s invitation to me, adding that time was short. I took this to mean that I should come soon if we were to meet; there had been numerous press reports of Zhou being in hospital for long periods. I decided to go. But before we could settle on a date in May 1976, Zhou died. We announced the proposed visit in mid-April. A few days later Raja restated the government’s position, that Singapore would be the last Asean country to exchange diplomatic representations with China.

This trip to China was my most thoroughly discussed and prepared foreign visit. We knew from other delegations that the Chinese were systematic and would probe every member of the delegation for information. We settled a common line on key issues for all senior members of my delegation. First, the question of recognition and diplomatic relations: we could not change our basic position, that we would move only after Indonesia had established relations; we had to be the last in Asean. Second, Soviet activities in Singapore: we would not allow the Soviet Union to engage in any anti-China activity, but as a free economy we had allowed the Soviets to open a branch of their Moscow Narodny Bank to conduct trade relations. The Chinese feared the Russians were buying the support of Chinese business leaders. We decided to assure the Chinese that we did not view a strong China with suspicion. We were neither pro-Soviet Union nor pro-China. We were pro-West because that was in the interest of Singapore and its neighbours. We were fully aware of Soviet activities in Singapore and the region and would keep such activities under close watch.

We expected them to push for liaison offices or trade representatives and decided to make it clear that this had to wait until they had established similar offices in Jakarta. However, we would concede one PRC representative of the Bank of China to work in its Singapore branch. While we wanted to encourage them to expand their trade with Singapore and were willing to allow relatively innocuous cultural and sports exchanges like ping-pong and basketball teams or acrobatic troupes, we did not want to hold out any false hopes for more, nor should we antagonise the Soviet Union. On Taiwan, we would reaffirm our policy of recognising only one China, namely the PRC. Most important of all, as we expected them to characterise Singapore as “kinsmen country”, we decided to emphasise our distinctiveness and separateness from them.

I asked for a lengthy visit to see as much of China as possible. They fixed it for 10–23 May 1976. To make doubly sure that no one doubted we were not going in as kinsmen Chinese, we had in our 17-member delegation a Jaffna Tamil foreign minister \(Rajaratnam\) and a Malay parliamentary secretary \(Ahmad Mattar\), who would be present at all meetings which would be conducted in English.

There was no direct flight from Singapore to Beijing. We flew to Hong Kong, took the train to Lo Wu at the border with China, and walked across the frontier to board the Chinese special train for Canton. That afternoon we were flown in their British-built Trident to Beijing where a welcome ceremony awaited us at the airport. I inspected a guard of honour mounted by units of the People’s Liberation Army, the navy and the air force after the PLA band played the Singapore and Chinese national anthems. Then some 2,000 schoolgirls in colourful costumes waved Singapore and Chinese paper flags and flowers, chanting *“Huan ying, huan ying”* \(welcome, welcome\) and *“Re lie huan ying, Re lie huan ying”* \(warmly welcome, warmly welcome\). There was a large banner in Chinese which read *jian jue zhi chi xin jia po ren* \(resolutely support the people of Singapore\). They did not express support for the *government* of Singapore. Unlike their usual reception for heads of government of countries with whom they had diplomatic relations, there was no welcoming editorial in the *People’s Daily* and the diplomatic corps were not at the airport to greet me. Otherwise they laid on full protocol honours for my visit.

Premier Zhou had died that January. Deng Xiaoping had been rusticated and was not in Beijing. I was received by Hua Guofeng. He looked and acted like the tough chief of security of a communist country that he had been. Our public positions were made at the formal state banquet on the night of 11 May. He complimented us: “In international affairs, Singapore opposes hegemonism and power politics, stands for peace and neutrality of Southeast Asia, actively develops relations with other Third World countries and has contributed positively to promoting economic exchanges and trade among nations.” Then he read out his standard denunciation against superpower hegemony, referring indirectly but obviously to the Soviets who were carrying out infiltration and expansion in Southeast Asia after the American withdrawal from Vietnam.

I replied, “History brought together Chinese, Malays and Indians in Singapore. We are proud of our own heritage. Sharing a common experience, we are developing a distinctive way of life. By geography, our future will be more closely interlinked with those of our neighbours in Southeast Asia.”

We had three formal meetings for a total of seven hours. At the first three-hour meeting in the Great Hall of the People on 11 May, Hua Guofeng invited me to speak first. I spelt out the basic facts concerning Singapore. Malaysia and Indonesia suspected Singapore of being pro-China because we were 75 per cent Chinese. The Americans and Russians were also suspicious. Singapore had its work cut out not to be seen in these simplistic terms, that because we had a Chinese majority we must therefore be pro-China. The problem was there were sections of our Chinese who were chauvinistic, the old generation born in China, but they were an ageing and diminishing group. In addition there was a younger generation, completely Chinese-educated, who were unable to master the English language and unable to get good jobs; although not as emotionally attached to the fatherland as those born in China, they tended to be pro-China, and some of them pro-communist. We had to prevent them from doing Singapore harm.

Singapore would not be anti-China, I continued. The stronger China became, the better and more equal the balance between the United States, the Soviet Union and China. This would be safer for the world and for Singapore. If China concluded that an independent Singapore was not against China’s interest, then many of the differences between our two countries would diminish. On the other hand, if it believed that an independent Singapore was against its interest or if China therefore wanted to help install a communist government, then disagreements were bound to increase.

Instead of answering my points, Hua launched into his script, an analysis of the “Three Worlds” which was then China’s standard exposition of the international situation. It was couched in strong revolutionary language. The current international situation would speed up the decline of the superpowers and promote the awakening of the Third World. The United States and the Soviet Union belonged to the First World, developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other parts of the world \(China and Singapore included\) belonged to the Third World, and the developed countries were the Second World. The United States and the Soviet Union were competing for world hegemony. The United States was overstretched and the Russians wanted to dominate the world. As long as they both continued this contest, the world was heading for another war. All countries should therefore be prepared for such an eventuality. However, China viewed both the United States and Russia as “paper tigers”; their strength did not match their ambitions. In carrying out their policy of expansionism and aggression the Russians were bound to be defeated. China was concerned that one wolf \(US\) should not be replaced by a tiger \(Russia\) at Asia’s backdoor. His speech was in the stilted language their radio and newspapers used when berating imperialists and revisionists.

On 12 May, just before the second meeting was to begin that afternoon, their protocol officer suddenly rushed to the guesthouse to tell us Chairman Mao would receive us. Visiting VIPs were usually not given any appointment to see the chairman. After they had sized up the visitor, if they thought it appropriate they would inform him at short notice that he would be given this signal honour of meeting their great leader. My wife and daughter were summoned back from sightseeing at the Summer Palace of the Empress Dowager without being told the reason. Select members of the delegation – myself, my wife and daughter, Rajaratnam \(foreign minister\), Hon Sui Sen \(finance minister\) and K.C. Lee \(minister of state for culture\) – were driven in a convoy to Mao’s secluded residence.

The cars turned into an old walled-off enclosure opposite the Great Hall of the People, called Zhongnanhai, near Tiananmen Square. We went through lacquered gates into a complex of Chinese-style low-rise villas sited around a lake, stopped at one of the villas and were ushered in. In the drawing room was “the great helmsman”, Mao Zedong, in a light grey Mao suit, supported by two female aides. We shook hands. Then we all sat down, correctly and properly, taking care not to cross our legs, a gesture of disrespect. For some 15 minutes Mao spoke indistinctly and a middle-aged woman repeated his words in Mandarin in a high-pitched voice. On several occasions, she wrote down some large Chinese characters to show to Mao who confirmed that that was what he had said. Then it was translated into English. It was not a substantial conversation. They had extended a courtesy to the Singapore delegation to signal that they considered us important enough. He no longer possessed the sharp intellect which Nixon and Henry Kissinger had described so eloquently after their meetings in 1972. I thought Mao had difficulty articulating not just his words but also his thoughts. I guessed he had Parkinson’s disease. At 82, he looked mentally and physically frail.

The next day their major newspapers, including the *People’s Daily*, carried a front page photo of him with me seated on his left. The photo showed him better than he was face-to-face. Years later, I kept being asked by journalists and writers what he was like. In all honesty I could only say I did not know. What I had seen was a shadow of the man who had led the Long March, built up a guerrilla army into a powerful fighting force, fought the Japanese in guerrilla actions until their surrender in August 1945, defeated the KMT Nationalist Army, and ultimately made the Communist Party supreme in China from 1949. He did liberate China from poverty, degradation, disease and hunger, although famine killed millions because of his Great Leap Forward in 1958. But he did not liberate the Chinese people from ignorance and backwardness. Yes, “the Chinese people have stood up” as Mao proclaimed at Tiananmen on 1 October 1949, but they do not yet stand tall.

I had my second meeting with Hua at the Great Hall of the People for two hours later that afternoon. He continued in the same language of the day before, that as a socialist country China firmly supported the struggle of Third World countries in opposing imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. Likewise, it supported the revolutionary struggles of all countries, and the Chinese Communist Party \(CCP\) had relations with many Marxist-Leninist parties in the world but did not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries. Party relations were one thing and state relations were another. I said I did not understand the logic of these statements. Instead of meeting my argument directly, he said how the Malaysian government dealt with the MCP and its activities and what their relations with each other should be were “altogether an internal matter of the Malaysian government”.

On Indochina, he emphasised China’s “international duty” to support the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in resisting “US aggression”. Soviet efforts to interfere and sow discord were unlikely to succeed as these countries would not give up their hard-won independence to another big power. It was a hint of the Sino-Soviet contest and impending problems with Vietnam.

This ended the two formal meetings in my programme. The following afternoon could be “talks or rest”. We spent the morning of 13 May visiting the Great Wall and the Ming tombs. It was warm, dry and dusty. We were all thirsty. We ended up with a full Chinese lunch which I washed down liberally with beer at a restaurant near the Ming tombs. As we drove back in the Red Flag limousine without air-conditioning, I felt drowsy.

When we arrived at the Diaoyutai guesthouse, the protocol officer was standing at the door to say that Premier Hua was waiting to have a meeting with me. They had given us no notice during the whole morning that there would be a meeting that afternoon, or I would not have gone on that long, tiring excursion. The programme had stated either a meeting or tour of the Temple of Heaven. Since they had taken us on such an exhausting journey to the Great Wall and the Ming tombs, we had assumed that the afternoon was free. I was fatigued from the walk up the Great Wall and drowsy from the beer at lunch and the hot, dusty, 90-minute drive back. Their tactics reminded me of those of the communist cadres in Singapore who often tried to wear us down. I went upstairs to wash with cold water, drank several glasses of Chinese tea and freshened up as best I could. I went down at 4:00 pm to what was to be a two-hour meeting.

We spent some time fencing over the niceties of party-to-party and government-to-government relations. I asked, “Will you support an Indonesian communist party which sets out to liberate Singapore or consider that an unjust war?” He replied, “The question is hypothetical and does not exist. The Indonesian invasion of East Timor was wrong. The people of East Timor should have the right to choose their own social systems and government.” I persisted, “Is the Malaysian Communist Party, calling itself the Malayan Communist Party, right or wrong to want to liberate Singapore?” He replied, “It is for the people of Singapore to choose their own social system and their own form of government.” I asked, “Then am I right that China will not support the liberation of Singapore by the Malayan Communist Party, because such a liberation should be by the people of Singapore, not the people of Malaysia?” He looked puzzled because he did not know that the Malayan Communist Party wanted to liberate both Malaya and Singapore.

At this stage Qiao Guanhua scribbled furiously and passed him a note. Like the tough security chief he was, he ostentatiously pushed aside the note without reading it, and said he did not know what the situation was; but wherever communist parties fought for liberation, they were bound to win because that was the tide of history.

I explained that the MCP claimed to be the communist party to liberate both peninsular Malaya and Singapore. So it would be useful at some stage for the PRC to make its position plain, that government-to-government relations with Singapore would be correct; however, any party-to-party relations should be between the Chinese Communist Party and a communist party of Singapore that sought to liberate Singapore, not a party of Malaysia or Malaya like the MCP.

Hua repeated that it was not possible for a foreign power to impose a socialist system on another country, if that was what I feared. I pressed him to clarify China’s stand on principle that it was wrong for a Malayan communist party to liberate people in Singapore. He fudged, saying he had not studied the matter. I repeated my question but he still refused to clarify his position.

Instead he went on the offensive, raising the main purpose of the meeting, Singapore’s military links with Taiwan. He began softly, that there existed long-term traditional friendship between the peoples of China and Singapore, a “kinsman-like relationship” between the Chinese people and the people of Chinese descent in Singapore. He hoped relations would further improve after my visit. Then he became stern and in a serious tone said we had developed a “military relationship” with the “Chiang clique from Taiwan”. This was in contravention of the one China position of the Singapore government and not beneficial to the development of relations.

I refused to be defensive. Yes, Singapore recognised that there was one China and that Taiwan and the mainland were one country. However, for the time being the Nationalist government that retreated from the mainland was in charge of Taiwan. I had to deal with the *de facto* authority in Taiwan. If the PRC were in physical charge of Taiwan I would have approached the PRC for training facilities. Singapore must have the ability to defend itself. Because of our limitations of air, sea and land space, we have had to do our training in Thailand, Australia and New Zealand. Before starting full-scale training in Taiwan in 1975, our foreign minister, Rajaratnam, had informed their foreign minister, Qiao Guanhua, that this move did not in any way reflect a change in our position of recognising one China. Qiao Guanhua had not responded to Raja.

Hua Guofeng concluded by stating that given the different social systems of the two countries, important differences existed. These did not matter, because both sides had found many common points through a frank exchange of views. Hua had pressed me as far as he could.

I said the front page publicity in the *People’s Daily* of my meeting with Chairman Mao would not be received with joy in Southeast Asia. It was better for China not to send a trade mission to Singapore until our neighbours’ suspicions from this publicity had subsided. The more China embraced us as “kinsman country” the greater would be our neighbours’ suspicions. It was difficult because Singapore’s neighbours had significant Chinese minorities who played a disproportionate role in the economy and their economic success had aroused the jealousy and resentment of the indigenous peoples. Where they were of different religions, there was little intermarriage as with the Muslims in Malaysia and Indonesia. This was a never-ending problem that China had to take into account. It was an important underlying factor in the relationship between China and the other countries in Southeast Asia.

Hua said he had already made it very clear that “the Chinese government recognises and respects the independence and sovereignty of Singapore”. China’s policy towards the people of Chinese descent living abroad was clear. It did not approve of dual nationality. It encouraged these people to take the nationality of their country of residence of their own volition. All those who did so would automatically lose their Chinese citizenship. He was happy that the overwhelming majority of people of Chinese descent in Singapore had already become citizens, and together with peoples of other nationalities \(meaning “races”\), were building up their own country. The traditional friendship and “kinsman-like” relationship between the peoples of Singapore and China were beneficial to the development of relations. His turgid, clichéd rhetoric jarred. Raja thought he lacked the sophistication and subtlety of Zhou Enlai, who, Raja believed, would have handled the discussions differently and without communist jargon. I was disappointed that the leader of such a huge country looked tough and strong but lacked finesse. He merely trotted out the standard party line when dealing with questions of race and kinship, and indulged in sophistry differentiating government-to-government from party-to-party relations to justify China’s interference in our internal affairs. And he would not admit the contradiction between his theory that liberation must come from within and China’s material and propaganda support for the Communist Party of Malaya to liberate Singapore by force. Qiao Guanhua and his foreign ministry officials familiar with Southeast Asia were uncomfortable as they watched their premier trying to browbeat, without success, the Singapore ministers.

In my return banquet speech two nights later, I emphasised, “China and Singapore agreed that they should conduct their bilateral relations by concentrating on those matters on which there is agreement and not those on which we have different views because of different basic assumptions. … Premier Hua says that being a socialist country, China supports the revolutionary struggle of all countries. But Premier Hua also states that China does not interfere in the internal matters of other countries, and that how the Singapore government deals with its communists is a matter for the Singapore government to decide. Based on this non-interference, I believe that we can develop our relations.” This public statement was to reinforce my hand against the communist united front elements in Singapore.

That night after dinner, Premier Hua Guofeng drove with me in the Red Flag car from the guesthouse in Diaoyutai to Beijing Central Railway Station. It was a ceremonial send-off with thousands of schoolchildren waving coloured paper flowers and chanting their farewell. They put me and the whole delegation, together with all the security, protocol and baggage officers, on a special train for our provincial tour to the west.

The train left Beijing at 10:15 pm. In my carriage was a bathtub, the largest I had ever seen. I wondered why anyone would want a bathtub instead of a shower in a railway carriage that jolted and shook. Perhaps it had been fitted out for Chairman Mao. We woke up in Yangchuan in Shaanxi province. After breakfast on the train, we were driven along a winding uphill road to Dazhai. There we were briefed by the revolutionary committee who had much experience in receiving VIP visitors. We listened to a well-practised recitation of how revolutionary fervour conquered all. We slept overnight on the train and woke up at Xian to see the recent discoveries of the tomb of Emperor Qin Shihuang. They had just begun excavating the terracotta warriors there.

Later, at a welcoming dinner given by the Shaanxi provincial revolutionary committee, we listened to the first of many speeches that followed Hua Guofeng’s line in denouncing the “capitalist roader”, someone who had sneaked into the Communist Party and was striving to restore capitalism. I had read that Deng Xiaoping had been removed from his position as second in command of the government and condemned as a “capitalist roader”. When I first heard Hua use this term, I paid little attention, but from its constant repetition at every place we visited, I concluded that this must be a serious matter; this man who remained unnamed had to be an important person if he needed to be condemned again and again.

The next morning we left for Yenan, the legendary base of the Eighth Route Army, and the loess cave which had been Mao’s study. At the museum of memorabilia, the guide, a young woman, spoke like a zealous evangelist. She referred to Mao with religious fervour as if he was God and Zhou Enlai and the other immortals of the Long March his archangels. A small white horse had been stuffed and put into a glass case because Zhou Enlai had ridden on it for part of the Long March. The guide’s recitation was so oppressive that both Choo and Ling wandered off, leaving me to show interest and make polite responses.

We stayed the night at Yangchialing, the biggest town near Yenan. Again we heard the compulsory denunciation of the “capitalist roader” by the prefectural revolutionary committee chairman. We flew back to Xian and stayed in the spacious guesthouse complex where I was given a suite with an enormous bathroom and dressing room. They said it had been specially built for Chairman Mao. These plush guesthouses were perks for provincial and Beijing leaders.

We flew to Shanghai, to be greeted once more by dancing schoolgirls in gay-coloured clothes carrying paper flags and flowers. At dinner the chairman of the Shanghai municipal revolutionary committee, a young man, denounced the “capitalist roader” with some vehemence and passion. We learnt that Shanghai was the most leftist of all the cities and provinces and the base of the radicals around Mao’s wife, Jiang Qing, and the Gang of Four who were to be arrested and imprisoned soon after Mao died.

Towards the end of our provincial tour, some fraternisation took place between their officials and members of my party who could speak Mandarin. They bantered as they helped each other to the dishes at dinner, saying ironically, “*zi li geng sheng*”, one of the slogans Mao promoted: “self-reliance, self-help”, meaning, I will help myself to the food, there is no need for you to serve me. The ice was breaking. Behind the disciplined exterior of the communist cadre was a human being who appreciated good food and good wines, which they enjoyed only when VIPs came visiting.

Then a last dinner by the Guangdong provincial and the Guangzhou \(Canton\) municipal revolutionary committees. Mercifully only one speech and one last denunciation of the “capitalist roader”, delivered with absolutely no passion or conviction.

The next morning they gave us a colourful send-off at the Canton railway station before we boarded the special train for Shenzhen. For the final time, hundreds of schoolgirls bounced up and down carrying paper flags and flowers, chanting goodbye. I wondered how they could allow students to miss classes for such displays. Two hours later we were at Lo Wu. As we walked across the border away from China we breathed a sigh of relief at leaving behind the chants and slogans.

All of us had been eager to see this new mysterious China. For ethnic Chinese in Nanyang it had a mystical appeal as their ancestral homeland. The Chinese put their children in their best clothes to greet and send us off at airports, railway stations, kindergartens and other places we visited. Their bright-coloured frocks, jumpers and sweaters were worn only on special occasions and then carefully put away. The mass of the Chinese people wore drab dark blue or dark grey ill-fitting unisex Mao jackets. We did not know it then, but these were the last few months of the Mao era. He was to die four months later, after the Tangshan earthquake that September. Later, I was glad to have seen the country before Deng Xiaoping opened up China, to have witnessed the enforced uniformity of dress and speech and listened to their mind-numbing propaganda.

Everyone we met gave the same answers to our questions. At Beijing University I asked students what they would do after they graduated. The answers came pat, “Whatever the party decides, how I can best serve the people.” It was disturbing to listen to parrot-like responses from highly intelligent young people. The answers were all politically correct but not sincere.

It was a strange world. I had read about China, especially after the Nixon visit. But the relentless assault of the huge slogans – painted or pasted on walls, giant placards planted in the middle of wheat and rice fields, all in the fiercest revolutionary terms – was a surrealistic experience. To have these slogans blaring forth from loudspeakers in railway stations and public parks and on the radio numbed the senses. We found little of such fervour in the people, except when they had to speak to us about the Cultural Revolution in simulated animated tones of praise. It was a Chinese kind of Potemkin village.

Dazhai was their model commune in mountainous, infertile Shaanxi in the northwest. For years it was frequently praised in their media for regularly producing miracle harvests. Mao’s slogan was: To learn about agriculture, study Dazhai. To learn about industry, study Daqing – *Nong ye xue Dazhai. Gong ye xue Daqing*. \(Daqing in the northeast was where the oilfields were.\) So I had asked to see Dazhai.

Ten years later, they disclosed that Dazhai was a fraud. Its higher outputs were due to special inputs that made its agricultural yield so high. In the Daqing oilfields the model workers did not extract the maximum from the ground because of poor technology, and their yields were going down. Revolutionary fervour could not make up for expertise whether in agriculture or in mining. The belief in the Mao era, “Better Red than Expert”, was a fallacy, a fraud practised on the people.

At every provincial capital the chairman of the revolutionary council \(or governor, as he was known after the Cultural Revolution had officially ended\) gave me a welcoming dinner. Each uttered the same denunciation and vituperation of “the capitalist roader”, the code name for Deng Xiaoping. We could make no sense of it, not understanding then the coded language they used to denounce him. I watched the solemn faces of the men who read out the speeches deadpan. The interpreters knew by heart what was coming and simply repeated the stock phrases in English again and again. I wondered what their real feelings were, but no one betrayed his thoughts.

There was such a welter of impressions that it took us some time to sort them out. I compared notes with Choo every night. If they were eavesdropping as the Russians did in Moscow in 1970, they did not show it. My daughter Wei Ling, then a third-year medical student, accompanied us. She had been completely Chinese-educated in Nanyang Girls’ High School up to O levels, ten years of formal education in the Chinese language before she switched to English for her A levels to read medicine at our university. She had no difficulty with the language, but she had immense difficulty in really understanding them, their inner thoughts. When she wandered about on her own in the provincial cities we visited, crowds would gather around her out of curiosity. Where was she from? Singapore. Where was that? Their women at dinners were equally interested in Ling. She looked Chinese, spoke their language, yet was unlike them in her behaviour – not shy, talking freely in adult company. She was well-dressed compared to them, forward and outward-going, like a girl from the moon. She herself felt different from them. Like me, she found the constant barrage of propaganda from the loudspeakers and the radio a deafening and deadening experience.

My daughter’s reactions were a revelation. She had studied pre-communist Chinese history and literature in a Chinese school and looked forward to seeing the historic monuments, cultural artefacts and scenic wonders, especially those referred to in the purple passages she had memorised. But seeing their poverty juxtaposed against mountains and temples with those romantic-sounding names convinced her that China’s emphasis on being the world’s oldest continuous civilisation was an obstacle to its catching up with the developed world; that Singapore was better off because we had no such stumbling block.

She was surprised to see how different China was from even the East European countries she had visited with me, more isolated from outside influence; and how thoroughly the people had been indoctrinated to produce politically correct standard answers however junior the official, from whatever province. She had few opportunities to interact with ordinary people. Wherever she jogged or walked, her security escort accompanied her and sealed her off. What she tired of seeing were the big-character slogans, several in fashion then: “Criticise Confucius – Criticise Deng Xiaoping”, “Crush bourgeois economism \[sic\]”, “Long live the ever-victorious Mao Zedong thought”. She was amazed at the people’s unquestioning obedience to authority. By the end of the visit she was glad her ancestors had chosen to seek their fortunes in Nanyang.

Before this visit our government had been strict in refusing Singaporeans under the age of 30 permission to visit China. On my return I instructed that this ruling be reviewed, convinced from my own observations and Ling’s reactions that the best way to eradicate romantic ideas about the great fatherland was to send them on a visit, the longer the better. Soon thereafter we removed this restriction.

I was impressed by the size of China and the vast differences between their 30 provinces. What I was not prepared for was the gaggle of different accents I came across. It was difficult to understand many of them. Premier Hua was a Hunanese with a thick accent. Very few of the people I met spoke standard *pu tong hua* \(the common language, Mandarin\). The range of dialects and accents when they spoke “Mandarin” was so great that when we got to Guangzhou their woman interpreter who accompanied me, an excellent interpreter, could not understand the elderly member of the revolutionary council who came from Hainan island, even though he was speaking what he thought was Mandarin. I understood him because we had many Hainanese in Singapore who spoke Mandarin like his, so I interpreted their Hainanese revolutionary council member to their interpreter\! This is a small example of the problem of unifying China through a common language. China is five times the size of continental Europe in population and area. The Chinese are 90 per cent Han Chinese using the same script. But they have different consonant and vowel values for the same written word and had developed different idioms and slang in their various provinces and even in adjoining towns in the same province. They have been trying to unify their language since the overthrow of the Qing dynasty in 1911, but it will be a very long time before they succeed. With satellite TV, radio and cellular telephones they may be able to achieve it in another one to two generations, but only for the better-educated of their younger population.

For a fortnight in China we were on the move every day, accompanied by different hosts in the different provinces, attended to by their Southeast Asia desk officers, interpreters and protocol, baggage and security officers who accompanied us all the way from Beijing to Guangzhou. Towards the end it became a strain to always be on our best behaviour. They had officials in their team who spoke every language and dialect we did. Whether we spoke Hokkien, Malay or English, they had officials who had lived in Southeast Asia, or had served in Indonesia for many years, and spoke Malay, Bahasa Indonesia or Hokkien like natives, and could eavesdrop and understand us. So we could not switch languages to cut them out. On the few nights we had dinner by ourselves we had a hilarious time comparing notes.

At every stop the Beijing officials who looked after us and our needs would engage members of our party in conversation to gauge our attitudes on various issues and our reactions to them. They were very thorough. Our press men told us that late every night they were seen discussing the day’s findings and writing up detailed reports of the day’s conversations and observations. I wondered who would read them – obviously somebody must, because they took their reporting seriously. I concluded one reason they wanted me to visit was their desire to meet me face-to-face and assess my character and attitudes.

As we bade them goodbye at the railway station in Guangzhou, the desk officer in charge of Southeast Asia and Singapore, a tall, consumptive-looking man in his 50s, told K.C. Lee that after observing me for two weeks, he found me hard and tough. I took that as a tribute. When they clapped their hands in unison to welcome me, I waved back. I did not clap back, as was their form. I felt it ridiculous to clap in response. I made a point of being Singaporean and different. We reacted alike: neither Choo, Ling nor I felt we were one of them. In fact we had never felt more un-Chinese than on that first visit.

It was also embarrassing, when visiting a factory or exhibition, to be offered, as was their custom, a brush, Chinese ink on a slab of slate and a sheet of rice paper or a clean page in a book to write my comments. Since my acquaintance with a Chinese brush was limited to a few months in primary school, I had to decline and ask for an ordinary pen to write my comments in English.

This feeling of not being Chinese became less intense as I got to know them better and was no longer distracted by the differences of speech, dress and manners. But on that first visit, we found them and their manners alien. With the Chinese in the south, we could have passed off in appearance as one of them. But even so we felt keenly that we were not one of them.

I was to discover that many of our young Chinese students who went back to China in the 1950s to contribute to the revolution were never accepted into Chinese society. They were always separate, *hua qiao* or overseas Chinese, different, “softies” who did not quite belong. It was sad; they had gone back because they wanted so much to contribute and belong. They were, or perhaps had to be, treated differently with perks and privileges not available to the locals, or life would have been too difficult for them. And because of those perks and privileges, they were resented. It was difficult for both sides. Sentiments of kinship were fine provided the overseas relative lived abroad and visited occasionally bearing gifts and greetings. But to stay and be part of China was to be a burden unless the relative had special skills or knowledge. Many who went back with romantic revolutionary ideals ended up as émigrés in Hong Kong and Macau, where they found life more congenial, more like that in the Singapore and Malaya they once despised and abandoned. Many of them had petitioned to be allowed to return to Singapore. Our Internal Security Department strongly recommended against this, suspecting plants by the MCP who would create trouble. It was a total misreading of the true position. These people had been thoroughly disillusioned with China and communism and would have been our best inoculation against the virus of Maoism.

We are so much like the Chinese in the southern provinces in physical appearance. We have the same cultural values, in attitudes towards relationship between the sexes, relations within the family, deference due to our elders and other social norms regarding family and friends. But we are so different in our outlook and view of the world and of our place in this world. Theirs is so huge a country that they feel absolutely confident there will be a seat for them at the top table once they have put themselves right, and it was only a matter of time. No Chinese doubts their ultimate destiny after they have restored their civilisation, the oldest in the world with 4,000 years of unbroken history. We, the migrants who have cut our roots and transplanted ourselves on a different soil, in a very different climate, lack this self-confidence. We have serious doubts about our future, always wondering what fate has in store for us in an uncertain and fast-changing world.




