+++
title = "37 Deng Xiaoping’s China"

+++



My meeting with Vice-Premier Deng Xiaoping was unforgettable. A dapper, stocky man of 74, not more than five feet tall, in a beige Mao suit came down from a Boeing 707 at Paya Lebar Airport in November 1978. Walking briskly, he inspected the guard of honour, then drove with me to the Istana Villa, our guesthouse in the Istana domain. We met that afternoon for formal discussions in the cabinet room.

After seeing the spittoons in the Great Hall of the People, I had arranged for a blue-and-white porcelain spittoon to be placed next to Deng. I had read that he regularly used one. I also placed an ashtray ostentatiously for him alone although there was a no-smoking rule for air-conditioned rooms in the Istana. It was a gesture to a great figure in the history of China. I made sure that the exhaust fan serving the cabinet room was switched on.

I welcomed him as a great Chinese revolutionary. He replied that Singapore could be said to be an old place for him. Fifty-eight years ago, in 1920, he had visited it for two days on his way to France. When I visited Beijing in 1976, he had not been able to meet me; at that time he had been “shoved aside”. He had been defeated by the Gang of Four, but in the end they were defeated. He spent the next two and a half hours on the dangers the Soviet Union posed to the world. All countries and peoples who did not want war had to form a united front against the warmongers. He quoted Mao: we should all unite to cope with the *wang ba dan* \(literally “tortoise egg” but translated by his interpreter as the S.O.B\). He gave a comprehensive survey of Soviet manoeuvres in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, South Asia, and finally in Indochina. The Soviets had scored immensely in Vietnam. Some people did not understand why relations between China and Vietnam were so bad, and why China had taken action such as cutting off aid, which pushed Vietnam towards the Soviet Union instead of winning it over. The question to ask was, why did Vietnam see fit to fall completely on the lap of the Soviet Union when it was not in their interest? The answer was Vietnam’s “fond dream for many years of the Indochina federation”. Even Ho Chi Minh had had such an idea. China had never agreed to it, and Vietnam regarded China as the greatest obstacle to its realisation of this federation. China had concluded that Vietnam would not change and would become more anti-China. The expulsion of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam was one such manifestation. After careful consideration China had decided to cut aid.

Deng said China’s total aid to Vietnam had been over US$10 billion, at current value worth US$20 billion. When China cancelled aid to Vietnam, the Soviet Union had to carry this burden alone. When they could not satisfy Vietnam’s needs, they got it admitted to COMECON \(the communist bloc counterpart to the EEC\), to shift the burden to the East European countries. The Vietnamese were also putting out their begging bowls before Japan, America, France, Western Europe and even Singapore. In 10 years’ time, he said, China would consider pulling Vietnam from the Soviet Union again. I thought to myself that Deng took a very long view, totally different from American leaders.

He said the real and urgent problem was a possible massive invasion of Cambodia by Vietnam. What would China do, he asked rhetorically. What China would do would depend on how far the Vietnamese went, he answered himself. He repeated this a few times, not committing himself outright to a counterattack on Vietnam. He said if Vietnam succeeded in controlling the whole of Indochina, many Asian countries would be exposed. The Indochina federation would expand its influence and serve the global strategy of the Soviet Union to move southwards into the Indian Ocean. Vietnam’s role was that of a Cuba of the East. The Soviets were drastically increasing their Pacific fleet. The world had witnessed great turbulence in the last two years as was evident from events in Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, all pointing to a southward thrust by the Soviet Union. China’s policy was to counter the strategic deployment of the Soviet Union, whether in Zaïre or Somalia. Wherever the Soviet Union attacked, China would help to repel the attack. To have peace, Asean had to unite with China and repel the Soviet Union and its Cuba in Southeast Asia, Vietnam. His two interpreters did not take notes diligently; they only made a few squiggles. I concluded he must have made the same presentation in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur and they knew it by heart. It was past sunset when he finished. I asked whether he would like me to respond or adjourn till the next day to give him time to change for dinner, and for me to think over what he had said. He preferred not to let the dinner get cold.

At dinner he was sociable and friendly, but still tense. Vietnam’s invasion of Cambodia was very much on his mind. When I pressed him – what would China do, now that General Kriangsak, the prime minister of Thailand, had committed himself on China’s side by giving Deng such a warm reception in Bangkok – he again muttered, it depended how far they went. My impression was that if the Vietnamese did not cross the Mekong River, it would not be so dangerous, but if they did, then China would do something.

He invited me to visit China again. I said I would when China had recovered from the Cultural Revolution. That, he said, would take a long time. I countered that they should have no problem getting ahead and doing much better than Singapore because we were the descendants of illiterate, landless peasants from Fujian and Guangdong while they had the progeny of the scholars, mandarins and literati who had stayed at home. He was silent.

The next day I made my points in one hour – actually half an hour, without the translation. I summarised what he had said about the Soviet threat by referring to well-documented studies of their military capabilities by the International Institute of Strategic Studies in London. I pointed out that Germany’s Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, France’s President Giscard d’Estaing and American leaders in Washington had given me different conclusions on the dangers the Soviet Union posed. Some of them believed the Soviets were wasting too much of their resources on armaments. Anyway, small countries like Singapore could only take note of these world trends but could not influence the outcome. We had to analyse the situation from a regional, not a global viewpoint. The problem after the end of the Vietnam War was that American troops had withdrawn from Vietnam and Thailand. It was clear that they would never again engage communist insurgents on the Asian mainland. The next question was how long would American forces stay in the Philippines to balance the growing Soviet fleet in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Singapore wanted the United States to stay in the Philippines.

To allay Deng’s concern about Singapore’s attitude to the Soviets, I listed our main trading partners – Japan, the United States, Malaysia and the European Union, each with 12–14 per cent of our total world trade. China was only 1.8 per cent and the Soviet Union a mere 0.3 per cent. Soviet contribution to our economic life was negligible. I also needed no lessons on the hegemonistic behaviour of the Russians. I recounted to him how in 1967, after visiting Abu Simbel and Aswan, when I was returning to Cairo on an Egyptian aircraft accompanied by an Egyptian minister, there was a commotion in the cockpit as the plane was about to land. The minister excused himself to go to the cockpit. After the plane landed, I discovered that the Soviet pilot of another plane had told airport control he did not understand English, and demanded priority to land ahead of the VIP plane. The Egyptian minister had to bark his order from the cockpit to ensure that the VIP plane landed before the Soviet plane. I needed no lessons on the arrogance of the Russians.

China wanted Southeast Asian countries to unite with it to isolate the “Russian bear”; the fact was that our neighbours wanted us to unite and isolate the “Chinese dragon”. There were no “overseas Russians” in Southeast Asia leading communist insurgencies supported by the Soviet government, as there were “overseas Chinese” encouraged and supported by the Chinese Communist Party and government, posing threats to Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and, to a lesser extent, Indonesia. Also, China was openly asserting a special relationship with the overseas Chinese because of blood ties, and was making direct appeals to their patriotism over the heads of the governments of these countries of which they were citizens, urging them to return and help China in its “Four Modernisations”.

A few weeks earlier, in October, Vietnamese Prime Minister Pham Van Dong had visited us and was sitting where he \(Deng\) was now seated. I had asked Pham Van Dong the reason for Vietnam’s trouble with the overseas Chinese, or Hoa people; his blunt answer was that, as an ethnic Chinese, I should know that ethnic Chinese would always support China all the time, just as Vietnamese would support Vietnam, wherever they might be. I was less concerned with what Pham Van Dong thought than with the impact of what he must have told the leaders of Malaysia. I recounted another incident where the Vietnamese permanent representative to the UN had told the four Asean permanent representatives that the Vietnamese had treated the Hoa people equally, and yet they turned ungrateful; that was the main cause of the exodus of 160,000 ethnic Chinese from Hanoi to China across their border, while other Chinese fled from the south in boats. The Indonesian permanent representative, forgetting that his colleagues from the other three Asean countries, Philippines, Thailand and Singapore, were ethnic Chinese, told the Vietnamese that they had been too kind and generous to the Hoa people, and that they should learn from the Indonesians. I left Deng in no doubt as to the visceral suspicions of its neighbours Singapore faced.

Pham Van Dong, I added, had placed a wreath at Malaysia’s National Monument. Deng had refused to do this. Pham Van Dong had also promised he would not help subversion. Deng had not. The Malaysians must be suspicious of Deng. There were underlying suspicions and animosity between Malay Muslims and Chinese in Malaysia, and between Indonesians and their ethnic Chinese. Because China was exporting revolution to Southeast Asia, my Asean neighbours wanted Singapore to rally with them not against the Soviet Union but against China.

Asean governments regarded radio broadcasts from China appealing directly to their ethnic Chinese as dangerous subversion. Deng listened silently. He had never seen it in this light: China, a big foreign power, going over the governments of the region to subvert their citizens. I said it was most unlikely that Asean countries would respond positively to his proposal for a united front against the Soviet Union and Vietnam and suggested that we discuss how to resolve this problem. Then I paused.

Deng’s expression and body language registered consternation. He knew that I had spoken the truth. Abruptly, he asked, “What do you want me to do?” I was astonished. I had never met a communist leader who was prepared to depart from his brief when confronted with reality, much less ask what I wanted him to do. I had expected him to brush my points aside as Premier Hua Guofeng had done in Beijing in 1976 when I pressed him over the inconsistency of China supporting the Malayan Communist Party to foment revolution in Singapore, not Malaya. Hua had answered with bluster, “I do not know the details, but wherever communists fight, they will win.” Not Deng. He realised that he had to face up to this problem if Vietnam was to be isolated. I hesitated to tell this seasoned, weather-beaten revolutionary what he should do, but since he had asked me, I said, “Stop such radio broadcasts; stop such appeals. It will be better for the ethnic Chinese in Asean if China does not underline their kinship and call upon their ethnic empathy. The suspicion of the indigenous peoples will always be there, whether or not China emphasises these blood ties. But if China appeals to these blood ties so blatantly, it must increase their suspicions. China must stop radio broadcasts from south China by the Malayan and Indonesian Communist Parties.”

Deng said simply that he needed time to think about what I had said, adding that he would not learn from Pham Van Dong. He, Deng, had also been asked to lay a wreath at the National Monument which commemorated those who had killed Malayan communists. As a communist, it had been impossible for him to do this. Pham Van Dong could do such a thing because he was “that kind of a communist”. He was “selling his soul”. China, he emphasised, spoke honestly. The Chinese had never concealed their views, and what the Chinese people said counted. During the Korean War, China had issued a statement that if the Americans approached the Yalu River, the Chinese people could not sit idly by. But the Americans took no notice. On foreign policy, China always spoke what it thought. As for communist parties, he had nothing to add, so the interpreter said. But in his Mandarin, what Deng actually said was, he had “lost interest in stating it again”.

The reiteration of their overseas Chinese policy, he said, was for two reasons: the first was the anti-Chinese activities of Vietnam; the second was the internal considerations of China, the result of the activities of the Gang of Four in the Cultural Revolution. Relatives in China of the overseas Chinese had suffered badly, many persecuted and imprisoned. He wanted to restate China’s position on ethnic Chinese abroad: that China favoured and encouraged them to take up the citizenship of the country of residence, that those who wanted to remain Chinese would still have to abide by the laws of the country of residence, and that China did not recognise dual nationality.

On Cambodia, he assured me that China’s approach would not be affected by the conclusion of the Soviet-Vietnamese treaty of friendship and cooperation. China was not afraid if Vietnam should ask the Soviet Union to threaten China, adding that the Soviet Union would not dare to engage China in a big way. He looked deadly serious when he added that China would punish the Vietnamese if they attacked Cambodia. China would make them pay a heavy price for it, and the Soviet Union would discover that supporting Vietnam was too heavy a burden. Then he asked what advice China’s friends \(meaning Singapore\) would give on the problems confronting both countries \(China and Singapore\).

I replied that Cambodia’s leaders must be sensitive to international opinion as they needed the sympathy of the world. They were behaving in an irrational way with no feeling for their own people. Deng’s response was that he also did not “understand” some of the things done in Phnom Penh; he made no defence of the Khmer Rouge’s genocide.

Winding up, I said Deng had stated that China needed 22 years for modernisation. In these 22 years, if there were no unnecessary problems created in Southeast Asia, conditions should improve. If there were such problems, the consequences would be adverse for China, as they had been for Vietnam and Cambodia. Deng agreed with me. He hoped there would be unity and stability in Asean. He was saying this “from the bottom of my heart”.

He was the most impressive leader I had met. He was a five-footer, but a giant among men. At 74, when he was faced with an unpleasant truth, he was prepared to change his mind. Two years later, after they had made alternative arrangements for their fraternal communist parties in Malaysia and Thailand, the radio broadcasts stopped.

During dinner I had urged him to smoke. He said, pointing to his wife, that the doctor had told her to get him to stop. He was trying to cut down. That night, he did not smoke or use the spittoon. He had read that I was allergic to smoke.

Before his departure I called on him at the Istana Villa to talk for some 20 minutes. He was glad he had come and seen Singapore again after 58 years. It was a dramatic transformation and he congratulated me. I replied that Singapore was a small country with two and a half million people. He sighed and said, “If I had only Shanghai, I too might be able to change Shanghai as quickly. But I have the whole of China\!”

He said he had wanted to visit Singapore and America before he joined Karl Marx. Singapore, because he had seen it once when it was a colonial territory, while on his way to Marseilles after the end of the First World War to work and study. America, because China and America must talk to each other. It was not until after Vietnam occupied Cambodia that I understood why he was keen to visit the United States.

During the drive to the airport, I asked him point-blank what he would do if the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia. Would he leave the Thais vulnerable and watch them being intimidated, and then bend towards the Soviet Union? He pursed his lips, and his eyes narrowed as he whispered, “It depends how far they will go.” I said he would have to do something after the Thai prime minister had so openly and wholeheartedly received him in Bangkok. Kriangsak had to rely on China to maintain some balance. He looked troubled and again whispered, “It depends how far they will go.”

At the airport he shook hands with the VIPs and ministers, inspected the guard of honour, walked up the steps to his Boeing 707, then turned around and waved goodbye. As the door closed on him, I said to my colleagues that his staff were going to get a “shellacking”. He had seen a Singapore his brief had not prepared him for. There had been no tumultuous Chinese crowds, no rapturous hordes of Chinese Singaporeans to welcome him, just thin crowds of curious onlookers.

A few weeks later I was shown articles on Singapore in their *People’s Daily*. Its line had changed. Singapore was described as a garden city worth studying for its greening, public housing and tourism. We were no longer “running dogs of the American imperialists”. Their view of Singapore changed further in October the following year, 1979, when Deng said in a speech, “I went to Singapore to study how they utilised foreign capital. Singapore benefited from factories set up by foreigners in Singapore: first, foreign enterprises paid 35 per cent of their net profits in taxes which went to the state; second, labour income went to the workers; and third, it \[foreign investment\] generated the service sectors. All these were income \[for the state\].” What he saw in Singapore in 1978 had become a point of reference as the minimum the Chinese people should achieve.



At the end of January 1979 Deng visited America and restored diplomatic relations with President Carter without the United States abandoning Taiwan. He was making sure the United States would not align itself with the Soviet Union when China attacked and “punished” Vietnam. That was why he was keen to visit the United States.

At the governor’s lodge at Fanling in Hong Kong for a golfing holiday, I met David Bonavia, a China expert, formerly of the London *Times*. He dismissed Deng’s warning as an idle threat because the Soviet navy was in the South China Sea. I said that I had met Deng three months ago and he was a man who weighed his words carefully. Two days later, on 16 February 1979, Chinese forces attacked across the border with North Vietnam.

China declared that the objectives of the military action were limited, and urged the UN Security Council to take immediate and effective measures to stop Vietnam’s armed aggression against Cambodia and bring an end to Vietnam’s occupation of Cambodia. The operation lasted one month. They incurred heavy losses but showed the Vietnamese that, whatever the cost, they could make deep incursions into Vietnam, destroy towns and villages in their path and withdraw, as they did on 16 March 1979.

During China’s invasion of Vietnam, Deng said publicly that China was prepared for a possible war with the Soviet Union, and that a lesson for Vietnam was also a lesson for the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union did not attack China. The Western press wrote off the Chinese punitive action as a failure. I believe it changed the history of East Asia. The Vietnamese knew China would attack if they went beyond Cambodia on to Thailand. The Soviet Union did not want to be caught in a long-drawn-out war in a remote corner of Asia. They could afford a quick decisive action against China, but the Chinese denied them this by declaring that their military action was a “punitive” action and was not intended to capture Vietnam. As Deng had predicted, the Soviet Union was saddled with the burden of supporting Vietnam, which they did for 11 more years until 1991, when the Soviet Union disintegrated. When this happened, the Vietnamese agreed in October 1991 to withdraw from Cambodia – after 12 years of costly and futile occupation.

On my second visit to China, in November 1980, I found many changes. The men who had got “helicopter” promotions during the Cultural Revolution had been quietly shunted aside and their keen, zealous attitudes were no longer on display. Our protocol officer’s perpetual eager-beaver look was an enduring impression I had carried away from my first visit in 1976. With the Cultural Revolution officially denounced, the people appeared greatly relieved.

Premier Zhao Ziyang met me for talks. He was a different character from Hua Guofeng or Deng Xiaoping. Of medium build, he had the complexion of someone with a light suntan over his fine features. I had no difficulty understanding his Mandarin because he had a good, strong voice without any heavy provincial accent. He came from Henan, a province south of Beijing that had been the cradle of the Chinese civilisation, a huge, once-rich agricultural area now poorer than the coastal provinces.

We discussed the Cambodian issue and how we had to find an alternative to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas who were doing the bulk of the fighting. Zhao nodded, acknowledging that Pol Pot would be unacceptable to the world. I conceded that unfortunately the Khmer Rouge was the best fighting force against the Vietnamese. Zhao had just taken over as premier and lacked the confidence to settle issues on Cambodia and Vietnam without referring to Deng. I found him a reasonable, balanced and rounded man, not ideologically blinkered.

An advance copy of my dinner speech had been given to their protocol. They wanted me to remove a passage critical of their policy towards the Communist Party of Malaya and its radio broadcasts from China. It read, “For years China instigated and helped guerrilla insurgency in Thailand, Malaya and Indonesia. Many Asean leaders have put these unfortunate events behind them. Unfortunately, a residue of China’s past policies continues to trouble relations between China and Asean.”

When we resumed talks that afternoon, I referred to this. Their protocol had said that this part was unacceptable and had to be left out if the speech was to be delivered, otherwise there would be no speeches. This was most unusual. I had already given copies to the Singapore press and they would have released the speech to foreign correspondents, so it was not possible to delete anything. Zhao replied that the Chinese people would not forgive him if I delivered this speech and he did not respond to some of the points made by me. He did not want to turn “a grand and friendly banquet” held in my honour into an occasion for a hard exchange of words which would have an adverse international effect. There was no question of wanting to tell me what I should not say at the banquet; he was merely suggesting that both sides cancel the speeches. If my views were nevertheless made known to the public, he would understand. I agreed to no speeches.

He launched into the Chinese view of Soviet global strategy. He assured me that China would do its part to allay the suspicions and fears of Malaysia and Indonesia towards China. Soviet objectives were to control oil resources and sea lanes, including the Straits of Malacca, in order to strangle Japan and Western Europe, and to some extent the United States; the collaboration between the Soviet Union and Vietnam was not one of fortuitous expediency but a strategic collaboration. He said Malaysia and Indonesia could never win over Vietnam away from the Soviet Union unless either Vietnam renounced regional hegemony, in which case it would not need the Soviet Union, or the Soviet Union renounced global hegemony, in which case it would not need Vietnam.

As for party-to-party relations, it was a historical problem of a global nature and China was sincerely making efforts as far as possible so that it would not affect its relations with Asean countries. The problem would take some time to solve. He would say formally to me that China would solve the problem, but not overnight.

The overseas Chinese question was another problem left over from history. China was not in favour of dual nationality and had encouraged Chinese living abroad to take up the nationality of their host country. But if ethnic Chinese abroad remained Chinese nationals, China could not cease to have contact with them. As for the contributions made by ethnic Chinese abroad to China’s modernisation, this did not represent the policy of the government of the People’s Republic of China. China would make an effort to reduce the suspicion of other countries over the question of overseas Chinese. However, both sides should be concerned with more important issues than the policy of China towards overseas Chinese. On Cambodia, I would be meeting Deng Xiaoping, who would deal with all the points I would wish to raise; in other words, Deng was the final authority.

The next morning I met Deng Xiaoping for over two hours in a different room in the Great Hall of the People. He looked lively and vigorous. He had been well-briefed and did most of the talking. He said my talks with Zhao had gone well, adding that General Ne Win also had not delivered a speech at the banquet in his honour at the Great Hall of the People, but had “good talks” with the Chinese. This was his reassurance that the cancellation of my speech would make no difference to the outcome of our talks.

Deng argued that China was a huge country with a large population. It did not need the resources of other countries. It was preoccupied with the problem of uplifting its people out of poverty and backwardness, “a great undertaking that might take half a century”. China was too populous. There were just too many things to do. He hoped I would explain China’s “genuine and clear” position to Indonesia and Malaysia. China wanted to see a strong Asean, “the stronger, the better”. China had a “global strategy” in handling its relations with Asean countries, the United States, Japan and Western Europe. He fully understood Singapore’s position regarding establishing diplomatic relations with China, that we would do so after Indonesia. Singapore’s calculations were correct and in conformity with Singapore’s “strategic considerations”.

On Cambodia, he said, there were two basic points that must be met: first, a political settlement of the Cambodian question must be based on Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, otherwise there was nothing to talk about; second, there had to be unity among all resistance forces inside Cambodia. The Khmer Rouge was willing to unite with other resistance forces; it was prepared to accept Sihanouk or, if Sihanouk was not willing, Son Sann as head of state. But neither was willing, I said. He stressed there was no alliance to speak of without the Khmer Rouge forces. Pol Pot’s policies were wrong, but any political settlement in Cambodia must be based on “prevailing realities”.

One such reality, I said, was that except for the PRC the rest of the world believed that Pol Pot was murderous and mad, and Sihanouk and Son Sann were right in not working with the Khmer Rouge. Thailand and Singapore were in danger of being seen as stooges of China for supporting the DK \(Democratic Kampuchea\) government’s seat in the UN.

In my view, two major problems had to be solved: first, international representation at the UN, because a vacant seat would eventually be filled by Heng Samrin; second, how to intensify resistance fighting in Cambodia. Much of the fighting was by the Khmer Rouge, but this must not be forever. Malaysia and Indonesia must be satisfied that continued support of the DK government would not lead to the restoration of China’s influence in Cambodia. Both believed Vietnam’s argument that Asean’s actions helped China to weaken Vietnam and would allow China to increase its influence in Southeast Asia. President Suharto had told me that in 10 years China could create great problems for the region.

Instead of answering my points, Deng asked how the Malaysians and Indonesians could drive the Vietnamese out of Cambodia. I replied that neither was troubled by the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia; they believed a strong Vietnam could oppose any southward expansion by China. The problem was one of perspectives. The question was not what China intended to do, but what China was capable of doing, and whether it was in China’s interest. Malaysia and Indonesia saw China as the supporter of communist forces that had troubled them for the last 30 years.

Deng repeatedly asked me to play a role in promoting an alliance between the Cambodian resistance groups. China had built a “palace-like residence” for Sihanouk in Beijing. There was friendship between him and Sihanouk, but they deliberately avoided talking politics. I recapitulated his position: first, that China would support and encourage the establishment of a non-communist force to resist the Vietnamese; second, that China would accept the emergence of an independent Kampuchean government after a Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, even though China did not have any hold on such a government. He confirmed it. At a press conference in Beijing with foreign correspondents I made these two points. Their reports were never contradicted by the Chinese.

Deng asked me to tell my Asean neighbours that they should not believe that any power which was communist would naturally have good relations with China. The Soviet Union was the biggest threat and one needed to have a good and clear understanding of the damaging effects of its global policy. He asked rhetorically, what would Indonesia gain by thwarting China’s policy of opposing Soviet global strategy? Making concessions to Malaysia and Indonesia would not solve the problem, because they had the wrong strategic assessments.

On that note, we went to lunch where they served a Chinese delicacy, the fabulous *xiong zhang* – bear’s paws, braised tender in a rich gravy. It was the best gourmet meal I ever had at the Great Hall of the People. The chef had made a special effort for Deng’s guests. \(Bears are now an endangered species in China.\)

Chinese protocol was correct in taking me to see Hua Guofeng last. He was still chairman of the Communist Party and therefore ranked higher than Deng, a vice-chairman. But from the importance of the officials in attendance, I had no doubt whose words carried the day.



Premier Zhao Ziyang met me again in Beijing in September 1985. He referred to me as an “old friend of China”, their label for those they want to put at ease. Then he asked for my impressions of the places I had visited on my way to Beijing.

His manner encouraged me to speak up. I said I could give inoffensive observations, leaving out the critical, but that would be of no value to him. I first gave him my positive impressions. Shanghai had younger leaders than in 1976, vigorous and dynamic; people looked happier and more prosperous in colourful clothes; there was construction everywhere; and the traffic problem was still manageable. I was impressed by the governor of Shandong province, a vigorous go-getter, full of ideas and great ambition to upgrade the infrastructure of Shandong. He had plans for airports in Jinan and Yantai, and had proposed three business projects to our businessmen; his staff was well-organised.

Then I gave the negatives: bad old practices were unchanged. As prime minister for over 20 years, I had stayed in many guesthouses, and could guess the nature of the administration from their condition. Jinan’s huge guesthouse complex gave an impression of waste; I was told my suite with its giant-size bathtub had been built specially for a visit by Chairman Mao. The labour to keep this complex in good condition could be put to better use running a top-class hotel. Because guests in residence were few and far between, the staff were out of practice.

Next, the poor road system. Parts of the 150-kilometre road from Jinan to Qufu, the birthplace of Confucius, were just mud tracks. The Romans built roads that lasted 2,000 years. China had labour and stones in abundance and there was no reason why there should be mud tracks linking Jinan, the provincial capital, to Qufu with its tourist potential.

Singapore had little culture or history and a population of two and a half million, but it had three million tourists a year \(in the mid-1980s\). China’s monuments and ruins resonated with history. Selling scenery, fresh air, fresh food, laundry services, curios and souvenirs to tourists would give much employment and put money into the pockets of many people. China, with a population of about 1,000 million, had only one million tourists a year – 800,000 overseas Chinese and 200,000 foreigners.

Hesitantly, I suggested that they might like to send some of their supervisors to Singapore. They would not encounter language and cultural differences and could observe our work ethics and attitudes. Zhao welcomed my proposal. He suggested that our managers and experts at top, middle and grass-roots level visit China to assess their workers in a Chinese context. I said their workers might not respect our supervisors, because they were “descendants of coolies from Fujian province”. \(Later, they sent several delegations of managers of their state-owned enterprises to Singapore. They saw a different work culture that placed importance on the quality of work.\)

He said China had three major economic tasks: first, build up infrastructure like roads and railways; second, upgrade as many factories as possible; and third, improve the efficiency of their managers and workers. He described the problem of inflation. \(This was to be one of the causes of the trouble in Tiananmen four years later.\) He wanted more trade, economic and technical cooperation between China and Singapore. China was ready to sign a three-year agreement with us to process not less than three million tons of Chinese crude oil per year, and would import more chemical and petrochemical products from Singapore as long as they were at international prices. Thus began their participation in our oil industry. Their state oil company set up an office in Singapore to handle this business and also do oil trading.

On Cambodia, Zhao disclosed to me that the Vietnamese had offered to enter into secret negotiations with them. They had refused Vietnam’s offer: it was not sincere and was designed to split China from Asean and from the Cambodian resistance groups. There could be no improvement in Sino-Vietnam relations before the Vietnamese committed themselves to withdrawing from Cambodia. China had repelled repeated Vietnamese intrusions into Chinese territory; 700,000 soldiers, or 60 per cent of Vietnam’s forces, were tied down on the China-Vietnam border but China had several hundred thousand men and would continue to pressure Vietnam. Unlike his hesitancy in 1980, Zhao now spoke confidently on Cambodia and Vietnam and did not refer me to Deng.



I was taken to meet Deng. He bantered about his advanced age of 81 compared to my 62. I assured him that he did not look old. He was not worried about age. China had made satisfactory arrangements for personnel changes: “Even if the heaven collapsed, there would be people in China to shoulder it.” China’s domestic development, in every aspect, was reasonably good, with many changes in the last five years. Ten old leaders had retired from the politburo, their posts taken by younger leaders. Many leaders over the age of 60 had resigned from the central committee, and 90 new, younger ones had been elected. These leadership changes had been in progress for seven years, but were still not completely satisfactory and needed further reshuffling. By right, he, Deng, should also retire, but there were a few problems he first had to solve.

He repeated he was already 81, ready to meet Marx, that it was a law of nature and everyone should be aware of it, except Mr Chiang Ching-kuo. He asked when I had last met Chiang and whether he had solved the leadership problem. Only then did I realise that his opening remarks on age were not casual banter but a lead to Chiang and Taiwan. I said I last met Chiang in January, eight months earlier, that Chiang had diabetes, which was generally known, and that he was aware of his mortality. Deng wondered aloud whether Chiang had made any personnel arrangements after him. As best as I could see, he had, I replied, but could not say who would replace him eventually. Deng feared chaos and confusion in Taiwan after Chiang’s departure. At the moment, at least both sides shared a common feeling that there was only one China. Chaos could lead to the emergence of two Chinas. I asked how. He explained that there were two possible developments: first, there were forces in the United States and Japan which supported Taiwan’s independence; second, the United States would continue to regard Taiwan as one of its unsinkable aircraft carriers. The present US government \(with Ronald Reagan as president\) had not completely changed its policy on Taiwan. It regarded Taiwan as an important military base and wanted to keep it in its sphere of influence. Deng had discussed Taiwan with President Reagan the year before and had tried to persuade him to give up this aircraft carrier policy, pointing out that the United States had ten other unsinkable aircraft carriers around the world. Taiwan was of crucial importance to China.

He had asked US Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger his reaction to eventualities. If Taiwan refused to negotiate on reunification, what should China do? And if Taiwan became independent, what then? Because of these eventualities, China could not renounce the use of military force to solve the Taiwan question, but it would make every effort to solve the problem and achieve reunification by peaceful means. He had told both President Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz that Taiwan was the crux of relations between China and the United States. Last December, he had asked British Prime Minister Thatcher to convey a message to President Reagan to help China achieve the reunification of Taiwan in his second term. He had also told Shultz and Weinberger that if they failed to handle the question properly and allowed the US Congress to intervene, it would give rise to conflict in Sino-US relations. China might not be able to attack Taiwan but could block the Straits of Taiwan. The United States could be drawn into the conflict. He had asked US leaders what they would then do, but the response was that the United States did not answer hypothetical questions.

Knowing that Chiang Ching-kuo and I were good friends, he then requested me to convey his personal regards to “Mr Chiang” when I next met him. I agreed. He hoped to be able to cooperate with Chiang as both had been in the same university in Moscow in 1926 although not in the same class. Chiang was about 15 or 16 and Deng was 22 in 1926. \(A month later I personally passed Deng’s message to Chiang in Taipei. He listened in silence and did not reply.\)

As for the Cambodian situation, Deng said it was not unfavourable. I responded that what he had said in 1978, before Vietnam invaded Cambodia, had come about. The Vietnamese were stuck in Cambodia. We should continue to help the guerrilla forces to ensure that they stayed mired, with no trade, investments or economic development and totally dependent on the Soviets. China’s success in economic reforms, I said, would not be lost on the Vietnamese: they could have built up their own country and traded with the world instead of occupying their neighbour and suffering for it.

Deng regretted that the Vietnamese leaders were not prepared to follow China’s way. He said “some friends” in Southeast Asia believed in Vietnam’s publicity stances and empty promises. The true motive of Southeast Asian leaders \(referring to Indonesia and Malaysia\) was to use Vietnam and sacrifice the Cambodian nation in order to counter China whom they regarded as their real enemy. Deng then referred to Gorbachev; China had demanded that he remove three obstacles in the way of Sino-Soviet relations, the first of which was to stop military aid to Vietnam and get the Vietnamese to withdraw from Cambodia. China had seen no sign of this.



When I next met Zhao Ziyang, on 16 September 1988, he had been promoted to general secretary. He saw me at my villa in Diaoyutai, their guesthouse complex, to speak about China’s economic problems. He was disturbed by a wave of panic-buying throughout China a few weeks earlier, in late August and early September. They had had to reduce construction, control the growth of money for consumption, and slow down economic growth. If other measures did not work the government would have to stress party discipline – I took this to mean “punish high officials”. The panic-buying must have reminded him of the last days of the Nationalist government in 1947–49.

Then he took me to the restaurant in the Diaoyutai complex to celebrate my 65th birthday. During dinner, he asked for my views on a recent television series he had sent me, the “Yellow River Elegy”, produced by some younger members of his reform programme think-tank. It had depicted a China steeped in feudal tradition, tied down by superstitions and bad old habits, a China that would not make a breakthrough and catch up with the modern world unless it abandoned old conformist attitudes.

I thought it over-pessimistic. China need not abandon its basic cultural values and beliefs in order to industrialise and modernise. Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore had all sought to preserve their traditional values of thrift, hard work, emphasis on scholarship and loyalty to family, clan and the wider nation, always placing community interest above individual interest. These Confucian values had resulted in social cohesion, high savings and investments, which led to high productivity and growth. What China needed to change was its over-centralised system of administration and the attitudes and mindset of the people, so that people would be more receptive to new ideas, whether Chinese or foreign, and be willing to test them out and adapt them to China’s circumstances. This the Japanese had done successfully.

Zhao was concerned that China’s economy was not taking off like those of the NIEs without being plagued by high inflation. I explained that this was because, unlike China, the NIEs never had to deregulate planned economies with prices for basic commodities controlled at unrealistically low levels.


He exuded the quiet confidence of a good mind that took in briefs swiftly. Unlike Hua Guofeng, he was a gentleman, not a thug. He had a pleasant manner, neither abrasive nor bossy. But one needed to be tough and ruthless to survive at the top in China, and for the China of that period he was too liberal in his approach to law and order. When we parted I did not know that within a year he would become a non-person.

The next day, 17 September 1988, I had my last meeting with Deng. He was suntanned after several weeks at Beidaihe, the seaside resort for China’s leaders to the east of Beijing. He looked vigorous and his voice was strong. I praised China’s economic progress. Yes, there had been “pretty good results” during the last decade, but good economic development had created new problems. China had to curb inflation. It was important to strengthen discipline. The central government had to exercise effective control but not contradict the opening up to the outside world. Good management was more important after opening up, otherwise there would be anarchy and “great chaos under heaven”. China was a large country but backward in technology and even in culture. In the past decade, the Chinese had solved the problem of food and clothing. Now they wanted to reach a *xiao kang* \(comfortably off\) stage, quadrupling their 1980 per capita GDP to between US$800 and US$1,000. China had to learn from others, “including you and even South Korea”.

I complimented him on the considerable changes in China, not only in new buildings and roads but, more importantly, in people’s thinking and attitudes. People were more critical and questioning, but optimistic. I said his 1979 visit to the United States, telecast in daily half-hour programmes, had shown US conditions, changing Chinese perceptions of America forever.

Deng remarked that the Americans had treated him very moughtfully. He had told Secretary Shultz that Sino-US relations were developing smoothly but the main problem remained Taiwan. He then asked whether I knew that “my schoolmate and your good friend” Chiang Ching-kuo had on many occasions said that he \(Chiang\) would “justify himself to history”. Deng obviously wanted an answer to the message he had asked me to give to Chiang. I did not respond, because Chiang had not given any reply. Deng said that although the United States had publicly declared it did not want to get involved in the reunification question, the US government had intervened in the handling of this question. There were many obstacles to reunification but the “largest obstacle” was the United States. He repeated the point he had made when I last saw him, that the United States was using Taiwan as an “unsinkable aircraft carrier”. When he normalised relations on his 1979 visit to Washington, President Carter had agreed that the United States would do three things: abrogate the joint defence treaty with Taiwan; withdraw US troops from Taiwan; and sever diplomatic relations with Taiwan. These commitments had been carried out. But the United States intervened many times on the Taiwan question through its Congress, which passed the Taiwan Relations Act and various resolutions interfering in China’s internal affairs. He had told Reagan and Shultz that they had to reconsider their policy of maintaining “unsinkable aircraft carriers”. Deng said he dearly wanted to ensure the reunification of Taiwan with the mainland before he went to meet Karl Marx.




