+++
title = "38 China Beyond Beijing"

+++



In the 1980s and ’90s, I visited China almost every year to better understand its leaders’ motivations and ambitions for China. Because we had started from antagonistic positions, we needed time and deeper interaction to develop a relationship of confidence with China. China had been exporting revolution to turn Singapore into a communist state. When they had a fight with Vietnam on their hands, they needed better relations with Asean. It was during this period, from 1978 to 1991, when we worked in our different ways against Vietnam’s occupation of Cambodia, that our perceptions of each other changed.

On each visit, I would spend over a week touring the provinces, accompanied by a junior Chinese minister. Travelling with him across China for some 8–10 days on the same VIP aircraft, spending many hours together, I gained a better understanding of the thinking and background of their leaders. His wife would keep Choo company.

On one such visit in 1980, I found China a very different country. My daughter Wei Ling was agreeably surprised. She had been sightseeing in Beijing and had noticed the more relaxed mood of Chinese people she met, now that Mao had died and the Gang of Four had been removed. Both officials and *lao baixing* \(the 100 surnames, Chinese for hoi polloi\) were freer and more at ease when speaking to her. I still remember some of the spectacular sights we visited including Chengde, the summer capital of Qing Emperor Qian Long, and the Yangtze River’s Three Gorges. The trip down the Yangtze from Chongqing \(formerly Chungking, Chiang Kai-shek’s World War II capital in Sichuan\) to Yichang at the exit of the gorges took one and a half days. To look up and see, high up on the perpendicular surface of sheer rock, huge Chinese characters carved thousands of years ago to commemorate events and ideas was to be awed. It resonated with the history of a people struggling against immense odds. Even more startling was the sight of human beings working as beasts of burden, towing barges and small ships as they had done from time immemorial. Whole rows of men with ropes on their shoulders and backs pulled boats upstream for miles. It was as if time had stood still and the machines used in the rest of the world had missed them.

On that trip the vice-minister for foreign affairs, Han Nianlong, and his wife accompanied us. Both were able, well-informed and good company. Ten years my senior, he had a lively temperament and a nimble mind to match. He was a small man, well-groomed with good taste in Western clothes, often sporting a waistcoat. He understood English and had a keen sense of humour. He added to my education and enjoyment of my second visit. He had been in charge of the Vietnam conflict. In him the Vietnamese faced a formidable opponent. He had detailed knowledge of everything that concerned Vietnam and Cambodia. China was going to pin Vietnam down and exhaust it in the coming years, however long it might take. He was absolutely confident that the Vietnamese would, as President Ronald Reagan would say, “cry uncle”. We spent several hours talking over meals on that ship. They had simple tastes in food, and after days of rich party food it was a relief to join them for a plain bowl of noodles. We had been offered banquet food but asked for their simple fare. He came from one of the poorest provinces in China, Guizhou, which produced maotai, their most famous liquor, more powerful than vodka. I have a healthy respect for its potency – its delayed kick is tremendous and even a heavy meal does not buffer its effect. Maotai flowed freely but I asked for beer.

Our visit to the university in Wuhan, one of China’s major industrial cities along the Yangtze River, was a saddening experience. Some of the professors we met were American-educated. Although advanced in age and their English rusty, they were obviously men of erudition and quality. In the library, Ling, then a medical student, spoke to a young man who was reading an English-language biology textbook. She asked to see it and found that it was printed in the 1950s. She was incredulous. How could they be reading a biology book 30 years out of date? But they had been shut off for more than 30 years; having just opened up to the West, they had no foreign exchange to buy the latest textbooks and journals. And they had no photocopying machine. They were going to take a long time closing the knowledge gap that had widened between them and the developed world. The Cultural Revolution had set them back by a whole generation. The present students, recovering from the Cultural Revolution, were taught with outdated textbooks by teachers using outmoded teaching methods and without audiovisual aids. This would be another semi-lost generation. True, the most brilliant of them would make it regardless of the disadvantages. But an industrial society required a well-educated total population, not just the brilliant few.

After the welcoming dinner in Wuhan, our host and all the officials accompanying us disappeared. We wondered what had happened and sent our aides to find out. They reported that they were all clustered around a television set in a sitting room, watching the Gang of Four in the dock, on trial. It was the moment of retribution for the people who had terrorised them for years, now about to get their just desserts. We went to our guest drawing room to watch. It was a Chinese version of what I had read of Soviet trials in Stalin’s time, except that no executions were expected and there were no long self-incriminating confessions. On the contrary, Jiang Qing, Mao’s widow, looked defiant and ferocious, talking, almost screaming, in a high-pitched, shrill voice as she pointed to all her judges and berated them. When Mao was in charge, they were his dogs who barked when he told them to. How dare they sit in judgement over her\! She was as bold and defiant a shrew as when she cracked the whip while Mao was alive.

For the rest of our journey, the Gang of Four and their evil deeds were subjects of innumerable conversations between the Chinese officials and members of our party. Some had sad stories to tell of their experiences. It was frightening that an ancient civilisation could be reduced to such madness, proudly referred to then as the Cultural Revolution.

Other things had also gone wrong. A friendly senior provincial official from Fujian, a southern province, accompanying me on a drive through Wuhan, pointed to a building nearing completion and said, *tai zi lou*, a high-rise building for princes. I did not understand. He explained that “princes” meant the sons of important officials in the province and the city. He shook his head and said it was bad for morale, but there was little he could do about it. Without saying so, he acknowledged that it was a slide back to the old China where power had always meant privilege, and privilege meant perks for family, relatives and friends.

Of the other stops, Xiamen and Gulangyu \(Amoy and Kulangsu in the Fujian dialect\) were memorable. For the first time in China, we heard the familiar dialect sounds of Singapore. I had spent years learning it to fight elections and it was a joy to hear them speak it the way I had been taught by my teacher, with the Xiamen accent of the pre-war sophisticates in Fujian province who came into contact with Western businessmen and missionaries.

At Gulangyu, an island next to Xiamen, they showed us two bungalows belonging to the Singapore government. They had been purchased by the colonial government before World War II to house British colonial officers sent to Amoy to learn Hokkien. What we saw were two dilapidated buildings, each occupied by four or five families, many times the number of persons it was meant to house. They hastened to assure us that they would restore and return the buildings to us. \(Hon Sui Sen, my finance minister, later told me he had heard horror stories of landlords who had taken back possession of their properties and been asked to pay arrears of salaries to caretakers for all the years since 1949.\) Gulangyu was remarkable as a relic of European dominance. Every style of European architecture was represented. Some of the big houses were owned by wealthy overseas Chinese who had returned before the war to retire there. They had used French and Italian architects to build these once beautiful homes with curved staircases and banisters of Travertine marble, and marble statues indoors and outdoors as if they were in Florence or Nice. Gulangyu must have been an oasis of luxury before the Japanese captured it in 1937 together with Shanghai.

Our hosts pointed across the straits in the direction of Jinmen \(Quemoy\), an island under Taiwanese control. On a clear day it could be seen with the naked eye. That was exactly what President Chiang Ching-kuo had told me earlier that year when he took me to Jinmen and pointed across the same stretch of water to Gulangyu. Only a few years ago, the Taiwanese had been sending over balloons from Jinmen to Gulangyu carrying food parcels, cassettes of Taiwanese pop singers including Teresa Teng, their top-of-the-chart pop star, and propaganda leaflets. In the 1950s and ’60s they had exchanged artillery barrages. In the 1980s they traded insults over loudspeakers.

The difference between the standards of living of Taipei in Taiwan and Xiamen in Fujian was stark. One was linked to the outside world, particularly America and Japan, with capital, technology, knowledge, foreign experts and their own returned students from America and Japan building a modern economy. The other was plodding along, proud of its agricultural prowess based on knowledge of the 1950s and hardly any farm machinery, with deplorable communications and a low standard of living.

The cuisine was familiar but different. At lunch they produced the original *baobing* \(popiah\), stir-fried shredded bamboo shoot wrapped in a pancake to make a spring roll with the necessary garnishes and condiments. It was different from the Singapore version. They had all the familiar candies, such as delicious crushed peanut brittle, rolled up like a mini-Swiss roll, tastier than what we had in Singapore. All of us knew this was where most of our ancestors came from. Wherever their village in Fujian province, for their journey to the South Seas, most would have come to Xiamen, the international settlement, to board the big ships that would take them south to Nanyang.

From Xiamen we flew to Guangzhou \(Canton\), then went back to Hong Kong by train. They had stopped the constant exhortations over loudspeakers, monotonous and repetitious speeches about the “capitalist roader” and other clichés of the Gang of Four. The Chinese were also less rigorous in their dress code. Once we left Beijing, the women interpreters who accompanied us wore floral blouses with slacks or skirts, which they did not do in 1976. Maoist China was fading into history. The old habits of the Chinese would return; a few good ones, and more than a few bad ones, as we were to discover on my next visit in 1985 – growing corruption, nepotism and favouritism, the ills that have always beset China.

This time we left with more favourable impressions. Our hosts were relaxed, enjoyed the meals and conversation, and were ready to talk of the disastrous decade of *wen ge* – their shorthand for *wen hua da ge ming*, the great Cultural Revolution. The leaders and officials we met were more open and at ease, willing to discuss their past mistakes and future problems. There were fewer of the slogans that used to be plastered all over Beijing and other cities, and of the giant square placards in rice and wheat fields. The few modest slogans now exhorted people to work hard for the Four Modernisations. They were becoming more natural, more like other societies.

China’s leaders were conscious of having lost a generation because of the Cultural Revolution. They had turned away from Mao’s belief in perpetual revolution. They wanted stable relations with other countries to get economic cooperation and help China recover. I thought it unlikely that there would be a modern China for another generation.

Every province of China is different in geography, economy, education and standard of efficiency. The preoccupations of their governors are different. I did not realise how dry, dusty and barren north China was until I visited Dunhuang, the beginning of the Silk Road, to see the famous Buddhist grottoes which had been abandoned for many centuries. When the governor of Gansu province sent me on a camel ride to the “Singing Sands” not far from Dunhuang, I realised that we were on the edge of the Gobi and Taklamakan deserts. Their Bactrian camels were splendid double-humped shaggy creatures more elegant than the single-humped dromedary of the Arabian peninsula. The scenery with its high sand dunes was beautiful if bleak; but life was and still is hard.

These tours showed us why provincial loyalties were strong in such a vast and densely populated country. Their accents, diets and social habits vary. The elite could not know each other as well as their counterparts did in Europe, Japan and the United States. America may be a continent, but the population is not as large, and excellent communications allowed their elite to meet and interact regularly. China is too populous, and until the 1980s when they built up their airports and imported Western aircraft, communications were so poor that they lived in separate worlds. Hence every leader who rose to the top in Beijing brought with him as many of his provincial colleagues as was decent without arousing resentment from those excluded. Fellow provincials understood and could best read their leader’s mind.

There is strong inter-provincial rivalry. Every governor will rattle off the basic statistics of his province – land area, population, cultivable land, rainfall, annual production of agriculture, industry services, and its ranking among the 30 provinces for each individual item, including total GDP. There is equally keen inter-city rivalry; each city mayor will recite its vital statistics and ranking among cities. The ranking is settled by the central government to encourage competition, which appears over-keen as leaders try to improve their position by all means, even resorting to trade wars. A fast-growing province like Guangdong needed to import food for the influx of “floating” workers from other provinces; its neighbour would refuse to sell it grain. A province with a successful motorcycle manufacturing plant could not export its products to adjoining provinces that wanted to protect their own motorcycle plants.

I had assumed that the communist system made for complete unified central control. This never was so in China. From the earliest dynasties, provincial authorities have enjoyed considerable independence in interpreting imperial edicts, and the further away from the centre a province was, the greater its independence. Five words, *shan gao, huang di yuan* \(mountains are high, the emperor is far away\), express the cynicism and scepticism of generations of the disaffected who have been shortchanged by the local authorities. We were to have firsthand experience of this when we embarked on an ambitious project in the city of Suzhou in the 1990s.

I gained some insights into how their government works: cumbersome and multi-layered, with four layers of authority – central, provincial, city or county, and district. In theory, written directives from the centre apply equally across a whole continent. In practice, their battles over turf are fierce and tenacious, each ministry jealously guarding its rights and trying to extend its powers. Intra-ministry contests and gridlocks are frequent. There is no distinction between a civil servant and a political appointee. The Chinese Communist Party is supreme and anybody of any consequence must have a position in the party. To rise as an official or do well in private business, party membership is invaluable.

The quality of the men in charge of China is impressive. With training and exposure to free-market economies they could equal top executives in America, Western Europe and Japan. They have capacious minds, analytical and quick on the uptake. Even in casual conversation the subtlety of their presentation shows a sharpness of intellect that can be fully appreciated only if one understands the Chinese language.

I had expected this of the leaders in Beijing, but was surprised to discover the high calibre of their provincial officials, party secretaries, governors, mayors and senior officials. The thick layer of talent spread over the continent is impressive. Those who get to the very top are not necessarily a class apart from those who just missed it. In a populous country like China, the luck of the draw plays a considerable part in getting to the top even though they have a careful and thorough process of selection, with the emphasis on ability and character, no longer on ideological purity or revolutionary fervour as during the disastrous years of the Cultural Revolution.

One former cadre gave me an insight into how the personnel section of the Communist Party of China selects their top talent. Everyone has a file or dossier, which starts with his primary school report, containing not only his academic performance but his teachers’ assessments of his character, behaviour, values and attitudes. At every stage of his career, there are records of judgements of his peers and superiors. At every level for promotion, all suitable candidates are assessed before appointment. At the top echelons of the pyramid is a core of between 5,000 and 10,000 who have been chosen and carefully graded by the organisation department of the Communist Party, not the government. To ensure that gradings are correct, inspection teams from the centre visit provinces and cities to assess the assessors and interview a cadre before he is promoted. In case of disagreement, the matter would be reviewed in Beijing. The selection process is thorough, searching and comprehensive. Finally, at the very top, promotion is done by the leader himself who has to judge not only the merit but also the loyalty of the candidate. It was Deng Xiaoping who chose Zhao Ziyang to be general secretary of the Communist Party and nominally number one in China. It was Deng who reversed his decision after Tiananmen in 1989.




