+++
title = "39 Tiananmen"

+++



In May 1989 the world watched a bizarre drama unfold in Beijing. It was shown live on satellite television because the Western media were there in strength with their cameras in position to cover the Deng-Gorbachev summit. Students had gathered in large numbers in orderly fashion at Tiananmen Square in front of the Great Hall of the People. They carried banners and placards to protest against corruption, nepotism and inflation. The police were benign. The general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party \(CCP\) himself, Zhao Ziyang, made encouraging noises, that the students wanted the party and the government to reform, and had good intentions. As the crowds swelled, the banners and slogans became more critical, anti-government and strident. They started to denounce the government and Premier Li Peng by name. When nothing happened, they targeted Deng Xiaoping, ridiculing him in satirical doggerel. When I saw this on television, I felt that this demonstration would end in tears. No emperor in China can be lampooned and ridiculed and continue to reign.

Tiananmen was a strange episode in China’s history. Li Peng was telecast reading out the declaration of martial law. I watched excerpts of Beijing television relayed by satellite via Hong Kong to Singapore. One vivid pre-martial law episode showed representatives of the students in the Great Hall of the People arguing rudely with Premier Li Peng. They wore jeans and T-shirts. Li Peng was in an immaculately pressed Mao suit. The students scored heavily against Li Peng in that TV encounter. The drama reached a climax when soldiers tried to march into the square and were repulsed. Finally, on the night of 3 June, tanks and armoured personnel carriers rolled in while the world watched on television. Some researchers who have sifted through the evidence were persuaded that there was actually no shooting in Tiananmen Square itself, that the shootings took place as troops accompanying the tanks and armoured personnel carriers were forcing their way through the streets leading to the square.

It was unbelievable. The People’s Liberation Army \(PLA\) had turned its guns on its own people. I felt compelled to issue a statement the following day, 5 June:

“My cabinet colleagues and I are shocked, horrified and saddened by this disastrous turn of events. We had expected the Chinese government to apply the doctrine of minimum force when an army is used to quell civil disorder. Instead, the fire power and violence used caused many deaths and casualties. They were totally disproportionate to the resistance unarmed civilians offered.

“A China with large sections of her people, including her best-educated, at odds with the government means trouble, with people resentful, reforms stalled, and economy stagnant. Because of her size, such a China could create problems for herself and her neighbours in Asia.

“We hope wiser counsels will prevail to pursue conciliation, so that the Chinese people can resume the progress which the open-door policies have brought them.”

I did not condemn them. I did not regard them as a repressive communist regime like the Soviet Union. A certain momentum had been built up by mass demonstrations in those two months.

The reactions of ethnic Chinese communities in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore were markedly different. People in Hong Kong were distressed and terrified. They had watched the tragedy unfold on television almost 24 hours of the day. They identified themselves with the students. Some Hong Kong youths had even camped with them in Tiananmen Square. That was a time when China had encouraged Hong Kong and Taiwanese journalists and visitors to get closer to China. When the shooting took place Hong Kongers were distraught at the prospect of coming under the control of such a cruel government. There were spontaneous outpourings of grief and rage. A million people took to the streets soon after the scenes appeared on television. For days they continued demonstrations outside the Xinhua News Agency, the unofficial PRC presence in Hong Kong. They helped protesters escape from the mainland through Hong Kong to the West.

In Taiwan, there was sadness and sympathy for the students but not fear. There were no mass demonstrations of protest or grief. They were not about to be governed by China.

Singaporeans were shocked. Few believed that such fire power was necessary, but nobody demonstrated. People knew China was different, a communist country. A delegation of students from the universities presented a protest letter to the Chinese Commercial Representative’s Office.

It was an instructive moment, highlighting the different positions, perceptions and emotional involvement of these three groups of ethnic Chinese, placed in varying degrees of political proximity to communist China.

But for his part in ordering the PLA to clear Tiananmen, Deng would have been eulogised in the West when he died in February 1997. Instead every obituary was laced with heavy criticism of the brutal crackdown on June 4 and every TV soundbite included a playback of the same scenes of Tiananmen. I do not know how Chinese historians will evaluate his role. I consider Deng a great leader who changed the destiny of China and of the world.

He was a realist, practical and pragmatic, not ideological. Twice he had been purged by Mao, but he came back to power to save China. Twelve years before the Soviet Union collapsed he had known that the centrally planned economy did not work. He opened up China to free enterprise and the free market, starting with the special economic zones on the coast. Deng was the only leader in China with the political standing and strength to reverse Mao’s policies. Like Mao, Deng fought to destroy the old China. But he did what Mao did not do. He built the new China, using free enterprise and the free market “with Chinese characteristics”.

A veteran of war and revolution, he saw the student demonstrators at Tiananmen as a danger that threatened to throw China back into turmoil and chaos, prostrate for another 100 years. He had lived through a revolution and recognised the early signs of one at Tiananmen. Gorbachev, unlike Deng, had only read about revolution and did not recognise the danger signals of the Soviet Union’s impending collapse.

Twenty years after Deng’s open-door policy, China shows every promise of becoming Asia’s largest and most dynamic economy. If it avoids disorder and conflicts, either domestic or international, it will become a giant economy in 2030. When he died Deng left the Chinese people a huge and promising legacy. But for him the People’s Republic of China would have collapsed as the Soviet Union did. If China had disintegrated, the Western media would have sympathised with the Chinese people as they have done with the Russians. Instead, the West has to weigh the prospect of a powerful China in 30–50 years.

Three months after Tiananmen, on 24 August, Hu Ping, China’s minister of commerce who had accompanied me on my provincial tour in 1988, called on me. Premier Li Peng wanted him to brief me on the “6-4” incident \(“6-4”, June 4th, is a Chinese shorthand – they refer to big events by the month and day on which they occurred\). The situation was now stable, but the impact on China had been great. During the 40–50 days of turmoil, China had lost control of the situation. The students had used the problems of corruption and inflation to rally people to their cause. Their police lacked experience and were not able to deal with such demonstrations as they did not have water cannons and other riot control equipment.

He said that by early June, the students had militarised themselves by robbing weapons and equipment from the PLA. \(I had not read of this.\) The troops tried to enter Tiananmen Square on 20 May but were obstructed. They were withdrawn and “re-educated”. On 3 June the troops began another push. Some were armed, but many were not. All had orders not to fire. In fact, the ammunition pouches of many of the troops contained biscuits. They had no rubber bullets. The day after the incident, he himself had toured Chang-An Road \(road of eternal peace\), the stretch from the Military Museum to the Diaoyutai guesthouse, and seen the smoking wrecks of 15 tanks and armoured cars. The troops had acted with great restraint, abandoning their vehicles and firing shots into the air. His ministry was located near the square and he saw the million-strong demonstration. In fact, 10 per cent of the staff of his ministry and of other ministries had joined the demonstrators. They were also against corruption and were sympathetic to the students. Casualties, Hu Ping insisted, were caused when the troops were trying to get to Tiananmen Square, not in the square itself as the foreign press claimed.

Since then, foreign businessmen and their Chinese staff had returned to work. He believed that their foreign friends would gradually understand. Some young Chinese had links with an intelligence agency of a Western country and had spread Western opinions and information through advanced equipment. \(I took this to mean the fax machine.\) Although Western countries had now imposed sanctions, China would never allow foreign interference in its internal affairs. But most of these countries, including international banks, had not taken sanctions further. Contacts were being restored. He hoped Singapore-China bilateral relations would stay good because they were on firm foundations.

“6-4” was a shock to me and the people of Singapore, I replied. We had not expected to see the use of such tremendous fire power and force. We were accustomed to seeing on television, almost nightly, clashes between South Korean police and workers and students, white South African policemen beating up blacks, and Israelis using tear gas, rubber bullets and other weapons against Palestinians, with occasionally one or two deaths; tanks and armoured cars were never used. Singaporeans could not believe what they had seen – a Chinese government that had been so reasonable, forbearing and tolerant in May, suddenly turned brutal, using tanks against civilians. Singaporeans, especially ethnic Chinese, could not understand this and felt deeply shamed by such an uncivilised action. There were deep mental scars.


China had to explain to Singapore and the world why it was necessary for the demonstrations to be put down in this way, why there was no other way. To go overnight from “soft” to “hard” was not explicable. China’s real problem was not with countries in Southeast Asia which had neither the wealth nor technology to help China modernise. Its problem was with the United States, Japan and Europe. The United States especially, through the World Bank and the IMF, had done China many good turns. China had to erase the bad impression it had created. I suggested they get some American public relations firm to help in this task. Americans were an emotional people. Television had a tremendous impact on them. Senators and congressmen controlled the president and money; China must pay close attention to them. Fortunately for China, President Bush had lived in China for several years and knew it better than most Americans. He had been trying to calm down Congress.

I cautioned that if China stopped sending students abroad because of the added problems they had caused through faxing their ideas to their friends in Beijing, China would shut itself off from knowledge and technology. The loss would be incalculable.

He assured me that their policies on students and on opening up would not change. Many businessmen from Taiwan were coming in to invest. Their policy towards Hong Kong and Taiwan also would not change. But the situation in Hong Kong was more complicated, he said. The slogans people had coined in Hong Kong had changed from “Hong Kong people rule Hong Kong” to “Hong Kong people *save* Hong Kong”. He did not refer to the enormous outpouring of fear and sympathy in street processions of a million Hong Kong people in protest against “6-4”.

A sad memory I have of Tiananmen Square, packed with demonstrators sporting slogans on headbands, is of Zhao with a megaphone, almost in tears, pleading with the students to disperse, telling them that he could no longer protect them. That was on 19 May. It was too late. The CCP leaders had decided to declare martial law and use force if necessary to break up the demonstrations. At that stage, the students had either to disperse or be forcibly removed. Zhao had not shown that toughness needed in the leader of a China on the verge of *luan* \(chaos\). Orderly protesters had been allowed to become defiant rebels. If not firmly dealt with, they could have triggered off similar disorder throughout the vast country. Tiananmen is not London’s Trafalgar Square.

Communist China has adopted the Soviet practice of the “non-person”. However powerful a leader has been, once he is out he becomes a non-person and is never mentioned in public. Although I would have liked to meet Zhao Ziyang on my later visits to China, I could not raise the subject. A few years after Tiananmen, I met one of his sons and was given a glimpse of what life had been like for Zhao and his family after his fall from grace. Zhao had had to move out of Zhongnanhai, where all party leaders lived, to a house occupied by Hu Yaobang \(the former general secretary of the party\) when Hu was a director of the organisation department of the CCP. For the first few years Zhao had a sentry at the entrance and his movements were monitored. Later, the surveillance was relaxed. He could play golf at a Chinese-owned golf course in a Beijing suburb but not on a foreign joint-venture golf course. He could visit inland but not coastal provinces, to minimise contact with foreigners and the resulting publicity. Zhao’s children were overseas, except for one daughter who worked in a Beijing hotel. His living conditions were comfortable. His family could visit him. By Soviet standards of treatment for non-persons, he was not badly off. He was better-treated than Krushchev had been by Brezhnev, or Gorbachev by Yeltsin.



The man who publicly carried the international and domestic odium for the declaration of martial law and the forcible dispersal of the crowd at Tiananmen was Premier Li Peng. In fact the decision was made by Deng, supported by several of the Long March veterans. I first met Li Peng in Beijing in September 1988. He had taken over as premier from Zhao Ziyang who had become general secretary. Li was not as outgoing as Zhao. A Russian-trained engineer in his mid-60s, he had a good, capacious mind and was always well-briefed and careful with his words. He was not the back-slapping type and could take offence when none was intended. I adjusted to his temperament and we got on. After I came to know him better, I found him a sensible if conservative man.

He was the son of a leading communist and had been adopted by Premier Zhou Enlai. He has no provincial accent at all, because he lived where the CCP headquarters were, with the Zhou family in Yenan, and later in Beijing. His wife is more outgoing, an easy conversationalist with an attractive personality. Unlike most Chinese leaders’ wives who kept in the background, she frequently played hostess. She spoke English for social purposes. Choo found it easy to talk to her in English without interpreters.

At our formal discussion Li Peng asked about Singapore’s business developments in China. I said Singapore investors faced many difficulties. Too many had lost money and become discouraged. The word had got around that there was confusion in China, so investments had slowed down. They could not understand why Chinese managers and supervisors could not exercise discipline over Chinese workers. Singapore- and Hong Kong-owned hotels needed to employ their own Chinese as supervisors to discipline the staff. Even so there were problems. For instance, workers sacked for removing materials from a hotel had to be reinstated because other workers created trouble. Labour relations had to change if China wanted progress. They should allow investors to manage their own enterprises, including hiring and firing workers.

He replied that foreign investors were welcome to make money, but China’s policy was to ensure that they did not make too much money. \(I took this to mean that, whatever might have been agreed, if in their opinion profits were too high, they would find some way of making the division of profits more equitable.\) China’s taxation policies in the special economic zones were better than those in Hong Kong. But he admitted that foreign investors faced low efficiency in the government and much red tape. China had great difficulty in solving this. Many state-owned enterprises were overstaffed and making losses. They had to care for retired workers. With the free market, China’s wage system had become absurd. A senior professor in a well-known university had a salary of about 400 yuan. The professor’s daughter, an attendant in a foreign enterprise, received as much. No one could say that the contribution of the daughter was as large as that of the father. The entire wage system would have to be changed, but he could not raise the salary of the professor because the government had insufficient resources. China had achieved much since it initiated the policy of opening up to the outside world, he said, but inflation had been very high and had to be controlled by slowing down the rate of investments in construction. China would not reverse the reforms. He was confident they would overcome their difficulties.

Asked for an assessment of the security situation in East Asia, I painted an optimistic picture of growth and stability, provided there were no security upsets. The Soviet Union was contained by both the United States and China. The US policy was to coopt Japan with its economic strength to supplement its own while providing security for Japan. As long as this arrangement prevailed, there was no need for Japan to rearm. Japan did not have nuclear capability, but it was possible that Japan would go it alone if the United States proved no longer dependable. In that case the threat to all countries in Southeast Asia would increase. Most Japanese leaders of the older generation wanted to continue this partnership with the United States which had brought them prosperity and the good life. There was a danger that a younger generation of leaders, having no experience of the last war, might think differently, especially if they revived their myth that they were descendants of the sun goddess.

Li Peng thought I had underestimated the Japanese danger. China had to be vigilant over the resurrection of the Japanese military. Despite Japan’s self-imposed ceiling of 1 per cent of GNP, its military expenditure was some US$26–27 billion more than China’s. There were some Japanese leaders who wanted to reverse the verdict of history that Japan had committed aggression against China, Southeast Asia and the South Pacific. He cited two examples: the way they wrote their textbooks and visits to the Yasukuni shrine by top Japanese leaders. \(The Yasukuni shrine honours soldiers who died in war.\) Japan’s economic success had created the wherewithal to make it a major political and military power. At least some Japanese leaders were thinking along those lines. His concern at a possible revival of Japanese militarism was real. At the same time, China “was consistently on guard” against danger from the Soviet Union.

Two years later, on 11 August 1990, Premier Li Peng visited Singapore. He had just reestablished Sino-Indonesian diplomatic relations in Jakarta. We met with only note-takers and an interpreter. I had said on many past occasions that Singapore would be the last country in Asean to establish diplomatic relations with China. Now that Indonesia had restored diplomatic relations, I wanted to resolve this before I stepped down as prime minister in November that year. Li Peng noted that during my long years as prime minister, relations between Singapore and China had developed well. He too would like to settle this matter before I stepped down. Hence he invited me to visit China in mid-October.

I then referred to the issue that had bogged down discussions at the official level on the agreement to exchange embassies – our troops training in Taiwan. I did not see a final date for our training there. Singapore was deeply indebted to Taiwan, in particular to the late President Chiang Ching-kuo who had enabled us to break out of our limited space for military training. We could not forget our debt. We paid only for what we consumed or used and had not paid a single extra dollar. It was a special relationship. We felt close to each other because we were both non-communists and shared the same language, culture and ancestry. Li expressed understanding of our position, that Singapore was prosperous but not big. Finally he said China would not insist on a specific time-frame for Singapore training in Taiwan to end.

After that meeting, a thorny issue over which negotiations had been stalled for many months was on its way to resolution. Unlike in 1976, I was no longer concerned that a Chinese embassy in Singapore could pose problems for our security. Our domestic conditions had changed. We had solved some basic problems in Chinese education. All our schools had converted to a national system with English as their medium of instruction. Nanyang University no longer taught in Chinese and its graduates could easily find employment. We had stopped breeding successive generations of disadvantaged graduates.

At a full delegation meeting after our discussion, Li referred to Tiananmen as the “turmoil in China last summer”. Some countries had imposed sanctions that caused China some difficulties but also hurt themselves. The Japanese had eased their sanctions after the G7 meeting. I said that, unlike the Western media, Singapore did not consider Tiananmen to be the end of the world, but it was a great pity that China had lost out in public relations. Li said, “The Chinese government lost total control of the situation.” As premier, he “could not even go into the streets. This chaos lasted for 48 days.”

Li Peng is not a man for lighthearted jests. That day he surprised everyone when he said he would like to “crack a joke” on our troop-training in Taiwan: they could train in China on terms better than in Taiwan. There was a burst of spontaneous laughter around the table. When that day arrived, I said, peace would have broken out in Asia.

Two months later I paid my last visit to Beijing as prime minister, to formalise and establish diplomatic relations on 3 October. After this was done we discussed the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. Li Peng said Iraq could not be defeated easily in a blitzkrieg. \(When with sophisticated weaponry Desert Storm tore through Iraq’s defences in a matter of days, it must have come as a surprise to China’s civil and military leaders.\)

He disclosed that a few weeks before our meeting, at Vietnam’s request, its leaders Nguyen Van Linh \(premier\), Do Muoi \(party secretary\) and Pham Van Dong \(the senior leader and former prime minister who had visited Singapore in 1978\) had held talks in Chengdu, Sichuan province, with General Secretary Jiang Zemin and him. They had agreed that Vietnam would unconditionally withdraw from Cambodia under UN supervision, and that a national security council would govern Cambodia until the elections. China was now ready to improve relations with Vietnam.



In October 1990, I met President Jiang Zemin. He received me warmly, quoting from Confucius’ *Analects*: “It is a pleasure to receive friends from afar.” He had missed me when he visited Singapore in the early 1980s, and when I visited Shanghai in 1988 when he was mayor there. He had visited Singapore twice, on the first occasion for two weeks to study how the Economic Development Board \(EDB\) got investments into Singapore and how we developed industrial estates. He was then tasked with setting up special economic zones in Guangdong and Fujian. The second visit was a transit stop. He had carried away a deep impression of Singapore’s city planning, orderliness, traffic conditions, cleanliness and standard of service. He remembered our slogan, “Courtesy is our way of life”. He was pleased he could speak Mandarin with ordinary people in the streets, which made it easy for him to get around.

Jiang said that after the “6-4” incident, the West claimed that through television it was possible for them to interfere in Chinese affairs. The West acted in accordance with their value system. He could accept that there were different views, but not that only one view was correct. There was nothing absolute in these concepts of democracy, freedom and human rights. They could not exist in abstraction, but were linked to a country’s culture and level of economic development. There was no such thing as freedom of the press. Western newspapers belonged to and were controlled by various financial groups. He referred to Singapore’s decision in 1988 to restrict sales of the *Asian Wall Street Journal* and said China should have done the same during Gorbachev’s visit. Many Western media reports on the “6-4” incident were not accurate.

Deng’s policy of opening to the world and adhering to socialism remained unchanged. Since I had expressed concern about the continuance of this open-door policy, Jiang assured me that it would be “accelerated”. They had decided to break away from the Soviet centrally planned system. He had studied in the Soviet Union for two years and visited the country on 10 occasions, so he knew the difficulties of their system. China wanted to establish a mixed economy, to combine the best of the centrally planned economy and market regulation.

China wanted to maintain contact with other countries. It faced difficulties in feeding 1.1 billion people. It was an enormous effort to supply the whole country with grain alone. As mayor of Shanghai, with a population of 12 million, he had found it difficult to supply two million kilos of vegetables daily. For an hour he spoke of China’s colossal needs. At dinner the conversation was lively. He quoted couplets and verses from his immense mental anthology memorised since childhood. His comments were peppered with literary allusions, many beyond my limited knowledge of Chinese literature, which added to the work of the interpreter.

Instead of the stereotyped grey communist apparatchik I had expected, I found a medium-height, stocky, fair, bespectacled, broad-faced, black hair combed straight back, ready-smiling party chairman. He was the No. 1 man in China, chosen by Deng Xiaoping in a matter of days after “6-4” to take the place of Zhao Ziyang. He was highly intelligent and well-read and had a gift for languages. He was fluent in Russian, spoke English and German, and could quote Shakespeare and Goethe. He told me he also spoke Romanian, having worked in Romania.

Jiang was born in 1926 into a scholarly family in Yangzhou town, Jiangsu province. His grandfather was a renowned physician and a talented poet, painter and calligrapher. His father was the eldest son. An uncle who had joined the Communist Youth League at 17 and been killed at 28 in the civil war against the Nationalists in 1939 was considered a revolutionary martyr. His father gave Jiang Zemin, then 13, to the widow of this uncle who had no son. So Jiang had impeccable revolutionary antecedents when he joined the communist student groups in the universities in Nanjing and Jiaotong in Shanghai.

He was brought up in a home with books, paintings and music. Jiang sings, plays the piano and enjoys listening to Mozart and Beethoven. There were significant differences in academic performance between people of the various provinces. Jiangsu was the “Lake District” of China where over the millennia its pleasant micro-climate had attracted retired mandarins and literati. Their progeny have raised the academic level of the population there. Suzhou in Jiangsu province, once the capital of one of the states in the Spring Autumn period \(about 770–476 BC\), has one street called Zhuang Yuan Jie. *Zhuang Yuan* was the title given to the candidate who came first in the imperial examinations that used to be held in the capital city once every three years. Suzhou leaders proudly claim that quite a number of them came from that street.

Although I had been well-briefed, Jiang was a surprise. I had not expected so extrovert a Chinese communist leader. When Jiang spent two weeks in Singapore in 1980, Ng Pock Too, an EDB director, was his liaison officer. After Jiang was made general secretary, Ng gave me a thumbnail sketch. He was surprised Jiang had been placed in this top position. He remembered him as a serious, hardworking, conscientious and thorough official: Jiang would study every problem in detail, take notes and ask searching questions. Ng thought highly of him because, unlike other Chinese officials who stayed in five-star hotels, Jiang chose a three-star hotel off fashionable Orchard Road. He travelled modestly – in Ng’s car, by taxi or on foot. Jiang was a thrifty, honest official, but did not appear to be a political animal.

Towards the end of the two weeks, Jiang had looked Ng Pock Too in the eye and said, “You have not told me everything. You must have a secret. China has cheaper land, cheaper water, cheaper power, cheaper labour. Yet you get so many investments and we don’t. What is the secret formula?” Nonplussed, Ng explained the key importance of political confidence and economic productivity. He pulled out his copy of the Business Environment Risk Index \(BERI\) report, and pointed out Singapore’s rating as 1A on a scale of 1A down to 3C. China was not even included in the rating. Singapore was safe and favoured for investments because of political, economic and other factors. There was no danger of confiscation. Our workers were industrious and productive, and there were minimal strikes. Our currency was convertible. He went through the BERI measurements. Jiang was not altogether convinced, so Ng gave him the BERI report to take home. They had a summing-up discussion in Jiang’s small hotel room before they left for the airport. Jiang finally said he understood the magic formula, that the EDB had the “unique knowhow to sell confidence”\! Ng concluded, “I never thought he would be the No. 1 man in China. He was too nice.”

Our personal chemistry was good. Jiang was gregarious. I was open and direct. Whereas with Li Peng I had to be careful not to speak even half in jest, Jiang knew I meant well and did not take offence. He also had a very un-Chinese habit of holding his guest’s forearm and looking him earnestly in the eye when he asked a direct question. His eyes were his lie detector. I assumed he must have been satisfied that I was not being evasive when he asked some very probing questions about Taiwan, America and the West, and about China itself.

Personal chemistry does make a difference to the ease with which business can be done on difficult and sensitive issues. I could not have talked as freely with either Hua Guofeng or Li Peng as I did with Jiang Zemin. It might have been possible with Zhao Ziyang, but not in the same free-ranging manner.

Many, myself included, underrated Jiang’s staying power because of his bonhomie and his penchant for quoting poetry at every opportunity. But there must be the tough infighter side of him which his opponents would have discovered to their cost when they thwarted him. There is no question about his integrity and dedication to the high cause placed upon him by Deng Xiaoping, to carry China’s modernisation forward and make China a prosperous, industrial society with “a socialist market economy”. He explained its meaning to me at some length, that China had to be different from a Western free-market economy because the Chinese were socialists.

When I met Jiang again two years later, in October 1992, we talked about the international situation. It was a few weeks before the US elections. I suggested China would need to buy time for itself if Clinton won. He should give Clinton room to manoeuvre and do a U-turn on some of his policies, like China’s Most Favoured Nation status, to avoid a head-on confrontation. A new, young president eager to show his supporters that he was ready to live up to his election speeches could result in problems for both China and America.

Jiang listened. He answered indirectly. He had read my speeches, those delivered in China and elsewhere. During Deng’s tour of the southern provinces in January that year, Deng had referred to the rapid development of Southeast Asia and especially Singapore. The 14th party congress to be held the following month would carry out Deng’s policy of “socialism with Chinese characteristics”. For this, China needed a peaceful and stable international and internal environment. The market economy would expand in China but would take a long time. As for democracy for China, the East had been influenced by the teachings of Confucius and Mencius. Any “shock treatment” \(of sudden democracy\) for China, like that on the Soviet Union, was out. As for the present unhappy state of US-China relations, the fault was not China’s. By selling fighter planes and weapons to Taiwan, America had violated the principles of the 1982 communiqué agreed between China and the United States. But China had not made a big issue of it because it did not want to embarrass President Bush during his election campaign.

He described China’s economic situation. Then he asked me what would be the most satisfactory rate of GNP growth for China. Their previous target was 6 per cent. In the next congress, their proposed target was 8 or 9 per cent. The four Little Dragons and Japan, I replied, had achieved double-digit growth with little inflation for sustained periods during the early phases of their industrialisation. Before the oil crisis, Singapore had achieved 12–14 per cent growth rates with little inflation. The optimum rate of growth for Singapore did not depend on any magic figure, but on how much of our labour and production capacity was under-used and also on our rates of interest and inflation. I added that Dr Goh Keng Swee \(my former finance minister, who had been advising the Chinese on their special economic zones\) believed China’s most important problem was the inability of the People’s Bank of China \(PBOC\), their central bank, to control credit. Each PBOC branch in the provinces responded to pressure from provincial governments when creating credit. Furthermore, data on money supply at any given time was insufficient. China had to control money supply to keep inflation under control, and not allow the provincial branches of the PBOC to create credit without the knowledge and permission of the central bank.

He made a note of this. He said he had graduated as an electrical engineer but had begun to learn economics and was reading the works of Adam Smith, Paul Samuelson and Milton Friedman. He was not the only Chinese leader studying market economics. I advised him to study the workings of the US Federal Reserve Bank and the German Bundesbank, two successful central banks. Of the two, the Bundesbank had been more successful in fighting inflation. The chairman of the Bundesbank was appointed by the chancellor, but once appointed he had independence and the chancellor could not order him to increase money supply or lower interest rates. China must get credit creation under control and not be over-concerned about not exceeding a putative ideal rate of growth. For example, if Guangdong province could grow faster than other provinces because of inputs from Hong Kong, then he should let it do so, and encourage that growth to spread to neighbouring provinces through improved road, rail, air, river and sea transportation. He said he would study these points.

When I next met Jiang in Beijing in May 1993 he thanked me for having facilitated the Wang-Koo talks in Singapore between “unofficial” representatives of China and Taiwan. It was the first time since 1949 that the two sides of the civil war had met, albeit “unofficially”. Jiang said, however, that he felt “very strange and disappointed” with the numerous reports that Taiwan wanted to join the UN. He thought it was unwise for the West to treat China as a potential enemy.

I said that Taiwan’s push to join the UN was not encouraged by the United States. Dick Cheney, the former US secretary for defence under Reagan until 1992, and Jeanne Kirkpatrick, the former US permanent representative to the UN, also under Reagan, had said in Taipei recently that it was not realistic for Taiwan to join the UN, that Taiwan could join UNESCO, the World Bank, and other technical organisations, but not the UN itself. I believed Taiwan’s wish to join the UN was a passing phase with President Lee Teng-hui, who wanted to break away from the old KMT position, which was not to join any international body because Taiwan was not a full member of the UN. \(I was to discover later that I was wrong; it was not a passing phase. Lee Teng-hui really hoped to join the UN and to assert Taiwan’s separateness as the Republic of China on Taiwan.\)

The best outcome of China-Taiwan relations, I believed, was a peaceful and gradual interlocking of economic, social and political relations between the two. For example, in 1958 the mainland had exchanged artillery fire with Taiwan across the narrow Straits of Quemoy and Matsu. If China had succeeded in reuniting with Taiwan then, China would now be in a less advantageous position. Because it did not, it could now tap the resources of some 20 million Taiwanese who had acquired economic and technological assets through their association with America. He nodded in agreement. Would it not be better to have Taiwan carry on as a separate entity, I suggested. Then America and Europe would continue to let Taiwan have access to their technology and knowhow for another 40 to 50 years, and China could benefit further from what Taiwan could put into the mainland. He shook his head in disagreement.

I next argued that if he wanted the United States to have less leverage, he should open up China to more European MNCs. Then American businessmen would lobby their government against actions that jeopardised their interests in China for fear of losing out to European and Japanese MNCs. He thought this a good point. I added that America and Europe could not tolerate another Japanese-style closed-market economy in a China that only exported and did not import. For China to develop, it must use its potentially huge market to attract foreign investments which can sell their products in China and thus “lock them into China’s growth”. Jiang agreed that as a big country it was not realistic to have a wholly export-oriented economy. China must increase its exports, but not to the United States alone, and China had to develop an open market. He agreed more with the view of Vice-Premier Li Lanqing \(in charge of trade\) than with that of Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji \(in charge of industries\). Zhu held the view that local industries must have a certain degree of protection. Jiang said China’s policy was to learn from various countries and pick up their strong points, not only in knowhow, science and technology but also in cultural experience.

One animated meeting I had with Jiang was in October 1994, about Taiwan. Earlier that year, in May, Taiwan’s President Lee Teng-hui had stopped over in Singapore to ask Prime Minister Goh to convey a proposal to President Jiang. This was to set up an international shipping company, to be jointly owned by the PRC, Taiwan and Singapore \(with only a nominal Singapore shareholding\), to handle trade between China and Taiwan. All ships trading with the PRC would be put under this company.

Goh had written to Jiang to convey the proposal. Jiang had not accepted it. Then Goh and I had decided to put up a Singapore proposal to bridge the gulf between the two, by forming a company for both shipping and airline, to be registered in Singapore and jointly owned by the PRC, Taiwan and Singapore in more or less equal shares. This company would wet-charter ships and aircraft \(lease ships and aircraft with their full crew complement\) in equal numbers from China and Taiwan. After three years, the two would buy out Singapore’s share. President Lee had agreed to this proposal when we met in Taiwan in mid-September 1994.

I met Jiang a few days later, on 6 October, in the Great Hall of the People. He proposed that we talk in a small group, he with his deputy director, state council \(Taiwan affairs\), I with our ambassador. Jiang said, “I have an interpreter but let us not waste time. You’ll speak in English, I can understand you. I’ll speak in Chinese, you can understand me, and when you don’t, my interpreter will help.” We did save time.

President Lee, I said, had agreed to our proposal but believed there would be many difficulties in the details, so he would want Singapore to be involved in resolving them. The Taiwanese foreign minister wanted the shipping line to start first. They had designated a special zone at Kaohsiung as their international transit cargo port. After it had been run successfully for a year, the airline could start.

Jiang said Prime Minister Goh’s proposal had been made with good intentions, but was not appropriate. There was no reason for any camouflage for the two sides to get together. He had heard these same views from many sources. He then referred to Lee Teng-hui’s interview with Ryotaro Shiba, published in a Japanese magazine in April. \(In it, Lee had referred to himself as Moses leading his people out from Egypt to the Promised Land.\) Jiang added that Lee’s attempt to attend the Hiroshima Asian Games showed him as totally unreliable. Lee wanted two Chinas, or one China and one Taiwan. The more talks there had been, the wider the gap between them. Lee had been saying one thing and doing another. Lee should not assume that he \(Jiang\) was a fool and could not read his true position. China’s leaders weighed their words carefully and stood by them, he said, suggesting Taiwan’s leaders did not. China’s leaders placed great importance on trust and righteousness, he said, implying Lee did not have these qualities. Jiang showed anger when he said that Lee was cosying up to his former colonial masters \(meaning Japan\).


He was in such full flow that even when I did not understand specific phrases he used and only caught the gist of his meaning, I did not stop him for clarification. He spoke with great passion, to underline the seriousness of his position and the depth of his convictions.

At the time I did not understand his controlled anger. Later I discovered that three days before our meeting, while I was in Henan province, President Lee had said in the *Asian Wall Street Journal*, “There is no leader strong enough in Beijing, nobody able to give the final say. Deng Xiaoping is still around, but we don’t think he is in any condition to exercise his brains. Mr Deng had tried to establish Jiang Zemin as top leader wearing all the hats … After Mr Deng has gone, we may find the true leader taking the stage. We don’t know if there is someone we can see now or someone hiding who will come out.”




