+++
title = "40 China: To Be Rich Is Glorious"

+++



Deng Xiaoping went on a well-publicised tour of south China in February 1992. At Shenzhen he said that Guangdong should catch up with Asia’s Four Dragons \(Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan\) in 20 years, not only in economics but also in social order and social climate. China should do better than these countries in these matters. Only then would it have the distinguishing characteristics of Chinese socialism. Deng added, “There is good social order in Singapore. They govern the place with discipline. We should draw from their experience, and do even better than them.” In China, commendation from Deng was the ultimate word on what was good.

I had told Deng over dinner in 1978 in Singapore that we, the Singapore Chinese, were the descendants of illiterate landless peasants from Guangdong and Fujian in south China, whereas the scholars, mandarins and literati had stayed and left their progeny in China. There was nothing that Singapore had done which China could not do, and do better. He stayed silent then. When I read that he had told the Chinese people to do better than Singapore, I knew he had taken up the challenge I quietly tossed to him that night 14 years earlier.

After Deng’s endorsement, several hundred delegations, most of them unofficial, came from China armed with tape recorders, video cameras and notebooks to learn from our experience. Singapore had been given the imprimatur of their supreme leader. They put us under their microscopes and studied those parts they considered attractive and wanted to reproduce in their cities. I wondered what my communist adversaries of the 1960s, the Plen, the Malayan Communist Party leader in Singapore, and Lim Chin Siong, the communist united front leader, would say. The Chinese Communist Party had been their source of inspiration.

China’s leaders had been troubled by the “social pollution” – proliferating prostitution, pornography, drugs, gambling and crime – in the special economic zones. Ideological purists criticised the wisdom of the open-door policy. Deng’s answer was that when windows were opened, with the fresh air some flies and mosquitoes were bound to fly in, but they could be dealt with.

Soon after Deng’s speech, the head of the International Liaison Department of the Chinese Communist Party asked our ambassador in Beijing if we would brief them on “how we had maintained strong moral standards and social discipline”. Specifically, they wanted to know “if Singapore had experienced contradictions in the process of absorbing Western technology that was needed to develop the economy, and how to maintain social stability”. They had been observing us for some years. Reports had been appearing in their media commending Singapore for its infrastructure, housing estates, cleanliness, orderliness and greenness, its social stability and harmony, and the courtesy of its people.

A delegation led by their vice-minister of propaganda, Xu Wei-cheng, came for a 10-day briefing. “Vice-minister of propaganda” was a misnomer: he was actually vice-minister of ideology. We explained our belief that social control could not depend on discipline alone. People had to have a decent life with reasonable housing and social amenities if they were to lead moral and upright lives. They had to accept the basic principles of our system of government, like obeying the law and observing their duty to help the police in the prevention and investigation of crime.

The delegation visited all departments connected with social order – the police \(especially those sections dealing with drugs, prostitution and gambling\); the agencies in charge of censorship of undesirable videos, films, books and magazines; newspaper offices and radio and TV stations to ask about their role in informing and educating the public; and the NTUC and the People’s Association to see organisations that catered to workers.


I met Xu at the end of his visit. He told me he was interested in how we had used the free market to achieve rapid economic growth; how we had blended Western and Eastern culture as we absorbed Western science and technology; and, most important, how we maintained racial harmony. His delegation was responsible for ideology and wanted to learn how to eradicate social vices.

We were candid about the problems we could not solve. Vices like prostitution, gambling, drug addiction and alcoholism could only be controlled, not eradicated. Singapore’s history as a seaport meant prostitution had to be managed and confined to certain areas of the city where the women were given regular health checks. Gambling was impossible to suppress. It was an addiction Chinese migrants had carried with them wherever they settled. But we had eliminated the triads or secret societies and broken up organised crime.

As for corruption, Xu expressed his doubts whether agencies like Singapore’s Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau and the commercial affairs department could deal with the large “grey areas” in a society like China where *guanxi* \(personal relationships\) was all-pervasive. The definition of corruption in China was different. Moreover, he stressed, the party was supreme and the cadres could only be disciplined internally within the party. \(This meant that some 60 million party members are not subject to the ordinary law of the land of China. Since then several very senior party cadres have been sentenced to death for smuggling, and others to long prison terms for corruption. But the party leaders can intervene and reverse judicial decisions.\) Xu said that not all Singapore’s methods could be replicated as China’s system was very different. Perhaps small new cities like Shenzhen could usefully follow Singapore’s experience. China would always remain socialist. Their only way was to try out policies one at a time, for unlike Singapore, China had to adapt its policies to differing conditions in its 30 provinces.

He was struck by our clean and efficient administration. How had we preserved the people’s social and moral values? All we did, I replied, was to reinforce the cultural assets the people had, their inherited values and sense of right and wrong. Confucian virtues like being filial to one’s parents, honest and upright, hardworking and thrifty, sincere to one’s friends and loyal to the country were important supports for the legal system. We reinforced these traditional values by rewarding behaviour that conformed to them and punishing contrary behaviour. At the same time, we set out to eradicate weaknesses like nepotism, favouritism and corruption, which were the dark side of Chinese Confucianism – the obligation to help one’s family. Singapore is a compact society and its leaders had to set the example in honesty and upright conduct. We considered it vital that the people feel confident the government would not cheat or harm them. Then, however unpopular government policies might be, the people accepted that they were not the result of immorality, nepotism or corruption.

Xu asked how a government should deal with foreign influences out to change a country’s internal system. The problem, I said, was not foreigners directly interfering with our internal policies, but indirectly and insidiously, through their media and through personal contact, influencing and changing our people’s attitudes and behaviour. This would become increasingly difficult to control because satellite broadcasting technology would improve. We could only mitigate the harm to our social fabric by inculcating and strengthening the traditional values of our people. The family, I believed, had the greatest influence on a child’s values in the first 12 to 15 years of his life. Sound values if rooted early in life could later resist contrary influences and pressures. Roman Catholic priests, if entrusted with a child for the first 12 years of his life, could usually ensure the child would remain Catholic for life.

When the delegation returned to China, their report was circulated as “Reference News” and read by party cadres. In a paperback published to give an account of Singapore, Xu quoted what he considered summed up my approach: “It requires prolonged efforts to administer a country well, and to change the backward habits of the people; a certain amount of administrative pressure is necessary at the beginning, but what is most important is education.” Li Ruihuan, the politburo member in charge of ideology, told me when I visited Beijing a year later that he had initiated the study mission. He had visited Singapore when he was mayor of Tianjin, and considered it worth studying.

Another area they were interested in was our legal system. Qiao Shi, chairman of the National People’s Congress standing committee and third-ranking leader of China, was also responsible for settling the necessary legislation to establish the rule of law. He visited Singapore in July 1993 to study our laws. The Chinese communist leaders, he said, had abolished all existing laws when they promulgated the People’s Republic of China on 1 October 1949. Thereafter, they had governed by edicts. Party policies became the law. Only after Deng Xiaoping’s open-door policy did they recognise the need for laws to govern commercial relations. Qiao Shi said no one would cooperate with China if it was seen as unstable and fractured. China needed the rule of law to maintain long-term stability. I said China should be able to get a system of laws established in 20 to 30 years, but it would take longer for people as a whole to accept the rule of law and act in accordance with it. He replied that not everyone had to understand it. As long as the top people practised it, the rule of law would work. He came across as a serious man who had thought through his problems.

China under Deng was more open and willing to learn from the world than it had been for centuries. Deng was courageous and strong enough in the party and the nation to admit openly that China had lost many years in pursuit of a revolutionary utopia. It was a refreshing time of open minds and enthusiastic progress, a radical change from the years of wild slogans and disastrous campaigns. Deng initiated the fundamental changes that laid the foundations for China to catch up with the rest of the world.



In September 1992, together with Deputy Prime Minister Ong Teng Cheong, I visited Suzhou, China’s Venice. It was in a dilapidated condition, with its canals filthy and polluted. But it struck us that we could redevelop Suzhou, make it into a beautiful city, and build a new industrial and commercial section next to it. It had beautiful Chinese gardens built around villas so that every window and every veranda looked out on to rockery, water and plants. Traces of its old grandeur could still be seen in some of the mansions that had been restored.

Suzhou’s mayor, Zhang Xinsheng, drew me aside after lunch one day to say, “Singapore has US$50 billion in reserves.” “Who told you that?” I asked. He had read it in World Bank reports. He added, “Why don’t you invest 10 per cent of it in Suzhou? Get us industrialised like Singapore? I will guarantee you special treatment so that your investments will succeed.” I said, “Able and energetic mayors soon get promoted; then what?” He paused and replied, “Well, you may have trouble with my successor, but after a while he will have no choice but to go along the route that I would have laid down. People in Suzhou want what they have seen of Singapore on television and in the newspapers – jobs, housing and a garden city.” I replied, “You have no power to give us a fresh site on which we can build a miniature Singapore. You need the central government’s authority to do that.”

I gave no more thought to this. That December, he turned up at my office to say he had approached Deng Xiaoping’s office with his proposition. There was a good chance it would go through. Could I put up the proposal in a plan? He was close to Deng Xiaoping’s son, Deng Pufang. So Ong Teng Cheong did some artist’s impressions of what old Suzhou could be like after restoration, with a modern industrial township next to it. A few months later, when Deng Pufang visited Singapore, I showed him sketch plans of a restored city together with an adjoining new industrial township. He was enthusiastic. His input through his father’s office gave this project a push. When Prime Minister Goh visited Beijing in April, he discussed the proposal with Premier Li Peng and Jiang Zemin.

In May 1993 I met Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji in Shanghai. I had earlier written to him on the Suzhou project. I explained my proposal for cooperation: a government-to-government technical assistance agreement to transfer our knowledge and experience \(what we called “software”\) in attracting investments and building industrial estates, complete with housing and commercial centres, to an unbuilt site of about 100 square kilometres in Suzhou. This would be backed by a business consortium of Singapore and foreign companies in a joint venture with Suzhou authorities. The project would take more than 20 years to complete, and there would be difficulties adapting our methods to the different conditions of China.

At first Zhu thought my proposal was another money-making idea on behalf of our investors. I explained that my proposal was in response to many delegations that had come from China to study us in a piecemeal manner but would never understand how our system worked. With Singapore and Chinese managers working together side by side, we could transfer our methods, systems and knowhow. Zhu agreed it was worth trying. He pointed out that Suzhou had access to the Yangtze River and was near Shanghai \(90 kilometres to the west\), China’s largest international centre.

Four days later I met newly promoted Vice-Premier Li Lanqing in Beijing. He was from Jiangsu province, born in a town not far from Suzhou. He fully supported the project because Suzhou had high-quality people and could absorb and adapt Singapore’s experience. Li said Singapore-China cooperation had the advantages of a common culture, tradition and language. A pragmatist, he acknowledged that the project must be economically viable and yield a reasonable return. When he was vice-mayor of Tianjin, his basic principle for cooperation had been “equality and mutual benefit”.

Beijing sent two delegations in October 1993 to study Singapore’s system – one from the state council, the other from Jiangsu province. Only after they were satisfied that parts of our system were suitable for China did they agree to this “software transfer”.

In February 1994 I signed the Suzhou Agreement with Vice-Premier Li Lanqing in Beijing, witnessed by Premier Li Peng and Prime Minister Goh. I met Jiang Zemin to confirm that the work in Suzhou would start soon but would take more than 10 years to reach a significant level of development. Jurong Industrial Township in Singapore, only 60 square kilometres, had taken us 30 years.

The project, Suzhou Industrial Park \(SIP\), took off with great enthusiasm on both sides, but we soon ran into difficulties. There was a divergence of objectives between the centre \(Beijing\) and the locals \(Suzhou\). The top leaders in Beijing knew that the essence of the project was to transfer our knowledge of how to plan, build and administer a comprehensive industrial, commercial and residential park which could attract high-quality foreign investors. The officials in Suzhou moved away from this core objective and were sidetracked by their parochial interests. We wanted to show them how to do things the Singapore way, with our emphasis on financial discipline, long-term master planning and continuing service to investors – our software. They wanted the “hardware” – the buildings, roads and infrastructure which we could build and the high-value investments we could attract using our worldwide connections and reputation. They were not focused on learning how to create a pro-business climate; nor did they select their most promising officials to be trained to take over from us. “Hardware” brought direct and immediate benefits to Suzhou and credit to its officials; Beijing wanted “software” so as to spread its benefits to other cities through adopting Singapore’s pro-business practices.

Instead of giving SIP their full attention and cooperation as was promised, they used their association with Singapore to promote their own industrial estate, Suzhou New District \(SND\), undercutting SIP in land and infrastructure costs, which they controlled. This made SIP less attractive than SND. Fortunately, many of the large MNCs valued our interface and chose SIP in spite of its higher land costs. Hence, despite these difficulties, SIP made significant progress and within three years had attracted over 100 projects with a total investment commitment of almost US$3 billion. It ranked top in China in terms of the average value of each investment project. These projects would create over 20,000 jobs, 35 per cent of which would be for the tertiary-educated. The chairman of the Office of the Special Economic Zone commented that “in merely three years from inception, SIP’s speed of development and the overall standard are first-class in China”.

This progress was made in the face of increasing difficulties. The rivalry between SND and SIP confused potential investors and diverted the attention of the Suzhou officials from the objective of software transfer. Things came to a head in mid-1997 when the vice-mayor of Suzhou, who ran SND, told a meeting of German investors in Hamburg that President Jiang did not support SIP, that they were welcome to SND and did not need Singapore. This made our position untenable. We were wasting too much time, energy and resources fighting with the local authorities.

I raised the problem with President Jiang in December 1997. He assured me that SIP remained his top priority and that the problems at the local level would be resolved. But notwithstanding this assurance from the very top in Beijing, Suzhou did not stop promoting SND in competition against SIP. We had reasons to believe they had borrowed so heavily that to stop promoting SND would cause severe financial difficulties. After much discussion we agreed in June 1999 that there would be a change in responsibilities in the existing joint venture between the Singapore consortium and the Suzhou authorities. The Singapore consortium would remain the majority partner in control of the project and complete the first 8 square kilometres by the end of the year 2000; the Suzhou authorities would then take over majority partnership, control the project and complete the rest of the 70 square kilometres using the first 8 square kilometres as a reference model. We would remain for at least a further three years until 2003 as minority partners and help guide a Chinese management team in servicing investors in SIP.

It was a chastening experience. Both sides had believed that because of apparent language and cultural similarities there would be fewer problems in dealing with each other – each side expected the other to behave like itself. Unfortunately, while language was no problem, our business cultures were totally different. Singaporeans take for granted the sanctity of contracts. When we sign an agreement, it is a full and final undertaking. Any disagreement as to the meaning of the written document is interpreted by the courts or an arbitrator. We took great care that the documents we prepared were both in English and Chinese, with both versions authoritative. For the Suzhou authorities, a signed agreement is an expression of serious and sincere intent, but one that is not necessarily comprehensive and can be altered or reinterpreted with changing circumstances. We depended on laws and systems. They were guided by official directives; often these were not published and their interpretation varied with the official in charge.

For example, power supply. Although the Suzhou government had in a written agreement promised to provide a certain quantity of electricity, it failed to get the relevant authority to deliver on its promise. To resolve this, we got the Suzhou government’s permission to build a diesel power plant. After the plant was built, we were told that diesel plants were discouraged by the power authority and were prohibited from operating it. The municipal officials explained that they had no control over the power authority. When they agreed to let us install the diesel power plant, they knew the power authority had overriding control on energy but did not tell us we needed the latter’s concurrence. It took months of negotiation and only when the problem threatened to shut down the park was it resolved. The five years in Suzhou educated us on the intricacies of their multi-layered administration and flexible business culture. We acquired a more intimate understanding of their system and learnt how to work around its blocks and obstacles to get them finally to wrap up our project as a partial success, not a total failure.

China has an immensely complex government. After two centuries of decline that began with the Qing dynasty, China’s leaders face the formidable task of installing modern management systems and changing the mindsets and habits of officials steeped in the traditions of the imperial mandarinate.



China is still a poor country with many backward provinces. Their domestic problems require sustained economic growth to resolve. As China’s development nears the point when it has enough weight to elbow its way into the region, it will make a fateful decision – whether to be a hegemon, using its weight to create its sphere of influence in the region for its economic and security needs, or to continue as a good international citizen because it can achieve better growth by observing international rules.

China has repeatedly stated that it will never become a hegemon. It is in everyone’s interest that before that moment of choice arrives, China be given every incentive to choose international cooperation which will absorb its energies constructively for another 50 to 100 years. This means China must have the economic opportunities to do this peacefully, without having to push its way to get resources like oil, or to have access to markets for its goods and services. There are fair and equitable rules in multilateral organisations like the WTO for a free exchange of goods and services so that each country can stay within its borders and improve its people’s wellbeing through trade, investments and other exchanges. This was the way the Germans and the Japanese were able to rebuild after World War II. Their territories shrank even as they had to receive back their nationals expelled from territories they had occupied and colonised. Despite smaller territories and reduced natural resources, both flourished as never before because they had access to markets through the IMF and GATT. If such a route is not open to China, the world must live with a pushy China. In that event the United States will not be alone in being concerned about what China will do when it is able to contest the present world order settled by America and its partners in Europe.

The Chinese Communist Party faces a profound challenge. Communism has failed worldwide and the people of China know it. But the CCP has not failed. It has liberated China, unified it and enabled the people to feed and clothe themselves. Despite the disasters of the Great Leap Forward \(1958\) and the Cultural Revolution \(1966–76\), the Chinese are proud that foreigners can no longer violate China’s sovereignty with impunity as they did when they exercised extraterritorial rights in the foreign concessions.

I had an interesting sample of the rapid change in China when in September 1994 I arrived at Zhengzhou Airport in the inland province of Henan. A line of their old Red Flag limousines was waiting. I knew Henan was not as prosperous as the coastal provinces but had not expected them to be still using the Red Flag limousines. To my surprise, they ushered me and the party secretary, Li Changchun, to a brand new Mercedes 600. I was intrigued to hear the familiar way in which he and the driver conversed with each other. Later, when I was alone with the driver, I asked how much he earned as a driver. He replied that he was really the owner of the car. Party Secretary Li had wanted to borrow it for my visit and he decided to drive it to meet me. Six years ago, he was a supervisor in a factory, but after Deng’s exhortation to get rich, he had gone into business. He now had three factories employing some 5,000 workers assembling electronic products. He owned three cars including this Mercedes 600. China was changing fast and irrevocably.

The government and the CCP are also changing, but not as fast as the economy and society. To demonstrate popular support, the CCP has allowed elections at village and county levels. In provincial elections for high officials, Communist Party members who have not been nominated by the party can stand against the official candidates. The governor of Zhejiang province in 1994 was a candidate who had defeated the Communist Party nominee. The legitimacy of the CCP now rests upon the benefits that Deng Xiaoping’s reforms, initiated in 1978, have brought to the farmers and workers: more food, clothing, homes and consumer goods – and more wealth than they ever had. But the people also know that the Chinese in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao have done better than the mainland Chinese because they have free markets. As long as the CCP can produce results and improve the people’s lives, its legitimacy will not be challenged. This could go on for another generation. The CCP policy is to absorb the brightest and the best into the party. Many have joined to avoid the disadvantages of not being a member, but the study of Marxist-Leninist-Maoist theories by party cadres is perfunctory.

In the next 50 years, the Chinese will have to complete three transitions: from a planned to a market economy, from a rural to an urban base, from a tightly controlled communist society to an open civic one. Several factors can derail China from its present track of catching up with the industrial nations. The first and most important is Taiwan. If Chinese leaders feel that Taiwan is going to go independent and could be lost, they will not be so detached and calculating and could act with unpredictable consequences. The next factor is rapid urbanisation. At present, 30–35 per cent of the 1.3 billion Chinese live in small towns and cities. By 2050 they will be 80 per cent, well-informed and able through electronic means to mobilise for mass action. They will be able to do this with more ease than the Falungong, a cult that through the Internet organised some 10,000 of its followers to gather peacefully in Beijing in April 1999 to squat around Zhongnanhai, the enclave for the Communist Party leaders. China’s political structures must allow its citizens more participation and control over their lives or there will be pressures that could destabilise society, especially during an economic downturn.

A third factor would be the widening differences in incomes, growth rates and quality of life between the wealthy coastal and riverine provinces and the disadvantaged inland provinces. However extensive the roads, railways, airfields and other infrastructure the central government may build to bring industries, trade, investments and tourism inland, they will still lag behind. This could increase peasant discontent, causing serious tensions and massive migrations. Furthermore, as more Han Chinese populate the border provinces of Tibet, Xinjiang and Qinghai, there could be problems between them and the minority races.

The fourth and most profound factor will be the different values and aspirations of the next generation. The people and government want to build a modern, strong and united China, whatever that takes. Better education and wider global exposure will result in a people who are knowledgeable about the world, with frequent and multiple links with their counterparts in other societies. They will want Chinese society to be equal to other advanced countries in standard of living, quality of life and individual freedoms. This desire is a powerful force that the leaders are harnessing to drive the nation forward. In particular, how Japan, Korea and Taiwan, with cultures and traditions similar to China’s, are governed will have a great influence on the thinking of the Chinese intelligentsia.

Several problems can cause serious disruptions: a breakdown of the banking system, huge unemployment following reforms of state-owned enterprises without adequate social security nets, an ageing population that will place a heavy burden on the one-child family generation having to support their elderly parents, and serious environmental pollution.


However, the most pernicious problem is corruption. It has become embedded in their administrative culture and will be difficult to eradicate even after economic reforms. Many Communist Party cadres and government officials in the provinces, cities and counties are not above corruption. Worse, many officials who are expected to uphold and enforce the law – public security officers, procurators and judges – are also corrupt. The root cause of the problem was the destruction of normal moral standards during the Cultural Revolution. Deng’s open-door policy in 1978 enlarged the opportunities for corruption.

The leaders want to establish a legal system with proper institutions. Because they know the institutions necessary for the rule of law in a civil society cannot exist in a moral vacuum, they are re-emphasising Confucianist teachings among the population. They have also launched the “three stresses” campaign in an attempt to clean up the party’s rank and file: to talk about learning, to talk about politics, and to talk about honour and dignity. But so long as officials are paid unrealistically low wages, such exhortations will have little effect, regardless of the severity of the punishment meted out, even death and long prison terms.

Nevertheless, pragmatic, resolute and capable leaders have steered China through these perils since 1978. They command authority and credibility. They have successors in place as competent and resourceful and even better-educated than themselves. If these future leaders remain pragmatic, they should be able to overcome these difficulties.


In the two and a half decades since my first visit in 1976, I have seen China transformed. I find most astonishing not the physical structures, new buildings, expressways and airports, but the different attitudes and habits of the people and their willingness to speak their minds. Books are written and published that would have been sedition in the 1970s or ’80s. The free market and modern communications have brought more openness and transparency. They will make China as different again in another two decades.

I place my hope for China’s progress on their best and brightest who have studied or travelled extensively abroad in their impressionable years. More than one hundred thousand of them are now studying in the United States, western Europe and Japan. The present leaders in their late 60s and 70s are products of the anti-Japanese war and did their postgraduate work in Russia. Their mindsets will not change much. Many of their children who have PhDs from American universities have vastly different outlooks. Vice-Premier Qian Qichen, formerly the foreign minister, has a son, Qian Ning, who worked for the *People’s Daily* and shortly after Tiananmen went to the United States to study journalism in Ann Arbor. He stayed in America for four years and on his return wrote a candid book which was published and sold in China. The observations of a man with such an impeccable background are significant, reflecting the thinking of a younger generation in their 30s: “I realised a simple truth, we Chinese, at least the younger generation, can have another way of life. … Chinese women are liberated once again – what they have lost are only the chains of tradition, but what they have gained is their freedom.” I believe it is not only Chinese women who lose their fetters after a stay in America. These men and women in their 20s and 30s who studied in the West are the best-equipped intellectually to meet the needs of China’s modernisation. They have been exposed to new ideas and knowledge in societies vastly different from their own. In 20 to 30 years their generation will change the shape of China. They probably already realise that even after China has been restored as a great industrial power, it will not be a Tang or a Han “Middle Kingdom”, the centre of the universe, but one of several advanced nations.

Americans would do well to keep their options open. The Chinese are a different people with a different culture and a different history. They will change at their own pace in their quest for technology and a modern economy, preserving their values and traditions, and maintaining continuity with their past. China-bashing by constantly denigrating them for their lack of democracy and human rights will only antagonise a whole generation of Chinese and make them anti-American and xenophobic. This is not far-fetched. When the tragic bombing of the Belgrade Chinese embassy took place in May 1999, I thought at first that the demonstrations, with slogans reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution, were orchestrated. But our mission in Beijing reported that the Chinese were genuinely outraged and angered by what they saw as a bullying America out to put China down. To foster such a reaction will not contribute to peace and stability. The Americans will have to learn that some reforms require time to make them possible. And such changes will be made by the Chinese for Chinese purposes, not in order to comply with American norms, under American economic or moral sanctions.

Even before the bombing, bilateral relations had already been strained when President Clinton did not accept major concessions made by Premier Zhu Rongji in April in Washington to join the WTO. When I met him in Beijing in September, Zhu dwelt at length on this subject. He would not back away from the offers he had made, but required serious concessions in return. Four days later, while in Shanghai for a meeting of the Fortune Global Forum, Henry Kissinger and I urged Robert Rubin, the treasury secretary who had just resigned in July after an illustrious six-year term, to speak to President Clinton. And I made the same points a few days later to the US secretary for defence, William Cohen, when he visited Singapore. Cohen, who needed no persuasion on the merits of bringing China into the WTO, brought it up with his president.

After five days of strenuous bargaining in Beijing, China and the United States reached agreement on 15 November 1999. It was a relaxed Premier Zhu who visited Singapore a fortnight later. He attributed the success of the negotiations to the intervention of President Jiang. Joining WTO was not without its dangers, he said to me, but if China’s leaders did not believe they could overcome the problems, Jiang would not have agreed to it. Zhu’s responsibility was to implement Jiang’s decision. The painful measures necessary will be less difficult to execute because it was the president who made the decision to join.

For both China and the United States, strategic considerations must have been as important as economic benefits in reaching this agreement. China’s WTO membership will help it restructure its economy to gain in competitiveness and long-term growth, but it will have to become a rule-abiding member of the international community.



Over the last 40 years, I have seen how Koreans, Taiwanese and Japanese officials and business executives have changed. From a reserved, inward-looking and nationalistic elite, they are now self-confident and at ease with American and Western ideas. Many of them have been educated in the United States and are not ill-disposed towards its people. This is not to say that Chinese on the mainland, conscious of their potential big-power status, will evolve just like the Taiwanese. America has a choice, to have them neutral or friendly instead of becoming hostile. When dealing with an old civilisation, it is wise not to expect swift changes. The biggest problem between America and China will be Taiwan. It is an imponderable, left over from the unfinished Chinese civil war. With Taiwan under Chen Shui-bian, a new president whose party stands for independence, the danger of miscalculation by the three parties directly involved – mainland China, Taiwan and the United States – has increased. Any misstep could upset growth and development in China and East Asia. This problem can be contained if the status quo is not changed, and eventual reunification is an aspiration for both sides.

Meanwhile, through the WTO, the Chinese economy can become integrated into the rest of the world. With broad and deepening people-to-people contacts, stereotyped perceptions of each other will be replaced by more realistic appraisals. When the Chinese people’s livelihood is interdependent with that of the world through trade, investments, tourism and the exchange of technology and knowledge, there will be a better basis for a stable world.

China has the potential to realise its goal of becoming a modern economy by 2050. It can be engaged as an equal and responsible partner in trade and finance, and become one of the major players in the world. If it is not deflected from its present concentration on education and economic development, China could well be the second largest, if not the largest, trading nation in the world, with greater weight and voice in international affairs. This is one vision of China in 50 years – modern, confident and responsible.





Part III

**Winding Up**




