+++
title = "08 THE GANDHI - JINNAH APPEAL FOR PEACE"

+++
**THE GANDHI - JINNAH APPEAL FOR PEACE**

The new Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, who took over from Lord Wavell in
March, 1947 arrived upon a terrible scene of carnage and destruction in
the Punjab, the effects of which were soon to envelop the Frontier
Province in a carnage and destruction equally severe and were to spread
out into most parts of Northern, Eastern and Central India in the form
of serious communal rioting.  The Viceroy sincerely wanted this
bloodshed to end and an atmosphere of calm negotiation and preparation
for the transfer of power to be created.  So, in the midst of the
recrudesence of communal attacks in Amritsar, following upon the
uprooting of a large part of the Hindu and Sikh population of the
Rawalpindi division and Multan, he initiated a peace appeal to be
addressed by Mahatma Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah to the country.  This appeal,
the text of which was publicized all over the country in dozens of ways
known to the modern technique of publicity, was carried to the farthest
corners of the country.  Especially in the Punjab the publicity given to
it was tremendous indeed.  The *communique* announcing the appeal,
bearing the signatures of the two leaders, ran as follows--

“On His Excellency the Viceroy’s initiative and at his specific request,
Mahatma Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah signed the following declaration and
authorized its publication:

“We deeply deplore the recent acts of lawlessness and violence that have
brought utmost disgrace to the fair name of India and the greatest
misery to innocent people, irrespective of who were the aggressors and
who were the victims.

“We denounce for all time the use of force to achieve political ends and
we call upon all the communities in India, to whatever persuasion they
may belong, not only to refrain from all acts of violence and disorder
but also to avoid, both in speech and in writing, any incitement to such
acts.”

This appeal, signed as it was by the two most influential men in India,
did not stop acts of aggression on innocent people in the Punjab, in the
Frontier Province and later in other parts of India.  The reason for
this appeal falling flat on the people of India is not far to seek. 
That reason is, that the appeal was not meant seriously and sincerely by
the party which needed to back it up with sincerity and earnestness. 
That party was the Muslim League.  The Congress had never made communal
warfare its political weapon.  On the contrary the Congress wanted
passionately to keep a united and strongly-welded Indian nation to
receive power as an undivided and powerful free India from the British
Government.  The League, on the contrary, wanted to achieve its separate
state of Pakistan.  It must show the creation of such a state to be
inevitable for a solution of the country’s problem.  For showing this it
argued, it was not possible for Hindus and Muslims even to live
together, much less to fight for a common political objective.  And
knowing that Hindus (and Sikhs) would not agree to a partition of the
country the League wanted to force them into accepting it, or driving
them out of certain zones in which no non-Muslim populations would be
left to resist partition and to demand organic political relationship
with a Central Government of All-India.  So, the League, from its Direct
Action Day on, in August, 1946 organised warfare against the minorities
of Bengal, the Frontier Province, the Punjab and later of Baluchistan
and Sind as well.  In this background how could it be expected that the
League would relinquish by stopping communal warfare, the one weapon
which would help it to achieve its objective?  So the Muslims never took
the appeal of Jinnah seriously.  The very words of the *communique*,
containing the appeal, ‘On H. E. the Viceroy’s initiative’ vitiated its
nature and diluted its-force and appeal.  The appeal did not proceed
spontaneously from the heart of Jinnah.  He put his signature to it out
of courtesy with undoubted mental reservations.  That is the light in
which the average Muslim took this appeal.  An appeal to be effective
must proceed from the heart and must have the backing of a man’s will
and actions.  When the Congress denounced the rioting by Hindus in
Bihar, it also followed up its denunciation by effective action.  And
the Bihar riots stopped, even though the average Hindu thought the
Congress was being hard on the Hindus.  That thought was no doubt wrong,
but what is intended to be shown is the way in which an appeal, if it is
sincerely meant, can and should be made effective.

The Muslim League leaders pursued a path contrary to the spirit in which
an appeal like the Gandhi-Jinnah appeal should have been followed up. 
They continued to visit troubled areas like Amritsar for further
incitement and for giving directions for new attacks.  They continued
with a pose of hypocritical innocence, to denounce imaginary Hindu-Sikh
atrocities against Muslims.  A full-hearted condemnation of the
Rawalpindi Carnage or the Multan destruction never came from the Muslim
League.  There was a train outrage near Kohat in early April, in which a
number of Hindu and Sikh refugees were killed by a Muslim mob.  No
Leaguer condemned this barbarous act.  The League silence was direct
approval of and implied incitement to the repetition of such incidents,
which in fact multiplied more and more as the months advanced.  Wrote
the *Civil and Military Gazette* of Lahore regarding this in its issue
of April 6, 1947:-

“………we have waited in vain for responsible League condemnation of the
dastardly train outrage near Kohat.  In this eight people, including
four women, were murdered, 20 wounded and one woman kidnapped, while 15
men, women and children are missing, as a result of an attack made by
what Dr. Khan Sahib, Premier of the Frontier Province, describes as
Muslim Leaguers in green uniforms…… League efforts should be made to
help the authorities to trace the miscreants……….”

Now this was exactly what the League never did.  It never condemned such
acts and never helped the authorities in tracing such criminals, who in
fact were its own army in action.  It may be recalled that Mahatma
Gandhi successfully persuaded Hindu murderers of Muslims in the Bihar
Riots to surrender themselves to justice.  Master Tara Singh repeatedly
said, and rightly too, that the only basis on which any peace
negotiations could be entered into was that the League must condemn
Muslim acts of violence against Hindus and Sikhs, and help to trace
Muslim criminals.

When the Gandhi-Jinnah appeal was issued, the *Civil and Military
Gazette* wrote editorially on this:-

“Will Mr. Jinnah honour his signature to the document by banning the
unconstitutional agitation of the Muslim League in the North-Western
Frontier Province?”

Mahatma Gandhi was disappointed at Mr. Jinnah not following up his
appeal with actions.  In his New Delhi prayer meeting on May 2 he said:

“It was not open to Jinnah Sahib to plead (in explanation of the
ineffectiveness of the appeal) that his followers did not listen to his
appeal.  That would be cutting the whole ground from under his feet,
because he was the undisputed leader of the All-India Muslim League,
which claimed to represent the Muslim population.

“Where was the authority of the League if the Muslims resorted to
violence for gaining political aim which was summed up in the word
Pakistan?

“He said that he had expressed his doubts as to the wisdom of issuing
the joint appeal unless it was certain that it meant for both the
signatories all that the words thereof conveyed.”

The concluding words quoted from the Mahatma’s speech are significant. 
For Mr. Jinnah the words of the appeal did not mean all that they meant
for the Mahatma.  He, Mr. Jinnah, signed it with mental reservations.

Referring to Mr. Jinnah’s evident disinclination to make this appeal
effective, Syed Ali Zaheer said:

“The riots were and are the direct result of the Direct Action
resolution of the Muslim League, and they began on August 16, 1946.  So
long as that resolution holds the field, such appeals are a mere farce. 
If Mr. Jinnah had called the meeting of the Working Committee of the
League and had asked it to withdraw that resolution, the appeal would
have had a more earnest ring about it.  As it is, it sounds hollow………”

So, attacks on trains and buses, burning of whole quarters of towns,
murders of thousands with unspeakable atrocities proceeded unchecked or
uncondemned by the League.  Its plan of action was succeeding
admirably.  Pakistan was coming within near sight by every act of
lawlessness committed by the League adherents, for it was only another
argument for separate states for two such hostile peoples as Hindus and
Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
