+++
title = "11 AMRITSAR"

+++
**AMRITSAR**

In the history of the Muslim League War on the Hindus and Sikhs of the
Punjab in 1947, Amritsar occupies an outstanding position.  It was in
this city, along with Lahore, though with an intensity even greater than
in the latter town, that the most sustained war, lasting for over five
months was waged on the Hindus and Sikhs, especially the latter, by the
Amritsar Muslims.  In the scheme of the Muslim League, Amritsar appears
to have been Theatre of War No. 1. On the degree of success achieved in
Amritsar would depend the League measure of success in cowing down the
minorities in the Punjab and the prospect of the establishment of
Pakistan.  While in Lahore the Muslim population was quite a large
majority, in Amritsar it was almost balanced by the Hindus and Sikhs
combined.  Amritsar was the spiritual capital of the Sikhs, and Sikh
history is full of wars waged by Sikhs in the pre-Ranjit Singh Era for
the recovery of Amritsar from the hands of Muslims who desecrated the
holy Hari Mandir (the Golden Temple of, later days) and filled the
sacred Tank with sand.  The Muslim League knew that Sikhs might be
uprooted and even exterminated in Rawalpindi and the West, they might be
driven out of Lahore, but they would make a determined, last-ditch stand
in Amritsar.  To surrender Amritsar to the Muslims would mean
practically the writing off of Sikh history and admitting a status
inferior to that of the Muslims in the Punjab-a status, in view of the
past record and declared ambitions and methods of the Muslim League, of
serfdom.  To break the Sikh resistance and morale in Amritsar was,
therefore, of the first importance.  And it was in Amritsar that the
League poured all its strength and resources.  It, was in Amritsar again
that the Sikhs staked their lives during the long months of agony and
unequal fighting from March to August, 1947.  Amritsar, to use a not
inappropriate parallel, became a kind of Stalingrad of this Muslim
League-Sikh War.  The Sikhs did live it through.  They ‘took it’ as
London did in 1940 and 1941, or as Stalingrad did till 1944.  And then
the tide turned.  The Sikhs successfully stood the Muslim onslaught for
four months or more.  And with the approach of August 15, the Muslims
fearing the inevitable counter-attack on the part of the Hindus and
Sikhs, rendered inevitable in this case by the accumulated sufferings
and helplessness, hate and anger of months of destruction in Amritsar,
Lahore, Multan, Rawalpindi, the Frontier Province and other places, lied
Amritsar in panic.  It was a wonderful sight to see how within the space
of a day and a night, almost no Muslim was to be seen in Amritsar when
freedom dawned on August 15, expecting those who had entrenched
themselves in the notorious area of Sharifpura, expecting what they knew
to be well-deserved punishment for brutal and inhuman crimes against
their fellow-men.

Such is the character of the story of Amritsar, which opened in the
afternoon of March 5. Even during the days of the Muslim League
agitation Amritsar had been the scene of the most hectic violence seen
anywhere in the Punjab.  It was here that the League agitators several
times attacked the police and officials, raided the courts and murdered
a helpless Sikh police constable, who was stranded in their midst.  Most
of the train hold-ups during the League agitation period occurred in
Amritsar.  The Muslims of Amritsar were undoubtedly a very formidably
well-organized Community and strategically well-situated to wage a
relentless and even successful war against Hindus and Sikhs.  Mat
ultimately carried the latter through, was the dogged tenacity of the
Sikh character, which has never taken defeat, even after heavy losses,
as these undoubtedly were in Amritsar.  To understand the nature of the
‘War’ in Amritsar, and the relative strength of the Muslims, a few
factors may be noticed, as given below:

\(1\) Out of the total Hindu-Muslim-Sikh population of Amritsar
(376,824) Muslims were as many as 184,055 that is, nearly half.  The
Hindus were roughly 1,34,000 and Sikhs 58,769.  So, in point of numbers
the Muslims had great advantage and were a solid, well-knit community.

\(2\) In Amritsar the Muslim National Guards Organization was the
strongest anywhere in the Punjab.  This organisation, according to
reports received by the authorities, had a membership of over 8,000 when
the ‘war’ started in March.  Later on recruitment to it proceeded apace
in every Muslim ward and mohalla.  Working hand in hand with the
National Guard, were two other well-equipped Muslim organizations, the
Khaksars and the Ahrars.  The former of the two had a long record of
secret violent training and activity.  The Muslim National Guards. 
Headquarters were shifted from Lahore to Amritsar in March, as Amritsar
was the most important front on which the League had to fight.

\(3\) The Muslim localities were situated in a ring quite deep *all
around* the town of Amritsar.  Hindu and Sikh areas were in the interior
of the circle, and once the Muslims decided to close in upon these areas
and shut egress and ingress into the city, Hindus and Sikhs were shut in
and cut off from the rest of the world.  Excepting an opening through
Sultanwind Gate, which is away from the Railway Station, the Courts,
Civil Hospital, Telegraph Office etc. there was no opening in the deep
Muslim belt through which any Hindu or Sikh could come out without
running the gauntlet of large and well-posted Muslim mobs, ever ready
with their murder squads.  A very large number of casualties among
Hindus and Sikhs occurred round the city walls.

\(4\) Proportion of Muslims in the regular and additional police force
in the Punjab, as has been pointed out, was everywhere very heavy, that
is, over 70%.  So was the proportion of officials in the Civil list. 
These two classes of Government employees could and did make all the
difference for the peace and safety of an area. A separate and detailed
study is needed to assess the true *role* of the Muslim police and
officials in riots in Bengal and in the Punjab, especially the latter. 
Majorities no doubt tell in such a total warfare as the Punjab Muslim
League attacks of 1947, but even the majority in population without the
collusion of the police and officials cannot inflict such losses as
those sustained by Hindus and Sikhs in the Western districts of the
Punjab.  And in a place like Amritsar, where the two sides were balanced
in population, without the police and officials working ‘all out’ for
one side, Hindus and Sikhs could not have been held at bay by Muslims
for so many months.  Most of the Hindu and Sikh policemen were posted in
the Southern and Eastern districts of the Punjab, in which the majority
in population was Hindu and/or Sikh.  In Amritsar as in Lahore one might
rarely come across a Hindu or Sikh policeman, else all the force was
Muslim.  The Muslim police helped Muslims to collect arms both lethal
and firearms and ammunition.  Smuggling was done in collusion with the
Muslim police who were posted on all strategic points.  Storage of arms
and petrol, the latter for purposes of quick arson, was done in houses
and buildings which were protected from detection by the Muslim police. 
Again, the operation of the curfew was made to work in favour of the
Muslim assailants and to the detriment of the Hindus and Sikhs who might
want to protect their houses from burning.  Muslim goondas or even
Muslim policemen set fire to Hindu and Sikh houses during curfew hours,
and no Hindu or Sikh was allowed, on pain of being shot, to come out of
his house to fight the fire.  This happened both in Lahore and
Amritsar.  The police stood guard while Muslims broke open Hindu and
Sikh houses and shops and carted away the loot, at great leisure.  The
dumps for such looted property were known to and guarded by the Muslim
police.  The police went shares with the looters.  Hindu and Sikh
officers were generally held under terror by Muslim policemen, and in
some cases were attacked, or not protected when attacked by Muslim mobs,
as in Amritsar, Dera Ismail Khan and other places.  Sometimes rifles and
rounds were supplied by Muslim policemen to Muslim mobs.  Muslim
policemen went about in lorries and jeeps sniping at Hindus and Sikhs,
and in several cases asking men to come out of their houses on some
pretext and then shooting them dead.  This happened in a number of cases
in Amritsar, and in other places.

\(5\) Muslim Government servants other than the police behaved in the
same partisan manner, and in collusion with the Muslim Leaguers.  Muslim
doctors in the Civil Hospital would not attend to Hindu and Sikh
injured.  Muslim telephone operators, who almost had the monopoly of the
Department in Amritsar, cut off Hindu and Sikh telephone connections and
tapped their lines and made secrecy of communication among Hindus and
Sikhs impossible.

\(6\) Muslim colleges and schools, especially the M. A.-O. College at
Amritsar, the houses and mills of Muslims notables, such as Sheikh Sadic
Hassan, President of the Amritsar District Muslim League, were regular
arsenals and planning and operating centres in the war on Hindus and
Sikhs.

\(7\) Large stores of brickbats were collected by Muslims in their
houses, for their fight against Hindus and Sikhs.  They would shower
brickbats mercilessly on Hindus and Sikhs from the roofs of their
houses.  The Muslims themselves were mostly steel-helmeted, and so could
even sally out on Hindus and Sikhs, while Hindus and Sikhs, being
unprovided with any such defence, got serious and even fatal injuries
from these brickbat showers.

\(8\) The Muslims’ methods of arson were skilled.  In arson there were
always two men-one who sprinkled petrol and the other who lit the
match.  This was a ‘safe’ method.  When non-Muslims retaliated, both
processes that is, of sprinkling petrol and lighting the match were
entrusted to the same man.  This man invariably got burnt.  It was long
after that non-Muslims realised the nature of the Muslim technique of
arson and learnt to do the thing efficiently as the Muslim ‘army’ of the
League had no doubt learnt by forethought long before the thing was
taken up in real earnest.

\(9\) On the 5th March, when the attack opened, the Muslims attacked
only such Hindu-Sikh areas as were mostly surrounded by heavy Muslim
zones, such as Sattowali Gali, Gokal New Abadi in Kila Bhangian,
Deviwali Gali, Chhaju Misr’s Gali, Islamabad, Hall Bazar etc.  All this
shows pre-planning.

\(10\) Attacks on Hindus and Sikhs were made by Muslims in Muslim
National Guards’ uniforms, wearing steel helmets on their heads.

*The attack opens*:

The Muslims of Amritsar began preparations for the attack on Hindus and
Sikhs on the 4th March, the day on which the Hindu-Sikh students’
procession was fired on by the Muslim police, and Muslim mobs and
assassins had taken a good number of Hindu and Sikh lives in Lahore. 
The Sikhs and Hindus on the 4th evening held a public meeting in
Amritsar, in which the resolve not to tolerate a communal ministry in
the Punjab was reiterated.  These speeches were interpreted by the
Muslim League as a challenge to their design of establishing Pakistan,
of which the Punjab was to be the ‘corner-stone’.  So, they tried to
beat down the Hindu-Sikh, especially Sikh, opposition in Amritsar, the
city in which a defeat of the Sikhs would mean breaking their morale. 
Amritsar was rightly selected from the League view-point as the place on
which the entire energy of the League must be concentrated.  Defeat and
rout the Sikhs in Amritsar, and they will not fight elsewhere, at least
not anywhere very near -that was how the League tacticians argued.

Nothing happened on the 4th, however, although the atmosphere was
tense.  Hindus and Sikhs did not expect that a general mass attack would
be made on them.  So, they were nowhere prepared even to save their own
lives in the event of a sudden attack.  Everywhere they were taken by
surprise, and lost heavily in life and property.  The Muslims, on the
other hand, were fully prepared for a large-scale offensive, big enough
to surround the entire city and destroy Hindu-Sikh localities and force
the inhabitants out and finish them off.  Arms and petrol were stored in
large quantities by Muslims.  They had organised squads for committing
arson, for looting, for stabbing and for general attacks and sorties. 
Among the proceedings of the Executive Committee of the Amritsar Muslim
League, held on the 3rd March, 1947, *two days before the attacks
started and at a time when no Hindu or Sikh could imagine there would be
any emergency*, this body appointed a sub-committee for first aid to the
injured and maintenance of an Ambulance Unit.  This provision means
clearly that they were preparing ahead for the fight which, they knew
was coming, for it were they themselves who were to make it when the
time was opportune.  A Sikh lawyer, who was going to attend court on the
morning of the 5th March, noticed a great rush at Muslim sword-shops,
where swords were being distributed free to Muslims.  Hindus and Sikhs
did not take warning from this very clear action.  They probably thought
there would be sabre-rattling but not actual fighting, with the result
that on the 5th, the opening day of attack and on the two subsequent
terrible days, Sikhs and Hindus had nowhere any arms or other means of
defence.  In Darbar Sahib, the holy of holiest of Sikh faith, which in
the case of a general attack by Muslims would be one of the first
targets of Muslim attack, as it actually would have been but for the
morale of the few Sikhs who took it upon themselves to defend the holy
place, there were about only two dozen *sewadars* or attendants employed
by the Committee managing the shrine and its precincts.  These two dozen
men had swords on them, as they always had as a symbol of their being
Sikhs.  There were some thousand defenceless Sikh pilgrims, including
women and children, who would be a problem rather than help in the
defence of the holy place.  There were four old and rusted twelve-bore
guns and a small stock of cartridges in the place, but no one present
knew how to use them.  Khalsa College, the premier Sikh institution did
not have even ten swords on that day, and no firearms.  It was open to
attack from all sides, and a large population of young students,
teachers and their families were residing on its premises.  The same was
true of the Shahid Sikh Missionary College.  And this was true of all
Hindu and Sikh mohallas and areas-utter defencelessness.  No one was
prepared for defence, for no one naturally knew the designs and plans of
the Muslim League.

Muslim Government servants with the exception of the police, were almost
wholly absent from their places of work on the 5th March.  Especially
was this true of the Muslims in the Rationing Department, as they knew
better than others the location of Hindu and Sikh houses which were to
be burned.

They were, instead, by information passed round among Muslims, keeping
out of harm’s way or even joining in the plan for attack in their
respective areas.  Hindus and Sikhs did not know, very naturally, of
what was going to happen, and so by the afternoon they got stuck up
wherever they were-in their offices, at the Railway Station, in the
Golden Temple or other holy places etc.  These marooned people in most
cases could not reach their houses and families right up till the 11th
March, the day on which the curfew was for the first time relaxed after
being imposed on the 7th.

During the day on the 5th March, a group of three or four Sikhs on
behalf of the Shiromani Akali Dal went about Amritsar announcing the
holding of a public meeting that very evening to protest against the
design of the Muslim League to establish Pakistan in the Punjab.  So
little did the Sikhs expect an attack or general attack on that day. 
This group was attacked by Muslims with a storm of brickbats in Chowk
Moni and one Sikh, Bhai Mangal Singh by name, was done to death.  The
news of this brutal act spread throughout the town, and Hindus and Sikhs
apprehending trouble, began to close their shops.  But traffic to and
from the Railway Station was still continuing.  In the meantime, without
any provocation being given by any Hindu or Sikh, Muslim goondas in
thousands collected in all parts of the City, especially in the
outskirts, near the approaches to which areas the Muslims had an
overwhelmingly large population.  The collecting of Muslim parties and
mobs all over the town and up till a great depth from all approaches
practically closed the town to those who were outside it and made it
impossible for those inside it to get out.  Hall Bazar, the main
business centre of the City and the most important approach to and from
the Railway Station and the Golden Temple, was full on both sides of
large armed Muslim mobs.  Hindus and Sikhs, unsuspecting any
developments and incidents were going about the town, when at a signal
at about 4 o’clock a general attack by the Muslim in all parts of the
town began.  Hindus and Sikhs found in Hall Bazar, whether in tongas or
going on foot or at their shops, were attacked and done to death.  One
of the victims of these attacks, Mohan Singh, was a student of the
Khalsa College, who along with another student got caught in a Muslim
mob in Hall Bazar.  One of the boys escaped with a hurt; the other was
killed on the spot.  In this first attack a large number of Hindus and
Sikhs, especially the latter, were killed.  By five o’clock dozens of
Sikh dead were brought to the Government mortuary, but many never got
traced.  Hindus and Sikhs were marooned wherever they were.  Telephones
were somehow not functioning at this time; the Muslim operators had
disconnected Hindu and Sikh lines.

The Muslims now turned to general destruction of Hindus and Sikhs.  In
Hall Bazar, almost all the shops were the property of Hindus and Sikhs,
and it was a prosperous business centre.  The surrounding population was
almost entirely Muslim.  This bazar was looted fearlessly and on a large
scale by Muslim mobs.  A large number of shops after being looted were
burned.  Muslims would come out in parties from Khair Din’s Mosque
situated in the middle of the bazar and the M. A.-O. College, distant
about half a furlong on a side.  The police were just doing nothing. 
The City Kotwali is where the Hall Bazar ends.  Within five minutes the
police could be on the scene of the looting even at the other end of the
fine Bazar.  But the looting continued throughout the afternoon and the
night, uninterrupted.  Booty literally worth millions was carried away. 
So leisurely and assured was the conduct of the looting Muslim mob that
in some cases they did not even care to take the trouble to break open
the locks of the shops.  All that was done was to remove a plank of the
outer door, to scop a kind of manhole and to remove loot out of
that.  Such a thing was possible only because there was a plan behind
all that was happening, and those engaged in looting knew that the
police would not come, as it actually did not.^([1](#1))

A large number of Sikhs killed at this time were Sikh factory workers
who left work at 5 o’clock when they used to be let off, and set out for
their homes, unaware of the general Muslim attack.  As they approached
the City gates such as Hathi Gate, Hall Bazar, Mahan Sigh Gate or Ghee
Mandi Gate, they were surrounded and done to death.  Another class of
Sikhs who lost heavily in these first days were the Sikh milkmen who
used to carry the milk-supply of the town from the neighbouring
villages.  They were killed on the 5th and 6th March; and by the 6th
morning, 18 dead bodies of these men had been carried to the mortuary. 
The total number of milkmen killed must have been very much larger, for
the Muslims generally threw the dead bodies into the burning houses or
otherwise disposed them of.

On the 5th March in Amritsar, there was no Government, no law and
order.  No one’s life was safe.  On all sides was killing, burning and
looting.  People suddenly woke up from the notions of safety and
security to which they had grown accustomed during the days of British
rule.  Now on all sides there was complete lawlessness.  The police were
not merely neutral in this, but were planning for, leading and aiding
the Muslim aggressors.  The Muslims burnt and looted whatever area they
pleased-the only thing to stop them being possible effective Hindu-Sikh
resistance, which on these two days and for months after was not
organised.  Not Darbar Sahib itself, not any of the Gurdwaras was safe
at this time.  The Muslims had planned an all-out offensive, and were
carrying it out very successfully.  No one in the whole city ate
anything on this night; no one slept a wink.  The whole town was ringing
with the yells of the attacking Muslims and the defiant shouts of Hindus
and Sikhs.  Flames were rising and tall buildings were gutted with huge
fires.

The dead bodies in the Civil Hospital brought on the 5th March were
seven in number; 6 Sikhs and one unidentified as Hindu or Muslim.  Among
these six Sikhs killed was Mohan Singh, a student of the Khalsa College,
whose murder has been mentioned elsewhere.  This circumstance will show
more than anything else that the Muslims were aggressors in Amritsar,
and they remained so for months.  Figures of casualties given later on
will amply prove this.

During the night, the Hindu and Sikh quarters got hell.  Parties of
Muslims would go about shouting Pakistan and Islamic slogans, setting
fire to Hindu and Sikh houses.  The method adopted for setting fire
showed planning, skill and long preparation.  Petrol would be sprinkled
over buildings with a stirrup pump or some other device.  Then a burning
ball of cloth or cotton was shot over the petrol-soaked surface and he
flames left to do the work of destruction.  Sometimes a solution of
phosphorus was just painted over the door of a shop or house and left to
burn of itself within a short time.  Hindus and Sikhs trying to escape
from flames were lynched by the mob.  A large part of Amritsar was
reduced to cinders and rubble in the fires of this night and the one
following it.  If one stood on the top of a high building in the night,
red flames could be seen rising high, spread over large areas, lending a
terrible and awful glow to the darkness of the night.  Hall Bazar, Kara
Jaimal Singh and several other localities were almost wholly destroyed.

Attacks on various localities began as the evening fell.  Firing from
the attackers could be heard all through the night.  By the morning
thousands of man, women and children whose homes had been burnt or who
had been beseiged throughout the night left as refugees to various
localities where shelter could be had.  Many went to Darbar Sahib and
the other sites in its vicinity such as Jallianwala Bagh.  Many ran out
to the Civil Lines which were comparatively safe.  Khalsa College
received a few thousand of these hunted people whose homes were
attacked.

During the night a Muslim mob tried to attack Krishna Market, one of the
largest emporia of cloth in Northern India, which is close to Darbar
Sahib, and Darbar Sahib itself.  A pitched battle took place on the road
between the Queen’s statue and Chowk Fawara.  In this battle courage and
grit shown by Sikhs and Hindus routed the Muslim assailants, and
immediate danger to Darbar Sahib was averted.

Attacks on Sikhs found anywhere became a feature of the Muslim campaign
in Amritsar.  Any Sikh found anywhere on the road was attacked and
killed.  A large number of Sikhs coming from the villages around
Amritsar, and many pilgrims coming from outside to visit Darbar Sahib
were stabbed by Muslim parties lying in ambush.

Many of those killed were Sikh milk-sellers, who carried milk singly or
in groups of two or three from villages round about Amritsar into the
town.  As they had to pass through Muslim localities in order to enter
the city, they would be waylaid and done to death.  In many cases
several Muslims would fall upon a Sikh, snatch his kirpan and butcher
him with the kirpan so snatched.  So widespread and persistent was the
campaign of stabbing that Sikhs were stabbed even at the Railway
Station, which was supposed to be a comparatively safe place-one man was
stabbed while actually boarding a train; the kirpan of another was
snatched.  Public servants were not immune from attack while engaged in
doing duty.  Such dastardly attacks were made by Muslims everywhere in
the Punjab on public servants.  In Amritsar, one Sikh wireman was
murdered while repairing an electric wire connection in a Muslim
locality under orders.  A Hindu postman was assaulted while on his
round. The most serious case of its kind was the attack made by a Muslim
mob on a Sikh Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police on duty.  This officer
was on duty in Hall Bazar with a force of Muslim constables under him. 
As he was standing, a Muslim mob of about 150 attacked him.  The Muslim
constables whom he was supposed to command, simply stood and watched
their officer being attacked by the mob, who left him for dead. Later,
however, this officer recovered from his serious injuries.  This is only
one evidence of the spirit which actuated the Muslim police in these
times.

Attacks on Hindus and Sikhs became more frequent and easier because Hall
Bazar, the main thoroughfare leading into the City and to Darbar Sahib,
was blocked by the ruins of burned down houses and shops, and anyone
coming out and going in had to make a long *detour*, and pass for about
a mile through Muslim areas to reach the Queen’s Statue, the place where
the non-Muslim areas began.  Hindu and Sikh passersby were almost daily
attacked and killed here.  It was only when on repeated representations
and protests of Hindu and Sikhs, including several from Master Tara
Singh, the Hall Bazar was made available for two-way traffic, that these
attacks grew fewer.  But the police morale was so much deteriorated that
the existence of police in those days afforded no protection to any
Hindu or Sikh.

One of the most dastardly attacks which sent a thrill of horror through
every Hindu and Sikh was the attack on the 6th of March by the Muslims
of Sharifpura, a suburb of Amritsar spread for a long distance south of
the railway track east-west wise, on Sikhs and Hindus arriving from
Pathankot side.  The assailants stopped the arriving train by climbing
on to the outer signal and raising it.  Then the mob, concealed in
Muslim houses along the railway track, fell upon the helpless Hindu and
Sikh passengers, and murdered a good number, including women and
children before the train could be restarted and brought to Amritsar
station.  Trains and lorries coining from Jullundur and Pathankot and
Narowal were similarly attacked by Muslims of this suburb and Sikhs
killed with great brutality.  Men, women and children were chased like
animals and gored to death with spears.  This was the first train-attack
made anywhere in this conflict, and this kind of thing was repeated by
Muslim Leaguers in many places in the subsequent months.  This cowardly
attack horrified all decent people everywhere.

Besides the Muslim mobs and assassins, Muslim police shot out of hand
any Sikh or Hindu they could lay hands on.  Muslim police are known to
have gone about prowling of a night, to have sometimes called out of
their homes Hindus and Sikhs and to have shot them dead on the spot. 
This practice they called ‘shikar’ and it was a terror for Hindus and
Sikhs.

These first March days were a period of extremely great disaster for
Hindus and Sikhs, especially the latter, of Amritsar.  With houses and
shops burnt in large numbers, and with daily imposition of curfew all
business was at a standstill.  Thousands got unemployed in consequence
of this.  Thousands were rendered homeless in Amritsar itself, and
destitute through destruction of household property.  They had to be
sheltered and fed.  Over and above all this was the problem of looking
after the hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing from Muslim terror
in the West Punjab.  No doubt the community felt it was passing through
a life-and-death struggle, and it ‘took it’ with characteristic Sikh
calm and courage.

The Muslim police was working with full vigour in implementing its
policy of partiality towards Muslims.  In the extensive house searches,
both in Amritsar town and in the countryside, every semblance of a
weapon was taken away from Sikhs-not only spears, but even wood-choppers
and knives.  Licensed weapons were confiscated so that whole groups of
Hindus and Sikhs were left defenceless in time of attack.  The Muslims,
on the other hand, could import arms and material for making
spear-staves, swords, daggers and even pistols.  Guns and bombs flowed
freely among them.  It was only rarely, when a non-Muslim might happen
to be on the watch duty that such smuggling might be intercepted.  Once
a Hindu police-man on duty at Putlighar, on the Grand Trunk Road on the
Lahore side of Amritsar, stopped a Muslim-driven truck which was
carrying into the town 4,300 lathis.  These were obviously intended for
making spears.  But while this one truck-load got intercepted hundreds
such must have passed on to their destination without check.  That is
why Muslims could make such a terrible blitz against Hindus and Sikhs.

The attack on Sikhs was carried on by the Muslims with such vigour and
organisation that the Sikhs suffered heavy casualties during all the
months from March to June, and even later.  The Muslims continued, with
police help, to waylay individual Sikhs and to make mass attacks on
them.  Their plan for Amritsar City was ambitious.  They wanted to keep
the City beseiged, to force Hindus and Sikhs out by arson and murder,
and finally to capture two places held dear by Sikhs, and wearing a
character symbolic of Sikh greatness and pride: Darbar Sahib and Khalsa
College.  Letters threatening destruction of these two places continued
to be received by the authorities of these places from Muslims.  In
their confidence and feeling of being advantageously situated the
Muslims did not mind declaring their plans.  That during all these
months Sikhs were fighting against superiorly armed and determined
attacks is shown by the following official figure of casualties in
Amritsar.  These figure are, of course, bound to be gross
underestimates, but they help to establish the proportions in which
casualties were suffered.  In almost all cases Sikh casualties are more
than Hindu and Muslim casualties put together, or at least many more
than of either community.  In considering the nature and extent of the
Muslim attack, Hindu and Sikh casualties may also be reckoned together.

Casualties to date

|                    |           |          |            |                  |
|--------------------|-----------|----------|------------|------------------|
| **Date of report** | **Hindu** | **Sikh** | **Muslim** | **Hindu & Sikh** |
| 11.4.47            | 8         | 24       | 11         | 32               |
| 2.5.47             | 15        | 44       | 19         | 59               |
| 9.5.47             | 23        | 67       | 32         | 90               |
| 11.5.47            | 32        | 100      | 48         | 132              |
| 15.5.47            | 50        | 135      | 60         | 185              |
| 22.5.47            | 69        | 174      | 85         | 243              |

The moral of all this is very clear:

\(a\) Sikhs were the victims of a malignant and determined campaign of
murder and arson, so that even according to official figures, up till
22.5.47, that is, more than two and a half months after the attack
opened on March 5, as many as 174 of them had been killed as against 85
Muslims.  The total number of all non-Muslims killed by Muslims during
this period is 243.

\(b\) Sikhs did not attack Muslims anywhere in the areas where the
former were in a majority.  East Punjab continued to report “quiet”
during all this period and till much later.

\(c\) While Muslims had a plan of subduing and even exterminating the
Sikhs, the Sikhs had obviously no such plan.  During all these months
they suffered heavily everywhere, fought an unequal struggle against the
Muslim majority organised for fighting, and the Muslim police and
officials in combination.

\(d\) One other factor which conclusively proves that the Sikhs had not
only no intention of attacking Muslims, but did not even have knowledge
of any intended attack on the part of Muslims is that on and after the
5th March, a large number of Sikhs had gone on the Hola pilgrimage to
Sri Anandpur Sahib, in Hoshiarpur District, and were in fact marooned
there on account of the curfew in Amritsar and several other towns.  A
large number of these Sikh pilgrims had to be escorted by the Patiala
State police to Amritsar, Lahore and Gujranwala etc., in lorries
provided by the State.

Every nook and corner of Amritsar, which was close to a Muslim area, and
where a Muslim mob could gather conveniently or a few assassins hide or
lurk, was a place of death for any Sikh found in its vicinity.  The
technique adopted by the Muslim goondas was skilled and well-thought out
beforehand.  These assailants would generally divide themselves into
groups of three, each hiding at a distance of fifteen or twenty yards
from the other along a lane or street.  While the Hindu or Sikh
pedestrian, cyclist or rider in tonga, as the case might happen to be,
had been allowed by the first group along the line to pass, the middle
group would raise a hue and cry and scare the intended victim.  As he
ran for life backwards or forwards, he was pounced upon by the group
which happened to be nearest to him, and done to death.  In this way
hundreds got killed in the various Muslim localities, especially along
the road leading from Hall Gate to Hathi Gate towards the West, and that
leading from Hall Gate out through Rambagh, Mahan Singh and Ghee Mandi
Gates to Sultanwind, either of which roads the Sikhs and Hindus must
take if they were at all to enter the town from the northern side.  Burj
Baba Phula Singh, a Sikh shrine and kind of abbey, which is situated
just outside Mahan Singh Gate, and was surrounded on all sides by large
Muslim populations was repeatedly attacked, and several of the Sikh
inmates were killed.

In the attack which began on the 5th March three Sikh foot-constables of
police were reported missing.  Reports daily poured in of Sikhs stabbed,
speared or shot dead on the outskirts of the town.  Sharifpura, Mahan
Singh Gate, Hathi Gate, Bhagtan wala Gate and Chauk Farid were
localities especially notorious for this kind of attack on the Sikhs. 
M. A.-O. College, was a very active centre of attack from which Muslim
groups sallied out to attack or snipe at Hindus and Sikhs.  One cinema
house, belonging to a Hindu and situated next door to M. A.-O. College
was burned.  Hindu and Sikh houses situated on all sides in the vicinity
of the M. A.-O College were kept constantly under fire by gunmen from
inside this College.  A large number of these Hindu-Sikh houses, along
with others lying between this place and Chauk Farid were burned.

There is a marked difference in the behaviour of Muslims and Sikhs
towards women and children captured during this fight.  While Muslims
everywhere dishonoured, abducted or murdered Hindu and Sikh women and
children, Sikhs never resorted to anything of which they might have
reason to be ashamed. On the first day of attack, several Muslims got
killed by an infuriated Sikh crowd in a locality which was at the
junction of a Muslim and non-Muslim zone, not very far from the centre
of the Sikh influence.  More than one hundred Muslim women and children,
whose menfolk had either been killed or had run away for safety, fell
into the hands of the Sikhs.  Sikhs kept them safe and fed them for the
two or three days that the fighting lasted and all communications in the
town were cut off, and later sent them under escort to the City Police
Station, These women acknowledged the chivalry and courtesy of the
treatment of the Sikhs towards them.

The first round of the attack was over after the curfew partly lifted on
the 11th March.  The sight which was revealed to passersby and onlookers
was truly terrible and pitiful.  In various parts of the city huge
mountains of debris and rubble were lying, blocking roads and bazars. 
Burnt, demolished buildings, with holes for doors and windows gaping out
of damaged walls told a tale of utter and stark brutality.  Merchandise
and household property worth so many millions had been destroyed by
fire, and some was buried under debris, which must have also killed many
human beings while falling.  This scene of destruction and desolation
elicited from Pandit Nehru, who visited the city in March, the remark
that Amritsar looked like a bomb-scarred city.  The experience, thought
Hindus and Sikhs, must have chastened the Muslims and made them realize
the folly of a fight in which fire destroyed the neighbouring Muslim
houses and shops as much as the Hindu, and in which some at least of the
Muslims, no doubt as innocent as the Hindu and Sikh victims of
assassination, must have lost their lives.  But the Muslims were
thinking in no such way.  They looked upon this first fight only as one
major test of success of their methods and preparedness and the perfect
co-ordination of all wings of their forces-the Muslim National Guards,
the mobs, the police and officials.  So, they were on the look-out for a
repetition of this first attack and for winning more ‘victories’ over
Hindus and Sikhs.

Muslims made repeated attempts at saying prayers in the burnt Pragdas
Chowk Mosque.  This place is situated in the midst of Sikh-Hindu
localities, though on one side it had easy approach to a vast stretch of
Muslim-inhabited area, ending in Gilwali Gate.  To have attempted to
lead a Muslim congregation, which was bound to he well-armed, defiant
and shouting ‘slogans’, was really an attempt at mischief.  In those
times when passions were running high, when hundreds of Sikh Gurdwaras
had been burned down in Rawalpindi and Western Punjab and not a word of
regret or condemnation for such acts had emanated from any Muslim
Leaguer, to have tried to lead a prayer-gathering in Chowk Pragdas was
both an insult to Sikhs and a calculated attempt at mischief.  Sikhs
opposed such a move.  But the European Deputy Commissioner permitted
that every Friday a limited number of Muslims say their noon prayer in
Pragdas Chowk under heavy police protection.  On April 11, which was
again a Friday, a large Muslim crowd estimated at 4,000 to 5,000 came to
Chowk Pragdas with the ostensible purpose of saying prayers.  But they
were well-armed and were shouting slogans vowing to take revenge for the
Muslims who had been killed in Chowk Pragdas in the early days of the
attack.  This naturally hurt the Sikhs.  But, although provoked, Sikhs
did not do anything which might lead to unpleasant occurrences.  And the
prayers were done peacefully.  But after the prayers were over, some of
the returning Muslims attacked some Sikhs.  At this some Sikhs in return
attacked some Muslims and rioting again started in Amritsar on April 11,
after being suspended for about a month, though during this interval
stabbing had continued.  The Muslim crowd got out of the control of the
Police, a large part of which was naturally not too conscientious about
checking its activities.  Muslims murdered Sikhs and set fire to Hindu
and Sikh houses in several areas, including Chowk Lachhmansar, Qila
Bhangian, Chauk Chira and Hall Bazar.  Extensive damage was done by
these fires, and the tall pillars of smoke could be seen from as far as
Chheharta which is more than five miles from Amritsar.

There had been a comparative lull for sometime in the campaign of
stabbing Hindus and Sikhs in the later part of March and early April. 
But after the Chowk Pragdas incident of April 11 narrated above, this
stabbing campaign was intensified.  Arson too began to be on the
increase.  No day went without the report of some Hindus and Sikhs being
stabbed or shot dead, mostly by the hired Muslim assassins and sometimes
even by the police.  Hindus and Sikhs got killed in varying
circumstances.  They were sometimes killed while trying to extinguish
fire in their own houses.  If they fought Muslim assailants in
self-defence, more often than not they were shot dead by the police,
which always intervened on behalf of the Muslims.  If not killed, Hindus
and Sikhs fighting in self-defence would be arrested, while the Muslim
aggressors were let off.^([2](#2)) As shown above, the death-roll of
Hindus and Sikhs continued to be very high. Sikhs got killed in larger
numbers than Muslims and Hindus combined.

Incidents typical of what was happening in Amritsar in April and after
are given below:-

\(1\) The grinding mill of a Sikh was gutted by a Muslim mob on 11.4.47.
On this same day one Sikh was fired on by the police for no cause
whatever.

\(2\) Two Sikhs were surrounded by a group of Muslims near Bhagtawanwala
Gate and their kirpans were seized.  The Sikhs escaped by running away.

\(3\) The car of Sardar Ishar Singh Majhail, a prominent Sikh leader,
and later Minister of the East Punjab was surrounded by a Muslim mob,
and he was saved only by the skill of his driver.

\(4\) On 2.5.47 one Sikh was stabbed outside Hakiman Gate.

\(5\) One Sikh, Sohan Singh was brutally murdered while going on bicycle
near Chauk Farid.

\(6\) Two Sikhs were murdered by being shot near Rego Bridge, which is
on the Grand Trunk Road, close to the Railway Station.

\(7\) On 21-5-47 one.  Sikh was found murdered in Gol Bagh between
Baijnath High School and the Railway Footbridge.  On this day also were
set on fire 7 Hindu and Sikh shops inside Hall Gate and several houses
inside Mahan Singh Gate and Gali Lahorianwali in Katra Karam Singh.  One
Sikh was murdered on the Mall, and two Sikhs were assaulted and chased
in the same locality.

\(8\) On 24.5.47 one Sikh who had gone towards Anjuman Park to buy
vegetables was murdered.  One Sikh was stabbed in the middle of Hall
Bazar near Chartered Bank while a Muslim police constable, No. 132, was
looking on.  One Hindu was murdered near Hall Bazar, and two others were
shot dead near Ganj-di-Mori by Muslims, while extinguishing the fire in
their houses.  Two Hindus were shot dead in similar circumstances in
Gali Nain Sukh.  Eighteen Hindus received serious injuries in two places
where fire was set to Hindu houses.  In these places members of the
family of Sheikh Sadiq Hassan, President of the District Muslim League
of Amritsar, were leading the attack.

\(9\) On 26.5.47 one Muslim Sub-Inspector of Police chased a Hindu from
Islamabad Railway Crossing to Khalsa College, and repeatedly fired on
him with a revolver.  This crossing and all other crossings and
junctions of roads were guarded by Muslim Police, who shot dead any
Hindu or Sikh they could lay hands on.

\(10\) Sikhs murdered in different localities in the beginning of May,
1947 were: 9 outside Bhagtanwala Gate, near the brick klin; 7 in
Daimganj; 30 outside Rambagh Gate; 12 outside Sharifpura, and a large
number in the Muslim abadis of Maqbulpura and Rasulpura.

\(11\) The Grand Trunk Road between village Vallah and the Canal to the
city was absolutely closed to Hindus and Sikhs, who inevitably got
murdered if found there.  Hundreds of Muslims, however, freely moved
about in these areas.  Muslims could also move about near Hindu and Sikh
areas, but not *vice versa*.

\(12\) One Sikh Bal Singh of village Mulachak was killed by Muslims on
25. 5. 47 near the canal.

\(13\) Trucks nos. 2410, 1421, 1428 and cars nos. 676 and 3388 regularly
went about the roads outside the town with Muslim goondas in them
picking off Hindus and Sikhs.  Information about this was conveyed by
responsible Hindus and Sikhs to the authorities.

\(14\) On 25. 5. 47 village Mulachak was attacked by 60 Muslims with
firearms.  Sikhs of the village put up stiff resistance, and the
assailants ran away.

\(15\) On 26-5-47 one Sikh was stabbed in Hall Bazar while going to the
police station to give report of arson in his own house.  One Hindu was
murdered in Chitta Katra.

One of the most shocking and dastardly outrages took place in the
Daimganj locality of Amritsar on the 10th May.  A party of about a dozen
Sikhs and Hindus, including women were going out to cremate the dead
body of a child.  They passed by the large Muslim locality of Daimganj,
close to which is also the Idgah.  While these Hindus and Sikhs were
returning to their homer after cremating the child, the Muslims who were
hiding inside the Idgah, fell upon them, killing seven on the spot.  The
dead bodies were sought to be made unidentifiable by being soaked in
petrol and set ablaze.  The smoke attracted the sight of the police
force inside the Amritsar Fort, who reached the spot.  The authorities
imposed a fine of Rs. 20 per male adult Muslim in this entire locality.

This murder was most shocking and brutal, and it shook the conscience of
the entire Hindu and Sikh population of the Punjab.  Even barbarians
respect the sight of death, and none but these offspring of the Muslim
League doctrines with unclean minds and souls would have done killing in
the circumstances of this incident.  It is significant that no Muslim
Leaguer uttered a word in condemnation even of this brutal outrage. 
This incident intensified rioting both in Lahore and Amritsar.  Muslims
were already adding to the pile of Hindus and Sikhs killed and Hindu and
Sikh houses burnt.  Now, both in Lahore and Amritsar, Hindus and Sikhs
too began reprisals.  The Daimganj brutality anyway could not be
forgotten.  The comments of the Chief Secretary to the Punjab Government
of those days, Mr. Akhtar Hussain; are significant:

“Some of the acts committed were shocking in their stark brutality and
an attack on a funeral party of a child in which six Sikhs and one Hindu
were killed has added to an already overlong list of Muslim atrocities. 
As a result of these happenings in Amritsar, the situation in Lahore
deteriorated a few days later, on the 13th of May, and much damage has
been done to life and property.  In Amritsar the casualties since
communal trouble started in March have been over two hundred killed and
twice that number seriously injured.  In Lahore over the same period,
one hundred and ten persons have lost their, lives and three hundred and
seventeen have suffered grave hurt.  For the province the death roll
exceeds three thousand three hundred while the injured number fourteen
hundred.”

The over-all report of the above-named Chief Secretary to the Punjab
Government for the month of April and May is:-

“In Amritsar, since a recredescence of trouble took place on the 11th of
April, more than four hundred and sixty persons have either been killed
or injured, and in Lahore since the 9th day of May, the day on which the
new outbreak commenced, there have been three hundred and twenty-five
victims of communal strife.  The two cities have shown some distinctive
features in their disorders and in Lahore stabbings had the place in
favour taken by crude bombs in Amritsar.  However, both have points in
common, the most important of which have been arson and the signs of
better organization and greater determination which have emerged. *In
respect of arson Muslims have been the main culprits and there have been
numerous acts of incendiarism in both places resulting in conflagrations
which have taxed the available army and civil resources to their utmost
limit*.”^([3](#3))

The high-ups of the Muslim League were fully alive to the needs of
keeping up the ‘morale’ of the Muslims of Amritsar in their fight
against Hindus and Sikhs of Amritsar.  They constantly visited the city
to plan, advise and guide this fight.  Sheikh Sadiq Hassan, President of
the City Muslim League was directing this entire fight and was
maintaining efficient liaison.  On the 17th March Sardar Abdur Rab
Nishtar, later a Minister in the Pakistan Government,^([4](#4)) Begum
Shah Nawaz, prominent lady in the Punjab League circles, Sardar Shaukat
Hyat Khan, till recently Minister in the West Punjab and Siddiq Ali
Khan, Salar-i-Ala of the Muslim National Guards came to Amritsar.  On
the 25th March Mian Mumtaz Daultana, now President of the West Punjab
Muslim League, Mian Iftikharuddin, his predecessor in that office,
Maulana Daud Ghaznavi and Mian Amiruddin, League Mayor of Lahore also
visited Amritsar.  These visits were made ostensibly for the purpose of
collecting funds for the relief of such Muslims as might have suffered
in the wide-spread campaign of arson which sometimes also involved
Muslim houses, but were in reality “pep” things to plan and direct
intensification of the Muslim League War.  Sheikh Sadiq Hassan, who has
been mentioned earlier, visited Tarn Taran, a fairly large town near
Amritsar and distributed two bags of steel helmets among members of the
Muslim National Guards.  On the 26th of April, Dr. Ziaul Islam and Ahmed
Said, President and Organizing Secretary respectively of the Punjab
Muslim Students’ Federation visited Amritsar.  This organization
contained zealous League workers, and rowdy elements.  It took leading
part in the war on Hindus and Sikhs, especially from its headquarters in
the M. A.-O. College.

Mian Nasrullah Khan, a member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly,
visited several villages of Amritsar District on the 17th May.  So far
there had been no attacks in the rural areas, but now under the
instigation of Mian Nasrullah Khan, such attacks started.  On the 22nd
May this gentleman again visited several more villages and inspired an
abortive Muslim attempt to demolish the Hansali, the water channel which
serves as a conduit for the water which is supplied to the sacred tank
of Sri Darbar Sahib at Amritsar.

The tempo of the war against Hindus and Sikhs grew very fast as the
fateful day of June 3, on which the British Government’s award on the
future government of India was to be announced, approached.

While the Punjab Government was endeavouring to take some steps for the
maintenance of peace, these efforts were rendered more or less
ineffective by the communally biased attitude of the Muslim personnel of
the Army, which got infected with this evil by association with the
Muslim police.  Muslim soldiers on duty invariably acted as the Muslim
police had so far done.  They connived at Muslim mobs setting fire to
the city and murdering Hindus and Sikhs, while they were very prompt to
arrest any Hindu or Sikh found in any public place, any pretext serving
for such action.  Cases of arson which had so far been isolated after
the first March days, now began to be widespread; and whole localities,
comprising hundreds of houses and shops began to be burnt.  Two of the
most persistently burnt localities were Chil Mandi and Katra Karam
Singh, the former not more than a hundred yards from the headquarters of
the city Police and fire-brigade.

Khaiwali Gali, Sattowali Gali and Gali Kandharian were some of those
localities which were surrounded by large Muslim populations.  In these
localities repeated attacks on Hindus and Sikhs were made, and looting
and burning on a large scale done.  In Katra Karam Singh, which
continued to burn for three days, more than two hundred residential
houses, sheltering several thousand human beings, were destroyed by
fire.

Here is a brief and by no means complete list of Hindu and Sikh property
burned near and after June 3, when it might be expected that in view of
their Pakistan demand being conceded, the Muslims would give up
aggression and settle down to have peaceful relations with Hindus and
Sikhs.  But no such thing happened.  On the 2nd June there was
widespread burning of Hindu and Sikh localities.  Katra Karam Singh,
Kucha Beli Ram, Kucha Khotian, Katra Sher Sinoh and Tunda Talab etc.
were some of the localities which were burned extensively.

On the 7th June, a Sikh’s house in Katra Bhabrian was burned, and also a
Hindu’s house in Chuhar Beri.

On the 8th a Hindu textile factory situated inside Lohgarh Gate was
burned, and on the 11th, the Parkash textile factory, which was situated
near the M. A.-O. College.  The Cinema house situated in this locality
had been burned previously.

On the 13th, a Hindu’s textile factory near the Power House was burned,
and fire was set to the D.A.-V. Middle School in Toba Bhai Salo on the
14th June.

On the 24th, 26th, 27th, 28th and 30th June large-scale arson in Hindu
and Sikh houses occurred in Katra Sher Singh Kohna, Chauk Telian, Ghee
Mandi, Katra Karam Singh, Bazar Bakarwanan and in Chauk Jaura.

On the 24th June on a search these arms were recovered from a mosque in
Katra Bagh Singh in Amritsar:-

9 spears, 3 hatchets, 4 gallons of incendiary spirit, 2 gallons of
kerosene oil, 1 gallon of methylated spirit and some helmets.  This was
by no means an isolated instance of Muslims keeping weapons and means of
fire-raising in large quantities or of their using places of worship as
arsenals.

On the 1st July a Hindu’s textile factory inside Lahori Gate was burned,
and a bomb was thrown into a Hindu’s house.

On the 3rd July Hindus’ houses in Katra Bagh Singh were burned with
kerosene oil.

On the 7th July a Hindu’s textile factory on the Batala Road was set on
fire.

On the 31st July the Eduljee Ice Factory situated on the Grand Trunk
Road, off a Muslim locality was set on fire.

Right into August, till only a few days before the establishment of free
India and free Pakistan the Muslims continued to be aggressors in
Amritsar.  Bomb-throwing on Hindus and Sikhs was frequently indulged
into by Muslims.

On the 23rd July a bomb was thrown on Hindu-Sikh houses on Hukam Singh
Road.  On the next day 3 Sikhs were attacked by Muslims near cattle-fair
ground, and 2 of these were killed.

On the 27th July, several.  Sikhs were murdered on the Sultanwind Road.

On the 31st July a bomb was thrown in the Hall Bazar on a tonga carrying
Hindus and Sikhs.  On the next day another tonga was destroyed by a
bomb, and its Hindu occupants killed.  On the same day one Hindu was
killed in Katra Bagh Singh, one Sikh was murdered in Hall Bazar and
Hindus and Sikhs were stabbed inside Sikandar Gali and Lohgarh Gate.

On the 4th August a Hindu was shot dead inside Lohgarh Gate, two Sikhs
were shot dead near Burj Phula Singh, off a heavily populated Muslim
area, and another in Hall Bazar, in Chauk Ghulam Hussain.

The war was getting intensified. 1,000 Muslims attacked the village of
Dhapai near Amritsar.  A Sikh was injured by a bomb near Khasa.

On the 9th August the police arrested a Pathan, named Mohammad Saeed,
near the Railway Tonga Stand, when he was lying in ambush to murder any
stray Hindu or Sikh.

On the 11th August, one Sikh and 2 Hindu were injured near Khuh
Bombaywala; one Sikh was shot dead by a Muslim constable. 12 Muslims
were arrested while assembling for an attack on Hindus and Sikhs.  One
gun and several spears were recovered from these.

On the 14th August, the Muslims celebrated establishment of Pakistan by
setting fire to Hindu and Sikh buildings in Chauk Fawara, Chil Mandi,
Kot Atma Singh, Chauk Phullanwala, and handloom factories on the Grand
Trunk Road and in Chauk Fawara.  Attacks on trains by Muslims outside
Bhagtanwala Gate, their stronghold, frequently occurred.

As a result of the Muslim campaign of arson, from the 5th March onwards,
more than one-fourth of the city of Amritsar has been laid in ruins-the
worst sufferer in this respect among the cities of the Punjab.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))One Hindu chemist’s shop is said to have been spared, as he
agreed to pay a blackmail of ten thousand rupees to the Muslim League,
through some Muslim friend of his.

^([2](#2a))The Police would simply refuse to trace Muslim goondas whose
parentage was not received.  As the name of a man’s father might not be
known to his victim, this was a convenient excuse for not interfering
with any Muslim.  Sometimes several men of the same name were taken into
custody and then let off.

^([3](#3a))Emphasis by the present writer.

^([4](#4a))Now Governor of West Punjab.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
