+++
title = "20 XXI"

+++
**XXI**

*Tales of Abductions.*

*Statement of Shrimati Viranwati, Daughter of Shri Sewa Singh aged 16/17
years, village Ilbhagwan, Tehsil Mirpur, to the Chief Liaison Officer,
Lahore.*

About 2½ months ago a Muslim mob attacked my village.  My father and
mother were killed in this attack.  Nawab Pathan one of the raiders
abducted me and took me to Hoti Mardan.  My younger sister Gian Kaur,
aged about 6 years also accompanied me.  The attack took place on the
refugee camp at Mirpur where lots of people from the neighbouring
villages were gathered.  The raiders took away 4500 girls with them. 
From Hoti Mardan he took me to Maj Garhi.  I remained with him for over
a month.  I was married to him at Maj Garhi.  He was hiding me from
place to place as the police was in search of me.  The police afterwards
caught hold of me and brought me to Rawalpindi and put me in the Camp. 
Nawab asked me whether I wanted to go back to India but I under fear
told him that as my parents had been killed I would not go to India and
thus agreed to the *Nikah* with him.  In the camp at Rawalpindi there
were 51 girls.  These girls are from the Poonch State and from Kahuta
Tehsil.  This Camp is guarded by the police.  This Camp is visited by
those Muslims who are married to the girls lodged in it, but the police
does not permit the girls to go with these Muslims.

**XXII**

*Statement made by Sarjit Kaur, wife of Jaswant Singh, aged about 19
years, of Lahore, now residing at Mahalpur, Hushiarpur District, to the
Chief Liaison Officer, Lahore*

I was married only 10 months ago at Mirpur.  My parents resided in
village Janjit, which is at a distance of 30 miles from Mirpur.  After
my marriage I stayed for two months with my husband at Lahore in Krishan
Nagar, Guru Nanak Road and went back to my parents.  Since then I was
with my parents at Janjit from where we shifted to Mirpur proper 4/5
months ago.  It was on or about the 10th of Maghar (November) last when
the last attack was made at Mirpur and the State forces gave way,
leaving all the citizens at the mercy of Pathans.  The whole of the
public followed the military on the Bhimbar Road towards Jammu.  Our
batch consisted of 2,000 persons.  Men and women, were separately kept
in a small village Akalgarh, where we stayed for two days.  After two
days the Mohammedans and the Pathans led us back on the Mirpur Road.  It
took us two days to travel on the path.  My whole family consisting of
my father, mother, sister with four children, her husband, Lal Singh,
and one sister-in-law were with me, when I was snatched away from them
by one Mohammedan who was in the company of many military soldiers of
Pakistan.  He was also armed.  Then I was kept by that man in village
Haryawan for two nights.  Then at about midnight he made me to walk from
that place after covering a mile.  When we were near Camp of Thathal I
was snatched from him by two military persons and Mohd.  Hussain,
tonga-driver of village Kotian, thana Aurangabad, District Gujrat.  It
is nearly 20 days that I have been living in this village.  With the
help of the school-mistress I conveyed the message to Lala Avtar Narain
this morning, who went and rescued me from the house of Mohd.  Hussain,
tonga-driver.

My family was deprived of the cash, gold and silver on the way and I was
left with two golden churis which have been now taken away by Mohd. 
Hussain, tonga driver.

**XXIII**

*Statement of Harbhajan Kaur, wife of Sunder Singh, Shopkeeper of
Alibeg, District Mirpur.*

My father Harnam Singh belonged to village Balani, 8 miles from Sarai
Alamgir in British Punjab.  I was married to Sardar Sunder Singh,
shopkeeper of Ali Beg 13 months back.

Four and a half months ago on account of communal disturbances I along
with my husband, his father and mother, left Alibeg for Mirpur.  The
former is at a distance of two hours journey from the latter by lorry. 
With us came Sardar Mangal Singh, my husband’s uncle, his wife Bhain,
his two young sons Iqbal and Jito, and his unmarried daughter Balwant,
aged 14.

On the 11th of Maghar corresponding to 26th November Mirpur was set on
fire by the raiders sin the forenoon.  I along with the relatives
mentioned above and others left our houses at midday for the refugee
camp at a distance of one mile from Mirpur.  We had hardly stayed in the
camp for half an hour when the Dogras deserted the camp and about 27
thousand of the refugees in the camp accompanied them.  We all marched
towards Jammu.

We had hardly covered two miles when we were fired at by the raiders
from their morchas. I did not see them and cannot say whether they were
Pathans or other Muslims.  Under bullet shots I proceeded on and missed
my relatives.  Balwant, with her younger brother aged 1 year was
accompanying me.  We were left behind by the state military who were on
mules.  We had passed the well of village Marel, two miles from Mirpur
when we were surrounded by Muslims armed with spears, swords and axes
and were stopped.  It was dusk.  We were taken back to village Marel. 
Here women and men were separated and kept in separate blocked up
rooms.  Balwant was along with me in the same room. I was taken away by
Akhtar, Qudrat Ullah and Haider to village Sehutha. I was detained in
the house of the father-in-law of Akhtar.  Here I was raped by Akhtar
and his wife’s brother Araf who had come from Mandi two days later. 
From Sehutha, I was taken to Mandi by Akhtar who was accompanied by his
father-in-law and mother-in-law, Haider, Qudrat Ullah and one young
lady.  I was kept at Mandi for four days in the house which had been
taken by Akhtar’s father-in-law. I was not molested at Mandi.  Araf came
to Mandi when I had stayed there for four days.

On 3-12-47, I was taken to Chapra village at a distance of ½ mile from
Sarai Alamgir, by Araf and Haider, his sister’s son.  We reached Chapra
at 11 O’clock and stayed with Araf’s father’s sister.  On the 4th, I was
taken to Sarai Alamgir early in the morning.  From Sarai Alamgir I was
taken to Jhelum by Araf and Haider and stayed with Mst.  Chanane sister
of Araf in Bagh Mohalla in some school.  We stayed at Jhelum for about
two hours.  From Jhelum I was taken to Gujrat in lorry.  At Gujrat we
stayed in a hotel for the night.  Next morning we left for Lahore
reaching here at about midday of the 6th December.

At Lahore I was kept at 14, Cooper Road residence of Mr. G. H. Lodhi,
Barrister-at-law.  Araf’s sister is married to Mr. Lodhi.  She did not
like the idea of her brother abducting a non-Muslim girl and marrying
her.  Mr. G. H. Lodhi arranged to deliver me to the Chief Liaison
Officer.

Araf wanted to take me to the village in Montgomery district where he
had his squares of land and stopped in the way at Lahore as he had to
leave Haider with his brother-in-law, Mr. G. H. Lodhi.

I was temporarily deprived of my ornaments at Sehutha but was restored
my ornaments when I left Mandi.

I did not know what had become of my husband, his father and mother. I
was told that they were killed.  My parents were presumably in Sitapur
Biwabin, India.  My father’s maternal uncle, S. Wasakha Singh is a
resident of Amritsar near the Railway Station.  He and his sons Balwant,
Kartar Singh and Labh Singh are dealers in fruits and have carts for
use.

**XXIV**

*Pakistan scheme to convert the younger women among those abducted.*

CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE REPORT

“A batch of 291 Hindus and Sikhs abducted persons including a number of
children arrived at the Ganga Ram Hospital Transit Camp in Lahore on
Sunday, February 29, from Campbellpur and Kunjah refugee camps. 
Seventy-six of these persons came from Campbellpur and the rest from
Kunjah.

“These rescued women and children appeared to have been better fed and
looked after than the previous group of 694 persons.  They were clad in
comparatively cleaner clothes and did not present an unrelieved picture
of misery and starvation as the previous batch strikingly did.

“One of the women told a pressman that they had been supplied with
improved diet in the Camp at Kunjah during last week.

“The Pakistan Government commissioned a regular force of Maulvis to work
their magic on the “Younger and more acceptable” type of abducted
women.  The aged and infirm remained “unblessed.” No arguments and
persuasions are spent on the latter to make Pakistan their home.”

**XXV**

*Statement of Lala Sona Ram, son of Lala Narain Dass Batra, Opium
Contractor, Kalabagh, District Mianwali.*

I reached Lahore on the 21st of August to enquire about my brother Lala
D. L. Batra, working in the Central Bank of India.  I was accompanied by
Mohd.  Asaf Khan who called me ‘uncle’ and I posed to be a Mohammedan. 
When I reached Lahore there was not a single non-Muslim to be found
moving about anywhere.  I could not meet my brother at Lahore. I went to
his house and found that portion of it had been burnt down and there was
water all round.  On the 23rd I reached Lahore railway station and saw a
lot of killing being done by the Muslim goondas.  Mutilated bodies of
non-Muslims were being carried on stretchers by the Pakistan military
men.  We boarded the Frontier Mail on that day at 3 p.m. Between Gujrat
and Campbellpur 5 non-Muslim passengers were done to death.  We reached
Campbellpur on the following day at about 6-30 a.m. From there I
proceeded to Ghur Ghusthi where I had to leave my companion.  I returned
to Kalabagh on the 25th morning.  I did not find any non-Muslim
passenger in the train.  It was being openly talked by the Muslims that
no non-Muslim should be spared.  When I reached Kalabagh I found some
non-Muslims still living there.  Piara Singh (Sikh) was in Kalabagh, but
he was killed later on.

A refugee camp was started at Santpura by the district authorities. 
Piara Singh was put in the camp after his beard and hair had been cut. 
He was killed in the camp on the 17th September.  Previous to it Sunder
Mal Sawhney was stabbed on the platform at the Mari Indus railway
station in broad day light.  His family was at Mianwali and he was alone
at the time of the incident.

Lala Jetha Mal was Assistant Station Master at Mari Indus.  Every day
after duty he used to come back to Kalabakh to his family by train.  On
the 13th September while Jetha Mal was going to his duty by train he was
stopped, cut into pieces and thrown into the river.

On the 12th September, an attack was made on the non-Muslim refugees
camp.  One *Ghumar* entered the camp and with a knife (chhura) he
wounded 4 persons (2 men and 2 women).  The women died on the following
day in hospital.

All this time I remained in my own house in the main bazar.  I was told
that it was now my turn.  I thereupon moved to the house of the
Sub-Inspector of Police and spent the night there.  I then went to see
Wahab Khan, an employee of Nawab of Kalabagh and asked him for help.  He
said he could not help me unless I embraced Islam.  I was not prepared
to accept this solution but Wahab Khan insisted that there was no other
way to save my life.  He then took me to the Nawabzada and told me to
wait outside while he himself went to see the Nawabzada.  The Nawabzada
told Wahab Khan that I should not be spared and that I and my family
would be finished as I was a popular figure.  Wahab Khan urged that I
should be allowed to be converted and that I and my family should not be
put to death.  The Nawabzada then agreed to the suggestion of Wahab Khan
and said that I may be converted.  At 10 a.m. Wahab Khan brought me back
to my place.  My family was living in my house.  I always had the doors
locked from inside and never stirred out.

The Nawabzada sent his man to fetch Maulvi Fakhar Zaman of Kot
Chandana.  After consulting the Nawabzada the Maulvi was sent to the
Idgah Mosque.  They also decided that unless I was made to lodge a
report in the Police Station I should not be converted.  A number of
Muslims then came to my house and told me about this position.  Khan
Zaman tailor, Ghulam, Khawaja Mohd.  Hussain and others came to me and
they accompanied me to the Police Station where I lodged a report and
signed it. I was then brought back to my house.  Accompanied by my
family comprising five sons, one daughter and my wife, I was made to go
to the Idgah.  There were about 4-5 thousand persons including women. 
Then the Maulvi made me and my family members read the Kalma and
garlanded us.  My wife accompanied by the children was taken away by the
Muslim women present to my house and I was taken to the house of Nawab. 
Still the Nawabzada stuck to his view that I and my family should have
been put to death and it was a bad thing to have converted us to Islam. 
At the Idgah, Maulvi Mohd.  Zaman addressed the spectators and told them
that they should give up the idea of killing me as I had been
converted.  Oil being told by the Maulvi that after my conversion I had
become a Muslim and therefore was entitled to protection, the Nawabzada
kept quiet but still he refused to meet me.  Wahab Khan brought me back
to my place and Maulvi Fakhar Zaman went to his village.

After 3-4 days of my conversion, Malli and Ghulam Hussain, Muslim
goondas came to me and told me that my conversion could not be treated
as genuine until I performed the circumcision ceremony of my 5 sons.  I
told them that I was prepared to have the ceremony.  On the following
day I was taken to a doctor where the arrangement was made and
circumcision done.  My eldest son aged about 15 years had also to
undergo the circumcision.  I entreated that he should at least be spared
but nobody listened to me.

On or about 19th or 20th of September a second attack was made on the
non-Muslim refugee camp at Kalabagh.

The camp was at that time being guarded by the Pakistan military and
police but they did not check the attackers, or prevent them in any
way.  They remained content with firing in the air.  The attackers
belonged to Kalabagh town and the neighbouring villages.  They were
fully armed with rifles and daggers.  They entered the camp.  There was
a large number of casualties and a lot of property was looted.  After
the attackers had gone away the Pakistan Military posted on duty started
looting.

The non-Muslims in the refugee camp at Kalabagh were evacuated to
Makarwal Colliery.  On the way they were attacked on the bridge and a
lot of looting by the Pakistan military and police took place.

The Nawabzada declared himself to be a protector of non-Muslims and in
this garb he persuaded a large number of non-Muslims to leave their
valuables in deposit with him.  He did not give any receipts and
whatever was left with him he has managed to retain up till now.  He
also received a large number of rifles, guns and ammunition.  The attack
on the camp was the result of his machination.

I am tendering herewith the camp pass given to me at Kalabagh.  After
conversion I was named Ahmed Said.

**XXVI**

FORCIBLE CONVERSIONS (LYALLPUR)

The Hindus and Sikhs resident of Chak No. 23 W. B. requested Mohd. 
Hanif Shah, Superintendent, to arrange protection of their lives and
property, and the Superintendent gave full assurance that he would do
his best.  On 27-8-47 in the morning again it was repeated by him, they
were given full assurance of their safety.  But in the afternoon on that
day, it has been alleged that under the instructions of the
Superintendent, the Muslims of neighbouring chaks collected and the
Muslims of Chak 23 W. B. were ordered to stand around the chak.  They
gave the Hindus the threat either that they should embrace Islam or they
would be killed along with their families.  They said the womenfolk
would be ill treated, their breasts, ears and noses would be cut off. 
On this they approached the Superintendent and reminded him of his
promise.  His advice was to embrace Islam and thus secure safety.  So
there was forcible shaving of the head hair and beards of the Sikhs from
7 to 10 p.m. and they all had to embrace Islam.

Note: (*In some other cases, circumcision was also insisted on and
performed in public*).

**XXVII**

FORCIBLE AND ILLEGAL MARRIAGES

*Statement of Sh. Ram Piari alias Piari, wife of Amar Nath Arora, aged
20 years of Baddomali, District Sialkot, made to the Chief Liaison
Officer, East Punjab.*

“About 3 months back, my village was raided by Muslims and the village
was set on fire and there was general looting.  The Hindu population was
asked to walk out with a promise that they would be given a free passage
across the river Ravi towards India.  When we walked out of our houses
we were subjected to searches and all our belongings were taken away. 
They did a lot of killing.  I was forced to accompany a Muslim whose
name I do not know.  Later at the asking of Labhu, a tongawala of
Baghbanpura, I was taken over by him.  Against my consent and at the
point of dagger I was subjected to rape by Labhu. I was also deprived of
my two gold rings, one gold necklace, one pair of earrings and about Rs.
8,900 that I had carried with me.  After 7-8 days this Labhu against my
wishes performed Nikah ceremony with me and used me as a wife.

**XXVIII**

FROM THE CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE (OCTOBER 1947)

A senior Sikh Military officer was virtually ejected from a leading
Hotel in Lahore on Wednesday night because Muslims present there
insisted that a Sikh should not be allowed entry to a Public place in
Pakistan, says a Press Note from the Office of the Deputy High
Commissioner for India in Pakistan.  This, the note continues, is an
interesting sequel to the communal harmony propaganda of Mr. Ghaznafar
Ali Khan, Food Minister of the Pakistan Government.

The Sikh Officer, accompanied by another Indian Army Officer, and two
ladies went to this Hotel for dinner.  He had been there hardly for ten
minutes when the manager of the hotel approached him and said, “I admire
your courage, but I am very sorry that the Muslims around here object to
your presence”.

“The Manager, who was a European, was very apologetic about the attitude
of the people, but he said it was advisable for the Officer to leave the
hotel in order to avoid any unpleasant incident.

“The Sikh officer, much against his will, agreed to leave.  Meanwhile,
the other officer with him went around and talked to the people who had
objected to the presence of the Sikh officer in the hotel, but their
attitude was extremely unreasonable.  They threatened to shoot the Sikh
officer if he did not remove himself immediately.”

In connection with the above incident the author of “Inside Pakistan”
has this to say:

“I personally verified the truth of the above report from the Manager of
the Falettis Hotel, where the incident took place.  The Press report
might well have added that the Sikh officer concerned was a Colonel and
had that day arrived in Lahore after guarding a convoy of Muslim
Refugees from East Punjab and saving their lives several times on the
road.  The incident created a bad impression in Delhi where Muslims were
and have always been welcome to the Maidens and Imperial Hotels and the
Associated Hotels in Simla and elsewhere.  From personal knowledge the
author can say that but for the courtesy of the management of the
Associated Hotels in Simla during last summer, several Muslim families
and particularly ladies whose men-folk were in Pakistan, would have been
murdered.  The Sikh staff did everything possible to protect Muslim
residents in the Hotels.”

**XXIX**

MURDER OF PRINCIPAL BARTLAM (NOVEMBER, 1947)

Principal Bartlam of the Punjab College of Engineering and Technology,
Lahore was neither a Hindu nor a Sikh.  He was British, and had joined
the College as Principal in 1945.  He had been recruited in London by
the Secretary of State and was signed on for a period of five years.  On
the establishment of Pakistan, Principal Bartlam decided to serve out
his term, and the Pakistan Government was glad to avail of his services
particularly as Pakistan would be sorely in need of engineers and the
College was the premier Engineering and Technology institution in the
whole of Pakistan.

The College had Hindu and Sikh Professors and Demonstrators, but they
had all to migrate owing to the massacre of non-Muslims in August, on
the eve of and soon after the establishment of Pakistan.  Late in
October, 1947, one of the Hindu Professors approached Principal Bartlam
for permission to remove his personal belonging.  This was resented by
the Muslim staff and students as everything in Pakistan was considered
to be the property of Pakistan.  There was a strike in the College. 
Principal Bartlam, however, was adament that he would permit the
Professor to remove his personal belongings.  In the course of a
disturbance Principal Bartlam was stabbed to death, so too the Hindu
Professor, his son, and a servant of Mr. Bartlam.

**XXX**

HINDUS AND THEIR BELONGINGS

S*tatement of Mr. Sehgal, Assistant Liaison Officer.*

On the 30th morning (30-1-48) at 11-30 a. m. Mr. Chaman Lal who had
already secured a permit from the Custodian for the removal of his
personal effects from his own house, went to collect his jewellery which
was buried there on Ravi Road a little beyond the first bridge. Just as
he had started digging with the help of two coolies, a police man came
and stopped him asking him to get a permit in which removal of ornaments
from the earth was specifically stated.

Mr. Chaman Lal returned to my office and requested that he should get
the special permit for him immediately and help him to remove his
jewellery.  The permit was obtained from the Custodian and I accompanied
him to his house.  I found two policemen on duty, guarding the place
where the digging had been started. I showed them the permit but they
said chat unless their station house officer, Badami Bagh, ordered, they
would not allow the permit to he operated. I went to the police
Inspector, Naulakha Sadar who assured me that he would ring up S. H. O.
Badami Bagh to send a constable to the spot to instruct these constables
on duty to allow us operations. I went back but nobody came.  The
attitude of the policemen on duty was very offensive.  One of them
threatened the coolies who were with us.

Along with Mr. Chaman Lal I went to the officer incharge, Badami Bagh
police station to show him the permit and get his permission to
operate.  He sent his Havildar with me to the Inspectors for orders. 
The Inspector, Mumtaz Ahmed told him to allow us to dig and put the
ornaments and as a precautionary measure sent with us a. Sub-Inspector
and another Havildar. I had already one with me belonging to the special
guard provided to us by the Pakistan Police.

By then it was 4-30 p.m. whilst the digging was going on over two
thousand men had collected, shouting, and abusing us.  The ornaments
were not found and the owner wanted that we should return.

The crowd had sticks, axes takuas, brick-bats and other crude weapons in
their hands.

We were surrounded by them and they shouted slogans like Nara-e-Takbir,
Allah-ho-Akbar and then “Marro”, “Marro”.  One very hot-headed darkish
man with small moustaches who appeared to be a refugee was very
mischievous and was exhorting the crowd in the name of Quran not to let
us escape with our lives.

Suddenly as we came upto the station wagon belonging to our Government,
we were literally mobbed with sticks and brickbats and one of our party
was consequently wounded.  A huge brick was hurled at me from the front
smashing the glass.  My driver was badly pulled out and gear was put in
neutral.  All this happened within about five or ten minutes.  Our
murder was a question of a few moments then, and I advised the
Sub-Inspector to open fire to which he did not respond, but he only kept
on requesting the crowd not to kill us. I, in the circumstances, came
out of the station wagon and addressed the crowd that they should be
ashamed of their behaviour towards an officer who was there to do his
duty. I was perfectly cool throughout, and perhaps it was on account of
that attitude, that they took me for a Muslim Officer and a few of the
mob shouted that they should not touch a Muslim officer on duty.

(The above is typical of many such incidents in which Hindus and Sikhs
were obstructed in removing their property from Pakistan.  Principal
Bartlam of the Engineering College was murdered for the crime of helping
a Hindu Professor to remove his belongings.)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)  [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)  [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
