+++
title = "07  Chapter 7         Educational System During Pre-British Days"

+++
Chapter 7  
Educational System During Pre-British Days

Ancient India was celebrated for its learning all over civilized Asia
and Europe. Megasthenese (ca. 302 BC) was struck by the depth of this
learning during his mission to the court of Chandragupta. Fa-hien, the
famous Chinese traveller (399413 AD) spent some years at the Pataliputra
and Tamralipti monasteries. He also spent two years in Ceylon which too
had its monasteries after the India fashion. These monasteries were a
big affair, housing and teaching several hundred monks each. Two
centuries after came Hiuen Tsang undertaking a hazardous journey across
Central Asia and northern parts of India. During the seventeen years he
spent in India (629-645 AD) he visited many monasteries belonging to the
Mahayana and the Hinayana schools. He visited Hiranyaparvata, the Golden
Hill (Munghir), a city on the bank of the Ganges, which had 10
Sangharamas with 4,000 priests, and 12 Deva temples. At Tamralipti (at
the mouth of Hoogly), there were 10 monasteries with a thousand monks.
The same story is told of many other towns he visited.

I-tsing (671-695 AD) came to India by sea-route. He spent ten years
studying at the Nalanda University, the most dominant at his time. It
was supported by a revenue of 200 villages and housed more than 3,000
monks. The building contained eight halls and three hundred apartments.
On the way back, he spent seven years in Sribhoja (Sumatra), which was a
cultural extension of India.

In the face of continued Muslim onslaught from across the north-west
frontier, Hindu Buddhist sciences began to retire into the ineterior.
Alberuni tells us how "Mahmud ruined the prosperity of the country
(India)", how they (Hindus) were turned into "atoms of dust scattered in
all directions", how "this is the reason, too, why Hindu sciences have
retired far away from those parts of the country conquered by us, and
have fled to places which our hand cannot yet reach, to Kashmir,
Benares, and other places." As time passed and the Muslim inroads became
deeper, Hindu centres of learning were destroyed in the interior too.
Eventually, from there they retired into neighbouring countries like
Tibet.

Tibet preserved as best as it could, what India was no longer in a
position to do. For example, 4000 books belonging to the Sanskrit, Pali
and Prakrit literature were translated into Tibetan language. Today,
about 3800 of them are no longer even known in India. They were so
completely destroyed. The work of destruction was so complete. Today
much of old India is found in neighbouring countries like Tibet and Siam
and Cambodia; and India's old past history cannot be reconstructed
except with their aid.

The Nalanda University continued its glorious existence for a thousand
years till it was destroyed by the Muslims. Bakhtiyar Khilji invaded
Bihar in 1197 AD and found that at Odantapuri (present-day Bihar-Sharif
in Patna District) "most of inhabitants were Brahmins with shaven heads.
They were put to death. Large number of books were found there, and,
when the Muhammadans saw them, they called for some persons to explain
their contents, but all the men had been killed. It was discovered that
the whole fort and city was a place of study. In the Hindi language the
word Behar (*vih√¢r*) means a college" (Elliot and Dowson, *The History
of India*, Vol.11, p.306).

After this, India entered an era lasting over several centuries which
may be called its dark period. Hindus came under the repeated attacks of
the Muslims who destroyed their places of worship and learning. But
their hands could not reach everywhere; and even in places where they
were more securely established, their rule did not remain undisputed for
long. As a result, Hindu India and its institutions, though badly
mauled, still survived.

  
European Era

As we enter the period of European conquest, we find that the European
travellers and administrators bear testimony to the great veneration in
which the Hindus hold learning and instruction. One of the earliest
observations made on the subject of indigenous education was by Fra
Paolino Da Bartolomeo. Born in Austria, he spent fourteen years in India
(1776-1789). Recalling what Megasthenese wrote, he says that the method
of teaching and writing was introduced into India two hundred years
before Christ, and that he still found it in practice. "No people,
perhaps, on earth have adhered as much to their ancient usage and
customs as the Indians," he says. He tells us that the Greek historians
represent the Indians as people of greater size, and much more robust
than those of other nations. He himself "seldom saw in India a person
either lame, crooked, or otherwise deformed". Among many factors,
climatic and cultural (like wholesome nourishment, cold bath, oil
message etc.), which he recounts, he says that "temperance and education
contribute, in an uncommon degree, to the bodily conformation, and to
the increase of these people". Then he describes the method and practice
of teaching and instruction as he found them in Malabar schools.

We may here also quote the testimony of Brigadier-General Alexander
Walker who served In India between 1780 and 1810. He says that "no
people probably appreciate more justly the importance of instruction
than the Hindus". According to him, "they sacrifice all the feelings of
wealth, family pride and caste that their children may have the
advantage of good education". He also found that this love of learning
was no exclusive characteristic of the Brahmins but "this desire is
strongly impressed on the minds of all the Hindus. It is inculcated by
their own system, which provided schools in every village." He adds that
the "spirit of enquiry and of liberty has most probably been effected by
the soodors \[Shudras\] who compose the great body of population, and
who were in possession of the principal authority and property of the
country".

Even during the early days of the British, when they had not entrenched
themselves so well, indigenous education was thriving. Discussing the
famous "Nuddeah School" of Bengal, an article (*Calcutta Monthly
Register*, January 1791) has the following to say: "In the college of
Nuddeah alone, there are at present 1,100 students and 150 masters.
Their numbers, it is true fall very short of those in former days. In
Rajah Roodre's time (Circa 1680) there were at Nuddeah, no less than
4,000 students and masters in proportion." All, the teachers as well as
the pupils, were supported by the revenue of free land, the Rajah's
treasury supplying any deficiency.

The fact of wide-spread education - a school in every village - was
uniformly noticed by most early observers. Even writing as late as 1820,
Abbe J.A. Dubois says that "there are very few villages in which one or
many public schools are not to be found ... that the students learn in
them all that is necessary to their ranks and wants ... namely, reading,
writing, and accounts".

  
The Government Survey

For a hundred years, the hands of the British Government were full with
the problems of military conquest and revenue system. But for the
consolidation of their power, they had to turn to other more intangible
aspects of the country's life. Education, so important an Institution,
could not be left out of their vigilant attention. The Raj made a
thorough study of the prevailing indigenous educational system before
introducing its own. Surveys were made in the Bombay Presidency
(1820-1830), and the Madras Presidency (1823-1826). A limited,
semi-official survey was also made in the Presidency of Bengal ten years
later by W. Adam, an excommunicated Baptist missionary, and the findings
were published in 1835 in *A Report on the State of Education in
Bengal*. \[His first Report was followed by two more, published in 1836
and 1838.\] When Punjab was annexed in 1849, the British Government had
already developed its Educational policy which it put into operation
immediately in this region. G.W. Leitner, Principal of Government
College, Lahore, and for some time also the Director of Public
Instruction, Punjab, made his own investigations and published his
Report in 1883.

Adam's Reports on Bengal became celebrated and saw several reprints, the
last in 1983 with a scholarly introduction by Joseph Dibona, the
Associate Professor of Education at the Duke University, Durham.[1](#1)
Leitner's Report on Punjab, which has been unavailable for decades, has
also been reprinted in 1971 by the Languages Department, Punjab.[2](#2)
Madras data was the most comprehensive but it never came out in print
though its conclusions were known and were referred to by several
authorities in several occasions. Dharampal has collected this data on
its fullness and published it for the first time. With a long,
illuminating introduction, and with many appendices including long
portion from Adam's Reports and Leitner's *History*, his *The Beautiful
Tree* may be considered as the single, most comprehensive document in
the subject.[3](#3)

It turned out that what the Government undertook was not a sample survey
but a veritable census. The Madras study and Adam's study of the Thana
of the Nattore in the Rajashahy District of Bengal counted every school,
scholar and teacher. These reports described the mode of instruction.
They touched many points: curriculum, text-books, the hours of coaching,
the tuition fees, the financial support of the system. They also
contained information regarding the state of the female education; they
collected the caste-composition of the scholars and the teachers and
also their religious and linguistic affiliations. In this way, these
reports, besides throwing light on the educational state of the period,
became a mine of information on many sociological facts.

  
The Mode of Instruction

There were certain characteristic features of the Hindu mode of
instruction. Reading and writing were combined. As a pupil spoke aloud a
letter, he also wrote it with his finger on the ground in sand. When he
had acquired a little proficiency, he could use an iron style or reed or
some other instrument to write on a palm-leaf or plantain-leaf.
Wooden-boards and brazen-plates were also used. The writing could be
effaced with a wet cloth, and boards and slates used again for writing
upon. The method was economical.

The very first lessons which taught a knowledge of letters also provided
moral and religious instruction. A letter was learnt by referring to a
word beginning with that letter, then by a verse which was also a moral
maxim, in order to impress it better in the memory. For example the
letter 'k' stood for *kubr√¢* (hump-backed), and it was accompanied by
the verse: *kakk√¢ kar kart√¢ k√Æ p√ªj√¢, wah√Æ nira√±jan aur na d√ªj√¢* (worship
the Creator; He is pure and He has no second). Again, the alphabet 'd'
was accompanied by this verse; *dosh na d√Æje k√¢h√ª; dosh karam apne k√¢*
(do not attribute your failure to others; attribute it to your own
destiny). G.W. Leitner gives a whole list of these verses for all the
letters. Thus the very first lessons which taught knowledge of the
alphabets also provided moral and religious instruction.

There was also another feature of this mode of learning: the pupils
learnt in groups of four or five, generally led by a more advanced
student. Describing the method, A.D. Campbell, Collector of Bellary,
says: "The economy with which children are taught to write in the native
schools, and the system by which the more advanced scholars are caused
to teach the less advanced, and at the same time to confirm their own
knowledge is certainly admirable, and well deserves the imitation it has
received in England." This refers to the well known fact that some of
the features of the Indian indigenous education were borrowed by
Europe.[4](#4)

  
Grass-roots Schools-system

Even though already much decayed when the British undertook the survey,
the remains indicated an immense edifice which had its foundations deep
in the culture of the country and had penetrated every village. W.
Adam's Report of 1835 showed that in the then states of Bengal and
Bihar, there were 100,000 indigenous elementary schools, or one school
for every 31 or 32 boys of school-going age, as the author calculated.
The Madras Report which was the most comprehensive showed that there
were 12,498 schools containing 188,650 scholars. During the same period,
schools of a similar nature were found scattered throughout the Bombay
Presidency too. Leitner found that 8000 pupils still received their
education in the indigenous schools of Punjab in spite or "the 26 years
of repressive education of the Educational Department",

The data shows that the female education was very much neglected though
it was not altogether absent. Certain regions like Malabar and Joypoor
in Vizagapatam made a better showing then other areas. In these regions,
we also find that the Shudras did better in the matter of female
education than the upper class Hindus including the Brahmins. In the
Punjab, according to Leitner, "female education is to be met in all
parts". According to him, the Punjabi woman has not only been "always
more or less educated herself, but she has been an educator of others".
He tells us that even before the annexation of the Punjab, six public
schools for girls in Delhi were kept by Punjabi women.

The Reports also show that besides the system of public education, there
was also widespread private coaching. The Collector of Canara wrote,
that whatever education was there in his district was "entirely
private". In Madras, the number of pupils taught privately at home was
considered to be "above five times greater than that taught in the
schools", according to Sir Thomas Munro, Governor of Madras Presidency.
In Malabar District, 1,094 Hindu students of advanced learning, were
being coached privately, while only 75 attended the only one public
institution financed by the impoverished Raja. The Collector narrates
the pathetic story of this ancient institution, first destroyed by the
Muslims in 966, and later on ruined by being denied its revenues by the
British. According to Adam, in the Nattore Thana, while only 659 pupils
were taught in any kind of public schools, 2,382 were taught at home.

Private coaching including self-education remained an important part of
the Indian scene. Edward Thompson writing in the 1930's says: "There are
in India poor folk who never went to any sort of school who have learnt
to read. . . There must be more literacy in the sense of reading the
vernaculars, than the numbers in schools indicate, or else how every
Bengal bazaar swarms with these frightfully printed (but cheap) texts of
Ramprasad, Chandidas, Krittibas's Ramayana (before the War, according to
Dinesh Sen, two hundred thousand sold every year). . . Sarat Chatterjee
told me that in 1921 the twelve annas edition of his fiction had brought
him in twelve thousand rupees in royalties, which I estimate to be on a
sale of two hundred thousand."

  
Higher Education

There was also a well-developed system of specialized education and
higher learning.

According to the *Survey of Indigenous Education in the Province of
Bombay* (1820-30), there were 16 schools of higher learning in
Ahmednagar; and in Poona there was as many 164 such schools out of a
total of 222 educational institutions of all description.

Madras Presidency reported 1,101 schools (with 5431 students) of higher
learning, Rajahmundry heading the list with 279 such schools.
Trichnopoly had 173, Nellore 137 and Tanjore 109. These taught 5,431
scholars who learnt here, according to their specialization, the Vedas,
or Law, or Astronomy, or Poetics, or Music, etc.

Hamilton said in 1801 that within the limits of the 24Parganas, beyond
the limits of Calcutta, there were 190 seminaries, all indigenously
maintained where Hindu Law, Grammar and Metaphysics were taught. Ward,
who wrote in 1818, enumerated 28 institutions of higher learning in the
city of Calcutta alone where Ny√¢ya and Smriti Sh√¢stras were taught.
There was well organized instruction in the Indian system of medicine
and inoculation against small-pox was also taught.

Adam gives much data on the subject. According to his Report, in the
Thana of Nattore in the District of Rajashahy alone, there were 38
higher schools of learning with 379 scholars, of whom 261 came from
distant places. We have the same story from another corner in India,
namely the Punjab. Leitner's Report says: "The Vedas were, comparatively
speaking, little taught in the Punjab in Ranjit Singh's time, the
teachers chiefly coming from the Dekkan"; but, he adds that in Sanskrit
and in Grammar, "Punjab Learning was proverbial throughout India, whilst
Punjabi Pandits also excelled in Niaya (Logic), Mimansa, the
Dharmshastras, Vedant and Sankhya (six Shastras), Patidhant and Siddhant
(Astronomy)".

  
Subjects

The subjects taught in these schools of higher learning were the Vedas,
S√¢Mkhya (Philosophy), the Six DarSanas, Law, Logic, Poetics, Grammar,
Astrology and Astronomy, and Medicine. Fra Paolino Da Bartolomeo,
describing education in Malabar also mentions the following subjects:
Chess (*ciudarangam*), fencing (*payatta*), Navigation (*naushantra*)
and the use of the spear on foot (*hastiludiun*). Another interesting
subject taught was silence or mauna. Yes, mauna too has to be taught and
it is as important a subject as any other. We learn from Leitner's
Report that Ranjit Singh also gave grants to architects and gun-makers.
It is not clear whether the grants were personal or meant for teaching
their arts to other deserving students.

  
The Pandits

Adam praises the teachers for their learning which was equalled only by
their modesty. He found them "not only unpretending but also plain and
simple". Though "adepts in the subtleties of the profoundest grammar" of
a language "probably the most philosophical", and masters of logic,
ethical philosophy and of their national laws, they were "discriminating
and mild". He found in them "no abjectness to a supposed or official
superior". They praised other Pandits for their learning, generally in
their absence, rather than themselves. Let us salute their memory. What
was said about the country's cotton-weavers could as justly be said
about its teachers and Acharyas - their bones are bleaching the plains
of the country.

  
Text-books

The Collector of Bellary District reports that "the three books which
are most common in all the schools, and which are used indiscriminately
by all the several castes, are the Ramayana Mahabharata, and Bhagvata".
Thus contrary to the current notion, the highest ethical and spiritual
literature of the Hindus was open to all irrespective of their caste.
Very much unlike the West, where the Bible remained unread and even a
prohibited reading for many, many centuries; and, in fact, many times
its translators into vernacular were burned at the stake - till the
triumph of Protestantism, which gave birth to an opposite movement
called bibliolatry.

F.W. Robertson, Collector of Rajahmundry District, names 66 text books
including the Ramayana, various Shutcums (Krishn Shutcum, Suryanarayan
Shutcum, Jankeya Shutcum, Narayan Shutcum), and various Charitums (like
Vamana Charitum, Mala Charitum, etc.). Some text-books, like the
Visvakaram-Purana, were special to the manufacturing classes. Adam names
29 text-books taught in elementary schools in Bengal, and 120 books
taught in higher Institutes. These related to such subjects as Grammar
(20), General Literature (11), Law (17), Vedanta (4), Logic (31),
Astronomy and Astrology (19), Medicine (4), etc.

In his Report on the Punjab, Leitner names hundreds of textbooks -
Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic and Gurmukhi - taught in Hindu and Muhammadan
schools of different grades in the Punjab. For example, text-books
taught to Sikh students of Gurmukhi schools are divided into two
sections: those taught to the beginners and those taught to advanced
students. To the first section belonged Balopdesha, Panj Granthi, Janam
Sakhi, the tenth Guru's Panj Ekadash, Bhagvat, Tulsi Ramayana, Vishnu
Purana, Pingal (10 parts), Ashwa Medha, Adhyatma Ramayana, Vichara
Sagar, Moksha Pantha, Surya Prakash, the sixth Guru's Guru Vilas,
Vashishtha Purana, and Daswan Askandha.

This must be embarrassing to the new-style, collaborationist Sikh
intellectuals.

  
Education Open to All

There is a popular notion that education in India was monopolized by the
Brahmins; but the data destroys this myth completely. This interested
lie was first spread by the missionaries and the British rulers and the
colonized mind of many Indian intellectuals still continue to sing their
tune. But the data reveals a different story. It tells us that out of
the total number of 175,089 students, both male and female, elementary
and advanced, only 42,502 were Brahmins (24.25%); 19,669 were Vaishya
students (about 11%); but 85,400 were Shudras (about 48.8%); and still
27.516 more were "all other castes", meaning castes even lower than the
Shudras including the pariahs (15.7%). Thus the higher castes were only
about 35% and the Shudras and other castes were about 65% of the total
Hindu students. If we also include the Muslims who were about 7% of the
total Hindu and Muslim students, then the share of the Brahmins was even
less.

We have a table showing the caste-wise division of all male school
students, both in absolute numbers and in percentage, of all the 20
districts of Madras Presidency. The data shows that the share of the
Brahmins in certain areas was indeed very low. For example, in
Seringapatam, it was only 7.83% in Madura 8.67%; in North Arcot, Brahmin
boys were 9.57%, while the Shudras and "other castes" were 84.46%.

Even in higher learning, non-Brahmins were not unrepresented. In
Malabar, out of 1,588 scholars of Theology, Law, Astronomy, Metaphysics,
Ethics and Medical Science, only 639 were Brahmins, 23 Vaishyas, 254
Shudras and 672 "other castes". Only in the Vedas and Theology did the
Brahmins have a near-monopoly, as the Shudras and the "other castes" had
in other branches of advanced learning like Astro-nomy and Medical
Science. In Astronomy, out of a total of 806 scholars, Brahmins were
only 78, Vaishyas 23, Shudras 195, and other lower castes 510. In
Medical Science, the share of the Brahmin scholars was only 31 out of a
total of 190. The rest belonged to the Shudras and "other castes".

According to the *Survey of Indigenous Education in the Province of
Bombay* (1820-1830), Brahmins constituted only 30% of the total scholars
in that province.

Adam tells the same story about Bengal and Bihar. In the five districts
he investigated, the total number of Hindu students was 22,957. Out of
these 5,744 were Brahmins, or about 25%. Kayasthas were about 12%.
Students belonging to 95 castes find representation in his Report. It
includes 66 ChanDals, 20 Muchis, 84 Doms, 102 Kahars, and 615 Kurmis.

In spite of the claims of the missionaries, they did no better for the
Hindu *low-castes*. According to Adam's findings, Burdwan had 13
missionary schools, yet they had only 1 ChanDal student while the native
schools had 60. The former had only 3 Doms and no Muchis while the
latter had 58 and 16 respectively. Of the 760 pupils belonging to the
lowest 16 castes, "only 86 were found in the missionary schools, and the
remaining number in native schools".

As teachers, the Brahmins were even less represented. Out of a total of
2,261 teachers in these districts, Brahmins were only 208, or about 11%.
In this region Kayasthas were the teachers par excellence. They were
1,019 in number, or a little less than half the total. Other teachers
belonged to other 32 castes. ChanDals had six, Goalas had five, Telis
had eleven; while Rajputs had only two, and Chhatri and Kshetriya taken
together had only three.

  
Comparison

It will not be out of place here to compare the state of instruction in
India at this period with the one prevalent in the West, and
particularly in England, the country with which we have better
acquaintance. The West was at this time acquiring monasteries and
new-style universities which were gaining fame for teaching theology,
but it still had no national system of elementary education for
instructing its younger ones.

In England, the attempt to introduce any semblance of wider instruction
was first made in mid-fifties in the nineteenth century under factory
laws. But the legislation "provided nothing more than that the children
shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours
(three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of a place called
a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive weekly a
certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by the
subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress" (*Report of the
Inspector of Factories*, Parliamentary Papers, June 30, 1857).

The level of literacy of these teachers was such that many of them
signed the certificate of attendance at school with a cross. As a
result, an Act had to be passed in 1844 which required that the "figures
in the school certificate must be filled up in the handwriting of the
schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and surname in full". But
that did not improve matters very much. Sir John Kincaid, Factory
Inspector for Scotland, tells us how a school teacher, one Mrs. Ann
Killin, spelled her name sometimes with letter C, sometimes with K and
in various other ways. He also tells us of a "schoolroom 15 feet long,
and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, who were
gabbling something unintelligible" (Parliamentary Papers, 31st October
1858) About the "cultural" acquirements of these scholars, one may read
Karl Marx (*Das Capital*, Part III, Chapter 10, Section 4), who quotes
extensively from the *Children's Employment Commission Report*.

Punishment in India under the indigenous system of education was mild.
Even in the Punjab region where it was more common, it consisted in
making a student stand in a corner, or making him pull his own ears by
passing his hands through his knees; or making him sit down and stand up
for a number of times; or disallowing him to leave the class-room during
the meal time. There were no fines. On the other hand, teachers in
England were sadists - at least, this is what the English accounts of
the period tell us. For example, Charles Dickens in his *Nicholas
Nickleby* (1838-39) describes these schools and their teachers,
particularly in Yorkshire. He says that these "schoolmasters, as a race,
were the blockheads and impostures"; that, they "were the lowest and
most rotten in the whole ladder"; that they were "ignorant, sordid,
brutal men, to whom few considerate men would have entrusted the board
and lodging of a horse or dog". He said that these schools were opened
by "any man who had proved his unfitness for any other occupation in
life".

  
Sanction in Hinduism

The Indian national education system was no freak. It was grounded in
Hindu culture and its system of local self-government. *Ludlow's British
India* says that "in every Hindu village which has retained anything of
its form ... the rudiments of knowledge are sought to be imparted; there
is not a child... who is not able to read, to write, to cipher; in the
last branch of learning they are confessedly most proficient". The same
source says at another place that "where the village system has been
swept away by us, as in Bengal, there the school system has equally
disappeared". Leitner quotes a report of a British Inspector of Schools
in the Punjab which too brings out the intimate link between indigenous
educational system and it underlying system of ideas and polity. It
says: "The indigenous education of India was founded on the sanction of
the Shastras, which elevated into religious duties and conferred dignity
on the commonest transactions of every-day life. The existence of
village communities, which left not only their municipal, but also in
part their revenue and judicial administrations, in the hands of the
people themselves, greatly helped to spread education among all the
different members of the community."

  
British Hostility

The new rulers were understandably hostile to the indigenous system. As
soon as the British took over the Punjab, the Education Report of 1858
says: "A village school left to itself is not an institution which we
have any great interest in maintaining."

This hostility arose partly from a lack of imagination. To the new
rulers, brought up so differently, a school was no school if it did not
teach English. To such preponderant elements among them, the answer of a
rare and imaginative administrator like Leitner was this: "If a
collegium held, according to Hindu tradition, in the teacher's own
house, is not a school; if to read and write Gurmukhi and the *naharas*
is not to know the three or any r's, then, of course, all discussion is
at an end... When, however, by school is meant an indigenous school; by
a knowledge of reading and writing that of the indigenous characters; by
learning or science, oriental learning and science, then indeed was
education far extended when we took the Punjab than it is at present."
To these who despised an indigenous school because it taught a small
number of students, he answered: "If the Lahore Government College could
be called a college when it had only four students, there is no reason
why an indigenous school should not be called a school when it has less
than ten students."

  
Financial Support

The teacher of an indigenous school was an idealist, but the system
itself was founded on realistic public financial support. Schools were
supported by the grant of rent-free lands and monetary assignments.
During the British rule, this support was withheld or drastically
curtailed. The data for rent-free lands to support local needs like the
police, the temples, the education has not been fully worked out but
that this portion was very large is beyond doubt. Dharampal shows that
it was sometimes as large as 35% of the total land, and sometimes even
50%. Leitner gives the names of many hundreds of scholars who were
endowed with such lands but whose grants were terminated and as a result
of which the institutions they ran so well died down within a
generation. The Collector of Bellary District wrote: "There is no doubt
that in former times especially under the Hindu Government very large
grants both in money and in land were issued for the sake of learning."

When the British started studying indigenous education, they had already
been in control of the territory for over fifty years; and during these
years much harm had already been done. The land grants were already
stopped or curtailed. There was a general breakdown in the economy at
large. The old classes which supported local institutions were
impoverished. These and other causes combined to bring about a fast
deterioration is the educational condition. Adam mentions many specific
villages in Nattore Thana which at the time of investigation had only
two schools where there had been once ten or eleven schools in living
memory. The decay was fast.

  
Increasing Illiteracy

No doubt, indigenous education decayed and illiteracy increased during
the British period. According to Sir Henry Lawrence, there was one
school for every 1783 inhabitants of the most backward division of the
Punjab at the time of annexation. But thirty years later in 1881, "there
is one school of whatever sort, to every 9,028 inhabitants", according
the President of the Educational Commission.

Adam estimated that there was 11% literacy in the Thana of Nattore
during 1830s. "A century later the British considered this an
accomplishment in many parts of India," says Joseph DiBona, the author
of *One Teacher, One School*. This is the charge which Mahatma Gandhi
also brought against the British when he said in 1931 that "today India
is more illiterate than it was fifty or a hundred years ago". He charged
that the British destroyed "the Beautiful Tree", an epithet he used to
describe old Indian indigenous education and which Dharampal has also
borrowed from him to provide the title to his book on the subject.

Indigenous education served local needs, both economic and cultural and
religious. Under the British, it was divorced from both. For example,
one Government report says: "If a boy learns arithmetic in our schools,
he is of little use for the shop, because he finds there a different
system of accounts, and the meanest Banya can cast up the intricacies of
the grain-trade accounts by a mental process far more rapidly than if he
had taken honours in Mathematics at the Calcuttta University."

Under the indigenous system, primary education was imparted in the local
language. But the British Government introduced Urdu as the medium of
instruction over a large territory of North India. This "practically
excluded from primary instruction" the whole Hindu priestly class, the
artisans and the agricultural classes, according to the testimony of the
Brahmo Samaj. The common men and women wanted to learn to read in order
to be able to study the Ramayana and other religious books which were
available in their own language. But Urdu which was foreign to them did
not help them in that direction. It was meant to make students *munshis*
which was not their aim.

  
Cultural Self-alienation

While teaching a boy three r's, indigenous education also familiarized
him with the nation's epics, religion and literature. This did not suit
the white rulers and missionaries. So they put forward the principles of
"secularism" and 'religious neutrality' - principles which continue to
be pleaded even today by our brown sahibs with equal duplicity and equal
harm to the deeper life of the nation. Pleading these convenient
principles, the then Inspector of a provincial schools reported: "I
directed the disuse of all books of a religious character in the
schools." The Ramayana and the other great indigenous literature still
continue to be on the Index of the so-called indigenous Government
thirty-six years after independence.

Thus the nation's accumulated riches were denied to the new generations
and they grew in self-forgetfulness of their rich heritage. The nation's
sciences, philosophies, religion and literature were taken out of the
life of the growing generations and these merely became the topics or
subjects of Indology.'

Under the indigenous system, the Hindu schools were closed on *Poornima*
of every month and on other Hindu festivals. Under the new dispensation,
Sunday became the new holiday. Thus we were cut off from our calendar
too with which so much else in our history and religious discipline and
observances is also connected. In due course, came into being a class of
Macaulay's dream, a class oblivious of its roots, a class of cultural
barbarians, a class Indian in blood and colour but European and
missionary in its contempt of everything Indian in general and Hindu in
particular.

Deep down, the issue was not English language, or higher learning of the
West or modern sciences. Hindu culture had a rich tradition of secular
learning and it could easily imbibe whatever the West had to offer. In
fact, it could even make its own contribution to the pool and perhaps
help in taming the aggressive urges of modern sciences. The problem was
deeper. It had to do with a pattern of self-forgetfulness and
self-alienation that was imposed on the country. And we were so
thoroughly brainwashed that we now delight in it. The
imperialist-missionary policies of the British have now become the
political religion of our own neo-intellectuals and administrators. The
attack still continues under the guise of "Tradition versus
Modernity".  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *One Teacher, One School: The Adam Reports on Indigenous
Education in 19th Century India*, by Joseph DiBona, Biblia Impex Pvt.
Ltd., New Delhi.  

[2](#2a) *History of Indigenous Education in the Punjab since Annexation
and in 1882*, by G.W. Leitner, 1883, Reprinted by Languages Department,
Punjab, Patiala, 1971.

[3](#3a) *The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian Education in the
Eighteenth Century*, by Dharampal (Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi).

[4](#4a) The Indian system of education was so economical, so effective
that some of its features were exported to England and Europe. The
"monitor", the "slate", the "group-study" were directly borrowed from
the old Indian practice. A short account of this practice is available
from an eye-witness report of a European named Pietro Della Valle
published in 1623. But 200 years later, around 1800, two Britons, Dr.
Bell and Mr. Lancaster, who were servants of the East India Company,
introduced in England a "New System of Schooling", embodying Indian
practices of teaching. Both claimed originality for themselves. In the
controversy that ensued, it was found that both had borrowed from India
without acknowledgment, of course. In this connection we have the
testimony of Brigadier-General Alexander Walker who served in the East
India Company from 1780 to 1810. While reporting on teaching methods in
Malabar, he says that the new British "system was borrowed from the
Brahmans and brought from India to Europe. It has been made the
foundation of the National Schools in every enlightened country. Some
gratitude is due to a people from who we have learnt to diffuse among
the lower ranks of society instructions by one of the most unerring and
economical methods which has ever been invented". According to him, by
this method, "the children are instructed without violence, and by a
process peculiarly simple".

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
