+++
title = "04 Chapter Three Some Historical Questions Sita Ram Goel"

+++
Chapter Three  
**Some Historical Questions**  
Sita Ram Goel

Why did Islamic invaders continue to destroy Hindu temples and desecrate
the idols of Hindu Gods and Goddesses throughout the period of their
domination? Why did they raise mosques on sites occupied earlier by
Hindu places of worship?  These questions were asked by Hindu scholars
in modern times after the terror of Islam had ceased and could no more
seal their lips.

In India - and in India alone - two explanations have come forth.  One
is provided by the theology of Islam based on the Quran and the Sunnah
of the Prophet.  The other has been proposed by Marxist professors and
lapped up by apologists of Islam.  We shall take up the second
explanation first.

The credit for pioneering the Marxist proposition about destruction of
Hindu temples goes to the late Professor Mohammed Habib of the Aligarh
Muslim University.  In his book, *Sultan Mahmud of Ghaznin*, first
published in 1924, he presented the thesis that Mahmud’s destruction of
Hindu temples was actuated not by zeal for the faith but by “lust for
plunder.” According to him, India at that time was bursting with vast
hoards of gold and silver accumulated down the ages from rich mines and
a prosperous export trade.  Most of the wealth, he said without
providing any proof, was concentrated in temple treasuries.  “It was
impossible,” wrote the professor, “that the Indian temples should not
sooner or later tempt some one strong and unscrupulous enough for the
impious deed. Nor was it expected that a man of Mahmud’s character would
allow the tolerance which Islam inculcates to restrain him from taking
possession of the gold… when the Indians themselves had simplified his
work by concentrating the wealth of the country at a few places” (p.
82).

Professor Habib did not hide any of the salient facts regarding
destruction of Hindu temples by Mahmud, though the descriptions Le gave
were brief, sometimes only in footnotes.  He also narrated how Mahmud’s
exploits were celebrated at Baghdad by the Caliph and the populace and
how the hero was compared to the companions of the Prophet who had
achieved similar victories in Arabia, Syria, Iraq and Iran.  Only the
conclusion he drew was radically different from that drawn by Mahmud’s
contemporaries as well as latter-day historians and theologians of
Islam.  “Islam,” he wrote, “sanctioned neither the vandalism nor the
plundering motives of the invader; no principle of the *Shariat*
justifies the uncalled for attack on Hindu princes who had done Mahmud
and his subjects no harm; the wanton destruction of places of worship is
condemned by the law of every creed.  And yet Islam, though it was not
an inspiring motive could be utilised as an *a posteriors* justification
for what was done.  So the precepts of the Quran were misinterpreted or
ignored and the tolerant policy of the Second Caliph was cast aside in
order that Mahmud and his myrmidons may be able to plunder Hindu temples
with a clear and untroubled conscience” (Pp. 83-84, Emphasis in source).

This proposition of Mahmud’s guilt and Islam’s innocence appealed to the
architect of India’s secularism, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.  In a letter
dated June 1, 1932, he wrote to his daughter, Indira Gandhi, that Mahmud
“was hardly a religious man”, that he was “a Mohammedan of course, but
that was by the way” and that Mahmud would have done what he did “to
whatever religion he might have belonged” (*Glimpses of World History*,
1982 Reprint, p. 155).  In fact, Pandit Nehru went much farther than
Professor Habib.  The latter had written how Mahmud gave orders to burn
down thousands of temples at Mathura after he had admired their
architectural excellence.  Pandit Nehru narrated how Mahmud admired the
temples but omitted the fact that they were destroyed by him (*Ibid.*,
Pp. 155-156).  Thus a determined destroyer of Hindu temples was
transformed into an ardent admirer of Hindu architecture!  This
portrayal of Mahmud remained unchanged in his *Discovery of India* which
was published in 1946 (1982 Reprint, p. 235).

In days to come, Professor Habib’s thesis that lust for plunder and not
the Islamic theology of iconoclasm occasioned the destruction of Hindu
temples, became the party line for Marxist historians who, in due
course, came to control all institutions concerned with researching,
writing and teaching of Indian history.  This was extended to cover all
acts of Muslim iconoclasm in medieval Indian history.  It became a crime
against secularism and national integration even to mention Islam or its
theology in this context.  Any historian who dared cite facts recorded
by medieval Muslim historians was denounced as a “Hindu communalist.”
Three Marxist professors wrote a book attacking Dr. R.C. Majumdar in
particular, simply because the great historian was not prepared to
sacrifice truth at the altar of Communist politics.  The book was
printed by a Communist publishing house and prescribed for graduate and
post-graduate courses in Indian universities.

What was more, the Marxist professors discovered a political motive as
well.  Hindu temples were seen as centres of political conspiracies
which Muslim sultans were forced to suppress.  And if the temples got
destroyed in the process, no blame could be laid at the door of the
sultans who were working hard in the interest of public order and
peace.  In a letter published in the *Times of India* on October 21,
1985, twelve Marxist professors rallied in defence of Aurangzeb who had
destroyed the Keshavdeva temple at Mathura and raised an Idgah in its
place.  “The Dera Keshava Rai temple,” they wrote, “was built by Raja
Bir Singh Bundela in the reign of Jahangir.  This large temple soon
became extremely popular and acquired considerable wealth.  Aurangzeb
had this temple destroyed, took its wealth as booty and built an Idgah
on the site.  His action might have been politically motivated as well,
for at the time when the temple was destroyed he faced problems with the
Bundelas as well as Jat rebellion in the Mathura region.”

The climax was reached when the same Marxist professors started
explaining away Islamic iconoclasm in terms of what they described as
Hindu destruction of Buddhist and Jain places of worship.  They have
never been able to cite more than half-a-dozen cases of doubtful
veracity.  A few passages in Sanskrit literature coupled with
speculations about some archaeological sites have sufficed for floating
the story, sold *ad nauseam* in the popular press, that Hindus destroyed
Buddhist and Jain temples on a large scale.  Half-a-dozen have become
thousands and then hundreds of thousands in the frenzied imagination
suffering from a deep-seated anti-Hindu animus.  Lately, they have added
to the list the destruction of “animist shrines” from pre-Hindu India,
whatever that means.  And these “facts” have been presented with a large
dose of *suppressio veri suggestio falsi*.  A few instances will
illustrate the point.

A very late Buddhist book from Sri Lanka accuses Pushyamitra Sunga, a
second century B.C. king, of offering prizes to those who brought to him
heads of Buddhist monks.  This single reference has sufficed for
presenting Pushyamitra as the harbinger of a “Brahmanical reaction”
which “culminated in the age of the Guptas.” The fact that the famous
Buddhist stupas and monasteries at Bharhut and Sanchi were built and
thrived under the very nose of Pushyamitra is never mentioned.  Nor is
the fact that the Gupta kings and queens built and endowed many Buddhist
monasteries at Bodh Gaya, Nalanda and Sarnath among many other places.

A Pandyan king of Madura is reported to have been a persecutor of
Jains.  This is mentioned in a book of the Saiva faith to which he
belonged.  But the source also says that before becoming a convert to
Saivism, the king was a devout Jain and had persecuted the Saivites. 
This part of the story is never mentioned by the Marxist professors
while they bewail the persecution of Jains.

According to the *Rajatarirgini* of Kalhana, King Harsha of Kashmir
plundered Hindu and Buddhist temples in his lust for the gold and silver
which went into the making of idols.  This fact is played up by the
Marxist professors with great fanfare.  But they never mention Kalhan’s
comment that in doing what he did Harsha “acted like a Turushka
(Muslim)” and was “prompted by the Turushkas in his employ.”

This placing of Hindu kings on par with Muslim invaders in the context
of iconoclasm suffers from serious shortcomings.  Firstly, it lacks all
sense of proportion when it tries to explain away the destruction of
hundreds of thousands of Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jain temples by
Islamic invaders in terms of the doubtful destruction of a few Buddhist
and Jain shrines by Hindu kings.  Secondly, it has yet to produce
evidence that Hindus ever had a theology of iconoclasm which made this
practice a permanent part of Hinduism.  Isolated acts by a few fanatics
whom no Hindu historian or pandit has ever admired, cannot explain away
a full-fledged theology which inspired Islamic iconoclasm.  Lastly, it
speaks rather poorly of Marxist ethics which seems to say that one wrong
can be explained away in terms of another.^([1](#1))

Coming to the economic and political motives for the destruction of
Hindu temples, it does not need an extraordinary imagination to see that
the Marxist thesis is contrived and farfetched, if not downright
ridiculous.  It does not explain even a fraction of the facts relating
to the destruction of Hindu temples as known from literary and
archaeological sources.  Even if we grant that Hindu temples in India
continued to be rich and centres of political unrest for more than a
thousand years, it defies understanding why they alone were singled out
for plunder and destruction.  There was no dearth of Muslim places of
worship which were far richer and greater centres of conspiracy.  The
desecration of Hindu idols and raising of mosques on temple sites is
impossible to explain in terms of any economic or political motive
whatsoever.  Small wonder that the Marxist thesis ends by inventing
facts instead of explaining them.

Professor Habib cannot be accused of ignorance about the theology or
history of Islam.  The most that can be said in his defence is that he
was trying to salvage Islam by sacrificing Mahmud of Ghaznin who had
become the greatest symbol of Islamic intolerance in the Indian
context.  One wonders whether he anticipated the consequences of
extending his logic to subsequent sultans of medieval India.  The result
has been disastrous for Islam.  In the process, it has been reduced to a
convenient cover for plunder and brigandage.  The heroes of Islam in
India have been converted into bandits and vandals.

It is amazing that apologists of Islam in India have plumped for
Professor Habib’s thesis as elaborated by succeeding Marxist scribes. 
They would have rendered service to Islam if they had continued
admitting honestly that iconoclasm has been an integral part of the
theology of Islam.  Their predecessors in medieval India made no bones
about such an admission.  Nor do the scholars of Islam outside India,
particularly in Pakistan.

What we need most in this country is an inter-religious dialogue in
which all religions are honest and frank about their drawbacks and
limitations.  Such a dialogue is impossible if we hide or supress or
invent facts and offer dishonest interpretations.  Mahatma Gandhi had
said that Islam was born only yesterday and is still in the process of
interpretation.  Hiding facts and floating fictions is hardly the way
for promoting that process.

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, April 16, 1989**

</div>

  

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) It is intriguing that the Marxist professors never mention
the destruction of Buddhist and Jain establishments in Transoxiana,
Sinkiang, Seistan and India which on the eve of the Islamic invasion
included present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh.  Every
historian and archaeologist of that period knows that the vast Buddhist
and Jain establishments at Bukhara, Samarkand, Khotan, Balkh, Bamian,
Begram, Jalalabad, Peshawar, Takshasila, Mirpur-Khas, Nagar-Parkar,
Sringar, Sialkot, Agroha, Mathura, Hastinapur, Kanauj, Sravasti,
Ayodhya, Sarnath, Nalanda, Vikramsila, Vaishali, Rajgir, Odantpuri,
Bharhut, Paharpur, Jagaddala, Jajnagar, Nagarjunikonda, Amaravati,
Kanchi, Dwarasamudra, Bharuch Valabhi, Palitana, Girnar, Patan, Jalor,
Chandrawati, Bhinmal, Didwana, Nagaur, Osian, Bairat, Gwalior and Mandu
were destroyed by the swordsmen of Islam. Smaller establishments of
these faiths, which met the same fate, add up to several hundred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
