+++
title = "06 Chapter Five A Need to Face the Truth Ram Swarup"

+++
Chapter Five  
**A Need to Face the Truth**  
Ram Swarup

The article “Hideaway Communalism” (*Indian Express*, February 5, 1989),
is unusual.  It discusses a question which has been a taboo and speaks
on it with a frankness rare among Indian intellectuals.

Similarly, in his articles “The Tip of An Iceberg” and “In the Name of
Religion” (February 9, May 21) Sita Ram Goel brings to the subject
unequalled research and discusses it in a larger historical perspective.

In the history of Islam, iconoclasm and razing other peoples’ temples
are not aberrations - stray acts of zealous but misguided rulers - but
are central to the faith.  They derive their justification and validity
from the Quranic Revelation and the Prophet’s *Sunna* or practice.  It
is another matter though that these could not always be implemented in
their full theological rigour due to many unfavourable circumstances -
an exigency for which Islamic theology makes ample provisions.

**Early Islam**

Shrines and idols of the unbelievers began to be destroyed during the
Prophet’s own time and, indeed, at his own behest. *Sirat-un-Nabi*, the
first pious biography of the Prophet, tells us how during the earliest
days of Islam, young men at Medina influenced by Islamic teachings
repeatedly crept into a house every night and carried its idol and threw
“it on its face into a cesspit.”

However, desecration and destruction began in earnest when Mecca was
conquered.  Ali was chosen to destroy the idols at Ka‘ba which, we are
told, he did mounting on the shoulders of the Prophet.  Umar was chosen
for destroying the pictures on the walls of the shrine.  After this, as
*Tarikh-i-Tabari* tells us, raiding parties were sent in all directions
to destroy the images of deities held in special veneration by different
tribes including the images of al-Manat, al-Lat and al-Uzza,
intercessories of the Satanic Verses.  Sa’d was sent to destroy the
shrine of al-Manat, the deity of the tribes of Aus and Khazraj.  When
the shrine of al-Lat was invaded, its devotees resisted.  But finding
themselves overpowered, they surrendered and became Muslims.  The
women-worshippers wept to see how their deity was

> “Deserted by Her servants,  
> Who did not show enough manliness in defending Her.”

Similarly, Walid was sent by the prophet to destroy the idol of al-Uzza
at Nakhla, venerated by the tribes of Kinan and Nadar.  Overawed, the
guardians left the deity to defend herself.  They called out:

> O Uzza! make an annihilating attack on Khalid,  
> O Uzza! if you do not kill the man Khalid  
> Then bear a swift punishment or become a Christian.

Why **Christian**? The word should have been **Muslim**.  It seems the
tradition belongs to the very early period of Islam when at least, on
the popular level, Christians and Muslims were mistaken for each other. 
For, both shared a common outlook, both indulged in forced conversions
and both destroyed shrines belonging to others.

**Semitic Revelation**

The fact is that the Revelation of the Prophet of Islam does not stand
alone.  It is rooted in the older Judaic Revelation from which
Christianity also derives.  The two Revelations differ in some
particulars but they have important similarities.  The God of both is
exclusive and brooks no rivals, no partner.  He demands exclusive
loyalty and commands that his followers would “worship no other God.”
But though so demanding in their worship, he does not make himself known
to them directly.  On the other hand, he communicates his will to them
indirectly through a favourite messenger or prophet, or a special
incarnation.

This God is so different from God in other religious traditions.  For
example, in Hindu tradition, a God is not exclusive.  He lives in
friendliness with other Gods.  In fact, “other” Gods are His own
manifestations.  In this tradition, He also has no rigid form and is
conceived in widely different ways: plurally, singly, monistically.  He
also recognises no single favourite intermediary but reveals Himself to
all who approach Him with devotion and in wisdom.  No Semitic protocol
here.  The Hindu tradition also accords fullest freedom of worship.  Not
only every one has a right to worship his God in his own way but every
God is also entitled to the worship of His own devotees.  Freedom
indeed, both for men as well as for Gods.  It was on this principle that
early Christians enjoyed their freedom of worship.

**“Chosen” People**

The other side of the coin of a “Jealous God” is the concept of a
“Chosen People” or a Church or *Ummah*.  The chosen God has a chosen
people (and even his chosen enemies).  Both assist each other.  While
their God helps the believers in fighting their neighbours, the
believers help their God in fighting his rival-Gods.

It is common for men and women everywhere to invoke the help of their
Gods in their various undertakings, big or small.  But the God of the
believers also calls upon them to fight for his greater glory, to fight
his enemies and to extend his dominion on the earth.  In short, they are
to become his swordsmen and salesmen, his “witnesses”, his martyrs and
*Ghazis*.  They must fight not only their unbelieving neighbours but
also, even more specifically, their (neighbours’) Gods.  For these Gods
are not only the Gods of their enemies, but they are also the enemies of
their God, which is even worse.

The believers have taken this god-given mission seriously. The *Hedaya*
(Guidance), the Muslim Law Book *par excellence*, quotes the Prophet and
lays down: “We are directed to make war upon men until such time as they
shall confess.  There is no God but Allah.”

**Earthly Reward**

However, it is not all God and his glory all the time.  The undertaking
has its practical side too.  The crusaders are not without their earthly
rewards.  They work to extend the sovereignty of their God and, in the
process, their own too.  A pious tradition proclaims that the earth
belongs to Allah and his Prophet.  Therefore, the inescapable conclusion
is that the infidels are merely squatters, and they should be
dispossessed and the land returned to its rightful owners, the
believers.

Today, the intellectual fashion is to emphasize the political and
economic aims of imperialism and to neglect its theological component. 
But history shows that the most durable imperialisms have been those
which had the support of a continuing theological motive.  Such
imperialisms dominated without a conscience - or, rather, whatever
conscience they had supported their domination.  The power of faith
killed all possible doubts and self-criticism.

“Hideaway Communalism” quotes extensively from the Foreword of Maulana
Abul-Hasan Ali Nadwi which he contributed to the book, *Hindustan under
Islamic Rule*.  These quotes show that in its self-estimation and
self-righteousness, the white-man’s burden of civilising the world is a
poor match to Islam’s responsibility of bringing the earth under Allah
and his Prophet.

**Iconoclasm**

Semitic “My-Godism” described as Monotheism has another dimension:
Iconoclasm.  In fact, the two are two sides of the same coin.  When
worshippers of the Semitic God came into Contact with their neighbours,
it was not clear what they abhorred more, their Gods or their idols.  In
point of fact, they made no such fine distinction.  Trained as they
were, they made war on both indiscriminately.

The Judaic God commands his worshippers that when they enter the land of
their enemies, they will “destroy their altars, and break their images,
and cut down their groves, and burn their graves images with fire”
(*Bible*, Deut. 7.5). Perhaps the Judaic Revelation was meant to apply
only to the territory of the Promised Land; but when Christianity and,
in due course, Islam became its proud inheritors and adopted the
Biblical God, its operation became university.  Wherever the two creeds
went, temple-razing followed.  Today, Christianity seems to present a
different face but during the better part of its career it was stoutly
iconoclastic In the Mediterranean countries, in Northern Europe, in Asia
and the two Americas, it destroyed shrines of the pagans with
unparalleled thoroughness and perfect self-satisfaction.  When America
was discovered, the Benedictine monks who came in the train of Columbus
boasted of having destroyed single-handed 170,000 images in Haiti
alone.  Juan de Zummarage, the first Bishop of Mexico, writing as early
as 1531, claimed that he destroyed 500 temples and 20,000 idols of the
heathens.  In our own country, in Goa, Jesuit fathers destroyed many
Hindu temples.

Islam did the same.  Wherever it went, it carried fire and sword and
destroyed the temples of the conquered people.  Goel has documented some
of the cases but as he himself says they represent merely the tip of an
iceberg.

**Islam’s Religious Policy**

Like its monotheism, Semitic iconoclasm too was essentially a
hegemonistic idea.  No imperialism is secure unless it destroys the
pride, culture and valour of a conquered people.  People who retain
their religions, their Gods and their priests make poor subjects and
remain potential rebels.

Islam knew this and it developed a full-fledged theory of Religious
domination.  Temples were destroyed not for their “hoarded wealth” as
Marxist historians propagate - who ever heard of Hindus being specially
in the habit of hoarding their wealth in their temples? - nor were they
destroyed by invaders in the first flush of their victory.  On the other
hand, these formed part of a larger policy of religious persecution
which was followed in peace-time too when the Muslim rule was
established.  The policy of persecution had a purpose-it was meant to
keep down the people and to disarm them culturally and spiritually, to
destroy their pride and self-respect, and to remind them that they were
Zimmis, an inferior breed.

According to this policy, Zimmis were allowed to exercise their religion
in low key so long as they accepted civic and political disabilities and
paid *Jizya* “in abasement”.  There were many restrictions, particularly
in cities.  The Muslim Law (*Hedaya*) lays down that “as the tokens of
Islam (such as public prayers, festivals, and so forth) appear in the
cities, Zimmis should not be permitted to celebrate the tokens of
infidelity there.” Some of these restrictions placed on Hindu
processions and celebrations still continue.  This is a legacy of the
Muslim period.

The same law laid down that the infidels could not build new temples
though they could repair old ones.  Probably this explains why there is
no record of a worthwhile Hindu temple built since 1192 in Delhi.  The
first such temple Lakshmi Narayan Mandir, inaugurated by Mahatma Gandhi,
came up in 1938, after a lapse of more than seven hundred years.

**No Easy Solution**

The foregoing discussion shows that the problem is not that of the Rama
Janmabhumi Temple of Ayodhya, or the Krishna Temple of Mathura or the
Visveshvara Temple of Varanasi.  In its deeper aspect, the problem
relates to an aggressive theology and political ideology which created
an aggressive tradition of history.  Needless to say that the problem in
all its huge dimensions admits of no easy solution.  In an ordinary
situation, one could appeal from Philip drunk to Philip sober, from a
man’s passion to his reason and conscience.  But in the present case
when Islamic theology is on the side of its historical practice and its
more aggressive aims, this option is hardly available. But even then
while showing, by exercising firmness, that aggression will not pay, we
must yet be patient and understanding.  We must realize that the problem
is not **Muslims** but **Islam** or **Islamic theology**.  Therefore,
this theology needs a more critical examination than has been hitherto
done.  We must properly study Revelatory religions, their Gods and their
prophets, their theories of special covenants and favoured *ummahs*,
their doctrine of **one God** and **two humanities**, their categories
of believers and infidels or pagans, their theory of Prophetism, their
divinely ordained mission to convert and crusade.

It is a task which needs the creative labour of all seekers and
articulators of truth.  Closed creeds are a threat both to deeper
spirituality and to deeper humanity, and they badly need some sort of
*glasnost*, openness and freedom.  A wider discussion will help them to
open up.

In this task, Muslim intellectuals can play an important role.  In fact,
it is expected of them.  It may start a new process of rethinking among
the Muslims on their fundamentals - a different and truer sort of
fundamentalism than they have hitherto known.

It is also a task which imposes an inescapable duty on Hindu-Buddhist
thinkers with their inheritance of Yoga.  In fact, India’s Yoga has a
lot to contribute to the discussion.  We are told that Revelations come
from Gods.  But from another angle, Revelations and Gods themselves come
from man and his psyche, as Yoga teaches us.  This psyche in turn has
its various levels of purity and inwardness and every level projects its
own God, Revelation and Theology.  Therefore, not all Gods and
Revelations have the same purity.  In fact, some of them are not worthy
enough and they support an equally questionable politics.

Such a conclusion may disappoint many Hindu wise men who fondly cling to
the belief that all religions are the same and all prophets preach and
say the same things.  But they must learn not to evade issues and even
while seeking unities, they must yet learn to recognise differences
where they exist.

At the end, we again return to “Hideaway Communalism” which tells us of
“evasion and concealment” and the need to “face the truth.” However, the
sorry fact is that in order to avoid facing truth we have built up an
elaborate system of evasion and concealment which protects not merely
“hideaway communalism”, but also shields and even fosters more sinister
forces of a “hideaway Imperialism” and a “hideaway theology” which
distorts relations between man and Gods and between man and man.  The
need is to become aware of the problem at a deeper level and in its
larger antecedents and consequences.

<div align="right">

**Indian Express, June 18, 1989**

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
