+++
title = "11 Chapter Ten Let the Mute Witnesses Speak Sita Ram Goel"

+++
Chapter Ten  
**Let the Mute Witnesses Speak**  
Sita Ram Goel

The cradle of Hindu culture[^1] on the eve of its Islamic invasion included what are at present the Sinkiang province of China, the Transoxiana region of Russia, the Seistan province of Iran and the sovereign states of Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal and Bangladesh. The Islamic invasion commenced around 650 A.D., when a Muslim army secured a foothold in Seistan, and continued till the end of the eighteenth century, when the last Islamic crusader, Tipu Sultan, was overthrown by the British. Hordes of Arabs, Persians, Turks, and Afghans who had been successively inspired by the Theology of Islam poured in, in wave after wave, carrying fire and sword to every nook and corner of this vast area. In the process, Sinkiang, Transoxiana region, Seistan and Afghanistan became transformed into *daru’l-IslĀm* where all vestiges of the earlier culture were wiped out.  The same spell has engulfed the areas which were parts of India till 1947 and have since become Pakistan and Bangladesh.

We learn from literary and epigraphic sources, accounts of foreign travellers in medieval times, and modern archaeological explorations that, on the eve of the Islamic invasion, the cradle of Hindu culture was honeycombed with temples and monasteries, in many shapes and sizes. 
The same sources inform us that many more temples and monasteries continued to come up in places where the Islamic invasion had yet to reach or from where it was forced to retire for some time by the rallying of Hindu resistance.  Hindus were great temple builders because their pantheon was prolific in Gods and Goddesses and their society rich in schools and sects, each with its own way of worship.  But by the time we come to the end of the invasion, we find that almost all these Hindu places of worship had either disappeared or were left in different stages of ruination.  Most of the sacred sites had come to be occupied by a variety of Muslim monuments-masjids and īdgāhs (mosques), dargāhs and ziārats (shrines), mazārs and maqbaras (tombs), madrasas and maktabs
(seminaries), takiyās and qabristāns (graveyards).  Quite a few of the
new edifices had been built from the materials of those that had been deliberately demolished in order to satisfy the demands of Islamic Theology.  The same materials had been used frequently in some secular structures as well-walls and gates of forts and cities, river and tank embankments, caravanserais and stepwells, palaces and pavilions.

Some apologists of Islam have tried to lay the blame at the door of the White Huns or Epthalites who had overrun parts of the Hindu cradle in the second half of the fifth century A.D. But they count without the witness of Hiuen Tsang, the famous Chinese pilgrim and Buddhist savant, who travelled all over this area from 630 A.D. to 644. Starting from Karashahr in Northern Sinkiang, he passed through Transoxiana, Northern Afghanistan, North-West Frontier Province, Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, North-Eastern Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Nepal, Bengal, Assam, Orissa, Mahakosal and Andhra Pradesh till he reached Tamil Nadu. On his return journey he travelled through Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Bharat, Sindh, Southern Afghanistan and Southern Sinkiang. In most of these provinces he found in a flourishing state many Buddhist establishments consisting of *vihāras*
(monasteries), *chaityas* (temples) and *stūpas* (topes), besides what
he described as heretical (Jain) and deva (Brahmanical) temples.  The wealth of architecture and sculptures he saw everywhere confirms what we learn from Hindu literary sources.  Some of this wealth has been recovered in recent times from under mounds of ruins.

During the course of his pilgrimage, Hiuen Tsang stayed at as many as 95 Buddhist centres among which the more famous ones were at Kuchi, Aqsu, Tirmiz, Uch Turfan, Kashagar and Khotan in Sinkiang; Balkh, Ghazni, Bamiyan, Kapisi, Lamghan, Nagarahar and Bannu in Afghanistan; Pushkalavati, Bolar and Takshasila in the North-West Frontier Province; Srinagar, Rajaori and Punch in Kashmir; Sialkot, Jalandhar and Sirhind in the Punjab; Thanesar, Pehowa and Sugh in Haryana; Bairat and Bhinmal in Rajasthan, Mathura, Mahoba, Ahichchhatra, Sankisa, Kanauj, Ayodhya, Prayag, Kausambi, Sravasti, Kapilvastu, Kusinagar, Varanasi, Sarnath and Ghazipur in Uttar Pradesh; Vaishali, Pataliputra, Rajgir, Nalanda, Bodhgaya, Monghyr and Bhagalpur in Bihar; Pundravardhana, Tamralipti, Jessore and Karnasuvarna in Bengal; Puri and Jajnagar in Orissa; Nagarjunikonda and Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh; Kanchipuram in Tamil Nadu; Badami and Kalyani in Karnataka; Paithan and Devagiri in Maharashtra; Bharuch, Junagarh and Valabhi in Gujarat; Ujjain in Malwa; Mirpur Khas and Multan in Sindh. The number of Buddhist monasteries at the bigger ones of these centres ranged from 50 to 500 and the number of monks in residence from 1,000 to 10,000.  It was only in some parts of Eastern Afghanistan and the North-West Frontier Province that monasteries were in a bad shape, which can perhaps be explained by the invasion of White Huns. But so were they in Kusinagar and Kapilavastu where the White Huns are not known to have reached.  On the other hand, the same invaders had ranged over Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and most of Uttar Pradesh where Hiuen Tsang found the monasteries in a splendid state.  They had even established their rule over Kashmir where Hiuen Tsang saw 500 monasteries housing 5,000 monks. It is, therefore, difficult to hold them responsible for the disappearance of Buddhist centres in areas where Hiuen Tsang had found them flourishing. An explanation has to be found elsewhere. In any case, the upheaval they caused was over by the middle of the sixth century. 
Moreover, the temples and monasteries which Hiuen Tsang saw were only a few out of many. He had not gone into the interior of any province, having confined himself to the more famous Buddhist centres.

What was it that really happened to thousands upon thousands of temples and monasteries? Why did they disappear and/or give place to another type of monuments? How come that their architectural and sculptural fragments got built into the foundations and floors and walls and domes of the edifices which replaced them? These are crucial questions which should have been asked by students of medieval Indian history. But no historian worth his name has raised these questions squarely, not to speak of finding adequate answers to them. No systematic study of the subject has been made so far. All that we have are stray references to the demolition of a few Hindu temples, made by the more daring Hindu historians while discussing the religious policy of this or that sultan. Sir Jadunath Sarkar[^2] and Professor Sri Ram Sharma[^3] have given more attention to the Islamic policy of demolishing Hindu temples and pointed an accusing finger at the theological tenets which dictated that policy. But their treatment of the subject is brief and their enumeration of temples destroyed by Aurangzeb and the other Mughal emperors touches only the fringe of a vast holocaust caused by the Theology of Islam, all over the cradle of Hindu culture, and throughout more than thirteen hundred years, taking into account what happened in the native Muslim states carved out after the British take-over and the formation of Pakistan after partition in 1947.

Muslim historians, in India and abroad, have written hundreds of accounts in which the progress of Islamic armies across the cradle of Hindu culture is narrated, stage by stage and period by period. A pronounced feature of these Muslim histories is a description-in smaller or greater detail but always with considerable pride-of how the Hindus were slaughtered *en masse* or converted by force, how hundreds of thousands of Hindu men and women and children were captured as booty and sold into slavery, how Hindu temples and monasteries were razed to the ground or burnt down, and how images of Hindu Gods and Goddesses were destroyed or desecrated. Commandments of Allah (*Quran*) and precedents set by the Prophet (*Sunnah*) are frequently cited by the authors in support of what the swordsmen and demolition squads of Islam did with extraordinary zeal, not only in the midst of war but also, and more thoroughly, after Islamic rule had been firmly established. A reference to the Theology of Islam as perfected by the orthodox Imams, leaves little doubt that the citations are seldom without foundation.

The men and women and children who were killed or captured or converted by force cannot be recalled for standing witnesses to what was done to them by the heroes of Islam. The apologists for Islam-the most dogged among them are some Hindu historians and politicians-have easily got away with the plea that Muslim “court scribes” had succumbed to poetic exaggeration in order to please their pious patrons. Their case is weakened when they cite the same sources in support of their owns speculation or when the question is asked as to why the patrons needed stories of bloodshed and wanton destruction for feeding their piety. 
But they have taken in their stride these doubts and questions as well.

There are, however, witnesses who are not beyond recall and who can confirm that the “court scribes” were not at all foisting fables on their readers. These are the hundreds of thousands of sculptural and architectural fragments which stand arrayed in museums and drawing rooms all over the world, or which are waiting to be picked up by public and private collectors, or which stare at us from numerous Muslim monuments. These are the thousands of Hindu temples and monasteries which either stand on the surface in a state of ruination or lie buried under the earth waiting for being brought to light by the archaeologist’s spade. These are the thousands of Muslim edifices, sacred as well as secular, which occupy the sites of Hindu temples and monasteries and/or which have been constructed from materials of those monuments.  All these witnesses carry unimpeachable evidence of the violence that was done to them, deliberately and by human hands.

So far no one has cared to make these witnesses speak and relate the story of how they got ruined, demolished, dislocated, dismembered, defaced, mutilated and burnt.  Recent writers on Hindu architecture and sculpture-their tribe is multiplying fast, mostly for commercial reasons-ignore the ghastly wounds which these witnesses show on the very first sight, and dwell on the beauties of the limbs that have survived or escaped injury.  Many a time they have to resort to their imagination for supplying what should have been there but is missing.  All they seem to care for is building their own reputations as historians of Hindu art. If one draws their attention to the mutilations and disfigurements suffered by the subjects under study, one is met with a stunned silence or denounced downright as a Hindu chauvinist out to raise “demons from the past”[^4] with the deliberate intention of causing “communal strife.”

We, therefore, propose to present a few of these witnesses in order to show in what shape they are and what they have to say.

**Tordi (Rajasthan)**

“At Tordi there are two fine and massively built stone *baolis* or step wells known as the Chaur and Khari Baoris. They appear to be old Hindu structures repaired or rebuilt by Muhammadans, probably in the early or middle part of the 15th century…  In the construction of the (Khari) Baori Hindu images have been built in, noticeable amongst them being an image of Kuber on the right flanking wall of the large flight of steps…”[^5]

**Naraina (Rajasthan)**

“At Naraina… is an old pillared mosque, nine bays long and four bays deep, constructed out of old Hindu temples and standing on the east of the Gauri Shankar tank… The mosque appears to have been built when Mujahid Khan, son of Shams Khan, took possession of Naraina in 840 A.H. or 1436 A.D… To the immediate north of the mosque is the three-arched gateway called Tripolia which is also constructed with materials from old Hindu temples…”[^6]

**Chatsu (Rajasthan)**

“At Chatsu there is a Muhammadan tomb erected on the eastern embankment of the Golerava tank. The tomb which is known as Gurg Ali Shah’s
*chhatri* is built out of the spoils of Hindu buildings… On the inside
of the twelve-sided frieze of the *chhatri* is a long Persian inscription in verse, but worn out in several places. The inscription does not mention the name of any important personage known to history and all that can be made out with certainty is that the saint Gurg Ali
(wolf of Ali) died a martyr on the first of Ramzan in 979 A.H.
corresponding to Thursday, the 17th January, 1572 A.D.”[^7]

**SaheTh-MaheTh (Uttar Pradesh)**

“The ruined Jain temple situated in the western portion of MaheTh… derives the name ‘Sobhnāth’ from Sambhavanātha, the third TīrthaMkara, who is believed to have been born at Śrāvastī…[^8]

“Let us now turn our attention to the western-most part of Sobhnāth ruins. It is crowned by a domed edifice, apparently a Muslim tomb of the Pathān period…[^9]

“These remains are raised on a platform, 30’ square, built mostly of broken bricks including *carved* ones… This platform, no doubt, represents the plinth of the last Jain temple which was destroyed by the Muhammadan conquerors… It will be seen from the plan that the enclosure of the tomb overlaps this square platform. The tomb proper stands on a mass of *debris* which is probably the remains of the ruined shrine…[^10]

“3. Sculpture… of buff standstone, *partly destroyed*, representing a TīrthaMkara seated cross-legged in the attitude of meditation on a throne supported by two lions couchant, placed on both sides of a wheel…

“4. Sculpture… of buff sandstone, *partly defaced*, representing a TīrthaMkara seated cross-legged (as above)…

“8. Sculpture… of buff sandstone, *defaced*, representing a TīrthaMkara standing between two miniature figures of which that to his right is seated.

“9. Sculpture… of buff standstone, *defaced*, representing a TīrthaMkara, standing under a parasol…

“12.  Sculpture… of buff standstone, *much defaced*, representing a male and a female figure seated side by side under a palm tree.

“13.  Sculpture… of buff standstone, *broken in four pieces*, and carved with five figurines of TīrthaMkaras… seated cross-legged in the attitude of meditation.  The central figure has a Nāga hood. The sculpture evidently was the top portion of a large image slab.”[^11]

Coming to the ruins of a Buddhist monastery in the same complex, the archaeologist proceeds:

“In the 23rd cell, which I identify with the store-room, I found half-buried in the floor a big earthen jar… This must have been used for storage of corn…

“This cell is connected with a find which is certainly the most notable discovery of the season. I refer to an inscribed copper-plate of Govindachandra of Kanauj… The charter was issued from Vārānasī on Monday, the full moon day of ĀshāDha Sam. 1186, which… corresponds to the 23rd of June, 1130. The inscription records the grant of six villages to the ‘Community of Buddhist friars of whom Buddhabhattāraka is the chief and foremost, residing in the great convent of the holy Jetavana,’ and is of a paramount importance, in as much as it conclusively settles the identification of MaheTh with the city of Śrāvastī…”[^12]

He describes as follows some of the sculptures unearthed at SrAvastI:

“S.1. Statuette in grey stone… of Buddha seated cross-legged in the teaching attitude on a conventional lotus.  *The head, breast and fore-arms as well as the sides of the sculpture are broken*.

“S.2. Lower portion… of a blue schist image of Avalokiteśvara in the sportive attitude (*līlāsana*) on a lotus seat.

“S. 3. Image… of Avalokiteśvara seated in ardhaparyanka attitude on a conventional lotus… *The head and left arms of the main figure are missing*.”[^13]

**Sarnath (Uttar Pradesh)**

The report of excavations undertaken in 1904-05 says that “the inscriptions found there extending to the twelfth century A.D. show that the connection of Sarnath with Buddhism was still remembered at that date.” It continues that “the condition of the excavated ruins leaves little doubt that a violent catastrophe accompanied by willful destruction and plunder overtook the place.”[^14] Read this report with the Muslim account that Muhammad GhurI destroyed a thousand idol-temples when he reached Varanasi after defeating Mahārājā Jayachandra of Kanauj in 1193 A.D. The fragments that are listed below speak for themselves. The number given in each case is the one adopted in the report of the excavation.

a 42. Upper part of sculptured slab…

E.8. Architectural fragment, with Buddha (?) seated cross-legged on lotus…

a.22. Defaced standing Buddha, hands missing.

a.17. Buddha head with halo.

a\. 8. Head and right arm of image.

E.22. Upper part of image.

E.14. Broken seated figure holding object in left hand.

a.11. Fragment of larger sculpture; bust, part of head, and right overarm of female chauri-bearer.

E.25. Upper part of female figure with big ear-ring.

E.6. Fragment of sculpture, from top of throne (?) on left side.

n.19. Seated figure of Buddha in *bhūmisparśamudrā*, much defaced.

n.221. Torso, with arms of Buddha in *dharmachakramudrā*.

n.91. Lower part of Buddha seated cross-legged on throne. Defaced.

n.142. Figure of Avalokiteśvara in relief. Legs from knees downwards wanting.

n.1.  Relief partly, defaced and upper part missing. Buddha descending from the TrāyastriMśā Heaven Head and left hand missing.

i.50. Lower half of statue. Buddha in *bhūmisparśamudrā* seated on lotus.

i.17. Buddha in attitude of meditation on lotus. Head missing.

i.46. Head of Buddha with short curls.

i.44. Head of Avalokiteśvara, with Amitābha Buddha in headdress.

n.10. Fragment of three-headed figure (? Mārīchī) of green stone.

i.49. Standing figure of attendant from upper right of image. Half of face, feet and left hand missing.

i.1. Torso of male figure, ornamented.

i.4. Female figure, with lavishly ornamented head. The legs from knees, right arm and left forearm are missing. Much defaced.

i.105. Hand holding Lotus.

n.172. Torso of Buddha.

n.18. Head of Buddha, slightly defaced.

n.16. Female figure, feet missing.

n.97. Lower part of female figure. Feet missing.

n.163. Buddha, seated.  Much defaced.

K.4. Fragment of seated Buddha in blue Gayā stone.

K.5. Fragment of large statue, showing small Buddha seated in
*bhūmisparśamudrā*

K.18. Fragment of statue in best Gupta style.

J.S.18. 27 and 28.  Three Buddha heads of Gupta style.

J.S.7. Figure of *Kubera* in niche, with halo behind head.  Partly defaced.

r.67. Upper part of male figure, lavishly adorned.

r.72.  a and b. Pieces of pedestal with three Buddhas in *dhyānamudrā*.

r.28. Part of arm, adorned with armlet and inscription in characters of 10th century, containing Buddhist creed.

B.22. Fragment of Bodhi scene (?); two women standing on conventional rock. Head and right arm of left hand figure broken.

B.33. Defaced sitting Buddha in *dhyānamudrā*.

B.75. Lower part of Buddha in *bhūmisparśamudrā* seated cross-legged on lotus.

B.40. Feet of Buddha sitting cross-legged on lotus on throne.

B.38. Headless defaced Buddha seated cross-legged on lotus in
*dharmachakramudrā*.

Y.24. Headless Buddha stated cross-legged on throne in
*dharmachakramudrā*.

B.52. Bust of Buddha in *dharmachakramudrā*.  Head missing.

B.16. Standing Buddha in *varadamudrā*; hands and feet broken.

Y.34. Upper part of Buddha in *varadamudrā*.

B.24. Bust of standing Buddha in *abhayamudrā*; left hand and head missing.

B.31. Defaced standing Buddha in *abhayamudrā*. Head and feet missing.

B.48. Feet of standing Buddha with red paint.

B.15. Lower part of AvalokiteSvara seated on lotus in *līlāsana*.

Y.23. Bust of figure seated in *līlāsana* with trace of halo.

B.59. Legs of figure sitting cross-legged on lotus.

B.7. Female bust with ornaments and high headdress. Left arm and right forearm missing.[^15]

**Vaishali (Bihar)**

“In the southern section of the city the fort of Rājā Bisāl is by far the most important ruin… South-west of it stands an old brick Stūpa, now converted into a Dargāh… The name of the saint who is supposed to have been buried there was given to me as Mīrān-Jī…”[^16]

**Gaur and Pandua (Bengal)**

“In order to erect mosques and tombs the Muhammadans pulled down all Hindu temples they could lay their hands upon for the sake of the building materials…

“The oldest and the best known building at Gaur and Pandua is the Ādīna Masjid at Pandua built by Sikandar Shāh, the son of Ilyās Shāh. The date of its inscription may be read as either 776 or 770, which corresponds with 1374 or 1369 A.D… The materials employed consisted largely of the spoils of Hindu temples and many of the carvings from the temples have been used as facings of doors, arches and pillars…”[^17]

**Devikot (Bengal)**

“The ancient city of Kotivarsha, which was the seat of a district
(*vishaya*) under Pundra-vardhana province (*bhukti*) at the time of the
Guptas… is now represented by extensive mounds of Bangarh or Ban Rajar Garh… The older site was in continuous occupation till the invasion of the Muhammadans in the thirteenth century to whom it was known as Devkot or Devikot. It possesses Muhammadan records ranging from the thirteenth to the sixteenth century…[^18]

“The Rajbari mound at the South-east corner is one of the highest mounds at Bangarh and. must contain some important remains.  The Dargah of Sultan Pir is a Muhammadan shrine built on the site of an old Hindu temple of which four granite pillars… are still standing in the centre of the enclosure, the door jambs having been used in the construction of the gateway.

“The Dargah of Shah Ata on the north bank of the Dhal-dighi tank is another building built on the ruins of an older Hindu or Buddhist structure… The female figure on the lintels of the doorway now, fixed in the east wall of the Dargah appears to be Tara, from which it would appear that the temple destroyed was Buddhist…”[^19]

**Tribeni (Bengal)**

“The principal object of interest at Tribeni is the Dargāh of Zafar Khān Ghāzī. The chronology of this ruler may be deduced from the two inscriptions of which one has been fitted into the plinth of his tomb, while the other is inside the small mosque to the west of the tomb. Both refer to him and the first tells us that he built the mosque close to the Dargāh, which dates from A.D. 1298; while the second records the erection by him of a Madrasah or college in the time of Shamsuddīn Fīroz Shāh and bears a date corresponding to the 28th April, 1313 A.D. It was he who conquered the Hindu Rājā of Panduah, and introduced Islam into this part of Lower Bengal… The tomb is built out of the spoils taken from Hindu temples…[^20]

“The eastern portion of the tomb was formerly a *maNDapa* of an earlier Krishna temple which stood on the same spot and sculptures on the inner walls represent scenes from the *RāmāyaNa* and the *Mahābhārata*, with descriptive titles inscribed in proto-Bengali characters… The other frieze… shows Vishnu with Lakshmī and Sarasvatī in the centre, with two attendents, and five *avatāras* of VishNu on both flanks… Further clearance work has been executed during the year 1932-33 and among the sculptures discovered in that year are twelve figures of the Sun God, again in the 12th century style and evidently reused by the masons when the Hindu temple was converted into a Muslim structure…”[^21]

**Mandu (Madhya Pradesh)**

“MāNDū became the capital of the Muhammadan Sultāns of Mālvā who set about buildings themselves palaces and mosques, first with material pilfered from Hindu temples (already for the most part desecrated and ruined by the iconoclastic fury of their earlier co-religionists), and afterwards with their own quarried material.  Thus nearly all the traces of the splendid shrines of the ParamAras of MAlvA have disappeared save what we find utilized in the ruined mosques and tombs…[^22]

“The date of the construction of the Hindola Mahall cannot be fixed with exactitude… There can, however, be no doubt that it is one of the earliest of the Muhammadan buildings in MāNDū. From its outward appearance there is no sign of Hindu workmanship but the repairs, that have been going on for the past one year, have brought to light a very large number of stones used in the structure, which appear, to have been taken from some pre-existing Hindu temple. The facing stones, which have been most accurately and smoothly cut on their outer surfaces, bear in very many cases on their inner sides the under faced images of Hindu gods, or patterns of purely Hindu design, while pieces of Hindu carving and broken parts of images are found indiscriminately mixed with the rubble, of which the core of the walls is made.”[^23]

**Dhar (Madhya Pradesh)**

“…The mosque itself appears from local tradition and from the numerous indications and inscriptions found within it to have been built on the site of, and to a large extent out of materials taken from, a Hindu Temple, known to the inhabitants as Rājā Bhoja’s school. The inference was derived sometime back from the existence of a Sanskrit alphabet and some Sanskrit grammatical forms inscribed in serpentine diagrams on two of the pillar bases in the large prayer chamber and from certain Sanskrit inscriptions on the black stone slabs imbedded in the floor of the prayer chamber, and on the reverse face of the side walls of the mihrāb.[^24]

“The Lāt Masjid built in A.D. 1405, by Dilāwar Khān, the founder of the Muhammadan kingdom of Mālvā… is of considerable interest not only on account of the Iron Lāt which lies outside it… but also because it is a good specimen of the use made by the Muhammadan conquerors of the materials of the Hindu temples which they destroyed…”[^25]

**Vijayanagar (Karnataka)**

“During the construction of the new road-some mounds which evidently marked the remains of destroyed buildings, were dug into, and in one of them were disclosed the foundations of a rectangular building with elaborately carved base. Among the debris were lumps of charcoal and calcined iron, probably the remains of the materials used by the Muhammadans in the destruction of the building. The stones bear extensive signs of having been exposed to the action of fire. That the chief buildings were destroyed by fire, historical evidence shows, and many buildings, notably the ViThalaswAmin temple, still bear signs, in their cracked and fractured stone work, of the catastrophe which overtook them…[^26]

“The most important temple at Vijayanagar from an architectural point of view, is the ViThalaswāmin temple. It stands in the eastern limits of the ruins, near the bank of the TuNgabhadra river, and shows in its later structures the extreme limit in floral magnificence to which the Dravidian style advanced… This building had evidently attracted the special attention of the Muhammadan invaders in their efforts to destroy the buildings of the city, of which this was no doubt one of the most important, for though many of the other temples show traces of the action of fire, in none of them are the effects so marked as in this.  Its massive construction, however, resisted all the efforts that were made to bring it down and the only visible results of their iconoclastic fury are the cracked beams and pillars, some of the later being so flaked as to make one marvel that they are yet able to bear the immense weight of the stone entablature and roof above…”[^27]

**Bijapur (Karnataka)**

“No ancient Hindu or Jain buildings have survived at Bijapur and the only evidence of their former existence is supplied by two or three mosques, viz., Mosque No. 294, situated in the compound of the Collector’s bungalow, Krimud-d-din Mosque and a third and smaller mosque on the way to the Mangoli Gate, which are all adaptations or re-erections of materials obtained from temples. These mosques are the earliest Muhammadan structures and one of them, i.e., the one constructed by Karimud-d-din, must according to a Persian and Nagari inscription engraved upon its pillars, have been erected in the year 1402 Saka=A.D. 1324, soon after Malik Kafur’s conquest of the. 
Deccan.”[^28]

**Badami (Karnataka)**

“Three stone lintels bearing bas-reliefs were discovered in, course of the clearance at the second gateway of the Hill Fort to the north of the Bhūtnāth tank at Badami… These originally belonged to a temple which is now in ruins and were re-used at a later period in the construction of the plinth of guardroom on the fort.

“The bas-reliefs represent scenes from the early life of KRISHNA and may be compared with similar ones in the BADAMI CAVES…”[^29]

**The Pattern of Destruction**

The Theology of Islam divides human history into two periods-the Jāhiliyya or the age of ignorance which preceded Allah’s first revelation to Prophet Muhammad, and the age of enlightenment which succeeded that event. It follows that every human creation which existed in the “age of ignorance” has to be converted to its Islamic version or destroyed. The logic applies to pre-Islamic buildings as much as to pre-Islamic ways of worship, mores and manners, dress and decor, personal and place names. This is too large a subject to be dealt with at present. What concerns us here is the fate of temples and monasteries that existed on the eve of the Islamic invasion and that came up in the course of its advance.

What happened to many “abodes of the infidels” is best described by a historian of Vijayanagar in the wake of Islamic victory in 1565 A.D. at the battle of Talikota. “The third day,” he writes, “saw the beginning of the end. The victorious Mussulmans had halted on the field of battle for rest and refreshment, but now they had reached the capital, and from that time forward for a space of five months Vijayanagar knew no rest. The enemy had come to destroy, and they carried out their object relentlessly. They slaughtered the people without mercy; broke down the temples and palaces, and wreaked such savage vengeance on the abode of the kings, that, with the exception of a few great stone-built temples and walls, nothing now remains but a heap of ruins to mark the spot where once stately buildings stood. They demolished the statues and even succeeded in breaking the limbs of the huge Narsimha monolith. Nothing seemed to escape them. They broke up the pavilions standing on the huge platform from which the kings used to watch festivals, and overthrew all the carved work. They lit huge fires in the magnificently decorated buildings forming the temple of Vitthalswamin near the river, and smashed its exquisite stone sculptures. With fire and sword, with crowbars and axes, they carried on day after day their work of destruction. Never perhaps in the history of the world has such havoc been wrought, and wrought so suddenly, on so splendid a city: teeming with a wealthy and industrious population in the full plenitude of prosperity one day, and on the next seized, pillaged, and reduced to ruins, amid scenes of savage massacre and horrors beggaring description…[^30]

The Muslim victors did not get time to raise their own structures from the ruins of Vijayanagar, partly because the Hindu Raja succeeded in regrouping his forces and re-occupying his capital and partly because they did not have the requisite Muslim population to settle in that large city; another invader, the Portuguese, had taken control of the Arabian Sea and blocked the flow of fresh recruits from Muslim countries in the Middle East. What would have happened otherwise is described by Alexander Cunningham in his report on Mahoba. “As Mahoba was,” he writes, “for some time the headquarters of the early Muhammadan Governors, we could hardly expect to find that any Hindu buildings had escaped their furious bigotry, or their equally destructive cupidity. When the destruction of a Hindu temple furnished the destroyer with the ready means of building a house for himself on earth, as well as in heaven, it is perhaps wonderful that so many temples should still be standing in different parts of the country. It must be admitted, however, that, in none of the cities which the early Muhammadans occupied permanently, have they left a single temple standing, save this solitary temple at Mahoba, which doubtless owed its preservation solely to its secure position amid the deep waters of the Madan-Sagar. In Delhi, and Mathura, in Banaras and Jonpur, in Narwar and Ajmer, every single temple was destroyed by their bigotry, but thanks to their cupidity, most of the beautiful Hindu pillars were preserved, and many of them, perhaps, on their original positions, to form new colonnades for the masjids and tombs of the conquerors.  In Mahoba all the other temples were utterly destroyed and the only Hindu building now standing is part of the palace of Parmal, or Paramarddi Deva, on the hill-fort, which has been converted into a masjid. In 1843, I found an inscription of Paramarddi Deva built upside down in the wall of the fort just outside this masjid. It is dated in S. 1240, or A.D. 1183, only one year before the capture of Mahoba by Prithvi-Raj Chohan of Delhi. In the Dargah of Pir Mubarak Shah, and the adjacent Musalman burial-ground, I counted 310 Hindu pillars of granite. I found a black stone bull lying beside the road, and the *argha* of a lingam fixed as a water-spout in the terrace of the Dargah. These last must have belonged to a temple of Siva, which was probably built in the reign of Kirtti Varmma, between 1065 and 1085 A.D., as I discovered an inscription of that prince built into the wall of one of the tombs.”[^31]

Many other ancient cities and towns suffered the same tragic transformation. Bukhara, Samarkand, Balkh, Kabul, Ghazni, Srinagar, Peshawar, Lahore, Multan, Patan, Ajmer, Delhi, Agra Dhar, Mandu, Budaun, Kanauj, Biharsharif, Patna, Lakhnauti, Ellichpur, Daulatabad, Gulbarga, Bidar, Bijapur, Golconda-to mention only a few of the more famous Hindu capitals-lost their native character and became nests of a closed creed waging incessant war on a catholic culture. Some of these places lost even their ancient names which had great and glorious associations. It is on record that the Islamic invaders coined and imposed this or that quranic concoction on every place they conquered. Unfortunately for them, most of these impositions failed to stick, going the way they came. But quite a few succeeded and have endured till our own times. Reviving the ancient names wherever they have got eclipsed is one of the debts which Hindu society owes to its illustrious ancestors.

On the other hand, a large number of cities, towns and centres of Hindu civilization disappeared from the scene and their ruins have been identified only in recent times, as in the case of Kāpiśī, Lampaka, Nagarahāra, Pushkalāvatī, UdbhāNDapura, Takshśilā, Ālor, Brāhmanābād, Debal, Nandana, Agrohā Virātanagara, Ahichchhatra, Śrāvastī, Sārnāth, Vaiśālī, Vikramśīla, Nālandā, KarNasuvarNa, PuNDravardhana, Somapura, Jājanagar, DhānyakaTaka, Vijayapurī, Vijayanagara, Dvārasamudra. What has been found on top of the ruins in most cases is a mosque or a dargāh or a tomb or some other Muslim monument, testifying to Allah’s triumph over Hindu Gods. Many more mounds are still to be explored and identified. A survey of archaeological sites in the Frontier Circle alone and as far back as 1920, listed 255 *dheris*[³²](#32) or mounds which, as preliminary explorations indicated, hid ruins of ancient dwellings and/or places of worship. Some *dheris*, which had been excavated and were not included in this count, showed every sign of deliberate destruction.  By that time, many more mounds of a similar character had been located in other parts of the cradle of Hindu culture. A very large number has been added to the total count in subsequent years. Whichever of them is excavated tells the same story, most of the time. It is a different matter that since the dawn of independence, Indian archaeologists functioning under the spell or from fear of Secularism, record or report only the ethnographical stratifications and cultural sequences.[^33]

Muslim historians credit all their heroes with many expeditions each of which “laid waste” this or that province or region or city or countryside. The foremost heroes of the imperial line at Delhi and Agra such as Qutbu’d-Dīn Aibak (1192-1210 A.D.), Shamsu’d-Dīn Iltutmish
(1210-36 A.D.), Ghiyāsu’d-Dīn Balban (1246-66 A D.), Alāu’d-Dīn Khaljī
(1296-1316 A.D.), Muhammad bin Tughlaq (1325-51 A.D.), Fīruz Shāh
Tughlaq (135188 A.D.) Sikandar Lodī (1489-1519 A.D.), Bābar (1519-26 A.D.) and Aurangzeb (1658-1707 A.D.) have been specially hailed for “hunting the peasantry like wild beasts”, or for seeing to it that “no lamp is lighted for hundreds of miles”, or for “destroying the dens of idolatry and God-pluralism” wherever their writ ran. The sultans of the provincial Muslim dynasties-Malwa, Gujarat, Sindh, Deccan, Jaunpur, Bengal-were not far behind, if not ahead, of what the imperial pioneers had done or were doing; quite often their performance put the imperial pioneers to shame. No study has yet been made of how much the human population declined due to repeated genocides committed by the swordsmen of Islam. But the count of cities and towns and villages which simply disappeared during the Muslim rule leaves little doubt that the loss of life suffered by the cradle of Hindu culture was colossal.

Putting together all available evidence-literary and archaeological-from Hindu, Muslim and other sources, and following the trail of Islamic invasion, we get the pattern of how the invaders proceeded vis-a-vis Hindu places of worship after occupying a city or town and its suburbs. It should be kept in mind in this context that Muslim rule never became more than a chain of garrison cities and towns, not even in its heyday from Akbar to Aurangzeb, except in areas where wholesale or substantial conversions had taken place.  Elsewhere the invaders were rarely in full control of the countryside; they had to mount repeated expeditions for destroying places of worship, collecting booty including male and female slaves, and for terrorising the peasantry, through slaughter and rapine, so that the latter may become a submissive source of revenue.  The peasantry took no time to rise in revolt whenever and wherever Muslim power weakened or its terror had to be relaxed for reasons beyond its control.

1\. *Places taken by assault:* If a place was taken by assault-which was mostly the case because it was seldom that the Hindus surrendered-it was thoroughly sacked, its surviving population slaughtered or enslaved and all its buildings pulled down. In the next phase, the conquerors raised their own edifices for which slave labour was employed on a large scale in order to produce quick results. Cows and, many a time, Brahmanas were killed and their blood sprinkled on the sacred sites in order to render them unclean for the Hindus for all time to come. The places of worship which the Muslims built for themselves fell into several categories. The pride of place went to the Jāmi‘ Masjid which was invariably built on the site and with the materials of the most prominent Hindu temple; if the materials of that temple were found insufficient for the purpose, they could be supplemented with materials of other temples which had been demolished simultaneously. Some other mosques were built in a similar manner according to need or the fancy of those who mattered. Temple sites and materials were also used for building the tombs of those eminent Muslims who had fallen in the fight; they were honoured as martyrs and their tombs became mazārs and rauzas in course of time. As we have already pointed out, Hindus being great temple builders, temple materials could be spared for secular structures also, at least in the bigger settlements. It can thus be inferred that all masjids and mazārs, particularly the Jāmi‘ Masjids which date from the first Muslim occupation of a place, stand on the site of Hindu temples; the structures we see at present may not carry evidence of temple materials used because of subsequent restorations or attempts to erase the evidence. There are very few Jāmi‘ Masjids in the country which do not stand on temple sites.

2\. *Places surrendered:* Once in a while a place was surrendered by the Hindus in terms of an agreement that they would be treated as *zimmis* and their lives as well as places of worship spared. In such cases, it took some time to eradicate the “emblems of infidelity.” Theologians of Islam were always in disagreement whether Hindus could pass muster as
*zimmis*; they were not People of the Book. It depended upon prevailing
power equations for the final decision to go in their favour or against them. Most of the time, Hindus lost the case in which they were never allowed to have any say. What followed was what had happened in places taken by assault, at least in respect of the Hindu places of worship. The *zimmi* status accorded to the Hindus seldom went beyond exaction of
*jizya* and imposition of disabilities prescribed by Umar, the second
rightly-guided Caliph (634-44 A.D.).

3\. *Places reoccupied by Hindus:* It also happened quite frequently, particularly in the early phase of an Islamic invasion, that Hindus retook a place which had been under Muslim occupation for some time. In that case, they rebuilt their temples on new sites. Muslim historians are on record that Hindus spared the mosques and mazārs which the invaders had raised in the interregnum. When the Muslims came back, which they did in most cases, they re-enacted the standard scene vis-a-vis Hindu places of worship.

4\. *Places in the countryside:* The invaders started sending out expeditions into the countryside as soon as their stranglehold on major cities and towns in a region had been secured.  Hindu places of worship were always the first targets of these expeditions. It is a different matter that sometimes the local Hindus raised their temples again after an expedition had been forced to retreat. For more expeditions came and in due course Hindu places of worship tended to disappear from the countryside as well. At the same time, masjids and mazārs sprang up everywhere, on the sites of demolished temples.

5\. *Missionaries of Islam:* Expeditions into the countryside were accompanied or followed by the missionaries of Islam who flaunted pretentious names and functioned in many guises. It is on record that the missionaries took active part in attacking the temples. They loved to live on the sites of demolished temples and often used temple materials for building their own dwellings, which also went under various high-sounding names. There were instances when they got killed in the battle or after they settled down in a place which they had helped in pillaging. In all such cases, they were pronounced *shahīds*
(martyrs) and suitable monuments were raised in their memory as soon as
it was possible. Thus a large number of *gumbads* (domes) and *ganjs*
(plains) commemorating the martyrs arose all over the cradle of Hindu
culture and myths about them grew apace. In India, we have a large literature on the subject in which Sayyid Sālār Mas‘ūd, who got killed at Bahraich while attacking the local Sun Temple, takes pride of place. His mazAr now stands on the site of the same temple which was demolished in a subsequent invasion. Those Muslim saints who survived and settled down have also left a large number of masjids and dargAhs in the countryside. Almost all of them stand on temple sites.

6\. *The role of sufis:* The saints of Islam who became martyrs or settled down were of several types which can be noted by a survey of their *ziārats* and *mazārs* that we find in abundance in all lands conquered by the armies of Islam. But in the second half of the twelfth century A.D., we find a new type of Muslim saint appearing on the scene and dominating it in subsequent centuries. That was the sufi joined to a
*silsila*. This is not the place to discuss the character of some
outstanding sufis like Mansūr al-Hallāj, Bāyazīd Bistāmī, Rūmī and Attār. Suffice it to say that some of their ancestral spiritual heritage had survived in their consciousness even though their Islamic environment had tended to poison it a good deal. The common name which is used for these early sufis as well as for the teeming breed belonging to the latter-day *silsilas*, has caused no end of confusion. So far as India is concerned, it is difficult to find a sufi whose consciousness harboured even a trace of any spirituality. By and large, the sufis that functioned in this country were the most fanatic and fundamentalist activists of Islamic imperialism, the same as the latter-day Christian missionaries in the context of Spanish and Portuguese imperialism.

Small wonder that we find them flocking everywhere ahead or with or in the wake of Islamic armies. Sufis of the Chishtīyya *silsila* in particular excelled in going ahead of these armies and acting as eyes and ears of the Islamic establishment. The Hindus in places where these sufis settled, particularly in the South, failed to understand the true character of these saints till it was too late. The invasions of South India by the armies of Alāu’d-Dīn Khaljī and Muhammad bin Tughlaq can be placed in their proper perspective only when we survey the sufi network in the South. Many sufis were sent in all directions by Nizāmu’d-Dīn Awliyā, the Chistīyya luminary of Delhi; all of them actively participated in *jihāds* against the local population.  Nizāmu’d-Dīn’s leading disciple, Nasīru’d-Dīn Chirāg-i-Dihlī, exhorted the sufis to serve the Islamic state.  “The essence of sufism,” he versified, “is not an external garment. Gird up your loins to serve the Sultān and be a sufi.”[^34] Nasīru’d-Dīn’s leading disciple, Syed Muhammad Husainī Banda Nawāz Gesūdarāz (1321-1422 A.D.), went to Gulbarga for helping the contemporary Bahmani sultan in consolidating Islamic power in the Deccan. Shykh Nizāmu’d-Dīn Awliyā’s dargāh in Delhi continued to be and remains till today the most important centre of Islamic fundamentalism in India.

An estimate of what the sufis did wherever and whenever they could, can be formed from the account of a pilgrimage which a pious Muslim Nawwāb undertook in 1823 to the holy places of Islam in the Chingleput, South Acort, Thanjavur, Tiruchirapalli and North Arcot districts of Tamil Nadu. This region had experienced renewed Islamic invasion after the breakdown of the Vijayanagar Empire in 1565 A.D. Many sufis had flocked in for destroying Hindu temples and converting the Hindu population, particularly the Qādirīyyas who had been fanning out all over South India after establishing their stronghold at Bidar in the fifteenth century. They did not achieve any notable success in terms of conversions, but the havoc they wrought with Hindu temples can be inferred from a large number of ruins, loose sculptures scattered all over the area, inscriptions mentioning many temples which cannot be traced, and the proliferation of mosques, dargāhs, mazārs and maqbaras.

The pilgrim visited many places and could not go to some he wanted to cover. All these places were small except Tiruchirapalli, Arcot and Vellore. His court scribe, who kept an account of the pilgrimage, mentions many masjids and mazārs visited by his patron. Many masjids and mazārs could not be visited because they were in deserted places covered by forest. There were several graveyards, housing many tombs; one of them was so big that “thousands, even a hundred thousand” graves could be there. Other notable places were takiyās of faqirs, sarāis, dargāhs, and several houses of holy relics in one of which “a hair of the Holy Prophet is enshrined.” The account does not mention the Hindu population except as “harsh kafirs and marauders.” But stray references reveal that the Muslim population in all these places was sparse. For instance, Kanchipuram had only 50 Muslim houses but 9 masjids and 1 mazār.

The court scribe pays fulsome homage to the sufis who “planted firmly the Faith of Islam” in this region. The pride of place goes to Hazrat Natthar WalI who took over by force the main temple at Tiruchirapalli and converted it into his khānqāh. Referring to the destruction of the Sivalinga in the temple, he observes: “The monster was slain and sent to the house of perdition.  His image namely *but-ling* worshipped by the unbelievers was cut and the head separated from the body. A portion of the body went into the ground. Over that spot is the tomb of WalI shedding rediance till this day.”[^35] Another sufi, Qāyim Shāh, who came to the same place at a later stage, “was the cause of the destruction of twelve temples.”[^36] At Vellore, Hazrat Nūr Muhammad Qādirī, “the most unique man regarded as the invaluable person of his age,” was the “cause of the ruin of temples” which “he laid waste.” He chose to be buried “in the vicinity of the temple” which he had replaced with his khānqāh.[^37]

It is, therefore, not an accident that the masjids and khAnqAhs built by or for the sufis who reached a place in the first phase of Islamic invasion occupy the sites of Hindu temples and, quite often, contain temple materials in their structures. Lahore, Multan, Uch, Ajmer, Delhi, Badaun, Kanauj, Kalpi, Biharsharif, Maner, Lakhnauti, Patan, Patna, Burhanpur, Daulatabad, Gulbarga, Bidar, Bijapur, Golconda, Arcot, Vellor and Tiruchirapalli-to count only a few leading sufi center-shave many dargāhs which display evidence of iconoclasm.  Many masjids and dargāhs in interior places testify to the same fact, namely, that the sufis were, above everything else, dedicated soldiers of Allah who tolerates no other deity and no other way of worship except that which he revealed to Prophet Muhammad.

7\. *Particularly pious sultans:* Lastly, we have to examine very closely the monuments built during the reigns of the particularly pious sultans who undertook “to cleanse the land from the vices of infidelity and God-pluralism” that had cropped up earlier, either because Islamic terror had weakened under pressure of circumstances or because the proceeding ruler (s) had “wandered away from the path of rectitude.” Fīruz Shāh Tughlaq, Sikandar Lodī and Aurangzeb of the Delhi-Agra imperial line belonged to this category.  They had several prototypes in the provincial Muslim dynasties at Ahmadabad, Mandu, Jaunpur, Lakhnauti, Gulbarga, Bidar, Ahmadnagar, Bijapur and Golconda. There is little doubt that all masjids and mazārs erected under the direct or indirect patronage of these sultans, particularly in places where Hindu population predominates, stand on the sites of Hindu temples.

**A Preliminary Survey**

We give below, state-wise and district-wise, the particulars of Muslim monuments which stand on the sites and/or have been built with the materials of Hindu temples, and which we wish to recall as witnesses to the role of Islam as a religion and the character of Muslim rule in medieval India. The list is the result of a preliminary survey. Many more Muslim monuments await examination. Local traditions which have so far been ignored or neglected, have to be tapped on a large scale.

We have tried our best to be exact in respect of locations, names and dates of the monuments mentioned.  Even so, some mistakes and confusions may have remained. It is not unoften that different sources provide different dates and names for the same monument. Many Muslim saints are known by several names, which creates confusion in identifying their mazārs or dargāhs. Some districts have been renamed or newly, created and a place which was earlier under one district may have been included in another. We shall be grateful to readers who point out these mistakes so that they can be corrected in our major study. This is only a brief summary.  
   
 

**ANDHRA PRADESH**

I. Adilabad District.

> *Mahur*, Masjid in the Fort on the hill. Temple site.

  
II. Anantpur District.

> 1\. *Gooty*, Gateway to the Hill Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Kadiri*, Jāmi‘ Masjid.  Temple site.  
> 3. *Konakondla*, Masjid in the bazar. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Penukonda* >
> > \(i\) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid in the Fort. Converted Temple.  
> > (iii) Sher Khān’s Masjid (1546).[^38] Converted Temple.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Babayya. Converted Īśvara Temple.  
> > (v) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1664-65). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Dargāh of Shāh Fakbru’d-Dīn (1293-94). Temple site. >
> 5\. *Tadpatri* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1695-96). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh completed in 1725-26. Temple site. >
> 6\. *Thummala*, Masjid (1674-75). Temple site.

  
III. Cuddapah District

> 1\. *Cuddapah* >
> > \(i\) Bhāp Sāhib-kī-Masjid (1692). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1717-18). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bahādur Khān-kī-Masjid (1722-23). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Shāh Amīnu’d-Dīn Gesū Darāz (1736-37). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Duvvuru*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Gandikot*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1690-91). Temple site.  
> 4. *Gangapuru*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Gundlakunta*, Dastgīrī Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 6. *Gurrumkonda*, Fort and several other Muslim buildings. Temple > materials used.  
> 7. *Jammalmaduguu*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1794-95). Temple site.  
> 8. *Jangalapalle*, Dargāh of Dastgīr Swāmī. Converted Jangam temple.  
> 9. *Siddhavatam* >
> > \(i\) Qutb Shāhī Masjid (restored in 1808). Temple materials use.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1701). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Bismillāh Khān Qādirī. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Fort and Gateways. Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Chowk-kī-Masjid. Temple site. >
> 10\. *Vutukuru* >
> > \(i\) Masjid at Naligoto. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid at Puttumiyyapeta. Temple site.

  
IV. East Godavari District.

> *Bikkavolu*, Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
V. Guntur District.

> 1\. *Nizampatnam*, Dargāh of Shāh Haidrī (1609). Temple site  
> 2. *Vinukonda*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1640-41). Temple site.

  
VI. Hyderabad District.

> 1\. *Chikalgoda*, Masjid (1610). Temple site.  
> 2. *Dargah*, Dargāh of Shāh Walī (1601-02). Temple site.  
> 3. *Golconda* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid on Bālā Hissār. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Tārāmatī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Hyderabad* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Mūsā Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid on the Pirulkonda Hill (1690). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Tolī Masjid (1671). Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Miān Mishk (d. 1680). Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Mu’min Chup in Aliyābād (1322-23). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Hājī Kamāl-kī-Masjid (1657). Temple site.  
> > (vii) Begum Masjid (1593). Temple site.  
> > (viii) Dargāh of Islām Khān Naqshbandī. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Dargāh of Shāh Dā‘ūd (1369-70). Temple site.  
> > (x) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1597). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Maisaram*, Masjid built by Aurangzeb from materials of 200 > temples demolished after the fall of Golconda.  
> 5. *Secunderabad*, Qadam RasUl. Temple site.  
> 6. *Sheikhpet* >
> > \(i\) Shaikh-kī-Masjid (1633-34). Temple site.  
> > (ii) SarāiwAlī Masjid (1678-79). Temple tite.

  
VII. Karimnagar District.

> 1\. *Dharampuri*, Masjid (1693). TrikūTa Temple site.  
> 2. *Elangdal* >
> > \(i\) Mansūr Khān-kī-Masjid (1525). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Alamgīrī Masjid (1696). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Kalesyaram*, Ālamgīrī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Sonipet*, Ālamgīrī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Vemalvada*, Mazār of a Muslim saint. Temple site.

  
VIII. Krishna District.

> 1\. *Gudimetta*, Masjid in the Fort, Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Guduru*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1497). Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Gundur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted temple.  
> 4. *Kondapalli* >
> > \(i\) Masjid built in 1482 on the site of a temple after Muhammad > > Shāh BahmanI had slaughtered the Brahmin priests on the advice of > > Mahmūd Gawān, the great Bahmanī Prime Minister, who exhorted the > > sultan to become a Ghāzī by means of this pious performance.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shāh Abdul Razzāq. Temple site. >
> 5\. *Kondavidu* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1337). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Barandaula. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Qadam Sharīf of Ādam. Converted temple. >
> 6\. *Machhlipatnam* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Nandigram*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 8. *Pedana*, Iama‘il-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 9. *Rajkonda*, Masjid (1484). Temple site.  
> 10. *Tengda*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 11. *Turkpalem*, Dargāh of Ghālib Shahīd. Temple site.  
> 12. *Vadpaili*, Masjid near NarsiMhaswāmīn Temple. Temple materials > used.  
> 13. *Vijaywada*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
IX. Kurnool District.

> 1\. *Adoni* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1668-69). Materials of several temples used.  
> > (ii) Masjid on the Hill. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Fort (1676-77). Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Cumbum* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1649). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Gachinālā Masjid (1729-30). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Havli*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Karimuddula*, Dargāh. Akkadevi Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Kottakot*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1501). Temple site.  
> 6. *Kurnool* >
> > \(i\) Pīr Sāhib-kā-Gumbad (1637-38). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1667). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Lāl Masjid (1738-39). Temple site. >
> 7\. *Pasupala*, Kalān Masjid. Temple site.  
> 8. *Sanjanmala*, Masjid. Temple sites.  
> 9. *Siddheswaram*, Ashurkhāna. Temple materials used.  
> 10. *Yadavalli*, Mazār and Masjid. Temple sites.  
> 11. *Zuhrapur*, Dargāh of Qādir Shāh Bukhārī. Temple site.

  
X. Mahbubnagar District.

> 1\. *Alampur*, Qalā-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Jatprole*, Dargāh of Sayyid Shāh Darwish. Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Kodangal* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hazrat Nizāmu’d-DIn. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Kundurg*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1470-71). Temple site.  
> 5. *Pargi*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1460). Temple site.  
> 6. *Somasila*, Dargāh of Kamālu’d-Dīn Baba (1642-43) Temple site.

  
XI. Medak District.

> 1\. *Andol*, Old Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Komatur*, Old Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Medak* >
> > \(i\) Masjid near Mubārak Mahal (1641). VishNu Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort, Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Palat*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Patancheru* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shykh Ibrāhīm known as Makhdūmji (1583). Temple > > site.  
> > (iii) Ashrufkhāna. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort (1698). Temple materials used.

  
XII. Nalgonda District.

> 1\. *Devarkonda* >
> > \(i\) Qutb Shāhī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Sharīfu’d-Din (1579). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Qādir Shāh Walī (1591). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Ghazinagar*, Masjid (1576-77). Temple site.  
> 3. *Nalgonda* >
> > \(i\) Garhī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Latīf. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Qutb Shāhī Masjid (Renovated in 1897). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Pangal*, Ālamgīrī Masjid. Temple site.

  
XIII. Nellore District.

> 1\. *Kandukuru*, Four Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 2. *Nellore*, Dargāh named Dargāmittā. Akkasālīśvara Temple materials > used.  
> 3. *Podile*, Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 4. *Udayagiri* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1642-43). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Chhotī Masjid (1650-51). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Fort. Temple materials used.

  
XIV. Nizambad District.

> 1\. *Balkonda* >
> > \(i\) Patthar-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Bodhan* >
> > \(i\) Deval Masjid. Converted Jain temple.  
> > (ii) Patthar-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Ālamgīrī Masjid (1654-55). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Dudki*, Ashrufkhāna. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Fathullapur*, Mu’askarī Masjid (1605-06). Temple site.

  
XV. Osmanabad District.

> *Ausa*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1680-81). Temple site.

  
XVI. Rangareddy District.

> *Maheshwar*, Masjid (1687).  Madanna Pandit’s Temple site.

  
XVII. Srikakulam District

> 1\. *Icchapuram*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 2. *Kalingapatnam*, DargAh of Sayyid Muhammad Madnī Awliyā (1619-20). > Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Srikakulam* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1641- 42). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Bande Shāh Walī (1641- 42). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Atharwālī Masjid (1671-72). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Burhānu’d-Dīn Awliyā. Temple site.

  
XVIII. Vishakhapatnam District.

> 1\. *Jayanagaram*, Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Vishakhapatnam*, Dargāh of Shāh Madnī. Temple site.

  
XIX. Warangal District.

> *Zafargarh*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
XX. West Godavari District.

> 1\. *Eluru* >
> > \(i\) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Sawāi Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (iii) Qāzi’s House. Someśvara Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Nidavolu*, Masjid. Mahādeva Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Rajamundri*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1324). Converted VeNugopālaswāmin > Temple.

   
 

**ASSAM**

> District Kamrup  
> *Hajo* >
> > \(i\) Poā Masjid (1657). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of a Muslim saint who styled himself Sultān Ghiyāsu’d-Dīn > > Balban. Temple site.

   
 

**BENGAL**

I. Bankura District.

> *Lokpura*, Mazār of Ghāzī Ismāil. Converted Venugopala temple.

  
II. Barisal District.

> *Kasba*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
III. Birbhum District.

> 1\. *Moregram*, Mazār of Sayyid Bābā. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Patharchapuri*, Mazā of Dātā, or Mahbūb Sāhib. Temple site.  
> 3. *Rajnagar*, Several Old Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 4. *Sakulipur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Siyan*, Dargāh of Makhdūm Shāh (1221). Materials of many temples > used.

  
IV. Bogra District.

> *Mahasthan* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh and Masjid of Shāh Sultān Mahīswār. Stands on the ruins > > of a temple.  
> > (ii) Majid on Śilādevī Ghat. Temple materials used.

  
V. Burdwan District.

> 1\. *Inchalabazar*, Masjid (1703). Temple site.  
> 2. *Kasba*, Rājā, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Kalna* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Majlis (1491-93). Temple site.  
> > (ii) ShāhI Masjid (1533). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Mangalkot*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1523-24). Temple site.  
> 5. *Raikha*, Talāb-wālī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 6. *Suata* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Sayyid Shāh Shahīd Mahmūd Bahmanī. Buddhist Temple > > materials site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1502-02). Temple site.

  
VI. Calcutta District.

> *Bania Pukur*, Masjid built for Alāud-Dīn Alāu’l Haqq (1342). Temple > materials used.

  
VII. *Chatgaon* District.

> Dargāh of Badr Makhdūm. Converted Buddhist Vihāra.

  
VIII. Dacca District.

> 1\. *Dacca* >
> > \(i\) Tomb of Bībī Parī. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Saif Khān-kī-Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (iii) Churihattā Masjid. Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Narayanganj*, Qadam Rasūl Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Rampal* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Bābā. Adam Shahīd (1308). Temple materials used. >
> 4\. Sonargaon, Old Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
IX. Dinajpur District.

> 1\. *Basu-Bihar*, Two Masjids. On the ruins of a Buddhist Vihāra.  
> 2. *Devatala* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shykh Jalālu’d-Dīn Tabrizi, Suhrawardīyyia sufi > > credited in Muslim histories with the destruction of many, temples. > > Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1463). VishNu Temple site. >
> 3\. *Devikot* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh and Masjid of Pīr Atāu’llah Shāh (1203). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Bukhārī. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Pīr Bahāu’d-Dīn. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Shāh Sultān Pīr. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Mahisantosh*, Dargāh and Masjid. On the site of a big VishNu > Temple.  
> 5. *Nekmard*, Mazār of Nekmard Shāh. Temple site.

  
X. Faridpur District.

> *Faridpzir*, Mazār of Farīd Shāh. Temple site.

  
XI. Hooghly District.

> 1\. *Jangipura*, Mazār of Shahīd Ghāzī. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Pandua* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shāh Safiu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Fath Minār. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Santoshpur*, Masjid near Molla Pukur (153-310). Temple site.  
> 4. *Satgaon*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Tribeni* >
> > \(i\) Zafar Khān-kī-Masjid (1298). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Zafar Khān. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1459). Temple site.

  
XII. Howrah District.

> *Jangalvilas*, Pīr Sāhib-kī-Masjid. Converted temple.

  
XIII. Khulna District.

> 1\. *Masjidkur* >
> > \(i\) Shāt Gumbaz. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Khanjā Ali or Khān Jahān. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Salkhira*, Dargāh of Maī Chāmpā. Temple materials used.

  
XIV. Malda District.

> 1\. *Gangarampur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Atā. Śiva Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid on the river bank (1249). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Gaur*, Muslim city built on the site and with the ruins of > LakshmaNāvatī, Hindu capital destroyed by the Muslims at the end of > the twelfth century A.D. Temple materials have been used in the > following monuments: >
> > \(i\) Chhotī Sonā Masjid.  
> > (ii) Qadam Rasūl Masjid (1530)  
> > (iii) Tāntipārā Masjid (1480)  
> > (iv) Lāttan Masjid (1475)  
> > (v) Badī Sonā Masjid (1526)  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Makhadūm Akhī Sirāj Chishtī, disciple of Nizāmu’d-Dīn > > Awliya of Delhi (1347)  
> > (vii) Darsbārī or College of Theology.  
> > (viii) Astānā of Shāh Niāmatu’llāh.  
> > (ix) Chāmkattī Masjid (1459).  
> > (x) Chikkā Masjid.  
> > (xi) Gunmant Masjid.  Converted temple.  
> > (xii) Dākhil Darwāzā.  
> > (xiii) Kotwālī Darwāzā.  
> > (xiv) Fīruz Minār.  
> > (xv) ChaNDipur Darwāzā.  
> > (xvi) Bārāduārī Masjid.  
> > (xvii) Lukāchuri Masjid.  
> > (xviii) Gumtī Darwāzā. >
> 3\. *Malda* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1566). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Sak Mohan Masjid (1427). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Pandua*, Another Muslim city built with the ruins of > LakshmaNāvatī. Temple materials have been used in the following > monuments. >
> > \(i\) Ādina Masjid (1368)  
> > (ii) Yaklakhī Masjid.  
> > (iii) Chheh Hazāri or Dargāh of Nūr Qutb-i-Ālam (1415).  
> > (iv) Bāis Hazārī or Khānqāh of Jalālu’d-Dīn Tabrizī (1244).  
> > (v) Sonā Masjid.  
> > (vi) Barn-like Masjid.  
> > (vii) Qadam Rasūl.

  
XV. Midnapur District.

> 1\. *Gagneswar*, Karambera Garh Masjid (1509). Śiva Temple site.  
> 2. *Hijli*, Masnad-i-Ālā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Kesiari*, Masjid (1622). Mahādeva Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Kharagpur*, Mazār of Pīr Lohāni. Temple site.

  
XVI. Murshidabad District.

> 1\. *Chuna Khali*, Barbak-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Murshidabad*, Temple materials have been used in the following > monuments: >
> > \(i\) Katrā Masjid.  
> > (ii) Motījhīl Lake Embankments.  
> > (iii) Sangī Dālān.  
> > (iv) Mahal Sarā‘.  
> > (v) Alīvardī Khān-kī-Masjid.  
> > (vi) Hazārduārī Mahal. >
> 3\. *Rangamati*, Dargāh on the Rākshasī DāNgā. Stands on the ruins of > a Buddhist Vihāra.

  
XVII. Noakhali District.

> *Begamganj*, Bajrā Masjid. Converted temple.

  
XVIII. Pabna District.

> *Balandu*, Madrasa. Converted Buddhist Vihāra.

  
XIX. Rajshahi District.

> 1\. *Bhaturia*, Masjid. Śiva Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Kumarpura*, Mazār of Mukarram Shāh. Converted temple.  
> 3. *Kusumbha*, Old Masjid (1490-93). Constructed entirely of temple > materials.

  
XX. Rangpur District.

> *Kamatpur* >
> > \(i\) BaDā Dargāh of Shāh Ismāil Ghāzī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh on a mound one mile away. Temple materials used.

  
XXI. Sylhet District.

> 1\. *Baniyachung*, Famous Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Sylhet* >
> > \(i\) Masjid of Shāh Jalāl. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazārs of Shāh Jalāl and many of his disciples. Temple sites.

  
XXII. 24-Parganas District.

> 1\. *Barasat*, Mazār of Pīr Ekdil Sāhib. Temple site.  
> 2. *Berchampa*, Dargāh of Pīr GorāchāNd. Temple site.

   
 

**BIHAR**

I. Bhagalpur District.

> 1\. *Bhagalpur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hazrat Shāhbāz (1502). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid of Mujahidpur (1511-15). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Makhdūm Shāh (1615). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Champanagar* >
> > \(i\) Several Mazārs. On ruins of Jain temples.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1491). Jain Temple site. >
> 3\. *Sultanganj*, Masjid on the rock on the river bank. Temple site.

  
II. Gaya District.

> 1\. *Amthua*, Masjid (1536). Temple site.  
> 2. *Gaya*, Shāhī Masjid in Nadirganj (1617). Temple site.  
> 3. *Kako*, Dargāh of Bībī Kamālo. Temple site.

  
III. Monghyr District.

> 1\. *Amoljhori*, Muslim Graveyard. VishNu Temple site.  
> 2. *Charuanwan*, Masjid (1576). Temple site.  
> 3. *Kharagpur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1656-57). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1695-96). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Monghyr* >
> > \(i\) Fort Gates. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Nafa‘ Chishtī (1497-98). Temple site.

  
IV. Muzaffarpur District.

> *Zaruha*, MamūN-BhāNjā-kā-Mazār. Temple materials used.

  
V. Nalanda District.

> 1\. *Biharsharif*, Muslim capital built after destroying UdaNDapura > which had a famous Buddhist Vihāra. Most of the Muslim monuments were > built on the site and from materials of temples. The following are > some of them: >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Makhdūmu’l Mulk Sharīfu’d-Dīn. (d. 1380).  
> > (ii) BaDā Dargāh.  
> > (iii) Chhotā Dargāh.  
> > (iv) Bārādarī.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Shāh Fazlu’llāh GosāīN.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Malik Ibrāhim Bayyū on Pīr PahāDī.  
> > (vii) Kabīriu’d-Dīn-kī-Masjid (1353).  
> > (viii) Mazār of Sayyid Muhammad Siwistāni.  
> > (ix) Chhotā Takiyā containing the Mazār of Shāh Dīwān Abdul > > Wahhāb.  
> > (x) Dargāh of Shāh Qumais (1359-60).  
> > (xi) Masjid in Chandpur Mahalla.  
> > (xii) Jāmi‘ Masjid in Paharpur Mahalla. >
> 2\. *Parbati*, Dargāh of Hājī Chandar or ChāNd Saudāgar. Temple > materials used.  
> 3. *Shaikhupura*, Dargāh of Shykh Sāhib. Temple materials used.

  
VI. Patna District.

> 1\. *Hilsa* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Jumman Madārīyya (repaired in 1543). Temple > > site.  
> > (ii) Masjid. (1604-05). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Jana*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1539). Temple site.  
> 3. *Kailvan*, Dargāh and Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Maner*, All Muslim monuments stand on temple sites. The following > are prominent among them: >
> > \(i\) BaDā Dargāh of Sultānu’l Makhdūm Shāh Yāhyā Manerī.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Makhdūm Daulat Shāh.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Hājī Nizāmu’d-Dīn. >
> 5\. *Muhammadpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1510-11). Temple site.  
> 6. *Patna* >
> > \(i\) Patthar-kī-Masjid (1626). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Begū Hajjām-kī-Masjid (1510-11). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Muslim Graveyard outside the Qiladari. On the ruins of > > Buddhist Vihāras.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Shāh Mīr Mansūr. On the ruins of a Buddhist Stūpa.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Shāh Arzāni. On the site of a Buddhist Vihāra.  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Pīr Damariyā. On the site of a Buddhist Vihāra.  
> > (vii) Mirza Māsūm-kī-Masjid (1605). Temple materials used.  
> > (viii) Meetan Ghāt-kī-Masjid (1605). Temple site.  
> > (ix) Katrā Masjid of Shāista Khān. Temple site.  
> > (x) Khwāja Ambar Masjid (1688-89). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Bābuganj Masjid (1683-86). Temple site.  
> > (xii) Sher-Shāhī Masjid near Purab Darwaza. Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Chamnī Ghāt-kī-Masjid. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Phulwarisharif* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Pashmīnāposh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Minhāju’d-Dīn Rastī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Lāl Miān. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Sangī Masjid (1549-50). Temple site.

  
VII. Purnea District.

> 1\. *Hadaf*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Puranea*, Masjid in Keonlpura. Temple site.

  
VIII. Saran District.

> 1\. *Chirand*, Masjid (1503-04). Temple site.  
> 2. *Narhan*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Tajpur-Basahi* Mazār of Khwāja Bādshāh. Temple materials used.

  
IX. Shahabad District.

> 1\. *Rohtasgarh* >
> > \(i\) Masjid of Aurangzeb. Part of a temple converted.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Sāqī Sultān. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Sasaram*, Mazār of Chandan Shahīd Pīr. Temple site.

  
X. Vaishali District.

> 1\. *Amer*, Mazār of Pīr Qattāl. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Chehar* >
> > \(i\) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Hajipur* >
> > \(i\) Hājī Ilyās-kī- Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Barkhurdār Awliyā. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Pīr Shattārī. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Hājīu’l Harmain. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Pīr Jalālu’d-Dīn. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Basarh* >
> > \(i\) DargAh of Pīr Mīrān. On top of a Buddhist Stūpa.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shykh Muhammad Faizu’llāh Ali alias Qāzin Shattārī. > > Temple site.  
> > (iii) Graveyard. Many tombs built with temple materials.  
> > (iv) Masjid. Temple site.

  
XI. District to be determined.

> 1\. *Hasanpura*, Mazār of Makhdūm Hasan. On the site of a Buddhist > Stūpa,  
> 2. *Jhangira*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

   
 

**DELHI**

Islamic invaders destroyed the Hindu cities of Indarpat and Dhillikā with their extensive suburbs and built seven cities successively. The following Muslim monuments stand on the site of Hindu temples; temple materials can be seen in some of them.

I. *Mehrauli*

> 1\. Quwwatu’l Islām Masjid (1198).  
> 2. Qutb Mīnār.  
> 3. Maqbara of Shamsu’d-Dīn Iltutmish (1235.)  
> 4. Dargāh of Shykh Qutbu’d-Dīn Bakhtyār Kākī (d. 1236).  
> 5. Jahāz Mahal.  
> 6. AlāI Darwāzā.  
> 7. AlāI Mīnār.  
> 8. Madrasa and Maqbara of Alāu’d-Dīn Khaljī.  
> 9. Maqbara of Ghiyāu’d-Dīn Balban.  
> 10. Masjid and Mazār of Shykh Fazlu’llāh known as Jamālī-Kamālī.  
> 11. MaDhī Masjid.

  
II. *Sultan Ghari*

> Maqbara of Nāsiru’d-Dīn, son of Sultān Shamsu’d-Dīn Iltutmish (1231).

  
III. *Palam*

> Bābrī (Ghazanfar) Masjid (1528-29).

  
IV. *Begumpur*

> 1\. Masjid.  
> 2. Bijai Mandal.  
> 3. Kālu Sarāi-kī-Masjid.  
> 4. Mazār of Shykh Najību’d-Dīn Mutwakkal Chishtī (d. 1272).

  
V. *Tughlaqabad*

> Maqbara of Ghiyāsu’d-Dīn Tughlaq.

  
VI. *Chiragh-Delhi*

> 1\. Dargāh of Shykh Nasīru’d-Dīn Chirāgh-i-Dehlī (d. 1356).  
> 2. Maqbara of Bahlul Lodī.

  
VII. *Nizamu’d-DIn*

> 1\. Dargāh and Jama‘t-Khāna Masjid of Shykh Nizāmu’d-Dīn Awliyā (d. > 1325).  
> 2. Kalān Masjid.  
> 3. ChauNsaTh-Khambā.  
> 4. Maqbara of Khān-i-Jahān Tilangānī.  
> 5. Chillā of Nizām’d-Dīn Awliyā.  
> 6. Lāl Mahal.

  
VIII. *Hauz Khas*

> 1\. Maqbara and Madrasa of Fīruz Shāh Tughlaq.  
> 2. Dādī-Potī-kā-Maqbara.  
> 3. Biran-kā-Gumbad.  
> 4. Chhotī and Sakrī Gumtī.  
> 5. Nīlī Masjid (1505-06).  
> 6. Idgāh (1404-00).  
> 7. Bāgh-i-Ālam-kā-Gumbad (1501).  
> 8. Mazār of Nūru’d-Dīn Mubārak Ghaznawī (1234-35).

  
IX. *Malviyanagar*

> 1\. Lāl Gumbad or the Mazār of Shykh Kabīru’d-Dīn Awlīyā (1397).  
> 2. Mazār of Shykh Alāu’d-Dīn (1507).  
> 3. Mazār of Shykh Yūsuf Qattāl (d. 1527).  
> 4. Khirkī Masjid.

  
X. *Lodi Gardens*

> 1\. Maqbara of Muhammad Shāh.  
> 2. BaDā Gumbad Masjid (1494).  
> 3. Shīsh Gumbad.  
> 4. Maqbara of Sikandar Lodī.

  
XI. *Purana Qila*

> 1\. Sher Shāh Gate.  
> 2. Qalā-i-Kuhna Masjid.  
> 3. Khairu’l Manzil Masjid.

  
XII. *Shahjahanabad*

> 1\. Kālī Masjid at Turkman Gate.  
> 2. Maqbara of Raziā Sultān.  
> 3. Jāmi‘ Masjid on Bhojala PahāDī.  
> 4. Ghatā or Zainatu’l Masjid.  
> 5. Dargāh of Shāh Turkmān (1240).

  
XIII. *Ramakrishnapuram*

> 1\. Tīn Burjī Maqbara.  
> 2. Malik Munīr-kī-Masjid.  
> 3. Wazīrpur-kā-Gumbad.  
> 4. Mundā Gumbads.  
> 5. Barā-Lāo-kā-Gumbad.  
> 6. Barje-kā-Gumbad.

  
XIV. *The Ridge*

> 1\. Mālchā Mahal,  
> 2. Bhūlī Bhatiyāri-kā-Mahal.  
> 3. Qadam Sharīf.  
> 4. Chauburzā Masjid.  
> 5. Pīr Ghaib.

  
XV. *Wazirabad*

> Masjid and Mazār of Shāh Ālam.

  
XVI. *South* Extension  
1. Kāle Khān-kā-Gumbad.  
2. Bhūre Khān-kā-Gumbad.  
3. Chhote Khān-kā-Gumbad.  
4. BaDe Khān-kā-Gumbad.

XVII\. *Other Areas*

> 1\. Maqbara of Mubārak Shāh in Kotla Mubarakpur.  
> 2. Kushk Mahal in Tin Murti.  
> 3. Sundar Burj in Sundarnagar.  
> 4. Jāmi‘ Masjid in Kotla Fīruz Shāh.  
> 5. Abdu’n-Nabī-kī-Masjid near Tilak Bridge.  
> 6. Maqbara of Raushanāra Begum.

   
 

**DIU**

> Jāmi‘ Masjid (1404). Temple site.

   
 

**GUJARAT**

I. Ahmadabad District.

> 1\. *Ahmadabad*, Materials of temples destroyed at Asaval, Patan and > Chandravati were used in the building of this Muslim city and its > monuments. Some of the monuments are listed below : >
> > \(i\) Palace and Citadel of Bhadra.  
> > (ii) Ahmad Shāh-kī-Masjid in Bhadra.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid of Ahmad Shāh.  
> > (iv) Haibat Khān-kī-Masjid.  
> > (v) Rānī Rūpmatī-kī-Masjid.  
> > (vi) Rānī Bāī Harīr-kī-Masjid.  
> > (vii) Malik SāraNg-kī-Masjid.  
> > (viii) Mahfūz Khān-kī-Masjid.  
> > (ix) Sayyid Ālam-kī-Masjid.  
> > (x) Pattharwāli or Qutb Shāh-kī-Masjid.  
> > (xi) Sakar Khān-kī-Masjid.  
> > (xii) Bābā Lūlū-kī-Masjid.  
> > (xiii) Shykh Hasan Muhammad Chishtī-kī-Masjid.  
> > (xiv) Masjid at Isānpur.  
> > (xv) Masjid and Mazār of Malik Sha‘bān.  
> > (xvi) Masjid and Mazār of Rānī Sīprī (Sabarai).  
> > (xvii) Masjid and Mazār of Shāh Ālam at Vatva.  
> > (xviii) Maqbara of Sultān Ahmad Shāh I. >
> 2\. *Dekwara*, Masjid (1387). Temple site.  
> 3. *Dholka* >
> > \(i\) Masjid and Mazār of Bahlol Khān Ghāzī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Barkat Shahīd (1318). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Tanka or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1316). Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Hillāl Khān Qāzī-kī-Masjid (1333). Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Khīrnī Masjid (1377). Converted Bāvan Jinālaya Temple.  
> > (vi) Kālī Bazar Masjid (1364). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Isapur*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Mandal* >
> > \(i\) Sayyid-kī-Masjid (1462). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site. >
> 6\. *Paldi*, Patthar-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 7. *Ranpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1524-25). Temple site.  
> 8. *Sarkhej* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shykh Ahmad Khattū Ganj Baksh (d. 1445). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (ii) Maqbara of Sultān Mahmūd BegaDā. Temple materials used. >
> 9\. *Usmanpur*, Masjid and Mazār of Sayyid Usmān. Temple site.

  
II. Banaskantha District.

> 1\. *Haldvar*, Mazār of Lūn Shāh and Gūjar Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Halol* >
> > \(i\) Ek Mīnār-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) PāNch MuNhDā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1523-24). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Malan*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1462). Temple materials used.

  
III. Baroda District.

> 1\. *Baroda* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1504-05) Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Pīr Amīr Tāhir with its Ghāzī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Pīr GhoDā (1421-23). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Dabhoi* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of PāNch Bībī. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Māī Dhokrī. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Hira, Baroda, MabuDa and NandoDi Gates. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (v) MahuNDi Masjid. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Danteshwar*, Mazār of Qutbu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 4. *Sankheda*, Masjid (1515-16). Temple site.

  
IV. Bharuch District.

> 1\. *Amod*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Bharuch* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1321). Brahmanical and Jain temple materials > > used.  
> > (ii) Ghaznavī Masjid (1326). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Idgāh (1326). Temple site.  
> > (iv) ChunāwāDā Masjid (1458). Temple site.  
> > (v) Qāzī-kī-Masjid (1609). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār of Makhdūm Sharīfu’d-Dīn (1418). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Jambusar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1508-09). Temple site.  
> 4. *Tankaria*, BaDī or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1453). Temple site.

  
V. Bhavnagar District.

> 1\. *Botad*, Mazār of Pīr Hamīr Khan. Temple site.  
> 2. *Tolaja*, Idgāh and Dargāh of Hasan Pīr. Temple site.  
> 3. *Ghoda*, Masjid (1614). Temple site.

  
VI. Jamnagar District.

> 1\. *Amran*, Dargāh of Dawal Shāh. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Bet Dwarka*, Dargāh of Pīr Kirmānī. Temple site.  
> 3. *Dwarka*, Masjid (1473). Temple site.

  
VII. Junagarh District.

> 1\. *Junagarh* >
> > \(i\) BorwāD Masjid (1470). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid in Uparkot. Jain Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid at Māī GaDhechī. Converted Jain temple. >
> 2\. *Loliyana*, Dargāh of Madār Shāh. Temple site.  
> 3. *Kutiana*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Mangrol* >
> > \(i\) Rahmat Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1382-83). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) JūnI Jail-kī-Masjid (1385-86). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Revālī Masjid (1386-87). Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Masjid at Bandar. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Dargāh near Revāli Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Mazār of Sayyid Sikandar alias Makhdūm Jahāniyā (1375). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (viii) GaDhi Gate. Temple materials used. >
> 5\. *Somnath Patan* >
> > \(i\) Bāzār Masjid (1436). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Chāndnī Masjid (1456). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Qāzī-kī-Masjid (1539). Temple site.  
> > (iv) PathānwaDi Masjid (1326). Temple site.  
> > (v) Muhammad Jamādār-kī-Masjid (1420). Temple site.  
> > (vi) MiThāshāh Bhang-kī-Masjid (1428). Temple site.  
> > (vii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (viii) Masjid made out of the SomanAtha Temple of Kumārapāla.  
> > (ix) Masjid at the back of the Somanātha Temple. Converted temple.  
> > (x) Motā Darwāza. Temple materials used.  
> > (xi) Māīpurī Masjid on the way to Veraval. Temple materials used.  
> > (xii) Dargāh of Manglūri Shāh near Māīpurī Masjid. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (xiii) Shahīd Mahmūd-kī-Masjid (1694). Temple site. >
> 6\. *Vanasthali*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted VAmana Temple.  
> 7. *Veraval* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1332). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Nagīna Masjid (1488). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Chowk Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) MāNDvī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazār of Sayyid Ishāq or Maghribī Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Muhammad bin Hājī Gilānī. Temple site.

  
VIII. Kachchh District.

> 1\. *Bhadreshwar* >
> > \(i\) Solākhambī Masjid. Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) ChhoTī Masjid. Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Pīr Lāl Shāhbāz. Jain Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Bhuj* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Gumbad of Bābā Guru. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Munra or MunDra*, Seaport built from the materials of Jain > temples of Bhadreshwar which were demolished by the Muslims; its Safed > Masjid which can be seen from afar was built from the same materials.

  
IX. Kheda District.

> 1\. *Kapadwani* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1370-71). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Sām Shahīd-kī-Masjid (1423). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Khambhat* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1325). Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid in Qaziwara (1326). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in Undipet (1385). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Sadi-i-Awwal Masjid (1423). Temple site.  
> > (v) Fujrā-kī-Masjid (1427). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār of Umar bin Ahmad Kāzrūnī. Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Mazār of Qābil Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Mazār of Shykh Alī Jaulāqī known as Parwāz Shāh (1498). > > Temple site.  
> > (ix) Mazār of Shāh Bahlol Shahīd. Temple site.  
> > (x) Maqbara of Ikhtīyāru’d-Daula (1316). Temple site.  
> > (xi) IdgAh (1381-82). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Mahuda*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1318). Temple site.  
> 4. *Sojali*, Sayyid Mubārak-kī-Masjid. Temple site.

  
X. Mehsana District.

> 1\. *Kadi* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1384). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1583). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Kheralu*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1409-10). Temple site.  
> 3. *Modhera*, Rayadi Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Munjpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1401-02). Temple site.  
> 5. *Patan* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1357). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Phūtī Mahalla or Pinjar Kot-kī-Masjid (1417). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bāzār-kī-Masjid (1490). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid in a field that was the Sahasralinga Talav. Temple > > materials used.  
> > (v) Masjid and Dargāh of Makhdūm Husāmu’d-Dīn Chishtī, disciple of > > Shykh Nizāmu’d-Dīn Awliya of Delhi. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) GūmDā Masjid (1542). Temple site.  
> > (vii) RangrezoN-kī-Masjid (1410-11). Temple site.  
> > (viii) Dargāh of Shykh Muhammad Turk Kāshgarī (1444-45). Temple > > site.  
> > (ix) Dargāh of Shykh Farīd. Converted temple. >
> 6\. *Sami*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1404). Temple site.  
> 7. *Sidhpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Built on the site and with the materials > of the Rudra-mahālaya Temple of Siddharāja JayasiMha.  
> 8. *Una*, Dargāh of Hazrat Shāh Pīr. Temple site.  
> 9. *Vijapur* >
> > \(i\) Kalān Masjid (1369-70). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mansūrī Masjid. Temple site.

  
XI. Panch Mahals District.

> 1\. *Champaner* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1524). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Bhadra of Mahmūd BegDā. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Shahr-kī-Masjid.  Temple site. >
> 2\. *Godhra*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Pavagadh* >
> > \(i\) Masjid built on top of the Devī Temple.  
> > (ii) PāNch MuNhDā Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site, >
> 4\. *Rayania*, Masjid (1499-1500). Temple site.

  
XII. Rajkot District.

> 1\. *Jasdan*, Dargāh of Kālū Pīr. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Khakhrechi* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Kamāl Shāh Pīr. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Mahuva*, Idgah (1418). Temple site.  
> 4. *Malia*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Morvi*, Masjid (1553). Temple site.  
> 6. *Santrampur*, Masjid (1499-1500). Temple site.

  
XIII. Sabarkantha District.

> 1\. *Hersel*, Masjid (1405). Temple site.  
> 2. *Himmatnagar*, Moti-Mohlat Masjid in Nani Vorwad (1471). Temple > site.  
> 3. *Prantij* >
> > \(i\) Fath or Tekrewālī Masjid (1382). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Sikandar Shāh Shahīd (d. 1418). Temple materials > > used.

  
XIV.  Surat District.

> 1\. *Navasari* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1340). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Shāhī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Rander*, The Jains who predominated in this town were expelled by > Muslims and all temples of the former were converted into mosques. The > following mosques stand on the site of and/or are constructed with > materials from those temples: >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid.  
> > (ii) Nit Naurī Masjid.  
> > (iii) Miān-kī-Masjid.  
> > (iv) Khārwā Masjid.  
> > (v) Munshī-kī-Masjid. >
> 3\. *Surat* >
> > \(i\) Mirzā Sāmi-kī-Masjid (1336). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Nau Sayyid Sāhib-kī-Masjid and the nine Mazārs on Gopi Talav in > > honour of nine Ghāzīs. Temple sites.  
> > (iii) Fort built in the reign of Farrukh Siyār. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iv) Gopi Talav (1718). Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Tadkeshwar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1513-14). Temple site.

  
XV. Surendranagar District.

> 1\. *Sara*, DarbargaDh-kī-Masjid (1523). Temple site.  
> 2. *Vad Nagar*, Masjid (1694). Stands on the site of the Hātakeśvara > Mahādeva temple.  
> 3. *Wadhwan*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1439). Temple site.

   
 

**HARYANA**

I. Ambala District.

> 1\. *Pinjor*, Temple materials have been used in the walls and > buildings of the Garden of Fidāi Khān.  
> 2. *Sadhaura* >
> > \(i\) Masjid built in Khaljī times. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Two Masjids built in the reign of Jahāngīr. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iii) QāzioN-kī-Masjid (1640). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Abdul Wahāb-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Shāh Qumais. Temple site.

  
II. Faridabad District.

> 1\. *Faridabad*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1605). Temple site.  
> 2. *Nuh*, Masjid (1392-93). Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Palwal* >
> > \(i\) Ikrāmwālī or Jāmī‘ Masjid (1221). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1211). Temple material Is used.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Sayyid Chirāgh. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Ghāzī Shihābu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazār of Sayyid Wārah. Temple site.

  
III. Gurgaon District.

> 1\. *Bawal*, Masjid (1560). Temple site.  
> 2. *Farrukhnagar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1276). Temple site.  
> 3. *Sohna* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1561). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazārs known as Kālā and Lāl Gumbad. Temple sites.

  
IV. Hissar District.

> 1\. *Barwala*, Masjid (1289). Temple site.  
> 2. *Fatehabad* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh of Tughlaq times. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid built by Humānyūn (1539). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Hansi* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh built in the reign of Shamsu’d-Dīn Iltutmish. Temple > > site.  
> > (ii) JulāhoN-kī-Masjid built in the same reign. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bū Alī Baksh Masjid (1226). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Ādina Masjid (1336). Temple site.  
> > (v) Masjid in the Fort (1192). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Shahīd-Ganj Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Humāyūn-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (viii) Dargāh of Niāmatu’llāh Walī with adjascent Bārādarī. Temple > > materials used.  
> > (ix) Dargāh of Bū Alī Qalandar (1246). Temple site.  
> > (x) Dargāh of Shykh Jalālu’d-Dīn Haqq (1303). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Dargāh of Mahammad Jamīl Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xii) Dargāh of Wilāyat Shāh Shahīd (1314). Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Chahār Qutb and its Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (xiv) Fort and City Gates. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Hissar*, This city was built by Fīruz Shāh Tughlaq with temple > materials brought mostly from Agroha which had been destroyed by > Muhammad Ghurī in 1192. >
> > \(i\) Lāt-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Humayūn’s Jāmi‘ Masjid (1535). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid and Mazār of Bahlul Lodī. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Humāyūn’s Masjid outside Delhi Gate (1533). Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Bābā Prān Pīr Pādshāh. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Fort of Fīruz Shāh Tughlaq. Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Jahāz Mahal. Converted Jain Temple.  
> > (viii) Gūjarī Mahal. Temple materials used. >
> 5\. *Sirsa* >
> > \(i\) Masjid in the Mazār of Imām Nāsir (1277). Temple materials > > used.  
> > (ii) Bābarī Masjid in the Sarai (1530). Temple site.  
> > (iii) QāzIzāda-kī-Masjid (1540). Temple site.

  
V. Karnal District.

> *Panipat* >
> > \(i\) Masjid opposite the Mazār of Bū Alī Qalandar’s mother (1246). > > Temple site.  
> > (ii) Bābarī Masjid in Kābulī Bāgh (1528-29). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Shykh Jalālu’d-Dīn (1499). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Bū Alī Qalandar (1660). Temple site.

  
VI. Kurukshetra District.

> 1\. *Kaithal* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shykh Salāhu’d-Dīn Abu’l Muhammad of Balkh (d. > > 1246). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Shāh Wilāyat-kī-Masjid (1657-58). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Madrasa. Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Kurukshetra*, Madrasa on the Tila. Temple site.  
> 3. *Thanesar* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh and Madrasa of Shykh Chillī or Chehalī Bannurī. Temple > > materials used.  
> > (ii) Pathariā Masjid near Harsh-kā-Tīlā. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Chīnīwālī Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
VII.  Mahendergarh District.

> *Narnaul*, Mazar of Pīr Turk Shahīd or Shāh Wilāyat (d. 1137). Temple > site.

  
VIII. Rohtak District.

> 1\. *Jhajjar*, Kālī Masjid (1397). Temple site.  
> 2. *Maham*, >
> > \(i\) PirzādoN-kī-Masjid built in Bābar’s reign (1529). Temple > > site.  
> > (ii) Humāyūn’s Jāmi‘ Masjid (1531). Temple site.  
> > (iii) QasāiyoN-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1669). Temple site.  
> > (v) Daulat Khān-kī-Masjid (1696). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Rohtak* >
> > \(i\) Dīnī Masjid (1309). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid in the Fort (1324). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bābar’s Masjid-i-Khurd (1527-28). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Bābar’s RājpūtoN-kī-Masjid. (1528). Temple site.  
> > (v) Second or Humāyūn’s Masjid in the Fort (1538). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Masjid at Gokaran (1558). Temple site.  
> > (vii) DogroN Wālī Masjid (1571). Temple site.  
> > (viii) Mast Khān-kī-Masjid (1558-59) Temple site.

  
IX. Sonepat District.

> 1\. *Gohana*, Dargāh of Shāh Ziāu’d-Dīn Muhammad. Temple site.  
> 2. *Sonepat* >
> > \(i\) Masjid and Mazār of Imām Nāsir (renovated in 1277). Temple > > site.  
> > (ii) Bābar’s ShykhzādoN-kī-Masjid (1530). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Khwāja Khizr. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Humāyūn's Masjid (1538). Temple site.

   
 

**HIMACHAL PRADESH**

> *Kangra*, Jahāngīrī Gate. Temple materials used.

   
 

**KARNATAKA**

I. Bangalore District.

> 1\. *Dodda-Ballapur*, Dargāh of Muhiu’d-Dīn Chishtī of Ajodhan (d. > 1700). Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Hoskot* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Saballī Sāhib. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Qāsim Sāhib. Converted temple.

  
II. Belgaum District.

> 1\. *Belgaum* >
> > \(i\) Masjid-i-Safa in the Fort (1519). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1585-86). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Badru’d-Dīn Shāh in the Fort (1351-52). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Gokak*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Hukeri* >
> > \(i\) Mān Sahib-kī-Dargāh (1567-68). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Kālī Masjid (1584). Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Kudachi* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Makhdūm Shāh Walī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shykh Muhammad Sirāju’d-Dīn Pīrdādī. Temple site. >
> 5\. *Madbhavi*, Masjid. Śiva Temple materials used.  
> 6. *Raibag*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site,  
> 7. *Sampgaon*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
III. Bellary District.

> 1\. *Bellary*, Masjid built by Tīpū Sultān (1789-90). Temple site.  
> 2. *Hampi*, Masjid and Idgāh in the ruins of Vijayanagar. Temple > materials used.  
> 3. *Hospet*, Masjid in Bazar Street built by Tīpū Sultān (1795-96). > Temple site.  
> 4. *Huvinhadgalli*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Kanchagarabelgallu*, Dargāh of Husain Shāh. Temple site.  
> 6. *Kudtani*, Dargāh. Durgeśvara Temple materials used.  
> 7. *Sandur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 8. *Siruguppa*, Lād Khān Masjid (1674). Temple site.  
> 9. *Sultanpuram*, Masjid on the rock. Temple site.

  
IV. Bidar District.

> 1\. *Bidar*, Ancient Hindu city transformed into a Muslim capital. The > following monuments stand on temple sites and/or temple materials have > been used in their construction: >
> > \(i\) Solā Khambā Masjid (1326-27).  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid of the Bahmanīs.  
> > (iii) Mukhtār Khān-kī-Masjid (1671).  
> > (iv) Kālī Masjid (1694).  
> > (v) Masjid west of Kālī Masjid (1697-98).  
> > (vi) Farrah-Bāgh Masjid, 3 km outside the city (1671).  
> > (vii) Dargāh of Hazrat Khalīlu’llāh at Ashtūr (1440).  
> > (viii) Dargāh of Shāh Shamsu’d-Dīn Muhammad Qādirī known as Multānī > > Pādshāh.  
> > (ix) Dargāh of Shāh Waliu’llāh-al-Husainī.  
> > (x) Dargāh of Shāh Zainu’l-Dīn Ganj Nishīn.  
> > (xi) Dargāh and Masjid of Mahbūb Subhānī.  
> > (xii) Mazār of Ahmad Shāh Walī at Ashtūr (1436).  
> > (xiii) Mazār of Shāh Abdul Azīz (1484).  
> > (xiv) Takht Mahal.  
> > (xv) Gagan Mahal.  
> > (xvi) Madrasa of Mahmūd Gawān. >
> 2\. *Chandpur*, Masjid (1673-74). Temple site.  
> 3. *Chillergi*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1381). Temple site.  
> 4. *Kalyani*, Capital of the Later Chālukyas. All their temples were > either demolished or converted into mosques. >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1323). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1406). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in Mahalla Shahpur (1586-87). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Maulāna Yāqūb. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Sayyid Pīr Pāshā. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Fort Walls and Towers. Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Nawāb’s Bungalow. Temple materials used. >
> 5\. *Kohir* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāhs of two Muslim saints. Temple sites. >
> 6\. *Shahpur*, Masjid (1586-87). Temple site.  
> 7. *Udbal*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1661-62). Temple site.

  
V. Bijapur District.

> 1\. *Afzalpur*, Mahal Masjid. Trikūta Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Badami*, Second Gateway of the Hill Fort. VishNu Temple materials > used.  
> 3. *Bekkunal*, Dargāh outside the village. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Bijapur*, Ancient Hindu city transformed into a Muslim capital. > The following monuments are built on temple sites and/or temple > materials have been used in their construction: >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1498-99).  
> > (ii) Karīmu’d-Dīn-kī-Masjid in the Ārk (1320-21).  
> > (iii) ChhoTā Masjid on way to Mangoli Gate.  
> > (iv) Khwāja Sambal-kī-Masjid (1522-13).  
> > (v) Makka Masjid.  
> > (vi) AnDū Masjid.  
> > (vii) Zangīrī Masjid.  
> > (viii) Bukhārā Masjid (1536-37).  
> > (ix) Dakhīnī Idgah (1538-39).  
> > (x) Masjid and Rauza of Ibrāhīm II Adil Shāh (1626).  
> > (xi) Gol Gumbaz or the Rauza of Muhammad Adil Shāh.  
> > (xii) JoD-Gumbad.  
> > (xiii) Nau-Gumbad.  
> > (xiv) Dargāh of Shāh Mūsā Qādiri.  
> > (xv) Gagan Mahal.  
> > (xvi) Mihtar Mahal.  
> > (xvii) Asar Mahal.  
> > (xvii) Anand Mahal and Masjid (1495).  
> > (xviii) Sāt Manzil.  
> > (xix) Ārk or citadel.  
> > (xx) Mazār of Pīr Ma‘barī Khandāyat.  
> > (xxi) Mazār of Pīr Jumnā.  
> > (xxii) Dargāh of Shāh Mīrānji Shamsu’l-Haq Chishtī on Shahpur Hill. >
> 5\. *Hadginhali*, Dargāh. Temple materials used.  
> 6. *Horti*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 7. *Inglesvara*, Muhiu’d-Dīn Sāhib-kī-Masjid. Munipā Samādhi materials > used.  
> 8. *Jirankalgi*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 9. *Kalleeri*, Masjid near the village Chawdi. Keśavadeva Temple > materials used.  
> 10. *Mamdapur* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Kamāl Sāhib. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Sadle Sāhib of Makka. Temple site. >
> 11\. *Naltvad*, Masjid (1315). Temple materials used.  
> 12. *Pirapur*, Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 13. *Salvadigi*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 14. *Sarur*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 15. *Segaon*, Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 16. *Takli*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 17. *Talikota* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) PāNch Pīr-kī-Masjid and Ganji-i-Shahīdān. Temple site. >
> 18\. *Utagi*, Masjid (1323). Temple site.

  
VI. Chickmanglur District.

> *Baba Budan*, Mazār of Dādā Hayāt Mīr Qalandar. Dattātreya Temple > site.

  
VII. Chitaldurg District.

> *Harihar*, Masjid on top of Harīhareśvara Temple.

  
VIII. Dharwad District.

> 1\. *Alnavar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Jain Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Bankapur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1538-39). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1602-03). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Graveyard with a Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dongar-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Shāh Alāu’d-Dīn-Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Fort (1590-91). Temple materials used, >
> 3\. *Balur*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Dambal*, Mazār of Shāh Abdu’llāh Walī. Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Dandapur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 6. *Dharwad*, Masjid on Mailarling Hill. Converted Jain Temple.  
> 7. *Hangal* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in the Fort. Temple site. >
> 8\. *Hubli*, 17 Masjids built by Aurangzeb in 1675 and after Temple > sites.  
> 9. *Hulgur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Sayyid Shāh Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid near the above Dargāh. Temple site. >
> 10\. *Lakshmeshwar*, Kālī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 11. *Misrikot*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1585-86). Temple site.  
> 12. *Mogha*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Ādityadeva Temple materials used.  
> 13. *Ranebennur*, Qalā, Masjid (1742). Temple site.  
> 14. *Savanur* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid reconstructed in 1847-48. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Khairu’llāh Shāh Bādshāh. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh and Masjid of Shāh Kamāl. Temple site.

  
IX. Gulbarga District.

> 1\. *Chincholi*, Dargāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Dornhalli*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Firozabad* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1406). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Khalīfatu’r-Rahmān Qādirī (d. 1421). Temple > > site. >
> 4\. *Gobur*, Dargāh. Ratnarāya Jinālaya Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Gogi* >
> > \(i\) Araba’a Masjid (1338). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Pīr Chandā, Husainī (1454). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Chillā of Shāh Habību’llāh (1535-36). Temple site. >
> 6\. *Gulbarga*, Ancient Hindu city converted into a Muslim capital and > the following among other monuments built on temple sites and/or with > temple materials: >
> > \(i\) Kalān Masjid in Mahalla Mominpura (1373).  
> > (ii) Masjid in Shah Bazar (1379).  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid in the Fort (1367).  
> > (iv) Masjid-i-Langar in the Mazār of Hājī Zaida.  
> > (v) Masjid near the Farman Talab (1353-54).  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Sayyid Muhammad Husainī Bandā, Nawāz Gesū Darāz > > Chishtī, disciple of Shykh Nasīru’d-Dīn Mahmūd ChīrAgh-i-Dihlī.  
> > (vii) Mazār of Shykh Muhammad Sirāju’d-Dīn Junaidī.  
> > (viii) Mazār of Hājī Zaida of Maragh (1434)  
> > (ix) Mazār of Sayyid Husainu’d-Dīn Tigh-i-Barhna (naked sword).  
> > (x) Fort Walls and Gates. >
> 7\. *Gulsharam*, Dargāh and Masjid of Shāh Jalāl Husainī (1553). > Temple site.  
> 8. *Malkhed*, Dargāh of Sayyid Ja‘far Husainī in the Fort. Temple > site.  
> 9. *Sagar* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Sūfī Sarmast Chishtī, disciple of Nīzāmu’d-Dīn > > Awlīya of Delhi. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Munawwar Bādshāh. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Āshur Khāna Masjid (1390-91). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort (1411-12). Temple materials used. >
> 10\. *Seram*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 11. *Shah Bazar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 12. *Shahpur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Mūsā Qādirī (1667-68). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Muhammad Qādirī (1627). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of IbrAhIm Qādirī. Temple site. >
> 13\. *Yadgir* >
> > \(i\) Āthān Masjid (1573). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
X. Kolar District.

> 1\. *Mulbagal*, Dargāh of Hyder Walī. Temple site.  
> 2. *Nandi*, Masjid east of the village. Temple site.

  
XI. Mandya District.

> 1\. *Pandavapur*, Masjid-i-Ala. Temple site.  
> 2. *Srirangapatnam*, Jāmi‘ Masjid built by Tīpū Sultān (1787). Stands > on the site of the Āñjaneya Temple.

  
XII. Mysore District.

> *Tonnur*, Mazār said to be that of Sayyid Sālār Mas’ūd (1358). Temple > materials used.

  
XIII. North Kanara District.

> 1\. *Bhatkal*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1447-48). Temple site.  
> 2. *Haliyal*, Masjid in the Fort. Temple materials used.

  
XIV. Raichur District.

> 1\. *Jaladurga*, Dargāh of Muhammad Sarwar. Temple site.  
> 2. *Kallur*, Two Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 3. *Koppal* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Araboñ-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Sailānī Pāshā. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Manvi*, Masjid (1406-07). Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Mudgal* >
> > \(i\) Masjid at Kati Darwaza of the Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Naī Masjid (1583-84). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Two Ashur Khānas built by Ali I Adil Shah. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort (1588). Temple materials used. >
> 6\. *Raichur* >
> > \(i\) Yak Mīnār Masjid in the Fort (1503). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Daftarī Masjid in the Fort (1498-99). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Hazār Baig Masjid (1511-12). Temple site  
> > (iv) Jāmi‘ Masjid in the Fort (1622-23). Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Jāmi‘ Masjid in Sarafa Bazar (1628-29). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Kālī Masjid in the Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Masjid inside the Naurangi. Temple materials used.  
> > (viii) Chowk-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Jahāniyā Masjid (1700-01). Temple site.  
> > (x) Dargāh of Shāh Mīr Hasan and Mīr Husain. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (xi) Dargāh of Sayyid Abdul Husainī at Sikandari Gate. Temple > > site.  
> > (xii) Pāñch Bībī Dargāh at Bala Hissar. Temple materials used.  
> > (xiii) Mazār of Pīr Sailānī Shāh in the Fort. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (xiv) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 7\. *Sindhanur*, Ālamgīrī Masjid near the Gumbad. Temple site.  
> 8. *Tawagera*, Dargāh of Bandā Nawāz. Temple site.

  
XV. Shimoga District.

> 1\. *Almel*, Mazār of Ghālib Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Basavpatna*, Masjid near the Fort. Temple site.  
> 3. *Nagar*, Masjid built by Tīpū Sultān. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Sante Bennur*, Randhullā Khān-kī-Masjid (1637). Materials of the > Rañganātha Temple used.  
> 5. *Sirajpur*, Masjid built on top of the Chhinnakeśava Temple for > housing Prophet Muhammad’s hair.  Images defaced and mutilated. Part > of the temple used as a laterine.

  
XVI. Tumkur District,

> 1\. *Sira* >
> > \(i\) Ibrāhīm Rauza with many Mazārs and a Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted > > temples.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Malik Rihān. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Sirol*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1696). Temple site.

   
 

**KASHMIR**

1\. *Amburher*, Ziārat of Farrukhzād Sāhib. Temple materials used.  
2. *Badgam*

> \(i\) Ziārat of Abban Shāh in Ghagarpur. Temple site.  
> (ii) Ziārat of Sayyid Swālia Shāh in Narbai. Temple site.

3\. *Bijbehra*, Masjid. Temple site.  
4. *Bumzu*

> \(i\) Ziārat of Bābā Bāmdīn. Converted Bhīmakeśava. Temple.  
> (ii) Ziārat of Ruknu’d-Dīn Rishī. Converted temple.  
> (iii) Ziārat farther up the valley. Converted temple.

5\. *Gulmarg*, Ziārat of Bābā Imām Dīn Rishī. Temple materials used.  
6. *Gupkar*, Ziārat of Jyesther and other monuments. Temple materials used.  
7. *Hutmar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
8. *Khonmuh*, Several Ziārats. Temple materials used.  
9. *Kitshom*, Two Masjids. Stand amidst temple ruins.  
10. *Loduv*, Ziārat. Temple materials used.  
11. *Lohar*, Ziārat of Sayyid Chānan Ghāzī. Temple site.  
12. *Lokbavan*, Garden Pavilion. Temple materials from Lokabhavana Tīrtha used.  
13. *Marsus*, Ziārat of Shāh Abdu’llāh. Temple site.  
14. *Pampor*

> \(i\) Ziārat of Mīr Muhammad Hamadāni. VishNusvāmin Temple materials > used.  
> (ii) Several other Ziārats. Temple materials used.

15\. *Pandrethan*, Masjid. Meruvardhanaswāmin Temple materials used.  
16. *Sangar*, Ziārat. Temple materials used.  
17. *Sar*, Ziārat of Khwāja Khīzr. Temple materials used.  
18. *Shalmar Garden*, Pavilion on the 4th terrace. Temple materials used.  
19. *Srinagar*, Ancient Hindu city converted into a Muslim capital. The following monuments stand on temple sites and most of them have been constructed with temple materials.

> \(i\) Ziārat of Bahāu’d-Dīn SAhib. Jayasvāmin Temple converted.  
> (ii) Graveyard and its Gate below the 4th Bridge.  
> (iii) Dargāh and Masjid of Shāh-i-Hamadānī in Kalashpura. On the site > of the Kālī Temple.  
> (iv) Nau or Patthar-kī-Masjid built by Nūr Jahān.  
> (v) Graveyard near the Nau Masjid.  
> (vi) Ziārat of Malik Sāhib in Didd Mar. On the site of Diddā Matha.  
> (vii) Masjid and Madrasa and Graveyard near Vicharnag. On the site and > from materials of the Vikrameśvara Temple.  
> (viii) Madnī Sāhib-kī-Masjid at Zadibal.  
> (ix) Ziārat south-west of Madnī Sāhib-kī-Masjid.  
> (x) Jāmi‘ Masjid originally built by Sikandar Butshikan and > reconstructed in later times.  
> (xi) Ziārat named Nūr Pirastān. NarendrasāAmin Temple converted.  
> (xii) Maqbara of Sultān Zain’ul-Abidin.  
> (xiii) Maqbara of Zainu’l-Ābidin’s mother, queen of Sikandar > Butshikan.  
> (xiv) Ziārat of Pīr Hājī Muhammad Sāhib, south-west of the Jāmi‘ > Masjid. VishNu RaNasvāmin Temple converted.  
> (xv) Ziārats of Makhdūm Sāhib and Akhun Mulla on Hari Parbat. > Bhīmasvamin Temple converted.  
> (xvi) Masjid of Akhun Mulla built by Dārā Shikoh.  
> (xvii) Ziārat of Pīr Muhammad Basūr in Khandbavan. On the site of > Skandabhavana Vihāra.  
> (xviii) Graveyard north-east of Khandbavan.  
> (xix) Dargāh of Pīr Dastgīr.  
> (xx) Dargāh of Naqshbandī.  
> (xxi) Ramparts and Kathi Gate of the Fort built by Akbar.  
> (xxii) Stone embankments on both sides and for several miles of the > Jhelum river as its passes through Srinagar.  
> (xxiii) Astāna of MIr Shamsu’d-Dīn Syed Muhammad Irāqī.

20\. *Sudarbal*, Ziārat of Hazrat Bāl. Temple site.  
21. *Tapar*, Bund from Naidkhai to Sopor built by Zainu’l-Ābidin. Materials from Narendreśvara Temple used.  
22. *Theda*, Ziārat near Dampor. Temple materials used.  
23. *Vernag*, Stone enclosure built by Jahāngīr. Temple materials used.  
24. *Wular Lake*

> \(i\) Suna Lanka, pleasure haunt built by Zainu’l-Ābidīn in the midst > of the Lake. Temple materials used.  
> (ii) Dargāh of Shukru’d-DIn on the western shore. Temple site.

25\. *Zukur*, Several Ziārats and Maqbaras. Temple materials used.  
   
 

**KERALA**

1\. *Kollam*, (Kozhikode District), Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
2. *Palghat*, Fort built by Tīpū Sultān. Temple materials used.  
   
 

**LAKSHADWEEP**

1\. *Kalpeni*, Muhiu’d-Dīn-Pallī Masjid. Temple site.  
2. *Kavarati*, Prot-Pallī Masjid. Temple site.  
   
 

**MADHYA PRADESH**

I. Betul District.

> 1\. *Pattan*, Dargāh of Sulaimān Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Umri*, Dargāh of Rahmān Shāh. Temple site.

  
II. Bhopal District.

> 1\. *Berasia*, Masjid (1716). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bhopal*, Jāmi‘ Masjid built by Qudsia Begum. SabhāmaNDala Temple > site.

  
III. Bilaspur District.

> *Khimlasa* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Pāñch Pīr. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Nagīnā Mahal. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid with three domes. Temple site.

  
IV. Damoh District.

> \(i\) Dargāh of Ghāzī Miān. Temple site.  
> (ii) Fort. Temple materials used.

  
V. Dewas District.

> 1\. *Dewas* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1562). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1705). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1707). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Gandhawal*, Graveyard inside the village. Jain Temple materials > used.  
> 3. *Sarangpur* >
> > \(i\) Madrasa (1493). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1640). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Pīr Jān-kī-Bhātī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Unchod*, Idgāh (1681). Temple site.

  
VI. Dhar District.

> 1\. *Dhar*, Capital of Rājā Bhoja Paramāra converted into a Muslim > capital. The following Muslim monuments tell their own story: >
> > \(i\) Kamāl Maulā Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Lāt Masjid (1405). Jain Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Abdu’llāh Shāh Changāl. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Mandu*, An ancient Hindu city converted into a Muslim capital and > the following monuments built on the sites of and/or with materials > from temples >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1454).  
> > (ii) Dilāwar Khān-kī-Masjid (1405).  
> > (iii) ChhoTī Jāmi‘ Masjid.  
> > (iv) Pahredāroñ-kī-Masjid (1417).  
> > (v) Malik Mughīs-kī-Masjid.  
> > (vi) Maqbara of Hushāng Shāh.  
> > (vii) Jahāz Mahal.  
> > (viii) Tawīl Mahal.  
> > (ix) Nāhar Jharokhā.  
> > (x) Hindolā Mahal.  
> > (xi) Rupmatī Pavilion.  
> > (xii) Ashrafī Mahal.  
> > (xiii) Dāī-kī-Chhotī Bahen-kā-Mahal.  
> > (xiv) Bāz Bahādur-kā-Mahal.  
> > (xv) Nīlkanth Mahal.  
> > (xvi) Chhappan Mahal.  
> > (xvii) Fort and Gates.  
> > (xviii) Gadā-Shāh-kā-Mahal.  
> > (xix) Hammām Complex.

  
VII. Dholpur District.

> *Bari*, Masjid (1346 or 1351). Temple site.

  
VIII. East Nimar District.

> 1\. *Bhadgaon*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1328). Temple site.  
> 2. *Jhiri*, Masjid (1581). Temple site.  
> 3. *Khandwa*, Masjid (1619-20). Temple site.

  
IX. Guna District.

> 1\. *Chanderi*, Muslim city built from the ruins of the old or Budhi > Chanderi nearby. The following monuments stand on the sites of temples > and/or have temple materials used in them: >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1392).  
> > (ii) Motī Masjid.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid.  
> > (iv) PāñchmūhñDā Masjid.  
> > (v) Qurbāni Chabūtrā.  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Mewā Shāh.  
> > (vii) Mazār known as BaDā Madrasa.  
> > (viii) Mazār known as ChhoTā Madrasa.  
> > (ix) Rājā-kā-Maqbara.  
> > (x) Rānī-kā-Maqbara.  
> > (xi) Battīsī BāoDī Masjid (1488).  
> > (xii) Hāthīpur-kī-Masjid (1691).  
> > (xiii) Mazār of Shykh Burhanu’d-Dīn.  
> > (xiv) Fort.  
> > (xv) Kushk Mahal.  
> > (xvi) Idgāh (1495). >
> 2\. *Pipari*, Masjid (1451). Temple site.  
> 3. *Shadoragaon*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1621-22). Temple site.

  
X. Gwalior District.

> 1\. *Gwalior* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Muhammad Ghaus. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid near Gūjarī Mahal. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid near Ganesh Gate. Gawālīpā Temple site.  
> > (iv) Graveyards on east and west of the Fort. Temple sites. >
> 2\. *Jajao*, Lāl Patthar-kī-Masjid, Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Mundrail*, Several Masjids (1504). Temple sites.  
> 4. *Sipri*, Several Masjids and Mazārs. Temple materials used.

  
XI. Indore District.

> 1\. *Depalpur*, Masjid (1670). Temple site.  
> 2. *Maheshwar* >
> > \(i\) ShāhI Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Mehdipur* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Godār Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Sanwar*, Masjid (1674). Temple site.

  
XII. Mandsaur District.

> 1\. *Kayampur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1676). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1701-02). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Mandsaur* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Rampura*, Pādshāhī BāoDi. Temple materials used.

  
XIII. Morena District.

> *Alapur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1561-62). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1586-87). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1697-98). Temple site.

  
XIV. Panna District.

> 1\. *Ajaigarh*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Nachna*, Masjid. Converted temple.

  
XV. *Raisen* District.

> Palmyka Mandir-Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
XVI. Rajgarh District.

> *Khujner*, Mazār of Dāwal Shāh.  Temple materials used.

  
XVII. Ratlam District.

> *Barauda*, Masjid (1452-56). Temple site.

  
XVIII. Sagar District.

> 1\. *Dhamoni*, Dargāh of Bāl Jatī Shāh (1671). Temple site.  
> 2. *Kanjia* >
> > \(i\) Khān Sāhib-kī-Masjid (1594-95). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1640). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Alamgīrī Masjid (1703). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Qalā-kī-Masjid (1643). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Khimlasa*, Pāñch Pīr. Temple site.

  
XIX. *Sehore* District.

> Masjid (1332). Temple site.

  
XX. Shajapur District.

> *Agartal*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
XXI. Shivpuri District.

> 1\. *Narod*, Zanzārī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Narwar* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Madār. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1509). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Masjid inside Havapaur Gate (1509). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Pawaya* >
> > \(i\) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Several other Muslim monuments. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Ranod* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1331-32). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1441). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1633). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1640). Temple site. >
> 5\. *Shivpuri*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1440). Temple site.

  
XXII. Ujjain District.

> 1\. *Barnagar*, Masjid (1418). Temple site.  
> 2. *Ujjain*, >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid known as Binā-nīv-kī-Masjid (1403-04). Temple > > site.  
> > (ii) Masjid unearthed near Chaubis Khamba Gate. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iii) MochI Masjid. Converted temple.

  
XXIII. Vidisha District.

> 1\. *Basoda*, Masjid (1720-21). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bhonrasa*, >
> > \(i\) Qalandarī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Jāgīrdār-kī-Masjid (1683). Temple site.  
> > (iii) BaDī Masjid in Bada Bagh (1685). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Bandi Bagh-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (v) Bārā-Khambā Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Ek-Khambā Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Binā-nīv-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Graveyard in Bandi Bagh. Amidst temple ruins.  
> > (ix) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (x) Fort (1594). Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Parasari*, Masjid (1694-95). Temple site.  
> 4. *Renkla*, Masjid. (1647-48). Temple site.  
> 5. *Shamsabad*, Masjid (1641). Temple site.  
> 6. *Sironj* >
> > \(i\) Ālamgīrī Masjid (1662-63). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in Mahalla Rakabganj (1657-58). Temple site.  
> > (iii) DargAh of Shykh Sāhib (d. 1657). Temple site. >
> 7\. *Tal*, Masjid (1644-45). Temple site.  
> 8. *Udaypur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1336). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid built by Aurangzeb. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Motī Masjid (1488-89). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1549). Temple site.  
> > (v) Two Masjids of Shāh Jahān. Temple sites.  
> > (vi) Masjid of Jahāngīr. Temple site. >
> 9\. *Vidisha* >
> > \(i\) Ālamgīrī or VijaimaNDal Masjid (1682). Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Masjid on Lohangi Hill (1457). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Shāh Jahāni Masjid (1650-51). Temple site.  
> > (iv) City Wall. Temple materials used,

  
XXIV. West Nimar District.

> 1\. *Asirgarh* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1584). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid built in the reign of Shāh Jahān. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Idgāh (1588-89). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Bhikangaon*, Idgāh (1643-44). Temple site.  
> 3. *Baidia*, Masjid (1456-57). Temple site.  
> 4. *Burhanpur* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1588-89). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Bībī Sāhib-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Shāh Mas‘ūd-kī-Masjid (1582-83). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh and Masjid of Shāh Bahāu’d- Dīn Bājan. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Sūfi Nūr Shāh. Temple site.

   
 

**MAHARASHTRA**

I. Ahmadnagar District.

> 1\. *Amba Jogi*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Bhingar*, Mulla Masjid (1367-68). Temple site.  
> 3. *Gogha* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh (1395). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Morakhwada Masjid (1630). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Jambukhed*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1687-88). Temple site.  
> 5. *Madhi*, Dargāh of Ramzān Shāh Mahī Sawār. Temple site.

  
II. Akola District.

> 1\. *Akot*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1667). Temple site.  
> 2. *Balapur*, Masjid (1717-18). Temple site.  
> 3. *Basim*, Kākī Shāh-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Jamod* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Pīr Paulād Shāh. Temple site. >
> 5\. *Karanj* >
> > \(i\) Astān Masjid (1659). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1669-70). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1698-99). Temple site. >
> 6\. *Manglurpir* >
> > \(i\) Qadīmī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Pīr Hayāt Qalandar (d. 1253). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Sanam Sāhib. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Narnala* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1509). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Ālamgīrī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 8\. *Patur*, Dargāh of Abdul Azīz alias Shykh Bābū Chishtī (d. 1388). > Temple site.  
> 9. *Uprai*, Dargāh of Shāh Dāwal. Temple site.

  
III. Amravati District.

> 1\. *Amner*, Masjid and Mazār of Lāl Khān (1691-92). Temple site.  
> 2. *Ellichpur* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid reconstructed in 1697. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dāru‘shifa Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Chowk-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazār of Shāh Ghulām Husain. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār of Abdul Rahmān Ghāzī known as Dūlhā Shāh. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Ritpur*, Aurangzeb’s Jāmi‘ Masjid (reconstructed in 1878). Temple > site.

  
IV. Aurangabad District.

> 1\. *Antur Fort*, Qalā-kī-Masjid (1615). Temple site.  
> 2. *Aurangabad* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Lāl Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Maqbara of Aurangzeb. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Daulatabad* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1315). Converted lain Temple.  
> > (ii) Yak Minār-kī-Masjid in the Fort. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid-i-Hauz at Kazipura (1458). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Idgāh (1359). Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Pīr Kādū Sāhib. Converted temple.  
> > (vi) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Gangapur*, Masjid (1690-91). Temple site.  
> 5. *Kaghzipura*, Dargāh of Shāh Nizāmu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 6. *Khuldabad* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hazrat Burhānu’d-Dīn Gharīb Chishtī (d. 1339). > > Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh on Pari-ka-Talao. Converted temple.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Halīm Kākā Sāhib. Converted temple.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Jalālu’l-Haqq. Temple site.  
> > (v) Bārādarī in Bani Begum’s Garden. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Paithan* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1630). Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Maulāna Sāhib-kī-Masjid. Converted ReNukādevī Temple.  
> > (iii) Alamagīrī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Makhdūm Husain Ahmad (1507). Temple site. >
> 8\. *Taltam Fort*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 9. *Vaijapur* >
> > \(i\) Mazārs in Nau Ghazi. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Syed Ruknu’d-Dīn. Temple site.

  
V. Bid District.

> *Bid* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Qāzī Sāhib-kī-Masjid (1624). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in Mahalla Sadr (1704-05). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid and Dargāh of Shāhinshāh Walī. Temple site.  
> > (v) Idgāh (1704). Temple site.

  
VI. Bombay District.

> \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> (ii) Mazār at Mahim. Temple site.  
> (iii) Mazār of Mainā Hajjām. Converted Māhālakshmī Temple.

  
VII. Buldana District.

> 1\. *Fathkhelda*, Masjid (1581). Temple site.  
> 2. *Malkapur*, Masjid near Qazi’s house. Temple site.

  
VIII. Dhule District.

> 1\. *Bhamer* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1481-82). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1529-30). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Erandol*, Jāmi‘ Masjid in Pandav-vada. Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Nandurbar* >
> > \(i\) Manyār Masjid. SiddheŚvaradeva Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Sayyid Alāu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Several Masjids amidst ruins of Hindu temples. >
> 4\. *Nasirabad*, Several old Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 5. *Nizamabad*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
IX. Jalgaon District.

> 1\. *Jalgaon*. Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Phaskhanda*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Shendurni*, Masjid-i-Kabīr (1597). Temple site.

  
X. Kolhapur District.

> 1\. *Bhadole*, Masjid (1551-52). Temple site.  
> 2. *Kagal*, Dargāh of Ghaibī Pīr. Temple site.  
> 3. *Kapshi*, Masjid-e-Husainī. Temple site.  
> 4. *Panhala* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shykh Saidu’d-DIn. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of BaDā Imām in the Fort. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Sādobā Pīr. Parāśara Temple site. >
> 5\. *Shirol*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1696). Temple site.  
> 6. *Vishalgarh*, Mazār of Malik Rihān Pīr. Temple site.

  
XI. Nagpur District.

> *Ramtek*, Masjid built in Aurangzeb’s reign. Converted temple.

  
XII. Nanded District.

> 1\. *Bhaisa* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Three Dargāhs. Temple sites. >
> 2\. *Deglur*, Mazār of Shāh Ziāu’d-Dīn Rifai. Temple site.  
> 3. *Kandhar* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1606). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid and Dargāh inside the Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Causeway of the Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Nanded*, Idgāh in Khas Bagh. Temple site.

  
XIII. Nasik District.

> 1\. *Galna* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Pīr Pūlād (1581). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Gondengaon*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1703). Temple site.  
> 3. *Malegaon*, Dargāh of Khākī Shāh. Temple site.  
> 4. *Nasik*, Jāmi‘ Masjid in the Fort. Converted Māhālakshmī Temple.  
> 5. *Pimpri*, Mazār of Sayyid Sadrau’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 6. *Rajapur*, Masjid (1559). Temple site.

  
XIV. Osmanabad District.

> 1\. *Ausa*, Masjid (1680). Temple site.  
> 2. *Naldurg*, Masjid (1560). Temple site.  
> 3. *Parenda* >
> > \(i\) Masjid inside the Fort. Built entirely of temple materials.  
> > (ii) Namāzgāh near the Talav. Converted Mānakeśvara Temple.

  
XV. Parbhani District.

> 1\. *Khari*, Mazār of Ramzān Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Latur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Mabsū Sāhib. Converted Minapurī Mātā Temple.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Sayyid Qādirī. Converted Someśvara Temple. >
> 3\. *Malevir*, KhaDu Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted temple.

  
XVI. Pune District.

> 1\. *Chakan*, Masjid (1682). Temple site.  
> 2. *Ghoda*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Built in 1586 from materials of 33 > temples.  
> 3. *Junnar* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple Site.  
> > (ii) Diwān Ahmad-kī-Masjid (1578-79). Temple site.  
> > (iii) GunDi-kī-Masjid (1581). Temple site.  
> > (iv) MadAr Chillā-kī-Masjid. (1611-12). Temple site.  
> > (v) Kamāni Masjid on Shivneri Hill (1625). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Khed*, Masjid and Mazār of Dilāwar Khān. Temple site.  
> 5. *Mancher*, Masjid at the South-Western Gate. Temple site.  
> 6. *Sasvad*, Masjid. Built entirely of Hemadapantī temple materials.

  
XVII. Ratnagiri District.

> 1\. *Chaul* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Pīr Sayyid Ahmad. Converted Sāmba Temple.  
> > (ii) Maqbara near Hinglaj Spur. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Graveyard. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Dabhol*, Patthar-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Rajpuri*, Aidrusia Khānqāh. Temple site.  
> 4. *Yeshir*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1524). Temple site.

  
XVIII. Sangli District.

> 1\. *Mangalvedh*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Miraj* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1415-16). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1506). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Kālī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Namāzgāh (1586-97). Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of BaDā Imām. Temple site.

  
XIX. Satara District.

> 1\. *Apti*, Masjid (1611-12). Temple site.  
> 2. *Karad* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1575-76). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Qadamagāh of Alī (1325). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Khanpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1325). Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Rahimatpur*, >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Maqbara known as that of Jahāngīr’s Mother (1649). Temple site.

  
XX. Sholapur District.

> 1\. *Begampur*, Maqbara near Gadheshvar. Temple site.  
> 2. *Sholapur*, Fort, Temple materials used.

  
XXI. Thane District.

> 1\. *Kalyan* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hazrat Yāqūb, Temple site.  
> > (ii) Makka Masjid (1586). Temple site. >
> 2\. Malanggadh, Mazār of Bābā MalaNg. Temple site.

  
XXII. Wardha District.

> 1\. *Ashti* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1521). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Lodī Masjid (1671-72). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Girad*, Mazār of Shykh Farīd.  Converted temple.  
> 3. *Paunar*, Qadīmī Masjid. Converted Rāmachandra. Temple.

   
 

**ORISSA**

I. *Baleshwar* District.

> Jāmi‘ Masjid in Mahalla Sunhat (163-74). Śrī ChanDī Temple site.

  
II. Cuttack District.

> 1\. *Alamgir Hill*, Takht-i-Sulaimān Masjid (1719). Temple materials > used.  
> 2. *Cuttack* >
> > \(i\) Shāhī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjids in Oriya Bazar. Temple sites.  
> > (iii) Qadam Rasūl Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1668-69). Temple site.  
> > (v) Masjid (1690-91). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Jajpur* >
> > \(i\) DargAh of Sayyid Bukhāri. Materials of many temples used.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid built by Nawwāb Abu Nāsir. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Kendrapara*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Salepur*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
III. Ganjam District.

> *Lalapet*, Masjid (1690). Temple site.

   
 

**PUNJAB**

I. *Bhatinda* District.

> Mazār of Bābā Hājī Rattan (1593). Converted temple.

  
II. Gurdaspur District.

> *Batala*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
III. Jalandhar District.

> *Sultanpur*, Bādshāhi Sarai. Built on the site of a Buddhist Vjhāra.

  
IV. *Ludhiana* District.

> \(i\) Dargāh and Masjid of Alī Sarmast (1570). Temple site.  
> (ii) Qāzī-kī-Masjid (1517). Temple site.

  
V. Patiala District.

> 1\. *Bahadurgarh*, Masjid in the Fort (1666). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bawal*, Masjid (1560). Temple site.  
> 3. *Samana* >
> > \(i\) Sayyidoñ-kī-Masjid (1495). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1614-15). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid near Imāmbāra (1637). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Pīrzāda-kī-Masjid (1647). Temple site.

  
VI. *Ropar* District.

> Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
VII. Sangrur District.

> *Sunam* >
> > \(i\) Qadīmī Masjid (1414). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Ganj-i-Shahīdān. Temple site.

   
 

**RAJASTHAN**

I. *Ajmer* District.

> It was a Hindu capital converted into a Muslim metropolis. The > following monuments stand on the site of and/or are built with > materials from temples. >
> > 1\. ADhāī-Dīn-kA-Jhoñprā (1199).  
> > 2. Qalandar Masjid at Taragarh.  
> > 3. Ganj-i-Shahīdān at Taragarh.  
> > 4. Dargāh of Muinu’d-Dīn Chistī (d. 1236).  
> > 5. Chilia-i-Chishtī near Annasagar Lake.  
> > 6. Dargāh and Mazār of Sayijid Husain at Taragah.  
> > 7. Jahāngīrī Mahal at Pushkar.  
> > 8. Shāhjahānī Masjid (1637).  
> > 9. Annasagar Bārādari.

  
II. Alwar District.

> 1\. *Alwar*, Mazār of Makhdūm Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Bahror* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Qādir Khān. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid near the Dargāh. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Tijara* >
> > \(i\) Bhartari Mazār. Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Masjid near the Dargāh. Temple site.

  
III. Bharatpur District.

> 1\. *Barambad*, Masjid (1652-53). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bari* >
> > \(i\) Graveyard of Arabs and Pathans. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1510). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Bayana* >
> > \(i\) Ūkha or Nohāra Masjid. Converted Ūshā Temple.  
> > (ii) Qazīpārā Masjid (1305). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Faujdārī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Syyidpārā Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Muffonkī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Pillared Cloister at Jhālar Bāolī. Temple materials used.  
> > (vii) Idgāh near Jhālar Bāolī. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Taletī Masjid in the Bijayagarh Fort. Converted temple.  
> > (ix) Abu Qandahār Graveyard. Temple site.  
> > (x) Masjid in Bhitari-Bahari Mahalla. VishNu Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Etmada*, Pirastān. Temple site.  
> 5. *Kaman* >
> > \(i\) Chaurāsī Khambā Masjid. Converted Kāmyakesvara Temple.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used.

  
IV. *Chittaurgarh* District.

> 1\. Mazār of Ghāibī Pīr and the surrounding Graveyard. Temple sites.  
> 2. Qanātī Masjid in the same area. Temple site.

  
V. Jaipur District.

> 1\. *Amber*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1569-70). Temple site.  
> 2. *Chatsu* >
> > \(i\) Chhatrī of Gurg Alī Shāh (d. 1571). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Nilgaroñ-kī-Masjid (1381). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Dausa*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1688-89). Temple site.  
> 4. *Naraina* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1444). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Tripolia Darwaza. Temple materials used. >
> 5\. *Sambhar* >
> > \(i\) Ganj-i-Shahīdān. Temple site.  
> > (ii) DargAh of Khwāja Hisāmu’d-Dīn Jigarsukhta. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in Mahalla Nakhas (1695-96). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid in Rambagh (1696-97). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Tordi*, Khāri Bāolī. Temple materials used.

  
VI. Jaisalmer District.

> 1\. *Jaisalmer*, Faqiron-kā-Takiyā. Temple site.  
> 2. *Pokaran*, Masjid (1704-05). Temple site.

  
VII. Jalor District.

> 1\. *Jalor* >
> > \(i\) Shāhī or Topkhānā Masjid (1323). Pārśvanātha Temple materials > > used.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1318). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bāoliwāli Masjid (1523). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Sanchor*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1506). Temple site.

  
VIII. Jhalawar District.

> *Sunel*, Masjid (1466-67). Temple site.

  
IX. Jhunjhunu District.

> *Narhad*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
X. Jodhpur District.

> 1\. *Jodhpur*, Yak-Minār-kī-Masjid (1649). Temple site.  
> 2. *Mandor* >
> > \(i\) Shāhī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Ghulām Khān-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Tannā Pīr. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Pipar City*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1658). Temple. site.

  
XI. Kota District.

> 1\. *Baran*, Masjid (1680). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bundi*, Mīrān Masjid on the hill east of the town. Temple site.  
> 3. *Gagraun* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1694). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Hazrat Hamīdu’d-Dīn known as Mitthā Shah. Temple > > site. >
> 4\. *Shahabad* >
> > \(i\) Sher Shāh Sūrī-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. (1671-72). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Rahīm Khān Dātā (1534-35). Temple site. >
> 5\. *Shergarh*, Fort of Sher Shāh Sūrī. Brāhmanical, Buddhist and Jain > temple materials used.

  
XII. Nagaur District.

> 1\. *Amarpur*, Masjid (1655). Temple site.  
> 2. *Bakalia*, Masjid (1670). Temple site.  
> 3. *Balapir*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Badi Khatu* >
> > \(i\) Shāhī Masjid (around 1200). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Qanātī Masjid (1301). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Pahāriyoñ-kī-Masjid and Chheh Shahīd Mazārs. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iv) Jāliyābās-kī-Masjid (1320). Temple site.  
> > (v) BaDī and ChhoTī Masjid in Mahalla Sayiddan. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Khānzādoñ-kī-Masjid (1482). Temple site.  
> > (vii) Masjid and Dargāh of Muhammad Qattāl Shahīd (1333). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (viii) Dhobiyoñ-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Masjid-i-Sangatrāshān (1639). Temple site.  
> > (x) Dargāh of Bābā Ishāq Maghribī (1360). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Dargāh of Samman Shāh. Temple sites.  
> > (xii) Ganj-i-Shahīdān. Temple site.  
> > (Xiii) Mominoñ-kī-Masjid (1667). Temple site.  
> > (xiv) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Basni*, BaDī Masjid (1696). Temple site.  
> 5. *Chhoti Khatu*, Dargāh of Shāh Nizām Bukhārī (1670). Temple site.  
> 6. *Didwana* >
> > \(i\) Qāzioñ-kī-Masjid (1252). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in Gudri Bazar (1357). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Band (closed) Masjid (1384). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Shaikoñ-kī-Masjid (1377). Temple site.  
> > (v) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Qālā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Havālā Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Sayyidoñ-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Takiyā-kī-Masjid (1582-83). Temple site.  
> > (x) Kachahrī Masjid (1638). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Dhobioñ-kī-Masjid (1662).  
> > (xii) Julāhoñ-kī-Masjid (1664). Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Lohāroñ-kī-Masjid (1665). Temple site.  
> > (xiv) Bisātiyoñ-kī-Masjid (1675-76). Temple site.  
> > (xv) Mochioñ-kī-Masjid (1686). Temple site  
> > (xvi) Shāh Chāngī Madārī Masjid (1711). Temple site.  
> > (xvii) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (xviii) Graveyard near Delhi Darwaza. Temple site.  
> > (xix) Dīn Darwaza (1681). Temple site.  
> > (xx) Mazār of Rashīdu’d-Dīn Shahīd. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Kathoti*, Masjid (1569-70). Temple site.  
> 8. *Kumhari* >
> > \(i\) Masjid and Dargāh of Bālā Pīr (1496-97). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Qalandarī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 9\. *Ladnun* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1371). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Hazirawālī or Khaljī Masjid (1378-79). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Shāhī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Umrāo Shahīd Ghāzī (1371). Temple site.  
> > (v) Graveyard near the above Dargāh. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār-i-Murād-i-Shahīd. Temple site. >
> 10\. *Loharpura* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Pīr Zahīru’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (ii) ChhoTī Masjid (1602). Temple site. >
> 11\. *Makrana* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. (Sher Shāh). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid near Pahar Kunwa (1653). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in Gaur Bas (1678). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1643). Temple site. >
> 12\. *Merta* >
> > \(i\) Masjid in Salawtan (1625-26). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in Gaditan (1656). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. (1665). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mochiyoñ-kī-Masjid (1663). Temple site.  
> > (v) Ghosiyoñ-kī-Masjid (1665). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mominoñ-kī-Masjid (1666). Temple site.  
> > (vii) Masjid in Mahārāj-kī-Jāgīr (1666). Temple site  
> > (viii) Chowk-kī-Masjid (1670). Temple site.  
> > (ix) Hajjāmoñ-kī-Masjid (1686-87). Temple site.  
> > (x) Miyāñjī-kī-Masjid (1690-91). Temple site.  
> > (xi) Sabungaroñ-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (xii) Dargāh of Ghaus Pīr. Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Takiyā Kamāl Shāh. Temple site. >
> 13\. *Nagaur* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Pīr Zahīru’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Bābā Badr. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Sūfī Hamīdu’d-Dīn Nagauri Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Shykh Abdul Qādīr Jilānī. Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Makhdūm Husain Nāgaurī. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Dargāh of Ahmad Alī Bāpjī. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Dargāh of Sayyid Imām Nūr (1527). Temple site.  
> > (viii) Dargāh of Shāh Abdu’s-Salām. Temple site.  
> > (xi) Dargāh of Mīrān Sāhib. Temple site.  
> > (xii) Shams Khān Masjid near Shamsi Talav. Temple materials used.  
> > (xiii) Jāmī‘ Masjid (1553). Temple site.  
> > (xiv) Ek Mīnār-kī-Masjid (1505-06). Temple site.  
> > (xv) Dhobiyoñ-kī-Masjid (1552). Temple site.  
> > (xvi) Chowk-kī-Masjid (1553). Temple site.  
> > (xvii) Mahawatoñ-kī-Masjid (1567-68). Tempe site.  
> > (xviii) Hamaloñ-kī-Masjid (1599-1600). Temple site.  
> > (xix) Shāh Jahānī Masjid at Surajpole. Converted temple.  
> > (xx) Masjid outside the Fort (1664). Temple site.  
> > (xxi) Kharādiyoñ-kī-Masjid(1665). Temple site  
> > (xxii) Ghosiyoñ-kī-Masjid (1677). Temple site.  
> > (xxiii) Masjid near Maya Bazar (1677). Temple site.  
> > (xxiv) Qalandroñ-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (xxv) Kanehri Julāhoñ-kī-Masjid (1669). Temple site.  
> > (xxvi) Sayyidoñ-kī-Masjid (1433-34). Temple site.  
> > (xxvii) AkhāDewālī Masjid (1475). Temple site. >
> 14\. *Parbatsar*, Mazār of Badru’d-Dīn Shāh Madār. Temple site.  
> 15. *Ren*, Masjid (1685). Temple site.  
> 16. *Rohal*, Qāzioyñ-kī-Masjid (1684). Temple site.  
> 17. *Sojat*, Masjid (1680-81). Temple site.

  
XIII. Sawai Madhopur District.

> 1\. *Garh*, Qalā-kī-Masjid (1546-47). Temple site.  
> 2. *Hinduan* >
> > \(i\) Rangrezoñ-kī-Masjid (1439). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in the Takiyā of Khwāja Alī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Kachahrī Masjid (1659-60). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Bārā Khambā Masjid (1665). Temple site.  
> > (v) Graveyard east of the Talav. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Masjid and Mazār of Rasūl Shāh. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Ranthambor*, Qalā-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
XIV. Sikar District.

> *Revasa*, Masjid. Temple materials used.

  
XV. Tonk District.

> *Nagar*, Ishākhān Bāolī. Temple materials used.

  
XVI. Udaipur District.

> *Mandalgarh*, Alāi Masjid. Converted Jain Temple.

   
 

**TAMIL NADU**

I. Chingleput District.

> 1\. *Acharwak*, Mazār of Shāh Ahmad. Temple site.  
> 2. *Kanchipuram* >
> > \(i\) Large Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Eight other Masjids. Temple sites.  
> > (iii) Gumbad of Babā Hamīd Walī. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Karkatpala*, Mazār of Murād Shāh Mastān. Temple site.  
> 4. *Kovalam*, Dargāh of Malik bin Dinār (1593-94). Temple site.  
> 5. *Munropet* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shāh Alī Mastān. Temple site. >
> 6\. *Pallavaram* >
> > \(i\) Hill of Panchapandyamalai renamed Maula Pahad and central hall > > of an ancient Cave Temple turned into a Masjid for worshipping a > > panjā (palm).  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shykh Husain Qādirī alias Būdū ShahId. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Poonmalle, Mīr Jumla’s Masjid (1653). Temple materials used. >
> 7\. *Rajkoilpetta*, Mazār of Hāji Umar. Temple site.  
> 8. *Rampur*, Takiyā of the Tabqātī order of Faqirs. Temple site.  
> 9. *Rayapeta*, Walājāhī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 10. *Walajahbad*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
II. Coimbatore District.

> 1\. *Annamalai*, Fort. Repaired by Tīpū Sultān with temple > materials.  
> 2. *Coimbatore*, Large Masjid of Tīpū Sultān. Temple site.  
> 3. *Sivasamudram*, DargAh of Pīr Walī. Temple site.

  
III. *Madras* District.

> Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
IV. Madura District.

> 1\. *Bonduvarapetta*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Devipatnam*, Large Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Goripalaiyam*, Dargāh of Khwāja Alāu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 4. *Madura*, Dargāh of Khwāza Alāu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 5. *Nimarpalli* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Makhdūm Jalālu’d-Dīn. Temple materials used. >
> 6\. *Puliygulam*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 7. *Soravandam*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 8. *Tiruparankunram*, Sikandar Masjid on top of the Hill. Stands > admist ruins of Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jain temples.

  
V. North Arcot District.

> 1\. *Arcot*, A city of temples before its occupation by Muslims. >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Tomb of Sadatu’llah Khān. Atreya Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Masjid and Mazār of Tīpū Awliyā. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Sayyid Husain Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (v) Qalā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Masjid of Shāh Husain Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Masjid and Gumbad of Pāpā ShahId. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Gumbad of Shāh Sādiq with a graveyard. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Masjid and Mazār of Shāh Azmatu’llāh Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (x) Masjid of Shykh Natthar. Temple site.  
> > (xi) Masjid of Murād Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xii) Masjid of Mīr Asadu’llāh Khān. Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Masjid of Maulawī Jamāl Alī. Temple site.  
> > (xiv) Masjid and Gumbad of Sayyid Ahmad alias Yār Pīr. Temple > > site.  
> > (xv) Masjid of Chandā Sāhib. Temple site.  
> > (xvi) Masjid of Miskīn Shāh with Gumbad of Amīn Pīr. Temple site.  
> > (xvii) Masjid and Mazār of Hazrat Usmān Khān Sarwar. Temple site.  
> > (xviii) Masjid in the Maqbara of Mughlānī. Temple site.  
> > (xix) Masjid of GhulAm Rasūl Khān. Temple site.  
> > (xx) Masjid of Shāh Ghulam Husain Dargāhi. Temple site.  
> > (xxi) Masjid of Hāfiz Abdul Azīz. Temple site.  
> > (xxii) Masjid of Hāfiz Karīmu’llāh. Temple site.  
> > (xxiii) Masjid and Gumbad in Tajpura. Temple site. Outside the > > city  
> > (xxiv) Takiyā of Qātil Pāndū Sarguroh. Temple site.  
> > (xxv) Masjid and Gumbad of Ahmad Tāhir Khān. Temple site.  
> > (xxvi) Masjid, Khānqāh, Graveyard and Gumbad in Hasanpura. Temple > > site.  
> > (xxvii) Gumbad of Hazrat Antar Jāmi with the Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (xxviii) Takiyā, of Sābit Alī Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xxix) Masjid and Mazār of Sayyid KarIm Muhammad. Qādirī. Temple > > site.  
> > (xxx) Masjid of Sā‘datmand Khān. Temple site.  
> > (xxxi) Masjid of Abu’l-Hasan Zākir. Temple site.  
> > (xxxii) Masjid of Da‘ūd Beg. Temple site.  
> > (xxxiii) Masjid and Gumbad of Hazrat Shāh Nāsir. Temple site.  
> > (xxxiv) Masjid of Punjī. Temple site.  
> > (xxxv) Mazār of Yadu’llāh Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xxxvi) Rangīn Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (xxxvii) House of Relic which has a footprint of the Holy Prophet. > > Converted temple. >
> 2\. *Arni* >
> > \(i\) Two Masjids. Temple sites.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Seven Shahīds. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Kare*, Naulakh Gumbad. Converted Gautama and Viśvamitra. Temple  
> 4. *Kaveripak* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Takiyā. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Three Masjids. Temple sites. >
> 5\. *Nusratgarh*, Many Masjids and Mazārs in the ruined Fort. Temple > sites.  
> 6. *Pirmalipak*, Mazār of Wājid Shāh Champār Posh. Temple site.  
> 7. *Ramna* >
> > \(i\) Masjid of Kamtu Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Takiyā of Shāh Sādiq Tabqāti. Temple site. >
> 8\. *Vellore* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) ChhoTī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Nūr Muhammad Qādirī who “laid waste” many temples. > > Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Shāh Abu’l-Hasan Qādirī.  
> > (v) Mazār of Abdul Latīf Zauqī. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār of Alī Husainī Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Mazār of Hazrat Alī Sultān. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Mazār of Amīn Pīr. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Mazār of Shah Lutfu’llah Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (x) Mazār of Sāhib Pādshāh Qādirī. Temple site. >
> 9\. *Walajahnagar*, Masjid and Mazār of Pīr Sāhib on the Hill. Temple > site.  
> 10. *Wali-Muhammad-Petta*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
VI. Ramanathapuram District.

> 1\. *Eruvadi* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hazrat Ibrāhīm Shahīd. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Hazrat Fakhru’d-Dīn Shahīd alias Kātbābā Sāhib. Temple > > site. >
> 2\. *Kilakari* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Muhammad Qāsim Appā. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Apparpallī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Periyapattanam*, Dargāh of Sayyid Sultān Walī. Temple site.  
> 4. *Valinokkam* >
> > \(i\) Pallīvāsal Masjid (1417-18). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Katupalli (1425). Temple site. >
> 5\. *Ramanathapuram*, Old Masjid. Temple site.

  
VII. Salem District.

> *Sankaridurg*, Masjid on the ascent to the Fort. Temple site.

  
VIII. South Arcot District.

> 1\. *Anandapur*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Chidambaram* >
> > \(i\) Lālkhān Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Nawal Khān Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Amīnu’d-Dīn Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazār of Sayyid Husain. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Gingee* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1718). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1732). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid in the Fort. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Kawripet*, Mazār of Qalandar Shāh. Temple site.  
> 5. *Manjakupham*, Mazār of Shāh Abdu’r-Rahīm. Temple site.  
> 6. *Mansurpeta*, Itibār Khān-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> 7. *Nallikuppam* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shykh Mīrān Sāhib. Temple site. >
> 8\. *Pannuti* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Gumbad of Nūr Muhammad Qādirī. Temple site. >
> 9\. *Swamiwaram*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 10. *Tarakambari* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Shykh Ismāil Sāhib. Temple site. >
> 11\. *Tirumalarayanapatnam*, Mazār of Abdul Qādir Yamīnī. Temple > site.  
> 12. *Warachkuri*, Mazār of Shāh Jalāl Husainī. Temple site.

  
IX. Thanjavur District.

> 1\. *Ammapettah* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Muīnu’d-Dīn Husain Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Shah Jāfar. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Ilyur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Ināyatu’llāh Dirwesh. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Muhammad Mastān. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Mīrān Husain. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Karambari* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Arab Sāhib. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Mubtalā Shāh. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Kurikyalpalayam* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Makhdūm Hājī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Makhdūm Jahān Shāh. Temple site. >
> 5\. *Kurkuti*, Gumbad of Hasan Qādirī alias Ghyb Sāhib. Temple site.  
> 6. *Kushalpalayam* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Hazrat Tāj Firāq Badanshāhī. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Hidāyat Shāh Arzānī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Yār Shāh Husainshāhī. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Nagur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Qādir Walī Shāh. Temple site. >
> 8\. *Urancheri*, Mazār of Pīr Qutbu’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> 9. *Vijayapuram*, GumbaD of Sultān Makhdūm. Temple site.  
> 10. *Wadayarkari*, MazAr of Bāwā SAhib Shāhid. Temple site.

  
X. Tiruchirapalli District.

> 1\. *Puttur*, Mazār. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Tiruchirapalli* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of NātThār Shāh Walī. Converted Śiva Temple. Lingam > > used as lamp-post.  
> > (ii) Masjid-i-Muhammadī. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Bābā Muhiu’d-Dīn Sarmast. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Hazrat Fathu’llāh Nūrī. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazār of Shams Parān. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Mazār of Sayyid Abdul Wahhāb. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Mazār of Shāh Fazlu’llah Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Mazār of Shāh Nasīru’d-Dīn. Temple site.  
> > (ix) Mazār of Farīdu’d-Dīn Shahīd. Temple site.  
> > (x) Mazār of Hazrat Chānd Mastān. Temple site.  
> > (xi) Mazār of Sayyid Zainu’l-Ābidīn at Tinur. Temple site.  
> > (xii) Mazār of Sayyid Karīmu’d-Dīn Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (xiii) Mazār of Alīmu’llāh Shāh Qādirī called Barhana Shamsīr (Nāked > > Sword). Temple site.  
> > (xiv) Mazār of Shāh Imamu’d-Dīn Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (xv) Mazār of Kākī- Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xvi) Mazār of Khwāja Aminu’d-Dīn Chistī. Temple site.  
> > (xvii) Mazār of Khwāja Ahmad Shāh Husain Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (xviii) Mazār of Shāh Bhekā. Converted temple.  
> > (xix) Mazār of Shāh Jamālu’d-Dīn Husain Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (xx) Mazār of Qāyim Shāh who destroyed twelve temples. Temple > > site.  
> > (xxi) Mazār of Munsif Shāh Suhrawardīyya. Temple site.  
> > (xxii) Mazār of Itiffāq Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (xxiii) Mazār of Sayyid Jalāl Qādirī. Temple site.  
> > (xxiv) Mazār of Mahtab Shah Shirāzī Suhrawardīyya. Temple site.  
> > (xxv) Masjid of Hājī Ibrāhīm where NāTThār Shāh Walī (see i above) > > stayed on his arrival. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Valikondapuram* >
> > \(i\) Masjid opposite the Fort. Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Mazār near the Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (iii) Sher Khān-kī-Masjid (1690). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Old Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
XI. Tirunelvelli District.

> 1\. *Ambasamudram*, Mazār of Hazrat Rahmtu’llāh near the ruined Fort. > Temple site.  
> 2. *Kayalpattanam* >
> > \(i\) Periyapallī Masjid (1336-37).  
> > (ii) Sirupallī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Nainār Muhammad. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Marukudiyarapallī Masjid. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Tirunelvelli*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.

   
 

**UTTAR PRADESH**

I. Agra District.

> 1\. *Agra* >
> > \(i\) Kalān Masjid in Saban Katra (1521). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Humāyūn-kī-Masjid at Kachhpura (1537-38). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid of Jahānārā (1644). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Kamāl Khān Shahīd in Dehra Bagh. Temple material > > uses.  
> > (v) Riverside part of the Fort of Akbar. Jain Temple sites.  
> > (vi) Chīnī kā Rauzā. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Bisauli*, Masjid (1667-68).  Temple site.  
> 3. *Fatehpur Sikri* >
> > \(i\) Anbiyā Wālī Masjid and several others in Nagar.  Converted > > temples.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Shykh Salīm Chishtī. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fatehpur Sikri Complex. Several temple sites. >
>   
> 4. *Firozabad*, Qadīm Masjid. Temple site.  
> 5. *Jajau*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 6. *Rasulpur*, Mazār of Makhdūm Shah. Temple site.  
> 7. *Sikandra* >
> > \(i\) Maqbara of Akbar. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid in the Mission Compound. Temple site.

  
II. Aligarh District

> 1\. *Aligarh* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh (1562-63). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shykh Jalālu’d-Dīn Chishtī Shamsul-Arifīn. Temple > > site.  
> > (iii) Graveyard with several Mazārs. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Shershāhī Masjid (1542). Temple site.  
> > (v) Masjid (1676). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Pilkhana*, Bābarī or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1528-29). Temple: materials > used.  
> 3. *Sikandara Rao*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1585). Temple site.

  
III. Allahabad District.

> 1\. *Allahabad* >
> > \(i\) Fort of Akbar. Temple sites.  
> > (ii) Khusru Bagh. Temple sites.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Shāh Ajmal Khān with a Graveyard. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1641-22). Temple site.  
> > (v) Gulabbari Graveyard.  Temple site. >
> 2\. *Koh Inam*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1384). Temple site.  
> 3. *Mauima*, Qadīm Masjid. Temple site.  
> 4. *Shahbazpur*, Masjid (1644-45). Temple site.

  
IV. Azamgarh District.

> 1\. *Dohrighat*, Kalān Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Ganjahar*, Masjid (1687-88). Temple site.  
> 3. *Mehnagar*, Tomb of Daulat or Abhimān. Temple site.  
> 4. *Nizambad* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Miān Maqbūl and Husain Khān Shahīd (1562).  Temple > > sites. >
> 5\. *Qasba*, Humāyūn’s Jāmi‘ Masjid (1533-34). Temple site.

  
V. Badaun District.

> 1\. *Alapur*, Ālamgīrī Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Badaun* >
> > \(i\) Shamsī or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1233). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Shamsī Idgāh (1209). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Hauz-i-Shamsī (1203). Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Shāh Wilāyat (1390). Temple site.  
> > (v) Several other Masjids and Mazārs. Temple sites. >
> 3\. *Sahiswan*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1300). Temple site.  
> 4. *Ujhani*, Abdullāh Khān-kī-Masjid. Temple site.

  
VI. *Bahraich* District.

> DargAh of Sālār Mas‘ūd Ghāzī. Sūryadeva Temple site.

  
VII. Ballia District. 

> *Kharid* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Ruknu’d-Dīn Shāh. Temple site.

  
VIII. Banda District.

> 1\. *Augasi*, Masjid (1581-82). Temple site.  
> 2. *Badausa*, Masjid (1692). Temple site.  
> 3. *Kalinjar* >
> > \(i\) Masjid in Patthar Mahalla (1412-13). Converted > > Lakshmī-NārāyaNa Temple.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1660-61). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Several other Masjids and Mazārs. Temple sites. >
> 4\. *Soron*, Dargāh of Shykh Jamāl. Temple site.

  
IX. Bara Banki District.

> 1\. *Bhado Sarai*, Mazār of Malāmat Shāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Dewa* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Hājī Wāris Alī Shāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1665). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Fatehpur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Imambārā. Temple site. >
> 4\. *Radauli* >
> > \(i\) Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Ahmad and Zuhrā Bībī. Temple site. >
> 5\. *Rauza Gaon*, Rauza of Da‘ūd Shāh. Temple site.  
> 6. *Sarai-Akbarabad*, Masjid (1579-80). Temple site.  
> 7. *Satrikh*, Dargāh of Sālār Sāhū Ghāzī. Temple site.

  
X. Bareilly District.

> 1\. *Aonla* >
> > \(i\) Begum-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Maqbara of Alī Muhammad Rohilla. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Bareilly*, Mirzai Masjid (1579-80). Temple site.  
> 3. *Faridpur*, Fort built by Shykh Farīd. Temple materials used.

  
XI. Bijnor District.

> 1\. *Barmih-ka-Khera*, Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Jahanabad*, Maqbara of Nawāb Shuja‘at Khān. Temple site.  
> 3. *Kiratpur*, Fort with a Masjid inside. Temple materials used.  
> 4. *Mandawar*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Najibabad*, Patthargarh Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 6. *Nihtaur*, Masjid. Temple site.  
> 7. *Seohara*, Masjid. Temple site.

  
XII. Bulandshahar District.

> 1\. *Aurangabad Sayyid*, All Masjids stand on temple sites.  
> 2. *Bulandshahar* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Materials of many temples used.  
> > (iii) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1311). Temple site.  
> > (v) Masjid (1538). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Masjid (1557). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Khurja*, Mazār of Makhdūm Sāhib. Temple site.  
> 4. *Shikarpur*, Several Masjids built in Sikandar Lodī’s reign. Temple > sites.  
> 5. *Sikandarabad*, Several Masjids built in Sikandar Lodī’ a reign. 
> Temple sites.

  
XIII. Etah District.

> 1\. *Atranjikhera*, Mazār of Hazrat Husain (or Hasan). Temple site.  
> 2. *Jalesar* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Mīrān Sayyid Ibrāhīm (1555). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Kasganj*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1737-38). Temple site.  
> 4. *Marahra*, Masjid and Mazār. Temple site.  
> 5. *Sakit* >
> > \(i\) Qadīm Masjid (1285). Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Akbarī Masjid (1563). Temple site.

  
XIV. Etawah District.

> 1\. *Auraiya*, Two Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 2. *Etawah*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted temple.  
> 3. *Phaphund*, Masjid and Mazār of Shāh Bukhārī (d. 1549). Temple > site.

  
XV. Farrukhabad District.

> 1\. *Farrukhabad*, Several Masjids. Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Kannauj* >
> > \(i\) Dīnā or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1406). Sītā-kī-Rasoī. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Makhdūm Jahāniān. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Bābā Hāji Pīr. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1663-64). Temple site.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Bālā Pīr. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Rajgirhar*, Mazār of Shykh Akhī Jamshed. Temple site.  
> 4. *Shamsabad*, All Masjids and Mazārs. Temple sites.

  
XVI. Fatehpur District.

> 1\. *Haswa*, Idgāh (1650-51). Temple site.  
> 2. *Hathgaon* >
> > \(i\) Jayachandi Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Burhān Shahīd. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Kora (Jahanabad)* >
> > \(i\) Daraāh of Khwāja Karrak. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1688-89). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Kot*, Lādin-ki-Masjid (built in 1198-99, reconstructed in 1296). > Temple site.

  
XVII. Fyzabad District.

> 1\. *Akbarpur* >
> > \(i\) Qalā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1660-61). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Ayodhya* >
> > \(i\) Bābarī Masjid. RAma-Janmabhūmi Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid built by Aurangzeb. Swargadvāra Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid built by Aurangzeb. Tretā-kā-Thākur Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Shāh Jurān Ghurī. Temple site.  
> > (v) Mazārs of Sīr Paighambar and Ayūb Paighambar near Maniparvat. On > > the site of a Buddhist Temple which contained footmarks of the > > Buddha. >
> 3\. *Fyzabad*, Imāmbārā. Temple site.  
> 4. *Hatila*, Mazār of a Ghāzī. Aśokanātha Mahādeva. Temple site.  
> 5. *Kichauchha*, Dargāh of Makhdūm Ashraf in nearby Rasulpur. Temple > site.

  
XVIII. Ghazipur District.

> 1\. *Bhitri* >
> > \(i\) Masjid and Mazār. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Idgāh. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Bridge below the Idgāh. Buddhist Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Ghazipur* >
> > \(i\) Mazār and Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Chahal Sitūn Palace. Temple site. >
> 3\. *Hingtar* >
> > \(i\) Qala-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 4\. *Khagrol*, Bārā Khambā or Dargāh of Shykh Ambar. Temple site.  
> 5. *Saidpur*, Two Dargāhs. Converted Buddhist Temples.

  
XIX. Gonda District.

> *Sahet-Mahet (Śrāvastī)* >
> > \(i\) Maqbara. On the plinth of Sobhnāth Jain Temple.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Mīrān Sayyid.  On the ruins a Buddhist Vihāra.  
> > (iii) Imlī Darwāzā. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Karbalā Darwāzā. Temple materials used.

  
XX. Gorakhpur District.

> 1\. *Gorakhpur*, Imāmbārā. Temple site.  
> 2. *Lar*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 3. *Pava*, Karbalā. On the ruins of a Buddhist Stūpa.

  
XXI. Hamirpur District

> 1\. *Mahoba* >
> > \(i\) Masjid outside Bhainsa Darwaza of the Fort (1322). Converted > > temple.  
> > (ii) Masjid built on a part of the Palace of Parmardideva on the > > Hill. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Two Maqbaras. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Pīr Muhammad Shāh. Converted Siva temple.  
> > (v) Dargāh of MubArak Shāh and Graveyard nearby. Contain no less > > than 310 pillar from demolished temples. >
> 2\. *Rath*, Two Maqbaras. Temple materials used.

  
XXII. Hardoi District.

> 1\. *Bilgram* >
> > \(i\) Sayyidoñ-kī-Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1438). Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Several other Masjids and Dargāhs. Temple materials used. >
> 2\. *Gopamau*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 3. *Pihani* >
> > \(i\) Abdul Gafūr-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Sadr-i-Jahān (1647-48). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Sandila* >
> > \(i\) Qadīm Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār in Bārah Khambā. Temple site.

  
XXIII. Jalaun District.

> 1\. *Kalpi* >
> > \(i\) Chaurāsī Gumbad complex of tombs. Many temple sites.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Abdul Fath Alāi Quraishi (1449). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Shāh Bābū Hājī Samad (1529). Temple site.  
> > (iv) DeoDhi or Jāmi‘ Masjid (1554). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Katra*, Masjid (1649). Temple site.

  
XXIV. Jaunpur District.

> 1\. *Jaunpur* >
> > \(i\) Atālā Masjid (1408). Atala DevI Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Daribā Masjid. Vijayachandra’s Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Jhāñjarī Masjid.  Jayachandra’s Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Lāl Darwāzā Masjid. Temple materials from the Viśveśvara Temple > > at Varanasi used.  
> > (v) HammAm Darwāzā Masjid (1567-68). Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Ibrāhīm Bārbak-kī-Masjid inside the Fort (1360). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (vii) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Pātāla Devī Temple site.  
> > (viii) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (ix) Akbarī Bridge on the Gomatī. Temple materials used.  
> > (x) Khālis Mukhlis or Chār Angulī Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (xi) Khān Jahān-kī-Masjid (1364). Temple site.  
> > (xii) Rauzā of Shāh Fīruz. Temple site. >
> 2\. *Machhlishahar* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Karbalā. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Sixteen other Masjids. Temple sites. >
> 3\. *Shahganj*, Dargāh of Shāh Hazrat Alī. Temple site.  
> 4. *Zafarabad* >
> > \(i\) Masjid and Dargāh of Makhdūm Shah (1311 or 1321). Temple > > materials used.  
> > (ii) Ibrāhīm Barbak-kī-Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (iii) Zafar Khān-kī-Masjid (1397). Converted temple.  
> > (iv) Ganj-i-Shahīdān. Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Fort. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Early Sharqī buildings including many Maqbaras. Temple > > materials used.  
> > (vii) Dargāh of Asaru’d-Dīn. Temple materials used.

  
XXV. Jhansi District.

> 1\. *Irich*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1412). Temple materials used.  
> 2. *Lalitpur*, Bāsā Masjid (1358). Materials of four temples used.  
> 3. *Talbhat* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1405). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Pīr Tāj Bāj. Temple site.

  
XXVI. Kanpur District.

> 1\. *Jajmau* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Alāu’d-Dīn Makhdūm Shāh (1360). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1307). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Qalā-kī-Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Jāmi‘ Masjid (renovated in 1682). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Makanpur*, Mazār of Shāh Madār. Converted temple.

  
XXVII. Lucknow District.

> 1\. *Kakori*, Jhāñjharī Rauza of Makhdūm Nizāmu’d-Dīn. Temple > materials used.  
> 2. *Lucknow* >
> > \(i\) Tīlewālī. Masjid Temple site.  
> > (ii) Āsafu’d-Daula Imambara. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Shāh Muhammad Pīr on Lakshmana Tila renamed Pir > > Muhammad Hill. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Shykh Ibrāhīm Chishtī Rahmatullāh. Temple materials > > used.  
> > (v) Nadan Mahal or Maqbara of Shykh Abdu’r-Rahīm. Temple site.  
> > (vi) Machchi Bhavan. Temple sites. >
> 3\. *Musanagar*, Masjid (1662-63). Temple site.  
> 4. *Nimsar*, Fort. Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Rasulpur*, Masjid (1690-91). Temple site.

  
XXVIII. Mainpuri District. 

> *Rapri* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Idgāh (1312). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Pīr Faddū. Temple site.

  
XXIX. Mathura District.

> 1\. *Mahaban*, Assī Khambā Masjid. Converted temple.  
> 2. *Mathura* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh on the Katrā Mound. Keśvadeva. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jāmi‘ Masjid built by Abdu’n-nabi (1662). Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Shykh Farīd. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Makhdūm Shāh Wilāyat at Sami Ghat. Temple materials > > used. >
> 3\. *Naujhil*, Dargāh of Makhdūm Shykh Saheti Sāhib. Temple materials > used.

  
XXX. Mecrut District.

> 1\. *Barnawa*, Humāyun’s Masjid (1538-39). Temple site.  
> 2. *Garhmuktesar*, Masjid (1283). Temple site.  
> 3. *Hapur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1670-71). Temple site.  
> 4. *Jalali*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1266-67). Temple materials used.  
> 5. *Meerut* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Stands on the ruins of a Buddhist Vihāra.  
> > (ii) Dargāh at Nauchandi.  Nauchandī Devī Temple site. >
> 6\. *Phalauda*, Dargāh of Qutb Shāh. Temple site.

  
XXXI. Mirzapur District.

> 1\. *Bhuli*, Masjid in Dakhni Tola. Temple site.  
> 2. *Chunar* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Shāh Qāsim Sulaimān. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. Temple materials used. >
> 3\. *Mirzapur*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.

  
XXXII. Moradabad District.

> 1\. *Amroha* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted temple.  
> > (ii) Dargāh and Masjid of Shykh Saddū. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Shykh Wilāyat. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1557-58). Temple site.  
> > (v) Many other Masjids. Temple sites. >
> 2\. *Azampur*, Masjid (1555-56). Temple site.  
> 3. *Bachhraon*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 4. *Moradabad*, Jāmi‘ Masjid (1630). Temple site.  
> 5. *Mughalpura-Agwanpur*, Masjid (1695-96). Temple site.  
> 6. *Sirsi*, Qadīmī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 7. *Ujhari*, Mazār of Shykh Da‘ūd. Temple site.  
> 8. *Sambhal* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Converted VishNu Temple.  
> > (ii) Masjid in Sarai Tarim (1503). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Mazār of Miān Hātim Sambhali. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Mazār of Shykh Panjū. Temple site.

  
XXXIII. Muzaffarnagar District.

> 1\. *Daira Din Panah*, Mazār of Sayyid Dīn Panāh. Temple site.  
> 2. *Ghausgah*, Fort and Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> 3. *Jhinjhana* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh (1495). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid and Mazār of Shāh Abdul Razzāq (1623). Temple site. >
> 4\. *Kairana* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1551). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1553-54). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Masjid (1617-18). Temple site.  
> > (v) Masjid (1630-31). Temple site.  
> > (vi) Masjid (1651-52). Temple site. >
> 5\. *Majhera*, Masjid and Mazār of Umar Nūr. Temple site.  
> 6. *Sambhalhera*, Two Masjids (1631-32). Temple site.  
> 7. *Thana Bhawan*, Masjid (1702-03). Temple site.

  
XXXIV. *Pilibhit* District.

> Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
XXXV. Pratapgarh District.

> *Manikpur*, Many Masjids and Mazārs. On the ruins of demolished > temples.

  
XXXVI. *Rampur* District.

> Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.

  
XXXVII. Rae Bareli District.

> 1\. *Datmau* >
> > \(i\) Idgāh (1357-58). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Fort. On the ruins of Buddhist Stūpas.  
> > (iii) Masjid (1616). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Jais* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1674-75). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Rae Bareli* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Jahān Khān Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Makhdūm Sayyid Jāfari. Temple site.  
> > (iv) Fort. Temple materials used.

  
XXXVIII. Saharanpur District. 

> 1\. *Ambahata* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1533-34). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1534-35). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Deoband* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1510). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Masjid (1557). Temple site.  
> > (iii) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1677-78). Temple site. >
> 3\. *Gangoh* >
> > \(i\) Mazār of Shykh Abdul Quddūs. Temple site.  
> > (ii) Three Masjids. Temple sites. >
> 4\. *Jaurasi*, Masjid (1675-76). Temple site.  
> 5. *Kaliyar*, Dargāh of Shykh Alāu’d-Dīn Alī bin Ahmad Sābrī, a > disciple of Bābā Farīd Shakar Ganj of Pak Pattan. Temple site.  
> 6. *Manglaur* >
> > \(i\) Masjid (1285). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Shāh Wilāyat. Temple site. >
> 7\. *Rampur*, Mazār of Shykh Ibrāhīm. Temple site.  
> 8. *Saharanpur*, Jāmi‘ Masjid. Temple site.  
> 9. *Sakrauda*, Dargāh of Shāh Ruknu’d-Dīn or Shāh Nachchan. Temple > site.  
> 10. *Sirsawa*, Mazār of Pīr Kilkilī Shāh. On top of temples destroyed.

  
XXXIX. Shahjahanpur District.

> 1\. *Kursi*, Masjid (1652). Temple site.  
> 2. *Shahjahanpur*, Bahadur Khān-kī-Masjid (1647). Temple site.

  
XL. Sitapur District.

> 1\. *Biswan*, Masjid (1637-38). Temple site.  
> 2. *Khairabad*, Several Masjids. Temple sites.  
> 3. *Laharpur*, Mazār of Shykh Abdu’r-Rahmān. Temple site.

  
XLI. Sultanpur District.

> 1\. *Amethi*, Mazār of Shykh Abdul Hasan. Temple site.  
> 2. *Isuli* >
> > \(i\) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1646-47). Temple site.  
> > (ii) Mazār of Sayyid Ashraf Jahāngīr Simnānī. Temple site.

  
XLII. Unao District.

> 1\. *Bangarmau* >
> > \(i\) BaDi Dargāh of Alāu’d-Dīn Ghanaun (1320). Temple materials > > used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Jalālu’d-DIn (d. 1302). Temple site.  
> > (iii) ChhoTī Dargāh (1374). Temple site.  
> > (iv) Jāmi‘ Masjid (1384). Temple site. >
> 2\. *Rasulabad*, Alamgīrī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 3. *Safipur* >
> > \(i\) Dargāh of Shāh Shafī. Temple materials used.  
> > (ii) Dargāh of Qudratu’llāh. Temple materials used.  
> > (iii) Dargāh of Fahīmu’llāh. Temple materials used.  
> > (iv) Dargāh of Hāfizu’llāh. Temple materials used.  
> > (v) Dargāh of Abdu’llāh. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) Fourteen Masjids. Temple sites.

  
XLIII. Varanasi District.

> 1\. *Asla*, Shāh Jahānī Masjid. Temple site.  
> 2. *Varanasi* >
> > \(i\) Masjid at Gyanavapi. Viśveśvara Temple material used.  
> > (ii) Masjid at Panchaganga Ghat. KirīTaviśveśvara Temple materials > > used.  
> > (iii) Masjid and Dargāh of Sayyid Fakhru’d-Dīn Sāhib Alvī (1375) > > Temple site.  
> > (iv) Bindu Madhava Masjid (1669). Converted Biñdu-Mādhava Temple.  
> > (v) Masjid and Mazār at Bakariya Kund. Temple materials used.  
> > (vi) ADhāi Kāñgrā-kī-Masjid in Adampura. Temple site.  
> > (vii) Darharā Masjid. Temple site.  
> > (viii) Mazār of Lāl Khān at Rajghat. Temple site.

  
  
**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) The word “Hindu” in the present context stands for all schools of Sanatana Dharma-Buddhism, Jainism, Saivism, Shaktism, Vaishnavism and the rest.

^([2](#2a)) *History of Aurangzeb*, Calcutta, 1925-52.

^([3](#3a)) *Religious Policy of the Mughal Emperors*, Bombay, 1962.

^([4](#4a)) Advice tendered to this author by Dilip Padgaonkar, editor of *The Times of India*, in the context of quoting correct history. Small wonder that he has converted this prestigious daily into a platform for communist politicians masquerading as historians. “Perhaps you want,” wrote a reader, “to invest them with some kind of academic glory by using the legend of JNU, but their best introduction, intellectually speaking, is that they are Stalinist historians… Their ideological brothers in the press make sure, through selective reporting and publishing, that their views are properly advertised. *The Times of India*, too, is in this rank; its editorials, leading articles, special reports-all breathe venom, not just against Ram Janmabhumi but any Hindu viewpoint. Anything in sympathy with this viewpoint is conscientiously kept out” (*The Times of India*, November 11, 1989, Letters).

^([5](#5a)) Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Report 1925-26.  Pp. 129-30. 

^([6](#6a)) *Ibid.*, p. 129.

^([7](#7a)) *Ibid.*, p. l28.

^([8](#8a)) *Ibid.*, 1907-08, p. 113.

^([9](#9a)) *Ibid.*, Pp. 114.

^([10](#10a)) *Ibid.*, p. 114-15.  Technical details have been omitted and emphasis added.

^([11](#11a)) *Ibid.*, p. 116.

^([12](#12a)) *Ibid.*, p. 120.

^([13](#13a)) *Ibid.*, p. 126.

^([14](#14a)) *Ibid.*, p. 61.

^([15](#15a)) *Ibid.*, 1907-08, Pp. 47, to 72.

^([16](#16a)) *Ibid.*, 1903-04, p. 86.

^([17](#17a)) *Ibid.*, 1902-3, p. 52.

^([18](#18a)) *Ibid.*, 1921-22, p. 83.

^([19](#19a)) *Ibid.*, p. 84.

^([20](#20a)) *Ibid.*, 1902-03, p. 56.

^([21](#21a)) *Ibid.*, 1933-34, Pp. 36-37.

^([22](#22a)) *Ibid.*, 1902-03, Pp. 16-17.

^([23](#23a)) *Ibid.*, 1993-4, Pp. 31-32.

^([24](#24a)) *Ibid.*, 1902-03, Pp. 17-18.

^([25](#25a)) *Ibid.*, 1903-04, p. 43.

^([26](#26a)) *Ibid.*, p. 63.

^([27](#27a)) *Ibid.*, 1904-05, p. 24.

^([28](#28a)) *Ibid.*, 1929-30, p. 29.

^([29](#29a)) *Ibid.*, 1928-29, Pp. 167-68.

^([30](#30a)) Robert Sewell, *A Forgotten Empire*, New Delhi Reprint, 1962, Pp. 199-200.

^([31](#31a)) Archaeological Survey of India, Volume I : *Four Reports Made During the Years* 1862-63-64-65, Varanasi Reprint, 1972, Pp. 440-41.

^([32](#32a)) Ratan Pribhdas Hingorani, *Sites Index to A.S.I. Circle Reports* New Delhi 1978, Pp. 17-262.

^([33](#33a)) A decision to this effect was taken by the *Archaeological Survey of India* soon after independence, ostensibly under guidelines laid down by an international conference.

^([34](#34a)) S.A.A. Rizvi, *History of Sufism in India*, Volume 1, New Delhi, 1978, P. 189.

^([35](#35a)) Ghulām Abdul Qādir Nazīr, *Bahr-i-‘Azam or Travels of ‘Azam Shāh Nawwāb Walājāh*, 1823, Madras, 1960, p. 128.

^([36](#36a)) *Ibid.*, p. 64.

^([37](#37a)) *Ibid.*, p. 128.

^([38](#38a)) Dates given in brackets refer to the Christian era.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
