+++
title = "100 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: G. Allana, Pakistan Movement Historical Documents (Karachi:
Department of International Relations, University of Karachi, nd
\[1969\]), pp. 61-75. Some very long paragraphs have been broken into
shorter ones, and the punctuation adjusted in some places for ease of
reading. Section numbers have been added by FWP for convenience in
reference. All notes in square brackets are by FWP. Maulana Muhammad Ali
(1878-1931) made this speech only six weeks before his death; he died in
London, and was buried in Jerusalem as he had wished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Maulana Mohammed Ali's speech at the Fourth Plenary Session of the
> Round Table Conference in London, 19th Nov., 1930

  
**\[\[1\]\] Mr. Chairman, may I exercise the privilege of the invalid**
and remain seated? My friend Dr. Moonje has explained his position as to
how he has been called a traitor to his country. I think we are
bracketed together here again. As he knows very well, on the day when he
and I were to depart from India \[inauspicious\] black flags were to be
flown to wish us Godspeed, and the wishes of people with whom we had
been working all these years were that the boat "Viceroy of India" might
prove very unseaworthy. Even when I came to this country one newspaper
in England which I have helped to stabilise financiallyÂ­-I am very glad
to see it has a million sale today--the "Daily Herald," published my
photograph and called me a convert--I suppose, a convert from patriotism
to treachery.

There is in Parliament, besides the Conservative peer who spoke
yesterday frankly and sincerely, another very Conservative gentleman,
who was my tutor professor at Oxford, Sir Charles Oman, and it is from
history that I quote one short sentence which formed the subject of one
of the questions asked us in the Indian Civil Service Examination, for
which I appeared and failed: "The Saracen alone it was impossible to
convert." I do not claim to have in me Aryan blood like all the white
people here and Dr. Moonje. I have the blood in me which my Lord
Reading--who sent me to prison--has perhaps running in his veins. I am a
Semite; and if he has not been converted from Zionism, I too am not
converted from Islam, and my anchor holds. I am the only person
belonging to my party who has been selected by His Excellency the
Viceroy, or the Government of His Majesty here, or whoever it is who has
appointed these wonderful Delegates. Whose Delegates we are we do not
know. I do not pretend to represent anybody; but I will say this much,
and I feel certain that when you have heard me--I hope patiently--you
will say that I. am right in my claim, that at least I am not
misrepresenting myself, and I think that should be enough. In politics
there is too much misrepresentation even of oneself.

"I hope your Lordship is a Conservative and will remain a Conservative;
because the only definition that I read of a Conservative was in
Tennyson, who said.

> "He is the best Conservative  
> Who lops the mouldered branch away."

I think those ideas which Lord Peel expressed, very sincerely and
frankly, really represent the mouldered branch which should be lopped
away. This is my only answer to him.

As regards the other Conservative, our own Prince from India, namely His
Highness the Maharaja Sahib of Rewa, I am not quite sure about his
conservatism. If he takes Burke to be a Conservative, and quotes him at
the end of his speech, I would say: "Be a Conservative and stick to it,
for, quoting Burke, His Highness said, "Small minds and large empires go
ill together." If the British Empire--call it Empire, call it
commonwealth of Nations, whatever you choose to call it I do not
care--if the British Empire desires to remain big, the small minds that
have been visible and audible only too long must disappear.

**\[\[2\]\] If you had followed Burke, you would not have lost
America,** and you would not be talking of parity today in building
warships. There should be much more talk of charity. And you would not
have all those debts to pay. You would not have all that worry. You
would not have to go so often to Geneva to the Preparatory Commission
for the Disarmament Conference. How long that preparation is going to
take, Heaven only knows. All these things came in because you forgot
your greatest politician, your greatest statesman, who was the man who,
in the House of Commons, was called the "dinner bell," because when
Burke got up to speak you all left and went to the dining room. You
still do that to people who are like Burke and I therefore say--and I
quote him once again--"Men, not measures." I do not care what
constitution you prepare for us, but all would be well if you have got
one man in England who is a real man.

> "Oh God! for a man with heart, head, hand,  
> Like some of the simple great ones gone  
> For ever and ever by..  
> One still strong man in a blatant land,  
> Whatever they call him, what care I?  
> Aristocrat, autocrat, democrat--one  
> Who can rule and dare not lie."

I hope my old friend Mr. MacDonald will at least prove the man to rule,
and that he would not dare to lie to his own  
Party, to his own conscience, to his dead wife, and to his living
country; and if you people of all parties assist him, as you  
should, I assure you we will make history.

But even more than I trust my old friend Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, I, a
republican, make this confession, that I place my trust in the man--I
call him a man, because "a man's a man for a' that"--who inaugurated
this Conference in the Gallery of the House of Lords, whose name is
George. Whether you call him His Majesty or whatever you call him, he is
a man! He knows India better than any of his Ministers, past or present,
and I am looking up to him to do justice to the 320 millions who
constitute one-fifth of the whole of humanity, and I am strengthened in
that belief by the wonderful patriotism shown by the Princes arrayed
over there, the conservative element in India. It must be a revelation
to my Lord Peel and to my Lord Reading; it is no revelation to me.

**\[\[3\]\] I am again a unique person.** While I am a British
subject--though I was yet being excluded from the Indian Civil Service
Examination because they said I was not a "natural born British
subject"--provisionally they admitted me, till evidence from my mother
came in, and they finally admitted me--I happen also to be subject of an
Indian State, and probably in that respect too I am a unique person in
this Conference. I was born in a State; I have served in that State. I
have served in another State, Baroda--my master, the Gaekwar, is here; I
ate his salt for seven years--and when I was dying two years ago it was
an Indian Prince, His Highness of Alwar, who sent me at his own cost his
own doctor here. When I was supposed to be going to die once more at
Simla, it was a Prince, whom I was once about to being to teach as a
private tutor, the Nawab Sahib of Bhopal, who exercised the truest
hospitality--which the British are not yet exercising--he turned his
guest-house into a hospital for me.

The British will be extending their hospitality to me in the letter as
well as they are doing in the spirit, if they make me a free patient in
every hospital that there is. When I was sent to Simla to the hospital I
made a judicious separation between two fiances, a lady on one side and
military officer on the other, who were to be married very shortly. I
occupied a room between them! Both were ailing. The lady asked our
doctor, when she saw a strange-looking Indian coming into the European
quarters, "What is this old man ailing from?" The doctor said, "Ask me
rather what the old man is not ailing from." A man with my dilated
heart; with my approaching and recurrent blindness through retinitis;
with my once-gangrened foot, with neuritis--this huge bulking foot
through oedema; with albuminaria; with diabetes, and the whole long list
that I could give you if Colonel Gidney would not think I was becoming
his rival as a medical man, I say no sane man with all these ailments
would have travelled seven miles. And yet I have come seven thousand
miles of land and sea because where Islam and India are concerned, I am
mad, and, as the "Daily Herald" puts it, I am a "convert"; from a
"rebel" against the Government, I have become a "traitor" to my country,
and I am now working "with the Government." I say I can work even with
the Devil if it is to be, like this work, in the cause of God.

I hope you will forgive this long introduction about my ill-health and
ailments and all sorts of things; but the fact is that today the one
purpose for which I came is this--that I want to go back to my country
if I can go back with the substance of freedom in my hand. Otherwise I
will not go back to a slave country. I would even prefer to die in a
foreign country, so long as it is a free country; and if you do not give
us freedom in India you will have to give me a grave here.

**\[\[4\]\] I begin with the Conservatives by thanking them.** When I
met Mr. Baldwin at the dinner which the Government hospitality provided
for us, when. I was really very ill and ought to have been in bed, I was
watching for the cherrywood pipe, and, thank God, it came out. So I went
to Mr. Baldwin, and I said, "In two ways you have made history. Although
a Conservative belonging to a party of the so-called idle rich, you have
at least been human enough to establish this rule, that where only
Coronas could be smoked after dinner an honest man could now bring out
his shag, put it into a cherrywood pipe, as I used to do at Oxford, and
smoke it." But, as I told him, he has done another historic thing also.
He has sent out a Conservative Viceroy of the type of Lord Irwin; if any
man has saved the British Empire today, it is that tall, thin Christian.
If Lord Irwin was not there today, heaven only knows what would have
happened. At least I would not be the "convert" I am supposed to be. We
should not have been at this Round Table. It is for the sake of peace,
friendship, and freedom that we have come here, and I hope we shall go
back with all that; if we do not, we go back into the ranks of fighters
where we were ten years before. They may now call us traitors to the
country. You may then call us rebels or outlaws. We do not care.

I have said something about His Excellency Lord Irwin, but I do not wish
to associate all that with his Government. They have woefully mismanaged
things. The only good point about their Despatch is that it has provided
us with another "historic document." The Simon Commission's Report is
not the only document we have to consider. The Despatch is a most
disappointing document. The best thing we can do after it is to create
our own "historic document" here. The best hearts and the best brains of
two big countries are assembled here. Many who ought to have been here
are still in gaol in India. Mr. Jayakar, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, and I
tried our hands at peaceÂ­making between the Viceroy and Gandhiji, but we
failed. I was the first in the field, bue failed. I hope we shall not
fail when we go back to our country this time, carrying with us the
substance of freedom.

Lord Peel said, "Oh, yes, but when you go back to your country with a
constitution such as you want, those people who are not co-operating
will wrest it from your hands." Wrest it! When I can fight the British,
I can fight the Indians too. But give me something to fight for. Do not
let me have to take back from here a charater of slavery and then expect
me to fight my own people. I could not do it, and if I tried to do it, I
should fail. But with freedom in our hands I would gladly go back to
those in whose name my friend Mr. Jayakar spoke. He claimed to speak for
Young India. I think he knows that, although I am older than him in
years, I am a younger man in heart, in spirit, in temperament, and in
love of fighting. I was non-co-operating when Mr. Jayakar was still
practising in the law courts. (Mr. Jayakar shook his head.) Anyhow he
was not in gaol with me. My brother and I were the very first to be sent
to gaol by Lord Reading. I bear him no grudge for that; but I want the
power also, when Lord Reading goes wrong again in India, to send him to
gaol.

**\[\[5\]\] I have not come to ask for Dominion Status.** I do not
believe in the attainment of Dominion Status. The one thing to which I
am committed is complete independence. In Madras in 1927, we passed a
resolution making that our goal. In 1928, in the Convention of All
Parties, the adoption of the Nehru Report Constitution was moved, the
very first clause of which was about Dominion Status. Even my old
secretary, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the President of the Congress today,
was kept down by his father. There is a Persian proverb which says: "Be
a dog, do not be a younger brother." And when you see my big brother
over there, "seven feet by five," as Colonel Wedgwood called him, you
can well believe, I believe, in this Persian proverb. In the case of
Jawaharlal I would say, "Be a cat, do not be the son of your father."
For it was .his father who, as President of the Congress, throttled poor
Jawaharlal at Calcutta in 1928. Well I got up in his place, when he
could not speak for complete independence, and I opposed the clause
dealing with Dominion Status.

But in 1929 I would not go further like Jawaharlal and make it my creed,
because once we make it our creed in the Congress, we cannot admit
anybody into the Congress who does not hold that creed. I liked to keep
the door open for negotiation. I would not like to slam the door in he
face of anybody. His Excellency Lord Irwin, a Conservative Viceroy, was
"the man on the spot." And he was sufficiently impressed by what he saw
on the spot and came here. When we come to London we hear that everybody
is appealing to "the man in the! street." Whether "the man in the
street" is well heard or not, I do not know; but Lord Rathermere and
Lord Beaverbrook and everybody else always talk about "the man in the
street" as the final court of appeal. In India it is always "the man on
the spot." Well, "the man on the spot" came here and he talked to the
leading "man in the street," who is presiding here. I am sure he
preached to the converted. They brought round Mr. Baldwin also; they
brought round some Conservatives; they brought round everybody they
could, and made the announcement that Dominion Status was meant, when in
1917 they said "Responsible Government." That cleared the fog which had
been created in a very memorable meeting of the Indian Legislative
Assembly in 1924 by the Officer in charge of the Home Department at the
time, who I am glad is present here today.

**\[\[6\]\] As I said two or three days ago, India has put on
fiftyÂ­league boots.** We are making forced marches which will astonish
the world, and we will not go back to India unless a new Dominion is
born. If we go back to India without the birth of a new Dominion we
shall go back, believe me, to a lost Dominion. We shall go back to an
America. Then you will witness, not within the British Commonwealth or
the British Empire, but outside it, with the Indian Princes, with Dr.
Moonje, with Mr. Jayakar, with myself and my brother, a Free and United
States of India. It will be something more than that. As I wrote shortly
after leaving Oxford long years ago, in India we shall have something
better than an America, because we shall not only have a United States,
but we shall have United Faiths.

> "Not like to like, but like in difference;  
> Self-reverent each and reverencing each;  
> Distinct in individualities,  
> But like each other, e'en as those who love."

It is with these passions surging in our hearts that we have come here.
It now depends upon our Conservative friends, upcn our Radical friends,
upon our Labour friends, and still more upon the one man whom I trust
more in England than anybody else--His Majesty King George, the grandson
of Victoria the Good, whose love for India nobody dare deny. Her whole
life was the Magna Charta of India, and in her grandson's time history
will be written again like this: "George III lost America. George V won
India"!

**\[\[7\]\] We are told t.hat there are difficulties.** It is said,
"Look at the States." But I come from the States, and I know they
present no difficulty whatever. "Then there is the Army." Well what
about the Army? It is the biggest indictment against Great Britain that
the Army is not ours today, and if you ever use that excuse of the Army
you will condemn yourselves out of your own mouths. Let me tell you
frankly and honestly, but in a friendly way, that your greatest sin was
the emasculation of India.

I am glad to hear my friend, Dr. Moonje, say "Hear, hear." I was very
sorry to hear him talk about our people being fired upon and therefore
running away for a time and then coming back. We have 320,000,000 of
people. When they can afford to die in millions from famine and from
plagues, surely they can afford to die from British bullets too. That is
the lesson which Gandhiji wanted to each us, and that is the lesson
which we must learn now. In 1913 I was in this country when Gandhiji was
leading his movement in South Africa. Mr. G. K. Chesterton presided over
a meeting in the Essex Hall; he called upon me to speak. Other speakers
had spoken of Gandhi's new philosophy. I said, "Please understand one
thing about that. Whether it is his philosophy or Tolstoy's, Jesus
Christ's or mine, it is the univeraal human philosophy". Nobody wins in
a battle if there is merely the will to kill. You must have the will to
die even before the will to kill. In India we have not the power to
kill, but the moment we develop the will to die, numbers will tell.
320,000,000 of people cannot be killed. There is no mechanization
\[=mechanism?\] for which you can find money to kill 320,000,000 people.
Even if you have got that mechanization, even if you have got the
material, you have not the morale (or immorale) to dare to kill
320,000,000 people. We must have in us the will to die for the birth of
India as a free and united nation. And this we are fast developing. When
this has been fully developed, what can you do? I do not for a moment
imagine that you could find in all England a hundred men so hardÂ­hearted
and callous as to fire for long on unarmed and nonÂ­violent people ready
to die for the freedom of their country. No; I do not think so badly of
English soldiers.

**\[\[8\]\] The real problem which is upsetting us all the time has been
the third problem--this Hindu-Muslim problem;** but that is no problem
at all. The fact is that the Hindu-Muslim difficulty, like the Army
difficulty, is of your own creation. But not altogether. It is the old
maxim of "divide and rule." But there is a division of labour here. We
divide and you rule. The moment we decide not to divide you will not be
able to rule as you are doing today. With this determination not to be
divided, we have come here. Let me assure every British man and woman
who thinks of shaping our destinies that the only quarrel between the
Hindus and the Muslims today is \[the\] quarrel that the Muslim is
afraid of Hindu domination and the Hindu, I suppose, is afraid of Muslim
domination. (Dr. Moonje: No, the Hindu is never afraid.) Well I am very
glad to hear that. In my country the she-buffalo attacks only when she
is afraid; and whatever the reverence of the Hindu for the cow, I am
glad he has never the fear of the she-buffalo. I want to get rid of that
fear. The very fact that Hindus and Muslims are quarrelling today shows
that they will not stand British domination either for one single
minute. That is the point to grasp.

British domination is doomed over India. Is our friendship doomed also?
My brother took service under the Government and served it for 17 years,
but he did one thing for me. He sent me to Oxford. He was always
taunting me in the non- co-operation days by saying: "You have a soft
corner in your heart for that place called Oxford." I must admit that I
had. I spent four years there, and I always carry with me the most
pleasant recollections of that time, and I want to keep that feeling. I
do have a very soft corner in my heart for my Alma Mater. But I can
taunt my brother, too. When he was being tried at KarachiÂ­-when the jury
let us off, and there was a British juryman among them, they voted for
our release because we were such a sporting lot--my big brother said:
"Even if it becomes my duty to kill the first Englishman I come across,
if he happens to have blue eyes, my knife will not work; because I shall
think of the eyes of Theodore Beck, my late Principal at my old College,
Aligarh." There are several Aligarh Old Boys here, and they can bear
witness to the fact that we who were brought up at Aligarh by Beck could
never be without a soft corner in our hearts for Engl:shmen. Therefore,
even if British domination is doomed--and it must be killed here--do not
let us kill British friendship. We have a soft corner in our hearts for
Great Britain. Let us retain it, I beseech you.

**\[\[9\]\] One word as to the Muslim position,** with which I shall
deal at length on some other occasion. Many people in England ask us why
this question of Hindu and Muslim comes into politics and what it has to
do with these things. I reply, "It is a wrong conception of religion
that you have, if you exclude politics from it. It is not dogma; it is
not ritual! Religion, to my mind means the interpretation of life." I
have a culture, a polity, an outlook on life--a complete synthesis which
is Islam. Where God commands I am a Muslim first, a Muslim second, and a
Muslim last, and nothing but a Muslim. If you ask me to enter into your
Empire or into your Nation by leaving that synhesis, that polity, that
culture, that ethics, I will not do it. My first duty is to my Maker,
not to H. M. the King, nor to my companion, Dr. Moonje; my first duty is
to my maker, and that is the case with Dr. Moonje also. He must be a
Hindu first, and I must be a Muslim first, so far as that duty is
concerned. But where India is concerned, where India's freedom is
concerned, I am an Indian first, an Indian second, an Indian last, and
nothing but an Indian.

I belong to two circles of equal size, but which are not concentric. One
is India, and the other is the Muslim world. When I came to England in
1920 at the head of the Khilafat Delegation, my friends said: "You must
have some sort of a crest for your stationery." I decided to have it
with two circles on it. In one circle was the word "India"; in the other
circle was Islam, wiih the word "Khilafat." We as Indian Muslims came in
both circles. We belong to these two circles, each of more than 300
millions, and we can leave neither. We are not nationalists but
supernationalists, and I as a Muslim say that "God made man and the
Devil made the nation." Nationalism divides; our religion binds. No
religious wars, no crusades, have seen such holocausts and have been so
cruel as your last war, and that was a war of your nationalism, and not
my Jehad.

But where our country is concerned, where the question of taxation is
concerned, where our crops are concerned, where the weather is
concerned, where all associations in those thousands of matters of
ordinary life are concerned, which are for the welfare of India, how can
I say "I am a Muslim and he is a Hindu"? Make no mistake about the
quarrels between Hindu and Muslim; they are founded only on the fear of
domination. If there is one other sin with which I charge Great Britain,
in addition to the sin of emasculating India, it is the sin of making
wrong histories about India and teaching them to us in our schools, with
the result that our school boys have learnt wrong Indian history. The
quarrels which are sometimes visible in our streets on certain holidays,
or quarrels the motives of which have been instilled into the hearts of
our so-called intelligentsia--I call it unintelligentsia--by the wrong
history taught us in our schools for political purposes. If that
feeling, which writes "Revenge" so large over the politics of certain
people in India, existed as it does, and if it existed to the extent
which it does today, and the Muslims were everywhere in a minority of 25
per cent and the Hindus were everywhere in a majority of 66 per cent, I
could see no ray of hape today; but thanks to the gerrymandering of our
saints and our soldiers, if there are Provinces like that of my friend
Dr. Moonje, in which I am only 4 per cent, there are other provinces
where I am 93 percent, as in the Province of my friend Nawab Sir Abdul
Qaiyum, for which we demand equal freedom. There is the old Province of
Sind, where the Muslims first landed, where they are 73 per cent; in the
Punjab they are 56 per cent, and in Bengal 55 per cent. That gives us
our safeguard, for we demand hostages as we have willingly given
hostages to Hindus in the other Provinces where they form huge
majorities.

**\[\[10\]\] I want you to realise that for the first time you are
introducing a big revolution into India;** for the first time majority
rule is to be introduced into India. In the days of Lord Rama there was
no majority rule, or he would not have been exiled. The old Pandu and
Kuru rulers, who gambled their kingdoms away, did not have majority
rule; Mahmud of Ghazni and Akbar and Aurangzeb did not have majority
rule, nor did Shivaji; when Ranjit Singh ruled in the Punjab, he too did
not have majority rule; when Warren Hastings and Clive ruled india, they
did not have majority rule; and even in the days of Lord Irwin there is
no majority rule. For the first time in India, we are going to introduce
majority rule, and I, belonging to a minority community, accept that
majority rule, although I know very well that if 51 people say that 2
and 2 make 5, and 49 people say that 2 and 2 make 4, the fact that 51
say that 2 and 2 make 5 does not cause them to make 5. Still I am
prepared to submit to majority rule. Luckily, hewever, there are Muslim
majorities in certain Provinces, and with the federal form of government
which is suited to India, not only for the solution of the Hindu-Muslim
problem, but is essential for the sake of the Princes also, this is in
our favour. The centrifugal and centripetal tendencies are so well
balanced in India that we are bound to have a federal system of
government there, not as a distant ideal, as the Government of India
says, but today, now this minute. We shall leave this conference only
with federation established in India, with new treaties made with the
Princes, with the consent of the crown and the Princes.

I sometimes hear it said that nothing can be done without the consent of
the Princes. No, Your Highness, we Our Lownesses, will do nothing
without your consent. But when, at the end of 1857, the powers of the
East India Company were transferred to the crown, nobody ever thought of
asking for your consent. There was not so much as "by your leave." Your
Relationship with the Crown was establis.hed merely ipso facto, but it
was with a family of Kings and Queens who were really good people, many
of whom worshipped their conscience as their King, and it is that which
gives us hope.

**\[\[11\]\] One more word and I have done.** I wish to say that just
this about the Army. I am giving away a secret in regard to the Army
now. When ten years ago, H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught was sent out to
India to open the Indian Legislatures, Mahatma Gandhi, Pandit Motilal
Nehru and myself were invited by our late lamented dear friend C.R. Das,
whom our eyes seek in vain today at this Table, and who would have
brought Motilal Nehru and Mahatma Gandhi also to this Table had he been
alive today, for he was a man of imagination. Gandhiji and I were
putting up together as the guests of Das, and I was acting as Lord
Chamberlain to Mahatma Gandhi. Any number of people were coming to see
Mahatma Gandhi and to touch his feet--I wish he had had the feet of a
centipede, but even then he could not have coped with the thousands who
came to touch his feet--and in trying to satisfy them and spare
Gandhiji, too, as much as possible, my life was a misery. Amongst these
people I saw 10 or 12 tall turbaned men, not in uniform, but looking and
dressed very much alike. I thought they were members of the C.I.D. from
the Punjab. My belief, after my arrest and internment in 1915 on the
report of a spy neighbour, is that there is no place where God and the
British C.I.D. are not present, so that whatever I say and whatever I
do, I say and do in the belief that God Almighty and the British spy are
equally omnipresent! I went up to these supposed British spies, and I
said: "What can I do for you? I have been doing a lot for the C.I.D. by
way of sedition and I should like to do something more." They said: "We
do not belong to the C.I.D.; we belong to the Army." "Then what," I
asked, "are you doing in this seditious house?" They said: "We have come
to pay our respects to Mahatma Gandhi; we belong to the escort that has
been brought from Poona for the Duke of Connaught."

I said if they wanted to see Mahatma Gandhi I would take them in
straightaway. Mahatama Gandhi asked them whether they were interested in
Swaraj, and they said: "Yes." Out of respect for the British Indian
Army, I will now stand up and repeat their words. Gandhiji said to them:
"Are you interested in Swaraj, you who belong to the Army, and who have
been brought as an escort all the way from Poona because they cannot
trust the people of Bengal, their first Presidency, for the safety of
the Duke of Connaught?"

They said, "Only the other day our Colonel on parade told us laughingly
something about you, Gandhiji, saying, 'Do you know that bunia,
Gandhiji, wants Swaraj for India' and he laughed, and asked us: 'Do you
also want Swaraj?' Of course he expected we would all say 'No, Sir', but
the regiment very quietly said 'Yes, Sir, we also want Swaraj for
India'. Then the Colonel, who was terribly shocked, asked them why they
wanted Swaraj, and they told him that when they were sent to fight in
Europe, even when they saw Belgian soldiers coming back after a defeat,
these soldiers would pull themselves up and proudly reply to anyone who
asked who they were, we are Belgians; we belong to the Army of Belgium'.
Sometimes the French came running back but if anybody asked them who
they were, they drew themselves up and replied with pride that they
belonged to the Army of France. It was the same with the British; but
these men said that, even when they had won and had saved the French
coast at a critical moment in October, 1914, when anybody asked them who
they were, they could not say with equal pride that they belonged to the
Army of India; they had to say 'We are British subjects. We belong to
the: Army of the British Sirkar'. Now these men said that they too
wanted to stand upright and be able to say, 'We belong to the Army of
India!'"

I tell you this is the fact, God's own truth, about the Indian Army. You
take a plebiscite of the Indian Army, God Almighty being present, and
the British spies, of course, being also present, but some of us also
being present, and you will find that we know more than anybody else on
that subject. India will defend herself today if you honestly want her
to do so.

The Government of India Despatch gees further than Sir John Simon's
Report and says that the Army should not be under the control of the
Government of England, but under the Government of India. There are
three members of the Government of India the pigment of whose skin is
the same as mine, and in some cases even darker. Two of them were my
stable companions in England as students, and the third also studied
here at that time. If these people can control the Army, why cannot Sir
Tej Bahadur Sapru as Prime Minister of India? Why cannot Sir Muhammad
Shafi or Mr. Jinnah be Prime Minister of India, and control the Indian
Army? Or why cannot even a humble man like myself or my big brother
become the Commander-in-Chief of India? I have no doubt exhausted your
patience, but I can assure you my speech has been, so far as I too am
concerned, both exhausting and exhaustive. I now take my seat and I hope
I shall not be called upon to speak again in the Plenary Conference
until you announce, Mr. Chairman, that India is as free as England.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- \*[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html)\* -- \*[FWP's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp)\* --

  
