+++
title = "12 Appendix"

+++
**Appendix**

Using the Babari Masjid-Ramajanmabhumi controversy as a pretext, Muslim
mobs went on a rampage all over Bangladesh. They attacked and burnt down
Hindu houses and business establishments in many places, murdered some
Hindus and inflicted injuries on many others. Hindu temples and
monasteries invited their special attention everywhere.

Starting on October 29, 1989, the mob fury reached its climax on
November 9 and 10 after the Shilanyas ceremony at Ayodhya. Many temples
were demolished or burnt down or damaged in various ways. Images of
deities were broken and thrown out. Temple priests were beaten up.

The Government of Bangladesh kept on looking the other way for almost
two weeks. Then it called off the operation. It also ordered repairs to
a dozen temples in order to maintain the pretence that what had been
done was not a command performance.

We reproduce below a report received by us.  
 

**INCIDENTS OF COMMUNAL REPRESSION IN BANGLADESH**

**Occurred on the Pretext of Babri-Masjid / Ram-Mandir**  
**Situation in India**

(Translated from original in Bengali published by the Hindu, Buddhist
and Christian Unity Council, 53, Tejturi Bazar, Dhaka, Bangladesh)

District: Narsingdi

1\. On November 11, 1989: The 400-year-old historic Kali-Temple at
Chinishpur was looted and set on fire.

2\. On the same day the Shiv-Temple of Brahmanadi was looted and set on
fire.

3\. On the same day the Kali-Temple of Bhelanagar was looted and set on
fire.

4\. In the market place of Bhelanagar near Narsingdi town a good number
of shops were looted, broken in, and some of the houses were set on fire
on the same day.

5\. In the town of Narsingdi, the Bhagbat Ashram was attacked on the
same day.

6\. The Kali-Temple of Narsingdi town was attacked with arms on the same
day (11-11-89).

7\. On the 8th of November 1989, the Milan Kali-Temple of Srirampur
Bazar in the Raipur Upajila was attacked and the image of the deity
broken up.

8\. On the same day the Raipur Bazar Temple was attacked and the image
of the deity broken up.

9\. On the same day at the village of Hashimpur under Raipur Upajila
many houses were attacked, looted, and set on fire.  
 

**District: Tangail**

10\. On November 10 and 11, 1989, in the town of Tangail several temples
were attacked and set on fire, and many shops were looted.

11\. In the village of Bajitpur hear Tangail many houses belonging to
the religious minorities were attacked, looted, and set on fire, and the
temples and the images of the deities were broken up.

12\. The temple in the village of Pakrail under Delduar Upajila was
attacked, and acts of breaking up and setting on fire were carried out.

13\. In several other villages under Delduar Union the temples were set
on fire.

14\. One temple in the village of Pakutia in Tangail was attacked, set
on fire and destroyed.

15\. House-to-house attacks were made on the traditional makers of
handloom sarees belonging to the members of religious minorities in the
village of Bajitpur, and their handlooms were destroyed.

16\. In the village of Akua in Tangail a temple was destroyed and its
foundations removed.

17\. A similar incident took place in the village of Kalihati.

18\. Mr. Dinesh Ch. Basak, deputy chief medical officer of the Meghna
Textile Mills, under Bangladesh Textile Industry Corporation, died on
November 10 in Tongi. The Mill authorities sent his body to Tangail for
cremation, and there a group of miscreants attacked the car carrying the
dead body. They also obstructed carrying out of the cremation.  
 

**District: Moulavi Bazar**

19\. On November 10, 1989, in the District of Moulavi Bazar, at
Srimangal Upajila several temples including Ramkrishna Mission,
Mangaleswari Kali-Bari, Durga-Bari, Jagannath Dev’s Akhra, and Kalachand
Mandir were attacked, broken in, and set on fire. At present no temple
exists at Srimangal.

20\. On November 10, 1989, the Ramkrishna Mission in the city of Moulavi
Bazar was attacked and burnt down.

21\. On the same day several Hindu houses and shops in the Srimangal
Upajila were attacked, structurally damaged and looted. This happened in
front of the officers responsible for law and order.  
 

**District: Naogaon**

22\. On November 10, 1989, several temples in the city of Naogaon were
attacked and structurally damaged.

23\. Fear and panic spread in the Hindu villages near the city of
Naogaon and many villagers went into hiding for fear of life and
prosecution.  
 

**District: Sirajganj**

24\. On November 11, 1989, at dusk, attackers as a large group emerged
from a mosque at Chanyaikona in Upajila Raigarh with agitating slogans,
and they attacked many nearby shops and residential places.  
 

**District: Rangpur**

25\. On November 10, 1989, Friday at 4 pm in the city of Rangpur a huge
group in a procession shouting slogans with excitement went on attacking
places of worships belonging to the minority communities.

26\. On the same day, the famous Rangpur Dharma Shava building at the
Station Road was attacked and severely damaged.

27\. The main Kali Temple in Rangpur known as Sri Sri Karunamoyee
Kali-Bari was attacked.

28\. Sri Sri Anandamoyee Ashram at College Road was attacked and
massively damaged.  
 

**District: Netrokona**

29\. The Kali-Mandir at Bara Bazar in the city of Netrokona was
attacked, looted, structurally damaged and set on fire.  
 

**District: Magura**

30\. In Magura Sadar Upajila, Bagia Union, at Bagia Thakur-Bari at the
performance of Puja in the Jagadhatri Temple on November 6, 1989, armed
attacks were made and, Ranjit Roy and Jagadish Roy were killed, and the
image of the deity was broken up and thrown away. Seriously wounded
Samar Roy had to be transferred to a Hospital for Disabled in Dhaka.  
 

**District: Barishal**

31\. On November 15 in the city of Barishal the temple of Chandan Nagar
Para was attacked, broken up and set on fire.

32\. On November 2, 1989 in the village of Dhamura in Uzirpur Upajila a
Kali Temple was attacked by an armed group under Haji Mobashar Uddin at
8 pm, the image of the deity was broken up and thrown away and the
temple was set on fire.

33\. On November 17, the Hindu Hostel under B.M. College was attacked
and students were indiscriminately beaten up and forced out of the
Hostel.

34\. On November 13, at the Sadar Betagi Upajila, temples were broken in
and shops belonging to Hindu community were looted. In Agoyeeljhara, the
Kali-Mandir was destroyed and the image of the deity disappeared.  
 

**District: Chittagong**

35\. On November 10, in the city of Chittagong, procession took place
shouting communal slogans.

36\. In Raujan Upajila at the Jagatpur Ashram attacks were made.

37\. At the historic Kaibalyadham Ashram in Chittagong attacks were
made.

38\. At the villages of Sadhanpur and Lankarchar in Patia Upajila some
25 temples were attacked and set on fire and the images of the deities
in these temples were broken. Many houses and shops belonging to the
members of minority communities were attacked and looted.

39\. In the villages of Uttar Satta and Fate Nagar in Raujan Upajila,
and in Nanupur, Baktapur, S. Rosong Giri and Ajadi Bazar under Fatikchar
Upajila several temples were attacked.

40\. On October 29 and 31, in the village of Unainagar Patia Upajila on
the Chittagong-Kox’s Bazar Highway, a bus was stopped and the Buddhist
and Hindu passengers were beaten up. In many Buddhist temples the
statues of Buddha were broken up.

41\. Under Rajaun Upajila in the village of Gujra on October 29 and
November 9, the Jalakumari House, Radha-Gobinda Ashram and other temples
were attacked and set on fire repeatedly.

42\. The Kali Temple of Bashkhali Upajila was attacked.

43\. On November 10, in the region called Patenga Kath-Ghar many Hindu
families abandoned their homes for fear of communal persecution. In the
city of Sandwip the images of the deities in the Jagannath-Bari,
Kali-Bari, and Char-Ani Shidheswari Kali-Bari were broken up and
scattered.  
 

**District: Kox’s Bazar**

44\. Many temples in the various Upajilas of Kox’s Bazar were
attacked.  
 

**District: Noakhali**

45\. In the city of Hatia several temples were attacked. In Bazra under
Begumganj Upajila the Hari-Mandir was destroyed.  
 

**District: Jamalpur**

46\. The temple at Basakpara in the city of Jamalpur was destroyed.  
 

**District: Chadpur**

47\. On November 10, at the Purana Bazar area in the city of Chadpur
many shops and businesses and many temples in the suburb of Chadpur were
attacked. The temple of Raja Lakshmi-Narayan in Habiganj has been
destroyed.  
 

**District: Nilfamari**

48\. In Saidpur area many temples have been attacked and severely
damaged.  
 

**District: Jhalakati**

49\. On November 9, in the city of Jhalakati almost all temples and the
houses and shops belonging to the members of the minority communities
were attacked.

50\. The living quarters and a temple belonging to the famous folk poet
(Charan Kabi) Mukunda Das was attacked and broken up.  
 

**District: Narayanganj**

51\. On November 10, the Ramakrishna Mission and several shops belonging
to the members of the minority communities were attacked.  
 

**District: Dhaka**

52\. Several temples in Dhamrai and Savar were attacked. On November 10,
at night, the Dhaka Ramakrishna Mission was attacked. In Demra an
ancient cremation structure has been destroyed. In Lal-bag police
station in Nagar-Bel-Tali Rishi-Para several shops and businesses were
attacked, looted and structurally damaged.  
 

**District: Laksmipur**

53\. On November 14, 1989, in the Union of Charbadam, Char Alexander,
Char Algi and Hajarihat under Ramgati Upajila of Laksmipur District,
some 36 houses, shops and businesses belonging to the minority
communities wore attacked, looted and set on fire, and women were raped
and rendered destitute. Besides these, some 11 temples were attacked and
destroyed by setting on fire including the temple of Rama-Thakur and
Ashram of Burakarta.  
 

**District: Sylhet**

54\. The historic Akhra of Mahaprabhu in Chhatak was attacked and the
statue of the Mahaprabhu was broken and damages were done to the
Akhra.  
 

**District: Khulna**

55\. On November 17, 1989 in the city of Khulna. Dharma-Shava Temple,
Koylaghat Kalibari, Barabazar Kalibari, and many other temples were
attacked and set on fire. At the corner of Barabazar and Picture Palace
all shops and businesses belonging to the Hindu community were looted.
In the localities inhabited by many Hindus including Tutpara,
Baniakhamar and Banargati, armed attacks were made and acts of looting,
breaking-in and setting-on-fire were carried out.  
 

**District: Bagerhat**

56\. On November 17, 1989, the entire temple complex at the Ramakrishna
Mission in Bagerhat including Hari-Mandir was attacked and structures
and the statue of Ramakrishna were broken up. Besides these attacks,
acts of destruction were carried out on Fatepur Kalibari, Bemta
Kali-Temple Giletala Hari and Kali temples, Karapara Kali Temple, and
Patarpara Kali-Temple, and a famous black-stone Siva-Linga was looted.  
 

**District: Maimensing**

57\. Hindu houses in the vicinity of the Zamidar-bari of Muktagachha
were attacked with arms and looted and acts of breaking-up were carried
out.  
 

**District: Feni**

58\. On November 9, in the Union of Radhanagar, and on November 14 in
the Union of Dhalia, under Chhagal-Naiya Upajila, temples were attacked
and acts of breaking-up were carried out.

59\. In the village of Char Sonapur under Sonagachhi Upajila, a temple
was attacked and acts of breaking-up carried out on November 12. In the
villages of Desherhat and Semerkhil several temple statutes were broken
up.

60\. The image of Goddess Kali in the village of Hirapur in Daganbhuia
Upajila was broken up.

61\. In the village of Daulatpur under Feni police station the image of
Goddess Kali was broken up.

62\. The image of Goddess Kali in the temple of Dakshineswari at
Shubhapur Bazar in Chhagal-Naiya, was broken up and the place was looted
and set on fire.  
 

**District: Bhola**

63\. On November 17, in the city of Bhola, several shops belonging to
the religious minorities were attacked and money was collected through
threats of violence.  
 

**District: Comilla**

64\. On November 11 at Muradpur, under Sadar Upajila, a temple was
destroyed. In the village of Ramaganj a similar incident happened.

65\. On November 11, at the festival of Rama-Thakur in the city of
Comilla, attacks were made using stones and bricks and several people
were injured.

66\. On November 12, a Kali-Temple in the village of Gahin-khali under
Barmbara Upajila was set on fire. Under Muradnagar Upajila at
Ramachandrapur Bazar, a temple was totally destroyed.  
 

**District: Brahmanbaria**

67\. In the villages of Shyamgram and Srigram under Nabinagar Upajila
several temples were attacked.  
 

**District: Madaripur**

68\. On November 11, the Hari-Temple of Puranabazar in the city of
Madaripur was broken up and a procession against the religious
minorities was taken out.

69\. The Dhamusa’s Ashram of Kalkini was broken up.  
 

**District: Munshiganj**

70\. The Kali-Temple at Baligaon was broken up.  
 

**District: Manikganj**

71\. In Saduria Upajila at Saduria itself and in the village of Buriara
temples were attacked and acts of breaking-up were committed.  
 

**District: Pabna**

72\. Temples and shops and businesses in the city of Pabna wore attacked
and looted.  
 

**District: Habiganj**

73\. Several temples in the District of Habiganj were attacked.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
