+++
title = "00 Preface"

+++
Preface

It was early in 1987 that *Hinduism Today*[1](#1) sent to me reprints of
four articles that had been published in its issue of November/
December, 1986.[2](#2) Based on extensive research, the articles told
the story of some Catholic missionaries establishing "ashrams" in
different parts of India and doing many other things in order to look
like Hindu sannyasins. They also pointed out some glaring contradictions
between Hindu spiritual perceptions on the one hand and the basic
Christian beliefs on the other. One of the articles quoted from Vatican
sources to show how Church proclamations disagreed with the professions
of Christian "sannyasins". Another asked the Christians as to how they
would look at a Muslim missionary appearing in their midst in the dress
of a Christian priest and adopting Christian rituals in a Church-like
mosque, but teaching the Quran instead of the Bible.[3](#3) I wrote to
*Hinduism Today* that Voice of India would like to publish the articles
in the form of a booklet for the education of Hindus, many of whom had
been hoodwinked by this form of mission strategy. The permission was
readily granted.

While these articles were getting printed, a friend in Madras informed
me that a dialogue on the subject of Christian ashrams had developed
through correspondence between Swami Devananda Saraswati and Father Bede
Griffiths. He sent to me an article and some letters to the editor which
had appeared in the *Indian Express* of Madras in March and April 1987,
and triggered the dialogue. The article, *An Apostle of Peace*, was the
summary of a talk which Dr. Robert Wayne Teasdale, a Catholic theologian
from Canada, had delivered in Madras on March 12, 1987. Fr. Bede
Griffiths had been presented by him as "Britain's appropriate gift to
India".[4](#4) The letters to the editor were reactions from readers of
the *Indian Express.*

I wrote to Swami Devananda and obtained from him copies of the letters
exchanged. He also supplied a letter from Dr. Teasdale that had appeared
in the Indian Express of June 1, 1987 and was a defence of Teasdale's
earlier presentation. I found the material illuminating and immediately
relevant to the subject I was planning to present for public discussion.
Swami Devananda had no objection to Voice of India publishing the
correspondence provided Fr. Bede Griffiths also gave his permission. He
wrote to Fr. Bede who agreed readily and with grace. Swami Devananda
then sent us copies of the last letters exchanged in October, 1987.

As I developed the Preface to the first edition and surveyed the mission
strategies in the history of Christianity in this country, I realized
that I was dealing with not only Catholic Ashrams but, in fact, with a
whole movement known as the Christian Ashram Movement in the Christian
Mission. Various Protestant missions were also practising the same
fraud. But it was too late to change the title of the book because its
main body had been already printed. I have retained the old title in
this edition also because it has become well-known under this name not
only in this country but also abroad, particularly in circles that
control the Christian missions in this country. But I have made the
subtitle more apt.

In this second edition, while all the old material has been retained, a
lot more has been added. The earlier Preface has been expanded and
rearranged into chapters with suitable headings. It now forms Section I
of the book. In Section II which carries the earlier articles from
*Hinduism Today*, two more articles from the same monthly have been
added as appendices. In the earlier edition, there was only one
dialogue, that between Swami Devananda and Fr. Bede. Now there are three
dialogues, two more having been put together by Swami Devananda and
brought to my attention. The dialogues form Section III of the present
edition. Another valuable addition is Section IV which comprises letters
exchanged between Fr. Bede and Shri Ram Swarup in early 1990. Three
articles written by Ram Swarup in different papers and referred to by
him in his letters to Fr. Bede have been reproduced as appendices to
this section. Section V of this edition is more or less the same as
Section III of the old one except for some changes in the numbering of
the appendices and addition of a new appendix. The information which
this section had carried earlier about Robert De Nobili has been
transferred to the appropriate chapter under Section I. The other new
features in the present edition are Bibliography and Index.

**II**

The first edition of *Catholic Ashrams* drew two sharp but opposite
reactions from Hindu and Christian quarters.

Hindu readers by and large reacted favourably and welcomed the Hindu
view of Christian missions. Some readers whom I had known for years and
who had thought that Christian missions had undergone a change of
character, were unpleasantly surprised. The only Hindu with whom I
failed to carry weight was a noted Gandhian who refused to concede that
there was anything wrong in what the Christian mission were doing. So
unlike Mahatma Gandhi, I thought. I have found that for the Gandhians,
by and large, Muslims and Christians are always in the right, and Hindus
always in the wrong. I wonder if anyone of them has ever cared to read
the Mahatma's works, and know that, no matter what his strategy of
serving Hinduism happened to be at any time, his commitment to Hinduism
was uncompromising.

On the other hand, my Christian friends whom I had known for many years,
expressed pain and resentment at what I had written, particularly about
Swami Abhishiktananda who had met me in 19

8 and known me rather well for years till he died in 1973. In our very
first meeting I had told him in so many words that Jesus came nowhere
near even the most minor Hindu saint, and that the missionary attempts
to foist him on Hindus with the help of Western wealth, was nothing
short of wickedness. He had never mentioned Jesus again, and our
discussions had centred on Hindu philosophy of which he knew quite a
bit, at least better than I did at that time. I had never suspected that
he himself was a missionary and a part of the apparatus. It was only
when I read his writings that I learnt the truth. I happened to be
Treasurer of the Abhishiktananda Society in Delhi at the time the first
edition of this book appeared. I told my Christian friends that we were
in the midst of a dialogue, and that personal relations should not
obscure ideological differences. But I have failed to impress them. Our
relations are now correct but cold. Having been a student of Christian
doctrine and history, I should have known that the post-Vatican II talk
about tolerance and dialogue was intended to be a one-way affair.

A friend (not Koenraad Elst) has sent to me the relevant pages from a
book written by a Christian lady and published from Leuven in Belgium.
She has been rather kind to me. "While there has been," she says, "much
sympathy and support from both the Hindu and Christian communities in
India, Catholic ashrams have also confronted opposition. In *Catholic
Ashrams*, Sita Ram Goel, a member of a fundamentalist movement within
Hinduism which seeks to return to the pure Vedic religion, severely
attacks and ridicules the phenomenon of Catholic ashramsâ€¦ As long as
Christians are not prepared to question their own fundamentals of faith,
more precisely the belief in the uniqueness of Christ, Hindus, according
to Goel, will remain suspicious of Catholic motives for starting
ashrams."[5](#5) I do not know what she means by "return of the pure
Vedic religion". I know of no such movement in India at present. At any
rate, I should like her to guide me to the movement to which I am
supposed to subscribe. But she has represented me quite correctly when
she says that I consider the Christian dogma of Jesus Christ being the
only saviour as a devilish doctrine which Hindus will never accept.
Readers of the two sentences I have quoted from her book can judge for
themselves as to who is a fundamentalist. In any case, I should like to
point out to this Christian enthusiast that fundamentalism is as foreign
to Hinduism as honesty is to Christian missions.

Coming to Jesus Christ, I had written an essay on what the
Christological research in the modem West has done to this mischievous
myth. The essay was intended to be a Preface to this edition of the
*Catholic Ashrams*. But owing to the wealth of detail which was needed
to tell the full story of the Jesus of History yielding place to the
Jesus of Fiction and finally leaving the fast dwindling number of
believing Christians with the Christ of Faith (blind belief), the essay
became too long and did not look suitable as a mere Preface. I have had
to make the essay a separate book, *Jesus Christ: An Artifice for
Aggression*, which is being published simultaneously with this edition
of the *Catholic Ashrams*. Readers may regard the two books as companion
volumes.

I end by mentioning a happy coincidence. When I sat down to write the
Preface to the first edition of *Catholic Ashrams*, I ran into a lot of
source material which enabled me eventually to write *History of
Hindu-Christian Encounters* (1989), which, in turn, brought Koenraad
Elst to me in December, 1989. This time, as I sat down to write the
Preface to this edition, I ran into another lot of material which has
enabled me to write *Jesus Christ: An Artifice for Aggression*. I look
forward to my next book on Christianity which I hope will enable me to
write yet another.

SITA RAM GOEL  
  
Vasantotsava  
New Delhi  
27 March 1994  

 

  

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This periodical is published by the Saiva Siddhanta Church
which has its international headquarters in Hawaii, USA. Starting as a
quarterly, *The New Saivite World*, on January 5, 1979 it became a
bimonthly in September 1985 and a monthly from July 1987 onwards.

[2](#2a) December 1986/January 1987 issue of the Indian Ocean Edition
published from Port Louis, Mauritius. Recently an Indian edition has
started coming out from New Delhi.

[3](#3a) Christian reaction to the main article in *Hinduism Today* came
out in the September 1987 issue of *Religion And Society*, published
from Bangalore. It is one of the six most important Christian journals
in India. The editor dismisses as "conservative" those Hindus who
suspect Christian ashrams as a new strategy for conversion. "While this
attack is nonsense or worse," he concludes, "it does show clearly how
Hindus of a kind, probably on the increase, view some Christian
ashrams." Obviously, the other kind of Hindus the editor has in mind are
either "progressives" who welcome everything hostile to Hinduism or
those simple people who know nothing about the missionary apparatus and
machinations and who, therefore, never ask any questions.

[4](#4a) Dr. Teasdale's *Towards A Christian Vedanta: The Encounter of
Hinduism and Christianity according to Bede Griffiths* has been
published from Bangalore in 1987.

[5](#5a) *Catherine Cornille, The Guru in Indian Catholicism: Ambiguity
or Opportunity of Inculturation*, Louvain, 1990, pp.192-93.  

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
