+++
title = "02 CHAPTER 2         Indigenisation: A Predatory Enterprise"

+++
CHAPTER 2  
Indigenisation: A Predatory Enterprise

The precedent cited most frequently by the literature of Indigenisation
is that which was set by the Greek Fathers when they used Greek cultural
forms for conveying Christianity to the pagans in the Roman Empire. Fr.
Bede recommends this precedent to the mission in India. "The Church," he
says, "has a perfect model of how it should proceed today in the way it
proceeded in the early centuries. Christianity came out of Palestine as
a Jewish sect. Yet within a few centuries this Jewish sect had taken all
the forms of thought and expression of the Greco-Roman world. A
Christian theology developed in Greek modes of thought, as did a
Christian liturgy in Greek language and in Greek modes of expression; a
calender also developed according to Greek and Roman traditions. Surely
all that is a wonderful example meant for our instruction of how the
Church can present herself to an alien world, receiving forms into
herself while retaining her own Catholic message."[1](#1)

Another expert on Indigenisation is more explicit about what the Church
had done in the Greco-Roman world. "As we reflect on the process,"
writes R.H.S. Boyd, "by which Christianity in the earlier centuries
became acclimatised in the Greek world, and by which it made use of
certain categories of Greek thought, we are struck by the double face of
its acceptance of 'secularised' Greek philosophy and philosophical
terminology, and its complete rejection of Greek religion and mythology.
Greek religion was gradually secularised. Philosophy was separated from
what had been a religio-philosophic unity. The religious content - which
had already been deeply influenced by secularisation right from the time
of Aristophanes and Euripides - developed into a cultural, literary,
artistic entity 'incapsulated' and isolated, except in the Orphic and
mystery traditions, from that living, existential faith which transforms
men's lives."[2](#2)

There is no evidence that Greek culture had become secularised before
some of its forms were taken over by the Church. The history of that
period stands thoroughly documented by renowned scholars. The record
leaves no doubt that it was the Church which forcibly secularised Greek
culture by closing pagan schools, destroying pagan temples, and
prohibiting pagan rites. In fact, the doings of the Church in the
Greco-Roman world is one of the darkest chapters in human history. Force
and fraud are the only themes in that chapter. But facts, it seems, have
no role to play when it comes to missionary make-believe.

In any case, Dr. Boyd has convinced himself that "there is at present a
rapid process of secularisation going on within Hinduism".[3](#3) He
finds that philosophical Hinduism in particular has become
"demythologized". "It would seem, therefore," he continues, "as though
Hinduism were already started on the path followed by Greek religion.
And so we are led to the question of whether or not it is legitimate for
Christian theologians to use and adapt categories of what still purports
to be *religious* Hinduism, and yet is very largely secularised. What,
indeed, is the real meaning of the word 'Hindu'? Does it describe the
fully mythological Hindu religion? Does it describe certain
philosophico-religious systems? Or is it simply a synonym for 'Indian
culture'? We shall find that some Indian Christian theologians, notably
Brahmabandhab, have believed that Christianity was not incompatible with
cultural, secularised Hinduism."[4](#4)

Legitimate or illegitimate, compatible or incompatible, the literature
of Indigenisation provides ample proof that several Hindu philosophies
are being actively considered by the mission strategists as conveyors of
Christianity. The Advaita of Shankaracharya has been the hottest
favourite so far. The Vishistadvaita of Ramanuja, the Bhakti of the
Alvar saints and Vaishnava Acharyas, the Integral Yoga of Sri Aurobindo
and the Vichara of Raman Maharshi are not far behind. For all we know,
Kashmir Saivism and Shakta Tantra may also become grist to the
missionary mill before long. Missionaries working among Harijans are
advocating that the Nirguna Bhakti of Kabir and Ravidas should also be
accepted as candidates for service to Christianity. The more
enterprising mission strategists recommend that different systems of
Hindu philosophy should he used for tackling different sections of Hindu
society. In the upshot, we are witnessing a keen contest among
Indigenisation theologians for acquiring doctorates in Hindu religion
and philosophy. Christian seminaries in India and abroad conduct crash
courses in the same field. Christian publishing houses are manufacturing
learned monographs, comparing Hindu philosophers with Christian
theologians - ancient, medieval, and modern. And the same operation is
being extended to other spheres of Hindu culture.

Fr. Bede is not bothered by considerations of legitimacy or
compatibility. What concerns him most is the need of the Church. "We are
faced," he says, "with a tradition of philosophy and mysticism, of art
and morality, of a richness and depth not excelled, and perhaps not
equalled, by the tradition of Greek culture which the Church encountered
in the Roman Empire. What then is our attitude towards it to be? It is
clear that we cannot simply reject it. The attempt to impose an alien
culture on the East has proved a failure. There are no doubt elements in
this tradition which we may have to reject, just as the Church had to
reject certain elements in the Greek tradition. But what is required of
us is something much more difficult. It is an effort of discrimination,
such as the Greek Fathers from Clement and Origen to Gregory of Nyssa
and Dionysius the Aeropagite undertook, not merely rejecting what is
wrong but assimilating all that is true in a vital act of creative
thought."[5](#5)

This is not the occasion for an evaluation of the philosophical calibre
of the Greek Fathers. Those who have taken the punishment of examining
their performance without wearing theological glasses, tell us that even
at their best they were no more than practitioners of petty casuistries.
What comes in for questioning in the present context is the Christian
claim that Jesus scored over Zeus simply because some theological
text-twisters tried to pass Judaic superstitions as Greek sublimities.
The history of Christianity in the Roman Empire is not an obscure
subject. The careers of many Christian emperors, popes, patriarchs,
bishops, saints, and monks are proof that the contest between paganism
and Christianity was decided not by philosophical cajoleries but by
brute physical force.

The mission in India had no scruples about using force whenever and
wherever it had the opportunity. It changed over to other methods only
when it could wield the whip no more. The latest method sounds soft but
is no less sinister. "Indigenisation," say Kaj Baago, "is
evangelisation. It is the planting of the gospel inside another culture,
another philosophy, another religion."[6](#6) What happens in the
process to that "another culture, another philosophy, another religion"
is not the mission's concern.

Fr. Bede give the clarion call. "In India," he says, "we need a
christian Vedanta and a christian Yoga, that is a system of theology
which makes use not only of the terms and concepts but of the whole
structure of thought of the Vedanta, as the Greek Fathers used Plato and
Aristotle; and a spirituality which will make use not merely of the
practices of Hatha Yoga, by which most people understand Yoga, but of
the great systems of Karma, Bhakti and Jnan Yoga, the way of works or
action, of love or devotion, and of knowledge or wisdom, through which
the spiritual genius of India has been revealed through the
centuries."[7](#7) Mark the words, "make use". The entire approach is
instrumental and cynical. Yet Fr. Bede calls it a "vital act of creative
thought". The whole business could have been dismissed with the contempt
it deserves or laughed out as ludicrous but for the massive finance and
the giant apparatus which the Christian mission in India has at its
disposal.

As one surveys the operation mounted by the mission under the label of
Indigenisation, one is driven to an inescapable conclusion about the
character of Christianity: Christianity has been and remains a sterile
shibboleth devoid of a living spirituality and incapable of creating its
own culture. This spiritual poverty had forced Christianity into a
predatory career from the start. It survived and survives to-day by
plundering the cultures of living and prosperous spiritual traditions.

Christianity's predatory nature is loathsome to pagans who have
inherited and are proud of their own culture. Yet it is quite in keeping
with Jehovah's promise in the Bible. "Just as the Lord your God promised
to your ancestors, Abraham, Issac and Joseph," proclaims Jehovah, "he
will give you a land with large and prosperous cities which you did not
build. The houses will be full of good things which you did not put in
them, and there will be wells you did not dig, and vineyards and olive
orchards you did not plant."[8](#8)

The Bible preserves a graphic and gory record of how the descendants of
Abraham and Issac and Joseph helped Jehovah in fulfilling this promise.
They appropriated the lands and properties of the pagans with a clean
conscience. They were convinced that they were only taking possession of
what already belonged to them by the terms of a divine pledge.

Christianity claims that Jehovah switched his patronage to the Church
militant when the latter-day progeny of his earlier prophets became
disobedient and killed his only son. It was now the turn of the Church
to redeem the divine pledge. The history of the Church in many lands and
over many centuries shows that it did far better than the preceding
chosen people. It deprived the pagans not only of their physical
possessions but also of their cultural creations. The condottieri who
carried out the operation in the field of culture are known as the Greek
Fathers.

It should not be a matter of surprise, therefore, that the mission has
started singing hymns of praise to Hindu culture. That is the mission
casting covetous glances before mounting a marauding expedition. What
causes concern is the future of Hindu culture once it falls into the
hands of the Church. The fate of Greek culture after it was taken over
by the Church is a grim reminder.

Hindu culture grew out of Hindu religion over many millennia. The once
cannot be separated from the other without doing irreparable damage to
both. The Christian mission is bent upon destroying Hindu religion.
Hindu culture will not survive for long if the mission succeeds. The
plundered Hindu plumage which Christianity will flaunt for a time is
bound to fade before long, just as the Greek and Roman cultures faded.

Let there be no mistake that the Christian mission is not only a
destroyer of living religions but also of living cultures. It promises
no good to a people, least of all to the Hindus.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) *Bede Griffiths*, op. cit., p. 182

[2](#2a) R.H.S. Boyd, *An Introduction to Indian Christian Theology*,
Madras, 1969, p. 4

[3](#3a) Ibid., p. 5

[4](#4a) Ibid., p. 6

[5](#5a) Bede Griffiths, *op. cit.*, p. 72

[6](#6a) Kaj Baago, *Pioneers of Indigenous Christianity*, Madras, 1969,
p. 85.

[7](#7a) Bede Griffiths, *op. cit.*, p. 24.

[8](#8a) Deuteronomy, 6. 10-11 (*Good News Bible*, Bangalore reprint, p.
177).

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
