+++
title = "07 CHAPTER 7 An Imperialist Hangover"

+++
CHAPTER 7  
An Imperialist Hangover

The Christian mission equates the expansion of Christianity in different
parts of the world with the march of the Holy Spirit. The history of
Christianity helps us in understanding what the Holy Spirit really
stands for-the march of European military machines, the forcible
occupation of other people's motherlands, the massacre of heathens or
their conversion at the point of the sword, the exercise of political
pressures by imperialist establishments, the use of money and manpower
and the mass media on a large scale, and the perfection of a scholarship
which excels in suppressio veri suggestio falsi (suppressing truth and
spreading falsehood). Christianity was a state enterprise for all
European countries, some of which became imperialist powers from the
sixteenth century onwards. The record of Christianity over the last
nearly two thousand years provides no evidence that it ever prevailed
over paganism by the moral or ethical or spiritual superiority of its
teachings.

Till less than two hundred years ago, the Christian mission used to
proclaim with considerable pride how many heathens it had killed or
forced into the fold, how many orphans it had collected and baptised,
how many pagan temples it had demolished, how many pagan idols it had
smashed, how many schools and seminaries of the infidels it had closed
down, and so on. The tales of the mission's brutalities were relished by
the beneficiaries of the booty it brought home. Jesus was thanked in
thousands of Churches for the bounties he had bestowed upon his beloved
people. Europe, America, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand and
many islands in the Pacific were christianised not by pious missionaries
mouthing catechisms but by armed mercenaries employed by the mission or
its patron states. In any case, no missionary ever succeeded in making
mass conversions in any place unless he was backed by the military or
political power of this or the European imperialism.

The mission had to change its methods when it came to some countries of
Asia and Africa which were not so defenceless or which had vibrant
cultures of their own. India which had been invaded successively by the
Portuguese, the Dutch and the French and conquered finally by the
British, was such a country. The British realized very soon that their
empire would be imperilled if the mission was let loose with all its
fury; so they kept it on a leash and allowed it to leap forward only in
tribal areas. The mission, however, continued to use violent and
vituperative language against everything held sacred by the Hindus, till
it received a strong rebuff from resurgent Hinduism. Meanwhile, the
struggle for freedom was gathering force. The two currents combined and
reached their climax in Mahatma Gandhi. The mission was thwarted for the
time being. It had to rethink, which it started doing from the Tambaram
conference onwards.

India has become independent. But the mission is yet to admit that it
has no role to play in India, and retire. It is still suffering from an
imperialist hangover. It had once confused the superiority of Western
arms with the superiority of the Christian creed. The confusion
continues and will not be corrected so long as the mission wields the
organisational weapon it had forged when India was in bondage.

We have traced elsewhere the history of Hindu-Christian encounters in
the past.[1](#1) It shows that Christianity was trounced whenever it
entered into a debate with Hinduism. Christianity has survived in India
not on account of any strength or merit in its arguments but because its
machine continues to grind even when it loses the debate. Hindus have
still to understand that game and defeat it on its own grounds.[2](#2)  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) History of Hindu-Christian Encounters by Sita Ram Goel, Voice
of India, New Delhi, 1989.

[2](#2a) The mission apparatus was partially discussed recently by Sri
Ram Swarup in two review articles in The Times of India. We are
reproducing them in this book, with some additions, as Appendices 2 and
3. They are a great help in understanding the working of the missionary
machine, in which Catholic ashrams are only a cog. Some figures on
mission finance have been given in Appendix 4.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
