+++
title = "09 CHAPTER 9         The J.R. Ewing Syndrome"

+++
CHAPTER 9  
The J.R. Ewing Syndrome

Television and movies struggle mightily to be dramatic, humorous,
tragic, colorful, sexy and outrageous. Video is modern man's moving
canvas; like a painting, it can mimic but never match the real thing -
life.

But perhaps it can help us interpret experience, find useful analogies,
study the human condition. In fact, it did just that last night. As we
pondered the front page story, seeking ways to explain the Hindu's
profound concerns to the global Catholic community, our analogy appeared
on the screen. It was J.R. Ewing. That's right, pardner, Dallas'
powerful, scheming oil baron came to our rescue, This deserves a little
explanation.

In this issue we tackled the confrontation of Catholic doctrine and
Hindu dharma. Avoiding a temptation to replay history's horrors (high
ratings, but not family viewing), the staff focused a journalistic lens
on the simple, contemporary issue of Catholic adoption of Hindu
spiritual forms and disciplines. Research deepened and two things became
clear. First Catholics are struggling with the issue on their side, too.
Almost every Catholic university has a special faculty member or even
full department dedicated to Asian Studies; they teach Hinduism and
Buddhism to students and theologians. They told us they love India and
are genuinely drawn toward Eastern spirituality, finding its disciplines
more profound, more effective.

Second, the Church still clings to the belief that the salvation of
every soul on earth depends on Christ and on baptism in its cathedrals
and by its priests. A few good Christians might get through, but God
help Buddhists, Hindus, Shintoists, Muslims and free thinkers. This
belief is so powerful, so compelling, so tenaciously held that it, all
alone, destroys every effort of the Catholics to tolerate (I mean accept
and leave alone, not merely endure) another culture's spiritual
heritage. It is the motive upon which all priests, nuns and bishops act;
it is the stone upon which all efforts at reconciliation are built. This
"there is one way" consciousness is not unique to Catholics. Fundamental
Christians hold it even more dearly, so do Muslims, There are, at last
count, 30,000 Christian and Islamic denominations each preaching a
slightly different and singularly salvific path. This belief is the
"J.R. Ewing Syndrome".

Think about it J.R. has one goal in life - to own the entire Ewing Oil
Company and dominate the industry. Everything he does and says serves
that desire. When he shakes a banker's hand, 60 million viewers know his
intent - to own Ewing Oil. When he asks his brother Bobby to cooperate
in some venture, he's after Bobby's shares. When he confesses to wifely
Sue Ellen that, yes, he used to be a dirty dealer and a poor sport but
is now a good ol'boy whom she should love and trust, he's up to
something. You can be sure.

Yet time and again family, friends, bankers and a hopeful viewer or two
get suckered by that winning smile and golden tongue. A moment's
kindness and they embrace him, say they knew he would come around one
day. Then, zap, JR. nails them when their back is turned. It's not his
fault. It's illness. JR. is driven by the need to own it all. He will do
anything and say anything (yes, even be nice) if it will get him Ewing
Oil.

The Catholic Church suffers from a particularly virulent religious
strain of the JR. Ewing Syndrome. It wants to own the company - which in
this case is religion. Deep down, it hopes for a day when all men in all
cultures will endorse its truths, worship at its altars, accept its
Savior and enter its heaven. Catholics truly believe that they have a
God-given duty to accomplish this. Their faith is unique, it is
inherently better. For the good of humanity they do this, not for
themselves; no doubt J.R. is equally certain that the company will be
better off with him at the helm. Nevermind that Bobby will have to go,
that Pam and Ray will suffer personal losses, that even his mother. Miss
Ellie, will lose her rightful legacy.

I know what you're thinking. "These editors are living in the past.
Sure, those things used to be so. But this is the 21st century. All men
want to be brothers. It's different today, right?" Wrong. In Madras
about three years back, local sisters were caught in a little ruse. It
seems they took busloads of Hindu children to a popular snake farm every
weekend. Oddly, the bus always broke down. The nuns would fuss and fail
to get it started, and ask the kids to pray, "First, let's pray to
Ganesha, the Hindu elephant God." No results. Poor children! They might
miss the snakes. "Well, let's all kneel and pray to Jesus for help." Lo,
the bus started! Cheers, and a quiet voice assuring them, "You see,
Jesus is more powerful. He loves you all."

Last week on our island a devout banquet manager invited two neighbors
into his shrine room. One of them, a missionary immediately bellowed.
"You're going to hell. I see satan in your eyes." Turning all deity
pictures to the wall, he urged the man to accept Jesus Christ and
abandon his Hindu heresies. Also last week a correspondent sent us
photographs from a seminary in South India. They showed a giant statue
of Christ, his two feet standing upon and completely covering the Indian
sub-continent as sari-and dothi-clad devotees worshipped him. Wrote our
researcher, "This is the dream of present-day Christians, the whole of
India must be Christianised."

No one wants a true brotherhood of believers more than the Hindu, but
such things must cease. Let Catholics tend their own flock as they wish.
All the Hindu asks is to be left alone to follow his dharma, to sing his
holy hymns, to raise his children as he deems fit, to seek his God in
the way his scriptures and saints have revealed. The Hindu's spiritual
heritage is priceless to him. He loves it as dearly as the Christian
love his, and he intends to protect and preserve it. He has never
imposed himself in Rome; and he doesn't want Rome to impose itself in
Madras.

Listen to a Tamil Catholic priest recently describing his Indian
students, "Some of them may never become good Catholics, but after my
classes they will never be good Hindus." Sounds like J.R.? If a real
family of man is ever to emerge on this earth (barring the terrible
possibility that some Muslim, Christian or Hindu denomination succeeds
in eradicating all other spiritual expressions), one in which all men
are free to believe or doubt as they choose, then mankind must eradicate
the J.R. Ewing Syndrome from religion. Anyone else who clings to the "my
way is the only way" doctrine, must relinquish it forever. To use our
analogy, as long as J.R. wants the whole company, his family and friends
can never really trust him, never believe the things he says. Such
ingenuous trust could be their destruction.

Christians have inherited a mischievous, peccant past. But the future
could be different. After all, actor Larry Hagman (J.R.) meditates every
morning and observes silence on Fridays! Let us see if Christian charity
can be done purely and without a motive to convert. Let us see if the
sisters can feed and clothe the poor Hindu, knowing he will be a
stronger, healthier Hindu (not silently wishing he will stop wearing a
tilak and give up beliefs in karma and reincarnation). Let us watch
their schools educate our children, knowing their intellectual powers
will strengthen and enrich the Sanatana Dharma. Let us welcome them to
give selflessly, to desist from all expansionism, all proselytizing
outside their church, knowing we will never sell them the family store.
That is true charity. Anything less is business.

Will J.R. see the error of his ways and change? Will he devise a plot to
usurp Ewing Oil Company? Tune in next week...  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
