+++
title = "26 Proselytisation as it is Practised"

+++
APPENDIX V  
Proselytisation as it is Practised[1](#1)

I did not realise I was stirring a hornet's nest in reviewing the
*Mission Handbook* (March 13, 14). It invoked many rejoinders, most of
them harsh. It helps inter-faith dialogue which the church has recently
invited.

Many points have been made but, quite understandably I can only deal
with a few more salient ones, and that too briefly. Mr Kuruvilla Chandy
presents a justification for Christian proselytizing which is novel in
its being so openly avowed. He compares it with proselytizing in
politics where "fraud is proverbial", and with "aggressive advertising"
of the commercial world. It is interesting that he finds nothing odious
in the comparison. He argues that "proselytizing is normal to fife."

**One-Way Traffic**

But this 'normal-to-life' theory of proselytizing is not supported by
Christian theory or practice. The Church always regarded proselytizing
as a one-way traffic. One could join it freely but one risked
excommunication and later on even death in leaving it.

Perhaps a creed is best known by what it does when it holds political
sway. As soon as Christianity came into power, heathen temples were
defaced and closed and their revenues transferred to the Church. "We
command that all their (heathens') fanes, temples, shrines, if even now
any remain entire shall be destroyed by the command of the magistrates"
was the order of the day (Theodosius Code, 380 A.D.).

The same methods were employed when Christianity moved to the north of
Europe. In Great Britain and Germany, priests and monks moved about
destroying the groves and shrines of the people. The last regions to
lose their religions in Europe were Prussia and the Baltic states. In
the beginning of the thirteenth century, they were conquered and
forcibly converted with the help of two religious-military Orders of
Litvonian and Teutonic Knights.

During Medieval times, the Church taught that the Pope was "almost God
on earth"; therefore the earth's sovereignty also belonged to him. In
the capacity of a overlord, he gave away the newly-discovered Americas
to the Spanish king and the Eastern part of the world to King Alfonso of
Portugal, "the right total and absolute, to invade, conquer and
subjugate all the countries which are under the enemies of Christ,
Saracene and pagan."

Space does not permit us to narrate what Christianity did in these
parts. Juan de Zumarrage, first Bishop of Mexico, writing in 1531,
claimed that he personally destroyed over 500 temples and 20,000 idols
of the heathens. From another part of the globe, St. Xavier was writing
from Cochin to the King of Portugal: "To your servants you must declare
as plainly as possible … that the only way of escaping your wrath is to
make as many Christians as possible in the countries over which you
rule."

Thus the Christian history is itself the best contradiction of Mr
Chandy's theory that proselytizing is "normal to life" and that it "is a
freedom". Moreover, there is a more comprehensive approach beyond this
one. Considered from a deeper angle, Christian proselytizing is a
bigoted idea, a denial of God and his working in others. Mahatma Gandhi
who studied Christian proselytizing closely says that it is the
"deadliest poison that ever sapped the foundation of truth," that it is
"arrogant", that it embodies a double falsehood: he sees "no spiritual
hunger" in nominal converts and "no spiritual merit" in professional
missionaries. He says that a missionary is "like any vendor of goods",
and that if he had "power to legislate", he "should certainly stop all
proselytizing."

"Social work" has been mentioned by several Christian writers as a
clincher. Mr Ishtiyaque Danish however also gave us an inside view of it
and showed us how it works in Indonesia. In India it works no
differently and the Neogy Report is full of similar facts but the report
was neglected and things have continued in the same old happy fashion.

The advantage of "social work" as a great support to proselytizing has
been long noticed by missionaries themselves. India and Its Missions, an
official Catholic publication, issued by its American Capuchin Mission
Monks (1923), discusses the *"Spiritual Advantages of Famine and
Cholera"* under that very heading! It quotes the report of the
Archdiocese of Pondicherry to his superiors in Europe: "The famine has
wrought miracles. The catechumenates are filling, baptismal water flows
in streams, and starving little tots fly in masses to heaven."

About Christian schools, the same source says that "conversion may often
be traced to the schools."  
Regarding their medical ministry, it says that a "hospital is a
readymade congregation; there is no need to go into the highways and
hedges and compel them 'to come in'. They send each other."

Certain subterfuges are described with perfect satisfaction. For
example, in an operation case, prayers are offered for the patient in
the presence of his relatives, the pagan servants or pagan pupil nurses
"in language they understand". When the cure is effected, it appears
"marvelous" to them and they "very naturally attribute the one to the
other".

Who pays for these services? It is Indians themselves though the money
is spent by the missionaries. For example, take education. In 1859, the
British government decided to help them by the backdoor. It offered
grant-in-aid to those "private" agencies who did work in the educational
field. The Missions flocked. In his *Colonialism And Christian
Missions*, Bishop Stephen Neil tells us that a "century of experience
suggests that the missions were right in their decision… In thousands of
villages where there was a Christian nucleus, the village teacher served
also as a catechist, carrying out many of the duties which in older
churches rest on ordinary ministry. About a third of the cost of
educational work was borne by the private agencies, two thirds by the
Government."

**Old Order**

He further adds that "even in independent India… the old order has
continued in being without radical modification." It seems the Indians
are paying not only for missionary "social service", but also for their
apparatus and for their own conversion by them.

Some writers have spoken of the "sacrifice" of the missionaries, their
love of Jesus and the natives in choosing their career. This
image-building may be good for enhancing the acceptability of
missionaries but it is seldom supported by facts. For most people,
missions have offered a lucrative career and they have joined it in
order to improve their social and financial status. Bishop Stephen Neil
tells us that the "missionaries of the last century were overdressed and
by the standard of the time lived in luxury, their stipend being £ 200 a
year." It will help clarity if we remember in contrast that Benjamin
Jowett, the great classical scholar, was appointed as Regius professor
of Greek language at Oxford in 1855-56 at £ 54 a year.

The suggestion that Europe and America are the paymasters has been
resented. One local missionary protested that he and his wife are
"supported by Christians from many parts of India". There is no
intention of hurting anybody's feelings and what he says may be true.
But it is more likely that people like him are supported by local
communities and Bishops who themselves are supported by foreign sources.

There is much financial interlocking at the top and who gives and who
receives and why can remain a mystery even after much investigation as
recent events prove. However, we have the testimony of Rev. James
Cogswell, head of the American National Council of Churches, that they
have "consciously" decided to send more cash and fewer people. "American
missionaries overseas cost a lot of, money," he explains, and it is "far
better to send support to workers in indigenous churches."

**New Policy**

The new policy is dictated by new political climate and new economic
factors. The local recruit costs less and his compulsion to prove his
missionary zeal is greater. Politically he causes less complications
and, rightly trained, he is no less earnest in his cause himself. A few
months ago, Rev. Abel Govender, an "Indian" Christian Minister in South
Africa, wrote to its president, P.W. Botha, that the country would lose
God's divine protection if Hinduism were allowed to flourish. "K. P.
Yohannan, a native of India", as he is introduced by the editors of
American *Gospel for Asia*, says the "enemy (Satan) has used Hinduism to
enslave India in a system that dooms her people to misery in this world,
as well as to an eternity in hell." Not many white missionaries could
outdo their brown counterparts.

Several rejoinders invoked Mother Teresa's name to show that I did not
even "spare her" and, therefore, what I said deserved no credibility.
One could admire Mother Teresa and her work without admiring the
ecclesiastical framework to which she belongs. British Imperialism had
many conscientious officers but it did not take away from the fact that
they served an iniquitous system.

Mother Teresa is a true daughter of the Church in having her mind and
heart closed to the religions of the countries of her labour, even
adoption. Sometime back, some European Vedantists learning that she was
at the Vatican went there to pay their respects. She rebuked them for
"betraying Christ".

Let me clarify the point a little further by bringing in Sister
Nivedita. She is a lady Hindus are proud of. She helped India by helping
it to rediscover itself. No higher service could be rendered to a nation
in the grip of self-forgetfulness. She stood for national justice for
India and she helped us by giving us national pride. This explains why
Sister Nivedita is Hindu India's hero. This also explains why Western
nations shower praise and money on Mother Teresa while Sister Nivedita
remained unsung in the West and there were no contributions from that
quarter even for her purely humanitarian work, like education and child
care and relief work which she did with no less dedication, sympathy and
loving care.

I had said that the *missionary* passage in Mark (earliest Gospel), 'Go
and preach the Gospel to all creatures', is an interpolation. They
questioned this statement. Well, my best defence is the Bible (RSV)
itself which does not even give these verses in the running text but
reproduces them only in a footnote. Similarly, the *Good News Bible*,
while reproducing the verses, explains in a foot-note that "some
manuscripts and ancient translations do not have this ending in Gospel,"
a euphemism for saying that the passage is a later-stage interpolation.

Anna Sujata Mathai expresses a wish that I too may "like St. Paul, who
also hated Christians, one day be forced to face.... dazzling truth of
Christ's compassionate love." A similar wish was conveyed in other
letters which I received from some readers.

However, while thanking Anna Mathai, I must add that anybody who has a
social conscience will make no such wish even for an enemy. Conversion
made Paul a greater persecutor, on a larger scale, and a menace for
centuries to come for other religions of the world.

Mr T.C. Joseph advises me to avoid an "endless number of books available
with an anti-Christian view", but "read up books of a different kind
which too abound." I assure him that I read no "anti-Christian" books
and I am hardly aware of them. On the other hand, I read the Bibles,
early Christian Fathers, Christian Catechisms, Christian Encyclopaedias,
Christian directories, orthodox accounts of Christian missionary
activities, histories of Protestantism and the Catholic Church held in
high esteem by them. I find this literature consistently anti-pagan and
I do not know what to think of a religion which teaches in and through
its scriptures and its other literature written by its most devout,
scholarly and pious sections such systematic hatred of all other
religions and believes in a divine injunction to supplant them.

I must also add that Mr Joseph's division of books on Christianity into
anti and pro lacks intellectual orientation. Besides these two, there is
also a third category: the critical and historical studies of the Bible
and Christianity. These are the most durable and solid and they have
proved the most damaging to Christianity. It is works of top-notch
scholars and theologians like Strauss, Renan, Buchner, Abbe Loisy, works
of highest credibility which have proved most "anti-christian".

**Scientists' Works**

Similarly, it is the works of scientists like Copernicus, Galileo,
Linnaeus, Buffon, Laplace, Lyell, Darwin and others which undermined the
structure of Christian thought. Astronomy, geology, natural history
added immense time and space to Europe's hitherto limited conception of
the universe; it proved most subversive of Christianity.

The work of -subversion was complete with the West's discovery of the
East. Science brought into discredit virgin birth, resurrection, and
miracles; Eastern spirituality did the same to sole sonship, single
revelation, special Covenants, proxy atonement, exclusive salvation,
chosen fraternity, single life, authorised saviours and mediators, etc,
In the religions of the East, the deeper Western thinker and seeker
found inferiority, transcendence and universality unknown to him before;
he found in them not commandments of some arbitrary deity but truths of
his own innermost being; similarly he found in them a principle of
tolerance, coexistence, benevolence and reverence which was new to him.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Article written by Ram Swarup in reply to a debate in *The
Times of India* following his review-article 'Christianity Mainly for
Export', and published in two installments in *The Times of India* on
May 23-24, 1988.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
