+++
title = "21 THE WAY OF ALL FEASTS"

+++
Il serait bien difficile de faire cesser les anciennes coutumes; il faut laisser au peuple quelque sorte de divertissements qui contribuent beaucoup à leur faire oublier leurs peines. 

-LIEUTENANT DU ROI EN LANGUEDOC 

Mais quelqu'un troubla la fête... 

LA FONTAINE 

WE HAVE SURVEYED the agencies of change at work. Now it is time to look at some direct effects of their conjunction. Since we have just left the realm of religion, as good a place as any to start is with a related one-that of feasts. 

It is not every day that there's a feast, says the French proverb; but at one time, almost every other day was a feast-fête, assemblée, ballade, frairie, vogue, apport, rapport, préveil, or riotée-in some place or for some trade. The diversity of land, crops, weather, and interests made for vast variety, in details and in dates. Thus in Savoy, where every valley lived under different conditions, rituals and celebrations similar in kind differed in nature from village to village. On the other hand, we have seen that saints venerated in many communities might perform differing functions. Saint George, honored widely through the country, had special significance in Lorraine, where the Moselle River was subject to winter freezes. His processions celebrated the reopening of river traffic. Everywhere, however, feasts carried religious overtones: ducasse in the north (from dédicace), pardon in Brittany (from the indulgences attached to a pilgrimage), bénéiçon or bénichon in the Jura and Vosges (from benediction); roumavage, romerage, or roumeyrage (from roumieu, the pilgrim who went to Rome); voto, or boto, for the votive saints' feasts of the southwest, kermesse from the Flemish kerk-misse. 

Even the profane terms relate to saints' festivals, for no rejoicing, jubilee, or merrymaking would have arisen without supernatural sanction. And everywhere great feasts shared a magic character: the ashes of the Christmas log or of the midsummer pyre were prophylactic, destroyed vermin,\* ensured fertility; the reed or fern blessed on Palm Sunday preserved from fire or lightning. Carnival, especially, marked the return of active life after the 

\* In fact they do. In wine country Saint John's feast was used as a signal to destroy all combustible waste, refuge of diverse parasites. Those vine-stock bundles that had not been removed from the vineyards by June went into Saint John's bonfire (Enquête sur ... l'agriculture, Marne). 

[[378]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

enforced pause of winter, the resumption of productive labor, the beginning of a new year in the calendar of the fields.\* The ceremonies performed on such occasions were considered crucial to the welfare of the community and its members. In Mazières-en-Gâtine at about mid-century feasting and dancing during Carnival went on for three days, a teacher recalled, but they were not devoid of purpose: "One danced chiefly in the bakehouses, in front of the oven door, in order to have hemp." In Sologne, one danced on the compost heap, so that the chickens should prosper.1 In the Norman bocage a fire feast celebrated with torches endured to the last quarter of the century, designed to rid the fields of moles and field mice. In lower Berry, around Issoudun, firebrands (brandons) were flourished through the fields on the first Sunday of Lent to aid the winter wheat and save the crops from blight and weeds. The original firebrands had been made of corn cockles, thistles, and mullein, the noxious plants they were meant to eliminate. Midsummer fires (among other things) brought marriage and fertility. Almost everywhere the lass who jumped over the embers expected to find a husband before the year was out; and the men and women who did so sought fertility for themselves or their property.2 

Naturally enough, especially when fertility was concerned, the festivities. were highly convivial. There was more and better food than usual. And there was also generally a fair, a tradition that continued in many places even during the Revolutionary period when patron saints' feasts and pilgrimages were banned.3 Benoît Malon remembered how the September feast at Prétieux in Forez meant mutton, pie, and wine, sous for the children to buy little sugared dolls, the intoxicating music of two bugles and a drum, lads all dressed up parading past on horses with beribboned girls riding pillion, a horse race with rich prizes, and dancing into the night.\* 

There were regions, like Rouergue and Quercy, where feasts were exceedingly rare. "The monotony of a life of work and deprivation is troubled only once a year at the patron saint's feast... lasting two days," reported a Lot teacher in 1881. "The young, deprived of amusements during the whole year ... dance even more than they eat." The same was true of Pierre Besson's village in Cantal. People had neither the time nor the means for such affairs. The patron saint's feast was about the only real festivity of the year, with lots of food and wine, though "for lack of habit, one got tippled at once." Further to the south a different attitude made the censorious feel there was no day 

\*Hence also a time for purification rites. In Sologne, Bernard Edeine tells us, the women struck the household beds with spindles enjoining the vermin (and evil) within to "go to the neighbor's house!" They also swept the house out backwards, then carried the muck to the neighbor's doorstep. (La Sologne, 2: 803, 805.) As ever, evil cannot just be made to vanish; it must be expelled at another's expense. But the rite described cannot have been carried out without some opposition. In a general sense, it is well to remember the words of Claude Durand: "As a matter of fact, this death of Carnival, of Lent, or of Winter, constitutes a double sacrificial negation. Most of the time it is a question of the 'death of Death,' of the fertilizing power of death, of the power of life that rests in death." (Les Structures anthropologiques de l'imaginaire, Paris, n.d. [1965?], p. 332.) 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[379]]

without procession or farandole. "One has to pray or one has to shout, one has to sing or one has to dance." In little towns along the Rhône the fire companies drilled on Sundays and marched past to the sound of martial music, "creating new festivals for the inhabitants."5 

Above all, the annual feast, with its parade, horses, costumes, band or bands, ringing church bells, cannon shots, gunfire, and exploding crackers and fireworks, was the high point of the small town's year-"focus of personal emulation and point of honor of civic pride" for rich and poor, as in the Carnival of Rio today. Villagers streamed in from roundabout to see the procession, splendid as an army with banners, to join in the rich mix of religion and profanity, to drink, eat, and dance and combine business with pleasure. Not even the suspension of Church festivals during the Revolution could stop this. In Osséja and in a great many other places, the dances in the village square continued to be held on Saint Peter's day without the customary mass beforehand: the magic, social, and economic functions embodied in the festival were too great to drop. As Paul-Louis Courier wrote in 1822, in his Petition for Villagers Who Are Prevented from Dancing, feasts were not just for fun: "Many a cow is sold that hadn't been sold at the fair," and many a marriage made.' 

But Courier was pleading for a festival that was being stifled. His Petition was a solitary shot fired to defend the inarticulate. The heavy artillery was ranged on the other side: festivals (as we have seen in the previous chapter) were sources of disorder, of moral laxity, indulging superstition and heathenish debauchery; they disrupted production, encouraging people to waste their time drinking and dancing when they should be at work. Viewed from every angle of the dominant urban culture, these affairs were better done away with. This took some doing; but it succeeded in the end. The local bourgeoisie drew back from having anything to do with such anomalous vulgar pastimes, thus curtailing their splendor and depriving them of the unquestioned status that they once enjoyed. Politically troubled times led to the real or imaginary linking of traditional rejoicing and political protest or subversive activity. Government and police officials, foreign to the localities they administered, found noisy popular practices particularly threatening, in part because they were unfamiliar, in part because they could always degenerate into less innocuous demonstrations. In any case, the margin between the two was narrow and uncertain. As Maurice Agulhon points out, manifestations of almost every kind incorporated a traditional ritual (rough music or the farandole), and this could easily be made to serve for, or turn into, a political demonstration. The forces of order also frowned on the discharging of sundry firearms to celebrate christenings, wedding parties, processions, and festivals. This indiscriminate use of arms, which the administration preferred to reserve to itself, had to be repressed by fines and prison sentences. 

In the process, administration and police clashed not only with local custom, 

[[8]]

[[380]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

but with local authorities, for whom such customs were commonplace and in no wise shocking. Typical of such encounters was the storm that broke out at Vézelay in December 1853 over a local tradition called a garçonnade. “Every time a marriage is celebrated between a young lady of the town and a young man from outside the locality," explained the local justice of the peace, "it is the habit of young men of the working class to gather, armed with rifles, in order to offer the bride and groom a compliment, which they accompany by discharging their weapons. This is what they call rendering honor to the married couple." In fact, the matter was probably more complicated. A noisy salute to newlyweds was pretty standard, and generally involved a payment to the young men who rendered such homage. But beyond this, a "fine" was levied against an alien spouse for appropriating one of the local girls. One cannot tell how much of this was still remembered in urban Vézelay, whose "bourgeoisie," in the words of a report written some months before, seemed "to have preserved, like the town it lives in, the character and physiognomy of an earlier age." At any rate, the justice of the peace's report continued: 

Hallowing this immemorial usage, 14 young men of Vézelay gathered the fifteenth inst. on the occasion of Mademoiselle Reuch's marriage and, armed with rifles, marched behind their drums, between 7 and 8 in the evening, to the Reuch house to accompany the intended to the civil ceremony. The corporal of gendarmes came around 10 P.M. to report the happenings, since these constituted a nocturnal disorder that troubled the tranquility of the population and, at the same time, a breach of a decree of the municipal police prohibiting the use of firearms in town. 

I told the corporal about the custom mentioned above, which if it is no excuse is at least an extenuating circumstance, and invited him to show indulgence. But the corporal informed me that these young men were all dressed in uniforms of the National Guard, which none of them had the right to wear, and that they claimed to have permission from the mayor, who supposedly discussed the matter with the police superintendent but failed to inform him [the corporal], military chief of the locality specially charged with the maintenance of public order and the repression of all violations thereof. 

On the following day the religious ceremony took place in the morning, the guard of honor still present and functioning. Around noon they could be seen going down the main street, drum before. They had retained the uniforms but had laid aside their arms to carry a barrel of wine (one of them sitting astride it), pies, bread, and other goodies-"a grotesque march," opined the justice of the peace, who crossed their path. Yet as a local man he was prepared to be tolerant, and invoked ancient usage and the innocent intentions of the accused to beg the imperial prosecutor's indulgence on their behalf. The police chief also pleaded for indulgence: "I have asked several inhabitants and all have said that it has always been thus." The mayor himself had provided the uniforms out of a stock of old ones that had been stored 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[381]]

at the town hall, and the license he had delivered on December 1 read "as has been the custom since time immemorial without the least harm." In later correspondence, the mayor would tell the prefect that garçonnades went back "from mayor to mayor to the mid-seventeenth century," and that for his 

part he had issued permits for such affairs only the previous year with no ques- 

tions asked. 

The authorities, however, proved unrelenting. The mayor was responsible for the gendarme's embarrassment, and for impairing his authority, answered the sub-prefect. "No custom, no precedents should or could give you the right to permit young men to don, contrary to article 259 of the Penal Code, uniforms of the National Guard and, for the purpose of private celebrations, to organize for two days a noisy and armed company." Tradition was no excuse, nor was the traditional hierarchy. The mayor complained that the gendarme was being shown preference over him. "I cannot imagine a comparison between a corporal and myself. And yet in whose favor is the decision going...? [His] is a German head, as incapable of understanding the sense of a police regulation as of speaking French or acting as a Frenchman." The gendarme corporal was called Schoettel, and one assumes from the name that he was Alsatian. But he was the representative of national authorities against local ones: an iron pot banging against old clay crocks. Within a few days, the mayor and his assistants resigned, as did Doctor Reuch, the bride's father, who was a member of the Yonne sanitary council and of several other departmental bodies. The prefect accepted their resignations. Nothing was left of the bitter dispute except a thick file of correspondence." 

Police and safety regulations forged ahead. The use of fireworks was codified and restrained. Pistols were introduced that were able to fire only blanks. Law and order enforced with solicitude gnawed away at the festive rioting of centuries. But on April 25, 1905, the mayor of Cheny (Yonne) still found it necessary to publish the following arrêté: 

Whereas the custom that young men have of firing shots in order to render honor on the occasion of a marriage or some other ceremony (the custom generally called billarde) may be dangerous for others and for themselves...; whereas this custom, which is perfectly praiseworthy and bears witness to good intentions, may advantageously be replaced by offering flowers, reciting compliments, etc., be it ordered:... Billardes are prohibited in the commune of Cheny.1 

The public forms of entertainment also increasingly disturbed humanitarians. Not all events were as innocuous as the wildly popular one at Prats (Pyrénées-Orientales) in which blindfolded men armed with sabers slashed at large sausages hung along the village street. Most festivals included a “torture," whether in fact or in effigy. "No good feast without a torture,” as Louise Michel noted about her native Haute-Marne.11 One might burn a 

[[382]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

human dummy of, say, King Herod or even stones, but live animals were more satisfying: cats, rats, foxes, snakes, or toads.\* The list suggests the original symbolic purpose of eliminating evil (cats or toads, familiars of witches), or noxious beings (rodents or predatory animals). But the sadistic excitement may have survived the prophylactic intent. A law of 1850 prohibiting cruelty to animals put an end to such practices, but not it seems to gory and cruel games. 

Everyone knows about cockfighting, which legislation has still not stamped out. But trussed-up birds were used in games of skill or chance: bound to a branch or mast to be shot at, or killed by throwing stones, or slashed at by mounted or blindfolded men. In the eighteenth century, around Sacy in Yonne, the men would buy a goat, tether it, then throw cudgels or stones until they battered it to death. The carcass would be roasted and devoured, with the successful killer absolved from sharing in the cost. Such fun is no longer heard of in the nineteenth century, but geese remained a popular target for similar sport, still practiced as part of the July 14 festivities in a number of places. At Saint-Florentin (Yonne) the proceedings were opened by the mayor, ceint de son écharpe, surrounded by the municipal council, whose members presumably helped him cast the first stone. In Lower Vivarais, though rifle shoots were organized until 1914 with sheep as targets, the favorite game was the tir au poulet. The unfortunate chicken was bound by one leg in a hole in the ground, or hung from a tree. Competitors who paid for each throw threw stones at it. The man whose stone finally despatched the bird won the pot. Though banned, the game was still being played at Vans and at Malarce (Ardèche) in 1939.† 

The most original form of this sport seems to have been devised by Allier mariners, who strung a goose by its legs from a rope across the river, then flung themselves at it from the prow of a rowboat. If a man managed to grab it by the neck as he was falling into the water, his crew was likely to be showered with the poor goose's blood, but they had won the bird. Games of this sort endured to the end of the century. We hear of them in Auvergne, 

Arnold Van Gennep, Manuel de folklore français, 1.4: 1852-62. Less deadly activities still shocked progressive minds. At Vouzon (Loir-et-Cher) at Carnival time the wool carders rang the church bell, threw a manikin in carder costume from the steeple, and then burned it. Bernard Edeine tells us that in 1855 the priest tried to prevent this, but the mayor's adjoint had the church opened by a locksmith and, the priest reported, "la folie s'est faite comme par le passé" (La Sologne, 2: 803). 

+ On Yonne, see M. C. Moiset, "Usages, croyances, traditions, superstitions," in Bulletin de la Société des Sciences... de l'Yonne, 1888, pp. 104-6; on Ardèche, Pierre Charrié, Folklore du Bas- Vivarais, p. 279. Of course, animals like plants also served a symbolic purpose. Thus, Charrié tells us, in certain hamlets near Lamastre a faggot of firewood was placed at the door of a new bride. Sometimes the pyre that she lit was surmounted by a perch to whose top was tied a cock, symbol of infidelity, which was left to burn alive (Folklore du Haut-Vivarais, p. 55). See also Alfred Reh, "Les Joutes strasbourgeoises ou le Gaenselspiel," Nouvelle revue des traditions populaires, 1950, pp. 174-89, which makes clear that a live bird continued to be used through the German occupation, and that the practice was abandoned only after the First World War. 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[383]]

in Lorraine, in Franche-Comté. No doubt the people had all the fun they could.12 

Games were not games to peasants, especially when they were competitive. Even horse races, an ancient feature of many feasts in Brittany and other regions, gave rise to troubles and fights that led to their suppression.\* This was the truer when it came to the various ballgames roughly resembling rugby or hurling that were widely played by village or hamlet teams. From Brittany to Picardy soule (choule) or variants thereof survived to the end of the century, and in a few places even later, despite numerous attempts to prohibit it. The popularity of the game is still reflected in numerous family names from Brittany to Artois (e.g., Chouleur, Chollet, Le Cholleux, Le Choulloux, Le Solleux), in place names (e.g., the Solle valley in the forest of Fontainebleau), and in linguistic usages (e.g., the Norman term for setting a dog on someonechouler un chien contre). The game was seasonal, played only from Carnival through the months of Lent, which suggests it was not a simple entertainment (however bloody). Of course, it reflected communal rivalries and perpetuated them by creating new frictions. A game of soule went on for many hours, and ended with numerous players injured, and often some dead. It is no wonder the authorities disapproved of it and did their best to end it. And they succeeded on the whole. In northwestern Orne, at Bellou-en-Houlme, where the annual game (played with a bran-stuffed leather ball weighing some 12 lbs) involved several hundred players and as many as 6,000 onlookers drawn by the bloody reputation of the show, it took four brigades of gendarmes to stop play on Mardi Gras in 1851. The game was played out by stealth the following Sunday and for a few years more, but the need for secrecy drained it of fun. It was given up, like its counterpart at Saint-Pierred'Entremont nearby, also abandoned in the 1850's only after a heavy show of force.13 

One way or another, feasts and disturbances were one. Significantly, in Allier one term for feasts was riotée. After all, that was part of their purpose: to alter the even rhythm of everyday life and thus refresh it. But the boisterous horseplay, the discharge of pent-up energies, as the prefect of Hautes- Pyrénées deplored, made for "excesses often harmful to health and nearly 

\* In Bourbonnais, too, horse races were an ancient custom, recalled by the Whitmonday chevaufug (a hobbyhorse-like race) of Montluçon and especially by the fêtes baladoires of country parishes, which the authorities had long tried to legislate out of existence because of the troubles and brawls that always ensued. The races at La Ronde, where a King of the Race was elected, were finally suppressed in 1870; but a horse fair, which had grown up around the race, continued at Chambérat until 1908. (Francis Pérot, Le Folklore bourbonnais, p. 53.) We have to remember the high fertility value of the horse, hence not only of horse races but of horse-dances with their magic disguises (chevau-fug above, chevau-frus in Provence, calárași in Romania) and all kinds of related rites. Fernand Benoît tells us that all along the Rhône valley, in Dauphiné and Ardèche, at Carnival time the youths carry horsetails. They also pretend to hammer horseshoes on the girls and to unshoe them with pliers-a symbolic fertility rite reflected in the saying a toumba un ferre ("she's lost a horseshoe") and the verb sferra (to have a child). Hence Alphonse Daudet's remark about his Arlésienne who had "perdu un fer ou deux en route." (La Provence, p. 329.)384 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

always to good behavior," which only too often became "the occasion of public disturbances." There was the rub. And what was true in the Pyrenees at the beginning of the nineteenth century remained true all over rural France pretty well to the beginning of the twentieth.1\* 

Rejoicing included fighting. The intoxication of a brief respite and sometimes of drink kindled high spirits higher. Teasing turned to tussles, contention to affrays. Those who were used to this took it for granted. In 1774 an Argonne priest described a local ceremony after which "one goes to make merry, to dance, to fight, etc." He argued for abolition of the ceremony but not of the forms of fun that followed. After all, battles between village youths were often ritual, though no less bloody for it. The fights at fairs and festivals, like the exchange of taunts or competition in sports, were probably degenerate heirs of half-forgotten communal conflicts, local wars, or long-drawn-out legal proceedings over pasture, timber, water, or meadow rights. In 1862 Jules Michelet recalled that villages used to fight without knowing the reasons for it, but added that it was still being done in places that were a bit out of the way. This seems to be confirmed by the mayor of Osséja, in Cerdagne, who took great care at every village celebration to keep potential contenders separate, assuming that "the division existing between the young men of this commune must necessarily give rise to fights."15 

After mid-century most references to this matter rejoiced that bloody affrays were things of the past, yet qualified the statement to show that they still survived. This seems to have been the case in Basses-Pyrénées, where the joint efforts of Church and legal authorities had by 1858 only incompletely stifled the traditional fights. Or in Aubrac, where the very popular pilgrimage to the Lake of Saint Andéol was finally abolished in 1867 after a particularly bloody bout. The clergy had long sought this end; only police action achieved it. As usual, clerical opposition by itself tended to be ineffective when popular interests were at stake. The Breton pardon of Saint Hervé, held on the border between Vannetais and Cornouaille, involved a bloody ritual struggle for the saint's banner, possession of which ensured a rich crop of buckwheat that year. The battle always left many wounded, often seriously and sometimes mortally. A priest attempted to suspend the procession in order to avoid such bloodshed but found, as a Finistère chronicler explained, that "Bretons obey their priests blindly only when these show themselves the slaves of ancient beliefs." Invading the sacristy, the peasants took the banner and forced the priest, bound to a chair, to attend the ceremony and the ensuing battle.1 

[[16]]

There is some evidence to suggest that, as in the case of all traditions, the older generation in many villages played a not insignificant part in maintaining traditional feuds. We come across complaints that when the young "of diverse parties" proposed to hold joint meetings to organize the local feasts, the opposition came from the older generation: "Old age does not soften the violent mood the older age groups retain from their past." This past was their 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[385]]

revolutionary experience and the settling of scores consequent to it. Time would help allay such factors, at least by killing off those directly involved. But we know that memories were long and potent at the village level, long enough to let a candidate win a parliamentary election in the Jura in 1902 by pointing out that his rival's uncle had a hand in trying Republicans after December 2, 1851.17 

It 

may be that the collective memory became diluted when the school poured new suggestions into it. It may be that village-to-village feuds waned as military service created bonds, or at least common references, that stretched beyond the limits of the parish and lasted after the uniform was put aside. It may even be, as Charles Tilly has suggested, that collective violence was nationalized and thus removed to a less immediate plane.18 There certainly was more adequate police enforcement, and as the century progressed-especially in its second half-fighting became less a communal and more of a personal enterprise.\* 

In 1875 Maurice Bastié recalled the bloody brawls that inevitably marked the votive feasts of villages in Tarn. He rejoiced that the "barbarian usage" had by then disappeared. It had not quite. Evidence from Brittany and from the Pyrenees suggests there had been transference, that serious clashes continued to occur, but within the structure of modern institutions-in political rivalry or conscript drafts.19 But public violence and gang fights can hardly be cited today as evidence of archaism. What matters is their context and their causes: by the end of the century these showed the impress and used the terminology of the modern world. 

One usage that came under heavy fire, as a military observer of 1863 put it, was "the mad, noisy glee" of Carnival: "In these days of mirth and of abandon, the villagers' spirits take flight; grotesque disguises, charivaris, songs excite the jollity of some, the legitimate irritation of others; hence they not only awaken the imagination of rural poets but often give rise to quarrels and dangerous brawls."20 

All sense that Carnival, which in those days ran all the way from Epiphany to Ash Wednesday, had a particular function seems to have been lost from sight. The revivifying and purifying purposes of ribald ceremonial, ignored by the upper classes, came to be largely forgotten by the participants too. The links that the masks periodically reforged between the dead and the living, the prophylactic magic of the fires and their scattered ashes, the sympathetic magic of disguises and play-acting, the symbolic expiation of Carnival himself, carrying the community's sins into the flames, turned into a season of pranks, practical jokes, and foolery. Yet even these could be fraught with 

\*Jean Vartier tells us that around Gérardmer, in Vosges, when the farm lads were invited to a grande veillée they did not agree right off unless they were told "et peu, on s'bettrai"-and then, we'll have a fight. (La Vie quotidienne, p. 90; I am indebted to Michael Marrus for this reference.) 

[[386]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

menace. The dispassionate account of the military observer gives all the clues we need to understand why anything with even the least taint of traditional ritual and rejoicing was cause for official unease.21 

Disguises, rough music, satirical songs and verses potentially subversive and critical of village notables, carried the seeds of trouble.\* Processions and counter-processions could easily clash, as they occasionally did at Pouilly-sur- Loire, where a group of young men held a procession on Ash Wednesday to mock and guy the Penitents; the youths, wearing white shirts and cotton bonnets with straw sticking out so as to almost hide the face, carried chains and chamberpots filled with wine to quaff from, and whipped one another around the town to the indignation of the more devout. Even in small villages opposing groups would organize rival dances, donning red or white bonnets to indicate their allegiances, and masked men would fall to fighting egged on by their womenfolk. Alternatively and just as serious, one hears about "disguises intended to injure the honor and reputation of the mayor and priest.” The guilty parties were severely punished.22 

The possibility of political content was particularly feared by the authorities. Close watch was kept; allusions to political and social themes, or expressions of criticism and opposition were quickly suppressed. The final judgment of bloated Carnival, condemned to die as Lent took over, afforded a convenient opening to condemn the rich, "living insults to peasant soberness," if indeed it did not give rise to more explicit political statements.23 In Brie Carnival included a "trial of the Marquis and the Marquise." In Var, we hear of the political sensations it could cause. The political tensions of the 1850's produced a rich crop of such breaches for the authorities to deal with. At Mauzé (Deux-Sèvres), a French-speaking bourg in a patoisant countryside, we hear of a procession in which the centerpiece was a young peasant who sym- 

\*Note that the popular license, scandalous songs, and shouted obscenities shocked and upset the respectable classes in town or bourg, rather than in the countryside proper; but the disguises, often using dress of the opposite sex, were particularly shocking to the priests. In the Revue des traditions populaires, 1919, pp. 40-41, Paul Saintyves printed an Upper Breton ronde in which the girls of Paimpont forest come to seek absolution for having gone dancing in boys' breeches, and are denied it by the angry priest: 

J'avons couru les danses En habit de garçons ... J'avions bien des culottes Mais point de cotillons... Allez-vous-en, les filles Pour vous point de pardon. 

In the song, the girls do not heed the priest; in practice, too, the travesties continued "dans certaines campagnes." 

+ In 1871 in many Brie villages the figures carried around were those of the Marquis and Marquise Bismarck. Meanwhile, in Franche-Comté young people passed through the streets at Carnival singing satirical songs, "made up for the occasion," to ridicule members of the upper classes who had been involved in some scandal during the year (Charles Beauquier, Traditions populaires, p. 29). On Brie, see Bulletin folklorique de l'Ile-de-France, 1939, p. 25; on Var, see Maurice Agulhon, La République au village, pp. 411-15. 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[387]]

bolized Liberty in Chains and repeatedly sang the rebellious "Chant des Vignerons." At Volonne (Basses-Alpes) the priest became the subject of an "immoral and irreligious" masquerade, whose organizers ended in court. In several places the military, obsessed with secret societies sending each other signals after the manner of James Fenimore Cooper's Mohicans, put out fires lit in honor of the occasion. At Bray (Somme) the mayor prohibited masks after sundown, and the gendarmerie intervened when unruly youths gathered "to sing and cause disorder." The population seemed ready to defy the rule until cowed into silence by a show of force. Two brigades of gendarmes and one company of infantry sent from nearby Peronne "produced a very good effect."24 

The Empire disappeared, but the suspicion of popular festivities did not. In February 1877 we hear that during a farandole at Arles-sur-Tech (Pyrénées- Orientales) a fight between Republicans and Legitimists was only narrowly averted when the gendarmerie intervened. The same tension threatened the Carnival of 1878, with opposing parties seeking to hold separate dances.25 Politics was shattering the communion of the great seasonal ceremonies. National issues and national divisions complicated local ones and helped to emphasize them. 

They also interfered with them in another way. Since the Revolution, festivals had been recognized as useful didactic instruments to create desirable attitudes.\* The constitution of 1791 decreed the establishment of national festivals "to preserve the memory 

of the French Revolution, maintain fraternity between citizens, and bind them to the constitution, the fatherland and the laws." The expression of enthusiasm, however artificial, would create enthusiasm engender or reinforce adherence to a regime or creed. To this end, official feasts competed with traditional ones, which they eventually helped to stifle. The Revolution's successors had followed the example it set: August 25 under Louis XVIII, November 4 under Charles X, and May I under Louis Philippe were dedicated to the King. 

Archives reveal very serious efforts to create feasts where there had been none before. Mayors and municipal councils were required to organize celebrations and to report on their success. Work was prohibited. There were to be festive illuminations, bells, fireworks, dancing, religious services, and the distribution of alms. The files are crowded with near-illiterate reports that testify to much humble effort, to great poverty, and to little success—in part because when resources were limited, the villagers husbanded what they had for the traditional feasts. 

The notion was not new, only its systematic application. Thus, in Lorraine, the fête des Rois had been celebrated with special pomp since the fifteenth century in honor of Duke René's victory over Charles the Bold of Burgundy on Jan. 5, 1477. This celebration was suppressed under the French occupation in the seventeenth century, reestablished by Leopold of Austria, again suppressed between 1702 and 1714 while Louis XIV's troops occupied the country, and finally abolished in 1737 by Stanislas Leszczynski. 

[[388]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Subsidies provided by the prefect or by rich citizens could usually produce a corporal's guard of indigents to cheer the King's name after a distribution of bread or a barrel of wine had snared a public, but the poorer the parish the less likely it was to see such funds. At Aspres in Pyrénées-Orientales, "L'assistance na pas été autant nombreuse que l'inspiration de la fete devoient nous faire espérér malgré que nous les abons exciter." While at Saint-Hipolite (sic), "Jai fait publié par le Crieur public la veille dans toute la Commune que personne ne pouvait travaillé messieurs les avitans de la commune ont violé la loi une grande partie.' 

[[26]]

Peasants were reluctant to give up work for these new festivals in general, and balked especially at the November date chosen by Charles X, when the cold and rains limited the possibilities of enjoyment, and there was apt to be winter sowing or other duties that could not be put off." This was even truer of October 6, the day of national mourning for the execution of Louis XVI, when there was not even the promise of dancing to mitigate the nuisance of enforced idleness. That feast went out with the Bourbons, and Louis Philippe had the good fortune to have his saint's day fall on the first of May, which had long-standing popular associations. Because of the coincidence with May Day, maypoles could be presented as symbols of loyalty and honor to the King. Even then, the celebration was sometimes shifted to the nearest Sunday in the knowledge that no one would attend on a weekday. Thus in the Pyré- nées-Orientales in 1841. That same year the sub-prefect of Saint-Flour, in Cantal, reporting on the solemnities and rejoicings in his town, added: “As for the rural communes, it is impossible to get anything done, especially on a weekday.' 

[[28]]

Still, as a result of steady pressure from the prefect, the rural communes of Cantal were beginning to accept the first of May by the end of the reign, especially when the date also saw the dispensing of charity to the poor, who never failed to express proper gratitude.\* Yet none of these fabricated feasts were given time to pass into local custom: nine years for Louis XVIII's, five for Charles X's, and seventeen for Louis Philippe's were too little. Then came the celebrations that welcomed the Second Republic in 1848. Alain Corbin sees these as the last occasions in the Limousin when folklore and political life interpenetrated in a truly spontaneous manner. In Forez Benoît Malon recalled the March Sunday when the village planted a tree of liberty, with two free tubs of wine placed in the village square, and free white bread and cheese for all the children. Malon and his little brother got half a glass of wine and "highly excited, we followed the two drummers who marched back and forth 

As the mayor of Nieudan duly noted, reporting the events of May 1, 1847: "Etant sortis de léglise Nous avons deménde aux proprietaires ésés, de donnér quelque chose aux pauvrés pour leur faire Celebrer la faite de St. Philipe, Nous avons ramasse 8ofr15c que nous avons distribué aux pauvres de la Commune ils ont desiute tous Crie vive Louis Philipe, vive louis philipe Notre bon roi, et avons terminé ainsi la faite du roi." (Archives Départementales, Cantal 43 M2.) 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[389]]

from one end of the village to the other, followed by enthusiasts crying 'Long live the Republic!'' 

"29 

Yet the old habits endured. In November 1848, for the promulgation of the new constitution, informal reports did not suffice; there had to be official procès-verbaux. The constitution rated a feast of its own, and a law of 1849 established commemorative ceremonies for the Revolution in February and a feast of the Republic on May 4. There was scant time to celebrate before the Second Empire replaced them with a new feast on August 15. This had the advantage of falling on the feast of the Assumption of the Holy Virgin, and was enforced with the regime's customary efficiency. By then, more numerous public employees, together with the founding of schools that could marshal children to join in, ensured greater participation. Thus by 1852 at Saint-Hippolyte (Pyrénées-Orientales), where a generation before the mayor could hardly scrawl out his reports and the village could hold no service for lack of a priest, we find a school, a flag, a village policeman who could carry it, a cantonnier, and a mayor whose rhetoric had a distinctly poetic cast.3 

But the heyday of civic ceremonial came only in the 1880's. The year 1879 opened the Republic of republicans. Jules Grévy became president. The public powers returned from Versailles to Paris. "La Marseillaise" became the national anthem. In 1880 July 14 was made the national feast, but it too took time to gain acceptance. In some part this was the work of opponents of the Republic, like the many priests who refused to ring their bells or let the tricolor fly from their church towers.31 But the chief problem was, as in other cases, the awkwardness of the season, a time when peasants worked particularly hard and were tired out. Proof, if any proof is needed, of the politicians' ignorance of (or indifference to) what was appropriate at harvest time. In some cases the fête was shifted to the nearest Sunday; in many more permission was sought to do the same.32 What success there was depended on local political orientation, especially where notables were concerned and while the celebration remained, as it had been at its invention, a “feast of the bourgeois.' 

33 In many places, the situation must have been like that at Blond (Haute-Vienne), described in a report of 1882: 

Je vous répond a votre l'etre et linstituteur avais mis un drapou ainsi que son adjoin qui en avais mis un a sa croisé aveque un écris ou il yavais vive la republique liberté egalité et fraternité et bien y i luminé.... 

au burau de tabaque il yavais un drapau ainci au bureau de la poste un drapau votre frere avait mis des chandelles a leurs croissé des bougis bruler sur le mur de vans la mairie mais pas de drapau a la mairie. 

des geunes gens se sont procurer de la poudre et ont fais partir quelques caux de essepion de petit canon.34 

It seems quite probable that, despite the efforts of a century, many small communes of the 1880's (like Orcines in Puy-de-Dôme) had never known 

[[390]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

such public celebrations. Most of them seem to have found the occasion unimportant, if not a downright nuisance, and the small costs involved an imposition. The prefect had a small fund available for subsidies, but this did not go far. Most of the costs had to be borne by the parish, that is, by its citizens. This inevitably caused a tug-of-war between the traditional local feast and the new national festival. Political considerations complicated matters, with the enemies of the Republic backing the old celebration and its friends opposing it, if only by implication.35 As for the schoolmaster, hostility to obsolete ways and the partisans of superstition very often seemed to him only consistent with his patriotic attachment to the Republic, the fatherland, and the Fourteenth of July.\* 

By 1889, when the Republic celebrated the hundredth anniversary of the Revolution, officially sponsored feasting had progressed in scale and content. Banquets had become an essential part of festivities, illuminations were no longer the exception but the rule, and popular initiative could even intervene to start impromptu dances. Then came the 1890's and the Ralliement, which meant that "réacs" who had so long abstained from governmental feasts made it a point to join them. And July 14 itself "becomes ever more part of custom," so that as the sub-prefect of Riom was pleased to note, "many small rural communities celebrated on the day itself instead of putting it off to the following Sunday." 

"36 

One casualty of the competition between festivals, in which July 14 emerged the clear winner, was the religious procession of the Church. There is a direct relationship between the official abolition of such processions and the official sponsorship of rival festivities, with one Republican municipality after another banning the religious celebrations, and with the government withholding the soldiers who lent color to the event and often drew a significant crowd on their own account. Gustave Hervé, who grew up in Brest, remembered how, after 1881, "it was no longer the Corpus Christi procession that attracted everyone's attention... but rather the Fourteenth of July with its elaborate parade." By the mid-1890's this effect had reached smallish market towns, like Billom (Puy-de-Dôme), where in 1896 the once all-important summer processions passed almost unnoticed. It was July 14, "now accepted by all, even reactionaries," that had taken their place.37 

But if the great ceremonies of the Church declined, so too did humbler local feasts and rites. We hear of this already under the July Monarchy. 

In an article in the Revue pédagogique, December 15, 1901, Henry Martin, school inspector at Bourg-en-Bresse, described the schools' contributions to the celebrations that marked the annexation of Franche-Comté to France, and delighted in "this ceremony that makes the school stand out and shows to the simple population of the countryside that a manifestation embellished by poetry and music can move and charm without having any religious character." 

+ Or rather say more precisely, the popular ceremonies declined. Meanwhile, new ceremonies, primarily official ones such as vins d'honneur, inaugurations, and school prize-givings became increasingly frequent. But they too tapered off after a time, and even at their peak they seldom involved the community as a whole. 

The Way of All Feasts 

391 Dissensions between the authorities and the Church, great keeper of traditional ceremonial; the occasional rebelliousness of firemen or national guard, balking at supplying the martial or musical element for small-town parades; the division of a society that attended things together and that began to separate into factions-all contributed to make common festivities less common and less attractive. Here too the rivalry with official feasts was an uneven struggle. In many cases local schools had been dismissed on the occasion of a particular feast (as was done for the feast of Saint Nicholas in Lorraine and Bourbonnais). This ceased to be countenanced in 1855, so that official holidays should have all the advantages on their side. Successful leaders of Provençal bravades gained too much political capital for the authorities to look on them with a friendly eye. In any case, there were few men left ready to ruin themselves to gain local kudos. The last bravade at Draguignan was celebrated in 1860. The rites of May, like those of Carnival, could lend themselves to slanderous allusions that had to be discouraged by the courts. Other local customs ended in drinking bouts followed by battles royal. The chevau-fug of Montluçon were finally forbidden in 1869. The pyres lit on Saint John's eve (June 23) or at Saint Peter's (June 29) carried the danger of fire and also frequently gave rise to disturbances. In addition they reflected political divisions, one party taking them over, the other opposing them. At Arles-sur-Tech (Pyrénées-Orientales) in 1878 the Legitimists alone danced at Saint John's feast. The Republicans stayed away. The village pyre did not survive much longer.38 

The causes of decay were many, the decay itself was evident. Belief in the beneficial function of popular ceremonies was fading. The control of the environment by technical means was gradually improving. Assumptions to the contrary were losing ground to rival conformities carried by the elementary school books—and the penny press. July 14 represented progress and a new kind of hope. It was not so much that technical progress 

progress solved many problems of the past or that new problems did not crop up in consequence. It was rather that men who had been taught to seek mystical causes and magic solutions for their problems now learned to tackle them by different means or, just as important, to put their faith instead in progress and the promise of a better life to come. The science and technology that made magic redundant also erased the memories that told people why certain rites made sense. Seasonal rites survived, but without any perceived usefulness, hence without meaning. They became games for children, and were tolerated-when they did not bother the adult world too much-chiefly as entertainment. 

The relegation of serious observances to the status of children's games is one of the most striking indications of what Max Weber called the disenchantment of the world. The rationalization of a universe in which effect could be expected to follow cause advanced apace. And the enchanted parts were set aside for children. 

[[392]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

In 1860 an army officer saw May queens collecting money in Isère and noted: "In past times it was adults who thus made a spectacle of themselves. ... Today only little girls continue the tradition." At one time the May queens had been nubile lasses collecting gifts and money for their dowries. But now this had become absurd and was left to children. Fifteen years earlier in that department another officer had noted that many a mountain parish elected a king and a queen of May, who would rule over the rituals of the day seated on a throne. Then, as the century wore on, the kings, or abbés de la jeunesse, disappeared. By 1860 almost all were gone. The children who were now elected to play the queen of May and her retainers continued the wasted rite by collecting money to spend on "buying dainties."39 

Soon it would sink even lower and be left to the children of the poor. The same was true about the many occasions, at New Year or Epiphany, or during Carnival, depending on the area, when throughout France young men had toured the villages, often in disguise, singing traditional ditties and collecting gifts-smoked meats, dried fruits, eggs, money-to end in a feast at the local inn. First their disguises became simpler. Then the gifts became increasingly symbolic. André Varagnac suggests that as diet improved and meat in particular began to be considered a staple, such gifts in kind no longer promised an exceptional banquet, and were abandoned as a matter of popular judgment and of the recipients' pride. In any case, by the turn of the century we hear that such door-to-door rounds had been left to children. In Upper Vivarais, where masks and masquerades had been common practice for adults and "youth," the custom was increasingly abandoned after 1870 until in 1914 "it was quite discredited and regarded as an amusement for children." In Franche- Comté, "rare exceptions apart, it is only children, especially those of the poor, who go around collecting gifts today." Similarly, at Cleebourg (Bas-Rhin) it was only poor children who went around collecting what in the 1930's came to be looked on as alms.\* 

[[40]]

The trees, branches, or maypoles that had been set up in the village square, or in front of the house of the most recently married couple, or before the homes of all the village girls, lost their ancient significance as symbols of fertility or of the authority of the village; even, in time, their significance as a sign of social approval or disapproval. By the end of the century we hear that in Franche-Comté village youths, instead of placing a branch in front of the house of each girl, now "find a collective token easier and less costly," and put a single maypole in the village square-with an empty bottle on top. It is true, the observer adds, that the forest administration strenuously protested the enormous damage visited on forests as a result of the old practice. But one cannot help thinking that such opposition must have existed earlier. Now, it provided the rationalization for an abandonment that reflected an exhaustion of belief. All that was left was a hallowed memory of fun and perhaps profit, so that in many places youths did not even offer tokens to the maidens of 

The Way of All Feasts 

393 their choice, but gave them "vulgarly to the municipal authorities or to the officers of the fire company ... with a view to the gastronomic rejoicings that 

will follow.' 

[[9941]]

So the May Day symbols endured, but the memory of their significance faded. The various references to them suggest decline. In Meuse they "still exist in a good few places" in 1890; in Vosges they "tend to disappear toward the end of the century"; in Nivernais they were "general to 1914, then found sporadically"; in Franche-Comté they were "discriminating before 1914, became routine thereafter."42 

This was the case with many practices. The shepherds' feasts of Mâconnais, once celebrated by "adolescents between fifteen and twenty," became a children's frolic.13 And toleration for childish pranks was itself receding. In 1880 at Abbeville, the children still went about the streets at Easter time banging with the small hammers they used in church on Maundy Thursday and singing an old refrain in honor of Saint Stephen. By 1885 the custom was obsolete, "following a municipal regulation. "\* Midsummer pyres, great fertility rites, their virtue remembered in the original sense of the English word bonfire, had been fed with wood collected by village youths from all the inhabitants. Then the collecting chore was relegated to the children. Householders began to refuse to contribute. The necessary wood was sometimes obtained by pilfering. Ritual thefts, well accepted in the first half of the century, came to be seen as trespass and spoliation. There were complaints and fights. At Crécyen-Brie (Seine-et-Marne) toward 1860-70 the theft of wood for the fire by children gave rise to "numerous lawsuits." Municipal authorities intervened, prohibiting the collections. At Brioude these had stopped altogether by the 1880's, leaving only the custom of children offering flowers to their parents on that day. Midsummer pyres continued to be lit in Haute-Loire at the turn of the century, but only children now danced around the flames. In Morvan, too, where around 1890-1900 the children built the bonfire for the "fire and dance of torches" on the first Sunday in Lent, an old woman in her seventies who came to secure a firebrand to guard her against storms explained that in her time this was not done by children but by men and women-a serious rite with words and steps and purpose.\*\* 

All over France, it seems, bonfires receded with the century. In the Ardennes they seem to have waned under the Second Empire, and attempts to revive them in the 1890's did not meet much success. At Château-Thierry they disappeared in the 1870's. By 1885 in Eure-et-Loir, where a few years before bonfires blazed widely, "the custom is being lost." Similarly, by the mid-1890's there were almost none in Saintonge, though in the 1870's every village had had its "new fire." Once common throughout Dauphiné, bonfires by the mid- 

Dieudonné Dergny, Images, coutumes et croyances, 1: 326. There must have been political overtones to this new rule, applied just at a time when municipality and church were at daggersdrawn.394 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

1880's seem to have lighted mostly the mountain villages. In Charente-Maritime they were "pretty rare" by the end of the century.45 The prestige attached to the lighting of bonfires declined or disappeared or became a bone of political contention. The King once lit the fire on the Place de Grève. In 1854 the sub-prefect of Saint-Flour was honored as the representative of the Emperor and given precedence in lighting the bonfire there on August 15.\* 

Squire, priest, mayor, oldest inhabitant, or president of the youth group, the first person to light the local bonfire reflected the values obtaining in his community. By the 1880's we hear that in Oise the clergy were keeping away, and the fires were now lit by children—a bad sign, as we know. In Creuse and Corrèze, where pyres were becoming rarer, they were once lit by local notables, now by "local people"-a vague term that seems to indicate lower prestige. In Lozère the priests no longer lit the village pyres and now recommended that their congregations avoid ceremonies devoid of religious character. The mayors took over the ceremony around 1885 and lit the bonfire to the sound of "Long live the Republic! Long live the mayor!" And there was dancing around the pyre with patois songs and "La Marseillaise." At Clessé (Haute-Saône), "formerly men organized this bonfire [the bordes, on the first Sunday in Lent], then the young men, then children alone were left to gather the faggots and the thorns; finally the old custom disappeared around 

1910. 

[[1146]]

There is plenty of evidence that bonfires, May Day offerings, and other observances endured into our century and indeed can still be found here and there. What matters is that their original associations have long since been forgotten. Prescriptions and ceremonials with a legitimacy of their own became dispensable, which meant that they could be jostled about, dismissed, or abrogated as convenience decreed. A striking illustration of this process appears in the fate of a ritual that long obtained in a village slightly west of the Argonne forest, Mesnil-en-Hurlus in northeastern Marne. On the first Sunday in Lent, day of torchlight feasts, the man most recently married in the village had to contribute a cartwheel (in good condition). This was carried to the top of a hill and made to roll down until broken, and the pieces were then distributed for good luck. Here was a fertility rite, possibly anterior to Christianity, directed to generation, fecundity, and plenty. In the vineyard country of Moselle such wheels (often set alight) frequently crashed through the vines and caused serious damage, but the vineyard owners accepted the destruction on the grounds of public (that is, magic) utility. At Hurlus, how- 

\* Archives Départementales, Cantal 43 M3 (St.-Flour, Aug. 16, 1854). The account suggests that the mayor of the town normally set the first torch. Interestingly, the cholera epidemic that hit Toulon in 1884 saw the resumption of bonfires that had only recently been discontinued. The excuse was that fires drove out miasmas and purified bad air, but in fact they appear to have been reinstituted simply because people took great pleasure in them. The fires were tended and maintained over a period of several weeks. All this time the Navy provided material for an especially big bonfire on the quay. (Bérenger-Féraud, Réminiscences populaires sur la Provence, pp. 138-39.) 

The Way of All Feasts 

[[395]]

ever, as early as the Second Empire a local landowner, irate at the damage the wheel caused to his crops and hedges, had sought to prevent its passage. The issue was brought before the justice of the peace at nearby Ville-sur- Tourbe, who found for the villagers, and the practice continued. Then came the Franco-Prussian War, and the swathes it cut seem to have discouraged weddings. At any rate, no marriage took place between 1869 and 1876. This meant that the man married last, in 1869, was forced to provide a fresh wheel every year for seven years in a row. The eighth year he finally refused to do so, and thus the custom lapsed." What had been unthinkable at mid-century could be accepted by 1876. The war had upset the long-established continuity---- and there are frequent references to other customs lapsing at this time. But could the war have wrought such permanent change if the custom had not been on the way out already and belief crumbling, as the earlier protest suggests? 

Utility had shifted to another plane. Young Bretons who had once taken ashes from the festival bonfires to improve their fields began to have recourse to fertilizer. In Vosges, where Midsummer bonfires were closely associated with cowherds and cattle pasturage, the fires declined in the late 1880's. Pasture was giving way to cultivated land; there were fewer cattle and fewer cowherds, and the police prohibitions of the 1850's based on the threat of fire could finally be enforced. In Languedoc by 1891 only children still believed that the water of the local stream changed to wine and the pebbles to bread at midnight on Saint John's Eve. At La Coquille (Dordogne), Saint John had long been especially honored by shepherds as their patron. Each year on June 24 they had brought gifts of sheepskins, fleeces, and as many as 40 or 50 lambs to the church dedicated to him. But around 1900 "the faithful no longer gave lambs to the priest; they also ceased to give him wool when it reached a profitable price." Their faith decayed as possibilities of marketing increased, a twofold development that seems to have been brought about by improvements in local communications. 

Having lost their unifying magic sense, ceremonies like Carnival and Midsummer bonfires were briefly infused with new meaning by politics. But the power of politics shook them to pieces, and the forces of "enlightened" criticism were of no mind to repair them. Priests had already hammered at superstitions; now teachers too attacked the disorder and the irrational aspects of Carnival, Yule logs, lighted firebrands, and bonfires, and rejoiced as these declined or disappeared. In Vivarais Carnival disappeared in bigger centers and only survived on the upper heights. In Lauragais in 1891 Carnival was decaying; only vestiges of its past splendor were left. "Carnival is on its way down," reported one teacher in 1899. "People find it ridiculous to rig themselves out in cast-off clothes and put on false faces." 

[[49]]

[[9950]]

Yet in the end the same urban forces that had stifled Carnival and other popular cults revived them when the blood had drained out of them. Even as 

[[396]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

village teachers rejoiced in the disappearance of absurd practices, they were reappearing as urban entertainment. A historian of popular festivals in Paris. has noted that the processions of Carnival and Mid-Lent Sunday would be replaced by publicity floats and artificial distractions. The procession of the fatted ox, suppressed in Marseilles in 1853 and in Paris itself since the Prussian war, was reestablished "to the delight of the rubbernecks" of 1891.51 At Nice the old communal fertility rites of maying were transmuted into flower festivals; and the May queens were revived as Rose queens to become focal points for local celebrations. In 1895 a perpetual endowment at Pessac (Gironde) established the Rose Queen's feast, which was still the town's chief festival in 1970. In Ardèche "only the votive feast still keeps its attraction, but only by imitating those of towns." At the romerage of Saint-Jeannet (Alpes- Maritimes) in 1909, the traditional pyre was replaced by store-bought fireworks and homemade tents by better marquees bought in Nice; the fife and drums gave way to an eight-piece band; and interest in the traditional games was plainly fading. Even the Carnival disguises that had been abandoned to children were taken up again in imitation of the city folks' new passion for masked balls. Having succeeded in suppressing popular rituals, the urban culture assimilated and regurgitated them as seemingly original products of its own. By that time they were no longer fêtes, just shows. Only suggestively garbled memories remained. By 1957 Laurence Wylie in his Vaucluse village would hear about the Midsummer festival: "There was a game that consisted of jumping over the bonfire, because it was said that whoever got across would not be bothered by fleas."52 

This evolution was perfectly natural. Traditions tend to be immemorial because memory is short. There is every indication that traditions are subject to change like everything else, and, of course, subject to outside influences. Feasts had generally been treated in a fairly practical manner. In Brie most pilgrimage feasts were seasonal, grouped into two periods: in spring before the haying and in late summer after the harvest and before winter closed in. In Marche, on the other hand, one of the most popular saints for feasting was Saint Anthony because his day fell in January when the masons were back from Paris. When a patron saint's day coincided with awkward periods, the fête was sooner or later moved to a more convenient day, such as the nearest Sunday or the anniversary of another saint. In Haute-Marne, between the Meuse and Saône rivers, parishes whose patron saint was Saint Stephen had long avoided the awkward problem of a date, December 26, that falls between Christmas and New Year by celebrating their patron instead in mid-September, after the harvest and before the grapes have ripened. Likewise at Brouenne (Meuse), the votive feast of Saint Hilary (January 13), following close on New Year and Epiphany, received only cursory attention. The real feast was la petite fête-Saint Martin's on November 11, which lasted for three days. The hot summer months as a rule did not afford much time for feasting." 

[[53]]

The Way of All Feasts 

[[397]]

That was the problem with the national festival for Louis on August 25, as with July 14. And one great Morvan feast, the fête du Beuvray, held on an otherwise barren mountain the first Wednesday in May, died out when it was shifted to July in the last part of the century.5 

[[54]]

Carnival and Lent fitted the calendar well. During the one, plants lay dormant, "so youth could devote many days to pleasure," as we hear in the Pyrenees; during the other, reserves were running out, and only a few vegetables were left over from winter stores. As Joseph Cressot has noted, the frugality of the Lenten fast was prescribed by the situation. Recalling his youth in the 1880's in southeastern Champagne, he writes: "Nothing... but the last cabbages pulled out of their frozen straw, leeks, turnips, potatoes. It was the heyday of herrings"-one a day for an adult, half for a child. So, fasts as well as feasts tended to be preserved by traditional conditions as long as these conditions lasted. When they outlasted conditions, it was in a new sense- "without religious spirit, but by tradition, which is close to it," as an informant put it in describing the feast of Saint Vincent at Gouaix (Seine-et-Marne).55 Holy days had turned into leisure time. 

Conditions counted less, of course, as they became less specifically local and more homogenized. One aspect of this was that certain local traditions spread to new areas: Saint Nicholas's day, native to the north and northeast, was the most important of the December feasts in Lorraine and the Jura but was ignored in most of the rest of France as an occasion for popular celebration. This feast would be spread by literature and publicity toward the end of the nineteenth century, when it became fairly general. About the same time December 6 was being displaced in its native habitat by an interloper--the Alsatian Christmas tree, carrying Christmas with it. The Yule log, part of most Christmas celebrations, gradually gave way to fir trees, while local practices were left to be forgotten.56 

Protestants and public schools, recognized agents of modernity, were the chief diffusers of the Christmas tree. At Lantenne, in Doubs, the Christmas tree, unknown before, was introduced by a schoolteacher, abandoned, then taken up again, again at school, probably after the First World War, as the occasion for an annual celebration and distribution of toys. In Ardèche the Protestants came first; at Salavas their church sported a tree in 1891, and a few years later we hear of another tree at a Protestant-owned factory at Viviers. Secondary schools followed suit at Vans and elsewhere. By 1903 the Catholics set out to imitate their adversaries. The French Catholic Women's League began to organize Christmas trees in all parishes of the Vivarais, complete with the toy distributions that provided one of their main attractions. After 1918, when every primary school tried to have its own tree, the coming of Father Christmas added the last touch to a typical tale of urban penetration. 

Communal and historic feasts declined to extinction; and once-public celebrations became increasingly private. Christmas, New Year, and Twelfth 

[[57]]

[[398]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Night turned into family affairs. So did the sacred events of life: baptisms, first communions, and marriages became private ceremonies, ultimately most of all big meals. Eating and drinking had been a great aspect of feasting; now they swallowed the whole sense of the term.58 There were no holy days left to celebrate, only holidays-free time-to enjoy not as collective communion but as evasion. Traditional feasts had fixed people in their milieu; modern holidays dispersed them, allowed them to escape the life of everyday and the traditional framework. There was no more call for renewal ceremonies that glorified time (the seasons), work (the harvest), or the community through its patron saint. The redistribution of goods managed through the ritual collections was more efficiently (and more stringently) managed by the state. The opportunities for courting were no longer restricted to a few village dances a year. The compensating festive hierarchies that paralleled the established social structure could now be found in sports, trade unions, political parties. The license and change in norms afforded by festivals became meaningless when license became the norm. The teaching and the transmission of traditions became a function of the schools. Urban society could do without festivals, even official ones. Seen in the context of traditional village life, it was a festival. 