+++
title = "22 CHARIVARIS"

+++

Ainsi done le eharivari, qui primitivement etait un eMtiment inflige spontanement par le peuple a eeux dont le mariage blessait les usages r~s et constituait un defi a la morale publique, est devenu un amusement pour les villages. 

-HENlll LALOU 

MANY MAY MOURN the passing of traditional celebrations like Carnival. But few today, and possibly few people of the time, would want to shed a tear for a more somber aspect of Carnival that we have only hinted at so far: the ridicule and punishment of those who had contravened the rules of village society. Social censorship of this order was another thing that modern society could and would dispense with. The state had laws, police, gendarmes, magistrates. There was no need for, and eventually no room for, unofficial justiciaries to visit society's wrath on those who "sinned" against it. Yet this form of rough justice endured into the twentieth century. 

A transgressor was still tried and burned in effigy at Carnival in small bourgs of the Charentes shortly before 1914, or promenaded facing a donkey's tail, as apparently still happened in Champagne and the Ardennes at the turn of the century. In Bourbonnais "they would smear his face with honey and with feathers, put an old basket or nightcap on his head, place a distaff in his hand, and drive him through the town or village sitting on a donkey with his face looking to the back." There would be a public trial, there would be satirical songs, and finally a manikin would be executed. If the guilty party had taken to his heels, his nearest neighbor would be seized instead for having failed to intervene and mend the situation. The memory of the practice survived in the remark Lorrainers made about a wife-dominated household: "Le voisin ira sur l'ane!"l This seems unfair from a modern viewpoint, to which, in any case, matters of this sort appear strictly private. But in village communities where everything was known to everyone, and where public opinion was the chief (or sole) agency of social discipline, transgressions were seen as dissolving forces (much as the publicity of the Kinsey report had the effect of rendering many secret practices licit). With everyone affected by everyone's behavior, everyone was responsible for everyone else. Perhaps unfairly but quite logically, the nearest neighbor was the first justiciary. If he failed, he 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

could be chastised by those, primarily the young men, who shouldered the punitive duties of the village. 

Most often those duties were exercised by means of the charivari-colliourari in Ariege, calibari in Lot, tocsin in Vosges, tracassin in Ain, caribari in Correze and Aveyron, caroviou in Var-rough music, mock serenade (quoth the dictionary), a vast discordant uproar, the clashing of pots and pans, ringing of cowbells, rasping of rattles, blowing of horns, shouting of jibes and jeers, or actual singing of songs composed for the occasion. Generally, though not always, the performance would take place at night, the dark adding its inherent menace to the frightening din, and the harassment could sometimes go on for months-a wearing experience for the strongest victims, and for their neighbors too.* 

The most frequent inspiration of charivaris was marriage outside the accepted norms: a widow or a widower remarrying too soon after the spouse's death, an older man or woman wedding a partner judged too young, notorious partners in adultery marrying after the spouse's death, or a man marrying into the community from an alien village who thus poached on the preserves of the village youth. This is not very surprising, since matters of property were of great importance, and marriage or remarriage played a great part therein. The remarriage of widows and widowers was common, especially when the death rate was high: 18,7 percent of all marriages performed at V raiville (Eure) between 1850 and 1950.2 What mattered more was to protect the children of the first marriage and the interests of rightful heirs. It also mattered that accepted decencies should be respected, that the dead should be treated with deference and decorum, that widows should not rewed with unseemly haste. The choice of marriageable partners in societies that were largely endogamous was normally restricted. A stranger marrying into such communities deprived the local young; and so did an older man, who might also be presumed to enjoy an unfair advantage as being better off than his younger rivals. Hints of immorality or ridicule (as in the case of age differences) made such matters worse, because they affected the honor of the village. Those whose behavior cast ridicule on their community had to be paid in shame. And often, in fact, the rough justice of the charivaris addressed itself less to morality than to honor: punishing cuckolds rather than adulterers. Public ridicule concentrated on males so unfortunate as to fail the dictates of honor by letting themselves be beaten or cuckolded, on young girls of dubious reputation, and on adulterous couples whose dalliance came to light.t Most other transgressions 

• The last recorded charivari at Etelfay (Somme) took place in 1906. It had gone on for two months before it culminated at Mardi Gras with a march-past of manikins that were finally burned in great pomp beside the railroad tracks just when the evening train was passing. The local gendarmes watched, intervening only after 9 P.M. when the caterwauling threatened the communal rest. (Jacqueline Picoche, Un Vocabulaire picard d'autrefois, p. 7I.) t In certain villages a list of cornards was drawn up and circulated annually on Saint Joseph's day, March 19. (See Charles Perron, ProtJerbes de la Franche-Comte, p. 122; Perron, Broye-Ies- 

Charivaris 

could be bought off. The young who charivaried also determined the amount of the fine that could prevent the rough music or secure its ending. In villages of Hautes-Pyrenees, strangers coming to marry or to settle in the community were subject to payment of "a right of entry," without which they got a charivari.3 But almost everywhere, as we have seen, neighbors and especially the village young organized "barrages" on the way to church, which held wedding parties up to playful ransom and which could easily degenerate into resentful raucousness if the expected tip or fine was not forthcoming. At Saint- Jeannet (Alpes-Maritimes), all marrying couples had to pay a tax to the abbot of the local youth. The tax was based on the estimated fortune of the couple and was levied at a higher rate in the case of remarriages. Refusal to pay led to a charivari; generous payments to bonfires, volleys of shots, and serenades in the couple's honor.* 

So things could be simple and quite pleasant, if one paid. The alternative was humiliation at Carnival or in a charivari organized to strike at an offender while the fire was hot. The public jibing at Carnival was doubtless painful, but from all accounts the charivari was rather frightening; and in any case, intolerable from the point of view of public authorities beginning to assert themselves at the expense of more ancient bodies. In Var a village mayor expressed indignation as early as 1821: "Disorders worthy of times of ignorance and barbarism" should be brought to an end. One had to prove "to those who, despite the efforts of the authorities, think they can do what they like with impunity under the pretext of an established usage, that one cannot hold people who remarry up for ransom."4 Our good mayor has summed everything up: the practice linked to "ignorance and barbarism," hence condemned by progress; the efforts of new "authorities" to supplant the old; the stress on the rule of law (one can no longer do just as one liked); the denunciation of traditional fines as sheer blackmail. So there were now some persons unwilling to accept the assumptions on which the charivari was based. And it seems that this point of view allied with police hostility to disturbances of the peace drove rough music back, especially in large urban centers.5 J.-A. Delpon noted that the charivari was beginning to disappear in the towns of Lot in 1831. At Saint- Jeannet, then in Var, it was prohibited in 1838. Yet, as at Vezelay, the more local the local authorities were and the less inhibited by the presence of limbs of the law, the more likely they were to support the practice, or at least close 

Pesmes.) In the mid-1880'S the widowed tenant farmer of the Seveyrac estate near Bozouls (Aveyron) had his lease canceled following a charivari that had denounced his housekeeper for sleeping with him (L'Aubrac, 2: 18t). 

• J.-E. Mallaussene, Saint-Jean net, p. 23. Compare events at Vezday in 1853. See also Paul Fortier-Beaulieu, Manages et noces campagnardes dans les pays ayant forme le departement de la Loire (Paris, 1945), pp. 236-42. Note that on the western border of Loire marriages provided the occasion for charivaris designed to revive family feuds that sometimes went back generations and might have started up over such diverse things as a suicide, the loss of a sow, or a boundary dispute. This was known as reproaching ("Faire des reproches"). 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

their eyes to it.6 Thus at Daumazan (Ariege) the marriage of the notary's servant girl, alleged to have been tampered with by her master, led to a charivari in 1844 whose participants ended in police court. Even so, "troubles" continued there, but both gendarmes and local authorities were sympathetic and minimized whatever infraction of the law there was. Under the Empire the village was run on a tighter rein; and in December 1861 the new mayor prohibited all songs and satirical noise-making after 8 P.M. as a disturbance of the peace: the provocations of songs and countersongs, each growing more insulting than the last, made for disorder and violence.7 

It is worth remembering that not all the objects of charivaris took them lying down. A good many replied in kind or even fired at their raucous tormentors. Of course, the nature of charivaris was to isolate their prey and make the victim helpless to retaliate. But even isolated men armed with determination and a good shotgun could cause some damage. This was all the truer when politics figured in.s 

Charivaris were a very forcible form of criticism: they could be directed as much against an offending notable as a local drunk or a chronic debtor.* It is hardly surprising that they were also connected with politics. In October 1819 a charivari organized by the anticlerical bourgeois of Brest forced the bishop of Quimper to put an end to the mission preached there by Jesuits. Similar tumults greeted the return of another mission in 1826. At Mas-d'Azil (Ariege) a political charivari in November 1830 was raised to repay a man accused of having used similar methods himself in 1815. At Moulins (Allier) in 1832 we hear of two: one against the bishop, the other against a local deputy, Monsieur de Schonen, "considered too devoted to King Louis Philippe." About this same time the "bourgeois" of the small bourg of Montpezat (Ardeche) were organizing Legitimist charivaris that worried the gendarmes. In 1833 the Minister of the Interior wrote to the prefect of Ariege to warn him against a proposed "outrage against our civilization," grotesque parodies of the disorders the government had recently repressed. A Republican society (Aide-toi) was apparently plotting to charivari all deputies. Prefects were to be on their guard and to use all means to prevent this. I have found no further trace of the alleged plot, but it suggests the propaganda possibilities of charivaris, with the government well aware of them-and of how they could be turned into political demonstrations.9 

In February 1834 Auxerre Republicans charivaried the mayor so effectively that the armed forces had to intervene. The following February (again the Carni val!) another Y onne town, Tonnerre, reported similar trouble. The sub-prefect complained that in the rural communes Shrovetide was being used as an excuse for songs that turned to politics. But most of the evidence 

• Their participatory counterpart, the donkey ride, was also inflicted on a variety of miscreants who had offended against other than sexual interdictions. At Angely (Yonne) thieves and pilferers were "mounted"; elsewhere the ride was forced on outsiders who flouted community custom by working on local feastdays or by trying to join in a village dance (M. C. Moiset, "Usages, croyances, traditions, superstitions ••• ," Bulletin de la Societe de! Science! ... de I'Yonne, 1888, pp. 20-22). 

Charivaris 

refers to T onnerre itself: one hears of a lot of songs, both personal and political (after all, the two were almost identical) being bandied about between February 18 and February 23, and of floats that were politically allusive. On February 24 the mayor forbade the use of drums between 6 P.M. and 8 P.M., hoping to discourage the raucous demonstrations that had marched to them. But the crowd marched without drum or float, and worse still, singing "La Marseillaise." The police superintendent could not disperse them; the national guard refused to intervene because all the inhabitants knew each other. Rather than send for troops, the authorities decided to sit it out and wait for the end of Carni va1.10 

The February Revolution of 1848 and the elections that followed also involved charivaris, though in what numbers one cannot tell. We hear of one at Strasbourg directed against an unpopular conservative deputy, Renouard de Bussiere; of others at BelIey (Ain) against Adolphe d' Angeville, author of the pioneering Essai sur la statistique de la population franraise, denounced as Malthusian in town and countryside, "the worst of insults in the Jura of 1848."11 The sparseness of the evidence could reflect the rarity of the usage. Yet it may be that such conventional forms of attack were not thought to deserve a mention. 

Noticeably, the political charivaris were largely restricted to towns with a political public. In smaller places even "political" tumults remained on familiar ground. At Arfeuilles (Allier) in 1828 a charivari was raised against the superior of the little seminary who had fired a teacher the students liked; at Cusset, in the same department, a charivari attacked the new justice of the peace in 1832. At Cunlhat (Puy-de-Dome) a big charivari turned against the collector of taxes and the local doctor, accused of having used their influence on behalf of an unpopular candidate to the General Council of the department. Only at Bretenoux, a smallish bourg in northeast Lot, do we hear of a truly political case in which a "representative of the people," Monsieur de Saint- Priest, had been charivaried and the local authorities had done nothing about it. But this was 1849, and Bretenoux is only a couple of miles from the castle of Castelnau. Political sentiment must have run strong and one-sided.12 

This is almost the last political charivari I have found. Unless we count one that never came off. This involved Jules Favre, the Republican barrister, who while in Morlaix to plead a case in August 1866 was spared the ordeal when a local magistrate prevented a charivari from being organized against him. The religious struggles of the turn of the century provided a revival, notably in Allier, where anticlericalism was strong and where in the years after 1877 roadside crosses were often broken and priests publicly insulted. Songs against priests were much appreciated, and some charivaris took place in front of village churches, as occurred at Dommerat, not far from Commentry, during Lent in 1884. On the other hand, straightforwardly social charivaris continued. In January 1853 the corporal of gendarmes at BelIey (Ain) reported a considerable charivari in one village in which about 100 persons of both sexesCHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

gathered to harass the widow Gauthier. The gendarmes intervened to disperse the crowd, arrested one man, and then had trouble when the rest of the crowd sought to free him, but "force est reste [sic] a la loi." In March of the same year the army commander at Lyon wrote about a charivari at Saint-Martin (Loire), not far from Montbrison, "on the occasion of a widower who married a young girl," in which the eharivariseurs continued their racket even after they had been paid 20 francs. Worse still, the mayor had supported them against the helpless gendarmes. The issue went as far as the Minister of the Interior, with the mayor arguing that the gendarmes were making unnecessary trouble.la But the Empire would not tolerate unlawful assemblies that . often ended tragically, as in Gers where near Lombez, in August r8S3, a married man accused of having left a girl in the family way was stabbed with an awl and died after a charivari degener~ted into a brawl. Still less, one supposes, would the state countenance scofHaws who, more than just defying the minions of the law, aimed their barbs directly at them. At Limoges, attempts to round up local prostitutes in 1857 failed because the women ran away from the hospital where they were confined and if they were further harassed, set off charivaris that got sympathetic support from the nearby barracks.14 

One suspects that police efforts helped to stifle the custom in a good few places. At Foix and at Saint-Girons the eour eornuelo operated through the 1840's, sentencing errant couples to public ridicule. A Limousin folklorist seems to think that the last charivaris at Tulle occurred in the 1850's but adds (after the First World War) that "in the countryside they are ever more rare," which suggests that where police forces were distant and local autonomy strong, the tradition endured. In the Basque country, wrote an observer in 1857, the police had tried to repress "these traditional games that had become too licentious" for IS or 20 years. But without success. The traditional game survived until after the Great War, with popular approval. At Agos-Vidalos (Hautes-Pyrenees) a bridegroom who refused the "honors" proffered for his wedding and-what was worse-would not pay for them became the object of a charivari in 1858. Others occurred at Argeles, against widowers who remarried and against a man-beating wife (r86r) ; at Lau, where the objection was not specified; and at Tilhouse, not far from Lannemezan.15 

Local Basque poets (koblakari) would often improvise charivari serenades to some traditional tune, and these would be taken up by the assembled crowd or sung around the village. But songs in local dialect especially composed for the occasion were a particular feature of the charivari: we hear of them in Ardeche and Lauragais, where names of the more notorious songsters survived well past their death."" They were no doubt as bawdy as the charivaresque farces performed at Carnival, which raised cries of indecency, obscenity, gross impropriety. Rape, birth, and castration were enacted on stage and commented 

• As in the case of a ropemaker from Villefranche (Haute-Garonne) who devised rhymes for a fee for people: of. the surrounding countryside. His wit and his wide: audience seem to have made him feared and influential (P. Fagot, Folklore du Lauragais, pp. 147-49). 

Charivaris 

on in the rudest language. This would not do. The offending plays were banned. The young were forced to camouflage their farces within acceptable mystery plays or tragi-comedies that could get by the censors far away at the prefecture. Hence the authorities were able to aver that such gross farces were dead (sub-prefect of Mault~on, 1903), while they carried on sub rosa. Still, it does seem, as the evidence thins out or its tone changes, that custom slipped into prank ish ness, while essence seeped away. By 1891 the charivari songs of Lauragais had "lost their primitive flavor for us who do not understand their particular references." And no new songs or poets rose to take their place.l6 In a charivari at Baume (Ardeche) in the J860's, whose organizers were condemned to fines and prison sentences, the object of their attention could have bought them off for a setier of wine (21 liters). The man who recalled this in the 1880'S was glad that "such bizarre and unpardonable customs disappear from day to day; the lights of instruction ... teach all to respect the liberty of their fellows."17 And, right enough, the schools taught that charivaris were improper. As the first-year civics text adopted in the 1880'S warned: "Those who make a charivari (confused noise of pans, cauldrons, whistles, and shouts) at somebody's door with an offensive purpose are punished with a fine up to IS francs and even with prison sentences."18 Primarily what one finds by this time are survivals that have taken refuge in the countryside.l9 The last chari varis at N anteuil (Seine-et-Marne) occurred in 1870; at ViIlierssur-Morin about a decade later. At Prades (Pyrenees-Orientales) in 1896 we hear: "charivari at a widow's who was about to marry for a second time. The mayor himself kept order." At Chateaulin in 1901 the local priest, "very unpopular in a religious town," planned a procession that would prevent the Mardi Gras fun. The local youth decided to follow the religious procession in disguise and organized a charivari. The police and the mayor persuaded the priest to give up his plan. In the Bourbonnais uplands the homemade bulIhorn called the bour/oir, made out of local beechwood, was still used for charivaris in 1908; and Varagnac was to witness a charivari in 1943 just a few miles from Montauban against a widow who had remarried.20 

In effect, like bonfires, like Carnivals of which they had so often been a part, charivaris survived here and there, resurfaced now and then. In Angoumois, where as in Quercy charivaris could be heard of through the Second World War, there were places where the long intervals between sporadic revivals made all assume the charivari was dead. There were other places where it had been abandoned in the early 1900'S and where its memory was dying or already dead because few children had heard about it from their parents. In Loire many villages still mounted charivaris in the 1930's but many others reported their disappearance with the turn of the century or the First World War. Most revealing, however, at Charlieu, a cantonal township in the department's northeast where charivaris were still to be heard, "now those who make them hide themselves."21 

The practice of promenading misdoers on a donkey had declined in the 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

same way: remoter, more isolated areas persisting in it the longest, so that the Ardennes, Poitou, parts of the Meuse valley still knew the asoade (or whatever) in the 1880'S. Some of the last specific references to beaten husbands thus held up to scorn come from small, remote places: Grand-Brassac (Dordogne) in 1880, a hamlet near Aumagne (Charente) in 1901. In Sologne by the last quarter of the nineteenth century, cornards were no longer publicly humiliated in bigger bourgs like Souesmes or Mennetou-sur-Cher. More isolated communities, like Saint-Viatre and Selles-Saint-Denis, kept the donkeys busy until 1914 but, as at Villeny, "it was only for fun." The spontaneous popular castigation of untoward breaches of usage or morality had become simply sport for the villagers.22 The carcass of charivaris remained. But it was disemboweled. 
