+++
title = "24 VEILLEES"

+++
Après le souper, on veille encore une heure ou deux en teillant du chanvre, chacun dit sa chanson à son tour. 

-JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU 

Veillée, n.f. Time from supper to bedtime, evening (in company); sitting up to work, etc. in company. 

-CASSELL'S FRENCH-ENGLISH DICTIONARY 

THROUGHOUT MOST OF rural France the winter evenings were long and cold and lonely. Fires had to be husbanded; candles and rushlights too. Everything cost too much. Adequate heat and light were almost unthinkable. During the frigid winter months in Mâconnais women, when they had finished their housework, went into the stables for the veillées du jour. The men would join them there, and the midday meal was often taken in the stable because the house was too cold. The evening meal necessitated a fire, but where fuel was short, people made the briefest possible use of the fire. So after the soupe they hastened to curl up in a pallet, in the dark, sharing the animal heat of one or several neighbors, presumably asleep; or took refuge in the stable; or repaired to any other place where they could find a little warmth. In places like Treigny in Yonne, where pottery was the main industry, most of the local people warmed themselves in winter by the heat of the kilns and "thus dispensed with making fires at home." The justice of the peace in 1852 reported considerable crowds “à la veillée" every evening. In parts of Marne veillées were held in wine cellars, which being of chalk kept in the warmth. Artisans who worked late into the night, perhaps because of different tasks during the daytime, needed a light, as carpenters and shoemakers did. Around them there might form a chatting circle, which sometimes turned into a chambrée. But most evening gatherings were to be found in barns or sheepfolds or stables, where the warmth of animals was more important than the sharp odors of manure.1 

Whether in house or stable, neighbors or friends gathered on winter evenings, once or twice a week, or even every day. Meeting in turn at one place after another, three to six families or more thus saved on heat and light, using only one family's resources at a time. It was not only firewood that mattered, but lighting. In the mountains of Provence, where the rustic caleu, a wick burning in walnut oil, continued to be used to the end of the century, partici-414 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

pants of veillées shared lighting costs.2 In Languedoc, when the veillée began, the mistress of the house put out her own tallow candle and lit a communal one whose price was shared by all who attended.\* 

Veillées began as the fall labors dwindled-sometimes around All Saints, more often after Saint Martin's (November 11)-and tended to end in March or around Easter, when the spring's sowing came. Their span reflected the natural order: as days grew longer, veillées grew shorter, and the women used one distaff less in their spinning. Hence the proverb "By Carnival day, a spindle put away" (A carmentrant, eune fusée sous le banc). As this suggests, the practical aspect of evening gatherings went beyond need, to production. According to the region, women spun, knitted, embroidered, or tatted; men dressed hemp, plaited baskets, or repaired their implements. The women, generally charged with more meticulous work requiring better light, got the best seats at veillées, close to the fire or the lumignon, though they often ate their meals standing up while serving their menfolk. The men generally sat far from the fire, in the near-darkness. Fruit was stoned, nuts shelled or chestnuts blanched, apples peeled for the preparation of a local wine or for making jam. In Upper Brittany alone, Paul Sébillot has distinguished, by activity, five different sorts of veillées in operation in 1880: spinning (filouas or filanderies), hemp-twisting (erusseries de chanvre), apple-cooking (cuisseries de pommé), night laundering (lessives de nuit), and veillonas, especially devoted to fun and dancing. 

Music and fun were a feature of most veillées; just as all evidence confirms that a major attraction was the opportunity for courtship and flirtation between lads and girls. The number of songs and games specifically involved with these courtship customs is vast. At Saille-les-Bains (Loire), the nutshelling began by rushlight around 5 in the afternoon, went on till 10 or so, when salt bread and buckwheat cakes were served, the empty shells were gathered up, 

and the young people danced to the accompaniment of a hurdygurdy, a singer, or (later) an accordion. This pattern was roughly followed in most such gatherings; and in another Loire village, Saint-Martin-d'Estréaux, not far from Lapalisse, we hear that in 1910 four-fifths of all marriages were born out of veillées.\* 

But veillées also had a didactic function-generally informal. Traditional skills were learned by participation. Traditional wisdom was learned in the same way. The talk was full of allusions to the past: the time of the lords, of the Revolution, of the wolves and how they disappeared. The oral culture perpetuated itself by the tales told, the pious legends, the teachings about the supernatural realm, the explanations of nature and of life, the precepts that applied to every sort of situation and that were contained in the formulas, songs, and proverbs repeated over and over again in these amorphous schools. 

But no more than half of the communal candle could be used at a meeting, so a knitting needle was thrust through it to divide it in half. When the needle fell, the veillée was over (René 

Nelli, Languedoc, p. 103). 

Veillées 

[[415]]

In Lorraine, where Louis Marin has argued that the veillée had a peculiar educational purpose, the winter meetings turned around traditional tales and fables and on the commentary they inevitably provoked-a kind of public reflection on experience and tradition, and a communion with the past. These ancient village institutions were going strong in the 1880's. The growth of industry, the influx of workingmen of outside origin, the flow of material novelties into the countryside-and schools of course--would finish them off. By 1900 half the parishes of the Lorraine plateau had given up veillées. Many of the rest had given up reciting the traditional tales, hence had shed their role in the transmission of oral traditions.5 

The competition of the schools was much too strong. In Breton gallo country, where by the 1880's veillées seem to have been less frequent than in the past, we hear that the old tales were being replaced by stories from the schoolbooks-often told by the children. The modern wisdom was the preserve of youth, not age. But the people of education and involved in education in the rural areas had never liked veillées. Schoolteachers felt their influence was pernicious. Rude language was used; there were lewd stories and sometimes lewder songs. In any case there were better things for the young to do. "Instead of gadding about to veillées uttering cries that make one doubt whether they are men or wild beasts," grumbled one teacher in Tarn in 1861, "they could go and read a book." And in a survey of the previous year, teachers in a wide range of departments-Aveyron, Ardèche, Ain, Saône-et- Loire, Nièvre, Bas-Rhin-expressed the hope that libraries might counter the mischief done in veillées. 

It was not so much that veillées were rude as that they were unenlightened. It is true that one feared moral laxity in gatherings "where all sexes and all ages are admitted." Priests hotly objected to the moral promiscuity of the sexes crowded together at night, and to what ensued: "revolting dances, unbecoming puns and double entendres, dangerous discourse." They would "brand and prohibit them from the pulpit" in Ariège; and local reformers denounced these "gravely objectionable gatherings... with their corruption, lewd jokes, and songs." Unfortunately, "young village girls enjoy the greatest liberty," and it was to be feared that "they take advantage of it on their way home." In Brittany, observed Sébillot, the clergy "by dint of preaching has forced the disappearance [of veillées] just as it has suppressed dancing.' 

[[997]]

Still, moral objections were not new. Intellectual objections, supported by the schools, had greater force. A report on the state of the schools in Ariège in 1868 makes clear that what was regarded as "a deadly deep-rooted" evil was the filling of young heads with "tales full of superstitious terrors." No wonder that the priests and teachers were not admitted to Lorraine veillées. They were seen as critics of old customs and of traditional tales, working to annihilate them and to root out the mentality they perpetuated.8 

Conditions were working for the critics. By the turn of the century, veillées were wasting away. Their productive functions were affected one by one. 

[[416]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Spinning declined as a contribution to the household budget. We hear of this first under the Second Empire, but obviously the decline took time to affect isolated regions. Hemp ceased to be an important crop; and chestnuts played less of a part in diet, as did nuts in providing oil. In a survey of 12 Roannais villages that at one time apparently had veillées about every other day during the winter season, two reported that they had been abandoned by 1900, another that they had declined about that time (only old maids still went), and a fourth that men had stopped dressing hemp about 1907 and even dancing had ceased in 1914. Four villages in all saw 1914 as putting paid to these activities; and in another, such social gatherings were infrequent after that date, falling off from three times a week to three times a year. In the seven villages where veillées survived, they were kept alive for the dancing (no work was mentioned), or by the continued patronage of a few people who would not give them up, or as a place for the old to meet. In most cases their ending was ascribed to concrete developments: the end of hand embroidery, of nut-shelling, of hemp-dressing. The same is true of Savoy, where veillées stopped once the market for walnut oil disappeared and the trees were cut for rifle stocks and furniture." 

The veillée appears to have declined well before the end of the century in some areas. In the Ardennes reports from schoolteachers suggest it waned during the 1880's. In Upper Brittany by 1880 the considerations of safety, which had led peasants to live close to one another, were no longer so pressing, and the distances between more isolated farms inhibited large gatherings. Meanwhile, improved roads gave more people access to other types of social activities in the bourg. Either way, veillées suffered. In Bresse, where in the 1870's all the inhabitants of certain hamlets had gathered for veillées, coming if need be by boat, by 1894 only the people in the poorest parts, untouched by prosperity, still kept up the custom.10 There, as in Mâconnais and Bouchesdu-Rhône, the major purpose of such gatherings seems to have been to find warmth and company in a stable. When homes became more comfortable and inns or cafés became available in villages, veillées lost their practical purpose. 

Now their format could be adapted to more novel enterprises, subversive of the world they represented. When, in 1905, a Socialist or Socialist-inspired study group was formed at Cuisery (Saône-et-Loire), a large rural bourg only a few miles east of Tournus, the pattern it adopted was that of the veillée. There were songs and moral tales; there were the sketch-playlets called saynètes, such as the one about John, a poor peasant in love with Jane, whose wealthier parents refuse to entertain his suit. We do not know the impact of these notions (clearly related to the proximity of the proud old town that boasted Greuze and Albert Thibaudet among its sons). But we do know that all proceedings were suspended from spring to fall, just as the veillées had been when fieldwork called.11 

Veillées 

[[417]]

Meanwhile, where life remained hard, and especially where local crops continued to provide a task for winter evenings, veillées carried on. In Cantal we hear of them at least to the end of the century. In Gers, to the north of Auch, poor sharecropper country where the diet remained deficient to the Second World War, veillées-"where one played belote or knitted while shelling and picking corn and eating potatoes and chestnuts baked in ashes"--began to disappear only after 1945. By contrast, by 1890 "the time of long veillées [was] past" for villagers south of Sedan; and in Vexin (where velocipedes appeared in villages) the veillées were withering: "only about ten persons," "the conversation apathetic," "rare remarks." There was some women's gossip, but not even much of that because the men were listening; the women preferred to guard their tongues until they could exchange confidences among themselves at the washhouse.12 

Common tasks and need provided a concrete excuse for social gatherings, and so did the lack of alternatives. When these motives waned so did veillées. The young left for the café, especially as bicycles became available. The balance of ages broke down. Without the young, the evenings became duller, and the old people who continued the circles tended to spend most of their time at cards, especially when artisanal tasks like ropemaking or basketweaving became less profitable as commercial products got cheaper. At Maillane in the mid-nineteenth century the peasants had gathered on winter evenings to work and warm themselves in the stable; by 1906 they went to play billiards or cards in a café. Even in Finistère, where veillées had been relatively short because of the need to economize fuel, by 1914 we see the servants hastening off to their own quarters while the master looks through the local paper or reads a chapter of the lives of the Breton saints. It seems that light and heat now permitted this. The interesting thing is that many traditional gatherings lingered on, like certain rites, until a war precipitated their end— either in 1870-71 or in 1914-18.13 

It is clear from the changed composition of the surviving veillées that their integrative functions no longer held. The classic veillée had gathered a group of different ages; now young and old tended to part company. The gatherings had been larger and had been based on locality rather than social class. This changed too. As early as 1869 we hear that in Vosges veillées were splitting up on social lines. As "civilization" spread, Xavier Thiriat tells us, tablecloths made their appearance, wine was served instead of the cheaper local brews, and festive spreads of meat, salad, and cakes replaced the rye bread and cheese of yore. As a result families that were unable to match the standards of their richer neighbors drank and played cards at separate veillées." 

The veillées of the new model were simply get-togethers, unconstrained by the conditions and necessities that had ruled the old. In Bourbonnais the men played cards, the women knitted or sewed. The same thing in Rouergue. In Allier, where men had occupied themselves in making the baskets they used 

[[14]]

[[418]]

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

in sowing (saneaux), wood or metal baskets were now bought in shops, and the veillée was devoted to reading, correspondence, and playing cards. In Franche-Comté husbands read novels while their wives sewed (the women would take up spinning again in the Second World War). Emile Guillaumin, for one, had little regret at the passing of the veillées or at the passing of the folklore that had been served in them. It had been only cover for, if not the inspiration of, chronic anxiety, suspicion, and uneasiness. Now, wrote Guillaumin in 1936, the world held less violence, less savagery.15 The superstitions that the veillée sustained and quickened were no longer appropriate. 