+++
title = "25 THE ORAL WISDOM"

+++

In the beginning was the Word. 

-JOHN 1:1 

WITH THE PASSING of the veillees there died one of the great institutions for the transmission of knowledge acquired by word of mouth. In the veillees there had been much talk, the voicing of personal memories, the recitation of tales, saws, and witty sayings. The degree to which this went on seems to have varied from region to region. Peasants in general do not appear to have been very articulate. But whether they tended to be taciturn and sober, as in the Landes or Beauce, or expansive and ebullient, as in Languedoc, peasants everywhere relied heavily in their everyday speech on an established fund of locutions that could take the place of general ideas. Like old Pere Martin in Ernest Lavisse's widely used elementary school text, L'Annee preparatoire d'instruction morale, the peasants talked largely in proverbs, dictons, common sayings-ready-made expressions of wisdom or comment. Proverbs, wrote Pe re Gorse, "there's the peasant's creed, the learning he has ripened and assimilated to the innermost recesses of his soul. ... All his thought is in them, and beyond that he thinks no more."! We should do well to heed this. 

Like memories preserved by word of mouth, an oral culture is almost by definition subject to change and evanescent. The formulas it elaborates are almost the only windows we have to look into its soul. At this stage in our observations what they reveal to us will not be very new, but if these formulations are valid evidence, they make still clearer the kind of world that we have left behind. 

The philosophy of life was stoic: "When the man can't cross by the bridge, he will cross through the water"; "When we have nothing left, we shall have nothing to lose." The realism was harsh: "A scalded cat fears even the cold water"; "The weakling cheats, the strong commands." After all, someone had to give the orders: "Many masters means no master." The song of the turning mill wheels was "I'll do unto you as you do unto me." In any ca~e, "Someone 

420 CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION else's trouble is a dream." There were no illusions: "One has to do anything to eat." And especially when it came to money : "To get his hands on the purse, a man will even marry a bear ." Trust was in short supply: "If one knew what goes on at night, one would have iron doors"; "You plant in vain if you don't enclose"; "Who comes from afar can lie more easily"; "It is easier to catch a rabbit than a liar"; and "If you pay anything in advance, you're paying your tormentor." But even one's closest kin could let one down, so "Don't strip yourself before you are in bed"; "Who gives his goods away before he dies deserves to suffer." And in any case, "He who complains lasts longest."2 

One didn't give secrets away: "Don't shout too loudly, for bushes have ears." Or trust in men's discretion either, for "A man would rather swallow his teeth than his tongue." The land was worth what the man was worth, but there was no justice: "The man who works gets the straw, the one who doesn't gets the wheat." And the peaceful inherited only trouble: "Pretend you're a sheep, the wolf will eat you up." It was no use pushing too hard: "You'll surely have enough land to cover you one day." But there was no sympathy for the idle: "Spin, Adeline, if you want clothes on your back"; "Lazybones would like to eat marrow but bewails his trouble in cracking the bone." No room for nostalgia either: "All yesteryears are good"; "Every tree has its shadow." And if "It's always fair weather for someone," most peasants probably added an under-the-breath "but not for me." There was scant room for affection: "Dead wife, new hat"; "Sorrow for a dead wife last as far as the door." As for a child, "Better load him down than fill him up." Wisdom lay in economy: "Undress Saint Peter to dress Saint Paul." And in prudence: "Don't count the eggs in a chicken's arse"; "After the fair, we'll count the cowpats"; "Always keep a pear for thirst." Wisdom also lay in knowing one's place: "Swineherd in this world, swineherd in the next"; "Don't pretend you know better than the priest"; "Don't fart higher than your arse"; "Don't be vain like a flea under a velvet coat" ; "Youth, don't raise your head; it is a sign of pride; do like the ear of corn: when it is ripe it hangs its head." Keep out of sight: "One's only happy in one's hole." Above all, keep away from the powerful: "Who thrusts himself among the legs of the great risks being trampled." And from lawmen: "A willow for shelter, a bailiff for friend, one is fast without friend and without shelter." Be close with your money-"Y ou choke if you payout to get a profit"-better do without. 

Excellent advice most of it, for survival in a world full of dangers. No wonder the Basque proverb said, "Old words, wise words." 

So, proverbs are compact ideological statements-much matter decocted in a few words, according to the definition of a seventeenth-century worthy. They reveal traditional experience, define the rules and structure that society sets 

The Oral Wisdom 421 

for individuals, fashion their mentalities, and help them construct their identities. They sketch out a world-view within accessible limits. The bourgeois refers in his saying to the splendors of the Bay of Naples, but the countryman has more accessible images of grandeur: "Who hasn't seen Auch cathedral and the belltower of Rodez has seen naught," says the southwestern saw. And closer still to home: "Between Tudet and La Chapelle [Tarn-et-Garonne] there is more money than in England"; or, "At Mountbegui the people haven't even the earth to make a pot."a Finally, proverbs regulate most people's elementary relations-not only with their fellow men, but with their land and work. 

This is where the English notion that proverbs incorporate one man's wit and all men's wisdom reveals itself as coined by an urban mind. The wisdom proverbs carry is not universally valid, and does not aim at generality. The monitory proverb provides specific counsel grown out of local conditions. "Year of wind, year of naught," says the Franc-Comtois, referring to the sudden gusts of dry wind from the south betokening drought. The Franc- Comtois also despises the northwest wind that blows in the springtime, which he calls prickle-blossom (l'air de pique-blanches) because it causes late frosts that kill the plum blossoms before the fruit has had a chance to set. Hence the old proverb that refers to Paris, which lies in the same direction: 4 

Neither good wind nor good people Have ever come from those whereabouts. 

This would not make sense in central or western France. On the other hand, the Poitou adage advising that nuts are ripe for picking at Saint Magdalen's (July 22) would have no meaning in Franche-Comte, where nuts do not ripen until September. In Morvan the advice for spring sowing is very precise: you have to sow your barley by Saint George's day (April 23); by Saint Mark's (April 25) it will be too late. But this is good for barley and for the latitude (and altitude) of a north-central plateau. It does not apply farther south, any more than another Morvan dicton: "February rain is as good as manure, March rain isn't worth a fox's piss." In Gers they tend to be even more discriminating: "The ox wants rain [for hay and straw], the pig wants dryness [for the wheat he gets]." In the Limousin pigs would eat acorns, and cattle graze on grass. And few outside the appropriate countryside would understand "Year of beechnut, year of famine; year of acorns, year of naught," which recalls the difficult times when, in the east, people ate the food of trees that they disdained when things went well. In Ardeche the west wind that blows from the rugged uplands of Velay bringing fine rain and often hailstorms is perceived as coming from Pradelles in Haute-Loire (just across the border), hence Iou pradellentcho.5 Similarly, in Gers, where the dominant winds come from the west and bring rain, rural dwellings faced east and 

422 CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

turned blind walls to the windy side. For Gascon peasants east is the front (le det/ant), west is the rear. On the other hand, the t/ent d' autan, hot and dry, blows from the east or southeast; hence the old proverb that 

The East wind goes to see its father [ocean], Will return in tears [rain].· 

Traditional sayings are local, and their meaning is often lost unless one knows the associations that brought them into being. Thus, in Auvergne, spring coincides not with the swallow, but with the cuckoo: 

A brillaou introu. Cucu chantou. Sounailles marlou. 

April arrives. Cuckoo sings. Bells tinkle. 

The cuckoo's song signals the release of cattle from their winter quarters; their bells celebrate their return to fresh grass and sunshine. Less romantically, the comparison of an unkempt girl with a resin candle made sense only where people were familiar with the messy dripping ways of such candles- Lauragais, Minervois, Agenais, and other southwestern regions. In Bourbon~ nais "Like godfather, like godson" refers not to some moral influence, but to the fact that grandfathers were normally selected to act as their grand~ children's godfathers.6 

Practical advice for the FranvComtois farmer was based on common sense, which may not be as common as the term suggests. Sow wheat below and plant vines above. Sow wheat in damp ground and barley in dry (Plutarch had said as much). If you want good turnips sow them in July. On the other hand, do not ever sow winter wheat after Saint Clement's (November 23); this must have referred to emergencies, since the fall sowing was proverbially related to the feastday of Saint Denis (October 9). Everything was couched in rhyme and related to familiar benchmarks, which made the counsels easier to remember: 1 

• In Provence, too, the bise, the good breeze that blows from west or northwest is the wind from doe, where behind "sea" [the or house): "mountain" vent de may darr". stand Jean for Poueigh south: "Mari cites similar dar e locutions cers escur, in es parts de plejo of Languea cop segur," or "mountagno claro, Bourdeu [Bordeaux) escur, plejo per sigur." The wind is commonly said to blow from, or in relation to, a familiar local landmark: Canigou in Pyrenees- Orientales, Maguelonne in Herault, Arbizon or Montaut in Hautes-Pyrenees, Marcou in the Lower cevennes. (Le Folklore des pays d'Oc, pp. 52-58.) Similarly, the position of the sun determined various place-names: at Miradoux (Gers) the sun rose above the spot called Le Point du Jour; at Pavie (Gers) it rose over the mill of Hebus (Phoebus); and Bigourdans knew it was noon when the sun stood above the Pie du Midi de Bigorre. (Henri Polge, Nouveaux melanges de phi/ologie et d'ethnographie gersoise, Auch, 1960, p. 108.) Lucienne Roubin tells us that in the villages of Upper Provence the highest point struck by the sun at noon and visible to the men working in the fields as to the womenfolk close to their houses became the midday line or the midday stroke, barre duou mied;6u ("Ordonnance toponymique en montagne proven~ale," in L'Homme, hier et au;ourd'hui, Paris, 1974, p. 477). 

The Oral Wisdom 

Ai lai Saint-Jouset Sanne tas pouets [peas]. Ai lai Saint-Panera Sannelas eheneva [hemp]. Ai lai Saint-Aubin Sanne das pois, t'en aire bin [you'll have aplenty]. Ai lai Saint-Denys Darrere vouguasson du pays [last sowing]. Qui veut hon navet Le seme en juillet. 

Passe la Saint-Clement Ne seme plus de froment. A la Sainte-Catherine Tout hois prend racine.8 

They were remembered so well that the proverbs survived the reality. Thus the saying has it that if it rains on Saint Medard's day (June 8) the rain will go on for 40 days. This could have had a semblance of sense before the Gregorian calendar reform of 1582, when that day fell around what is now mid- June, a time when the weather varies little. It makes less sense at the beginning of the month, when the weather is still notoriously unstable. A more striking example is to be found in a whole series of sayings about the length of days, according to which by Saint Lucy's (December 13) the day begins to grow a tiny bit-by a flea's step in most versions. This was quite correct before 1582, when the feastday fell after the winter solstice, but makes no sense by the modern calendar, since days are still growing short on December I 3. Yet these sayings continue to be repeated-even in the Petit Larousse.9 

Authentic peasant art was very limited. The printed images that flooded the countryside and that we shall shortly meet were an urban art, just as the oral story was a rural one. But the peasant's verbal imagery was very rich indeed, expressed in language that was full of humor and lyricism. Thus in Livradois sickles were called volants (flyers) because in use they flew and turned in flashes. Pastures in the Vendee bocage were mouchoirs a boeufs. The small winegrowers of the Marne valley west of Epernay called the absentee owners from the Reims "mountain" they worked for cossiers, after the beans (cosses) that grew between the vines and provided the workmen's staple diet. In fall the gangs of grape-pickers who descended like a horde on the vineyards were les hordons.ln Nievre a man was no more afraid of something than a lawyer is of an ecu; and something was made or done on purpose just as dogs are made for the express purpose of biting people. In Ille-et-Vilaine an active person was one who did not put both feet in the same sabot, and a cow drifting away from the herd mowed violets (faucher la violette).CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Popular Breton speech was (and is) full of picturesque metaphors: hard water that wears hard on linen "has teeth"; waves are "the roof of the sea"; the sun is the great butter-robber because it melts it; a man swelled up with pride is "stretched like a ship's sail"; and one who lives by his wits "lives off his nails." "The sun is past his threshold" indicates that a person is dead or out-of-date. One flings oneself on or seizes something or someone avidly "like misery upon poor people." As for a man who will agree with anybody, or modulate his song to anything, he is of the wood that flutes are made of. He can play any tune you like. 

In Franche-Comte a similar locution described those who are easily satisfied: they are of the wood pitchforks are made of. Pitchforks are also used to spread things out-generally manure-in fairly large quantities, so to say that it is easier to spend than to save, one said, "What comes with a rake, goes with a pitchfork." Since weavers were proverbially poor, a skinny person was thin as a weaver's dog. And since roadworkers were reputed to take it easy, something could be as rare as the sweat of a cantonnier. A frail or gimcrack structure-building or marriage-fell apart like a castle built of cornhusks. The cornmeal cakes known as god or gaudes had to be stirred a long time; so restless tossing about in bed became "to stir the god." Similarly, farter, a term that means rubbing or wearing down by friction as dressers did to hemp, came to mean wearing the sheets to threads by tossing about in bed.Io 

The ready-made imagery of the language would be recruited into service in the musical dialogues between groups of girls and lads at veillees, feasts, and other occasions; in the alternate couplets (like the Basque koblak) improvised and sung by poets (koblakari) trying to best each other; or in the almost ritual exchanges of japes and droll insults chanted or shouted by shepherds from one mountainside to another. All these, of course, also helped further enrich the store of locutions. So did in-jokes drawn from local stories. One old favorite concerns some men who were being lowered down a well on a rope. The man above shouts down that he can hold on no longer, and back comes the helpful advice: "Spit on your hands!" Another praised the wise old man who, alone in the whole village, managed not to slip and spill his water when going up the muddy slope that led from the well. Why? He was the only one who had the sense to set down his full buckets before he slipped.ll . 

There were a great many tales to tell. Some were grounded in historical events. In Burgundian Chalonnais the memories of the imperial raids of the seventeenth century persisted; the same in Bresse, where in the early 1900'S children had grown up praying to the Virgin every evening for protection against the Kaiserlicks of Captain Lacuzon. Elsewhere it was the Swedes of the Thirty Years War who fed the legends. In Maconnais, which was spared the ordeal of invasion until the Allied occupation of 1815, the fairly benevolent 

The Oral Wisdom 

presence of the Austrian troops seems to have left traumatic memories, so that in folktales the Austrians replaced even Saracens as the prototypes of past conquerors, and vestiges of ancient monuments were often attributed to the Austrians.12 Historical memories of another sort were perpetuated in the tales of old people, like the grandfather of Leon Cote in Bourbonnais, who "did not know the name of the masters who through his long life, nearly centenary, had governed France; but could recite without fail the redoubtable winters, when the black bread ... was rare, when the snowdrifts blocked the low doors, when one stayed in bed for days ... to save the meager provender."* 

Historical experience and social tensions could also be transmuted into fables and fairytales. The fact that few such tales are available now in their originai patois makes their analysis somewhat similar to reconstructing pterodactyls from a few bones: the glint in their eyes is missing. We know at any rate that old tales were generally adapted to the peasants' world. Cinderella, who in the Perrault version is the daughter of a gentleman, appears in oral tales as a peasant girl: she spins wool and guards sheep. It is while engaged in this last humble task that she encounters fairies, who give her clothes and shoes-not to go dancing but to attend mass-and it is at church that she meets the prince.t Similarly, in the literary version of "Beauty and the Beast," Beauty is the daughter of a merchant, but in all oral versions she is of much lowlier extraction: her father is a woodcutter, a gardener, a winegrower, or an unskilled laborer, according to the region. Even the kings of many fairytales sound more like prosperous farmers than monarchs: they hire their own servants, go out to meet a shepherd, or set off to the fair asking their daughters if they want anything brought back. One Breton story, more sophisticated than most, has a peasant lad winning his princess, thanks to a fairy's help, despite the bad faith and intrigues of the court around her. In the end, however, the couple return to live in the youth's village, where they are happier than in the royal palace because "kings are surrounded by a crowd of parasites, all lazy and lying."13 

Every striking feature in nature was explained by a tale. Jays had once been blue all over but lost their splendid plumage because one of their ilk had revealed the place where Jesus was hiding under a sheaf of corn. Mineral sources were generally the results of the fairies' intervention. Individual forests, rocks, and caves had their own legends, chiefly of terrible combats in which all the fighters seem to finish dead (a memory of the peasants who issued forth after the men-at-arms had done their bloody work), of wicked lords and innocent shepherdesses raped, of noble hunters and their band condemned 

• En montagne bourbonnaise, pp. 32, 36. Guy de Maupassant, writing on his travels in Brittany, observed: "Le paysan vous parle des aventures accomplies quinze siecles plus tot comme si e1les dataient d'hier, comme si son pe re ou son grand-pere les avait vues" (Oeuvrcs, I: 255). 

t It seems that those oral versions that derive from Perrault restore the heroine to the fields. 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

forever to roam as a chasse maligne.* Gargantua and Pantagruel appear in popular legends, but equally often one encounters local heroes like Morvan's John--of-the-Bearand his two companions, Wring-Oak and The-One-Who- Turns-Windmill:;-by-Blowing-with-His-Behind. t 

The peasant hero may be very strong, but he is just as often humorous and cunning. Violence seems to be left to the specialists: innkeepers who murder travelers (travel is never safe), but mostly nobles. These last, as villains, could be replaced in some tellings by Satan, just as he could be replaced by a rich farmer, a big landowner, or a nobleman. Fictional dangers gave way before real oppressors, oppressors took on symbolic evil form; the peasant's fantasies gave him a yearned-for chance to triumph over either. Many a tale presents the devil attempting to exploit some rustic clown he takes to be stupid, enticing the "bumpkin" into contracts, deals, or farming experiments for his own gain-very like the alien bourgeois or lord of the manor must have looked in the cottager's eye.14 

Escape into myth or fable provided a substitute for impossible action, the possibility of projecting hatreds and resentments, of rejecting fears, of situating misery, toil, and terror in some other world where they could be mastered by magic means or simply by fictional fulfillment. Thus, the medieval romance of the four Aymon brothers, translated into Breton in the sixteenth century, became no longer the tale of four knights resisting a prince (Charlemagne), but the story of rebel shepherds who assert their independence ("We have no master, because we are the strongest") and who articulate the peasant's own hatred of the nobles.t 

True Breton stories, insists F. M. Deguignet, a peasant himself, are easy to recognize by the theme of an encounter between peasant and lord, or peasant and devil, the enemy always finally balked by the peasant's cunning or by the intervention of a priest. This last could sometimes lead to dire results, as can be seen from a tale told in Lower Brittany to help explain the origin of the potato blight that ravaged the Quimper region in the late 1840'S. A would-be wizard of Finistere had gone to the devil's fair at Gourin (Morbihan) and bought a black cat to help him in his contrivances. The cat, of course, was the devil, and only a powerful exorcism would rid the land of it. A priest finally 

• Abbe M. M. Gorse, Au pays bas de Limosin, p. 26; Francis Perot, Folklore bourbonnais, pp. 7-14. The tales of the chasse could be updated simply by adding new means of transport. Thus Claude Seignolle quotes the warning of an old man of Montazeau (Dordogne), who cautioned his listeners to beware not only of the howling pack of "King David's hunt," but also of the "fiery train" that followed the hunt-four or five carriages passing through the sky, full of damned souls and pulled by the devil himself (Les Evangiles du diable, Paris, 1967, p. 324). t Jean Drouillet, Folklore du Nivernais, 4: 25. This last theme appears in a great many folktales in which the poor revenge themselves against the rich by means of farts (see Raymond Doussinet, Les Travaux, p. 485). t But nobles got no worse than the peasant who preyed on his fellows. Many popular tales denounce the debtor turned usurer, the miserable oppressed man who becomes an oppressor in his turn (see Cenac-Moncaut, Littbature populaire de Gascogne, chap. I). 

The Oral Wisdom 

managed to cast the cat out in 1845, but before vanishing it let off a fart so powerful that it knocked over the exorcist and turned all potato leaves black throughout the region. 

The starvation and nusery of the hungry 1840's had to be explained. The poor blamed the rich who engrossed, forestalled, and starved them; the rich blamed the poor who had made songs against the potatoes they had to eat too often for lack of other things, and had thus provoked God's wrath. Finally, all agreed to blame the devil, which may have helped ease the social conflict.15 The folk imagination at work in the political and economic realm can be seen in some of the stories born in the Third Republic. In 1889 it was said that General Boulanger had met Don CarIos (the Legitimist) and Mandrin (the bandit) in a cave at Balme in Dauphine. In 1898, when grain was dear, the story circulated that Jews had bought up large quantities, loaded them on ships, and ordered them dumped into the sea. In 1906 word spread through COtes-du-Nord that dead monks and nuns had come to seek members of the persecuted religious orders and hide them away in caves until things got better. In all these stories traditional motifs are intertwined in typical fashion with fact. But by this time the popular press was supplementing the popular imagination, and the extraordinary fin-de-siecle fantasies of Leo Taxil suggest that contemporary folklore had become predominantly urban.16 

By that time, too, traditional rhyming proverbs had been forgotten in a great many places. Everyone now, wrote a collector of the proverbs of Franche- Comte in 1876, can afford printed calendars that show the phases of the moon and indicate the appropriate times for sowing, planting, and other operations. Such a development was slower to come elsewhere, but even in the wild Morvan we hear that at Flety (Nievre) in 191 I "the present generation doesn't know the sayings that used to rule all life."17 The present generation was school-educated, and school taught universally accepted proverbs, preferably forged in urban circumstances. The peculiar institutions designed to transmit the manners, tales, and wisdom of the village, like the piats-bans and the couarails d'cnfants of Lorraine, where children soaked up the lore of local artisans and other assorted elders through traditional fables, collapsed and disappeared with the schools' coming in the 1880'S. One more support of the oral tradition fell with them.18 

Proverbs were still used to inculcate a view of life and of right and wrong, but the view was an altogether different one. They taught deferred gratification-"what is put off is not lost"-something no peasant would have accepted, and rightly. They taught that everyone is free to choose his tastes and colors, which went against communal judgment; and that all professions are good ("there is no stupid trade"), when every man knew that some were better than others; and that days follow each other but all are different. They taught that time is money and credit valuable; that all that is new is fine; 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

that simply to will something is to achieve it (one succeeds if one really wants to); and that values and ways of life are relative: other times, other ways. The peasant might have said "other places, other ways," but he would have known that only his own ways were right. 

Conventional wisdom now respected the proprieties. No saw would be ac~ ceptable to the new order that expressed ancient wisdom in uncouth terms."" The dominant class still thought that only a fool would try to fart higher than his arse, but that sort of language now was relegated only to the essays of Montaigne-when not expurgated. And nothing could be accepted save in French. Which made for many exclusions. And memories were short. In any . case, the old were no longer by definition wise, and old words were wise 

words no longer. 

• In 1919 Emmanuel Labat wrote: "La litterature non ecrite du village est morte" (L'Ame paysanne, p. 58). Was there a relation between the death of the oral tradition and that of the local speech in which the old tales had been told? The two declined together. 
