+++
title = "27 LE PAPIER QUI PARLE"

+++

I love a ballad in print, a-life, for then we are sure they are true. 

-SHAKESPEARE 

WE COME NOW to an obvious question affecting popular culture, and one of the most difficult, despite the attention it has received: when and how reading matter affected the common man. The printing press stands at the entrance of the modern world as dragons guard the gateway of a temple. But who, in nineteenth-century France, had access to the temple of the printing press? The answer is, surprisingly many people, for one need not read to enjoy its prod ucts. Yet printing was an urban art par excellence; it disseminated texts, images, ideas, that had been formulated by urban minds. Like printed songs, these often became popular in terms of their acceptance. They were not necessarily so by birth. 

Books are the obvious representatives of printed culture, and the most obvious inhabitants of the town. By the Restoration books could be bought in general stores, at the grocer's, or from old-clothes merchants and second-handfurniture men, all of whom often sold primers, calendars, almanacs, and prayerbooks, and some of whom also lent them.1 There were few public libraries and they were little used. When, under the Restoration, the prefect of Nievre borrowed the keys to the library at Nevers, he kept them for a year and even then was asked to return them only because "a second inquirer had appeared." When and where libraries began to be frequented, as at Lille, they remained the preserve of cultivated men and local scholars, a kind of sanctuary where blouses and sabots would have been looked on askance.2 Reading rooms run for profit were even more inaccessible, not only in terms of cost, but also in purely physical terms, since like the bookshops, they were all located in better parts of town. Beginning in the 1820'S various initiatives were launched to produce "good" books-Christian, moralizing, frequently saccharine-and these works were widely distributed by philanthropists and by the clergy. Serious efforts were made to get them into the hands of men, and sometimes even women, of the working class. But the scanty evidence 

Le Papier Qui Parle 453 suggests that they reached mostly the middle class and those aspiring to join it. The poorer inhabitants of urban centers, assuming that they could read, lacked the privacy in which to read a book, the light by which to read it, and most probably also the time and energy to attempt it.3 

This only really changed with the 1860'S, when "popular libraries" in bigger industrial towns battled for the opportunity to capture the popular mind; when rival lending libraries, some "Red," some Catholic, clashed in political struggles that reveal the existence of a working-class reading public; and when the authorities in small provincial towns reported the spontaneous founding of "savings societies" for collective subscriptions to newspapers. But once again, practically all the evidence and all the figures concerning this illdocumented field apply to urban centers.4 By 1890 there were II "popular libraries" serving the 758 communes of the Limousin. School libraries, of course, were far more numerous-333 in 1877 for 396 public schools-but even they lent out only an average of 30 books a year until the 1880'S.5 

The Second Empire witnessed a revolution in printing processes that made it possible to produce books on thinner paper and in smaller type, developments that greatly diminished their bulk, hence their cost, and encouraged competition to sell them more cheaply. Even so, novels, children's books, and other "respectable" works selling at a price equivalent to one or two days' wages were not aimed at the working class, but at the small bourgeoisie. Charles Nisard, whose History of Popular Books, published in 1854 and reedited a decade later, remains our richest source, was impressed by the growing thirst for printed matter, which permitted publishers to get rid of their unsold stocks. In 1853 some nine million books seem to have been distributed yearly. But when we hear about the go-ahead working men buying books -Agricol Perdiguier or Pierre Gilland-what they purchased were the street vendors' products, "little booklets at 30 centimes, spread out on walls or on the parapet of bridges: abridgements of Robinson Crusoe, Telemachus, Paul and Virginia, Bayard's life," or Aesop's fables. 6 The workers' tastes in reading material presumably lagged behind those of the more widely read bourgeois. They read much the same books that the peasants read, but fewer peasants read any books at all. 

An imperial prefect of Nievre once remarked that if books were strewn on the roads, no one would pick them up. And at that, he seems to have been thinking not of the peasants, but of the bourgeoisie.7 Could it have been because peasants not only did not read books, but simply did not read? In 1860-61, as part of a contest set up by the Ministry of Education, thousands of schoolteachers responded to questions concerning local reading habits. A study of 1,207 of these responses, the cream of those received, reveals (expectably) that reading was extremely rare (13 positive observations), and that the reading of novels was almost nonexistent. What evidence of interest there is comes primarily from the north and northeast, the Paris region, COte-d'Or,454 CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION and Bouches-du-Rh8ne. But a report from Eure-et-Loir gives us a clue: "No one reads in the countryside, and bad books get there more than good ones." So perhaps no one read, but there were books. Only they were bad: "bad books swarm in the countryside" (Ardennes); "immoral serials" (Somme); "almanacs-a collection of tales as absurd as they are insignificant" (Loiret); "cheap serials ... poison our countryside" (Seine-et-Oise); "only the Almanac" (Eure, Seine-Inferieure, Moselle); "frivolous and pernicious books" (Yonne); "almanacs and songbooks" (Aveyron); "those who know how to read own a missal, the almanac, sometimes the tale of the four Aymon brothers" (Dordogne).8.And so it goes. 

Other snippets of evidence are gleaned from routine official sources. "Right now," a teacher of Sa8ne-et-Loire reported in 1864, "one doesn't read at all in the countryside, neither good books nor bad." The same for the Pas-de- Calais, apart from a little during the winter period of veillees. In 1866 the mayor of Senez (Basses-Alpes) responded to an inquiry on reading tastes in his area: "I have the honor to tell you that one doesn't read in the commune." The prefect of Seine-et-Marne, confronted with the same problem, found the situation perplexing: "The number of our country people who like to read is so small that it is quite difficult to understand their taste." We have already glimpsed this taste, but it was obviously not what it should have been. What the people liked and what they should get were, on the whole, different things. This can be seen in the works housed in school libraries. Practically unused and as good as nonexistent when the 1860's opened, school libraries numbered 4,800 by 1866 and 14,395 by 1870' In that same five-year period their loan rate rose fivefold. A good deal of that increased use, however, probably most of it, reflected urban readership. In the countryside, as a report from Morbihan explained in 1866, only schoolchildren borrowed books. Otherwise, "the books lack readers even more than the readers lack books." For one thing-reports from Finistere, <Ates-du-Nord, and Corsica confirm it-most people did not know French, and of those who did, half at least did not know how to read.9 But then, why should they have bothered? 

An elementary school inspector ftom Aix explained in 1864: "The country people who turned to the teacher to obtain these books [from school libraries ] are ... very alike to children; hence the books that are meant for children suit them perfectly."10 

For children or adults, then, school libraries offered sound knowledge and indoctrination into the new world's ways. The mayor of Senez, when he had reported that no one in his area read, had volunteered the thought that if people did read, they would like books of stories. The prefect of Seine-et- Marne had pointed out the enormous popularity of the "little press"-Journal de la Semaine, du Dimanche, du Jeudi-with its tales and news and gory or sentimental serials. But this was too debased. Book lists submitted by teachers or departmental groups for their libraries consisted above all of agricul- 

Le Papier Qui Parle 455 tural, scientific, and historical works. Could that kind of fare be why books lacked readers; why in 1866, two years after the school library of Ocagnano (Corsica) had received a fine collection of (French) books, their pages were still uncut; why in 1878 the educational inspector reported from Allier that the work of school libraries "progressed slowly" when the figures he gave showed that readership had actually fallen?l1 The books were of no interest to the local people. 

We shall see that by this time things were beginning to change, and it is precisely the change that interests us. But change from what? We have already heard what reading matter the peasant liked, and the authorities kept a wary eye on it. At the very beginning of the nineteenth century, we hear about those "small writings ... that are the library of the poor and the first books of childhood": almanacs, calendars, yearbooks, chapbooks, collections of tales and stories, songs, prophecies, canticles, ballads, accounts of recent events and judgments of criminal courts, primers, and the Croix de Dieu.12 By the July Monarchy "demagogic books" were joining these in being hawked through the countryside: accounts of trials and songs with political overtones, speeches attributed to leaders of the Great Revolution, Republican catechisms, and so on.13 

As for those who distributed them, we have already encountered one of the principal figures-the itinerant peddler with his backpack, sometimes accompanied by a little monkey, displaying his wares at fairs, on the farm threshold, or in the village square. His pack always contained prints, tracts, chapbooks -sometimes in the false bottom of a box. There were, besides, professional ballad singers, sometimes doubling as beggars, with their stock of fly sheets ; and rag-pickers who took a hand in the same trade. There was a peculiar breed of saint exhibitors, men who trod the roads with their "saint" in a small cupboard on their backs. Some were Italians, with a wax doll in a glass case dressed in finery and surrounded by artificial flowers; and many were charlatans who represented their figurine to be whatever saint was venerated in the locality where they stopped, and sold color prints and pious objects-chaplets, medals-made holy by simple contact with it.a There were men from Chamagne, the Lorraine village where Claude Gelee the painter had been born. Chamagnon families left their village every autumn, the man carrying a small chest on his back that opened into a triptych. The center panel showed the Virgin or the Crucifixion, and one of the flanking panels held a picture of Saint Hubert. The wife and children carried merchandise. In villages the triptych was displayed on a table, and while the man commented on its pictures, the family sold the medals, chaplets, tracts, and images in their stock. Such entrepreneurs were generally known as montreurs.· In 

• Augustin Dubois, Les Anciens Livres de colportage, p. 2. The parish registers of Chamagne show that some 3,000 passports were issued to peddlers between 1850 and 1870. See also Jean Vartier, La Vie quotidienne en Lo"aine, chap. 6. 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Burgundy, where the cult of Saint Reine was widespread, there traveled around le montrou de sainte Reine, who opened the panels of his Gothicshaped reliquary after singing a long ballad about the saint. Once he had attracted a crowd, he turned to his real business-peddling small pictures of saints, battles of the Empire, Tom Thumb, Cinderella, and Little Red Riding Hood.15 

In a study of popular imagery we find reproduced the patter used by a montreur of Saint Hubert in 1866, which gives a good idea of the approach: 

See here the great Saint Philomenar who was a great saint, that there is no such great miracles that the great Philomenar hasn't done. See here the child Jesus who was born at Bethsalem, who was the son of the great all-powerful God, who redeemed us of our sins, who died on the cross for us, that there is no such great miracles that the child Jesus hasn't done. See here the great Saint Reine, that the pagans massacred who was a great saint. See here the great Saint Peter, who has the keys to paradise, hence that our Lord gave to him, that there is no such great miracles that the great Saint Peter hasn't done. See here the good father of Martincourt [Mattaincourt, in Vosges] who's healed all sorts of ills, that there is no such great miracles that the good father hasn't done. See here the great Saint Hubert, who was the greatest of all hunters. He was hunting in Arden forest when our Lord appeared to him a great day of Good Friday, hence that each and everyone must evoke against plague, accident, thunder, and mad dogs. Hence that each and everyone shall be kept safe forever and will go straight to heaven if he wears on him the medal of the great Saint Hubert, that there is no such great miracles that the great Saint Hubert hasn't done.16 

We may laugh at the level of this approach, but it sold the crowd, and especially, it appears, when the pictures being peddled portrayed saints or Biblical scenes. Three-quarters of the pictures that survive today are religious. This may be because they were treated with more respect than others. Many were pinned or pasted inside a chest lid or cupboard door to become the centerpiece of a small, personal altar; others were attached under the lids of boxes containing money or something else considered rare and precious, like letters. Yet such pictures were also commonly pinned or sewn to hat or clothes (which could hardly have contributed to their preservation), or nailed to a wall, a bedboard, or the mantelpiece, or put up in the stable. The saints provided personalized protection-for self, for home, for precious objects, for the cattle. Guardian images, images de preservation, were everywhere, and so was the Crucifixion, reminder that the peasant's difficult life was nothing when compared with the Passion of Christ.l1 There was even a Saint Napoleon, printed in 1842 and reprinted in 1869, representing "under a rather unexpected aspect," as an official commented, the image of Napoleon surrounded by flowers and by female saints playing the harp.'*' 

• Archives Departementales, Vosges 9 bis MI7 (Apr. 1874). A prolonged search under the First Empire had uncovered a Saint Neopolis or Neopolas, martyred in Alexandria under Diocle- 

Le Papier Qui Parle 457 So popular were religious images that in popular parlance all pri nted pictures became "saints" or "saint sheets." A child got a centime to go and buy a saint even if the picture he bought represented a war scene or a fable. "What saint do you want?" asked the peddler. "I want animals," answered the child. He could have asked for battles; or for the soldiers' uniforms that helped recruit volunteers for the army; or for the Wandering Jew; or for Lustucru, the legendary blacksmith who cut off women's heads and forged them new ones; or for Saint Faineante (Saint Idle), which was supposed to warn against the evils of idleness but actually publicized its pleasures.ls Other hot-selling items were Goodman Misery, who had trapped death itself in his magic pear tree; The Great Devil Money, patron of financiers; The World Turned Upside Down; The Art of Dying Well, with demons thronging around a deathbed, lusting for one more soul; and Credit Is Dead, with droll illustrations of all those who killed him. Taste was eclectic and the imagedecorated house appears in many prints, as in contemporary novels. Balzac, with his usual eye for truth, tells us of the darkened walls whose only ornament consisted of those illuminated images in blue, red, and green that show the death of credit, the Passion of Jesus Christ, the grenadiers of the imperial guard.19 

That was just on the eve of the great tide of cheap, popular images about to sweep over France during the July Monarchy and the Second Empire, and generally associated with Epinal in the Vosges, where by 1842 the firm of J.-C. Pellerin alone turned out 875,000 prints a year. Pellerin and another Epinal firm between them are estimated to have produced 17,000,000 such pictures under the Second Empire. Some 40 other printers were active during that time, and pieces of their work were still to be found on the market at the beginning of the twentieth century.20 But printers and engravers were urban professionals; their models and themes were taken from the towns; even figures of peasants and their accessories of life, when they appear, seem to have derived from urban models.2l This had always been so, and most of the traditional depictions that issued from a press reflected urban attitudes of one sort or another. But images of earlier days had grown familiar, had had the time to percolate into the rural world and be accepted by it. Contemporary differences in speech or garb or values were another matter. Like Mrs. Miniver projected before an audience of Afghans, such pictures could add the spice of exoticism, but the distance between two very different ways of life limited the appeal of many of the images in the countryside. 

Some of these prints were inspired by melodramas or operettas. One favorite depicted La Fille de Madame Angot. Others dwelt on exemplary themes, with sinners meeting a deserved punishment at the end. Two in this class were 

tian. A slight adjustment and the fortunate martyr became Saint Napoleon, whose feast, established by an imperial decree of February 19, 1806, was celebrated on August Is-the same day as the fcast of the Assumption. 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

The Catastrophes and Tragic End of the Child-Who-Touches-Everything (1863) and Pellerin's Two Apprentices (1864), which was inspired by Hogarth's Industry and Idleness, a secular version of Saint Idle's story. Like certain other series of the late 1860'S, all rather reminiscent in costume and scenery of the Countess of Segur's children's novels, these were above all destined for children of the middling and petty bourgeoisie. Other prints of a political nature, like those concerning the grotesque hunchback Monsieur Mayeux, were very popular even among the workers, especially those of Paris, but never caught on in rural areas. The peasants clung to their traditional images and moralities as long as both lasted. Even in 1874 Epinal turned out two different prints to show virtue rewarded. One, urban, had the abandoned bride making her family rich by trade. The other, on the theme of the grasshopper and the ant, showed careful, hard-working Martha being repaid with a proposal of marriage: "Miss Martha my name is Bigarreau. I have my mill that brings me 1,000 ecus a year. I offer you my hand and my mill." Virtue deserved and brought reward; but the aspirations, values, and possibilities of town and countryside continued to differ into the first decade of the Third Republic.22 

Whatever the message or presentation, there is little question of the popularity and impact of the form itself. These pictures were the great bibles of the little people. Studied long and attentively by men, women, and especially wondering children who had little else to distract or appeal to them, they left a powerful imprint on people's minds. Anatole France has testified how much he owed to the images d'Epinal. Charles Peguy's work is interwoven with it. The Great Devil Money shows what he describes in L'Argent (1913) as the capitalist bourgeoisie infecting the people: every class, especially commoners, groveling to gather gold coins distributed by the devil. The Burial of Marlborough sets off a long discussion of historical analyses in Clio 1I. The images of Saint Joan, so popular in Orleans, inspired Peguy's worship. He even, in an optimistic moment, compared his life to an image d'Epinal: "He was little, he worked well, ... he went to school ... and rose in the world."23 If this was the effect these pictures had on Peguy, what of the semiliterate people who were their major public? They reinforced the common man's hatred of money power; made known the figure of the Jew, unknown in the flesh in most parts of France; reflected the hopeless hopes of misery; stressed the accepted morality of work; and preached traditional virtues, usually along with traditional resignation. 

Then came the images of the modern world. Current events and propaganda of every kind began to take over. Even as early as 1848 the government distributed General Cavaignac's picture by the tens of thousands. The following regime did as much for Napoleon III and his family. Pretenders under the Third Republic-Prince Victor Bonaparte, the Comte de Paris, General Boulanger-followed suit. Battles, catastrophes, or notorious figures like Gari- 

Le Papier Qui Parle 459 baldi were all illustrated in color plates; and in 1899 a print entitled True and Authentic History of Panama, Jr. was circulating in Haute-Vienne, a satire of President Emile Loubet under attack as a supporter of Dreyfus.2~ Often such "occasional" prints came accompanied by a ballad that explained the sensational or terrifying event depicted. At this point, traditional and current sensationalism merged in a popular literature especially partial to bloody crimes, fabulous stories, and other daunting things that made the flesh creep like today's horror films-the canard. 

Canards and occasionnels-the former folio sheets, the latter smaller pageshave been dated back to the fifteenth century and the invention of printing. How the canard came by its name is uncertain-perhaps from the imperial eagle on Napoleon's battle bulletins. At any rate the term soon came to designate an absurd story addressed to a credulous public. That may be why Balzac in the 1840's wrongly supposed that the newspaper had killed canards. Partially right for Paris, he was quite wrong so far as concerned the rural areas, where they circulated by the tens of thousands to the end of the century and sometimes beyond. 

Not necessarily sensationalist, canards illustrated and discussed news items, carried useful tips (how to make currant syrup or heal the cramps), and provided calendars. Yet they are best remembered for their accounts of curious events and strange beasts, real or imaginary: pirates abducting maidens; the ravages of the great African Terrorifer on Monomotapa's shores; the arrival of an orangutan at the J ardin des Plames; assassination attempts against the throne; the raising of the obelisk on the Place de la Concorde; wars in distant parts; great fires or mine disasters; the birth or death of princes; wolves devouring children; dogs loyal to their masters to the death; floods; miracles; love or madness, or often as not the two combined, with lovers losing their minds and putting a violent end to life; new railways and their unbridled speed, or better still, a railway engine under heavy steam when a corpse is discovered in a passenger's trunk. Progress, sensationalism, and sanctimoniousness went hand in hand as often as they could-quite happily in the case of comets, when broadsheet legends could rejoice that no one still believed all the ancient humbug, and at the same time recite most of it.25 

Above all, the canard carried events into places where nothing ever seemed to happen, asserting the extraordinary where routine reigned. It spoke to the illiterate or barely literate, as can be seen from titles that are not only lurid, but written to be spoken rather than simply read. Its raw material was timeless: stories and themes were periodically revived, like that of parents who murder their own child without knowing it, a theme that Albert Camus was to use in his Malentendu, and that canards never exhausted through several centuries. Canards did not seek to be up-to-date, but were satisfied to be thrilling; wrote not of the actual but of the sensational. They did attempt to invest news items with some plausibility by giving lots of circumstantial 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

evidence, details of weapons, blows, and wounds. "Horrible murder committed Monday, July 16, in the Rue Traversine upon two persons, one of whom was pierced by eleven blows from a paring knife, while the other had the artery of his right arm cut with a knife." Yet detail can drown out fact. As Jean-Pierre SCguin, a devoted student of the art, has pointed out, canards give the month and even the hour of some event, but seldom the year it happened. By way of illustration, he presents one undated canard that reads: "Arrest of the priest, La Collonge, vicar of Sainte-Marie, near Beaune, department of COte-d'Or, accused of having murdered his mistress, who had mothered several of his children, of having cut her into pieces, and of having thrown them into the parish pond, where women found them while doing their laundry:; Under this, a large woodcut shows two gendarmes arresting a cheery-looking cleric standing beside a body of water in which one can see a woman's head and hair afloat and, a little farther back, one of her legs. Details and ballad follow.26 

Priests of course provided particularly succulent morsels, but an attentive reading of canards reveals many of the problems, resentments, and prejudices of their readers: greed for the money that middle-class victims of crime have carried or concealed; the suspicion of all strangers and of travelers, who have good cause to fear for their lives themselves; the reluctance to get involved in other people's business (dogs are better than men in giving aid); the venting of collective fury on some victim; the murder of children by parents and of parents by children; gang rapes; innocence condemned and sometimes saved; the unexpectedness of soldiers actually returning home from service; the terror of mad dogs, foxes, or wolves from whose bite until 1885 there was no cure except for the intervention of Saint Hubert; the danger of lonely places. Most country crimes took place in the mountains and woods; but from these accounts the roads and inns were no safer. Above all, fear, fear, fear: of brigands, thieves, rape, fire, hail, floods, rabies, epidemics, violence of all sorts. Were canards foils for the regular course of existence, the welcomed contrast of the extraordinary; or do we read a different note in a discussion of HaIley's comet in a canard of 1835? "It would be pretty ridiculous for men who live quietly in the midst of so many ills constantly menacing them to worry about events as improbable as the destruction of the earth by a comet!" Worry or no, the incredible tales of canards were accepted, skeptically perhaps, but in a context of general ignorance. As a canard of 1843 remarked: "What they say in Paris is nothing to what they say in the provinces." There, the huckster's rod pointed out the deliciously lurid details, the ballad was sung, the broadsheet was bought and nailed to the wall at home, "and this simple five-centime sheet terrified all who read it."27 

But the peddler's pack contained other reading matter: religious works, canticles, psalters, lives of the saints; real books of history or practical advice; 

Le Papier Qui Parle 

collections of model letters; and, of course, the poisonous writings that we have heard denounced, The Language of Flowers, The Ladies' Oracle, The Lovers' Catechism, The Key of Dreams, and other suggestive publications. Above all, it carried the small volumes of what was generally described as the Bibliotheque bleue, smallish, badly printed and barely legible on coarse paper, often unpaginated, and roughly bound in the same bluish paper that was used to wrap sugarloaves. At mid-century these little booklets, with their fables, legends, tales of knightly valor, and, most of all, almanacs, sold at a rate of about 9,000,000 a year. Fairy stories, often taken from folklore and recast in print, were served up in new forms with familiar aspects. Knightly tales had an eager and devoted public.28 Between 1818 and 1850 some 10,000 copies of the Breton-Ianguage version of The Lay of the Aymon Brothers, 527 pages long, were sold in the countryside of Lower Brittany.* 

But the core of a book collection-particularly if the collection numbered only one-was the almanac. Joseph Cressot has enumerated his peasant grandfather's books, gathered in the decades that ran from Louis Philippe to Sadi Car not. Most of them are almanacs: big ones, Almanac des familles, du pelerin, Le Messager boiteux, Le Bon Laboureur; small ones, Almanac du paysan, du vigneron, de la maison rustique; and the Bavard and Mathieu.de la Drome, with their calendars, zodiacs, phases of the moon, tasks for the month, collections of proverbs and jokes, recipes, and occasional pictures.29 Moliere's Monsieur Jourdain asks his master to teach him how to read, but he does not want to read just anything, he wants to read the almanac so he will know when there is a moon and when there is none. Behind the satire lurks the reality: the almanac is the simple man's treasury of knowledge. Almanacs were for the poor, for those who had little time, for those with empty purses, for the most modest class that read little, remarks Genevieve Bolleme. But in fact one did not need to read in order to tap the secrets of such books; one could still gaze at them, consult them for their signs, whose code was more easily learned than the alphabet, and saved troubling with the latter. No wonder that the men of Plozevet walked to Quimper and back, a 50-km hike in all, just to buy an almanac; that in some places the word came to be used as a synonym for a book (or great book: "le bon Yeu inscrit tout sus soun armanat," they said in Saintonge) or in revealing locutions. Liars in Saintonge were "menteurs coume in'armanat," while Auvergnats ridiculed a loquacious prattler as "bougre d'almanach."30 The jest, however, cannot conceal a cer- 

• Yann Brekilien, Vie quotidienne des paysans en Bretagne, pp. 91ft Andre Burguiere, who confirms this, also quotes an old tailor of the Quimperois who remembered that "in the old days a house without the Bouhez ar zent [Book of Saints] was not a very honorable house" (Bretons de P/ozevet, p. 153). The Bretons also had their own variant of the Wandering Jew-Boudedeoand composed a host of songs about his perambulations, including an encounter with Goodman Misery. A gwerz on that subject was published at Morlaix as late as 1886 (Champfleury, Histoire de /'imagerie popu/aire, 2d ed., Paris, 1886, p. 71). All this raises intriguing questions about the alleged illiteracy of Breton peasants, whose apparently widespread ability to read Breton did not count as learning in official eyes. 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

tain appreClatIOn. Books had an intrinsic power; they were magic objects passed from father to son for generations as a treasured possession. Their rarity added to their prestige. "Books have an incredible authority in the peasant's eyes," reported a teacher from Haut-Rhin in r861. "They are infallible I"*' And the book par excellence was the almanac. 

In the mid-nineteenth century "15 million Frenchmen learned the history of their country and its laws, the world's great events, the progress of their sciences, their duties, and their rights only through the almanac." Emile de Girardin exaggerated a little, but as a great press magnate he was in a position to know. So were J ules Michelet, Edgar Quinet, and Emile Littre, all of whom sought to reach the people through little almanacs of their own, but without success. The traditional almanacs had won the peasants' hearts. They bought them the moment they appeared, even if they had to borrow the money; they exchanged them among themselves or hired them at a sou a go from an enterprising peddler, and so might have read up to 10 a year. "These little books," reported a teacher from the relatively enlightened Vosges, "are so often exchanged, read, and reread that one can no longer make out the title on the cover ."81 The teacher added that they were no longer read for their predictions: the pf:asants did not believe these anymore in r86I.t That is as it may be. For me, part of .their attraction may be found in a story from the Second World War about the fate of an old copy of the New York Herald Tribune in Nazi Germany. Someone had bought it for three bottles of cognac from a Swedish sailor whose ship had berthed in Kiel. "The paper made its way through at least a hundred or more pairs of hands who could neither read nor write, and hardly spoke, English. Yet in their hearts they knew that this language ultimately contained a secret and powerful weapon."32 

Almanacs had their practical uses, but also a talismanic quality; they opened the door to knowledge, traditionally the preserve of the privileged, the urban, the rich. Deprived of books as they were deprived of other material goods, and hence of knowledge, the poor CCof the most modest class that reads little" were isolated, cut off from useful things. The almanac provided this. How far was it perceived as a bridge to "culture"? At first, the jumble of information it provided must have made as much sense as a beachcomber's trove. The character of the older popular culture was confusion: the categories were not distinct, chronology was irrelevant, fact and fancy, wonders, and fables mixed 

• Bulletin de la Societe Frank/in, 4 (1872): 109. Sanford Kanter quotes the remarks of a member of the Commission de l'Instruction Primaire (Archives Nationales, C3129, Jan. 19, 1872) to the effect that Charente peasants had "a sort of superstitious fear of education" and felt that "to teach their children to read would be to turn them into sorcerers" ("Defeat 1871," p. II6). And Philip G. Hamerton wrote of an intelligent young Burgundian peasant who, having no idea of printing, assumed a book was some sort of beautiful manuscript (Round My House, P·278). tIn 1903 we find Henri-Adolphe Labourasse repeating that the almanac had lost much of its credibility (Anciens us, p. 184). There must have been a lot of credibility if this still had to be said 40 years later I 

Le Papier Qui Parle 

together on an equal footing. But gradually urban values took hold. Modern science was first of all about categories. Modern life affirmed that categories were meaningful. Bolleme's study of almanacs shows how in the nineteenth century the qualifying terms used in their titles came to emphasize veracity, truth, and genuineness; also size and quantity. As in the official world, fact mattered, at least in the affirmation; and quantity was seen as an aspect of quality. Terms like French (which had appeared timidly in the eighteenth century) and National also gained ground; and-homage to a new sense of modernity and fashion~a number of almanac titles imitated newspapers, with names like Le National, Le Temps, Le Noutlelliste, and Le Courier.ss Time was trickling into the domain of the timeless; official knowledge came in with a rush through schools. Schools, books, the spreading skill of reading, were making knowledge accessible, less of a mystery and less rare. The almanac continued to exist, but divested of magic power and prestige. Furthermore, like the veillee, it had combined use and pleasure. The former ebbed as science and its more reliable advice took over. Pleasure remained for some, but separate from use; as in modern life where leisure and work, play and gainful employ. ment, became distinct categories. Defunctionalized, de sanctified, the almanac would become a book like any other. 

The images and printed matter of the countryside had been the same as those of city folk. A gap had grown between the two as the fare offered the latter became less naive and more up-to-date. This is what marked country reading through much of the nineteenth century, until the gap narrowed and finally, in the twentieth century, vanished. Only a few years after the nine· teenthcentury passed the halfway mark, Nisard, noting the survival of legen. dary tales in the countryside, was already pronouncing their death sentence. And official inquiries of the 1860'S bore him out, showing that they were be· ginning to disappear, along with those who had hawked them. Le Figaro carried an article in its June 28, 1884, issue on Chinese news sheets, which it identified as curious specimens of primitive information.S4, An instance and clear proof of how little the urban literate classes knew about what went on beyond their ken. Not only in small towns and in rural areas, but in Paris itself, many Frenchmen knew no other source of information than news sheets similar to those of the Chinese. But they were becoming hard to find. 

A file from Vosges in the 1870's shows a notable change of material in the peddler's pack. He still hawked such things as lives of the saints and accounts of bandits' exploits, but the traditional canards had turned to news-nouilelles interessantes of alleged recent crimes. One tract, though still with a portrait of an astrologer on the cover, turns out to offer Family Readings, providing a truly "edifying collection" (as the title claims) in· commendation of bravery, honor, and devotion to duty. And finally, there was War Stories: The French Campaign, detailing some battles of 1870. Traditional fantasy was giving wayCHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

to contemporary news and to an urban standard of morality. By the 1880'S offici1ldom, which heretofore had interfered mostly for political reasons, began to ban "false or exaggerated" news reports, and headlines screaming of an explosion in Parliament, the suicide of Sarah Bernhardt or of Louise Michel, a catastrophe in some mine.35 Morality now included greater accuracy. By then, newspapers were taking over the sensationalist functions of canards. The Petit Journal, splendid value for one sou, was a sort of News of the W orid: birth of quadruplets, bride gives birth a few hours after wedding, American abandons his bride and goes off with her dowry, sub-prefect falls off his horse. There was easy-to-understand coverage of happenings in Paris and the provinces that lent itself to comment and discussion around the kitchen table, news from abroad (sales of Cuban slaves, the chaining of Russian conscripts), court chronicles (elopements, confidence tricks, vendettas, crimes of passion), accounts of shows, debts, bankruptcies, current market prices (cattle, grain, etc.). One could not ask for more. Yet after 1890 the Petit Journal's illustrated supplement (eight pages, five centimes) offered vast frontand back-page illustrations in most glorious color, each with long explanations in print, a much better value than a canard or saint sheet. But the Supplement's debt to these is reflected in the subjects that it illustrated-current events (war or entente cordiale) and sometimes public figures, but especially catastrophes, shipwrecks, mining disasters, an automobile attacked by wolves, bloody riots, children defending a shop against apaches, a farmer's wife attacked by gypsies, a gamekeeper buried alive by poachers, the gamut of popular taste brought up-to-date. 

No wonder the image industry, declining for some time, fell off irremediably in the 1890's. Though as late as the 1880'S numbers of women in Bourbonnais were still buying these pictures, after the turn of the century no one bothered; in any case shops handed them out free as an advertising gimmick.'*' Broadsheets were going out. One of their last heroes would be the mass murderer Tropmann, executed in January 1870. In 1888 Paul Sebillot noted that 

• Francis Pe rot, Folklore bourbonnais, p. 108. Of course by then posters were plastered on every street. Indeed, already in 1889 we find the Remiremont municipal council alarmed about the effects of the horrifying or indecent posters seen about (French soldiers decapitated by Chinese; a rapist about to assault his victim, advertising Zola's La Bhe Humaine)-"provocations that no one can avoid, and that attract the schoolboys more than the classics do" (Archives Departementales, Vosges 9 bis M26, Dec. 1889). The first two exhibitions devoted specifically to posters were in fact held that very year. In 1896 the League for the Uplifting of the Mass~. going further than the protest of the Remiremont city fathers, put up large posters of Puvis de Chavannes' Life of Saint GenetJietJe in order to counter the influence of Toulouse-Lautrec's indecent works. But the poster would not be stopped. As Ernest Maindron wrote in his Les Affiches illustrees (Paris, 1886), "The museum is in the street, and this is only a beginning" (see Bibliotheque Nationale, Cinq siecles d'atfiches illustrees franfaises, Paris, 1953). Note that posters were not the only new source of public imagery. In this same period the Post Office was beginning to distribute the decorative calendars that were to become a part of every humble home; and firms selling seed, fertilizer, and agricultural equipment were following suit. I know of no study of the role such calendars played in bridging the gap between popular and academic taste. 

Le Papier Qui Parle 

images and canards survived in Lower Brittany (always, to be sure, with Breton captions!). But in Upper Brittany they were scarce; the broadsheets once found everywhere in Finistere or COtes-du-Nord were now almost nonexistent (one could read newspapers). When a notorious woman prisoner, HeIene Jegada, was tried at Rennes and a local printer sought to cash in with a broadsheet, he knew his public well enough to cut costs by using the plate of an advertisement for toothache to portray her. In Bourbonnais the last local criminal to elicit a broadsheet was Madame Achet, at Chantelles, near Moulins in 1891. Tropmann and the assassinated magistrate Antoine Fualdes went on selling: a photograph taken between 1900 and 1914 shows a marchand de complaintes singing such wares before his unfolded canvas. Frecleric Le Guyader assures us that in 1914 the type remained a fixture of the Breton fairs, where images also continued to be sold. Yet when in 19I1 we are told that these items had become objects of interest for artists and amateurs, we know that their survival was anachronistic and exceptiona1.36 Like noble shepherdesses at Versailles, the intellectuals took up canards and the Bibliotheque bleue as sources of inspiration. "The people," now pretty well all the people, preferred the papers and their color supplements. 

The contents of the peddler's pack changed, then vanished like the peddler himself. It is hard to tell if these wares preceded him into oblivion; but as a general pattern the improved roads and means of transportation that encouraged the growth of peddling activities soon also resulted in more numerous stores, including bookstores; and in the penetration of Paris print into hitherto printless regions. Already in 1866 a report on the subject concluded that the peddler book trade was disappearing "bit by bit under the impact of the facilities the book trade manages to set up in the smallest localities."37 That seems premature. A map drawn up by Alain Corbin shows that the number of bookstores in his three Limousin departments increased as follows between 1851 and 1879: Creuse, from 15 to 36; Haute-Vienne, from 20 to 47; and Correze, from 13 to 19. Either way, this is not many outlets for departments whose population in 1863 ran between 270,000 (Creuse) and 320,000 (Haute-Vienne). Since, as we might expect, bookstores were heavily concentrated in the prefectures, the other parts of the departments had few indeed. Correze has 289 communes and 30 cantons. Half its booksellers were concentrated in Brive and Tulle, and all the rest were divided among only five other localities. In Haute-Vienne, with 205 communes and 29 cantons, 12 of the 20 bookstores in 1851 were in Limoges, and 21 of 47 in 1879; the number of other places served rose from five to seven in 28 years. Creuse, home of numerous migrants, improved the most. In 1851 six localities were served outside the prefecture at Gueret; by 1879 the number had risen to 14. This was still only slightly better than one chef-lieu de canton in two, but better by a good piece than Correze and Haute-Vienne, where only about one in every four could boast a book- 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

seller.3s We have to bear this sort of situation in mind when reading about the impact of settled booksellers on peddlers and peddlers' wares in rural areas, for we have seen that many parts of France lived in conditions not very different from those of the Limousin. =11: 

Yet all the evidence indicates that book peddling was a dying trade. The prefects' replies to the inquiries of the Ministry of the Interior in 1866 make this clear. In Gers 27 permits were delivered to hawkers from outside the department in 1865, but only nine in the first six months of 1866. Dordogne, Landes, Cantal, Isere, Allier, Loire, Puy-de-Dome, Manche, Orne, the Alps, Seine-Inferieure, Indre, Saone-et-Loire, Creuse, Vosges, and COtes-du-Nord show the same pattern. We find a clue to this phenomenon in the response from COtes-du-Nord, quoting the report of the police superintendent of Saint- Brieuc to the effect that almost no novels had been sold in the past years, something the peddlers blamed on the great number of little newspapers publishing serials. The peddlers sold a good part of their wares in little towns. With the appearance of the Petit Journal in 1863, they began to lose their public. In Loir-et-Cher we hear of the disastrous competition of cheap illustrated papers: in Loiret the peasants read almanacs, the city readership "illustrated publications at five and ten centimes."39 

The country public for printed matter had always been limited. Now, with no urban sales to make their enterprise worthwhile, fewer and fewer peddlers would bother to exploit that market. Significantly, in Cantal, the lists of books authorized for peddling shrank concurrently with the inquiry of 1866 (the permits granted by the Third Republic would only authorize the sale of newspapers). Book peddlers were being driven out of the towns into a countryside tha~ did not provide an adequate market except for almanacs.t This may well be why those who trafficked in the traditional wares lost interest in their surviving clientele and instead of attempting to compete with the new, more attractive forms, preferred to dispose of their existing stocks and turn entirely to proven profitable lines: almanacs, schoolbooks, and books for prize-giving. It was a vicious circle. "Those buying books from peddlers," reported the prefect of Eure-et-Loir in 1866, "belong to the less enlightened and poorest classes; not infrequently they are illiterate or nearly so." They got what they could afford. When they could afford better, they would turn elsewhere. Consider the collection held by a Catholic farmer Daniel Halevy visited in Bour- 

• But note that some publishers sent salesmen out into the countryside to sell their books. This is mentioned as a novelty in 1866 in Saone-et-Loire and Loire, to which the Maison Conrad of Saint-Etienne dispatched two traveling salesmen every month, who offered the novels of Dumas, Sue, Paul de Kock, and other writers in serialized installments. Their sales were substantial, we are told. (Archives Nationales, F179146.) 

t The number of tracts and pamphlets sold in Haute-Vienne fell sharply, from 129,663 in 1863 to 28,693 in 1864, arid the sales dwindled to almost nothing by the end of the decade. On the other hand, the numbers of almanacs edited and stamped at Limoges indicate that sales in this domain continued to be impressive: 318,730 in 1872, 516,075 in 1877, nearly 4,000,000 over the period 1872-79 (Alain Corbin, "Limousins migrants," pp. 510-12). 

Le Papier Qui Parle 

bonnais in the early 1900'S. On his bookshelf (one!) there stood The Lay of the Aymon Brothers; a work by Edouard Drumont (probably his turgid and vitriolic anti-Semitic pamphlet La France juive); the Bible (bought from a Protestant peddler); and a small pile of tracts of the liberal Catholic Sillon. He was, to be sure, a man of property and of some social standing, and even then, "very much above the average" of his sort. Still, even the average had been inspired to new tastes by modern and attractive schoolbooks and by the wares of towns.40 

Of course, all this affected only the peddler's sales of printed matter, and even that relative to the continued isolation of his customers. Around the 1880'S and 1890's peddling as such declined, not only because the development of the local trade and shops made it unprofitable, but because fewer men needed a subsidiary source of income. Most could buy land; many found steady jobs or sources of income near home; some (as we have seen) set up as shopkeepers, others as small farmers. There were still peddlers on the roads, but they were fewer, and by the 1890's we find them with their backpacks and their uncertain trade only where isolation still obstinately persisted: in the Causses, in Aude, Ariege and other parts of the Pyrenees, in the Landes, in the Loire valley (whence they disappeared about 1905).41 By then, the press had fully assumed its role of conducting social electricity to the whole of the nation. This was a change not only from the day of Chateaubriand, who coined the phrase, but from mid-century when, in the words of the public prosecutor at Aix, "the people of the countryside and even those of the towns read papers little; when they read them, they don't understand them." Opinions and evidence tend to be contradictory, but I am inclined to agree. Certainly printed matter trickled or flowed through the countryside, but the spoken word was what made an impact. We hear about agitators trying to drive their speeches home by leaving pamphlets behind in taverns or scattered on the roads, an enterprise that returned them nothing, for the men who would willingly enough listen to arguments carried viva voce could not read and thus had no idea what was in the subversive tracts.42 

By the 1860'S literacy had improved, but in the countryside newspapers continued to be scarce. In all of Ariege, with a population of 252,000 in 1865, the total circulation of daily newspapers was 1,200; in Correze in 186J "there are no newspapers in the villages." Official or unofficial comments and reports refer largely to the public of little towns. Village notables may have received a paper by mail or perhaps brought one home from town, like the mayor of Pouldergat (Finistere) in 1864, who returned from Quimper with a paper that all the municipal councilmen discussed. The newspaper was still, like the white bread brought home from fairs, a rare urban delicacy, preserve of the privileged few.43 

When the Petit Journal appeared in 1863, there were a great many places where no one quite knew what a newspaper was or had any idea that this 

CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

might be purchased like any other item on the open market. Its sales soon soared, especially since the government looked on it with favor, as a welcome diversion from political concerns.u In well-off farm households the Petit Journal might be read aloud on the doorstep in summer, or around the table on wintry nights by the light of a lamp or chaleu. But it appears that "the popular masses" were scarcely touched by it. In all of Correze, Creuse, and Haute- Vienne <lpparently only 171 copies were sold during the entire first quarter of 1876. As Felix Pecaut remarked in 1879, "The people learn to read; they do not read as yet, even in the departments that statistics call enlightened." But newspapers were beginning to "seek out [the common man], even in his village."45 

Only a trickle still. In the Limousin the number of copies of newspapers in circulation rose from 6,154 in 1869 to 8,185 in 1876. The rise was due to the appearance of local papers, whose circulation tripled after the Prussian war and would increase further after 1880. They were read largely for their local news and only came to life at election time. As the low circulation figures readily show, newspapers continued to be read mainly by the artisans and shopkeepers of small towns and the notables and municipal councilmen in villages!6 

What happened later is reflected in two reports that date ten years apart. In 1878 the police superintendent at Rivesaltes (Pyrenees-Orientales) declared that the press had no influence on local people's minds. In 1888 the chronicler of a Correze village noted that the peasants were buying newspapers at the fair and bringing them back to be read aloud by the best reader at the veillee. The author was concerned about the effect this had on peasants' minds. He was not alone. The police began to take notice, as is indicated by hitherto unheard-of comments in their reports. "Much read by the peasant," remarked the police superintendent of Aurillac in 1896 about L'Avenir du Cantal, which with a circulation of 2,300 three times a week sold more copies than all the Cantal press in 1877. He could have said as much about the 4,3°0 copies of La Croix du Cantal that priests and sextons distributed through the countryside each week.41 

By 1903 in a country bourg in Upper Brittany-Guipel, in Ille-et-Vilainewith a population of about 1,500, 15 persons were buying a daily paper, and there were a great many more who, on Sunday, bought one of four local newspapers or the Petit Journal or the Petit Parisien. In Herault by 1907 almost every commune received newspapers. In some communes it was still only the priest, the notables, and the public employees who read them, and in most the peasants read them only irregularly. But the habit spread rapidly between 1907 and 191+ Thus at Perols, a village of about 1,000 in the coastal plain of Herault, 120 persons read newspapers in 1907, 214 in 1914. In rural Puy-de-Dome newspapers had barely existed in the 1890's; by 1906 or so they wielded considerable influence. News of current events penetrated to the far 

Le Papier Qui Parle 

corners of the mountains, to be discussed and wondered at: the explosion that killed so many on the battleship Una, a Paris strike of electricians and the menace of a strike by food workers, the death of Marcelin Berthelot, the chemist, and the revelations of the private papers of the papal nuncio.48 Sensational news no doubt, and likely to catch the eye. But note that now the eye was there, ready to be caught; and that the print, which it now deciphered fairly readily, made it familiar with events on a national scale. 

Such novelties helped drive out traditional topics of conversation. There was no more need for the news-spreaders (beggars, tailors) who went from farm to farm carrying the gossip of a region and snippets from the outside world. There was less room for folktales. At Guipel, in 1903, "the taste for newspapers creates serious competition for legends and traditional stories. It expels them from thought and from conversation." In Gascony (wrote Emmanuel Labat in 1910) peasant conversations used to turn on local events, gossip, and news. To be sure, peasants now talked about the weather and crops as they always had, but they also discussed politics and prices. What interested them now was the news newspapers brought them from afar: events in Morocco, trials and scandals, apaches and crime, flying machines. The village chronicle seemed petty compared with that of Paris; the storytellers who had livened the veilh~es had disappeared; old stories now had to be sought in books. When this sort of literature disappeared, added Labat, the very fact of its disappearance undoubtedly meant something.49 An insipid remark, apparently, and yet not without sense. 

What could it mean, when content in some ways remained unchangedthe same sensationalism, a very similar superficial logic, many familiar themes? Yet the scale had changed, the locus of the action had broadened or else been clearly sited in the town; and the very accessibility of the new urban culture, now easier to reach and to comprehend, made it more seductive. This meant in part that from concrete local concerns the peasant mind was turning to ones it shared with other Frenchmen. Newspapers established a unanimity of readership in which regional peculiarities no longer counted. As with the schools, as with politics, the press advanced both the process of homogenization and the level of abstract thought. The cultural tradition reflected in the press leaned to generalities, favored national or universal themes over local, specific ones. This in due course rubbed off on the readers' thinking. It rubbed off on the readers' language, too. Not only did the papers hasten the spread of French; they brought a whole vocabulary that reinforced but a]so supplemented the one learned in the schools. On the whole, the French vocabulary of the lower classes in the 1880'S was too limited for any really sensible discussion of current affairs or current politics. In 1883 even Socialist propaganda "written in a very clear style" recommended the use of a dictionary. As for the people in agricultural areas, "the number of words they can understand is very restricted."50 

470 CHANGE AND ASSIMILATION 

Newspaper style was simple enough to be accessible. As with almanacs, one could at need make out words one did not understand by reference to their context or to illustrations. Gradually, the newspaper readers' vocabulary grew; and by the mid-1890's Pkaut, who 15 years before had grumbled that even when people knew how to read they did not, was now troubled that they were reading the wrong things (again). "New and strange educators" competed with the schools, but actually represented the same party: that of modernity. "Le Petit Parisien is the Holy Scripture of the countryside," declared a Catholic in 1913.111 We know that the King James Version molded the English language. Here were unauthorized versions, rued by Church and school, that played an unstudied part in molding the speech of the French, and their minds as well. 
