+++
title = "01 CHAPTER I THE TWO BEHAVIOUR PATTERNS"

+++
**CHAPTER I**  
**THE TWO BEHAVIOUR PATTERNS**

“Pakistan and Bangladesh are their fixed deposits. Those are Islamic
states. No one else can lay a claim on them. India is a joint account.
Plunder it as much as you please.”^([1](#1)) This is how Shri Shiva
Prasad Roy, a very perceptive Bengali writer, has summed up the present
situation in what is described as the Indian subcontinent now a days but
what has been known as Bharatavarsha since time immemorial.

Shri Roy could have easily extended the logic and concluded that
Afghanistan was another fixed deposit created by the Muslims quite some
time before Pakistan and Bangladesh came into existence. Afghanistan,
too, has been an Islamic state since its inception. But Shri Roy is not
the only Hindu to have missed that point. Hindu society as a whole has
ceased to remember that Afghanistan rose on the ruins of Gandhara and
Kamboja, the two ancient *Janapadas* of Bharatavarsha which had stood
guard on our North-Western gateway for ages untold.

Nor would Hindu society like to remember that Baluchistan, North-West
Frontier Province, Sindh, West Punjab, East Bengal and Sylhet were
constituent units of the motherland a mere 40 years ago. Hindu society
would feign forget the Partition in 1947 if the Islamic crusaders inside
the residue that is Hindustan did not continue to remind it that
Partition was by no means a closed chapter. A proof positive of its own
preference in the matter is provided by a plethora of studies on the
subject published in this country in the years following 1947.  
 

**STALE STUDIES OF PARTITION**

All these studies describe in varying details the British game of
divide-and-rule; the growth of Muslim fears of ‘Hindu domination’ after
the Indian National Congress was founded in 1985; the rise of the Muslim
League as a reaction to ‘Hindu revivalism’ in the wake of the Swadeshi
Movement; the sabotage of efforts at Hindu-Muslim settlement by the
grant of separate electorates under the Minto-Morley Reforms; the
short-lived communal amity after the Lucknow Pact (1916) and during the
Khilafat agitation (1920-22) under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi and
the Ali Brothers; the failure of fresh efforts for a Hindu-Muslim
settlement under the initiative from C.R. Das and Motilal Nehru; the
mistake made by the Congress when it refused to accommodate the Muslim
League in provincial ministries formed in 1937; the ‘resultant’ rise of
Muslim separatism culminating in the Lahore Resolution of the League in
1940; the failure of the Cripps Mission due to last minute machinations
of Churchill; the move made by Wavell to break the deadlock in 1945 on
the basis of the Desai-Liaqat agreement; the ‘torpedoing’ of the Cabinet
Mission Plan by an ‘ill-advised’ statement of Pandit Nehru; the Direct
Action launched by the Muslim League in August 1946 and the large-scale
communal riots; the ‘disillusionment’ of Sardar Patel due to his ‘bitter
experience’ of the Congress-League coalition; the award of the Radcliff
Boundary Commission and the consequent blood-bath on both sides of the
borders; and the final drop of the curtain on a dismal drama when the
‘Father of the Nation’ was martyred by a ‘Hindu fanatic’. The one
unmistakable impression which these studies leave on a reader’s mind is
that the whole bloody business is by now a part of the dead past and
should excite no one except those who specialize in archival
excavations. It is regarded as a serious violation of scholarship to see
some pattern, psychological or ideological, in these developments.

Of course, the politicians who parade themselves as guardians of
Secularism - a doctrine proclaimed after Partition-are not prepared to
leave it at that. They tell us, in very grave tones, that the tragedy
that took place on the eve of independence has a lesson to teach to the
nation. They seem to be convinced that it was ‘Hindu communalism’ which
divided the country and killed the ‘greatest Indian born after Gautama
Buddha’. And they warn us that ‘Hindu communalism’ which was lying low
for a few years is again striving to stage a comeback in order to
subvert the secular ‘struggle for national integration’. They are never
tired of talking about a ‘Hindu backlash’.^([2](#2))

Some of these secularist politicians swear by Mahatma Gandhi and his
*sarva-dharma-samabhãva*. Many more swear by Socialism which gives a
good opportunity to the Communists and fellow-travellers to steal the
whole show for their own ends. One can also spot, in these secularist
ranks, many Mullahs playing the old separatist game under the cover of
new slogans. But there are hardly any politicians who dare question the
character or claims of this Secularism which has attained the status of
a national consensus. The only jarring note is heard when the
self-appointed high-priests of Secularism stigmatise some political and
socio-cultural organisations as communal, and when the spokesmen of
these ‘guilty parties’ bewail that they are being wrongly blamed and
spend almost all their time in trying to prove their credentials to the
contrary.  
 

**A BREATH OF FRESH BREEZE**

It is in this stale atmosphere of sterile scholarship and sloganized
politics that the book by Shri H.V. Seshadri has come like a breath of
fresh breeze. *The Tragic Story of Partition*[³](#3) is not only the
latest but also the best study of this subject made so far. It gives us
all the facts included in the earlier studies. It also takes into
account many known but neglected facts. But what distinguishes it from
all other studies, is its deeper probe and wider perspective in the
interpretation of all facts and episodes.

This remarkable book has many facets, rich in ideological implications
of a far-reaching import. We will take up those facets one by one in the
chapters that follow. To start with, we want to take up what we consider
to be its most important contribution, namely, the unravelling of two
behaviour patterns - Muslim and National - which collaborated closely
for years and precipitated Partition in the final round. The Muslim
behaviour pattern was characterized by acrimony, accusations,
complaints, demands, denunciations, and street riots. The National
behaviour pattern, on the other hand, was characterized by acquiescence,
assent, cajolery, concessions, cowardice, self-reproach, and surrender.

The two behaviour patterns have remained intact and are still operative.
That is why the Partition in 1947 cannot and should not be considered a
closed chapter. Moreover, the two behaviour patterns provide the key not
only to a correct understanding of the complexities of present-day
politics in India, but also to an anticipation of political developments
in days to come.  
 

**THE MUSLIM BEHAVIOUR PATTERN**

There is plenty of evidence to show that the Muslim behaviour pattern
has remained true to type in the years after 1947. We have witnessed an
increasing incidence of street riots staged by the same sort of Muslim
hooligans, on the same sort of petty pretexts as in the years preceding
Partition. Muslim spokesmen, no matter what political platform they use,
have levelled the same sort of accusations, namely, that the Muslims are
a ‘poor and persecuted minority’ entirely at mercy of a ‘brute Hindu
majority’; that ‘Muslim lives, properties and honour’ are not safe in
the midst of a rising tide of ‘Hindu communalism’; and that ‘Hindu
chauvinism’ is seeking to wipe out all vestiges of Muslim religion and
culture. It is the Pirpur Report^([4](#4)) of the Muslim League, all
over again.

Next comes the constant complaint that the Muslim community has had
hardly any share in the national cake, particularly in the fruits of
economic development that has taken place in the years after
independence. We are told that Hindu business houses do not give jobs to
deserving Muslims, that Hindu bureaucrats discriminate against Muslims
in public sector undertakings and state-sponsored welfare projects, and
that Hindu-dominated educational institutions deny every opportunity to
the Muslims to improve their qualifications. We are also informed that
Hindu vested interests conspire with Hindu hooligans, Hindu police and
Hindu militiamen to destroy Muslim properties and wreck Muslim business
establishments wherever and whenever the Muslims start getting
prosperous by their ‘own unaided enterprise’.^([5](#5))

These accusations and complaints have been followed by concrete demands
which also remind us of pre-Partition days. The general demand is that
Muslims should have not only reservations, proportionate to their
population, but also weightages in all sectors and at all levels of
national life, particularly the national administration including the
armed forces. A few years ago, a Muslim spokesman^([6](#6)) had demanded
that 20 percent seats in the Parliament and the State Assemblies should
be reserved for members of his community. He also recommended that the
remaining 80 percent seats should be filled only by those persons whose
selection before elections had been cleared by the same community!

Finally, Muslim spokesmen have threatened that if their complaints are
not heeded and their demands not met, ‘the Muslim masses will be forced
to launch a struggle for securing justice for themselves’. Syed
Shahabuddin, a luminary of the Janata Party, ‘shudders to think of the
day when Muslim young men lose patience and take to the
streets’.^([7](#7)) At the same time, they have invited all other
‘minorities’ to join them in a ‘just struggle’ for their rights. The
‘other minorities’ comprise not only the Christians but also Sikhs and
so-called Adivasis and Harijans. One should not be surprised if the
Jains and the Buddhists, the Jats and the Yadavas, the Vaishnavites and
the Lingayats also receive similar invitations in the near future. After
all, what is Hindu society but a ‘medley of minorities’, each with its
own ‘grievances’?

As this Muslim behaviour pattern unfolds further, a demand for separate
electorates is bound to be the next logical as well as psychological
step. The ‘downtrodden Muslim masses’ will ‘discover’ before long that
they cannot expect a ‘vigorous vocalization of their grievances’ from
representatives elected by a ‘mixed population’, even when some of these
representatives happen to come from their own midst. In due course,
pressure will be mounted for constituting Muslim majority districts,
divisions and regions wherever the Muslims have a sizable population.
These Muslim majority areas will clamour for becoming autonomous units
like the Kashmir Valley so that ‘the Muslims can decide their own
destiny’. And these autonomous units will wait for an opportune time to
federate with Pakistan or Bangladesh under the protection of this or
that world-power, depending upon the configuration of world forces at
that time. Meanwhile, Muslim majorities can be manipulated in many more
districts by mass conversion of the weaker sections of Hindu society
with the help of petro-dollars, by mass infiltration from Bangladesh and
Pakistan, and by mass breeding in pursuance of ‘divine’ commands
conveyed in the Quran and the Hadis. The contours of the campaign can be
seen by all those who have not become blinded by secularist slogans, or
have not been denationalized by a vote-hungry politics.  
 

**THE NATIONAL BEHAVIOUR PATTERN**

There is also plenty of evidence to show that the National behaviour
pattern vis-a-vis the Muslim ‘minority’ has also remained true to type
in the years after independence. The National leadership is once again
responding to this sinister situation in the same sloganized manner as
had been stereotyped by its predecessors in the years preceding
Partition. This leadership has once again failed to see the long-term
strategy at the back of short-term tactics. The scene is once again
being dominated by politicians who live from hand to mouth, who cannot
see beyond their nose, who run a rat race for winning applause from the
Muslims, whose eyes are galvanized greedily on the Muslim vote-bank, and
who take the Hindu society for granted.

There are several straws in the wind that is blowing in different parts
of the country. Urdu is being recognized as an official language in
state after state even though Urdu teachers in schools and colleges have
to sit idle for want of students. Academies are being set up in many
state capitals in the name of Iqbal, an ardent advocate of Islamic
imperialism. Kerala has given a lead in carving out Muslim majority
districts, leaving the local Hindu population at the mercy of Mullahs
and Muslim hooligans. Bengal under anti-national Communists and U.P.
under a crumbling Congress edifice are most likely to walk into this
Islamic trap before long. Several enquiry commissions or their reports
have been suppressed because the verdict was likely to go or had gone
against the Muslims in fixing the responsibility for riots. Jagannath
Mishra of Bihar set the record in this race for *suppressio veri
suggestio falsi* when he cooked up a summary of the Jamshedpur riots
report in direct contradiction to the conclusions reached by the enquiry
commission concerned, and palmed it off on the Parliamentarians and the
Press.

Assam is the most poignant pointer to the way towards which things are
heading. In the past, the Islamic imperialists who invaded India had to
equip and bring along their own armies. But in the case of Assam, the
same invader has been assured by the Government of India that he need
not bother to bring along his own battalions and that all ammunition and
manpower he needs will be supplied to him in India itself, free of cost
and in ample measure. It is a different story that the patriots in Assam
have fought back fiercely, though with bare hands, to meet and, many a
time, repel the rapacious marauder. The Government of India on its part
has left no stone unturned to aid and abet the aggressor.  
 

**NO WARNING VOICES**

In the years preceding Partition, we had Sri Aurobindo, Swami
Shraddhananda, Lala Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandra Pal, Sarat Chandra
Chatterjee, Veer Savarkar and Dr. Hedgewar who had studied and seen
through Islam and who had sounded an alarm. Even Rabindra Nath Tagore
had expressed his misgivings after exchanging notes with some Mullahs
and Muslims politicians. It is a different matter that their voices had
been drowned by the sermons which Mahatma Gandhi poured out in praise of
the ‘noble faith of Islam’. What remains significant in that old story
is that these thinkers and writers had done their duty by their people.
We hardly hear such voices of sanity in our present-day predicament.
What we have, instead, is a large number of self-righteous or
self-seeking politicians, hand-in-glove with scholars and scribes who
have never done their homework in Islamic theology or Islamic history or
Islamic theory of the state, and whose stock-in-trade is finding faults
with a prostrate Hindu society.

*The Tragic Story of Partition* by Shri H.V. Seshadri, therefore, is a
very welcome publication. It could not have come at a more opportune
moment.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Shiv Prasad Roy, *Dibbagyen Noy, KãNDagyen Chai*, Calcutta,
1982.

[²](#2a) The latest phrase patronised by Secularism is ‘Hindu
fundamentalism’.

[³](#3a) H.V. Seshadri, *The Tragic Story of Partition Bangalore*, 1982.

[⁴](#4a) A report published by the Muslim League in 1938 listing
‘atrocities committed against the Muslims’ by the Congress Ministries
since 1937. It has been reprinted recently from New Delhi.

[⁵](#5a) The noted journalist Kuldip Nayar swallowed this Muslim thesis
and tried his best to popularise it after the Moradabad Riots. Many
other Hindu-baiters have been retailing it with airs of profound
scholarship.

[⁶](#6a) Imam Abdullah Bukhari of Jama Masjid, Delhi.

[⁷](#7a) He is now in the Janata Dal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


