+++
title = "04 CHAPTER IV THE BUSINESS OF BLAMING THE BRITISH"

+++
**CHAPTER IV**  
**THE BUSINESS OF BLAMING THE BRITISH**

Problems have to be solved first at the level of thought before we can
hope to solve them at the level of things. Hindu society has got to do
some hard thinking in order to find an effective and lasting solution of
the problem posed by Islam.  
 

**ISLAM AND HINDU SOCIETY**

Islam came to India as a fully developed ideology of an aggressive and
self-righteous imperialism. It tormented Hindu society for several
centuries. It should have been demolished and dispersed when its
imperialist hold was broken at last, after a long struggle. But it was
allowed to survive and its inherent aggressiveness was not tamed. Hindu
society had meanwhile deceived itself into believing that Islam was just
another religion and, therefore, entitled to reverence.

Islam became an ardent and active accomplice of British imperialism
against which Hindu society had to wage another struggle. It made the
struggle much more difficult than it would have been otherwise, and
coerced the national leadership to do all sorts of political and
constitutional acrobatics. Finally, when Hindu society succeeded in
winning its freedom again, it forced a partition of the Hindu homeland
with the help of a foreign power. Hindu society had to pay this price
because it had again deceived itself into believing that Islam could
also inspire patriotism, and that the votaries of this creed also
deserved an honourable accommodation.

Islam has established its theocratic states on both sides of the
truncated homeland which Hindu society has been able to retain for
itself. It has driven away millions of Hindus from their ancestral
homes, and has been harassing in a most harrowing manner millions of
other Hindus who have been unable to escape from its bigotry.

Even inside the truncated Hindu homeland, Islam has been spreading its
poison in the whole body politic. It has fomented no end of strife,
violence, and vituperation. It has distorted the democratic processes
with the weight of its vote-bank. In recent years, it has started
corrupting public life with the help of massive finances obtained by it
from its neo-rich patrons abroad. And it is again out to decimate Hindu
society so that it may acquire a majority and restore its lost empire.

Hindu society should have done some hard thinking about Islam and its
invariably vicious behaviour which Hindu society has witnessed for so
long and at such great cost to itself. But that is exactly the habit
which Hindu society seems to have lost - the habit of hard thinking. For
quite some time now, Hindu society has been substituting some soft and
soothing slogans in place of hard and creative thought. What is worse,
even the slogans it raises are seldom its own. It simply borrows them
from wherever they are available in an alluring and facile form.

One such slogan has been that the British sowed the seeds of discord
between Hindus and Muslims, and brought about the partition of the
country before they left. The slogan was raised by leaders of the Indian
National Congress at an early stage of the freedom fight against the
British. In course of time, this slogan assumed the status of a dogmatic
‘diagnosis’ of the ‘communal situation’ which continued to deteriorate
in direct proportion to the pitch at which this slogan was shouted.

It had been observed that the Muslim leadership was not only reluctant
to join the national struggle but was also manifesting an increasing
hostility to the national movement. Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, the topmost
Muslim leader, had questioned not only the national character of the
Indian National Congress but also the very concept of Indian
nationalism. In his considered opinion, Hindus and Muslims could not
live together unless the one conquered and put down the other. The
leaders of the Congress went out in search of some Muslim notables who
could counter this hostile campaign. They found a few who agreed to
preside over the Congress sessions or to speak from its platform. But
all these ‘Nationalist Muslims’ ended by more or less singing the tune
set by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan.

This should have made the national leadership sit up and take stock of
the situation. A thoughtful way would have been to map out the Muslim
psyche, and trace it to its source. The leaders would have discovered
without too great an effort that the nation had to fight not only the
British but also the residues of Islamic imperialism - Syeds, Sheikhs,
Mughals, Pathans, Sufis, Khwajas, Alims, Mujaddids, mullahs, maulvis,
muftis, imams, hajis, qutbs and qazis. All these honorifics had been
monopolized by the descendants of Arabs, Turks, Iranians and North
Africans who had been, at one time or the other, either the swordsmen of
Islam or the flunkies of Islamic courts. They had never learnt to do a
day’s honest work, and had lived lavishly either on booty or on
*madad-i-ma’ash* (stipends) made available to them by the plunderers of
that booty. These predators and parasites were now trying to retain and
tighten their hold over a large segment of the native population which
had been lured or forced into the fold of Islam when their forefathers
had ruled the roost. The nation had to isolate these residues of Islamic
imperialism on the one hand, and to win back the lost sheep of Hindu
society on the other. That was the need of the hour and there was no
other way out.  
 

**A SLOGAN BORROWED FROM THE BRITISH**

But Hindu society did not undertake that difficult but necessary task.
Instead, it borrowed a slogan, this time from the British themselves,
and felt fully satisfied that it had found a way out of the dilemma.

Lord Elphinstone had said as far back as 1851 that “*Divide et empera*
was the old Roman motto, and it should be ours”. Many other British
politicians, historians and bureaucrats, in Britain as well as in India,
had made similar statements of British policy. The British had never
tried very hard to hide the game they had played in the past, and were
planning to play in the future. But the national leaders who read or
heard these statements became agog with excitement as if they had
uncovered a ‘dark secret’, and could now answer comfortably all
questions regarding the ‘communal problem’.

The leaders of the nation lost no time in taking into confidence the
‘leaders’ of the ‘Muslim community’. The message conveyed was that the
British imperialists were bent upon breaking the ‘bonds between brother
and brother’, and that Muslims should unite with Hindus to expose and
defeat the British game. But Muslim leaders remained far from being
impressed by the gravity of the message, or else smiled in utter
contempt. On their part, they were finding it much more profitable to
negotiate a cold and calculated *quid pro quo* with the British, on the
basis of mutual cooperation.

Yet the leaders of the nation did not even suspect that the slogan of
*divide et impera* was not at all relevant in the context of
Hindu-Muslim relations. Their speeches and writings remained chock-full
of the very same slogan. Some of them went to the extent of saying that
Hindus and Muslims will shed all mutual hostility and hug one another as
soon as the British took leave of India. The policies pursued by the
leaders were an integral part of this misreading of the Muslim mind, and
led to disaster in due course.  
 

**THE SAME SLOGAN IS STILL CURRENT**

The British have left. But the relations between Hindus and Muslims are
no better, if not worse, than they were during the British rule. This
should have been a sufficient proof that the British were only
exploiting the differences that already existed between Hindus and
Muslims, and that the British had not created those differences.

Yet this slogan gets the pride of place in study after study of
Hindu-Muslim relations during the post-1857 and pre-Partition period.
The political pundits inform us, with airs of profound insight, how the
British ‘persecuted’ the Muslims and ‘patronized’ the Hindus in the
aftermath of 1857; how they started tilting towards the Muslims and away
from the Hindus as soon as the latter showed signs of rebellion; how
they made ‘mischievous’ overtures towards the Muslims by carving a
Muslim majority province out of the Presidency of Bengal; how they took
advantage of the situation when the Hindus alienated the Muslims by
opposing the Partition of Bengal; how they broke the ‘joint family’ by
bringing in separate electorates; how they promoted Muslim separatism
till the Muslim League passed its Lahore Resolution; and finally, how
they commissioned a master diplomat like Mountbatten to enact the last
act in a ‘dirty drama’.

These are supposed to be sober and scholarly studies as compared to the
‘scientific studies’ produced by the Marxist-cum-Muslim ‘historians’.
This tribe which is now entrenched in every university department of
history and political science all over the country, which has come to
control all prestigious forums concerned with the writing and teaching
of history and social studies, and which enjoys exclusive patronage from
the powers that be, has explained away the ‘minor faults and follies of
the Muslim minority’ in terms of the ‘major crimes of Hindu
communalism’. These ‘historians’ have firmly fixed the responsibility
for Partition on ‘Hindu revivalism and reaction’ which joined hands with
the ‘forces of feudalism, capitalism and imperialism’ in order to ‘drown
the toiling masses in mutual bloodshed’. The chickens hatched by the
slogan of *divide et impera* have returned home to roost.  
 

**A WELCOME DEPARTURE**

It is, therefore, a welcome departure from the beaten and the brazen
tracks that Shri H.V. Seshadri has not laboured morbidly over British
machinations to divide the two communities. Out of as many as 27
chapters in *The Tragic Story of Partition* he has devoted only one
chapter to this jejune and jaded theme. In another chapter, Abetting
Muslim Separatism, he has made the point quite clear that separatism was
the stock-in-trade of Muslim leadership, and that the British only made
use of it for their own purposes. The unmistakable impression that is
left on one’s mind, after one has finished the book, is that it was not
the British but the misconceived though well-intentioned policies of the
national leadership which cleared the way for a re-consolidation of
Islamic imperialism in the Eastern and Western wings of India.

To an adult mind this whole business of blaming the British for Muslim
separatism, which was and is in fact inspired by Islam, must look like
an infantile attempt at refusing to accept our own responsibility for
our own failures on a strategic front. It is high time for Hindu society
to start facing unpleasant realities rather than wish them away by
taking resort to plausible explanations.

In this particular instance, the explanation is not even plausible. It
falls to the ground as soon as we go beyond the realm of Hindu-Muslim
relations, and reflect upon eventual results of the same British policy
elsewhere.  
 

**FAILURE OF BRITISH POLICY ON ALL OTHER FRONTS**

The British had practised their policy of divide-and-rule not only
between Hindus and Muslims; they had also tried to set several sections
of Hindu society against each other. They had tried to embitter the
‘Dravidian South’ against the ‘Aryan North’ by selling the story of an
‘Aryan invasion’ even to our school-going children. They had encouraged
the so-called scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to break away from
the so-called caste Hindus. The princes had been isolated from their own
people, and ‘native India’ from ‘British India’. The ‘martial races’ had
been demarcated from ‘non-martial’ communities, and the ‘agriculturalist
masses’ from ‘non-agriculturist classes’. The ‘non-Brahmins had been
instigated against the Brahmins. Some Sikh scholars had been egged upon
to protest that the Sikhs were not a section of Hindu society.
Resentment had been inspired against ‘Bengali imperialism’ in Assam,
Bihar and Orissa, and against ‘Tamil domination’ in Kannada, Malayalam
and Telegu speaking areas. The cinders of some of those flames ignited
by the British continue to fly in our faces every now and then, even
after independence.

But when the chips were down and the British got ready to go, all these
mutual misgivings were overcome. All segments of Hindu society closed
their ranks and stood united like a solid phalanx. It was only the
Muslim community which stood apart and stuck out like a sore thumb. The
British policy of divide-and-rule had failed everywhere except among the
Muslims. We have to find out the facts and forces which made the
difference.  
 

**FAULTY PERCEPTIONS OF NATIONAL LEADERSHIP**

The basic perception that the British policy of divide-and-rule did not
make much difference to the Hindu-Muslim relations becomes clear if we
reverse the context, and consider those policies which were evolved and
pursued by the national leaders themselves entirely on their own, and
which went a long way in promoting Partition. The British had absolutely
no hand in inspiring or shaping those surrenders which the Indian
National Congress made before the Muslim leaders at different stages.
And those policies were endorsed by the tallest and the topmost among
the national leaders.

Shri Seshadri has listed and commented upon many of these mistaken
policies. But those great leaders of a great people have not suffered
the slightest diminution in his estimation. He has not cast a single
aspersion on their large-heartedness or their good intentions. All that
he has done is to point out that good intentions alone are no guarantee
of good results, more so when the vision falters due to faulty
perceptions or lack of proper reflection.

We may add a word in order to emphasize that a bitter or indignant or
value-loaded lament over British policies of divide-and-rule is neither
here nor there, even when those policies did cause some great damage.
The British had not come to India for picking roses. They had not come
to India because they had fallen for her fauna and flora, or her folk
dances, or her mysticism and metaphysics. On the contrary, they had come
here for the very prosaic purpose of conquering, consolidating and
conserving an empire which had proved progressively more profitable to
them, and which was soon to catapult them from the status of a
second-rate European nation to that of the most formidable world-power.
They would not have been worth their salt if they had not played the
patent game of all imperialists, in all ages. Blaming the British on
that count is tantamount to conceding, in the first instance, the
British claim that they had a civilizing mission in India, and then
complaining that they had not lived upto that claim. The entire exercise
is infantile and extremely puerile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


