+++
title = "06 CHAPTER VI ISLAMIC ATAVISM RENAMED MUSLIM REVIVALISM"

+++
**CHAPTER VI**  
**ISLAMIC ATAVISM RENAMED MUSLIM REVIVALISM**

“He stayed for a good time in Medina,” writes Jablani, “and returned to
Mecca in 1731, a little before the start of the Hajj season. Of course,
he spent the whole month of Ramzan there and its last ten days in
seclusion (*itikat*) in the sacred Mosque. During those hours of
seclusion many secret truths were made clear to him and he was duly
apprised of some difficult problems. Once he saw in a dream that he was
the maintainer of the world - *Aaim-uz-Zaman*.”^([1](#1))

Professor S.A.A. Rizvi gives some graphic details of this dream
described by Shah Waliullah himself in his *Fuyûd al-Harmayn* which he
wrote soon after his return to Indian in 1732: “In the same vision he
saw that the king of the *kafirs* had seized Muslim towns, plundered
their wealth and enslaved their children. Earlier the king had
introduced infidelity amongst the faithful and banished Islamic
practices. Such a situation infuriated Allah and made Him angry with His
creatures. The Shah then witnessed the expression of His fury in the
*mala’ala* (a realm where objects and events are shaped before appearing
on earth) which in turn gave rise to Shah’s own wrath. Then the Shah
found himself amongst a gathering of racial groups such as Turks, Uzbeks
and Arabs, some riding camels, others horses. They seemed to him very
like pilgrims in the Arafat. The Shah’s temper exasperated the pilgrims
who began to question him about the nature of the divine command. This
was the point, he answered, from which all worldly organizations would
begin to disintegrate and revert to anarchy. When asked how long such a
situation would last, Shah Wali-Allah’s reply was until Allah’s anger
had subsided… Shah Wali-Allah and the pilgrims then travelled from town
to town slaughtering the infidels. Ultimately they reached Ajmer,
slaughtered the nonbelievers there, liberated the town and imprisoned
the infidel king. Then the Shah saw the infidel king with the Muslim
army, led by its king, who then ordered that the infidel monarch be
killed. The bloody slaughter prompted the Shah to say that divine mercy
was on the side of the Muslims.”^([2](#2))  
 

**WALLIULAH'S RECIPE FOR RE-ESTABLISHING ISLAM**

Jablani has left us guessing about ‘the solutions of some difficult
problems’ which had been revealed to Shah Waliullah in that dream at
Mecca. But Rizvi has summarized them in the following words from
Waliullah’s magnum opus in Arabic, *Hujjat-Allah al-Baligha*: “According
to Shah Wali-Allah the mark of the perfect implementation of the Sharia
was the performance of jihad. There were people, said the Shah, who
indulged in their lower nature by following their ancestral religion,
ignoring the advice and commands of the Prophet Mohammed. If one chose
to explain Islam to people like this it was to do them a disservice.
Force, said the Shah, was the better course - Islam should be forced
down their throats like bitter medicine to a child. This, however, was
possible only if the leaders of the non-Muslim communities who failed to
accept Islam were killed, the strength of the community was reduced,
their property confiscated and a situation was created which led to
their followers and descendants willingly accepting Islam. Another means
of ensuring conversions was to prevent other religious communities from
worshipping their own gods. Moreover, unfavourable discriminating laws
should be imposed on non-Muslims in matters of rule of retaliation,
compensation for manslaughter, and marriage and political matters.
However, the proselytization programme of Shah Wali-Allah only included
the leaders of the Hindu community. The low class of the infidels,
according to him, were to be left alone to work in the fields and for
paying jiziya. They like beasts of burden and agricultural livestock
were to be kept in abject misery and despair.”^([3](#3))

Shah Waliullah was son of Shah Abdur Rahim, a sufi who was employed by
Aurangzeb for compiling the *Fatãwa-i-Ãlamgîrî*. Those who have
illusions about Sufism will do well to study this master-piece of the
sufi mind. The son was also a sufi. But instead of turning to Rumi or
Attar or Hafiz, he chose Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni as his hero. According
to the Shah, Mahmud was the greatest figure in the history of Islam
after the first four caliphs. He accused the historians of Islam of
failing to recognise the fact that Mahmud’s horoscope had been identical
with that of the Prophet, and that Mahmud had won as many and as
significant victories in *jihãd* as the Prophet himself.

Waliullah had travelled all the way to Mecca and Medina - a difficult
and dangerous undertaking in his days - and studied under half a dozen
Sufis and savants of ‘Islamic sciences’, only to ‘discover’ and declare
what the meanest mullah in the most obscure village mosque in India had
been mouthing for more than a thousand years. He himself wrote as many
as 43 books between 1732 and 1762 - thirty thoughtful years - only to
re-echo the routine ravings of a thousand theologians who had continued
to thunder ever since the advent of Islam in this country!  He wrote
hundreds of letters to his contemporary Muslim monarchs and mercenaries,
including Ahmad Shah Abdali, whom he considered to be the saviours of
Islam in India, only to convey the conventional Islamic message which
all of them had crammed in their cradles - convert of kill the *kãfirs*,
humiliate the Hindus, and establish an Islamic state in keeping with the
‘holy’ commandments of the Quran!  
 

**ATAVISM IS NOT REVIVALISM**

We Hindus have an interesting saying - *khodã pahãD aur niklî chuhiyã*
(one went to the extent of excavating a mountain but found only a she
mouse). Muslims who have not lost their sense of humour have also a very
apt way of describing their die-hard theologians - *mullah kî dõD masjid
tak* (however long the way a mullah may run, he always ends at the
mosque). One cannot help being reminded of a remark by Bernard Shaw when
someone reported to him the way Pavlov had developed his theory of the
Conditioned Reflex. Shaw had observed: “After torturing a thousand dogs,
he has found what every bitch-trainer in Europe knows.”

Hindus who are enamoured of Islamic monotheism, are invited to
contemplate the character of Allah as he emerges from the writings of
Waliullah. Hindus who credit Islam with the concepts of human
brotherhood and social equality, are invited to learn from Waliullah the
correct meanings of these concepts according to the scriptures of Islam.

On the other hand, Muslims who often quote the Quranic verse - Let there
be no compulsion in religion (II. 257) - are invited to repudiate
Waliullah, and affirm that he has misrepresented Allah and the Last
Prophet. Muslims who proclaim that Islam stands for human brotherhood
and social equality are invited to pronounce that Waliullah went against
the fundamentals of their faith when he wrote what he did.

We can cite a hundred books, written by modern scholars, hailing
Waliullah as one of the half a dozen topmost interpreters of true Islam,
and as a veritable messiah for a ‘moribund’ Muslim society. Professor
Aziz Ahmad voices the Muslim consensus on Waliullah when he writes that
this man “forms a bridge between medieval and modern Islam in
India.”^([4](#4)) All Muslim scholars are agreed that Waliullah was the
inaugurator of ‘Muslim Revivalism’ in the 18th century.

The word ‘revivalism’ like the word ‘communalism’ has acquired a bad
odour in India’s political parlance. Most Hindu scholars have come to
share this repugnance. Muslim scholars, on the other hand, have no
objection to the use of this word in a derogatory sense, so long as it
is hurled at Brahmo Samaj, Arya Samaj, Bankim Chandra, Swami
Vivekananda, Lokmanya Tilak, Sri Aurobindo, Madan Mohan Malaviya, and
Mahatma Gandhi. But they have strong reservations when the same
treatment is extended to Waliullah (1703-1762), Syed Ahmad Barelvi
(1786-1831), Shariatullah (1790-1831), Sir Syed Ahmad Khan (1817-1898),
and Sir Muhammad Iqbal (1876-1938), to name only the most notable
spokesmen of Islam after the break-down of the ‘Muslim Empire’ in India.
In such a contingency, they return to the normal and morally positive
meaning of revivalism. We shall, therefore, use this word in the sense
in which the Muslim scholars use it for their own heroes.

The dictionaries define the word ‘revival’ as follows – “recovering from
languor, neglect, depression, etc; renewed performance, renewed interest
or attention; a time of extraordinary religious awakening or working up
of excitement especially accompanied by extravagance.” None of these
meanings fits the fulminations of Waliullah. The phrase ‘Muslim
Revivalism,’ as applied to his labours by Muslim scholars is a misnomer.
He may be reproached for repeating *ad nauseam* what his predecessors in
the prison-house of Islamic theology had prescribed; but he cannot be
accused of reviving anything which had fallen into abeyance for want of
ardent advocates.

Have a look at the history of Islamic theology in India till the time of
Waliullah. It might have suffered from many logical fallacies. But it
had never suffered from the psychological lapses of languor, neglect and
depression, etc. It had always been alive and kicking, alert and
aggressive.

Study the lives of Islamic theologians in India till their ranks were
joined by this new “luminary”. They might not have put up any
spectacular philosophical performance. But they had not pulled any
punches in their polemics against Hindu spirituality, culture and
society. Their ringing calls for a renewal of Islam by ruining the
Hindus had always gone out in an unmistakable language.

Survey the far-flung Sufi *silsilãs* till Waliullah came forward to
synthesize them all in the service of Islam in India. The Sufis might
not have taken any interest in their own self-improvement; they might
not have paid any attention to the abundance of sterling spirituality
which surrounded them in the lives of Hindu sages and saints. But few of
them had so far failed to curse the Hindu *kãfirs* and consign even the
greatest among the Hindu saints to an eternal hell-fire.

Compile a list of civil commotions in the cities that had passed under
the control of Islam till Waliullah started writing his long letters to
his contemporary military commanders. The Muslim mobs in these places
might have missed a religious awakening - ordinary or extraordinary -
because of continued brainwashing by the Mullahs and the Sufis. But they
had seldom missed the excitement and extravagance of street riots,
whenever the Hindu populace had tried to perform its religious rites.

It, therefore, goes to the credit of Shri H.V. Seshadri that he steers
clear of the meaningless phrase - Muslim Revivalism - in *The Tragic
Story of Partition*. He states in his chapter on Muslim Separatism that
Waliullah was only continuing, under changed circumstances, an old
Islamic crusade against the Hindus. Shri Seshadri does something more
which is equally significant. He links up Waliullah and his latter-day
followers - Syed Ahmad Barelvi and Shariatullah, etc. - with Sir Syed
Ahmad Khan of the Aligarh Movement, under whom the residues of Islamic
imperialism started revising their strategy after years of tilting their
blunted swords against the windmills of British imperialism. The British
had heaved a sigh of relief, even though the *jihãd* of Dudhu Mian
(1819-1860) and Titu Mian (1782-1831) etc., had never been more than a
marginal nuisance for them. Henceforward, tile residues of Islamic
imperialism were to be a nuisance for Indian nationalism, till they
succeeded in securing their first pound of flesh in the shape of
Pakistan.  
 

**AN OUTLINE OF ISLAMIC CRUSADE IN INDIA**

Shri Seshadri has not given a detailed description of the earlier
Islamic crusade which Waliullah had merely continued. Instead, he has
chosen to give glimpses of the national fight for freedom which had
finally defeated the foe. That is as it should be. The less we brood
over black evils of the past, the lighter we feel and the better we
become for facing tasks in the present. It is only because Muslim
separatism is still a festering sore in our body politic that one has to
go back to its sources in an earlier age when the first Muslim army had
stepped forward on the soil of India.

Professor Aziz Ahmad has narrated in the following words the encomiums
heaped on Mahmud Ghaznavi by the Sufis and Mullahs: “Mahmud of Ghazna’s
invasion of what was regarded as pagan India was a sensational novelty
at the end of the 10th century. The sack of Somnat and the destruction
of its temple came to be considered a specially pious exploit because of
its analogy in the past with the destruction of the idols of the pagan
Arabs by the Prophet. This led to invention of popular legends giving
Mahmud’s invasion a status of sanctity; and it explains the idealisation
of Mahmud by Nizam al-Mulk Tusi and the ideal treatment he has received
from earlier Sufi poets like Sanai and Attar, not to mention such
collectors of anecdotes as Awfi.”^([5](#5))

The Sufis and Mullahs had streamed towards India from all over the then
Islamic world soon after the first Sultanate was established at Delhi in
the first decade of the 13th century. The stream became a swollen flood
after the Mongol uprising against Islamic aggression in Central Asia.
The Mongols had started giving to the Muslims a stiff dose of the
latter’s own medicine. They had sacked most of the Muslim citadels and
cities in Transoxiana, Khurasan and Iran. Finally, in 1258 A.D., they
had destroyed the *Dãr-ul-Khilãfat* at Baghdad, and killed the
*Amîr-ul-Mu’minîn* in a merciless manner. Many Mullahs and Sufis had
fattended for long in these Muslim metropolises on the plundered wealth
brought in by the armies of Islam. Their harems were brimful of
beautiful maidens and beardless boys captured by Muslim swordsmen in
*jihãds* against infidel lands, or brought by Muslim slave merchants in
slave markets all over Islamdom. Now, all of a sudden, they had to run
in all directions to save their lives. Quite a few of them found a safe
haven in the cities and towns of North India which had meanwhile been
garrisoned by the armies of Islam.

Had these saints and scholars of Islam been normal human beings, they
would have been shaken by their harrowing experience at the hands of the
Mongols. The wrongs that had been heaped upon their countries and
compatriots would have, in that case, moved them to stand against
similar treatment being meted out to their fellow human beings
elsewhere. They would have sought to humanize their theology by revising
the premises on which their prophet had raised it.

But, unfortunately for them as for India, most of them had become
unbalanced by years of mugging up the conventional Islamic lore in
*madrasas* and *khãnqahs*. The Sufis in particular had poisoned their
hearts and heads to an incurable point by meditating morbidly on the
gangster masquerading as God in the Quran. They found it impossible to
break out of the lunatic asylum in which they had lived for so long.
Instead of interpreting the Mongol atrocities as a nemesis for the
wrongs done by the Muslims in the past, in many countries, they looked
at it all as Allah’s *qahr* (wrath) on a *millat* which had fallen from
the piety of early Islam! Thus they ended by stamping out whatever
little softening and sophistication Islam had undergone due to centuries
of contact with superior cultures - Greek, Zoroastrian, Chinese, and
Hindu-Buddhist.

In the next two centuries, this Sufi-cum-Mullah cartel spread over
Central and Southern India in the wake of victorious Muslim arms. Many
new *madrasas* and *khãnqhas* sprang up on the ruins of temples and
monasteries which the Muslim swordsmen had sacked. Islamic theology
became more self-righteous as the battles won by superior steel were
supposed to have been won by a superior doctrine. Ever since, this
theology has remained fossilized in all its fundamentals, and every
effort on the part of enlightened Muslims has so far failed to find a
chink in its armour.  
 

**COMMON CHARACTERISTICS OF ISLAMIC THEOLOGIANS**

The list is long of the Sufis and the Mullahs who pressed the war-weary
Muslim monarchs to wipe out *kufr* (infidelity) and *shirk* (polytheism)
from the face of India.  Space does not permit us to summarize the
individual performance of even the most prominent members of this large
tribe which flourished throughout what is paraded as the Muslim period
of Indian history. We will have to be content with describing a few
characteristics which they shared in common.

> 1\. All of them came from foreign countries already conquered by Islam
> and secured lucrative offices or liberal *madad-i-ma‘ash* (state
> stipends) in a state presided over by sultans. They lived in spacious
> mansions or sprawling *khãnqahs* endowed with lands and enriched by
> sumptuous shares in the loot collected by Muslim armies. Quite a few
> of them were corrupt and sold junior offices for a consideration, or
> befooled the believing Muslim masses with a variety of tricks dressed
> up as miracles;
>
> 2\. All of them affected longish names prefixed and suffixed by a
> variety of honorifics, with quite a few *bin* (son of) and *al* (of)
> in between. They tried to trace their ancestry to Ali and Fatima, or
> to other close relatives and companions of the Prophet;
>
> 3\. Most of them wrote commentaries on the Quran or the Hadis or on
> earlier commentaries of this or that theological or sufi school. There
> was always a rat race among them to secure larger and larger slices of
> *madad-i-ma’ash* from the king as well as the courtiers. Quite often,
> the presents they received from their patrons included helpless Hindu
> women captured from conquered provinces, or brought in the slave
> markets.
>
> 4\. Most of them had stayed in Mecca and Medina for short or long
> periods before they arrived in India, or performed a pilgrimage at a
> later stage. Their zeal for Islam and hatred for the Hindus received a
> new lease of life after they had studied under similar scholars and
> saints in the schools of Hijaz;
>
> 5\. All of them saw visions and dreamt dreams in which they
> communicated directly with the Prophet, or his progeny, or the four
> pious caliphs. This was how they received their confirmed commands for
> reviving Islam by a renewed slaughter of Hindus;
>
> 6\. Quite a few of them confided to their close disciples that they
> had also received revelations which compared quite favourably with
> those contained in the Quran. Some of them were convinced that they
> too were prophets in their own right, but could not publicize the
> secret for fear of being beheaded by a sultan, or getting killed by a
> Muslim mob instigated by rival claimants. So they ended by decorating
> themselves with slightly less lofty titles - *walî* (friend of Allah),
> *ghaus* (axis), *qutb* (guide), *qayyûm* (stabilizer), *mujaddid*
> (renewer), *Mahdi* (the great leader who appears on the Last Day),
> *abdãl, autãd, nuqta, akhyãr*, and the rest.
>
> 7\. All of them quarrelled continuously over a thousand themes in
> their theology. But they never failed to present a prompt agreement
> whenever they were consulted about the treatment to be meted out to
> the Hindus. The formula was fool-proof - convert the Hindus by force;
> kill those Hindus who refuse to recite the *kalima*; slaughter the
> Brahmins and eat the cows; burn Hindu scriptures; demolish Hindu
> temples and monasteries; and desecrate places of Hindu pilgrimage in
> order to humiliate the Hindus; impose draconian disabilities and
> discriminatory taxes on the Hindus in order to force them into the
> fold of Islam.

  
**MOST SUFIS WERE HARD-HEARTED FANATICS**

Many Hindus have been misled, mostly by their own soft-headed scholars,
to cherish the fond belief that the Sufis were spiritual seekers, and
that unlike the Mullahs, they loved Hindu religious lore and liked their
Hindu neighbours. The Chishtiyya Sufis in particular have been chosen
for such fulsome praise. The orthodox among the Muslims protest that the
Sufis are being slandered. But the Hindus remain convinced that they
themselves know better. Professor Aziz Ahmad is a renowned scholar of
Islam in India. He clinches the matter in the following words: “In
Indian sufism anti-Hindu polemics began with Muin al-din Chishti. Early
Sufis in the Punjab and early Chishtis devoted themselves to the task of
conversion on a large scale. Missionary activity slowed down under Nizam
al-din Auliya, not because of any new concept of eclecticism, but
because he held that the Hindus were generally excluded from grace and
could not be easily converted to Islam unless they had the opportunity
to be in the company of the Muslim saints for considerable
time.”^([6](#6))

Of course, the Auliya who lived in a sprawling *khãnqah* and received
rich gifts out of plunder was convinced that he himself was such a
Muslim saint. His temper and teachings can be known easily from the
writings of Amir Khusru, the poet, and Ziauddin Barani, the historian.
Both of them were leading disciples of the Auliya. Both of them express
a great hatred for Hindus, and regret that the Hanafi school of Islamic
Law had come in the way of wiping out completely the “curse of
infidelism” from the face Hindustan.

A similar Sufi saint who died a mere 79 years before Waliullah’s birth,
was Ahmad Sirhindi (1564-1624). He was always foaming at the mouth
against Akbar’s policy of peace with the Hindus. He proclaimed himself
the *Mujaddid-i-alf-i-sãnî*, ‘renovator of the second millennium of
Islam’. Besides writing several books, he addressed many letters to
several powerful courtiers in the reign of Akbar and Jahangir. His
*Maktûbãt-i-Imãm Rabbãnî* have been collected and published in three
volumes. According to Professor S.A.A. Rizvi, “‘Shariat can be fostered
through the sword’ was the slogan he raised for his
contemporaries.”^([7](#7))

A few specimens should suffice to show the quality of this man’s mind.
In letter No. 163 he wrote: “The honour of Islam lies in insulting
*kufr* and *kafirs*. One who respects the *kafirs* dishonours the
Muslims… The real purpose of levying *jiziya* on them is to humiliate
them to such an extent that they may not be able to dress well and to
live in grandeur. They should constantly remain terrified and trembling.
It is intended to hold them under contempt and to uphold the honour and
might of Islam.” In Letter No. 81 he said: “Cow-sacrifice in India is
the noblest of Islamic practices. The *kafirs* may probably agree to pay
*jiziya* but they shall never concede to cow-sacrifice.” After Guru
Arjun Deva had been tortured and done to death by Jahangir, he wrote in
letter No. 193 that “the execution of the accursed *kafir* of Gobindwal
is an important achievement and is the cause of the great defeat of the
Hindus.”^([8](#8))

Sirhindi ranks with Shah Waliullah as one of the topmost sufis and
theologians of Islam. Referring to his role, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad has
written in his *Tazkirah* that “but for these letters Muslim nobles
would not have stood by Islam and but for the efforts of Shaikh Ahmad,
Akbar’s heterodoxy would have superseded Islam in India.”^([9](#9))
Later on, when K.A. Nizami published a collection of Shah Walilullah’s
letters addressed to various Muslim notables including Ahmad Shah
Abdali, he dedicated it to Maulana Azad. The Maulana wrote back, “I am
extremely happy that you have earned the merit of publishing these
letters. I pray from the core of my heart that Allah may bless you with
the felicity of publishing many books of a similar kind.”^([10](#10))
That should give us a measure not only of ‘Muslim Revivalism’ but also
of many Maulanas who masqueraded as ardent nationalists in order to
fight the battle for Islam from within the Indian National Congress.  
 

**APPENDIX**

It is strange that most of the present-day Muslim scholars refuse to
cite the actual statements made about Hindus and Hinduism by their
heroes such as Ahmad Sirhindi and Shah Waliullah while praising them to
the skies as saviours of Islam in India. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and
Allama Iqbal are shining examples of this intriguing silence. The late
Professor Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi published two significant books on the
history of Islam in India - *Ulema in Politics* (1972), and *The Muslim
Community of the Indo-Pakistan Subcontinent* (1977). He has devoted many
pages to Ahmad Sirhindi and Shah Waliullah in both the books. But he has
not cited a single sentence written or spoken by the ‘great sufis’ on
how they looked at Hindus and Hinduism. I have no doubt that Nizami has
also suppressed those letters of Shah Waliullah in which the latter has
poured out his heart about *kufr* and the *kãfirs*. It is only Professor
S.A.A Rizvi who has taken us into the secret chambers so to say.
Professor Rizvi is a Shia. And the venom which characters like Ahmad
Sirhindi have poured on Hindus and Hinduism is quite comparable to that
which they poured out on Shias and Shiism.

Professor Rizvi has cited select passages from the original Persian of
Ahmad Sirhindi’s letters. It is only recently that the letters have
become available in Urdu translation. Ahmad Sirhindi wrote to many
Muslim notables in the reign of Akbar and Jahangir. Some of these
letters were in strong protest against Akbar’s policies vis-a-vis
Hindus. One of Sirhindi’s patrons was Abdul Rahim Khan-i-Khanan whom
many Hindus cherish as a Hindi poet and a devotee of Sri Krishna. It is
unfortunate that quite a few recipients of these letters cannot be
identified straight away because they are addressed by their titles and
not by their names. As the letters are not dated, it is difficult to say
whether the bearer of a particular title belonged to the reign of Akbar
or Jahangir. The same title was given to several persons in succession.
I reproduce below some passages from these significant letters in order
to show how the mind of this great sufi functioned. He was the leading
light of the Naqshbandi sufi *silsilã*, and the foremost disciple of
Khwaja Baqi Billah who brought this *silsilã* to India in the reign of
Akbar. I may add that the Prophet appeared quite frequently to both Baqi
Billah and Ahmad Sirhindi in their dreams or states of trance, and gave
guidance to them. We reproduce below some of his statements.

1. It is said that the Shariat prospers under the shadow of the sword
(*al-Shara‘ tahat al-saif*). And the glory of the holy Shariat depends
on the kings of Islam…^([11](#11))

2\. Islam and infidelity (*kufr*) contradict one another. To establish
the one means eradicating the other, the coming together of these
contradictories being impossible. Therefore, Allah has commanded his
Prophet to wage war (*jihãd*) against the infidels, and be harsh with
them. The glory is Islam consists in the humiliation and degradation of
infidels and infidelity. He who honours the infidels, insults Islam.
Honouring (the infidels) does not mean that they are accorded dignity,
and made to sit in high places. It means allowing them to be in our
company, to sit with them, and talk to them. *They should be kept away
like dogs*. If there is some worldly purpose or work which depends upon
them, and cannot be served without their help, they may be contacted
while keeping in mind all the time that they are not worthy of respect.
The best course according to Islam is that they should not be contacted
even for worldly purposes. Allah has proclaimed in his Holy Word (Quran)
that they are his and his Prophet’s enemies. And mixing with these
enemies of Allah and his Prophet or showing affection for them, is one
of the greatest crimes…

…The abolition of *jizyah* in Hindustan is a result of friendship which
(Hindus) have acquired with the rulers of this land… What right have the
rulers to stop exacting *jizyah*? Allah himself has commanded imposition
of *jizyah* for their (infidels’) humiliation and degradation. What is
required is their disgrace, and the prestige and power of Muslims. *The
slaughter of non-Muslims means gain for Islam*… To consult them (the
*kafirs*) and then act according to their advice means honouring the
enemies (of Islam), which is strictly forbidden…

The prayer (=goodwill) of these enemies of Islam is false and fruitless.
It should never be called for because it can only add to their numbers.
If the infidels pray, they will surely seek the intercession of their
idols, which is taking things too far… *A wise man has said that unless
you become a maniac (dîwãnah) you cannot attain Islam*. The state of
this mania means going beyond considerations of profit and loss.
Whatever one gains in the service of Islam should suffice…^([12](#12))

3\. Ram and Kirshan whom Hindus worship are insignificant creatures, and
have been begotten by their parents… Ram could not protect his wife whom
Ravan took away by force. How can he (Ram) help others?… It is thousands
of times shameful that some people should think of Ram and Kirshan as
rulers of all the worlds… *To think that Ram and Rahman are the same, is
extremely foolish*. The creator and the creature can never be one… The
controller of the Cosmos was never called Ram and Kirshan before the
latter were born. What has happened after their birth that they have
come to be equated with Allah, and the worship of Ram and Kirshan is
described as the worship of Allah? May Allah save us!

Our prophets who number one lakh and twenty-four thousand have
encouraged the created ones to worship the Creator… The gods of the
Hindus (on the other hand) have encouraged the people to worship them
(the gods) instead… They are themselves misguided, and are leading
others astray… See, how the (two) ways are different!^([13](#13))

4\. Before that *kãfir* \[Guru Arjun Deva\] was executed this recluse
\[meaning himself\] had seen in a dream that the reigning king had
smashed the skull of idolatry. Indeed, he was a great idolater, and the
leader of the idolaters, and the chief of unbelievers. May Allah blast
him! The Holy Prophet who is the ruler of religion as well as the world,
has cursed the idolaters as follows in some of his prayers – “O Allah,
demean their society, create divisions in their ranks, destroy their
homes, and get at them like the mighty one.”

It is required by religion \[Islam\] that *jihãd* should be waged
against the unbelievers, and that they should be dealt with harshly… It
is obligatory on Muslims to acquaint the king of Islam with the evil
customs of false religions… Maybe the king has no knowledge of these
evil customs… Some Ulama of Islam should come forward, and proclaim the
evils present in their (unbelievers’) ways… It will be no excuse on the
Day of Judgment that they did not proclaim the tenets of the Shariat
because they were not called upon (to do so)…^([14](#14))

5\. The Shariat prevails under the shadow of the sword (*al Shara‘ tahat
al-saif*) - according to this (saying), the Shariat can triumph only
with the help of mighty kings and their good administration. But for
some time past this saying has been languishing, which means inevitably
that Islam has become weak. The unbelievers (Hindus) of Hindustan are
demolishing mosques, and erecting their own places of worship on the
same sites. There was a mosque in the tank of Kurukhet (Kurukshetra) at
Thanesar, as also the tomb of some (Muslim) saint. These have been
demolished, and a huge *gurudwãrã* has been constructed on the same
sites. Besides, the *kafirs* are holding many celebrations of *kufr*…

It is a thousand pities that the reigning king is a Mussalman, and we
recluses find ourselves helpless. There was a time when Islam stood
glorified due to the might and prestige of its kings, and the Ulama and
the Sufis were honoured and held in high regard. It was with their help
that the kings made the Shariat prevail. I have heard that one day Amir
Taimur was passing through the bazar at Bukhara when, by chance, the
inmates of Khwaja Naqshbandi’s *khãnqah* were beating the dust out of
the mats used in that place. Because Islam was intact in Amir Taimur, he
stopped at that spot and regarded the dust of the *khãnqah* as musk and
sandal. He met a good end.^([15](#15))

6\. Therefore, it is necessary that infidelity should be cursed in order
to serve the faith (Islam). Cursing unbelief in the heart is the lesser
way. The greater way is to curse it in the heart as well as with the
body. In short, cursing means to nourish enmity towards enemies of the
true faith, whether that enmity is harboured in the heart when there is
fear of injury from them (infidels), or it is harboured in the heart as
well as served with the body when there is no fear of injury from them.

In the opinion of this recluse, there is no greater way to obtain the
blessings of Allah than to curse the enemies of the faith (be impatient
with them). For Allah himself harbours enmity towards the infidels and
infidelity…

Once I went to visit a sick man who was close to death. When I meditated
on him, I saw that his heart was layered with darknesses. I intended to
remove those darknesses. But he was not yet ready for it… When I
meditated more deeply, I discovered that those darknesses had gathered
due to his friendship with the infidels. They could not be dispersed
easily. He had to suffer torments of hell before he could get purged of
them…^([16](#16))

7\. Every person cherishes some longing in his heart. The only longing
which this recluse (meaning himself) cherishes is that the enemies of
Allah and his Prophet should be roughed up. The accursed ones should be
humiliated, and their false gods disgraced and defiled. I know that
Allah likes and loves no other act more than this. That is why I have
been encouraging you again and again to act in this way. Now that you
have yourself arrived at that place, and have been appointed to defile
and insult that dirty spot and its inhabitants, I feel grateful for this
grace (from Allah). There are many who go to this place for pilgrimage.
Allah in his kindness has not inflicted this punishment on us. After
giving thanks to Allah, you should do your best to ruin that place and
their false gods… whether the idols are carved or uncarved. Let us hope
that you will not act slow. Physical weakness and severity of the cold
weather, comes in my way. Otherwise, I would have presented myself, and
helped you in doing the job. I would have liked to participate in the
ceremony and mutilate the stones…^([17](#17))  
 

**II**

Shah Waliullah also was full of the poison which goes by the name of
Islam. But by the time be arrived on the scene, the situation for
Islamic imperialism in India had become desperate. Forces of Indian
nationalism had risen all over the country, and Islamic imperialism was
on a fast retreat. I am reproducing some portions from those letters of
Waliullah in which he is making frantic appeals to the swordsmen of
Islam for retrieving the situation. It is significant that whole
passages of the Persian originals have been dropped from the Urdu
translations. Those passages contain the obscene swear-words of which
every language of Islam is brimful.  
 

1\. ***Letter to Ahmad Shah Abdali, Ruler of Afghanistan***

The presence of the kings of Islam is a great blessing from Allah… You
should know that the country of Hindustan is a large land. In olden
days, the kings of Islam had struggled hard and for long in order to
conquer this foreign country. They could do it only in several
turns…^([18](#18))

Every (Muslim) king got mosques erected in his territory, and created
*madrasas*. Muslims of Arabia and Ajam (non-Arab Muslim lands) migrated
from their own lands and arrived in these territories. They became
agents for the publicity and spread of Islam here. Uptil now their
descendants are firm in the ways of Islam…^([19](#19))

Among the non-Muslim communities, one is that of the Marhatah (Maratha).
They have a chief. For some time past, this community has been raising
its head, and has become influential all over Hindustan…^([20](#20))

…It is easy to defeat the Marhatah community, provided the *ghãzîs* of
Islam gird up their loins and show courage…^([21](#21))

In the countryside between Delhi and Agra, the Jat community used to
till the land. In the reign of Shahjahan, this community had been
ordered not to ride on horses, or keep muskets with them, or build
fortresses for themselves. The kings that came later became careless,
and this community has used the opportunity for building many forts, and
collecting muskets…^([22](#22))

In the reign of Muhammad Shah, the impudence of this community crossed
all limits. And Surajmal, the cousin of Churaman, became its leader. He
took to rebellion. Therefore, the city of Bayana which was an ancient
seat of Islam, and where the Ulama and the Sufis had lived for seven
hundred years, has been occupied by force and terror, and Muslims have
been turned out of it with humiliation and hurt…^([23](#23))

…Whatever influence and prestige is left with the kingship at present,
is wielded by the Hindus. For no one except them is there in the ranks
of managers and officials. Their houses are full of wealth of all
varieties. Muslims live in a state of utter poverty and deprivation. The
story is long and cannot be summarised. What I mean to say is that the
country of Hindustan has passed under the power of non-Muslims. In this
age, except your majesty, there is no other king who is powerful and
great, who can defeat the enemies, and who is farsighted and experienced
in war. It is your majesty’s bounden duty (*farz-i-ain*) to invade
Hindustan, to destroy the power of the Marhatahs, and to free the
down-and-out Muslims from the clutches of non-Muslims. Allah forbid, if
the power of the infidels remains in its present position, Muslims will
renounce Islam and not even a brief period will pass before Muslims
become such a community as will no more know how to distinguish between
Islam and non-Islam. This will be a great tragedy. Due to the grace of
Allah, no one except your majesty has the capacity for preventing this
tragedy from taking place.

We who are the servants of Allah and who recognise the Prophet as our
saviour, appeal to you in the name of Allah that you should turn your
holy attention to this direction and face the enemies, so that a great
merit is added to the roll of your deeds in the house of Allah, and your
name is included in the list of *mujãhidîn fi Sabîlallah* (warriors in
the service of Allah). May you acquire plunder beyond measure, and may
the Muslims be freed from the stranglehold of the infidels. I seek
refuge in Allah when I say that you should not act like Nadir Shah who
oppressed and suppressed the Muslims, and went away leaving the
Marhatahs and the Jats whole and prosperous.

The enemies have become more powerful after Nadir Shah, the army of
Islam has disintegrated, and the empire of Delhi has become childrens’
play. Allah forbid, if the infidels continue as at present, and Muslims
get (further) weakened, the very name of Islam will get wiped
out.^([24](#24))

…When your fearsome army reaches a place where Muslims and non-Muslims
live together, your administrators must take particular care. They must
be instructed that those weak Muslims who live in the countryside should
be taken to towns and cities. Next, some such administrators should be
appointed in towns and cities as would see to it that the properties of
Muslims are not plundered, and the honour of no Muslim is
compromised.^([25](#25))  
 

2\. ***To Najibuddaulah, the Ruhela Ally of Abdali in India***

Your solemn letter has reached (me)…

At the ‘hidden level’ (occult word), the downfall of the Marhatahs and
the Jats has been decided. Now, therefore, it is only a matter of time.
As soon as the servants of Allah gird up their loins and come out with
courage, the magic fortress of falsehood will be
shattered…^([26](#26))  
 

3\. ***To Najibuddaulah***

…There are three groups in Hindustan which are known for the qualities
of fanaticism and zeal. So long as these three are not exterminated, no
king can feel secure, nor any noble. The people (read Muslims) also will
not be able to live in peace.

Religious as well as worldly interests dictate that soon after winning
the war with the Marhatahs, you should turn towards the forts of the
Jats, and conquer them with the blessings from the hidden (occult)
world. Next is the turn of the Sikhs. This group should also be
defeated, while waiting for grace from Allah.

…I appeal to you in the name of Allah and his Prophet that you should
not cast your eye on the property of any Muslim. If you take care in
this regard, there is hope that the doors of victory will be opened to
you one after another. But if this caution is ignored, I fear that the
wails of the oppressed may become obstacles in the way towards your
goal.^([27](#27))  
 

4\. ***To Najibuddaulah***

These words are being written in reply to the verbal message sent by
you. I have been asked (by you) to tell (you) about suppression of the
rebellion of Jats in the environs of Delhi.

The fact is that this recluse (meaning himself) has witnessed in the
occult world the downfall of the Jats in the same way as that of the
Marhatahs. I have also seen it in a dream that Muslims have taken
possession of the forts and the country of the Jats, and that Muslims
have become masters of those forts and that country as in the past. Most
probably, the Ruhelas will occupy those Jat forts. This has been
determined and decided in the most secret world. This recluse has not
the shadow of a doubt about that. But the way that victory will be
achieved is not yet clear. What is needed is prayers from those special
servants of Allah who have been chosen for this purpose.

…But keep one thing in your mind, namely, that the Hindus who are
apparently in your’s and your government’s employ, are inclined towards
the enemies in their hearts. They do not want that the enemies be
exterminated. They will try a thousand tricks in this matter, and
endeavour in every way to show to your honour that the path of peace is
more profitable.

Make up your mind not to listen to this group (the Hindu employees). If
you disregard their advice, you will reach the height of fulfilment.
This recluse knows of this (fulfilment) as if he is seeing it with his
own eyes.^([28](#28))  
 

5\. ***To Shykh Muhammad Ashiq***

…I have received your weighty letter…

According to whatever this recluse (meaning himself) has learnt (from
the occult world), Ahmad Shah Abdali will come again for putting down
the enemies. When this sacred promise is fulfilled, he will most
probably stay here, and dedicate his life to the last to (the welfare
of) this land. In spite of the crimes that abound and the evils that
have multiplied, the work is proceeding according to plan. The reason
for this most probably is that Allah wants to destroy the power of his
enemies.^([29](#29))  
 

6\. ***To Shah Muhammad Ashiq Pahalti***

…your letter has arrived…

Safdar Jang had reached such a state (of damnation) that his foot got
afflicted with cancer. The more they removed the (affected) flesh from
his foot, the worse it became. At last, they were forced to amputate his
foot. Finally, he passed away in this piteous condition. It means that
Allah’s wrath against the Marhatahs and the Jats has now become
manifest, and the defeat and destruction of these people has been
decided at the occult level.^([30](#30))  
 

7\. ***To Taj Muhammad Khan Baluch***

Your honoured letter regarding suppression of the Jats has arrived.
Allah is merciful, and it is hoped that he will crush the enemy. You
should rest assured… You should forge unity with Musa Khan and other
Muslim groups, and put to use this friendship and unity for facing the
enemies. I hope for sure that on account of this unity among Muslims and
their nobility, victory will be achieved.

The reason for the rise of enemies and the fall of Muslims is nothing
except that, led by their lower nature, Muslims have shared their
(Muslims’) concerns with Hindus. It is obvious that Hindus will not
tolerate the suppression of non-Muslims. Being farsighted and practising
patience are praiseworthy things, but not to the extent that non-Muslims
take possession of Muslim cities, and go on occupying one (such) city
every day… This is no time for farsightedness and patience. This is the
time for putting trust in Allah, for manifesting the might of the sword,
and for arousing the Muslim sense of honour. If you will do that, it is
possible that winds of favour will start blowing. Whatever this recluse
knows is this that war with the Jats is a magic spell which appears
fearful at first but which, if you depend fully on the power of Allah
and draw His attention towards this (war), will turn out to be no more
than a mere show. Let me hope that you will keep me informed of
developments and the faring of your arms…^([31](#31))  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) G.N. Jablani, *Life of Shah Waliullah*, Delhi, 1980, p.29

[²](#2a) S.A.A. Rizvi, *Shah Wali-Allah and His Times*, Canberra. 1980,
p.218.

[³](#3a) Ibid., pp. 285-286.

[⁴](#4a) Aziz Ahmad, *Studies In Islamic Culture*, Oxford, 1964, p.204.

[⁵](#5a) Ibid., p.79

[⁶](#6a) Ibid., p. 134.

[⁷](#7a) S.A.A. Rizvi, *Muslim Revivalist Movements in Northern India in
the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries*, Agra, 1965, p.247.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., pp. 248-249.

[⁹](#9a) Ibid., p. 215.

[¹⁰](#10a) Cited in the Preface to Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, *Shãh Walîullah
Dehlvî ke Siyãsî Makhtübãt*, Second Edition, Delhi, 1969, p. 5.

[¹¹](#11a) *Maktûbãt-i-Imãm Rabbãnî* translated into Urdu by Maulana
Muhammad Sa’id Ahmad Naqshbandi, Deoband, 1988, Volume I, p.211.
Emphases added. This letter was written to the Khan-i-Azam of that time.

[¹²](#12a) Ibid., pp.388-89. Emphasis added. There are several other
letters written to other notables in the same strain. This letter was
written to Shaikh Farid *alias* Nawab Murtaza Khan who was opposed to
Akbar’s religious policy, and who supported Jahangir’s accession after
taking from the latter a promise that Islam will be upheld in the new
reign.

[¹³](#13a) Ibid., p.396. Emphasis added. Ibis letter was written to
Hirday Ram Hindu who had “expressed affinity” with Sirhindi’s school of
thought.

[¹⁴](#14a) Ibid., pp.435-36. This letter was written to Shaikh Farid.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., Volume II, p.1213. This letter was written to Mir
Muhammad Nu‘man, obviously in the reign of Akbar.

[¹⁶](#16a) Ibid., Volume III, pp. 660-63. These passages are from a long
letter in which Ahmad Sirhindi answered a large number of questions from
his disciples.

[¹⁷](#17a) Ibid., pp.707. This letter was also written to Shaikh Farid
*alias* Nawab Murtaza Khan who had reached Kangra in November 1620 to
conquer the fort and desecrate its temples. Jahangir had followed the
Nawab in order to celebrate the victory by sacrificing cows and building
a mosque where none had existed before.

[¹⁸](#18a) Translated from the Urdu version of K.A. Nizami, *Shãh
Walîullah Dehlvî ke Siyãsî Maktûbãt*, Second Edition, Delhi, 1969, p.83.

[¹⁹](#19a) Ibid., p.84.

[²⁰](#20a) Ibid., p.85.

[²¹](#21a) Ibid., p.86.

[²²](#22a) Ibid., p.87.

[²³](#23a) Ibid.

[²⁴](#24a) Ibid., pp. 90-91.

[²⁵](#25a) Ibid., p. 92. There is more than a hint that Hindus alone
should be plundered and dishonoured.

[²⁶](#26a) Ibid., p. 103.  Shah Waliullah claimed and his devotees
believed that he could contact hidden levels of existence and foresee
future events. He was often consulted by leading Muslims for finding out
lets foresights. This letter was obviously written after the defeat of
the Marathas in 1761 AD.

[²⁷](#27a) Ibid., pp.104-05.

[²⁸](#28a) Ibid., pp. 106-07.

[²⁹](#29a) Ibid., pp. 116-17.

[³⁰](#30a) Ibid., pp. 125-26. Safdar Jang had invited Shah Waliullah’s
holy wrath because he took help from the Marathas and the Jats in his
struggle with the Sunni court faction in 1753 AD. He had been ousted
from his post as Prime Minister of the Mughal emperor Ahmad Shah.

[³¹](#31a) Ibid., pp. 150-51.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


