+++
title = "08 CHAPTER VIII NATIONAL RESURGENCE REVILED AS HINDU REVIVALISM"

+++
**CHAPTER VIII**  
**NATIONAL RESURGENCE REVILED AS HINDU REVIVALISM**

Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati (1824-1883) was speaking at a meeting in
Calcutta when some stones were thrown at him by some members of the
audience disgruntled by his criticism of Hindu orthodoxy. He remained
calm and self-possessed. He appealed for a patient hearing in the
following words: “The British Government has guaranteed freedom of
speech to all of us. Why should I be deprived of that freedom? Please!
Let me say what I want to say. Those who disagree with me will also have
their turn.”

This part of his speech was reported to the then Viceroy of India. The
Viceroy thought that the Maharshi was a great well-wisher of the British
Raj. The Maharshi was, therefore, invited to the Government House and
given a warm reception by the Viceroy himself. An official interpreter
was standing close by to establish communication between the Indian
recluse and the representative of the mightiest empire in world history.

After a brief spell of some small talk, the Viceroy broached the subject
he had on his mind. He said: “Swami, the people of India have started
forgetting the benefits conferred on them by the British Raj. They are
being misled by some mischief-makers. You did well to remind the people
of Calcutta that it was the Raj which had given them freedom of speech.
I hope you will keep on telling the same truth to your countrymen
everywhere you go. Freedom of speech is not the only benefit we have
brought to India. There are many more. I am sure you known them all.”

The Maharshi found it difficult to hide his embarrassment. He kept quiet
and looked away. The Viceroy was puzzled and prodded him for an
affirmation. The Maharshi had to break his silence. He said: “Sahebji, I
am sorry I have been misunderstood. Forgive me for what I am being
forced to say. The reference to freedom of speech was made by me in a
specific context. It was not at all my intention to uphold the British
usurpation of my country. Make no mistake. I consider the British Raj to
be a curse. I stand for *svarãjya*.”

The Viceroy was taken aback as the message of the Maharshi was conveyed
to him. He walked away in a huff, without so much as saying a good-bye
to his great guest. The rest of the viceregal retinue melted away in the
next few moments. The Maharshi walked out of the Government House, alone
but unrepentant. His gait was akin to that of a lion who had dared a
dangerous adversary in the latter’s own den.  
 

**MESSAGE OF MAHARSHI DAYANANDA**

Maharshi Dayananda lived to found the Arya Samaj in 1875. It made a
great contribution to India’s fight for freedom. But before the veterans
of the Samaj joined the political battle, they fought for a deeper
freedom of the spirit. That was the message of the Maharshi-the
surrenders made by our people at the spiritual, cultural, psychological
and ideological levels had to go before the shackles at the physical
level could be broken.

During the days of Muslim military domination, some sections of the
national elite in some parts of the country had started kowtowing to the
imperialist ideology and totalitarian culture of Islam. The same or some
other collaborationist sections had been similarly cowed down by the
imperialist ideology and culture of Christianity, soon after the British
succeeded in seizing political power by force of arms. The twin
surrenders were joining forces and working havoc with the morale of our
people when the Maharshi appeared on the scene.

The Maharshi was the first great Indian in modern times to see through
both Islam and Christianity. He challenged the claims of these closed
theologies masquerading as religion. And he appealed to his people to
eschew every element which Indian culture had borrowed or imbibed from
these alien cultures. He called Islamic and Christian cultures alien not
because they had come from foreign lands but because they were contrary
to the basic canons of rationalism, universalism and humanism, enshrined
in the ancient Indian culture.

But that was the least significant part of the Maharshi’s message. He
made a positive contribution when he pointed out that India had
inherited a spirituality and a culture which were not only indigenous
but also intrinsically superior to the imported creeds and cultures. He
encouraged and enabled his people to reawaken to their own inner sources
of strength, and hold their heads high in the face of foreign invaders.
He was the first to use the terms *swadeshî* and *swarãjya*.

At the same time, the Maharshi restored the Veda to its rightful place
as the permanent and profound centre of Indian spirituality, culture and
social philosophy. His people had lost consciousness of this centre when
they had started drawing a sharp line between *nishreyasa* (highest
good) and *abhyudaya* (worldly welfare), between here and hereafter,
between spirituality and science. They had become dwarfed in mind and
emaciated in body because, to start with, they had separated these two
from their unity in the Spirit.

He did something more. He raised an accusing finger against the heavy
weight of empty rituals and outmoded social traditions which were
smothering India’s indigenous society. There was a meaningless
multiplication of sects and cults. Superstition and magic had replaced
religion in many cases. Education had been reduced to a matter of
cramming certain traditional texts. Health had been ruined by early
marriages, and the lack of a proper physical culture. Women had been
driven into *purdah*, and deprived of their proper status as equal
partners with men in all spheres of life. And a sizable section of our
society had been condemned to live as untouchables, without an
opportunity to make their own characteristic contributions to social
welfare. The Maharshi appealed to his people to throw away all this dead
wood, and start breathing again in the unpolluted air of that
spirituality and science for which India had been famous in ages past.  
 

**BANKIM CHANDRA CHATTERJEE**

A younger contemporary of Maharshi Dayananda had meanwhile dived deep
into the ocean of Indian culture and come up with a vast and variegated
treasure. That was Bankim Chandra Chatterjee (1838-1894). The Maharshi
had never known what was passing for modern education and his know-ledge
of the West as well as of Christianity had perforce to be second-hand.
Bankim Chandra did not suffer from this disadvantage. He acquired a wide
knowledge of Western philosophy, sociology and science from the horse’s
mouth. He also knew Christianity from its original sources. He was thus
placed in a good position to compare his own heritage with whatever was
being trumpeted about as the latest and the best from the West.

Bankim Chandra brought out the shallowness of modern Indology in two
short satirical essays. The poverty of mind at the back of Western
scholarship vis-a-vis Hinduism was thus brilliantly portrayed. He also
questioned the notion current in his times that India had always been a
game for every foreign invader. It was he who showed with facts and
dates and for the first time that the Islamic sword which had swept so
swiftly over a large part of the world had taken a long time even to
breach the borders of India, and that it had failed in the final round.
Our people were thus enabled to look back at their past with a sense of
pride.

It was also Bankim Chandra who restored the Mahabharata to its rightful
place as a profound elaboration of what the Veda had said in the form of
mystic *mantras*. The Gita which had been subjected to sectarian
interpretations for several centuries past, was rescued by Bankim
Chandra from the quagmire of casuistry. This great scripture had been
interpreted by many *ãchãryas* either to support *sannyãsa* or to
bolster *bhakti*. Its central core of karmayoga had been consigned to
oblivion. Bankim Chandra was the first in modern times to restore the
lost balance, so much so that in his *ÃnandamaTha* it was the
*sannyãsin* who took up the sword in defence of Dharma. In days to come,
the Gita was to become the greatest single inspiration for revolutionary
action. Many a freedom fighter mounted the gallows with the Gita in his
hands and Bankim Chandra’s *Vande Mãtaram* on his lips.

But the greatest achievement of Bankim Chandra was the rehabilitation of
Sri Krishna of the Mahabharata. This highest Hindu image of the seer,
the statesman, and the hero had been made to sing and dance with the
*gopîs* for far too long. Some devotees of Sri Krishna’s dalliance with
the *gopîs* had gone to the extent of saying that Krishna had ceased to
be Krishna as soon as he left Vrindavana. Bankim Chandra did not fall
foul of this portrayal. Instead, he quietly brought back the Krishna who
had sided with the just cause in a controversy involving Dharma, who had
befriended Draupadi in moments of her great distress, who had guided the
Pandavas through every twist and turn of fortune, who had given the Gita
on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, who had rescued Yudhisthira from a
fit of unmanly remorse, but who had nonetheless bowed before Bhishma as
that paragon of valour, virtue, and wisdom lay on his deathbed.  
 

**SWAMI VIVEKANANDA**

Soon after Bankim Chandra, another brilliant star rose on the spiritual
horizon of Bharatavarsha. That was Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902). He was
a great *shishya* of a great *guru*. He started as a spiritual seeker.
But such was the sweep of his vision that it soon embraced every type of
human suffering in the world. The plight of his own countrymen invited
his particular attention. He started with the Upanishadic message,
*uttiSTha, jãgrata varãn nibodhah*. But such was the depth of his
sympathy for the poor and the downtrodden that in reply to a question by
one of his disciples, he said: “The poor, the ignorant, the illiterate,
the afflicted, let these be your God; know that service to these is the
highest religion.” He warned his people that they had mistaken their
*tamas* (inertia) for *adhyãtma* (spirituality), and that it was a fatal
folly.

Vivekananda was the first Indian to see clearly that Christianity had no
intrinsic worth, and that the missionaries in India were making inroads
into Hindu society simply because they were equipped with  
huge financial resources supplied by Western countries. He was also the
first to carry a campaign against Christian imperialism into the
latter’s own homeland. At the same time, he made India’s universal
spirituality known to the world. Here was a genuine spirituality, he
said, which was not at all in conflict with modern science, unlike the
theology of Christianity which had recoiled at the very first touch of
the scientific temper. Thus he had placed himself truly in the tradition
of those monks and mystics who had carried the message of India’s
universal spirituality to many foreign lands, before Christian and
Islamic imperialism had raised an impenetrable wall in their way.

It was only a few years after the passing away of Swami Vivekananda that
the world witnessed what Shri H.V. Seshadri has described as ‘A Nation
Bestirred’ in *The Tragic Story of Partition*. The stir had frightened
the British rulers as well as the residues of Islamic imperialism - the
descendants of foreign swordsmen and Sufis who had brought the terrorist
creed of Islam to this country.

Not many people remember it now that before the Partition in 1947, there
had been another Partition, almost along the same lines and brought
about by a combination of the same forces. That was the Partition of
Bengal in 1905 which gave a brute majority to the Muslims in the very
heartland of India’s national resurgence. Shri Seshadri has devoted a
whole chapter to it in his book. He quotes *The Statesman* of Calcutta
which had stated editorially that the Partition of Bengal was intended
“to foster in Eastern Bengal the growth of Mohammedan power which, it is
hoped, will have the effect of keeping in check the rapidly growing
strength of the Hindu community.”^([1](#1))

This first Partition had to be annulled because an awakened nation
offered a stiff resistance. The national vision had not yet become
vitiated by an obsessive pre-occupation with the so-called communal
problem. It was this National Vision which nurtured programmes like
Swadeshi, boycott, and non-cooperation. It could also see clearly that
the British rule was based on brute force, and that the nation had a
right to use force for the overthrow of that rule.  
 

**SRI AUROBINDO**

The Partition of Bengal converted Bankim Chandra’s *Vande Mãtaram* into
a *mantra* by reciting which our people scaled the highest heights of
courage and sacrifice. But what made that brief episode important in the
history of our fight for freedom was the emergence of another great seer
and sage. That was Sri Aurobindo (1872-1950). He shot like a meteor
across the political sky, and soon retired into a self-chosen seclusion
in search of new visions and victories. But the trail he blazed in the
realm of India’s spirituality and culture yet holds the promise of a
still more dazzling dawn.

Sri Aurobindo confirmed and completed the ideological work undertaken by
his predecessors - Maharshi Dayananda, Bankim Chandra and Swami
Vivekananda. The National Vision now became a vision which had fully
awakened to *Sanãtana Dharma* in all its dimensions. It was the ancient
Vedic Vision at its highest and best. Sri Aurobindo’s insights into
India’s inheritance - spiritual, philosophical, cultural, artistic,
social, and political - went very far in restoring our people’s
legitimate pride in their great past. He was very soon hailed as the
Prophet of Indian Nationalism.  
 

**THE NATIONAL VISION GETS VITIATED**

But, unfortunately, there were several other forces simmering below the
surface. Several generations of Hindus had by now been fed upon Western
education based on a materialist world-view, evolutionistic sociology,
utilitarian ethics, hedonistic psychology and parliamentary politics.
They had also swallowed heavy doses of Christianity disguised as
Comparative Religion. And what was worst of all, they had become
addicted to the Western version of Indian history and culture.

These self-alienated people behaved exactly as had been anticipated by
Macaulay and his cohorts who had laid the foundations of a new
educational system on the ruins of an old network which had moulded the
national mind for ages untold. Their highest spiritual value was a
mechanical monotheism, and a way of worship borrowed from the Christian
Church. Their highest cultural aspiration was to dress, dine, dance, and
decorate their drawing rooms after the fashion of their British masters,
Their highest social aspiration was a self-centred and acquisitive
individualism which frowned at every facet of the traditional social
system. And their highest political aspiration was a Dominion Status
within the British Empire.

Some of the leaders thrown up by this class of Indians were men of
unimpeachable character. Shri Seshadri has paid handsome tributes to
them for their “qualities of head and heart”. But, at the same time, he
has noted that they could not rise above the limitations imposed upon
them by their education and training. They could not think of India as a
great and ancient nation which had suffered a decline as a result of
imperialist inroads, Islamic and British. To them, India was still a
“nation in the making”.  
 

**THE TERMINOLOGICAL SWINDLE**

Meanwhile, Hindu society had been reduced from the status of a nation to
that of a religious community in the counting of heads which the British
rulers described as their census operation. Nationalism was now
increasingly being labelled as Hindu Communalism. A revaluation of the
national resurgence could not lag far behind. It was soon stigmatised as
Hindu Revivalism. This new terminology which was being used by a growing
tribe of sociologists and political scientists had far-reaching
ideological implications.

On the other hand, Islam was getting raised from the status of an
imperialist ideology to that of a religion. The residues of Islamic
imperialism were now being rehabilitated as the representatives of a
religious community which was in a ‘minority’ and which was trying to
‘save’ itself from the ‘domination of a majority’. The frantic efforts
of a foreign fraternity to retain its unequal rights and privileges,
earned during the days of its military domination, were now being
described as ‘a minority’s struggle for self-identity’. At the same
time, Islamic Atavism and resultant Muslim Separatism were being renamed
as Muslim Revivalism. Here, too, the use of a new terminology had
far-reaching ideological consequences.

This terminological swindle took place at the turn of the 19th century,
and was brought about by the combined efforts of the British
imperialists and the residues of Islamic imperialism. They shared a
problem in common. The problem was the rising tide of National
Resurgence in the indigenous Hindu society. The British imperialists now
started pointing out that while they ‘appreciated the legitimate
aspirations’ of the ‘majority community’, they could not leave the
‘minority community’ at the ‘mercy’ of the former. The ‘minority’ on its
part started protesting that parliamentary institutions were not at all
suited to the ‘peculiar conditions’ of a country divided into ‘rival
communities’, and that the Muslims could not look with equanimity at the
prospect of the British leaving India till the ‘majority community’ had
succeeded in ‘winning the trust’ of the ‘minority community’.  
 

**THE BLIND ALLEY**

The leaders of the Indian National Congress could think only in terms of
a parliamentary constitution patterned on the British model. They could,
therefore, see no alternative to 'winning the trust of the minority
community’. That was the starting point of an endless exercise for
finding a constitutional formula which could ‘satisfy’ the Muslims. They
could not see that they were thus getting into a blind alley from which
there was no way out. The reservations and weightages which the
‘minority community’ demanded in all spheres of national life, at every
conference table, went on multiplying in direct proportion to the
concessions made by the ‘majority community’. And the British were
always there to compete with the Nationalists in making greater and
greater concessions to the Muslims.

The constitutional settlement, however, was not the only settlement
which the ‘minority community’ was seeking. It was also objecting to
every manifestation of National Culture in the public life of the
country. If the Hindus sang *Vande Mãtaram* in a public meeting, it was
a ‘conspiracy’ to convert Muslims into *kãfirs*. If the Hindus blew a
conch, or broke a coconut, or garlanded the portrait of a revered
patriot, it was an attempt to ‘force’ Muslims into ‘idolatry’. If the
Hindus spoke in any of their native languages, it was an ‘affront’ to
the culture of Islam. If the Hindus took pride in their pre-Islamic
heroes, it was a ‘devaluation’ of Islamic history. And so on, there were
many more objections, major and minor, to every national
self-expression. In short, it was a demand that Hindus should cease to
be Hindus and become instead a faceless conglomeration of rootless
individuals.

On the other hand, the ‘minority community’ was not prepared to make the
slightest concession in what they regarded as their religious and
cultural rights. If the Hindus requested that cow-killing should stop,
it was a demand for renouncing an ‘established Islamic practice’. If the
Hindus objected to an open sale of beef in the bazars, it was an
‘encroachment’ on the ‘civil rights’ of the Muslims. If the Hindus
demanded that cows meant for ritual slaughter should not be decorated
and marched through Hindu localities, it was ‘trampling upon
time-honoured Islamic traditions’. If the Hindus appealed that Hindu
religious processions passing through a public thoroughfare should not
be obstructed, it was an attempt to ‘disturb the peace of Muslim
prayers’. If the Hindus wanted their native languages to attain an equal
status with Urdu in the courts and the administration, it was an
‘assault on Muslim culture’. If the Hindus taught to their children the
true history of Muslim tyrants, it was a ‘hate campaign against Islamic
heroes’. And the ‘minority community’ was always ready to ‘defend’ its
‘religion and culture’ by taking recourse to street riots.  
 

**THE TRANSVALUATION OF VALUES**

In the process, the residues of a bygone imperialism became equal
partners in staking their claims to the fruits of freedom for which they
were not prepared make the slightest sacrifice In the process, traitors
who were prepared to barter away India’s freedom for the sake of Turkey
or Saudi Arabia or some other Islamic country, started swaggering around
as more than equal to the proven patriots. In the process, quislings who
were sending ‘invitations’ to the Amir of Afghanistan or the Shah of
Iran to invade India, became ‘revolutionaries’ whose ‘idealism’ could
not be questioned. In short, there was a complete transvaluation of
values so that the black started looking white and vice versa.

The process is still continuing in the truncated homeland which the
nation has been able to retain for itself for the time being. In fact,
the process is fast moving towards a climax. The residues of Islamic
imperialism have not had to pay any price for their treachery and
treason; on the contrary, they have attained a higher status as the
‘guardians’ of democracy and secularism, which in their opinion are
‘being threatened by Hindu communalism, Hindu revivalism and Hindu
chauvinism’. They have been joined by a motley crowd of secularists,
socialists and communists, all of whom have mortgaged their minds to one
imported ideology or the other. And Hindu society which constitutes the
nation has been driven into a corner. Hindu leaders have been made to
cry that they are not communalists, that they have renounced revivalism,
that they cherish Islam as a great religion, that they regard Islamic
heroes as their own heroes, that they have no use for people who regard
the prevalent mode of secularism as perverse, and that they are fed up
with that ‘lunatic fringe’ which still continues to take pride in the
national heritage.  
 

**THE ONLY WAY OUT**

The nation will never be able to get out of this tight corner till it
clears up the terminological confusion, stops making use of meaningless
words like communalism and revivalism, and rewrites its books of
history, politics, and sociology in an exact and appropriate language.
This exact language will substitute Nationalism for Hindu Communalism,
National Resurgence for Hindu Revivalism, Islamic Atavism for Muslim
Revivalism, and Islamic Imperialism for Muslim Communalism. Then alone
the various elements and forces struggling for supremacy in the country
at present will fall into their proper places, and come out in their
true colours.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) *The Tragic Story of Partition*, p. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


