+++
title = "02 1. Credal definitions"

+++
**1. Credal definitions**

“The question is”, said Alice, “whether you *can* make words mean so
many different things.”

“The question is”, said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master-that’s
all.”^([1](#1))

A lot of ink has flowed over the question how to *define* Hinduism. 
There is no other religion for which the question of definition is so
difficult.  A Roman Catholic could be defined as a person who is
baptized by a priest ordained within an apostolic succession going back
to Jesus, and who accepts the Nicean Creed and the authority of the
Bishop of Rome.  A Muslim is defined by the Muslims themselves as one
who has affirmed the Islamic creed: that there is no god beside Allah
and that Mohammed is Allah’s prophet.  A Buddhist is one who has taken
the triple refuge into the Buddha, his teachings and his community.  But
there seems to be no accepted definition of a Hindu, neither one
sanctioned by Hindu tradition nor one on which the scholarly community
agrees.

Yet, for a “Hindu” movement the choice of a good definition may be a
very consequential matter.  In this book, we will see how the Hindu
Revivalist movement since ca. 1875 has dealt with the question: Who is a
Hindu?

**1.1. Vedic Hinduism**

According to Ananda Coomaraswamy, “the literature of Indian thought,
apart from Buddhism as interpreted by Buddhists, exhibits a continuous
development, and knows no acute crises; or rather, the real crises-such
as the identification of all gods as one, and the development of the
doctrines of emancipation and transmigration-are not determined by names
and dates, they were not announced as the Dharma of any one teacher, and
they are only recognized in retrospection.  Here there is a gradual
process of ‘thinking aloud’, wherein by stripping the self of veil after
veil of contingency there is nothing left but the Abyss which is ‘not
so, not so’, the ‘Ground’ of unity.  From animism to idealism there is
direct development, and it is for this reason that we meet with
primitive terminologies invested with a new significance; moreover the
old strata persist beneath the newest layers, and thus it is not only
primitive terms, but also primitive thoughts which persist in the great
complex that we speak of as Brahmanism.  But this does not mean that the
highest of these thoughts is primitive, it means only that the
historical continuity of thought is preserved in the final system, and
that system remains adapted to the intelligence of various
ininds.”^([2](#2))

This way, Hinduism cannot be caught in a criterion defining a specific
stage of human religious development.  Rather, like an individual human
being (or like a nation), it represents a continuous identity through
very different stages, and carrying the memory and the remains of all
these stages along.  For this reason, it is very difficult to formulate
an essentialist definition of Hinduism, of the type: “Is Hindu, he who
satisfies the following criteria:...” Even more difficult is, to catch
Hinduism in doctrinal criteria: “Is Hindu, he who believes the following
truth claims:...”

A well-known but evidently inaccurate proposal of definition was made by
Bal Gangadhar Tilak, the “Father of the Indian Freedom Struggle”, who
chose “belief in the Vedas, variety in the means and infiniteness of the
objects of worship” as the criteria for being a Hindu.[³](#3) The
“variety in the means” is a valuable contribution, because it
explicitates what is often only a tacit assumption presupposed in most
Hindu teachings.  The acceptance of many approaches to the ultimate
truth is indeed a distinctive characteristic of Hinduism, distinguishing
it from the exclusivism intrinsic to Christianity and Islam.

Yet, this reading may be too optimistic: perhaps “disagreement about the
means” would be a better description than “variety in the means”.  Thus,
many of the Sants of the Bhakti movement (Kabir, Nanak, Chaitanya) extol
repeating the God-name as the means to Liberation and explicitly
denounce both rituals and ascetic practices as *false* ways.  Hindus
have only agreed to disagree and not to interfere with other people’s
practices eventhough these may be considered as deceptive paths leading
nowhere.  It is perhaps in this sense that Hindus could accept the
presence of Christians and Muslims as much as that of rival Hindu sects,
because all of them, i.e. both non-Hindus and Hindus of certain rival
schools, are considered as being equally in the wrong.  At any rate,
Hindu tradition has an acute sense of true and false (hence a lively
culture of debate), and it does not attribute equal truth to Hindu and
non-Hindu, nor even to different Hindu schools of thought.

The assumption that all roads lead to the same goal is typical for
modern (urban and Western-oriented) Hinduism as propagated by Swami
Vivekananda and numerous more recent Gurus.  Thus, in his highly
critical account of the specificities of “Renaissance, English-speaking,
eclectic, basically anti-Sanskritic, pamphletistic neo-Vedanta”,
including its tendency to uncritical “synthesis”, the late Agehananda
Bharati remarks: “Patanjali’s yoga is for people who have accepted
brahmin theology.  This is a fact which is systematically overlooked (…)
by many teachers of the Hindu Renaissance.  One of their perennial
mottoes was that all religions are the same, that everyone can be a yogi
on the basis of his own theology, or of no theology.”^([4](#4))

Hinduism, by contrast, has kept up a tradition of debate and scholastic
argument since hoary antiquity, and has typically scorned soft options
and insisted on radicalism, not in the sense of smashing the heads of
people who disagree, but in the sense of settling for nothing less than
the truth which liberates.  Recent Hindu Revivalists merely return to
the genuine Hindu tradition when they state that “the comparatively
newfangled notion that all religions are one, equal or equally valid (…)
to us is a pleasant falsehood and thereby the biggest stumbling block in
the understanding of religion and the religions”.[⁵](#5) They refer to
the Mahabharata editor Vyasa who exercised his power of discrimination
when he observed that “moral principles may be shared by all religions
(…)but their philosophical positions are often different”.[⁶](#6) And
who is to say that philosophical viewpoints don’t matter?

Even at the level of moral precepts, religions are far from equal. 
Leave alone the details such as dietary taboos, even the general
principles may differ considerably.  Thus, ecstatic states provoked by
alcohol and other psychotropic substances are sought after in many
animistic and Shamanistic traditions, but abhorred in more sober
traditions like Buddhism and Islam.  Violence is strongly condemned in
Jainism but glorified, at least in specific conditions, in Islam and
other religions.  Again, these differences exist not only between Hindu
and non-Hindu, but also within the Hindu commonwealth of schools and
sects.  Tilak is aware of this pluriformity; what he intended to add, is
that this “variety of means” is not merely a factual situation, but that
it is also valued positively by Hinduism, and that in this, Hinduism
differs from its major rivals, which impose a single worldview and a
single system of ethics on their adherents.

But the major problem with Tilak’s definition is the criterion of
“belief in the Veda”.  This reduction of Hinduism to the “believers” in
the Veda does injustice to any accepted usage of the term *Hindu* (apart
from contradicting Tilak’s own just-quoted position of a plurality of
ways, arguably including non-Vedic ways as well).  For centuries,
Brahmins prohibited lower-caste Hindus from hearing, reciting and
studying the Vedas, a prohibition still supported in principle by Tilak
himself.[⁷](#7) Are those Hindus who are unfamiliar with the Vedas being
excluded from the range of the definition?  This would be greatly
welcomed by anti-Hindu polemicists, who like to claim that only
upper-caste Hindus are real Hindus.

Moreover, the expression “belief in the Vedas” shows a rather crude
understanding of the exact place of the Veda in the doctrine of its
adepts, a place which is radically different from that of the Quran for
Muslims.  In the Quran it is God who speaks to man, while in the Veda it
is man who sings praise to the Gods.  It is not even clear what
“believing” would mean in the case of the Vedas, collections of hymns
written for a number of Gods by several dozens of male and female poets
over several centuries.  If someone compiles an *Anthology of English
Religious Verse*, would it make sense to say: “I *believe* in this
anthology”?

The matter becomes a bit clearer when we consider Tilak’s Sanskrit
original:

*prâmânyabuddhirvedeshu sâdhanânâmanekatâ*  
*upâsyânâmaniyama etaddharmasya lakshanam.*^([8](#8))

Savarkar translates it as: “Belief in the Vedas, many means, no strict
rule for worship: these are the features of the Hindu religion.”[⁹](#9)
More literally, it would read: “Acknowledging the authority of the
Vedas, pluralism (‘not-one-ness’) of spiritual paths, no fixity about
the objects of worship: that is the characteristic of the Dharma.”

The point is that the Vedas are to be considered as a *pramâna*, a
“means of valid knowledge”, on a par with direct perception and
inference.  *Veda* may be understood in a very broad sense (common
enough in actual usage, e.g. “Vedic medicine”, “Vedic cooking”):
“knowledge”, as encompassing the entire Vedic corpus including the
Upanishads, the Upavedas and the Vedangas, thus meaning “the accumulated
ancestral knowledge”, or more or less “the tradition”.  This then
becomes a reasonable proposition: the accumulated knowledge passed on by
the ancestors is an important though not exclusive means of knowledge,
due to the human reality that we cannot start discovering everything
anew through personal experience within a lifetime.  It is also
distinctive for Hinduism along with all “Pagan” cultures, contrasting
them with Christianity and Islam, and to an extent even with Buddhism. 
The latter category, most radically Islam, rejects ancestral culture,
and takes a revolution against the tradition as its starting-point, a
total rejection of the preceding age as “age of ignorance” (*jâhilîya*).

However, in Tilak’s case, there is every reason to assume that he used
“Veda” in the restricted sense: Brahmanic scriptures to the exclusion of
all others, notably the four Samhitas (“collections”: Rik, Sama, Yajus,
Atharva), chanted by Brahmins since time immemorial and supposed to have
an auspicious effect.  In that case, the problem with Tilak’s definition
is that for a majority of practising Hindus, the Vedas are only a very
distant presence, much less important than the stories from the
Itihasa-Purana literature, the rules of conduct laid down in the
Dharma-Shastras, and (often counterbalancing the latter) the teachings
of the Bhakti poets. This is not because of some revolution rejecting
the Vedic heritage, but simply because of the time-lapse, and also
because of the jealousy with which the Brahmin caste increasingly
distanced the Vedic knowledge from the masses.

In the post-Vedic millennia, there was ample room for new writings, and
gradually the Veda proper was eclipsed by new Great Narratives, or new
formulations of old narratives, springing from the same inspiration as
the Vedas but better placed to catch the popular imagination.  But at
least these younger texts pay homage to the Vedas and fix them as a
distant and little-known object of veneration in the collective
consciousness.  The most influential post-Vedic text, the Mahabharata,
is explicitly rooted in the Vedic tradition, but it is younger and not
guarded for the exclusive hearing of the Brahmins.  Through this
indirect lip-service to the Vedas, even illiterate “little traditions”
in Hindu civilization can be covered by Tilak’s definition.  However,
even in its most inclusive reading, Tilak’s definition excludes
important groups which many Hindu Revivalists insist on including in the
Hindu fold: Buddhists, Jains, Brahmo Samajists, etc.  Savarkar, before
developing his own alternative, rejects Tilak’s definition precisely
because it is not sufficiently inclusive.

Finally, there is a decisive scriptural argument against Tilak’s
inclusion of “belief in the Vedas” as a criterion for Hinduism.  The
Puranas describe (and the Epics occasionally refer to) several dozens of
generations of ancestors of the Puru-Bharata lineage which patronized
the composition of the Vedas.[¹⁰](#10) Regardless of whether we accept
the historicity of those genealogies and family histories, they prove
that Hindus have at least *conceived* of a pre-Vedic period in
Arya/Hindu civilization.  Thus, though the Manu-Smriti in its present
version does not pre-date the Christian era, tradition ascribes it (or
at least its original version) to Manu Vaivasvata, putative ancestor of
all the Puranic dynasties and pre-Vedic founder of Hindu civilization,
thought to have lived several generations before the first Vedic poets
and a great many before the compilation of the Vedic Samhitas.[¹¹](#11)
If the central concept of dharma is ascribed to pre-Vedic sages, if the
Vedas themselves (like all ancient religious traditions) have an
awareness of venerable ancestry, it follows that Hinduism conceives of
itself as ultimately pre-dating the Vedas.  What else could you expect
of a religion which calls itself Sanatana, “eternal”, Dharma?

**1.2. Credal definition: Puranic Hinduism**

Indologists have distinguished between Vedic religion, laid down
descriptively or normatively in the Vedic text corpus, and Puranic
religion, or Hinduism proper, as it developed after the Buddhist
interregnum (later Maurya dynasty).  The distinction is not an
orientalist imposition, for Brahmins have all along made a distinction
between Vedic and non-Vedic elements within the native religion, e.g.
Shivaji was crowned with two ceremonies, one Vedic and one
Tantric.^([12](#12))

For all practical purposes, the Puranic tradition is now the dominant
one, and many of its non-Vedic elements have replaced the corresponding
Vedic elements even in circles of Vedic purists.  Thus, Vedic Gods like
Varuna and Indra have practically disappeared from the Hindu collective
consciousness in favour of restyled minor Vedic Gods like Shiva and
Vishnu and non-Vedic gods like Ganesha and Kali.  The major festivals of
the Hindu calendar are based on the epic feats of Rama and Krishna and
on the Puranic lore pertaining to Shiva and the Goddess.

A credal definition of Hinduism commonly accepted by Western scholars is
that a Hindu:

> (1) believes in reincarnation,  
> (2) observes caste rules, and  
> (3) observes the taboo on cow slaughter.^([13](#13))

This is an explicitation of Mahatma Gandhi’s description of his own
Hinduism: “Hinduism believes in the oneness not merely of all human
life, but in the oneness of all that lives.  Its worship of the cow is,
in my opinion, its unique contribution to the evolution of
humanitarianism. (…) The great belief in transmigration is a direct
consequence of that belief.  Finally the discovery of the law of
Varnashrama \[= differentiation after age group and social function\] is
a magnificent result of the ceaseless search for truth.”^([14](#14))

This description fits “Puranic Hinduism”, usually defined as the
specific form of Hinduism developed after the ascendancy of Buddhism in
the Maurya period, and which has as its dominant scriptural corpora the
Dharma-Shastras and the Itihasa-Purana literature.  This chronology of
Hindu religion is rejected by some Hindu Revivalist scholars, who claim
that the Puranas contain traditions as old as the Vedas (though also
including younger material), and that Vedic tradition even in its prime
should be seen as just one lineage within a much larger religious
landscape which is preserved in the Puranas.[¹⁵](#15) They point out
that a work or a literature called Purana is already mentioned in Vedic
literature itself.[¹⁶](#16) Nonetheless, we will consider these three
criteria when checking whether a given tradition is Hindu or not, but
not without some caveats.  On all three counts, this definition is
considered not to fit the pre-Buddhist Vedic religion, hence the
decision of many Indologists to consider the pre-Maurya Vedic tradition
and the post-Maurya Puranic tradition as two separate religions.  Even
in present-day Hinduism, these three criteria only fit a certain
mainstream but fail to include groups of people whom anyone would call
“Hindu” upon watching their religious practices, as we will see in the
next paragraphs.

**1.3. Caste**

It is commonly believed that caste, i.e. the division of society in
endogamous groups, is an exclusively Hindu institution.  Thus, after
briefly describing the system of the four varnas, Ambedkar writes: “This
is called by the Hindus the *Varna Vyavasthâ*.  It is the very soul of
Hinduism.  Without *Varna Vyavasthâ* there is nothing else in Hinduism
to distinguish it from other religions.”[¹⁷](#17) Harold A. Gould
summarizes: “Most \[researchers\] have found \[caste\] an integral and
inalienable part of the Hindu religion.” And he himself agrees: “This
ancient social institution was the necessary sociological manifestation
of the underlying moral and philosophical presuppositions of
Hinduism.  Without traditional Hinduism there could have been no caste
system. Without the caste system traditional Hindu values would have
been inexpressible.”^([18](#18))

One might say that the caste system has been Hinduism’s body for a long
time, the concrete structure with which Hindu culture organized its
social dimension.  But that is something very different from saying that
caste is the soul of Hinduism, its intrinsic essence.  Thus, Peter van
der Veer writes that caste may not be as all-pervading or intrinsic to
Hinduism as is usually claimed: “The idea that caste is the basis of the
Indian social order and that to be a Hindu is to be a member of a caste
became an axiom in the British period.  What actually happened during
that period was probably a process of caste formation and more rigid
systematization due to administrative and ideological pressure from the
colonial system, which reminds us of the so-called ‘secondary
tribalization’ in Africa.”^([19](#19))

But in fact, castes and caste systems have developed in very divergent
parts of the world, e.g. the originally ethnic division in Hutu and
Tutsi in Rwanda, or the endogamous hereditary communities of
blacksmiths, musicians and other occupational groups in West
Africa.[²⁰](#20) The European division in nobility and commoners was a
caste system in the full sense of the term: two endogamous groups in a
hierarchical relation.  When the Portuguese noticed the Indian *jâti*
system, they applied to it the term *casta*, already in use for a social
division in their homeland: the separate communities defined by
religion, viz.  Christians, Jews and Muslims.  In practice, these were
virtually endogamous, and there was a hierarchical relation between the
top community (first Muslims, then Christians) and the other two.

Historically, the insistence on including caste among the criteria for
Hinduism is not so innocent: it was part of the British “divide and
rule” strategy against the Freedom Movement.  In 1910, a British
official, E.A. Gait, passed a circular proposing several tests to decide
who is a Hindu, regardless of whether the person concerned described
himself as a Hindu: whether he worshipped the “great Hindu gods”;
whether he was allowed entry into temples; whether the Brahmins who
performed his family rituals were recognized as Brahmins by their
supposed caste members; on what side of the untouchability divide he
was.  Except for the first, these criteria were calculated to exclude
the lowest castes and certain sects, regardless of their beliefs and
Hindu practices.

The aim was to fragment Hindu society: “Given the upper caste character
of the leaders of the Swadeshi movement, this ‘test’ was designed to
encourage the detachment of low castes from the ‘Hindu’ category,
reducing the numbers on whose behalf the upper castes claimed to
speak.”[²¹](#21) The “test” in effect implemented a suggestion by Muslim
League leader Ameer Ali (1909) to detach the lower castes from the Hindu
category.  Ever since, it has remained a constant in anti-Hindu circles
to maximize the importance of caste, and in Hindu Revivalist circles to
work for its decrease in importance or even its ultimate abolition.

Given the existence of caste practices in non-Hindu societies, the caste
phenomenon does not need Hinduism.  But does Hinduism need caste?  Can
Hinduism exist without it?  To anti-Hindu agitators, the matter is very
simple: “Hinduism means caste.”[²²](#22) But real life tells a different
story.  Among overseas Hindu communities (e.g. in South Africa, Surinam,
the Netherlands), the sense of caste has waned and in many circles even
disappeared, without making them any the less Hindu.^([23](#23))

The Arya Samaj, which has worked hard to diminish the importance of
caste, argues that this is merely a return to the Vedic condition, for
indeed, the “family books” (2-7) of the Rigveda, the oldest literary
testimony of Hindu civilization, are silent about caste.  Only in the
Purusha Sukta of the Rigveda does the enumeration of the four varnas
appear, without any hint that this was a caste rather than just a class
system.[²⁴](#24) Even Dr. Ambedkar, who argues that modern Hinduism is
absolutely bound up with caste, describes how Vedic society knew a class
system rather than a caste system: “Particular attention has to be paid
to the fact that this was essentially a class system, in which
individuals, when qualified, could change their class, and therefore
classes did change their personnel.”[²⁵](#25) This is based on no more
than an *argumentum e silentio*, but there may be something to it.

At any rate, hereditary varnas are a very old institution, well-attested
in the Mahabharata and its most popular section, the
Bhagavad-Gita.  This text is frequently quoted by reformers as attesting
that the four varna functions already existed, but were allotted on the
basis of (not one’s birth but)[²⁶](#26) one’s *guna-karma*, “qualities
and activities”.  This is a constant in Hindu revivalist discourse aimed
at disentangling Hinduism from the caste system with Scriptural
authority: reference is to Krishna’s words in the Bhagavad-Gita: “The
four varnas have been created by Me through a classification of the
qualities and actions.”^([27](#27))

On the other hand, in the same Gita, the curse of *varna-sankara*,
“mixing of varnas”, is invoked as one of the terrible consequences of
intra-dynastic warfare by Arjuna: “When women become corrupted, it
results in the intermingling of varnas.”[²⁸](#28) If this can still be
dismissed as part of Arjuna’s initial plea (for not joining the battle),
which Krishna’s subsequent explanation seeks to *refute*, it is harder
to ignore Krishna’s own statement implying a negative opinion of
inter-varna marriage: “If I do not perform action, I shall become the
agent of intermingling (of varnas).”[²⁹](#29) it seems clear that by the
time of the final editing of the Gita, varna endogamy was a firmly
entrenched institution.  But one has to make the best of it, and so,
reformers like Swami Shraddhananda have highlighted such scriptural
alternatives to hereditary and endogamous caste as are available.

Observing caste rules is still the general practice among Hindus in
India, yet even there it has not been accepted as a defining component
of Hinduism in at least one court ruling.  The Ramakrishna Mission, in
its attempt to acquire non-Hindu status, had used the argument of its
professed rejection of caste as proof of non-Hinduness, but the Supreme
Court pointed out that abolition of caste had been the explicit
programme of outspoken Hindus like Swami Dayanand Saraswati, so that
Hinduism without caste did seem to be possible after all.^([30](#30))

**1.4. Sri Aurobindo on caste**

The difficult relation between caste in Hindu history and modern
anti-caste reform was perhaps best articulated by Sri Aurobindo.  First
of all, he emphasizes the confinement of caste to purely worldly
affairs: “Essentially there was, between the devout Brahmin and the
devout Sudra, no inequality in the single *virât purusha* \[Cosmic
Spirit\] of which each was a necessary part.  Chokha Mela, the Maratha
Pariah, became the Guru of Brahmins proud of their caste purity; the
Chandala taught Shankaracharya: for the Brahman was revealed in the body
of the Pariah and in the Chandala there was the utter presence of Shiva
the Almighty.”[³¹](#31) This could, of course, be dismissed as a case of
“opium of the people”, conceding to them a spiritual equality all the
better to justify the worldly inequality.

Secondly, Aurobindo avoids the somewhat contrived attempts to deny the
close connection between the specificity of Hindu civilization and the
caste system: “Caste therefore was (…) a supreme necessity without which
Hindu civilisation could not have developed its distinctive character or
worked out its unique mission.”[³²](#32) So far, he actually seems to
support the line now taken by anti-Hindu authors, viz. that caste is
intrinsic to Hinduism, eventhough selectively highlighting cases where
low-caste people got a certain recognition in non-social, religious
respects.

However, Aurobindo’s third point is that social reform including the
abolition of caste is equally true to the fundamental genius of Hindu
civilization: “But to recognise this is not to debar ourselves from
pointing out its later perversions and desiring its transformation.  It
is the nature of human institutions to degenerate, to lose their
vitality, to decay, and the first sign of decay is the loss of
flexibility and oblivion of the essential spirit in which they were
conceived.  The spirit is permanent, the body changes; and a body which
refuses to change must die. (…) There is no doubt that the institution
of caste degenerated. it ceased to be determined by spiritual
qualifications which, once essential, have now come to be subordinate
and even immaterial and is determined by the purely material tests of
occupation and birth.  By this change it has set itself against the
fundamental tendency of Hinduism which is to insist on the spiritual and
subordinate the material, and thus lost most of its
meaning.”^([33](#33))

Chronologically, this position could use some corrections (was the low
status of the Chandala who spoke to Shankara not a symptom of an already
advanced “degeneration”?), but we get the picture, the caste system may
have been right in some past age, but now Hindu society should adapt to
the modern age.  This evaluation by Aurobindo proved to be trend-setting
and is now very common in Hindutva discourse.

**1.5. Caste as a non-violent integrator**

The institution of caste is now eroding, first by the amalgamation of
closely related castes, and marginally, slowly but surely, even by the
intermarriage of people from very divergent ranks in the caste
hierarchy.  Interdining with people of unequal caste rank, a
revolutionary act in the British period, has become commonplace.  Even
the priesthood is open to members of lower castes in an increasing
number of temples.  The RSS was instrumental in fighting the rejection
of S. Rajesh, an RSS-affiliated low-caste candidate for the priesthood
in a Shiva temple (Kongarapilly, Kerala), in court; the verdict upheld
the candidate’s rights.[³⁴](#34) The fact that judicial interventions
are needed proves that there is still some way to go; on the other hand,
the fact that people challenge caste privileges in court, as a last
resort after challenging them in civil society, and that they succeed,
proves that caste is losing ground, and this without entailing the
disintegration of Hinduism.

Though trying to discover a basis in Hindu tradition for casteless
equality (as the Arya Samaj claims to have found in the Vedas) is a good
thing, it should not keep us from understanding why Hinduism could
accommodate the caste system so well.  One underlying Hindu value is
that of *ahimsâ*, “non-violence”, not in its extreme Gandhian sense
(when slapped, turn the other cheek), but in the subtler sense of
respecting every entity, not upsetting but preserving it.

To preserve the distinctive character and tradition of a community,
caste separatism was extremely helpful.  Thus, in China the Jews were
not persecuted, yet they disappeared because of intermarriage; in India,
in spite of their small numbers, they remained a distinctive community,
thanks to their caste separateness.  Hinduism profoundly respects
worldly difference and distinctiveness, and while that cannot justify
the atrocities which have been committed in the name of caste, it does
help to explain why Hindus could maintain the system with a perfectly
good conscience for so long.  So, in one sense, it is undeniable that
caste resonates profoundly with the Hindu world-view; but the point is
that Hinduism has more arrows in its quiver.

To put it differently, there is one intrinsic aspect of Hindu culture
for which the caste system was an eminently useful (though not strictly
necessary) social framework: the fabled Hindu tolerance.  It is one
thing to say that Hindu society has received the persecuted Jewish,
Syrian Christian and Parsi communities well, but another to devise a
system that allowed them to retain their identity and yet integrate into
Hindu society.  Whatever else one may think about the caste system, it
is a fact that it facilitated the integration of separate communities.

This very process of integration of separate communities with respect
for their distinct identity is at least a part of how the caste system
came into being: by gradually integrating endogamous tribal communities
in such a way that they could retain their identity, with only minor
changes in their traditions.  Dr. Ambedkar has drawn attention to this
structural continuity between caste and tribe:

“The racial theory of Untouchability not only runs counter to the
results of anthropometry, but it also finds very little support from
such facts as we know about the ethnology of India.  That the people of
India were once organized on tribal basis is well-known, and although
*the tribes have become castes*, the tribal organization still remains
intact.  Each tribe was divided into clans and the clans were composed
of groups of families.”^([35](#35))

And this tribal structure continues in the system of endogamous castes
divided in exogamous clans (*gotra*), indicating that caste is in fact a
continuation of tribal organization in a supra-tribal or post-tribal
society.

Likewise, the British indologist J.L. Brockington correctly argues that
one of the prime functions of caste “has been to assimilate various
tribes and sects and by assigning them a place in the social hierarchy”,
so Hinduism and caste do have a long common history, without being
identical: “To the extent that Hinduism is as much a social system as a
religion, the caste system has become integral to it.  But (…) in
Hinduism outside India, caste is withering.  More significantly, some
elements in India would deny its validity; the devotional movement in
general tends towards the rejection of caste (…) The limitation on such
attitudes to caste is that in general they were confined to the
distinctly religious field, but that only reinforces the point here
being made that *caste, though intimately connected with Hinduism, is
not necessary to it”*.^([36](#36))

Later on, Brockington gives the example of Virashaivism, a sect intended
as casteless, founded in 13th-century Karnataka by the Brahmin
politician Basava: “Yet, despite Basava’s rejection of the Vedas and the
caste system, along with so many other characteristic features of
Hinduism, the Lingayat movement has remained a part, though admittedly
an unorthodox part, of Hinduism.”^([37](#37))

Even at the height of his egalitarian innovation, Basava never called
himself a “non-Hindu” (because such terminology was not yet in use), and
he remained faithful to Hindu *religious* practices, starting with the
worship of Shiva.  He did promote intermarriage for one or two
generations, i.e. a caste equality which was more than merely
spiritual.  Very soon, his sect simply became one more high and proud
Hindu caste, which it has remained till today.  Its egalitarianism
lasted but a brief moment.  This may be sufficient to serve as a selling
proposition in the modern religion market, at least among people who go
by historical anecdote rather than living social practice.  On the other
hand, a non-cynical approach of this heritage would be, to say that the
hour for the awakening of a long-dormant ideal of casteless Shaivism has
struck.^([38](#38))

Along with the persistence of living Hinduism among non-resident Indians
who have shed their caste identities, this illustrates how Hinduism can
survive caste.  Likewise, it has also been amply documented how caste
can survive Hinduism: converts to Christianity or Islam tend to maintain
caste divisions even when they have long given up the supposed Hindu
basis of caste: belief in Shastras or in the doctrine of Karma.

**1.6. Untouchability**

A typical aspect of the Hindu caste system is the notion of *purity*,
unattested as such in the Vedas.[³⁹](#39) Here again, we find the same
phenomenon in divergent cultures, e.g. Islam has a distinct notion of
purity and impurity, and requires purity before offering prayers, just
like Hinduism.  Islam also considers unbelievers impure, though they are
free to become Muslims and shed their impurity.  It is only the coupling
of the hereditary character of caste with the notion of impurity which
yields a typically Hindu institution: hereditary untouchability.  The
genesis of this institution has not been definitively reconstructed yet,
though it is a matter of prime importance for understanding Hindu
history.

It is at any rate not due to the much-maligned “Aryans”, who originally
had no such notion whether in India or abroad.  Neither do the Vedic
Samhitas contain any reference to Untouchability; Vedic Hinduism, at
least, could exist without untouchability.  The Dravidians, by contrast,
seem to have had the notion in complete form: “Before the coming of the
Aryan ideas (…) the Tamils believed that any taking of life was
dangerous, as it released the spirits of the things that were killed. 
Likewise, all who dealt with the dead or with dead substances from the
body were considered to be charged with the power of death and were
thought to be dangerous.  Thus, long before the coming of the Aryans
with their notion of *varna*, the Tamils had groups that were considered
low and dangerous and with whom contact was closely
regulated.”^([40](#40))

Gerhard Schweitzer reports that even the orthodox are uncomfortable with
the Untouchability category: “The untouchables have not been noticed in
any of the sacred scriptures.  As Mahatma Gandhi said in an oft-quoted
statement: if he were to find even a single text passage in the Vedas or
the great Hindu epics which justified the abomination of Untouchability,
he would no longer want to be a Hindu.  For lack of historical source
material, it is completely unknown when this greater category of
‘Untouchables’ on the lowest rungs of the social ladder was
established.  No high-caste author of the past millennium seems to have
found it necessary to discuss the question in any form in his writings. 
Probably this greater category has only come into being during the 8th
or 9th century, so it is truly a young phenomenon.”^([41](#41))

In today’s urban Hinduism, the practice of untouchability (unlike the
practice of caste endogamy) is disappearing, yet that does not mean that
Hinduism is disappearing.  Indeed, it is the Hindu nationalists’ boast
that in their meetings and group activities, there is no trace of
untouchability or caste discrimination.^([42](#42))

So, caste may be included as a criterion for defining Hinduism in a
purely descriptive sense when discussing Hindu society in the classical
and medieval period (which in India is reckoned as lasting into the 19th
century), though Hindu religion can and does exist without it.  Of
untouchability, even this need not be conceded: its presence in Hindu
history is considerably more limited than the caste system, and there is
plenty of Hindu history which would wrongly be labelled “non-Hindu” if
untouchability were accepted as a criterion.  Though contemporary
anti-Brahmin polemic in media like *Dalit Voice* tends to fuse all
social phenomena of Hindu civilization into a single (“evil
Brahminical”) design, a more historical attitude is recommended: one
which explores the exact and probably separate origins of untouchability
and caste, just as within the institution of caste, social rank/varna
and endogamy/jati may have separate origins.

**1.7. Arun Shourie on the abolition of Untouchability**

Untouchability has been outlawed (1950), and even before that, it was
losing ground.  As Arun Shourie has observed, “reformers like Swami
Vivekananda, like Gandhiji, like Narayan Guru had had no difficulty in
showing that Untouchability had no sanction in our scriptures, that, on
the contrary, the conclusive doctrinal argument lay in the central
proposition of the scriptures themselves: namely, that all was Brahman,
that the same soul inhered in all.  There was also the historical fact
that whatever might have been the excrescences which had grown around or
in the name of Hinduism, the entire and long history of the religion
showed that it was uniquely receptive to new ideas, that it was uniquely
responsive to reformers, that it was adaptable as no other religion was,
and therefore there was no reason to believe that it would not reform
itself out of this evil also.”^([43](#43))

Incidentally, I don’t think that Shourie’s reference to the vision of
the same soul inhering in all (any more than the vision that all are
created by the same God) provides a sufficient ground for equality in
social practice.  At any rate it doesn’t remove the real-life inequality
between human beings and animals, so it can also co-exist with
inequality between nobles and commoners, between priests and laymen,
between Banias and Chandalas.  But the point is that both ancient
scriptures and modern Hindu reformers could perfectly do without the
institution of untouchability without being any the less Hindu for it.

Arun Shourie tells us that a lot can be learned from the case of Narayan
Guru who, early this century, as a member of the unapproachable Ezhava
caste in Kerala, became an acknowledged religious leader and profoundly
changed caste relations in Kerala for the better.[⁴⁴](#44) He “attained
the highest spiritual states, thereby acquired unquestioned authority,
and transformed society from within the tradition”.[⁴⁵](#45) He made use
of a major loophole in the rigidities of the caste system, a loophole
which Hindu society deliberately maintained precisely because Hinduism
was not merely a social system but, among other things, also a spiritual
system: renunciates in general, and sages with acknowledged yogic
realization in particular, are above the worldly divisions such as
caste.  They also have the authority to herald social transformations
which Hindus would never accept from purely political busybodies.

As you can verify from any publisher’s book list, Narayan Guru is not
very popular among Indian secularists and foreign India-watchers, quite
unlike that other Untouchable, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: “today, scarcely
anyone outside Kerala even knows about Narayan Guru”, while by contrast,
“Ambedkar’s statues outnumber those of Gandhiji”.[⁴⁶](#46) Narayan Guru
upsets the now-dominant Ambedkarite description of Hindu tradition as a
den of caste oppression beyond redemption.

Unlike secular people who were insensitive to the spiritual dimension,
such as Dr. Ambedkar and Ramaswamy Naicker, “Narayan Guru consistently
taught against conversion, he himself took back into the Hindu fold
persons from the lower castes who had gone over to other
religions”.[⁴⁷](#47) And the contrast with Ambedkar’s Dalit movement
persists when we study the long-term results: “The legacy of Narayan
Guru is a society elevated, in accord, the lower classes educated and
full of dignity and a feeling of self-worth.  The legacy of Ambedkar is
a bunch screaming at everyone, a bunch always demanding and denouncing,
a bunch mired in self-pity and hatred, a society at war with
itself.”^([48](#48))

Though there is still some way to go, it is nonsense to claim that
nothing in caste relations has changed, especially after ex-Untouchables
have become Deputy Prime Minister (Jagjivan Ram, 1977-79), President
(K.R. Narayanan, 1997-) and chairman of the ruling party (Bangaru
Laxman, BJP, 19992000).  This evolution provides an opportunity to test
the dominant theory that Hinduism cannot exist without caste: has
Hinduism diminished in proportion with the losses which caste inequality
has suffered?  The problems besetting Hinduism are most definitely not
due to the withering away of untouchability.  On the contrary, recent
conversions to Islam have typically happened in areas like
Meenakshipuram (1981) where discriminations of the Scheduled Castes are
still severe, e.g. where they are harassed by unscrupulous policemen and
seek safety by acceding to the Muslim community.[⁴⁹](#49) Hinduism has
everything to gain by liquidating caste inequality as quickly as
possible.

**1.8. Belief in reincarnation**

The Bhagavad-Gita, often called the “fifth Veda” and explicitly paying
respects to the Vedas, contains an explicit affirmation of the doctrine
of karma and reincarnation.  This doctrine is not attested in the Veda
proper (which hints at an afterlife not unlike the Germanic *Walhalla*
or the Greek *Elysean Fields*), and is only *in statu nascendi* in the
great Upanishads, eventhough there are sophisticated hypotheses
detailing the deeper origins of this doctrine in the Vedic doctrine of
sacrifices.[⁵⁰](#50) At any rate-and here we introduce an element which
must be taken into account in any definition of Hinduism-, Hinduism is
not a belief system.  Its rules extend to behaviour (*âchâra*), not to
opinion (*vichâra*).  Therefore, although “belief in reincarnation” is
indeed quite common among Hindus (and Sikhs and Buddhists), it is
questionable as a defining characteristic of Hinduism, modem or
ancient.^([51](#51))

Thus, Ananda Coomaraswamy, one of the most accurate and profound
20th-century exponents of Hindu thought, did not believe in individual
reincarnation: with an appeal to Shankara, he thought that “only Brahman
reincarnates”, not some individual soul.[⁵²](#52) Within Hindu
tradition, this is a somewhat simplistic view when compared to the
doctrine of the “causal body”, which as carrier of the accumulated karma
defines the individual soul as distinct from the universal
Brahman-consciousness.  On the bright side, this simplicity yields a
more robust view of human destiny than the awkwardly moralistic Puranic
belief in an individual soul being rewarded or punished for its past
deeds, a belief which deprives all good and bad events in life of their
innocence by employing them in a cosmic calculus of
retribution.[⁵³](#53) Indeed, the Upanishadic doctrine of the Self
(*âtman*), which transcends all individual distinction, may even be read
as the very opposite in spirit of the theory of reincarnation, which
extends individuality (*jîva*) beyond this life-time to near-eternity.

Frits Staal observes: “A Hindu (…) can but need not believe in
reincarnation or rebirth, or if he believes in them, he may interpret it
in so many ways that it is not clear whether there is a common element
in all these diverse notions.”[⁵⁴](#54) The Hindu view of afterlife and
reincarnation has evolved over the centuries, and it would be wrong to
pin “Hinduism” down on any single one of the stages in this
development.  Belief in reincarnation may be found among the majority of
contemporary Hindus and could be used as a valid indication but not as a
decisive criterion

**1.9. Caste and reincarnation**

It has often been said that the belief in reincarnation is a cornerstone
of the caste system.  For instance, Christian author Dr. J. Verkuyl
writes: “…the caste system in India has always been officially justified
and legitimized by the doctrine of karma.  Someone’s birth in a higher
or a lower caste or as an outcaste was the consequence of the law of
karma.”[⁵⁵](#55) But the fact is that many other societies have known
the doctrine of reincarnation (e.g. the Druze of West Asia) without
setting up a division in endogamous groups, or at least without deriving
the need for such a division from this belief.

It is especially remarkable that Buddhism has brought the notion of
reincarnation and karma to most of East Asia, without thereby creating a
caste system in those countries.  To be sure, Buddhism never had the
intention of reforming the Chinese, Japanese, Burmese etc. societies in
any direction, and it fully cooperated with and integrated into the
existing feudal and monarchical establishments in these countries; but
if caste were “the necessary sociological manifestation of the moral and
philosophical presuppositions of Hinduism”[⁵⁶](#56), among which
reincarnation and karma are certainly considered the foremost, then
these same notions, even when labelled “Buddhist”, should have had the
same effect on those other societies.

One might reply that the Buddhist notion of reincarnation is not
entirely the same, as Buddhism “does not believe in the Self”, but that
distinction is purely academic.  Commoners belonging to both Hinduism
and Buddhism take the karma doctrine as a ground for fatalism: you have
deserved what you are getting, so don’t complain.  People with more
philosophical education take it as a ground for activism: you make your
own fate, so do your best.  Practically all of them, excepting a handful
of scriptural purists, take reincarnation as an individual process, as a
journey of an individual Self directed towards its temporary destiny by
its specific load of karma.  The Jatakas describe the previous
incarnations of the Shakyamuni Buddha; the Dalai Lama (and all the other
institutionally reincarnating lamas or *Tulkus*) is believed to be
always the same individual reincarnating, etc.: in actual practice,
Buddhists have the same understanding of reincarnation as Hindus have,
relative to their level of education and inclination to purism.

And yet, in countries at some distance from India where Buddhism became
the state religion, it has not built the same social system.  That is
because the Buddhist notion of reincarnation does not motivate people to
build a particular type of society rather than another one, just like
the Hindu notion of reincarnation is not the cause of India’s particular
type of society either.  It is simply wrong to deduce an entire social
system from abstract metaphysical notions like *karma*.

**1.10. Taboo on cow-slaughter,**  
**         or: are the Untouchables Hindus?**

As for the taboo on cow slaughter, this is definitely accepted by most
committed Hindus (including the Sikhs, but not all tribals) as an
intrinsic element of their religion, at least in the last twenty
centuries or so.  Anyone not observing this taboo is *ipso facto*
untouchable.  That is why the Muslim invaders made forced converts eat
beef, to prevent them from being reintegrated in their castes
afterwards.  Here again, what counts is not belief but behaviour: Jain
scriptures are not particularly fussy about cows as distinct from other
animals, but since the Jains don’t eat *any* kind of meat, they are
untainted by beef and hence not untouchable.

The question whether the Vedic seers practised cow-slaughter is hotly
debated among Hindu revivalists and traditionalists.[⁵⁷](#57) Even the
Hindu Revivalist historian K.S. Lal quotes Arabic writer Albiruni (ca. 
AD 1000) with approval, when he relates about the Hindus: “for they say
that many things which are now forbidden were allowed before the coming
of Vasudeva, e.g. the flesh of cows”.[⁵⁸](#58) It is certain that the
cow was a sacred animal to the authors of the Vedas, but it may be
precisely because of that sacredness that the cow was sacrificed and
eaten on special occasions.  Indeed, P.V. Kane, the great expert on
Dharma Shastra, has written: “It was not that the cow was not sacred in
Vedic times, it was because of her sacredness that it is ordained in the
*Vâjasaneyî Samhitâ* that beef should be eaten.”^([59](#59))

At any rate, by modern consensus the Vedic Aryans ate beef, and if the
tribals are not Hindus on this ground, then neither were the Vedic
Aryans.  It is perfectly possible to worship the Hindu Gods but not to
observe the Hindu purity rules, of which the taboo on beef is one; that
was historically the situation of the untouchable castes, who by their
profession violated the taboo on handling dead and decomposing
substances (cobbler, barber, washer, sweeper, funeral worker).  If you
stick to such taboos as defining characteristics of a Hindu, then
untouchables are not Hindus.  Anti-Hindu campaigners do indeed apply
this logic, to lop off as many parts as possible from Hindu
society.[⁶⁰](#60) This would mean that many westernized modern Hindus
should also be subtracted from the Hindu fold, along with the Vedic
seers.

However, as even Christian missionaries admit, “the deep-rooted personal
attachment of the Dalits to the Hinduised form of their ancestral gods
and goddesses (…) make\[s\] any mass exodus of the Dalits out of
Hinduism unlikely.”[⁶¹](#61) In a religious sense, the Dalits practise
Hinduism; a definition of Hinduism which ignores this, is a bad
definition.  It is only logical to include all those who worship the
Hindu Gods or who perform Hindu rituals in the Hindu category.  Hinduism
is certainly larger than the tradition of theistic worship of Gods like
Shiva, Durga, Rama or local Goddesses, but at least it must include that
devotional tradition.  I know quite a few westernized Hindus who eat
meat including beef, but who practise Hindu rituals, marry their
daughters to fellow Hindus etc.; in what religious category would you
put them, if not under the heading “Hindu”?

That indeed is how the historical leader of the Untouchables, Dr.
Bhimrao Ambedkar, saw it.  In the 1930s, when the British pressed him to
champion their plans for institutional separation of the Depressed
Classes from the Hindu category, Ambedkar declared that the Untouchables
were a “separate community”, though practising the “same religion” as
the caste Hindus, comparing their separateness to the separateness of
the European nations in spite of their common religion.[⁶²](#62) Though
he hated Hinduism, he admitted that he was born as a Hindu, an
Untouchable Hindu, that his community “worship the same Gods and
Goddesses as the rest of Hindus, they go to the same places of
pilgrimage, hold the same supernatural beliefs and regard the same
stones, trees, mountains as sacred as the rest of the Hindus
do”.[⁶³](#63) He deduced quite logically that it would take a formal
conversion including an explicit repudiation of Hinduism (which he
performed shortly before his death in 1956) for him to become a
non-Hindu, in his case a Buddhist.

**1.11. Conclusion**

Let us conclude this section with an instance of the pragmatic way in
which a leading Hindu Revivalist philosopher deals with the admittedly
intricate question of “who exactly is a Hindu?” As we just saw, criteria
like taboo on beef-eating or belief in reincarnation might stamp the
Vedic seers as non-Hindus.  This point is exploited by people who want
to diminish the semantic extension of the term “Hindu”, e.g. by
spokesmen of the Ramakrishna Mission when they were trying to get their
organization reclassified as a non-Hindu minority.  Swami Hiranmayananda
asked a number of semi-rhetorical questions which were nonetheless
pertinent, e.g.: “I want to know something from Shri Ram Swarup.  Were
the Vedic people Hindus?” Of course, the term was not in existence yet,
so the Vedic people certainly didn’t *call* themselves Hindus.  But were
they Hindus?  This is Ram Swarup’s answer:

“Well, firstly, I would answer this question by putting a
counter-question: ‘Were they non-Hindus?  Were they Muslims?  Were they
Ramakrishnaites?’ Secondly, I would say that (…) they were (…) people
who in later days became better known as Hindus.  People have more names
than one and sometimes old names are dropped or forgotten and new names
given or adopted.  Thirdly, (…) though we may not be able to say whether
the Vedic people were Hindus, we quite well know that ‘the religion of
the Vedas is the religion of the Hindus’, to put it in the language of
Swami Vivekananda.  This kind of looking at the problem is good enough. 
It was good enough for Vivekananda, and it should be good enough for any
serious purpose.”[⁶⁴](#64) indeed, the question whether the Vedic seers
were Hindus is a contrived one, and Hinduism can flourish without
bothering about it.

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)From *Through the Looking-Glass*, in *The Complete Illustrated
Works of Lewis Carroll*, p.184.

[²](#2a)Ananda Coomaraswamy: *Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism*, p.207.

[³](#3a)First given during Tilak’s speech at the 1892 Ganapati festival
in Pune; quoted in D. Keer: *Lokamanya Tilak*, p. 173-174.

[⁴](#4a)Agehananda Bharati: *Light at the Center*, p.155.

[⁵](#5a)Harsh Narain: *Myth of Composite Culture*, p.47.

[⁶](#6a)Harsh Narain’s paraphrase (*Myth of Composite Culture*, p.53) of
Mahabharata, Shanti-Parva 300:9.

[⁷](#7a)D. Keer: *Lokamanya Tilak*, p. 174-175.  

[⁸](#8a)Reprodticed in V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p. 109.

[⁹](#9a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p. 109.

[¹⁰](#10a)According to the Puranas, Manu Vaivasvata, patriarch of the
present human race, or at least of the Aryas, had ten successors, one of
them being Sudyumna, founder of the Prayag-based Lunar dynasty (another
being Ikshvaku, founder of the Ayodhya-based Solar dynasty).  His
great-grandson Yayati left Prayag to conquer western India, and one of
his five sons, Puru, acquired the metropolitan area (East Panjab and
Haryana) of the Saraswati basin where the Vedic tradition was to
develop.  One of his descendants (23rd generation starting from Manu)
was Bharata, after whom India is named *Bhâratavarsha*.

[¹¹](#11a)A systematic table of dynastic lists given in the Puranas was
prepared by P.L. Bhargava: *India in the Vedic Age*, reproduced in S.
Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*, p.338-343. A
cross-reference between these lists and the kings names appearing in the
Vedas is given in Talageri: op.cit., p.345-347.

[¹²](#12a)Vide Jadunath Sarkar: *Shivaji*, p.158-167. The rivalry
between the respective priests provides a nasty example of Brahminical
greed and caste pride, a frequent point of reference in the Hindutva
variety of antiBrahminism as represented by the Shiv Sena.

[¹³](#13a)Winand Callewaert: *India, hetoverende versheideheid* (Dutch:
“India, enchanting diversity”), p. 14.

[¹⁴](#14a)M.K. Gandhi: *Hindu Dharma*, p.8.

[¹⁵](#15a)S. Talageri: *Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*,
p.297 ff.

[¹⁶](#16a)Atharva-Veda 11:7:24, Satapatha Brahmana 10:5:6:8, Chandogya
Upanishad 3:4:1, Kautilya Arthasastra 1:3, all quoted in S. Talageri:
*Aryan Invasion Theory and Indian Nationalism*, p. 298.

[¹⁷](#17a)Dr. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.4, p. 189.

[¹⁸](#18a)Harold A. Gould: *The Sacralization of a Social Order*, p. 1.
This statement is at least partly circular, for “traditional” Hinduism
(as opposed to anti-caste reform Hinduism) would be defined precisely as
that tendency within Hinduism which upholds traditional institutions
such as caste.

[¹⁹](#19a)Peter van der Veer: *Gods on Earth*, p.53.

[²⁰](#20a)Tal Tamari: “The Development of Caste Systems in West Africa”,
*Journal of African History* 1991, p.221-250.

[²¹](#21a)Pradip Kumar Datta: “‘Dying Hindus’”, *Economic and Political
Weekly*, 19-6-1993, p. 1306.

[²²](#22a)Congress MP and Scheduled Caste member B.P. Maurya, replying
to Organiser’s question what Hinduism is (8-9-1996).  He strongly
advocated conversion of Hindus to *any* other religion on the plea that
they are all more egalitarian than Hinduism.

[²³](#23a)In most of these communities, the Arya Samaj with its
anti-caste stance has played a major role.  The Arya Samaj is also a
factor in the much lower intensity of caste inequality in the Arya
heartland, Panjab.  As Bahujan Samaj Party leader Kanshi Ram, told me
(interview at BSP headquarters, Delhi 1993), he only became aware of the
seriousness of caste inequality when he moved from Panjab to the more
backward state of Uttar Pradesh.

[²⁴](#24a)“The *Brâhmana* was his month, of both his arms was the
*Râjanya* made.  His thighs became the *Vaishya*, from his feet the
*Sûdra* was produced.” (RV 10:90:12)

[²⁵](#25a)Dr. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol. 1, p.18.

[²⁶](#26a)I put these words between brackets, because they do not appear
in this line of the Gita (4:13), though Hindu apologists usually pretend
that they have at least been intended by Krishna.

[²⁷](#27a)Bhagavad-Gita 4:13.

[²⁸](#28a)Bhagavad-Gita 1:41.

[²⁹](#29a)Bhagavad-Gita 3:24.

[³⁰](#30a)M.D. McLean: “Are Ramakrishnaites Hindus?  Some implications
of recent litigation on the question”, in *South Asia*, vol. 14, no. 2
(1991).

[³¹](#31a)Aurobindo (22-9-1907): *India’s Rebirth*, p.27.

[³²](#32a)Aurobindo (22-9-1907): *India’s Rebirth*, p. 27.

[³³](#33a)Aurobindo (22-9-1907): *India’s Rebirth*, p. 27.

[³⁴](#34a)“Caste no bar to be Hindu priest”, *Times of India*,
8-12-1995.

[³⁵](#35a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol. 1, p.303.
Emphasis added.

[³⁶](#36a)J.L. Brockington: *The Sacred Thread: A Short History of
Hinduism*, p.3.

[³⁷](#37a)J.L. Brockington: *The Sacred Thread*, p. 148.

[³⁸](#38a)See e.g. J.P. Schouten: *Revolution of the Mystics.  On the
Social Aspects of Vîtrashaivism*; at least for historical data, for in
its interpretation, it overstates the egalitarian “revolution” of
Basava, in the usual Christian tactic of reducing everything Hindu to
caste, wholly caste and nothing but caste.  Basava was an ardent Shiva
worshipper, to the extent of feeling close enough to Shiva to neglect
the worldly conventions outside.  Virashaiva castelessness and unconcern
for purity rules (e.g. in case of menstrual “impurity”) results from an
intense religious, viz.  Shaiva-Hindu, enthusiasm.  For a first-hand
account of Virashaivism, I thank my old friend Shambo Linga, who spent
seven years as the live-in pupil of a traditional Virashaiva Guru.  He
told me how a government official had to intervene in a Virashaiva-run
village school in order to stop caste discrimination, with Virashaiva
children sitting on a platform and others on the ground.  Equality: a
long way to go even for self-proclaimed egalitarians.

[³⁹](#39a)For an analysis of the notion of purity, see the path-breaking
study (e.g. the first to discern the rationale behind Biblical purity
rules, p.51-57) of Mary Douglas: *Purity and Danger*, esp. p.8 and p.
123-128.

[⁴⁰](#40a)George L. Hart, III: “The Theory of Reincarnation among the
Tamils”, in W. Doniger: *Karma and Rebirth*, p.117.

[⁴¹](#41a)Gerhard Schweizer: *Indien*, Stuttgart 1995, p-97 ff.,
reproduced in Joachim Betz: “Indien”, *Informationen zur politischen
Bildung* no.257/1997, p.24.

[⁴²](#42a)The RSS likes to quote Mahatma Gandhi’s appreciation of the
absence of untouchability at RSS Shakhas, e.g. *RSS Spearheading
National Renaissance*, p.23.

[⁴³](#43a)A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*, p.230. Shourie is
arguing against Dr. Ambedkar’s view that Untouchability is of the
essence of Hinduism.

[⁴⁴](#44a)Vide P. Parameswar: *Narayan Guru*.

[⁴⁵](#45a)From the cover text of A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*.

[⁴⁶](#46a)From the cover text of A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*.

[⁴⁷](#47a)A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*, p.381. About “Perivar”
Ramaswamy Naicker, see Amulya Ganguli: “The atheist tradition”, *Indian
Express*, 20-9-1995, and M.D. Gopalakrishnan: *Periyar, Father of the
Tamil Race*.

[⁴⁸](#48a)A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*, p.381. The last sentence
refers to the foul language, violent ways and infighting among the
low-caste parties claiming Ambedkar’s legacy.  Christian missionaries
likewise report that communities converted to Christianity have
progressed much more in the last half century than the castes which have
followed Dr. Ambedkar into neo-Buddhism or into Dalit activism.

[⁴⁹](#49a)One of several more recent cases was reported in *Indian
Express*, 12-2-1995 and in *Young India*, July 1995: police excesses
have triggered off conversions of Pradhi tribals in central India to
Islam.  A local leader declared: “Now they have started laying hands on
our women.  We cannot tolerate this.  The only way to resist the
continued torment is to embrace Islam.  Conversion to Islam would earn
the Pradhis the support of a community which can act as a pressure
group.”

[⁵⁰](#50a)E.g. Herman W. Tull: *The Vedic Origins of Karma*.

[⁵¹](#51a)One of the best concise explanations of the theory of
reincarnation is by E. Krishnamacharya: *Our Heritage*, p.67-74.

[⁵²](#52a)A.K. Coomaraswamy: *Metaphysics*, p.74, p.80. p.347n.

[⁵³](#53a)Vide e.g. K. Elst: *De niet-retributieve Karma-leer* (Dutch:
“The non-retributive Karma Doctrine”).

[⁵⁴](#54a)F. Staal: *Een Wijsgeer in bet Oosten*, p. 107.

[⁵⁵](#55a)J. Verkuyl: *De New Age Beweging*, p.71.

[⁵⁶](#56a)Harold A. Gould: *The Sacralization of a Social Order*, p. 1.

[⁵⁷](#57a)The classic (though intemperate) summary of evidence for Vedic
cow slaughter is B.R. Ambedkar: *Hindus Ate Beef*.  However, the
opposite case also has its erudite defenders: in his book *Sânskrtik
Asmitâ kî Pratîk Gomâtâ* (Hindi: “Mother Cow, Symbol of Cultural
Identity”), Rameshwar Mishra Pankaj argues in favour of the Vedic origin
of the cow’s immunity.

[⁵⁸](#58a)K.S. Lal: *Growth of Scheduled Tribes*, p.102, quoting
Albiruni: *India*, vol.1, p.107. Albiruni uses it as an example of how
the Hindu laws, unlike the Shari’a, are open to change.  *Vâsudeva* is
Krishna, the cow-herd.  The depth and nature of the revolution brought
about by Krishna in the Vedic tradition is still insufficiently
understood by Indologists including myself.

[⁵⁹](#59a)P.V. Kane: *Dharma Shastra Vichar*, p.180; quoted by Dr.
Ambedkar: *The Untouchables*, Ch.11, in *Writings and Speeches*, vol.7.,
p.324.

[⁶⁰](#60a)Such is the stated position of the Bangalore fortnightly Dalit
Voice. “Dalits are not Hindus”.  The term *Dalit*, “broken, oppressed”,
was first used by the Arya Samaj to designate the untouchable Scheduled
Castes in their campaign for *dalitoddhâra*, “upliftment of the
oppressed”.  The term has now largely pushed out the allegedly
paternalistic Gandhian term *Harijan*, “people of God”, which only
unyielding Gandhians like Arun Shourie keep on using.

[⁶¹](#61a)A. Ayrookuzhiel: “The Dalit Church’s Mission: a Dalit
Perspective”, *Indian Missiological Review*, Sep. 1996, p. 44.

[⁶²](#62a)B. R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol. 9, p. 184-185;
discussed in A. Shourie: *Worshipping False Gods*, p.227-228.

[⁶³](#63a)B.R. Ambedkar: *Writings and Speeches*, vol.9, p. 184.

[⁶⁴](#64a)Ram Swarup: “In reply to Swami Hiranmayananda”, *Organiser*,
8-10-1995; Hiranmayanada’s article had appeared on 24-9-1995.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


