+++
title = "03 2. Hindus as “Indian Pagans”"

+++
**2. Hindus as “Indian Pagans”**

**2.1. Historical definition of “Hindu”**

In Hindu scriptures, the word “Hindu” is not to be found.  Yet, long
before Western scholars sat down to invent definitions of “Hindu”, the
term already carried a definite meaning.  The normal procedure ought to
be, to listen to this original version first.  It was brought into India
by the Islamic invaders, and meant: “Indian Pagan”.

The term “Hindu” is the Persian equivalent of the Indo-Aryan term
“Sindhu”, “river”, “the Indus”.  The equivalence is a simple application
of the regular phonetic relation between the indo-Aryan and Iranian
branches of the Indo-European language family: initial \[*s*\] is
retained in Indo-Aryan but changed into \[*h*\] in Iranian, while
aspirated voiced stops like \[*dh*\] are retained in Indo-Aryan but lose
their aspiration in Iranian.  The Iranians used the word *Hindu* to
designate the river Sindhu and the countries and populations situated
around and beyond the Sindhu.  From Persian, the Greeks borrowed the
river name as Indos and the people’s name as *Indoi*, hence English
*Indus, India, Indian*.

Indians in Southeast-Asia were never known as “Hindu”, but the Arabs,
Turks, Mongolians and other northern and western foreigners adopted the
Persian name as their own word for “India” and “Indians”, e.g. Arabic
*Hind*, Turkish *Hindistan*.  Xuan Zang (Huen Tsang, 7th century
AD), who had entered India through Persian-speaking Central Asia, notes
in so many words that the name *Xin-du* (regular Chinese rendering of
Persian *Hindu*)^([1](#1)) or, as he corrects it, *Yin-du*, is used
outside India but is unknown within the country, because the natives
call it Aryadesh or Brahmarashtra.^([2](#2)) As Sita Ram Goel comments:
“It may thus be said that the word ‘Hindu’ had acquired a national
connotation, since the days of the Avesta, although in the eyes of only
the foreigners.”^([3](#3)) In the next paras, we summarize his findings
about the prehistory of the current term *Hindu*.

When Buddhism was implanted in Central Asia, and Buddhist temples were
built for worship of Buddha-statues, the Mazdeans described the
enthusiasts of this Indian religion as *but-parast*,
“Buddha-worshippers”, as opposed to the Mazdean *âtish-parast* or
“fire-worshippers”.  The term *but-parast* came to mean more generally
“idol-worshipper”, for by the time of the Muslim invasions, but had
become the generic term for “idol”, hence *but-khana*, “idol-temple”,
and *but-shikan*, “idol-breaker”.  They made no distinction between the
different sects based in India, and by the time the persianized Arabs
and Turks invaded India, the word *but-parast* was randomly applied to
all Indian unbelievers.  Seeing that the Brahmins had fire-ceremonies
just like the Mazdeans, the Muslims occasionally included the Indian
Pagans in the category *âtish-parast* as well, again without bothering
about distinctions between different sects.

The Muslim invaders called the Pagans of India sometimes “Kafirs”,
unbelievers in general, i.e. the same religious designation which was
used for the polytheists of Arabia; but often they called them “Hindus”,
inhabitants of Hindustan, i.e. an ethnic-geographical designation. 
Thereby, they gave a fixed religious content to this geographical term:
a Hindu is any Indian who is not a Jew, Christian, Muslim or
Zoroastrian.  In other words: any Indian “Pagan”, i.e. one who is not a
believer in the Abrahamic religions nor an Iranian Pagan, is a Hindu. 
In its definition as “Indian Paganism”, Hinduism includes the whole
range from animal worship to Upanishadic monist philosophy, and from
Shaktic blood sacrifice to Jain extreme non-violence.

The term *Hindu* was used for all Indians who were unbelievers or
idol-worshippers, including Buddhists, Jains, “animists” and later the
Sikhs, but in contradistinction to Indian Christians (*ahl-i Nasâra* or
*Isâî*), Jews (*ahl-î-Yahûd* or *banû Isrâîl*), Mazdeans (*ahl-i Majûs*
or *âtish-parast*) and of course Muslims themselves.  This way, at least
by the time of Albiruni (early 11th century), the word *Hindu* had a
distinct religio-geographical meaning: a Hindu is an Indian who is not a
Muslim, Jew, Christian or Zoroastrian.^([4](#4))

**2.2. An unambiguous criterion**

The Hindus never described themselves as “Hindus”, until Muslim invaders
came and designated them by this Persian term.^([5](#5)) it does not
follow that those whom we would call Hindus in retrospect had no sense
of pan-Hindu cultural unity, as some might hastily conclude; merely that
the term *Hindu* was not yet in use.  Similarly, the Hindus called these
newcomers *Turks*, but this does not exclude recognition of their
religious specificity as *Muslims*.  On the contrary, even Timur, who
made it absolutely clear in his memoirs that he came to India to wage a
religious war against the Unbelievers, and who freed the Muslim captives
from a conquered city before putting the Hindu remainder to the sword,
referred to his own forces as “the Turks”, an ethnic designation, rather
than “the Muslims”.^([6](#6)) One should not confuse the term with the
concept: the absence of the term *Hindu* does not prove the
non-existence of a concept later enunciated as “Hindu Dharma”.

On the other hand, to those who insist that there was no Hindu identity
before, the genesis of the label *Hindu* should suggest an analogy with
the secularist narrative of the genesis of Indian nationhood: Indians
didn’t exist, but Indian nationhood was forged in the crucible of the
common struggle against the British.^([7](#7)) Likewise, if Hinduism had
been non-existent before, then nothing would have been as effective in
creating a common sense of Hindu-ness as being targeted together by the
same enemy, British or Muslim.  As Veer Savarkar wrote: “The \[Islamic\]
enemies hated us as Hindus and the whole family of peoples and races,
sects and creeds that flourished from Attock to Cuttack was suddenly
individualised into a single Being.”^([8](#8)) This is not historical in
its details, but it is nonetheless in agreement with a widespread view
of how nations are created: by a common experience, such as the deeply
involving experience of war against a common enemy.

So, a Hindu was by definition not a member of the Abrahamic religions,
nor of Persian quasi-monotheist Paganism (Mazdeism, better known as
Zoroastrianism).  But a Buddhist, a Jain, a tribal, they were all
included in the semantic domain of the term *Hindu*.  Though the early
Muslim writers in India had noticed a superficial difference between
Brahmins and Buddhists, calling the latter “clean-shaven Brahmins”, they
did not see an opposition between “Hindus and Buddhists” or between
“Hindus and tribals”, nor did later Muslim rulers see an opposition
between “Hindus and Sikhs”.  On the contrary, Albiruni lists Buddhists
among the idolatrous Hindu sects: he describes how the idols of Vishnu,
Surya, Shiva, the “eight mothers” and the Buddha are worshipped by the
Bhagavatas c.q. the Magians, the Sadhus, the Brahmins and the
Shramans.^([9](#9))

All Indians who were not Parsis, Jews, Christians or Muslims, were
automatically Hindus.  So, the original definition of Hindu is: an
Indian Pagan.  Since the earliest use of the term *Hindu* in India, a
clear definition has been given with it, and of every community it can
easily be decided whether it fits that definition or not.  It does not
matter if you do not like the name-tag: if you fit the definition, you
fall within the Hindu category.  The Hindus have not chosen to be called
Hindus: others have conceived the term and its definition, and Hindus
simply found themselves carrying this label and gradually accepted it.

Like in the census category manipulations of E.A. Gait, this definition
implies a “test” by which we can decide whether someone is a Hindu,
regardless of whether he uses or accepts that label himself.  The
difference is that here, the test was not made up *ad hoc* to prove a
point.  It is an authentic definition, generated by the real-life
encounter of the Muslim invaders with their Other: the native Indian
Pagans.

**2.3. What is Paganism?**

The term *Pagan* is generally used for people not belonging to the
Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.  But better than
mere convention, there could be a definition of the term *Pagan*.  And
this definition is readily suggested by the basic meaning of the word. 
Like its Germanic equivalent *Heathen*, the Latin word *Paganus*
literally means: rural.  Christianity started as a strictly urban
movement, and only after it had taken power in the Roman Empire in 313
AD did it start to conquer the countryside.^([10](#10))

The association of Christian with urban, Pagan with rural, is more than
just a historical accident.  It is perfectly logical that Paganism
originated in natural surroundings, long before man lived in cities, and
that Christianity spread in cities, where a large population was
concentrated.  The reason is that Paganism is based on immediate
reality, on mankind’s experience of the life cycles, the powers of
nature, the celestial phenomena: anyone living anywhere can be struck
with wonder by these realities.  By contrast, Christianity is something
which has never been discovered by anyone: you must have heard about it
from someone, from preachers who went to the market-place where they
could find a large audience.

Belief systems based on “Divine Revelation” spread first in the
population centres, where a message can be communicated.  In the
European countryside, Pagan beliefs and practices (though not the most
sophisticated ones, which had disappeared along with the Pagan elites,
often the first to be converted) continued, sometimes in Christian
disguise, until in the last two centuries they were rendered outdated,
not by Christianity but by modernity.

To an extent, the same relation has existed between Buddhism and
Hinduism: proselytizing Buddhism was an urban phenomenon, largely
because it was dependent on patronage from merchants, princes and
ordinary alms-givers, and on concentrations of people for the
recruitment of new monks.  Buddhism is a bit of a borderline case.  It
is a “natural religion” in that any individual could sit down under a
tree and discover the process of meditation for himself.  This way,
Paganism as the “natural religion” or “cosmic spirituality” stretches
from nature-oriented rituals to the heights of meditation, excluding
only the exclusive revelations of prophetic monotheism.

On the other hand, the experience of Enlightenment is a much rarer one
than the experience of the life cycle or the year cycle, and to that
extent, Buddhism had to be preached and propagated.  For this missionary
trait, and for its basic non-interest in a pantheon (neither to worship
it nor to reject it), Buddhism is often treated as separate from
Paganism; Christian authors nowadays hesitate to call it
Pagan.^([11](#11))

Paganism can thus be defined as the whole spectrum of “cosmic” religion
(or “universism”) as opposed to the “revealed” religions, whose message
is not intrinsic to the world order.  Prophetic monotheism desacralizes
the cosmos by concentrating the sacred exclusively in an extra-cosmic
deity: “Do not worship the sun and the moon, but worship Allah who
created them.”^([12](#12)) Paganism sees the sacred in manifestations of
cosmic order, cosmic power, cosmic beauty.  If religion is defined as a
matter of belief in a divine revelation, then one would have to say that
Hindu culture exists, but not Hindu religion.  Indeed, perceptive
Indologists like Frits Staal have remarked that unlike Christianity and
Islam, Hinduism is by no means a “religion” in the sense of “belief
system”.^([13](#13))

The point has also been made by many Hindu Revivalists and will be
repeated several times in these pages, but for now we will quote a
formulation by someone who was a Hindu revivalist in the most
constructive sense all while remaining aloof from polemics: the late
Ekkirala Krishnamacharya, physician, educationist and *Kulapati*
(rector) of the Theosophy-related World Teacher Trust in Visakhapatnam. 
To a question about the “ancient religion of India”, he replied:

“There was no religion in this land, nor was any religion necessary for
the Indians.  The ancient Indians had a code of law for man to follow. 
This was framed in accordance with various truths working in nature. 
The law of the existence of nature and its creation was observed in all
its detail and the law for man to follow was copied in accordance with
it.  This was called Dharma.  The term means that which bears and
protects.  It is that which bears and protects when we follow \[it\]. 
Man is honoured when he honours it.  He receives protection when he
protects it.  It was made into a constitution called Bharata Dharma.  It
was the path of life commonly accepted throughout the land.  Any attempt
for religion is naturally limited and narrowed when compared with
this.”^([14](#14))

So, Dharma is defined here as nothing but living in accordance with the
laws of nature.  We can accept this as a general definition even before
discussing what precisely those laws could be.

Yet, the general term *Pagan* should not be taken to indicate a single
“natural religion”: within the range of Pagan traditions, there are
important differences too, e.g. from vegetarianism to cannibalism.  The
difference lies in the crude or subtle perception of what precisely
constitutes the laws of nature, the cosmic order (what the Vedas call
*Rita*).  At a very primitive level, one could say that “survival of the
fittest” or “big fish eat small fish” is the law of nature to be
followed: this yields Paganism in its caricature form.^([15](#15)) At a
more civilized level, say that of Greek philosophy, an appropriately
more refined understanding of the laws of nature and of the concomitant
human ethic is developed.  The distinction which Hinduism claims is that
through yoga, it has refined human sensitivity and made man receptive to
subtler cosmic laws, such as the ultimate oneness of all sentient
beings, hence the need for *dayâ* or *karunâ*, compassion.

**2.4. Pagans and Hindus**

As a concept, Paganism is a cornucopia with very divergent phenomena. 
When we survey the “neo-Pagan” scene in the modern West, we find a wide
range of trends: from carnival-like impersonations of druids and witches
to high-brow efforts at certified historical authenticity, and
stretching across the political spectrum from neo-Nazis and ethnic
revivalists to feminists, ecologists and hippie anarchists, all around a
core mass of apolitical seeker types.^([16](#16)) The great insights of
Vedanta philosophy, or of “Pagan” Greek philosophy, are by no means a
common heritage of all Pagan traditions.

Yet, one could say that all of them have a common inspiration, and some
Hindu thinkers have developed the position that Hinduism should reach
out to other Pagan cultures and movements.  Ram Swarup calls on the
people who lost their Pagan heritage because of the take-over by
Christianity or Islam to “make a pilgrimage through time” to rediscover
their ancient Gods.^([17](#17)) Unlike most Hindu nationalists whose
horizon is limited by India’s borders, he also shows some awareness
about movements in the West actually exploring a revival of
pre-Christian spirituality.^([18](#18)) In the last couple of years, the
VHP has tried to open lines of communication with organized
neo-Paganism, but it is too early to report on any firm results.

It would seem that for real cooperation, the waters between Western
neo-Paganism and Hinduism are still pretty deep.  Many neo-Pagans reject
elements of Christianity which happen to be held dear by serious Hindus,
such as sobriety and self-restraint in matters of sexual morality, and
are often quite unfamiliar with the Hindu ascetic and meditative
traditions.  Racist neo-Pagans would not be very interested in meeting
dark immigrant Hindus anyway, and Left-leaning neo-Pagans are put off by
newspaper reports about obscurantist practices and non-feminist
conditions in Hindu society.  But Hindu-Pagan rapprochement certainly
has potential and may well flourish in the not too distant future.

**2.5. Polytheism and monotheism**

Ram Swarup’s book *The Word as Revelation: Names of Gods* is the closest
you can get to an apology of polytheism, though it finds a place for
monotheism as well.  In some Western “neo-Pagan” writings, we find an
explicit rejection of monotheism in favour of polytheism.^([19](#19))
With that, neo-Pagan authors accept the Christian view that while
Christianity is monotheistic, Paganism is polytheistic; they accept the
terms of the debate in which Christianity claims superiority.

By contrast, Hindu philosophers who know their tradition don’t fall for
this “mono-poly” dichotomy: “In this deeper approach, the distinction is
not between a True One God and the False Many Gods; it is between a true
way of worship and a false way of worship.  Wherever there is sincerity,
truth and self-giving in worship, that worship goes to the true altar by
whatever name we may designate it and in whatever way we may conceive
it.  But if it is not desireless, if it has ego, falsehood, conceit and
deceit in it, then it is unavailing though it may be offered to the most
True God, theologically speaking.”^([20](#20))

It is not either “one” or “many”, it is both: “like monotheism,
polytheism too has its spiritual motive.  If monotheism represents man’s
intuition for unity, polytheism represents his urge for
differentiation.  Spiritual life is one but it is vast and rich in
expression. (…) only some form of polytheism can do justice to this
variety and richness. (…) A pure monotheistic God, unrelieved by
polytheistic elements, tends to become lifeless and
abstract.”^([21](#21)) Ram Swarup argues that this is implicitly
admitted by monotheist religions, which reintroduce diversity in their
one God by giving one-hundred different names to Allah, by letting Him
“emanate” into creation through the stages of the “Tree of Life” in the
Jewish Kabbalah, or by perceiving a Trinity in Him, or by surrounding
Him with a Virgin Mother and a heavenly host of angels and saints.

Yet: “monotheism is not altogether without a spiritual motive.  The
Spirit is a unity.  It also worships nothing less than the Supreme. 
Monotheism expresses, though inadequately, this intuition of man for the
Supreme.”^([22](#22)) Some of the monotheist criticism of polytheism is
also well taken: “Similarly, purely polytheistic Gods without any
principle of unity amongst them lose their inner coherence.  They fall
apart and serve no spiritual purpose.”^([23](#23))

But according to Ram Swarup, Hinduism has long outgrown the childhood
diseases of polytheism with which lesser pantheons are afflicted: “The
Vedic approach is probably the best.  It gives unity without sacrificing
diversity.  In fact, it gives a deeper unity and a deeper diversity
beyond the power of ordinary monotheism and polytheism.  It is one with
the yogic or the mystic approach.”^([24](#24))

Likewise, Sri Aurobindo had already written: “Indian polytheism is not
the popular polytheism of ancient Europe; for here the worshipper of
marry Gods still knows that all his divinities are forms, names,
personalities and powers of the One; his gods proceed from the one
Purusha, his goddesses are energies of the one divine Force.” He adds a
brief defence of “idolatry”: “Indian image-worship is not the idolatry
of a barbaric or undeveloped mind, for even the most ignorant know that
the image is a symbol and support and can throw it away when its use is
over.”^([25](#25)) Devotees of non-Hindu Gods would probably say the
same thing for their own tradition.  At any rate, in the event of a
worldwide Pagan revival, Hinduism can claim a natural leadership role.

**2.6. Paganism in danger, Hinduism to the rescue**

Along with other Hindu Revivalists, Shrikant Talageri puts Hinduism in a
worldwide continuum of Paganism: “Hinduism is the name for the Indian
territorial form of worldwide *Sanâtanism* (call it Paganism in
English).  The ideology of Hindutva should therefore be a universal
ideology”, and Hindu Revivalists should “spearhead a worldwide revival,
rejuvenation and resurgence of spiritualism, and of all the world
religions and cultures which existed all over the world before the
advent of imperialist ideologies like Christianity, Islam, Fascism,
Marxism etc.”^([26](#26)) Somewhat like Moscow for the world Communist
movement, India should become the world centre of Pagan revival,

To put this Pagan solidarity into practice, the editors of the NRI paper
*Young India* suggest creating two, three, many Ayodhyas: “Some 600
years ago there was a grand pagan temple at the foot of a sacred hill in
Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania.  It was demolished, the high priest
banished (some say, murdered), and the place built up as a cathedral. 
We appeal to the Pope to return the spot to the Pagans of Lithuania who
are the original and lawful historic owners of the sacred site.  We
further appeal to the Pope not to condone the desecration any longer. 
It cannot please his Lord, Jesus Christ in Heaven, who abhorred
desecration and occupation of the others’ holy sites.”^([27](#27)) This
is perhaps not the kind of religious revival the world is waiting for;
it is at least not the focus of Talageri’s interest in world-wide
Paganism.

By “Paganism”, Hindu Revivalists do not just mean the Indo-European
(hence Veda-related) forms of pre-Christian religion: “The aborigines of
Australia, the Red Indians of America, the pre-Islamic Pagans of Arabia,
the Negroes of Africa are looking at Hindu society with expectation and
hope.  They are hopeful because it was the Hindu society in India alone
which could survive the combined onslaught of Islam, Christianity and
Marxism.”^([28](#28))

A remarkable item in this list is “the pre-Islamic Pagans of Arabia”. 
They have been out of existence since the 7th century, and unlike in
Europe, no movement for Pagan revival is known to exist in Arabia.  So,
perhaps this is no more than a symbolic exercise, but Hindu revivalists
want to render justice to the deceased Paganism of Arabia.

It is very common to mention the Pagans of Arabia, Prophet Mohammed’s
enemies, in purely pejorative terms.  That this is done in Islamic
writings is only to be expected; that Indian secularists follow suit, is
hardly surprising.  But it is also very common in Western scholarly
publications, e.g., a famous Dutch Islamologist writes: “The Arab
religion was a primitive polytheism, poor in real religiosity”
.^([29](#29)) Moreover, he also relays as fact the Islamic claim that
the Arab religion was a degeneration from what was originally a
prophetic monotheism founded by Abraham in Mecca, an *Ur*-form of Islam:
“Over time, among the Arabs, this original monotheism had degenerated
into Paganism: the true knowledge had been lost.”^([30](#30))

Against this near-monopoly of the Islamic version of what Arab Paganism
stood for, a few Hindu Revivalists, most articulately Sita Ram Goel,
have tried to reconstruct the Arab Pagans’ own viewpoint.  The subject
is worthy of a detailed treatment, for it is decidedly one of the most
original contributions of Hindu Revivalism, universally relevant for any
understanding of the Prophet’s career and of Islam; however, I will
limit myself to a few general points here.

Far from being originally a form of Abrahamic monotheism, Arab Paganism
was a cosmic religion, focusing largely on the starry sky, just like its
fellow “Semitic” sister religion of Babylon, or like the Vedic
religion.^([31](#31)) The Arabs had a pantheon comparable to that of the
ancient Greeks or Hindus, embodying metaphysical, cosmological and
ethical notions. Just like India, “the whole of their homeland was
honeycombed with temples and sanctuaries housing hundreds of divinities
with as many Names and Forms.”^([32](#32)) After finishing a survey of
what is actually known about Arab Paganism with a list of Arab deities,
Goel concludes: “The deities listed in the foregoing few pages may sound
too many to minds under the spell of monotheism.  The fact, however, is
that they are far too few and represent only what has been salvaged by
modern scholarship from the extensive ruins caused by
Islam.”^([33](#33))

The presiding deity of the Ka’ba, the Arab national shrine, was a male
moon deity, Hubal, who presents many similarities with Shiva; not least
the fact that in the temples of both, the central *mûrti* (idol) is an
unsculpted stone.  While it would be exaggerated to say that the Ka’ba
was a Shiva temple (a position taken by eccentric historian P.N. Oak),
there is an undeniable typological kinship between Hinduism and Arab
Paganism.

If we count the polytheistic Greeks and Hindus as civilizations, Goel,
who rejects the now-classical description of the Arab Pagan as
“quarrelling rabble addicted to idol-worship”, cautions us to think
twice before condemning the Arab Pagans as savages in urgent need of
Mohammed’s civilizing mission: “It is nothing short of slanderous to say
that pre-Islamic Arabs were barbarians devoid of religion and culture,
unless we mean by religion and culture what the Muslim theologians
inean.”^([34](#34))

The Pagan Arabs themselves, at least, thought themselves very religious,
though not in the sense of “believers”.  Goel quotes the reply of an
Arab prince when the king of Persia had told him how inferior he
considered the Arabs: “What nation could be put before the Arabs for
strength or beauty or piety, courage, munificence, wisdom, pride or
fidelity? (…) So liberal was he that he would slaughter the camel which
was his sole wealth to give a meal to the stranger who came to him at
night.  No other people had poetry so elaborate or a language so
expressive as theirs (…) So faithful were they to the ordinances of
their religion that if a man met his father’s murderer unarmed in one of
the sacred months he would not harm him.  A sign or look from them
constituted an engagement which was absolutely inviolable”.^([35](#35))

Again, we cannot go into more detail here, but it is important to note
that this non-nationalist tendency within the Hindu Revivalist movement
thinks in global terms.  One of its goals, though as yet only conceived
as distant and theoretical, is the restoration of Arabia, if not to its
ancient religion, at least to some form of pluralistic non-prophetic
religion.  It is to be noted how far this ambitious tendency is removed
from the defensive and gloomy psychology of “Hinduism under siege”,
though it is largely voiced by the same individuals.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)The Chinese transcription letter &lt;x&gt;, now pronounced as
cerebral \[sh\], often stems from an original strongly aspirated /h/,
/x/.  In modern Chinese, India’s name is rendered as *Yin-du*, on the
basis of the non-aspirated pronunciation proposed by Xuan Zang himself.

[²](#2a)Surendranath Sen: *India though Chinese Eyes*, p.59.

[³](#3a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2 (2nd ed.), p.396. The chapter
concerned has also been published separately: *Hindus and Hinduism,
Manipulation of Meanings* (1993).

[⁴](#4a)The pre-modern existence of the term “Hindu” was conceded,
before a disappointed audience of Indologists (who habitually teach and
write that Hinduism is a recent “Orientalist construct”) by Prof. David
Lorenzen, in a paper about the definition of “Hindu” read at the 1995
South Asia Conference in Madison, Wisconsin.

[⁵](#5a)I forego discussion of various crank propositions by Hindus to
explain *Hindu* as a Sanskrit word, e.g. that Hindu is derived from
Sanskrit *hîna*, “humble” (as in *Hînayâna*, “the lesser vehicle”), or
Xuan Zang’s little idea that it was derived from indu, “moon”.

[⁶](#6a)An English translation of Timur’s autobiography,
*Malfuzat-i-Timuri*, is given in Elliott & Dowson: *History of India*,
vol-3, 389-477.  Likewise, in the Yugoslav civil war, the Serbs referred
to the Muslims as “Turks”, though what they meant was not
Turkish-speaking people but people professing Islam.

[⁷](#7a)Not that I believe this narrative.  That Indian nationhood
originates elsewhere than in the freedom struggle is implied in the fact
that the Indian nation was by no means united in that struggle: numerous
Indians wholeheartedly collaborated with the British.  But this does not
deny their common nationhood either, just as the division of the French
in collaborators and resisters under the German occupation (1940-44)
does not prove the non-existence of the French nation.

[⁸](#8a)V.D. Savarkar: *Hindutva*, p.45.

[⁹](#9a)Albiruni: *India*, vol. 1, p. 121.  He attributes the division
of men into sects to none other than Rama.  “Magians” are Maga Brahmins,
who are indeed worshippers of Surya, the sun; the “eight mothers” are
the *ashta-Lakshmî*, usually depicted along with the Sri Yantra (four
upward and five downward triangles intertwined), and worshipped e.g. in
the Math of the Kanchi Shankaracharya.

[¹⁰](#10a)Another meaning sometimes given to *Paganism*, and not further
considered here, is the religious attachment to “material” elements such
as ritual prescriptions, as opposed to the Christian emphasis on the
“spirit” (in ethics, on the “intention”); by this criterion, pure
Theravada Buddhism is not Pagan, while orthodox Judaism is; Vedantic
Hinduism is not Pagan, while Tantric Hinduism is; the most austere forms
of Protestantism are not Pagan, while Catholicism with its sacraments
is.

[¹¹](#11a)For a typical example, Karen Armstrong, formerly a Catholic
nun and now an Islam enthusiast, calls herself a “free-lance monotheist
with Buddhist influence” (speaking to Ludo Abicht on Flemish radio,
1996).

[¹²](#12a)Quran 41:37.

[¹³](#13a)F. Staal: *Een Wijsgeer in bet Oosten*, p. 107-108.  Likewise,
in his book *Le Corps Taoïste*, Kristofer Schipper has made the same
remark about Taoism.

[¹⁴](#14a)E. Krishnamacharya: *Our Heritage*, p. 16.

[¹⁵](#15a)In that sense, both Communism and Nazism could be considered
as (secular, pseudo-scientific) forms of “Paganism”, as is frequently
done in Christian Writings, e.g. the Vatican document on Christian
responsibility for the Holocaust, March 1998. I find this usage
confusing and hence undesirable, but the valid point is that both
ideologies based themselves on (secularly understood) “laws of nature”,
in the case of Communism specified as “laws of history”.

[¹⁶](#16a)See e.g. G. Harvey & C. Hardman: *Paganism Today*, Vivianne
Crowley: *Principles of Paganism*; G. Harvey: Speaking Earth, Listening
People.

[¹⁷](#17a)Ram Swarup: *The Word as Revelation: Names of Gods*, p. 132.

[¹⁸](#18a)Ram Swarup corresponded with Prudence Jones, twice chairperson
of the Pagan Federation, and with Gudrun Kristin Magnusdottir, Icelandic
Pagan author of the book *Odsmal*, which ties the Germanic Asatru
religion in with Transcendental Meditation and other Eastern lore.  His
article “Of Hindus, Pagans and the Return of the Gods” (*Hinduism
Today*, Oct. 1991) was reprinted in the Californian anarcho-Pagan
magazine Green Egg, Yule 1991 and again March 1998.

[¹⁹](#19a)E.g. Alain de Benoist: *Comment peut-on être païen?* (French:
“How to be a Pagan?”), part of the “mono-poly” polemic which animated
the Paris parlours in ca. 1980, in which Bernard-Henry Lévy defended
monotheism, albeit a “monotheism without God”: *Le Testament de Dieu*
(French: “God’s testament”).

[²⁰](#20a)Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, p. 129.

[²¹](#21a)Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, p. 128. 

[²²](#22a)Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, p. 126. 

[²³](#23a)Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, p. 128. 

[²⁴](#24a)Ram Swarup: *Word as Revelation*, p. 128.

[²⁵](#25)Sri Aurobindo: *Foundations of Indian Culture*, p. 135.

[²⁶](#26a)S. Talageri in S.R. Goel: *Time for Stock-Taking*, p.227.
*Sanâtanism*: from *Sanâtana Dharma*, the “eternal” religion, a
self-designation of Hinduism.

[²⁷](#27a)*Young India*, April 1998, back cover; emphasis in the
original.

[²⁸](#28a)Mayank Jain: “Let us fulfil the Sardar’s mission”,
*Organiser*, 21-12-1997.

[²⁹](#29a)J.H. Kramers: *De Koran* (Dutch), p.viii.

[³⁰](#30a)J.H. Kramers: *De Koran*, p.x.

[³¹](#31a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2, p.266 and p.273-296, with
reference to F. Hommel in *The First Encyclopaedia of Islam*, vol.1,
p.377 ff., and to Shaikh Inayatullah: “Pre-Islamic Arabian Thought”, in
M.M. Sharif, ed.: *A History of Muslim Philosophy*, Lahore 1961.

[³²](#32a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2, p.294.

[³³](#33a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2, p.294.

[³⁴](#34a)S.R. Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol.2, p.272.

[³⁵](#35a)Quoted in D.S. Margoliouth: *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*,
p. 2-3, and in Goel: *Hindu Temples*, vol. 2, p. 270

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


