+++
title = "07 6. Are Hindu reformists Hindus?"

+++
**6. Are Hindu reformists Hindus?**

The historical and legal definition of “Hindus” as “Indian Pagans” is
clear-cut, easy to use, and it has the law and historical primogeniture
on its side.  This inclusive definition of Hinduism is eagerly used by
Hindu nationalist organizations (usually in its Savarkarite “Hindutva”
adaptation), but there is still a serious problem with it: a number of
the people included object to the label “Hindu”. Indeed, this label is
often in conflict with the self-descriptions of certain communities,
particularly among the Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs and some of, the
Scheduled Tribes.

An obvious choice for a definition could have been: “Is Hindu, he who
calls himself a Hindu”.  But history decided otherwise: no Hindu called
himself a Hindu when the term was first applied by the Muslim invaders. 
The converse definition: “is non-Hindu, he who calls himself a
non-Hindu”, was also not favoured by history: the British census
policies overruled the self-description of many Sikhs and tribals as
“Hindus” and forced them into newly created non-Hindu categories of
“Sikh” and “animist” against their explicit wishes.

Today, eventhough the term *Hindu* has gained wide acceptance as a
self-description, it is still an ill-fitting garment.  Within the Sikh
and Jain communities, there is discussion about the question: “Are we
Hindus?” Self-definition will be only one factor considered in the
following discussion of the Hindu or non-Hindu identity of some
borderline cases, along with the several sets of criteria which we have
come across in the preceding chapters.

**6.1. The Ramakrishna Mission’s conversion**

The label “Hindu” is very unpopular.  Both in its traditional and in its
activist incarnation, Hinduism has been getting a bad press: the former
is attacked as the ultimate in social injustice (caste, self-immolation
of widows etc.), the latter as fanatical and dangerous to the
minorities.  Moreover, being a Hindu brings material disadvantages:
Hindu organizations active in the field of education may find their
institutions taken over by State Governments, a take-over against which
minority institutions are protected by Article 30 of the Constitution,
esp.  Art. 30.(1): “All minorities, whether based on religion or
language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice.”

One such Hindu organization threatened in its educational project is the
Ramakrishna Mission, founded by Swami Vivekananda.  To protect itself
against such takeovers by the West Bengal Government, the Ramakrishna
Mission itself approached the Calcutta High Court in 1980 to have
“Ramakrishnaism” declared a non-Hindu religion which is, moreover, a
minority religion.[¹](#1) The opposite position, that the Ramakrishna
Mission has always been and still is a representative and servant of
Hinduism was upheld not only by the materially interested West Bengal
Government, but also by lay members of the Ramakrishna Mission itself
(who had joined the Mission for no other reason than that they wanted to
work for Hinduism), and especially by the teachers at Vivekananda
Centenary College, Rahara, District of 24 Parganas.  The latter had
started a trade-unionist agitation, supported by the Communist Party
(Marxist), against the college management, and their demands would have
to be met unless the college was a minority institution, which has far
greater freedom in selection and recruitment (including lay-off) of
personnel. 

RK Mission sympathizers like Abhas Chatterjee and Ram Swarup had no
problem in proving that Swami Vivekananda, representative of Hinduism at
the World Parliament of Religions (Chicago 1893), had established the
Mission as an instrument for rejuvenating and propagating
Hinduism.[²](#2) Ram Swarup replies to those who take Vivekananda’s
optimistic belief in a “universal religion” for a goodbye to Hinduism:
“Vivekananda believed in a universal religion, but to him it was not an
artificial product made up of quotations culled from various scriptures,
the current idea of universal religion.  To him, it already existed in
the form of *Vedânta*, which alone I can be the universal religion in
the world, because it teaches principles and not persons’.”[³](#3)
Whatever else Vivekananda may have been, he was certainly a Hindu.

**6.2. Ramakrishna’s experiments**

The central argument of the RK Mission for its non-Hindu character was
that, unlike Hinduism, it upheld the “equal truth of all religions” and
the “equal respect for all religions”.  The latter slogan was
popularized by Mahatma Gandhi as *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, a formula
officially approved and upheld in the BJP’s constitution.[⁴](#4) In
1983, RK Mission spokesman Swami Lokeshwarananda said: “Is Ramakrishna
only a Hindu?  Why did he then worship in the Christian and Islamic
fashions?  He is, in fact, an avatar of all religions, a synthesis of
all faiths.”^([5](#5))

The basis of the Swami’s claim is a story that Swami Vivekananda’s guru
Paramahansa Ramakrishna (1836-86) once, in 1866, dressed up as a Muslim
and then continued his spiritual exercises until he had a vision; and
likewise as a Christian in 1874.  If at all true, these little
experiments shouldn’t be given too much weight, considering
Ramakrishna’s general habit of dressing up a little for devotional
purposes, e.g. as a woman, to experience Krishna the lover through the
eyes of His beloved Radha (not uncommon among Krishna devotees in
Vrindavan); or hanging in trees to impersonate Hanuman, Rama’s monkey
helper.

But is the story true?  Ram Swarup finds that it is absent in the
earliest recordings of Ramakrishna’s own talks.  It first appears in a
biography written 25 years after Ramakrishna’s death by Swami
Saradananda (*Sri Ramakrishna, the Great Master*), who had known the
Master only in the last two years of his life.  Even then, mention (on
just one page in a 1050-page volume) is only made of a vision of a
luminous figure.  The next biographer, Swami Nikhilananda, ventures to
guess that the figure was “perhaps Mohammed”.[⁶](#6) In subsequent
versions, this guess became a dead certainty, and that “vision of
Mohammed” became the basis of the doctrine that he spent some time as a
Muslim, and likewise as a Christian, and that he “proved the truth” of
those religions by attaining the highest yogic state on those
occasions.^([7](#7))

It is hard not to sympathize with Ram Swarup’s skepticism.  In today’s
cult scene there are enough wild claims abroad, and it is only right to
hold their propagators guilty (of gullibility if not of deception) until
proven innocent.  In particular, a group claiming “experimental
verification” of a religious truth claim as the unique achievement of
its founder should not be let off without producing that verification
here and now; shady claims about an insufficiently attested event more
than a century ago will not do.  It is entirely typical of the
psychology behind this myth-making that a researcher can testify:
“Neither Swami Vivekananda, nor any other monk known to the author, ever
carried out his own experiments.  They all accepted the truth of all
religions on the basis of their master’s work.”[⁸](#8) This is the
familiar pattern of the followers of a master who are too mediocre to
try for themselves that which they consider as the basis of the master’s
greatness, but who do not hesitate to make claims of superiority for
their sect on that same (untested, hearsay) basis.

**6.3. Was Ramakrishna a Muslim?**

For some more polemical comment, let us look into one typical pamphlet
by a Hindu upholding the Hindu character of the Ramakrishna Mission:
*The Lullaby of ‘Sarva-Dharma-Samabhâva’* (“equal respect for all
religions”) by Siva Prasad Ray.[⁹](#9) The doctrine of “equal respect
for all religions” (in fact, even a more radical version, “equal truth
of all religions”, is one of the items claimed by the RK Mission as
setting it apart from Hinduism.

This doctrine is propagated by many English-speaking gurus, and one of
its practical effects is that Hindu girls in westernized circles
(including those in overseas Hindu communities) who fall in love with
Muslims, feel justified in disobeying their unpleasantly surprised
parents, and often taunt them: “What is the matter if I marry a Muslim
and your grandchildren become Muslims?  Don’t these Babas to whom you
give your devotion and money always say that all religions teach the
same thing, that Islam is as good as Hinduism, that Allah and Shiva are
one and the same?”^([10](#10))

When such marriages last (many end in early divorce), a Hindu or Western
environment often leads to the ineffectiveness of the formal conversion
of the Hindu partner to Islam, so that the children are not raised as
Muslims.  Yet, Islamic law imposes on the Muslim partner the duty to see
to this, and in a Muslim environment there is no escape from this
islamizing pressure.  Thus, after the Meenakshipuram mass conversion to
Islam in 1981, non-converted villagers reported: “Of course, there have
been marriages between Hindu harijans and the converts. (…) Whether it
is the bride or the groom, the Hindu is expected to convert to
Islam.”^([11](#11))

Even when the conversion is an ineffective formality, such marriages or
elopements which trumpet the message that Hindu identity is unimportant
and dispensible, do have an unnerving effect on vulnerable Hindu
communities in non-Hindu environments.  They also remain an irritant to
Hindus in India, as here to Siva Prasad Ray.  More generally, the
doctrine that all religions are the same leaves Hindus intellectually
defenceless before the challenge of communities with more determination
to uphold and propagate their religions.

To counter the facile conclusion that Ramakrishna had “practised
Christianity and Islam and proven their truth”, Siva Prasad Ray points
out that Ramakrishna was neither baptized nor circumcised, that he is
not known to have affirmed the Christian or Islamic creed, etc. 
Likewise, he failed to observe Ramzan or Lent, he never took Christian
or Islamic marriage vows with his wife, he never frequented churches or
mosques.  This objection is entirely valid: thinking about Christ or
reading some Islamic book is not enough to be a Christian or a Muslim.

Equally to the point, he argues: “‘Avatar’ or incarnation may be
acceptable to Hinduism but such is not the case with Islam or
Christianity.”[¹²](#12) In Christianity, one might say that the notion
of divine incarnation does exist, but it applies exclusively to Jesus
Christ; applying it to Ramakrishna is plain heresy.  Sitting down for
mental concentration to obtain a “vision” of Christ or Mohammed is
definitely not a part of the required practices of Christianity or
Islam.  Neither religion has a notion of “salvation” as something to be
achieved by practising certain states of consciousness.  In other words:
before you claim to have an agreement with other people, check with them
whether they really agree.

The same objection is valid against claims that Swami Vivekananda was
“also” a Muslim, as Kundrakudi Adigalar, the 45th head of the Kundrakudi
Tiruvannamalai Adhinam in Tamil Nadu, has said: “He had faith and
confidence in Hinduism.  But he was not a follower of Hinduism alone. 
He practised all religions.  He read all books.  His head bowed before
all prophets.”[¹³](#13) But “practising all religions” is quite
incompatible with being a faithful Christian or Muslim: as the Church
Fathers taught, syncretism is typical of Pagan culture (today, it is
called “New Age”).  Leaving aside polytheistic Hinduism, the mere
attempt to practise both Islam and Christianity, if such a thing were
possible, would have stamped Ramakrishna as definitely not a Christian
nor a Muslim.

Moreover, it is simply untrue that Swami Vivekananda ever “practised”
Christianity or Islam: he was not baptized or circumcised, did not
attend Church services or Friday prayers, never went to Mecca, never
observed Ramzan or Lent.  But he did practise vegetarianism (at least in
principle)[¹⁴](#14) and celibacy, which are both frowned upon in Islam. 
Worst of all, he did worship Hindu Gods, which by definition puts him
outside the Islamic fold, Islam being based on the rejection of all Gods
except Allah.

Ramakrishna was quite satisfied worshipping Goddess Kali, but: “There is
no respectful place for deities in female form in Islam.  Rama Krishna
engaged in the worship of Kali was nothing but an idolater in the eyes
of the Muslims. (…) Islam says that all idolaters will finally end up in
Islam’s hell.  Now, I want to ask these egg-heads of
*sarva-dharma-samabhâva* if they know where exactly is the place for
Rama Krishna in Islam?  The fact is that Rama Krishna never truly
worshipped in the Islamic fashion, neither did he receive Islamic
salvation.”^([15](#15))

Ray challenges the RK Mission monks to try out their assertions on a
Muslim or Christian audience: “All this is, thus, nothing but creations
of confused and boisterous Hindu monks.  No Christian *padre* or Muslim
*maulvi* accepts Rama Krishna’s salvation in their own religions.  They
make snide remarks.  They laugh at the ignorance of the Hindu
monks.”[¹⁶](#16) Ray makes the snide insinuation explicit: “Only those
Hindus who do not understand the implications of other religions engage
themselves in the propagation of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*; like stupid
and mentally retarded creatures, such Hindus revel in the pleasures of
auto-erotism in their wicked pursuit of the fad.”[¹⁷](#17) This rude
comparison means that they pretend to be interacting with others, but it
is a mere fantasy, all inside their own heads, with the assumed partners
not even knowing about it.^([18](#18))

Finally, Ray wonders what happened to the monks, those of the RK Mission
and others, who talked about “equal truth of all religions” and chanted
*“Râm Rahîm ek hai”* (“Rama and Rahim/Allah are one”) and *“Ishwar Allâh
tere nâm”* (“both Ishwara and Allah are Your names”) in East Bengal
before 1947.  As far as he knows, they all fled across the new border
when they suddenly found themselves inside Pakistan, but then: “Many a
guru from East Bengal \[who\] has been saved by the skin of his teeth,
once in West Bengal, resumed his talk of *sarva-dharma-samabâva*.
(…) But the point still remains that if they really had faith in the
message of *sarva-dharma-samabhâva*, they would not have left East
Bengal.”[¹⁹](#19) As so often in Indo-Pakistani and Hindu-Muslim
comparisons, the argument is reminiscent of the inequality between the
contenders in the Cold War: you could demonstrate for disarmament in the
West, but to demonstrate for this in the East Bloc (except if it were
for unilateral disarmament by the Western “war-mongers”) would have put
you in trouble.

Siva Prasad Ray also mocks the RK Mission’s grandiose claim of having
evaluated not just a few popular religions, but *all* religions: “Did
Rama Krishna ever worship in accordance with Sikh, Buddhist, Jain,
Saurya or Ganapatya principles?  No, he did not. (…) Neither did he
worship in accordance with the Jewish faith of Palestine, the Tao
religion of China, the religion of Confucius, or the Shinto religion of
Japan.”[²⁰](#20) Empirically verifying the truth of each and every
religion is a valid project in principle, but a very time-consuming one
as well.

According to Ray, the slogan of “equal truth of all religions” is
“nothing but a watered-down sentiment that means nothing.  It is useful
only in widening the route to our self-destruction.  It does not take a
genius to realise that not all paths are good paths in this life of
ours; this is true in all branches of human activity.”[²¹](#21) Unlike
the RK Mission monks, Ray has really found some common ground with other
religions and with rationalism too: they all agree on the logical
principle that contradictory truth claims cannot possibly all be right;
at most one of them can be right.

To sum up, Ray alleges that the RK Mission stoops to a shameful level of
self-deception and ridicule, that it distorts the message of Ramakrishna
the Kali-worshipping Hindu, and that it distorts the heritage of Swami
Vivekananda the Hindu revivalist.  Yet, none of this alleged injustice
to Hinduism gives the Mission a place outside Hinduism.  After all,
there is no definition of “Hindu” which precludes Hindus from being
mistaken, self-deluding or suicidal.  Regardless of its fanciful
innovations, the RK Mission remains a Hindu organization, at least by
any of the available objective definitions.  Alternatively, if the
subjective definition, “Is Hindu, he and only he who calls himself
Hindu”, is accepted, then of course the RK Mission, unlike its founders,
is no longer Hindu,-but then it is no longer Ramakrishna’s mission
either.

The larger issue revealed by the incident with the RK Mission is a
psychology of self-repudiation which is fairly widespread in the
anglicized segment of Hindu society, stretching from actual repudiation
of Hinduism to the distortive reformulation of Hinduism itself after the
model of better-reputed religions.  In a typical symptom of the colonial
psychology, many Hindus see themselves through the eyes of their
once-dominant enemies, so that catechism-type books on Hinduism explain
Hinduism in Christian terms, e.g. by presenting many a Hindu saint as “a
Christ-like figure”.[²²](#22) Modem translations of Hindu scriptures are
often distorted in order to satisfy non-Hindu requirements such as
monotheism.  This can take quite gross forms in the Veda translations of
the Arya Samaj, where entire sentences are inserted in order to twist
the meaning in the required theological direction.  The eagerness to
extol all rival religions and to be unsatisfied with just being Hindu is
one more symptom of the contempt in which Hinduism has been held for
centuries, and which numerous Hindus have interiorized.

**6.4. Yogic value of Ramakrishna’s visions**

Ram Swarup reflects a bit a more deeply on the RK Mission lore about
Ramakrishna’s visions: “The students of Yoga know that ‘visions’ are of
a limited value and they prove very little. (…) They tell us more about
the visionary than about the object visioned.”[²³](#23) In Christianity
and Islam, visions have nothing to do with the respective concepts of
salvation, and in the Hindu Yoga tradition, they are equally unimportant
(unlike in Shamanism, where the “vision quest” is the central
experience).  If the RK Mission monks had known this common trait of
each of the religions concerned, they would not have concluded to the
equal truth of these religions on the basis of one individual’s visions.

Even the sentimental theology of “equal truth of all religions” deserves
a better basis than an individual’s vision: “The fact is that the truth
of harmony and human brotherhood derives not from an absorbed trance but
from an awakened *prajñâ* or wisdom; and its validity depends not on any
dramatic ecstatic visions but it belongs to man’s (…) natural reason
unspoilt by theologies of exclusiveness.”[²⁴](#24) Universalist ideas
are very much part of the general Hindu outlook, but are not conceived
as depending on ecstatic experiences.

The luminosity of the faces visioned by Ramakrishna is again a normal
element in the visions produced as a side-effect of yoga practice: “From
the Yogic viewpoint also there was nothing unusual or extraordinary
about Ramakrishna’s visions of Jesus and Muhammad.  When one meditates
on the object (*karmasthâna*), it undergoes several successive
modifications.  It gets internalized; it loses its blemishes; it assumes
a luminous form (*jyotishmatî*); it assumes a joyous form (*visoka*). 
All this is a normal process of yogic modification and
ingestion.”^([25](#25))

The fact that images of Jesus and Mohammed passed through this mental
process, “need not give birth to an indiscriminate theology like the one
produced by the Mission-that all prophets and religions are equal and
that they say the same thing”.[²⁶](#26) Ram Swarup points out that yogic
writings like Patanjali’s *Yoga Sûtra* always stress the importance of
careful observation and discrimination, quite the opposite of the facile
and sweeping conclusions which the RK Mission monks draw from one or two
alleged visions.

Ram Swarup offers, for contrast, the example of another luminary of the
Bengal Hindu Renaissance, who did not lose his power of discrimination
after having had visions: “Visions of a transcendental state have a
limited phenomenal (*vyavahârika*) validity.  For example, Sri
Aurobindo, as a prisoner of the British, saw in the British jail, in the
British judge and in the British prosecuting officer the veritable image
of vasudeva, but this did not invalidate the Indian struggle for
independence nor the reality of British imperialism.  There was no
slurring over, no loss of discrimination.”[²⁷](#27) Ram Swarup’s point
is: whatever Ramakrishna may have visualized concerning Mohammed,
vigilance against Islam remains a foremost duty of responsible Hindus,
for reasons which can be ascertained without reliance on ecstatic
visions.

**6.5. The verdict**

In spite of all the arguments to the contrary offered by Hindus, the
Calcutta High Court ruled in 1987 that the Ramakrishna Mission is a
non-Hindu religious minority.[²⁸](#28)  The public debate occasionally
resumed and so did the court proceedings.  When the case was taken to
the Supreme Court, the Ramakrishna Mission submitted that “any attempt
to equate the religion of Ramakrishna with the Hindu religion as
professed and practised will be to defeat the very object of
Ramakrishnaism and to deny his gospel.”^([29](#29))

In 1995, the Supreme Court had the final say and ruled that
“Ramakrishnaism” is a branch of Hinduism.[³⁰](#30) As *Hinduism Today*
reported: “On July 2nd, 1995, the Supreme Court of India declared that
neither Sri Ramakrishna nor Swami Vivekananda founded any independent,
non-Hindu religion.  Thus ended the RK Mission’s labyrinthine attempt to
gain the privileges accorded only to minority religions in India,
specifically the right to manage their extensive educational
institutions free from government control.”^([31](#31))

The verdict came with an unexpected rider, disappointing the West Bengal
Government and considerably sweetening the defeat for the RK Mission:
“Despite the legal loss, the court’s decision surprisingly allows the RK
Mission to retain control of its schools in Bengal.  This was not by
virtue of any constitutional provision, but rather because the law in
Bengal regarding the governing of schools specifically exempted the RK
Mission schools from government control.”^([32](#32))

All those concerned about Hindu unity heaved a sigh of relief.  In a
last skirmish, the Mission’s office-bearer Swami Hiranmayananda
polemicized with Ram Swarup and denied that Swami Vivekananda had ever
expressed pride in Hinduism.  Ram Swarup now only had to quote the
Supreme Court verdict, which had quoted Vivekananda a number of times to
this very effect, e.g.: “Say it with pride: we are
Hindus.”[³³](#33) Another clinching quotation from Ramakrishna himself
was that “various creeds you hear about nowadays have come into
existence through the will of God and will disappear again through His
will (…) Hindu religion alone is *Sanâtana dharma*” for it “has always
existed and will always exist”.^([34](#34))

Ram Swarup remarks that none of the Ramakrishna Mission spokesmen have
been able to point out even one instance where Ramakrishna or
Vivekananda expressed a desire to give up Hinduism or to start a new
religion.  For, as so often, Ram Swarup and other Hindus had in fact
accepted the burden of proof by taking the trouble of proving the
Hinduness of Ramakrishna and Vivekananda, when that burden was logically
on those who made the totally new claim about “Ramakrishnaism”.  Now the
court case had exposed the Mission’s inability to discharge its own
burden of proof and to offer even the faintest evidence of Ramakrishna’s
desire (let alone decision, let alone implementation of the decision) to
found a new religion separate from Hinduism.  The evidence offered by
the Mission consisted entirely of testimonies by outsiders (Romain
Rolland, Arnold Toynbee, even Lenin) to the “universal spirit” of
Ramakrishna or Vivekananda, but even these Westerners (still a source of
authority) could not be quoted as attesting any *repudiation* of
Hinduism.

But the Supreme Court verdict was only a battle won, and the war
continues.  Ram Swarup observes: “Though it took shape under particular
circumstances, the RK Mission now has an articulated philosophy of being
non-Hindu, a veritable manifesto of separation. (…) Now that it is
forcefully articulated, the case for separation could exert a continuing
influence on the minds of RK Mission authorities. (…) Pseudo-secularism
is abroad, and under its auspices *Hinduism* is a dirty word, and
disowning Hinduism is deemed both prestigious and profitable.  Those
ideological conditions still obtain, and no court can change them. (…)
In trying to prove that it was non-Hindu, \[the Mission\] spoke quite
negatively of Hinduism (…) Can the RK Mission outlive this manifesto of
separation?”^([35](#35))

In Ram Swarup’s view, the RK Mission’s problem with being Hindu is but a
particular symptom of a widespread and deep-seated trauma: “We will do
well to remember that Hinduism has passed through a thousand years of
foreign domination.  During these centuries, its deepest ideas and its
cherished institutions were under great attack.  The trauma of this
period produced deep psychological scars.  Hindus have lost
self-confidence.  They have become passive and apologetic-apologetic
about their ideas, their institutions, about themselves and about their
very name.  They behave as if they are making amends for being
Hindus.”[³⁶](#36) This, then, is the fundamental problem underlying the
intellectual and political ferment which in the present study we are
seeking to map out and understand.  And such a large-scale problem will
take time to find its solution.

**6.6. Is the Arya Samaj Hindu?**

Many Hindus feared that a different outcome in the RK Mission court case
might have had a disastrous precedent value for other organizations with
a weak Hindu self-identification. Jagmohan, former Governor of Jammu &
Kashmir and a hero of the Hindutva movement, comments: “Had the Supreme
Court come to the same conclusion as the Calcutta High Court, many more
sects and denominations would have appeared on the scene claiming
positions outside Hinduism and thereby causing further fragmentation of
the Hindu society.”^([37](#37))

Then again, perhaps the effect of a recognition of the RK Mission as a
minority would not have been nearly as dramatic as Jagmohan expected,
for in several states, another Hindu reformist organization has enjoyed
minority status for decades without triggering the predicted exodus.
Jagmohan himself has noted a case where “the temptations in-built in
Article 30 impelled the followers of Arya Samaj to request the Delhi
High Court to accord the status of a minority religion” but “the
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court rightly rejected the contention
of the Arya Samaj”.[³⁸](#38) However, as early as 1971, the Arya Samaj
gained the status of “minority” in Panjab.  Then already, it had that
status in Bihar, along with the Brahmo Samaj.^([39](#39))

In a way, the Arya Samaj is a minority: the Arya-Samajis are fewer in
number than the non-Arya-Samajis.[⁴⁰](#40) By this criterion, every
Hindu sect is a minority, and every Hindu school which calls itself
“Shaiva school” or “Ram bhakta school” would pass as a minority
institution, protected by Art.30. But that is of course not how the
courts and the legislators have understood it: in principle, all Hindu
minorities within the Hindu majority are deprived of the privileges
accorded to the “real” minorities.

In Swami Dayananda’s view, the term Arya was not coterminous with the
term *Hindu*.  The classical meaning of the word *Arya* is “noble”.  It
is used as an honorific term of address, used in addressing the honoured
ones in ancient Indian parlance.[⁴¹](#41) The term *Hindu* is
reluctantly accepted as a descriptive term for the contemporary Hindu
society and all its varied beliefs and practices, while the term Arya is
normative and designates *Hinduism as it ought to be*.  Swami
Dayananda’s use of the term Arya is peculiar in that he excludes the
entire Puranic (as opposed to the Vedic) tradition from its semantic
domain, i.e. the major part of contemporary Hinduism.  Elsewhere in
Hindu society, “Arya” was and is considered a synonym for *“Hindu”*,
except that it may be *broader*, viz. by unambiguously including
Buddhism and Jainism. Thus, the Constitution of the “independent,
indivisible and sovereign monarchical Hindu kingdom” (Art.3:1) of Nepal
take care to include the Buddhist minority by ordaining the king to
uphold “*Aryan* culture and Hindu religion” (Art.20: 1).[⁴²](#42) Either
way, the semantic kinship of the two terms implies that the group which
chose to call itself Arya Samaj is a movement to reform Hinduism (viz.
to bring it up to *Arya* standards), and, not another or a newly
invented religion.

The Arya Samaj’s misgivings about the term *Hindu* already arose *in
tempore non suspecto*, long before it became a dirty Word under
Jawaharlal Nehru and a cause of legal disadvantage under the 1950
Constitution.  Swami Dayananda Saraswati rightly objected that the term
had been given by foreigners (who, moreover, gave all kinds of
derogatory meanings to it) and considered that dependence on an exonym
is a bit sub-standard for a highly literate and self-expressive
civilization.  This argument retains a certain validity: the
self-identification of Hindus as “Hindu” can never be more than a
second-best option.  On the other hand, it is the most practical choice
in the short run, and most Hindus don’t seem to pine for an alternative.

**6.7. Are travelling gurus Hindus?**

A somewhat special case is that of the travelling Hindu gurus in the
West.  They don’t have to worry about Article 30 or the Communist
government in Kolkata, but they do have to fine-tune their communication
strategy vis-à-vis the Western public.  Usually they claim that their
yoga is “universal”[⁴³](#43), often also that it “can be combined with
other religions”.  Thus, in a popular self-presentation video of
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s Transcendental Meditation (a.k.a. the Science of
Creative intelligence), a Christian pastor is interviewed and he
testifies that he has deepened his Christian faith with the help of TM. 
In the West, weary and wary of religious labels, this seems to be a more
successful strategy than an explicit attempt at conversion would be.

The International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) generally
denies that it is Hindu, in spite of practising purely Hindu rituals and
a purely Hindu lifestyle in the service of a purely Hindu god.[⁴⁴](#44)
That this policy is guided by petty calculations of self-interest is
clear from the cases where ISKCON exceptionally does claim to be Hindu,
viz. when collecting money from Hindus.

A former ISKCON member explains: that ISKCON is non-Hindu “is clearly
evident in the writings and lectures of Srila Prabhupada, ISKCON’s
founder, as well as in the day-to-day preaching statements of its
members and current-day leaders.  What is especially troubling is that
ISKCON periodically does claim to be a Hindu organization. 
Unfortunately, these claims on the part of ISKCON occur when, and only
when, it serves the legal and financial interests of the
sect.  Thousands of unsuspecting Indian Hindus have been persuaded to
contribute funds to the group with the reassurance that they were
supporting ‘Hinduism’, ‘Hindu’ temples and the printing of ‘Hindu’
books.”^([45](#45))

But these peculiar elements of separatism in this sect or that can only
occur because of the general background of the depreciation of Hindu
identity.  In Christianity and Islam, only the reverse case exists:
sects claiming to be Christian (Mormons) or Muslim (Ahmadiyas, Alevites)
but being denied that label by the orthodox.  The day Hinduism gets
respected again, these sects will probably reaffirm their Hindu
identity, and the RK Mission will preface its publications with
Vivekananda’s appeal: “Say with pride, We are Hindus!”  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a)According to the RK Mission register (quoted by Ram Swarup:
*Ramakrishna Mission in Search of a New Identity*, p-3), there were 1400
Ramakrishnaist monks and 106,072 lay followers in 1980; on an Indian
scale, this is definitely a minority.

[²](#2a)Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission in Search of a New Identity*
(1986) and his exchange of arguments with RK Mission representative Ram
Narayan in *Indian Express*, 19/20-9-1990 and 15/16-11-1990.

[³](#3a)Ram Swarup: “His vision and mission.  Vivekananda is being
wrongly portrayed as a champion of a synthetic religion”, *Observer of
Business and Politics*, 28-8-1993.  No source is given for what seems to
be a quotation; at any rate, it sums up, faithfully if not literally,
the message of the first part of Vivekananda’s famous address: “Is
Vedanta the Future Religion?” (San Francisco 1900), reproduced in
Vivekananda’s *complete Works*, vol.8, see esp. p.124-125.

[⁴](#4a)BJP: *Constitution and Rules*, art. IV, p.4.

[⁵](#5a)Quoted in S.P. Ray: *Turning of the Wheel*, p.58.

[⁶](#6a)Details of the step-by-step genesis of this story are given in
Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission in Search of a New Identity*, p.8-9.

[⁷](#7a)As the alleged vision of Jesus was slightly more glorious than
that of Mohammed, Ram Swarup sarcastically suggests (*Ramakrishna
Mission*, p.9) new horizons to the “equal truth of all religions”
school: “This difference could provide much scope for future disputants.
One school may hold that while all prophets are equal, some are more
equal than others.”

[⁸](#8a)George M. Williams: “The Ramakrishna Mission: A Study in
Religious Change”, in Robert D. Baird: *Religion in Modern India*, p.62.

[⁹](#9a)Included as Ch.7 in S.P. Ray: *Turning of the Wheel*.

[¹⁰](#10a)This scenario has been related to me by at least a dozen
overseas Hindus in the UK and the USA; the Hindu revivalist publisher
Arvind Ghosh (Houston, speaking to me in October 1995) told me that in
the Houston area alone, he knew of over 30 cases of Hindu girls marrying
Muslims to the dismay of their parents.  Others, like RSS *prachârak*
Rama Shastry from Los Angeles (October 1996), assured me that the
magnitude of this problem is being exaggerated.

[¹¹](#11a)Report in *Illustrated Weekly of India*, 6-2-1993, p.11.
Likewise: “In Khairontoli \[in the tribal belt near Ranchi\], there are
as many as 15 out of 28 families with 45 children whose fathers are
Muslims and mothers Christian tribals. (…) But marriage is held in a
unilinear direction, with Muslim boys tying the knot with Christian
tribal girls and not vice-versa.  Invariably, their offspring bear
Islamic names.” This report by Manoj Prasad was mis-titled: “Stupid
Cupid sees not caste, creed in Bihar” (*Indian Express*, 23-1-1994), for
what it shows is not at all that love overrules religious
discrimination, on the contrary: even in these reported love marriages,
Muslim families see to it that the dominant partner is Muslim, and that
at any rate, the children are exclusively Muslim.

[¹²](#12a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.58.

[¹³](#13a)T.S. Subramanian: “A Secular Vivekananda.  Interview with
Kundrakudi Adigalar”, *Frontline*, 12-3-1993.

[¹⁴](#14a)When travelling in the US, Vivekananda ate whatever he was
offered, including pork and beef.  This is one more reason why his
recognition as a “representative” of Hinduism at the 1893 Parliament of
Religion in Chicago was out of order, a pure stroke of personal luck.

[¹⁵](#15a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.60.

[¹⁶](#16a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.61.

[¹⁷](#17a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.63.

[¹⁸](#18a)At least one Muslim reply is known.  Ram Swarup (*Ramakrishna
Mission*, p.11) quotes an article “Ramakrishna and Islam” from an
unnamed Bangladeshi journal, in which a Muslim author argues that Islam
does not allow you to “take a holiday and spend a few days as a Muslim”,
because “the practice of Islam lasts till death.  To embrace Islam and
then leave it makes a man an apostate”, an act which “is punished with
death”.

[¹⁹](#19a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.56.

[²⁰](#20a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.59. *Saurya*: devoted to *Sûrya*, the sun
as deity; *Ganapatya*: devoted to *Ganapati*/Ganesha, the
elephant-headed deity.

[²¹](#21a)S.P. Ray: *Wheel*, p.62.

[²²](#22a)Sic in Viswanathan Edakkandiyal: *Daddy, Am I a Hindu?*, p.
157.

[²³](#23a)Ram Swarup: *Ramkrishna Mission*, p.11.

[²⁴](#24a)Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission*, p.13. 

[²⁵](#25a)Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission*, p.12. 

[²⁶](#26a)Ram Swarup: *Ramakrishna Mission*, p.12.

[²⁷](#27a)Ram Swarup: Ramakrishna Mission, p.12, with reference to
Aurobindo’s *Uttarpara Speech*.  *Vâsudeva*, “son of Vasudeva”, is
Krishna’s patronym.

[²⁸](#28a)Details in M.D. McLean: “Are Ramakrishnaites Hindus?  Some
implications of recent litigation on the question”, in *South Asia*,
1991/2.

[²⁹](#29a)Quoted in *Hinduism Today*, Sep. 1995, p.1.

[³⁰](#30a)The international monthly *Hinduism Today* (Honolulu), Sep.
1995, captioned this news as “Ramakrishna Mission Wins!” (viz. wins back
its true Hindu identity).

[³¹](#31a)”India’s Supreme Court to RK Mission: You’re Hindus”,
*Hinduism Today*, Sep. 1995.

[³²](#32a) “India’s Supreme Court to RK.Mission: You’re Hindus”,
*Hinduism Today*, Sep. 1995.

[³³](#33a)Organiser published Ram Swarup’s initial comment on the
verdict on 13-8-1995 (also in *Observer of Business and Politics*:
“Faith denied or identity regained?”), Hiranmayananda’s reply on
24-9-1995, and Ram Swarup’s final rejoinder on 8-10-1995.  Reference is
to Vivekananda’s *Complete Works*, vol.3, p.368-69. Incidentally, no
less a secularist than Jawaharlal Nehru testifies (*Discovery of India*,
p.337) that Vivekananda was a “Hindu sannyasin” and that “in America, he
was called the ‘cyclonic Hindu’”.

[³⁴](#34a)Culled by the judges from the testimonial collection *The
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna*, then quoted by Ram Swarup in “Ramakrishna
Mission: identity recovered”, *Organiser*, 21-7-1996, written in reply
to a statement by RSS man P. Parameswaran, President of the Vivekananda
Kendra, who defended the RK Mission’s stand with reference to the
impression that its very existence was threatened.

[³⁵](#35a)Ram Swarup: “The RK Mission: judging the judgment”, guest
editorial in *Hinduism Today*, Sep. 1995.

[³⁶](#36a)Ram Swarup: “The RK Mission: judging the judgment”, guest
editorial in *Hinduism Today*, Sep. 1995.

[³⁷](#37a)Jagmohan: “Hinduism and Article 30”, *Organiser*, 6-8-1995.

[³⁸](#38a)Jagmohan: “Meaning, message and might of Hinduism”,
*Organiser*, 10-9-1995.

[³⁹](#39a)Related by Edward A. Gargar: “Peril to the Indian State: a
defiant Hindu fervor”, in Arvind Sharma: *Our Religions*, p. 54.

[⁴⁰](#40a)A more principled Arya separatism also exists among Arya Samaj
individuals, see D. Vable: *The Arya Samaj*, which emphasizes its
distinctive traits and its quarrels with traditionalists.  But Arya
Sarvadeshik Pratinidhi Sabha president Vandematharam Ramachandra Rao
assured me (interview, 1995) that the official position still defines
the Arya Samaj as a reform movement of Hinduism, whatever its legal
status for practical (educational) purposes may be.

[⁴¹](#41a)Via Pali ayya and Apabhramsha *ajje*, we see the word evolve
to  become the modern honorific suffix -*jî*, as in Gândhjî-*jî*.  It is
well-known in Buddhist expressions like the *Chatvâri-ârya-satyâni*, the
“four noble truths”, the *Arya-ashtângika-mârga*, the “noble eightfold
path”, and *Arya Dharmna*.

[⁴²](#42a)A. Peaslee: *Constitutions of Nations*, p.772 and 778.

[⁴³](#43a)Far from marking a religion as non-Hindu, tall claims of
universalism are typical of modern Hinduism, e.g. this one by Prof. M.M.
Sankhdher (“Musings on Hinduism”, *Organiser*, 7-12-1997): “Hinduism is
an all-embracing, comprehensive, universal, human religion which
preaches love for all creations-humans, animals, plants and inanimates.”

[⁴⁴](#44a)”Why do Hindus say, ‘I’m not a Hindu’?”, *Hinduism Today*,
October 1998,

[⁴⁵](#45a)Frank Morales: “Appalled and disgusted”, letter, *Hinduism
Today*, January 1999.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------


