+++
title = "98 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
David Lelyveld, **Aligarh's First Generation: Muslim Solidarity in
British India** (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978). Very
slightly edited for classroom use by FWP (and diacritics lost). This
excerpt is made available through the generous permission both of the
author and of \*[Princeton University
Press](http://www.pupress.princeton.edu/)\*. The book is now in print
through \*[Oxford University Press India](http://www.oup.co.uk/)\*.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter II, *Sharif* Culture and British Rule  
Part One: Growing Up *Sharif*

*As if in a cage a captive bird*  
*still gathered twigs for its nest. --Ghalib*  


ONE part of a child's initiation into the social categories and
relationships of nineteenth century sharif culture was the architecture
that surrounded him or, rather differently, her. In a royal
establishment, a city ward, an old fortress town, or a peasant village,
the living places of the rich and even the relatively poor shared, with
varying degrees of elaboration, a common paradigm of rooms and open
places, walls and curtains, rooftops and doorways. Learning who might go
where and under what circumstances provided a whole structure of
assumptions about authority and subordination, group bonds and
exclusions. Learning how you yourself fit into this living space had a
good deal to do with defining who you were.**[/1/](#n01)**

One grew up into a life contained, centered on a courtyard that was open
to the sky but blocked on all four sides from any opening to the world
beyond. The courtyard might be large or small, crowded or lonely,
squalid or luxurious; the ground might be covered with marble, brick, or
a mixture of earth and dung. Often there was a tree in the center and,
**\[\[36\]\]** sometimes, a well. On the margins could be broad,
handsome verandahs set off with richly decorated columns and delicately
scalloped arches; or dingy, sunless rooms made of earthen blocks. The
structure rising above the courtyard could be one, two, even three
stories high. But in all cases the building was a fortress, closed off
and protected from the outside world by blank, windowless walls and a
substantial, well-secured entrance way.

Within these boundaries one discovered flexible arrangements for
channeling the movement of people so as to prevent some of them from
being seen by others-- a heavy cloth curtain, the pardah, hung from the
archways, or light bamboo blinds that let in air but shut off light;
rooms with doors on three sides so that different sorts of people might
come and go without crossing paths; readily moveable bedsteads and
cushions to transform the function of a given space; passageways in the
walls or over the rooftops leading to a whole network of connected
houses within the same *muhallah* \[neighborhood\].

Such was the *mahal khanah*, the palace, as it was called even in modest
homes, or more commonly the *zananah*, the women's place. It was a
layout that clearly embodied an "inner space" image of womanhood,
something to be protected because it was vulnerable, and also because it
was valuable: like food, jewelry, children, and what they all
signified-- honor, *'izzat*. For it was in terms of these possessions
that groups interacted and status or moral worth was assigned. Within
these walls a hierarchy of women passed their lives, arrayed in
expensive ornaments, the senior wife and mother seated on a *masnad*, a
carpeted throne. Women often spoke special dialects, and sometimes
adhered to different sects from the male members of their
family.**[/2/](#n02)** Poor women and **\[\[37\]\]** female servants
might have to go out from time to time, covered from head to foot in
great white tent-Iike sheets; others were carried by covered palanquin
or bullock cart for formal visits on special occasions. But the ideal
was to stay at home from marriage to death, visited, not visiting;
carried in, as the saying went, in a bridal palanquin, carried out in a
coffin.

Men lived in a different world, a big, bad world that required strength
and cunning for survival. In contrast to the purported innocence of
female life, men stood constantly on the brink of violence and their own
evil impulses. Or perhaps women were not so innocent after all; perhaps
it was the men who had to be protected from the overwhelming sensuality
of feminine sexuality-- such at least was the constant lament of male
poets and the admonition of male moralists. Women were the occasion for
a man's weakness; they were avoided and frequently resented. Specific
rules of female separation, also called *pardah*, differed from family
to family; but the general principle was that a woman might not be seen
by any potential mate. That might limit her to fathers, brothers,
husband, and sons; in some families even the husband's father and
brothers were out of bounds.

But if women were secluded in the mahal, men were excluded from it,
permitted to enter only with due warning and required to leave when
their presence was inappropriate.**[/3/](#n03)** If wealthy, a man might
have his own *divan khanah*, a hall of audience suggestive of a royal
court, in a separate section of. the building complex or even in a
totally different building, across the road.**[/4/](#n04)** Or it might
be a tiny room off the side of **\[\[38\]\]** the entrance way. A poorer
man would have to take a bamboo stool out into the street, one of those
narrow lanes of blank walls that snaked through any city or town, and
there join the ranks of hawkers, beggars, and, at least in poetry,
forlorn lovers who continually passed by. The alternative was to go off
to a mosque, shop, government office, or brothel to engage in prayer,
work, entertainment, or the rich art of conversation, according to the
decorum of the time and place.**[/5/](#n05)**

A young boy did not learn about that separate men's world until he was
old enough to join it, a gradual transition somewhere between the ages
of five and ten, well after acquiring all the preliminary skills of
walking, talking, and eating. These he learned primarily in the world of
women. And in later years the zananah would remain for him an image of
refuge and nurture as well as of childish impulsiveness, often little
more than a memory after he had lost his right to be there all the time
and was forced to deal with the life outside and sometimes far away.

But the zananah was hardly isolated. It is difficult to fix a concept of
"household composition" on the rambling network of courtyards and
rooftops within which woman's society operated, but there was certainly
a great variety of people coming and going throughout the
day.**[/6/](#n06)** Eating, sleeping, playing, cooking, sewing, and
praying were all activities that could go on in one of a number of
courtyards, rooms, rooftops, or verandahs, depending on the day-to-day
relationships of the people involved. These people included an array of
relatives, each set off in an elaborate and well-calibrated system of
status positions. In all but the poorest homes there were usually
servants, often quite a number of them. Long-term guests and poor but
"respectable" personages with **\[\[39\]\]** no place else to go were
often put up in a spirit of almost limitless hospitality.**[/7/](#n07)**
A child growing up into this world would have to learn to make intricate
distinctions in the hierarchy of people around him; even the language
embodied these distinctions in terms of address, verb forms, and
formulas of politeness. The variety of configurations possible in this
web of domestic relations would probably go some way to explaining the
considerable differences of individual personality encountered in this
milieu.

Sayyid Ahmad Khan was raised in the house of his maternal grandfather,
Khvajah Fariduddin Ahmad, at the southern edge of old Delhi. Such an
arrangement was slightly uncommon in a culture where women normally
married into their husband's paternal household and wife-giving
indicated lower status than wife-taking. In this case, however, Khvajah
Farid was able to compensate for relatively lower status-- he was not a
Sayyid (descendant of the Prophet) and his grandfather had come to Delhi
as a Kashmiri trader-- by wealth, prominence in the Mughal court and
Delhi intellectual circles, and especially, a Sufi bond with the father
of his daughter's husband. His son-in-Iaw, Mir Muttaqi, was apparently
happy to marry into a well-established household in return for freedom
to pursue an unconventional life as courtier, mystic, swimmer, and
master archer. For Khvajah Farid the arrangement not only meant a little
bit of social climbing, it was also a way to keep his favorite daughter
at home.**[/8/](#n08)**

That home was not a single building, but a complex of houses, some
connected, some separated by a narrow lane. **\[\[40\]\]** Khvajah Farid
would come to the mahal for his morning meal when the whole family-- his
two sons and three daughters, their wives and husbands and their
numerous children-- ate together, each getting personal attention from
the patriarch. In the evening his daughters would serve him separately
in the *divan khanah*. Then he would hear his grandchildren recite their
lessons and correct them on their manners and dress.**[/9/](#n09)**

Such a household was well stocked with servants: nurse-maids, cooks,
grooms, bearers, sweepers, water carriers, washermen, palanquin
carriers, a barber; such servants were likely to be attached to the
family on a relatively exclusive and long-term basis. *Sharafat* as
opposed to mere wealth entailed treating servants according to rank--
often the terminology was borrowed from coveted positions among the
Mughal nobility-- with the proper modulation of authority and
consideration. Once when Sayyid Ahmad was eleven or twelve he struck an
old family servant; his mother had him turned out of the house. An aunt
(his mother's sister) hid him in another house for three days, then
interceded on his behalf: he was allowed back only after begging
forgiveness from the servant.**[/10/](#n10)**

Sayyid Ahmad grew up in a well-populated world; his maternal
grandfather, his mother, his mother's brothers, his older brother, some
of the servants and, more distantly, his father, all represented various
levels of authority over him. His status among the children of the house
is not clear: normally a child visiting his maternal grandfather's house
is treated as a privileged guest. His mother is in her own home and does
not have to deal with the hostile authority of a
mother-in-law.**[/11/](#n11)** On the other hand, the absence of a
household in the paternal line may have represented some kind of
**\[\[41\]\]** deprivation, a sense that one's father's line lacked
authority and security. Such a background may have something to do with
why Sayyid Ahmad sought his career outside Delhi, raising his own
children in a whole string of north Indian towns where he was posted for
three- and four-year terms.

Such speculations are the stuff of full-blown biography, but the data
for interpreting the general cultural patterns of family life for a
significant population are sparse and difficult to come by. Even among
the handful of available biographical sources, however, there is a wide
range of variation with regard to the kinds of people a child would have
to deal with as "significant others." Mushtaq Husain, Sayyid Ahmad's
co-worker from Amroha, was also raised in his maternal grandfather's
house, an only child after his father's early death.**[/12/](#n12)**
Altaf Husain Hali of Panipat, poet of the Aligarh movement, lost his
parents at an early age, one to death and the other to insanity, and was
raised by his considerably older brother, who was married to his
mother's sister's daughter. The same elder brother was "father" to
Hali's eldest son; Hali even called the child "nephew" (brother's
son).**[/13/](#n13)** Agha Mirza of Delhi spent his earliest years in
the house of his father's sister. When he died, the family shifted to
the house of his father's elder brother, his *bare abba* (big father);
but the boy's mother, a granddaughter of Khvajah Farid, spent much of
her time with her own side of the family. The uncle was indeed a
magnified father: once when Agha Mirza was hit for disturbing some of
his father's work, the uncle came to his defense, brandishing a stick.
In 1857, when Agha Mirza was nine, the British captured Delhi; his uncle
was shot as a rebel and died a Muslim martyr. The family fled in
confusion to the protection, first of the mother's sister's husband in
Alwar State, then to another father's brother, a pro-British official in
Oudh.**[/14/](#n14)**

**\[\[42\]\]** One is hard pressed to find cases of children raised
simply by father and mother, either in this older generation of the
first half of the nineteenth century or in the first generation of
Aligarh students. Shaikh Masud Ali was one of the first students at
Aligarh College. His uncle (father's younger brother), who had two sons
of his own, took responsibility for him when his father died during his
infancy. Both father and uncle had been in British service in Delhi, but
also had some small property and numerous kinsmen in the town of
Fatehpur, near Lucknow. For some years Masud Ali's mother stayed in the
household of her brother-in-law; she too was from the Fatehpur lineage.
But when Masud Ali was six, his maternal grandfather came to get mother
and son and bring them back to the *vatan* \[homeland\] for an extended
visit. For several years the boy traveled with his mother from one rural
relative to another, then rejoined his uncle, who was then in service in
Dujanna, a small princely state in the Punjab.**[/15/](#n15)**

Sayyid Riza Ali, another student of Aligarh's first generation, was born
in 1880 in his paternal grandfather's house, a small two-story building
in the *qasbah* of Kandarkhi, near Moradabad. Apart from that house,
there was also a *mardanah*, a separate building for men. Riza Ali's
father was the only child of the grandfather's first wife, who died
young, but that wife's mother still lived in a little *kacca*
(unfinished) house next door. When his second wife died, the mother of
eight children, the grandfather married a third time. Like the
grandfather, all three wives belonged to the lineage of Sayyids that had
settled in the *qasbah* two hundred years before and now lived side by
side, visiting each other, sharing meals, intermarrying, and sometimes
engaging in bitter disputes. Most of them were cultivators, religious
teachers, and soldiers, **\[\[43\]\]** but the grandfather had managed
to achieve relative wealth by establishing a modest sugar-processing
operation. There is no information about other marriages in the
grandfather's household, but Riza Ali's mother came from a previously
unrelated family of Sayyids in a distant village near Bareilly. An
outsider, she somehow communicated to her son an unwillingness to accept
food from anybody but herself, and used that as an excuse not to attend
weddings and celebrations or otherwise accept hospitality from her
husband's relatives; she had to stay home to feed him. When Riza Ali was
six she took him off for a long visit to her native village. The
grandfather died two years later, and shortly after that the brothers
quarreled, divided the property-- houses, land, and sugar business-- and
established separate households. The family of the grandfather's young
widow, who was childless, instituted a litigation that lasted for twenty
years.**[/16/](#n16)**

Particularly in rural areas, where agricultural land and political
consolidation hung in the balance, social bonds based on a shared
genealogical identity could be extensive and deeply rooted. In many
cases, however, such unity was more an historical memory-- or
fabrication-- than a resource to be summoned up in the interests of
mutual security and ambition. Aftab Ahmad Khan belonged to a cadet
lineage of Yusufzai Pathans, attached to the Navabs of Kunjpura, a
defunct little kingdom north of Delhi, dating back to the early
eighteenth century. Although living close beside their wealthier
kinsmen, Aftab's own branch of the family was landless and derived its
income from service outside the *qasbah*. Aftab's grandfather had been a
courtier in Kapurthala State; Aftab's father's elder brother was a sepoy
who rebelled and disappeared in 1857. Ghulam Ahmad Khan, Aftab's father,
ultimately received high office in Gwalior. He left two younger
brothers, a wife, and two sons in Kunjpura.**[/17/](#n17)** Fakhruddin
Ahmad Khan also came from a large rural lineage, **\[\[44\]\]** Lodi
Pathans of Jullundhur District, and also had a father named Ghulam Ahmad
Khan who held important official posts far away from home, as a Punjab
Revenue officer and later an official in Kashmir. But in this case wife
and children tagged along on the father's peripatetic career. There was
one other difference between the family backgrounds of Aftab Ahmad and
Fakhruddin: Aftab's mother came from an unrelated family in
Muzzafarnagar District; Fakhruddin's was a cousin (her husband's
father's brother's daughter).**[/18/](#n18)**

From these few examples one discovers numerous variations in household
type that were possible within the same culture: the sibling position of
one's father; whether or not the paternal grandparents are alive and on
the scene; whether one's mother is a close relative on the paternal or
maternal side, or had no previous relation with her husband; the
proximity of other related households, and the extent to which they
share social and economic activities; the presence of elder brothers and
their wives and children; the career of the household head, and whether
he is absent or present; whether the family wealth can support a large
household and many servants. Some of these variations are linked to
birth and mortality; others to the economic resources available to a
kinship unit. There was room for disagreement about how widely economic
resources should be spread and at what point a joint holding in house or
land should be divided. One also comes across strong statements for and
against marrying cousins.**[/19/](#n19)** Such controversies were
possible within the bounds of *sharafat*. In the absence of data on the
frequency of particular patterns, one can only note scattered
biographical variation, and suggest that such variation was itself a
characteristic of the culture. Individuals did not grow up in
**\[\[45\]\]** identical family contexts. The emergence of significant
personality differences in what was supposed to be a group-oriented
society may be one reason, among others, for the endemic quarrels and
infighting one so frequently encounters.

\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~

There was, however, a well-plotted scenario for growing up, designed in
the case of male children to lead them from the protection and nurture
of the *zananah* to the battlefield of the outside world of men. "The
best time of all in a man's life is that of childhood," wrote Nazir
Ahmad of Delhi in 1869. "At that age he has no kind of
anxiety."**[/20/](#n20)** A child was born into a family after nine
months of rituals and omens regarding life and death for mother and
child and determination that the child would be a boy. For the mother it
was a period of pain and sickness-- she was often just barely past
puberty at the birth of her first child-- but the act of giving birth,
especially to a boy, was the ultimate fulfillment of her role in life,
the ultimate source of her recognition as a person. When a boy was born,
the household announced it by shooting off cannons or, at least, an old
rifle, by way of expressing proud triumph-- and to accustom the child to
the sound of gunshot from the start.**[/21/](#n21)** A midwife brought
the infant out to the men, and one of them-- a religious teacher, a
senior member of the family or, sometimes, a boy-- uttered the call to
prayer in the baby's left ear and the Islamic credo in the right, this
accompanied by a taste of honey.**[/22/](#n22)**

Loving devotion of mother for child was a hallowed ideal, but the
particular weight and manner of that relationship was hardly uniform in
the culture. A mother like Riza Ali's, who **\[\[46\]\]** came as a
stranger to the house of her father-in-law, had few alternative points
of focus for her attention and concern. Sayyid Ahmad's mother, on the
other hand, had her father, brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces all
about her. Similarly, a mother who was her husband's father's brother's
daughter, like the mother of Fakhruddin Ahmad, or who had some other
close kinship tie in addition to marriage, would not be so dependent on
her role as mother for recognition as a family member. Furthermore, in
many households there were other women to take up and diffuse the
mother's role: the child's grandmother, aunts, elder sisters. When a
mother died or was unable to nurse, another woman was usually available.
For example, a child might be nursed by his father's mother, sharing the
breast with the father's younger sister, and the two infants would grow
up calling each other brother and sister.**[/23/](#n23)** In wealthier
families there was usually a wet nurse to spare the actual mother the
burden of total devotion and special diet; such a wet nurse became a
permanent member of the family and object of the child's lifelong
devotion, her own children sometimes growing up in the household as
lesser brothers and sisters.**[/24/](#n24)**

For at least two years the infant had a mother-figure totally available,
at least as a source of nourishment. Whether that availability was
accompanied by warmth, playfulness, clinging attachment, or some other
personal quality was a matter of wide variation. Male biographical
literature portrays mothers as paragons of self-sacrifice, loving
devotion, **\[\[47\]\]** and profound religious piety, but there are
occasional hints of callousness and neglect.**[/25/](#n25)**

For the first three days an infant was fed on a medicinal mixture
prepared by the midwife and sometimes laced with opium; nursing started
on the fourth day, inaugurated by a crowded, joyful women's party in the
zananah when mother and child were put on display. This was followed by
a series of similar gatherings in the zananah for bathing the child,
shaving its head, placing the baby in a special cradle, or celebrating
his first handclaps, his first nonmilk diet (at seven months) , his
first tooth, and the first time he crawled--all accompanied by music,
the presentation of gifts, feasting, processions, and food for the
poor.**[/26/](#n26)**

All such celebration was hedged, however, with the persistent fear of
early death and a large repertoire of techniques to prevent it. The
infant was the embodiment of vulnerability, and proper care consisted of
sparing him pain and responding to his desires. Dressed only in a thin
loose shirt, but wrapped warmly in a quilt during cold weather, the
infant spent his first few months reclining except when being nursed. To
move him around was considered a cruel disturbance.**[/27/](#n27)** On
the other hand, it is likely that no one interfered in the child's
exploration of his own powers of movement, making sounds, regulating his
bladder and bowels. So while there was protection from pain there was
little social constraint on an infant's search for autonomy.

Many children continued to nurse after growing teeth and into the third
or fourth year, while gradually developing alternative nourishment such
as rice, lentils, and buffalo milk. But at least in Delhi there was a
decisive moment of weaning, and even a ceremony in which relatives from
both mother and father's families gathered and the child was
**\[\[48\]\]** offered a dish of dates or date-like candies. If he
picked up one, that meant his weaning would go smoothly with only one
day of fussing; if he picked up more, the household was in for a long
siege. The wet nurse, if there was one, got money and a dress, and there
were gifts to the other servants as well. So the painful transition of
weaning was accompanied by a reaffirmation of family solidarity.
Nevertheless, it was the beginning of adversity; the breast wasn't
simply denied but covered with the juice of a bitter plant so the child
would learn that what was once a source of pleasure could turn in the
end to pain. As Nazir Ahmad of Delhi wrote in 1869:

> So long as the child is very small the mother nurses it, and carries
> it about with her wherever she goes. She gives up her whole night's
> rest, while she is patting the baby to sleep. But when the child is
> old enough to begin eating "khichri," the mother leaves off nursing it
> altogether, and that milk which she has gone on giving to it so fondly
> for many years she now withholds from it persistently and sternly. She
> applies bitter tasting things (to keep the child away), and if the
> child is pertinacious she slaps and scolds it.**[/28/](#n28)**

British commentators on Indian society frequently complained about "the
enervating and stultifying influence of the Zunana" upon the developing
character of Indian males. According to Sleeman, who as a man was not in
a position to benefit from direct observation, "The sons are tyrannised
over through youth by their mothers, who endeavour to subdue their
spirit to the yoke...; and they remain through manhood timid, ignorant,
and altogether unfitted for the conduct of public
affairs."**[/29/](#n29)** A contrasting observation was that Indian
children were themselves the tyrants, taking advantage **\[\[49\]\]** of
a mother's desire to please them and satisfy their every wish. Thus
Margaret Morison, wife of an Aligarh professor, complained that children
lacked firm discipline and fixed schedules.**[/30/](#n30)** Indian
critics of contemporary social life, whether influenced by British
standards or not, often took up the theme that *zananah* women were
inadequate as raisers of children because of undue leniency aggravated
by lack of education.**[/31/](#n31)** On the other hand, there are
accounts of mothers, such as Sayyid Ahmad Khan's and Mushtaq Husain's,
who are portrayed as firm and skillful disciplinarians.**[/32/](#n32)**
In both those cases the mothers were in their own father's house, and
there is reason to believe that the authority of a woman was a function
of her security in the household as a lineal member of the kindred.

Sharif child-rearing assumed that a child progressed from helpless
vulnerability to arrogant willfulness; it was the role of male society
to tame and redirect this development by imposing an adult relationship
on the child that played down love and affection and emphasized stern
authority. A father would often be addressed by a title such as Huzur
(literally, "the presence"), and his authority was supposedly
absolute.**[/33/](#n33)** "No boy ever dared leave the compound without
the permission of his father." Such was the norm, if not universal
practice.**[/34/](#n34)**

As a young boy began to emerge from the zananah, he **\[\[50\]\]** would
at the same time begin to experience the competitiveness and rough and
tumble excitement of the world of men and boys. Ceremonies marking the
steps in this transition were held in the presence of men, although
women had separate celebrations. First came the *bi'smi'llah* ("in the
name of God"), preferably at the age of four years, four months, four
days and even four hours, when the child was taught the opening words of
the Qur'an, often against the background of lavish feasting and
entertainment by musicians and dancers. When the child finished reading
through the whole of the Qur'an, there was a similar celebration called
*hidiyah*. In the midst of his schooling, preferably at age seven, or at
least before puberty, a Muslim boy would undergo circumcision, honored
once again by a great celebration of feasting, gift giving, and
procession through the streets.**[/35/](#n35)** The point of this
practice was to place male sexuality within the bounds of God's covenant
with the Prophet Ibrahim; circumcision, like discipline and education,
was designed to tame a boy's impulses and subject him to divine law.

Teachers, like fathers, were sources of strict discipline and objects of
formal respect. But there were different kinds of teachers, designated
not only by what they taught, but by their social status in relation to
the students. The earliest lessons in Qur'an, the recitation and
memorization of the Arabic scriptures without benefit of translation,
could be taught at home by a paid employee, called a *miyanji* or, if
female, an *ustani*. Or the child could be sent out of the house to
learn Quran from the *qari sahib*, the public reciter of a mosque, or to
the house of the teacher, who could be doing the work as a living or a
philanthropic act. At the *hidiyah* ceremony the teacher would receive a
shawl and money.**[/36/](#n36)**

**\[\[51\]\]** Recitation of Qur'an, often accompanied by chanting and
memorization, as well as learning the movements of the body associated
with prayer, were all formidable achievements for a young child. He was
now able to do what adults could do in this most important aspect of
life, and had in his power skills that united him with the great world
community of Islam. Interpreting these actions-- learning, for example,
the meaning of the words he recited-- was a matter to be taken up in
later life, if at all. But for a child of seven or eight it must have
been extremely gratifying to stand side by side with the men of the
community and side by side to prostrate himself in prayer. Such a child
participated only to the extent of his inclination: the full religious
obligation of adulthood came only with puberty, as signaled by a boy's
first nocturnal emission.**[/37/](#n37)**

After going through the Qur'an, the next step was usually some sort of
education in Persian, usually with a few other children in a *maktab*.
The *maktab* was a makeshift arrangement located on the verandah or in
the courtyard of the teacher or some benefactor. Often it was in the
home of some of the children, but neighboring students, sometimes from
among the poor, could attend as well, paying the teacher a separate fee
or just allowed to sit in. There was often a mixture of Muslim and Hindu
boys, but not of boys and girls. Maulvi Zain ul-Abdin, a founder of
Aligarh College, started his *maktab* education in the house of a Hindu
benefactor in Machlishahar. Before entering Aligarh, Masud Ali had
frequently shifted from place to place; some of his education was with
village relatives, some with Hindu Khatris in Delhi, some with the sons
of the Navab of Dujanna. There is little evidence that there was a
feeling of solidarity among the students **\[\[52\]\]** in a *maktab*,
each of whom proceeded separately at his own pace through the course of
study.**[/38/](#n38)**

The course seems to have been fairly standardized: first learning to
recognize the letters of the Persian alphabet by sight and sound, a task
essentially accomplished by a Muslim who had already done his Qur'an,
then memorization of passages out of Sa'adi and other Persian classical
writers, but without translation. Only after that would a child start
writing, spending three to six hours a day at painstaking calligraphy,
written first on dirt, then on a wooden slate, finally on paper.
Gradually the teacher would introduce the translation of the Persian or,
at least, his approximation of it. Next a child would take up Persian
composition, imitating models that were often by Indian, even Hindu,
authors-- in formal and informal correspondence, petition writing, old
Mughal imperial proclamations, *shikastah* shorthand, and *raqm*
accounting, as well as all the elaborate forms of polite address.
Wealthier youths had special tutors for etiquette, and the basic
*maktab* education could also be supplemented by study with a master of
calligraphy. Arabic grammar and literature was often part of a child's
studies, for Hindus as well as Muslims. This system of education always
consisted of reading classical texts with one's teacher; rather than
grades, classes, or degrees a person's education was signified by the
books he had read and the teachers he had read them with. As for written
Urdu, it could be extrapolated from the classical languages, that is,
using the Persian script to approximate the vernacular, a task that
required no formal instruction.**[/39/](#n39)**

**\[\[53\]\]** Teachers, of course, were of uneven quality, some of them
highly learned men, themselves the students of famous teachers; others,
sadistic charlatans who knew little beyond the alphabet and the use of a
switch.**[/40/](#n40)** Whether a boy decided to continue with this
experience depended partly on the prompting he got from his elders, but
also very much on his own inclination or *shauq* for a particular aspect
of learning. If he had such an inclination, he would often go in search
of an *ustad*, the master of a particular area of knowledge or art, and
seek to be accepted as his *shagird*, or disciple. Such a teacher was
considered to be a second father.**[/41/](#n41)** Sayyid Ahmad Khan got
his mother's brother to teach him mathematics; then he went to a famous
*hakim* to learn the Arabic tradition of Greek medicine.**[/42/](#n42)**
Hali defied his family and slipped away from Panipat to Delhi to pursue
his gift for poetry with the greatest poet of the age,
Ghalib.**[/43/](#n43)** Sami Ullah Khan became a disciple of the famous
Delhi *mufti* Sadruddin Azurdah, who taught him Islamic theology and
law.**[/44/](#n44)** A person's intellectual ancestry became as
important as his family background in establishing his claim to honor.
Honored teachers might be associated with an endowed institution, a
madrasah, like Farangi Mahal in Lucknow, but they were often private
persons who received no income from their teaching. Often poor students
received stipends, called *vazifah*s.**[/45/](#n45)**

A religious teacher from among the *'ulama* was often revered as a
spiritual guide (*pir* or *murshid*), whose knowledge touched the
disciple with a kind of spiritual electricity passed from generation to
generation. Sayyid Ahmad's father was **\[\[54\]\]** part of such a
mystical genealogy, called a *silsilah*. The religious establishment
where one entered such a communion and learned its discipline was called
a *khanqah*, and one's *murshid*, like an *ustad*, was yet another
"father" in a person's life.**[/46/](#n46)**

The relationship of *ustad* and *shagird* extended from knowledge,
*'ilm*, to art or skill, *fan*. The same uncle who taught Sayyid Ahmad
mathematics had studied archery with Sayyid Ahmad's
father.**[/47/](#n47)** Swordsmanship, swimming, horseback riding, and
exercises with Indian clubs all represented carefully acquired military
skills. Wrestling was another art learned from an *ustad* in a kind of
gymnasium or pit called an *akhara*.**[/48/](#n48)** In the same
category of *fan* were music and painting-- Sayyid Ahmad's uncle was a
devotee of both-- and here, too, a teacher would only take on a disciple
who seemed to have the *shauq* for learning in a spirit of total
devotion and painstaking imitation.**[/49/](#n49)**

In contrast to all this seriously acquired learning, however, there were
activities devoted to pure pleasure, in which a man, young or old, could
release all those carefully cultivated powers of aggression. A typical
pastime was flying kites from the roof of the house: the kite string
would be coated with pieces of broken glass, and the object of the game
was to get your own kite up above competing kites sent up from the other
roofs in the neighborhood, then to pull down fast and cut away as many
strings as you could. Even this sport could be a serious enterprise:
Sayyid Ahmad's uncle, the devotee of music, also wrote a treatise on
kite making.**[/50/](#n50)** Similarly, many people kept pigeons on
their roofs and **\[\[55\]\]** trained them to obey commands: then one
would send the pigeons up and try to draw away birds from the
neighboring flocks. Board games like chess or parchesi, team games like
*kabaddi,* gambling games like cockfighting, all involved intense and
aggressive competition. For the puritanical, for whom such pastimes were
frivolous, there were equally fierce competitions in poetry, the
*musha'irah*, and scholastic disputation, the *munazarah*. In all these
examples it was individual virtuosity that was being asserted as the
measure of social worth.**[/51/](#n51)**

But if this social environment sometimes seethed with rivalry, there
were certainly occasions for warm friendship. The favorite pleasures
were those of the *mahfil*, the social gathering, though they tended to
be idealized as the glory of an irretrievable past, a time of emperors
and navabs. Such gatherings cut across lines of kinship and religion,
but were bound together by an identity of cultural style. Sayyid Ahmad
recalled occasions when his mother's brother would hold colorful musical
entertainments, or would take him along to the home of a wealthy Hindu
connoisseur to listen to the amateur performances of the *sharif* and
the professional singing and dancing of the leading courtesans of the
city.**[/52/](#n52)** Pious Muslims avoided such courtly displays, but
still cherished the spirit of the *mahfil*, a time when friends could be
relaxed, sitting together, exchanging witty remarks, philosophic
speculations, poetic repartee. The *huqqah* would be passed around,
there would be Mughal cuisine, some sweets, *pan*, perhaps a special
kind of mango. Each remark was supposed to be like *pan*, an exquisitely
folded betel leaf, to be tasted and savored in a rich "flower-shower of
conversation."**[/53/](#n53)** The spirit of friendship and equality was
communicated in a vocabulary of social precedence: one's own house was a
hovel, **\[\[56\]\]** the house of another was a palace; one's own
remarks were humble submissions, one's partner in conversation issued
only commands. But these formulas of politeness were mutual, and a young
boy sitting quietly in the midst of such a gathering would only
gradually learn the intricate subtleties of social
precedence.**[/54/](#n54)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

**[/1/](#m01)** I have used a fairly wide range of sources in this
attempt to explore the general outlines of sharif culture. These sources
include general accounts of manners and customs, biographical
literature, fiction, and interviews of descendants of Aligarh's first
student generation. The references given below are intended to be
illustrative rather than comprehensive. Other sources will be found in
the bibliography.  
**[/2/](#m02)** 'Abdul Halim Sharar, *Guzashtah Lakhnau* \[Olden
Lucknow\] (Lucknow: Nasim Book Depot, 1965 \[first published in
1914-1916\]), p. 119; for a fictional attempt to reproduce the women's
dialect of Agra see 'Ismat Chughtai, "Cauthi ka Jora," *Readings in
Urdu: Prose and Poetry*, ed. C. M. Naim (Honolulu: East-West Center
Press, 1965), pp. 1-17. The families of Khvajah Altaf Husain Hali of
Panipat and the Sayyids of Marehra are well-known examples of
Sunni-Shi'ah division by sex.  
**[/3/](#m03)** Vreede-de Stuers, *Parda*, p. 43, though the author is
quick to add that the burden of isolation remains on the women; see also
Hanna Papanek, "Purdah: Separate Worlds and Symbolic Shelter,"
*Comparative Studies in Society and History*, XV (1973), 289-325.  
**[/4/](#m04)** Diagram of the family home of Sayyid Ahmad Khan prepared
for me by his great-grandson, Hashim Muhammad Ali of Karachi (September
1969); see also Mohamed Ali, *My Life: A Fragment* (Lahore: Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, 1942), pp. 11-12.  
**[/5/](#m05)** Sharar, *Lakhnau*, p. 301; see also Ralph Russell and
Khurshidul Islam, *Three Mughal Poets* (Cambridge Harvard University
Press, 1968); Mirza Mohammad Hadi Ruswa, *Umrao Jan Ada*, tr Khushwant
Singh and M. A. Husaini (Bombay. Orient Longmans, 1961).  
**[/6/](#m06)** British census takers were hard pressed to deal with the
category of household composition (Ibbetson, pp 40-42)  
**[/7/](#m07)** Sarvar ul-Mulk \[Agha Mirza Beg\], *Karnamah-i Sarvari*
(Aligarh: Muslim University, 1933), pp. 2-5; the English version is
Nawab Serverul-Mulk, *My Life*, tr. Niwab Jivan Yar Jung Bahadur
(London: Arthur H. Stockwell, n.d.), pp. 12-15; see also E. M. Forster,
*Abinger Harvest* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, n.d.), pp.
315-318.  
**[/8/](#m08)** Khvajah Altaf Husain Hali, *Hayat-i javid* (Lahore:
A'inah-i Adab, 1966 \[originally published in 1901\]), pp. 65-85; Hali's
discussion of Sayyid Ahmad's childhood draws largely from Sayyid Ahmad's
own biography of Khvajah Farid, *Sirat-i Faridiyah* (Karachi: Pak
Academy, 1964 \[originally published in 1896\]); I am also indebted to
Hashim Muhammad Ali for discussing the family history with me.  
**[/9/](#m09)** Sayyid Abmad, *Sirat-i Faridiya*h, pp. 124-125.  
**[/10/](#m10)** lbid., pp. 136-137; cf. Mubammad Zaka' Ullah,
*Savanih-i 'umri Haji Maulvi Muhammad Sami' Ullah Khan Bahadur*
(Hyderabad: Nur ul-Islam, 1909), pp. 20-21.  
**[/11/](#m11)** See Sayyid Riza 'Ali, *A'mal namah* (Delhi: Hindustan
Publishers, 1943), pp. 21-22.  
**[/12/](#m12)** Mubammad Ikramullah Khan, *Viqar-i Hayat* (Aligarh:
Muslim University, 1925), p. 2.  
**[/13/](#m13)** Salihah 'Abid Husain, *Yadgar-i Hali*, 2d ed (A1igarh:
Anjuman-i Taraqqi-i Urdu \[1955\]), pp. 26-27, 33.  
**[/14/](#m14)** Sarvar u1-Mulk, *Karnamah*, pp. 5-6, 11. The English
translation omits reference to the martyrdom. A Muslim martyr goes
directly to Paradise without waiting for the Day of Judgment.  
**[/15/](#m15)** Mas'ud 'Ali Mabvi, *Kitab-i makhdum zadgan-i Fatehpur*
( \[Hyderabad?, 1946?\]), II, 143-158. I am indebted to Mashfiq Khwaja
of the Anjuman-i Taraqqi-i Urdu, Karachi, and Brigadier Kirmani, also of
Karachi, for loaning me copies of this privately printed family
history.  
**[/16/](#m16)** Riza 'Ali, *A'mal namah*, pp. 7-12, 30-32.  
**[/17/](#m17)** Habibullah Khan, *Hayat-i Aftab* (Allahabad: Asrar
Karimi Press, (1947), pp. 1-5.  
**[/18/](#m18)** Mushtaq Ahmad Khan, *Hayat-i Fakhr* (Lahore: Nuqush
Press, 1966), pp. 4-12.  
**[/19/](#m19)** For an argument in favor of marrying outside the family
see Nazir Ahmad, *The Bride's Mirror or Miratu l-Arus*, tr. by G. E.
Ward (London: Henry Frowde, 1899), p. 160; for a family dispute on the
issue see Mas'ud 'Ali, *Kitab-i makhdum*, II, 123.  
**[/20/](#m20)** Nazir Ahmad, *The Bride's Mirror*, p. 20.  
**[/21/](#m21)** This particular practice was terminated after 1857,
when the British disarmed the population. But people could still use
firecrackers.  
**[/22/](#m22)** For birth customs in different localities, see Mrs.
Meer Hasan Ali, *Observations on the Mussulmauns of India* (London:
Parbury, Allen, and Co., 1832), II, 1-13; Jaffur Shureef,
*Qanoon-e-lslam*, 2d ed. (Madras: I. Higginbotham, 1863), pp. 1-4;
Sayyid Ahmad Dehlvi, *Rasum-i Dehli* (Rampur: Kitabkar Publications,
1965 \[originally published in 1905\]), pp. 42-65.  
**[/23/](#m23)** Mushtaq Ahmad Khan, Hayat-e Fakir, p. 17; see also
Sayyid Hashmi Faridabidi, "Maulvi 'Abd ul-Haq," *'Aligarh Megzin*,
Aligarh Number, Part II (1954-1955), p. 53.  
**[/24/](#m24)** Mrs. Meer Hasan Ali, *Observations*, II, 11-12; for a
fictional account involving a Hindu wet nurse and her son in a Muslim
home, see Attiya Hosain, "The Loss," *Phoenix Fled* (London: Chat to and
Windus, 1953), pp. 117-133; also complaints about friendships with
servant children by Sayyid Husain Bilgrami in *Addresses, Poems, and
Other Writings of Nawab Imadul-Mulk Bahadur* (Hyderabad: Government
Central Press, 1925), p. 105; I am indebted to Mr. Sajjad Mirza of
Hyderabad, son of Aziz Mirza, for discussing these matters with me
(Hyderabad, September 1968).  
**[/25/](#m25)** For a fictional account of a bad mother, see Nazir
Ahmad, *The Taubatu-n-Nasuh*, tr. by M. Kempson (London: W. H. Allen &
Co., 1886); for the more saintly variety, C. F. Andrews, *Zaka Ullah of
Delhi* (Cambridge: W. Heffer & Sons, 1929), pp. 53-55.  
**[/26/](#m26)** Jaffur Shureef, *Qanoon-e-Islam*, pp. 15-23.  
**[/27/](#m27)** Mrs. Meer Hasan Ali, *Observations*, p. 7.  
**[/28/](#m28)** Nazlr Ahmad, *The Bride's Mirror*, p. 5; interview with
Sajjad Mirza; see also Sayyid Ahmad Dehlvi, *Rasum-i Dehli*, p. 71; for
a critical comment on prolonged breast feeding see the *Aligarh
Institute Gazette* (hereafter AIG), July 2, 1892.  
**[/29/](#m29)** Sleeman, *Rambles and Reflections*, I, 332.  
**[/30/](#m30)** Margaret Morison, "A Conversation," *Aligarh Monthly*,
December 1904, pp. 6-12. Englishmen made similar complaints about
American children, so these references may tell us more about the
English than about either Indians or Americans (Richard L. Rapson, "The
American Child as Seen by British Travelers," *The American Family in
Social-Historical Perspective*, ed. by Michael Gordon \[New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1973\], pp. 192-208).  
**[/31/](#m31)** Bilgrami, *Addresses*, p. 35.  
**[/32/](#m32)** Sayyid Ahmad, *Sirat-i Faridiyah*, pp. 135-148;
Ikramullah Khan, *Viqar-i Hayat*, pp. 2-3.  
**[/33/](#m33)** See *The Diary of Sahibzada Aftab Ahmad Khan Ahmadi,
1892- 93*, ms. in the Aligarh Muslim University Archives, Maulana Azad
Library, Aligarh (hereafter the Aligarh Archives will be referred toas
AA).  
**[/34/](#m34)** Bilgrami, *Addresses*, p. 23.  
**[/35/](#m35)** Sayyid Abmad DehlvI, *Rasum-i Dehli*, pp. 71-73; Jaffur
Shureef, *Qanoon-e-Jslam*, pp. 27-34.  
**[/36/](#m36)** Sayyid Ahmad was taught by an *ustani* (Hali, *Hayat-i
javid*, p. 86); Aftab Ahmad Khan was taught by a *miyanji* (Habibullah
Khan, *Hayat-i Aftab*, p. 6) ; Zafar Ali Khan started with his father's
father (Ashraf 'Ata, *Maulana Zafar 'Ali Khan* \[Lahore: Caravan, (1962)
1, p. 22) ; Masud Ali and Hali started with a *qari sahib* (Mas'ud 'Ali,
*Kitab-i makhdum*, II, 144; and Salihah 'Abid Husain, *Yadgar*, p. 26);
for study in the teacher's home see Mir Vilayat Husain, *Ap biti*
(Aligarh: privately published by Sayyid Hadi Husain Zaidi, 1970), p. 23;
examples of philanthropic teaching are in Zaka' Ullah, *Savanih*, p.
14.  
**[/37/](#m37)** Jaffur Shureef, *Qanoon-e-lslam*, p. 36.  
**[/38/](#m38)** Education Commission, *Report of the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh Provincial Committee* (Calcutta: Superintendent of
Government Printing, 1884), p. 383 and elsewhere (hereafter EC/NWP);
Mas'ud 'Ali, *Kitab-i makhdum*, II, 150; Qamruddin Ahmad Badayunl,
*Mahfil-i 'Aziz* (Hyderabad: A'jaz Printing Press, 1962), pp. 99-100.  
**[/39/](#m39)** For a general account see G.D.M. Sufi, *Al-Minhaj:
Being the Evolution of Curriculum in the Muslim Educational Institutions
of India* (Lahore: Shaikh Muhammad Ashraf, 1941); see also *ECI NWP*;
William Adam, *Reports on Vernacular Education in Bengal and Behar*
(Calcutta: Home Secretariat Press, 1968 \[originally published in 1835,
1838\]); Ziaul Haque, "Muslim Religious Education in Indo-Pakistan: An
Annotated Bibliography," Occasional Paper Series, Muslim Studies
Subcommittee, Committee on Southern Asian Studies (Chicago: University
of Chicago, 1972).  
**[/40/](#m40)** Vilayat Husain, *Ap biti*, p. 24; Muhammad Sa'id Khan
\[Navab of ChatarI\], *Yad-i ayyam* (Aligarh: Muslim Educational Press,
n.d.), I, 22.  
**[/41/](#m41)** Jaffur Shureef, *Qanoon-e-lslam*, p. 33.  
**[/42/](#m42)** Hali, *Hayat-i javid*, p. 86.  
**[/43/](#m43)** Salihah 'Abid Husain, *Yadgar*, p. 29.  
**[/44/](#m44)** Zaka. Ullah, *Savanih*, p. 20.  
**[/45/](#m45)** *EC/NWP*, p. 287.  
**[/46/](#m46)** Jaffur Shureef, *Qanoon-e-lslam*, p. 33; among Hindus
there were analogous institutions in the *guru*, *pathshala*, and
*math,* and a *sharif* Hindu, such as the poetic disciples of Ghalib or
several witnesses in *EC/NWP*, would have Sanskrit along with Persian
and Arabic as part of his education.  
**[/47/](#m47)** Sayyid Ahmad, *Sirat-i Faridiyah*, p. 133.  
**[/48/](#m48)** Sharar, *Lakhnau*, pp. 153-154; Habibullah Khan,
*Hayat-i Aftab*, p.6.  
**[/49/](#m49)** Sayyid Ahmad, *Sirat-i Faridiyah*, pp. 129-134.  
**[/50/](#m50)** Ibid., pp. 132-133.  
**[/51/](#m51)** Mrs. Meer Hasan Ali, *Observations*, II, 14-21; Jaffur
Shureef, *Qanoon-e-lslam*, Appendix 8; Sarvar ul-Mulk, *Karnamah*, p.
22.  
**[/52/](#m52)** Sayyid Ahmad, *Sirat-i Faridiyah*, pp. 130-132.  
**[/53/](#m53)** A recurring motif, for example, in Ralph Russell and
Khurshidul Islam, *Ghalib: Life and Letters* (London: George Allen and
Unwin, 1969).  
**[/54/](#m54)** Sharar, *Lakhnau*, pp. 300, 314-322

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on Sir Sayyid](../00litlinks/lit_colonial.html#sirsayyid) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --
