+++
title = "99 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Barbara D. Metcalf, **Islamic Revival in British India: Deoband,
1860-1900** (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982). This is
Chapter 1, pp. 16-45. The book has now been republished by \*[OUP
India](http://www.oup.com/)\*, and its first chapter is made available
here by the kind permission of OUP India and of the author.  
Scan by FWP, with no editing. Diacritics lost from footnotes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The 'Ulama in Transition: The Eighteenth Century

\*[Farangi Mahall](#farangi)\* -- \*[Shah Waliyu'llah](#shahwali)\*  


> What about the *'ulama'*? They, too, have emerged. There is a
> tendency, from which some of us at least have found ourselves
> suffering, to take this concept for granted; to suppose that there are
> 'ulama' in Islam and that this is somehow "natural," that they have
> always been there. Not so. ...They emerge in Islamic history in
> consolidated form a good deal later than is usually supposed, and
> develop in the Muslim history of India as a formal and constituted
> class a very great deal later--and perhaps even, in certain
> significant senses, only in the modern period. --Wilfred Cantwell
> Smith**[/1/](#n01)**

  
THE role of the religious leader in Islam is at once loosely defined and
centrally important. There is no tradition of priesthood in Islam--no
caste or family that has special power, no sacrament that sets some men
apart from their fellows, no monasticism. Indeed, it has not been
uncommon for people regarded as religious leaders to merge with the
general population, often filling other occupational roles in society as
well. As Shah Waliyu'llah (1703-1762) explained, those who have
religious knowledge, whether they acquire it by means of revelation or
wisdom or visions, are recognized by others as having gifts of
leadership and signs of grace, and are therefore obeyed--for this is the
central requirement of Islam--in doing what is commanded and eschewing
what is forbidden.**[/2/](#n02)** Muslims may be predisposed to accord
this authority to men descended from the Prophet or from some saintly
lineage, or to those holding some **\[17\]** judicial or educational
bureaucratic post. But the true basis of authority--always waiting in
the wings if not front stage--has been the standard of personal
knowledge and its pious embodiment expected of men who are at once
exemplars to their fellows and communal representatives to Muslims and
to others.

There were of course, people who had such knowledge from the beginning
of Islam, starting with the Companions of the Prophet. But it was only
after the decline of the 'Abbasid Empire in the tenth century, when
power was often wielded by new converts to the faith, that explicit
classes of religious leaders emerged. There were, generally speaking,
two kinds of religious specialists: the Sufis, who engaged in meditative
disciplines and sought direct knowledge of religious truths; and the
'ulama, who knew the scholarly traditions of the faith and, above all,
the injunctions of the Law. These categories usually overlapped, and a
man was known as Sufi or 'alim on the basis of which of the two kinds of
interdependent knowledge he emphasized.

Both 'ulama and Sufis acted at times as foci for revolutionary
movements, but more often gave their support to any ruler who maintained
order and provided a stable framework for the continuation of Muslim
social and religious life.**[/3/](#n03)** Such allegiance, however
guarded, was often troublesome, for Muslims have cherished the ideal of
organizing all aspects of life in accordance with the same religious
values. The *shari'at* or Law embodied a comprehensive way of life.
Nonetheless, compromise was regarded as inevitable. To their followers,
the religious leadership could then act as guides and guardians of the
traditions of the community whatever the qualities of the political
leadership. To the rulers, they served as spokesmen for local
interests.**[/4/](#n04)** The 'ulama were typically linked to
landholders, traders, and other influential people by class and
marriage, **\[18\]** and acted as legal officials for small communities.
When they held formal appointments, they were influential but often
suspect, dismissed as the *'ulama-yi zahir*, the externalist 'ulama who
cared only for form and letter, or even as the *'ulama-yi su*, the evil
'ulama. Some Sufis, too, were condemned for subordinating religious
values to those of political interests. The pious among them sought to
be personally true to their faith and argued the necessity of compromise
in order to influence political aspects of life.

In the eastern provinces of the Islamic world, the Sufis often emerged
as local intermediaries with newly conquered and converted peoples,
whereas 'ulama appeared as officials for legal and charitable matters at
the court. This was the case in India. In the early centuries of Muslim
rule (that is, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries A.D.), the
Sufis were the dominant religious figures--teaching, writing, and
mediating between their followers and the government and between rival
claimants to political power. In Mughal India (1526-1739), however,
their role was somewhat eclipsed and the role of the 'ulama was more
dominant. In that period, religious authorities of all kinds dealt with
a state that wielded effective and long-lasting power.

The sixteenth century saw the creation of a new political stability in
the Muslim world, stability unprecedented in its scope and duration.
Three great empires--the Ottoman, the Safavid, and the Mughal--all
agrarian-based and structurally similar, were then to rule from the
Balkans to Bengal for over two hundred years. In each empire the role of
the 'ulama expanded as the respective bureaucracies
expanded.**[/5/](#n05)** The power of the 'ulama was, to be sure,
severely circumscribed, for as in other periods of centralized imperial
rule, the 'ulama tended in fact to become members of the bureaucracy of
the state. Still it was they who were responsible for the education of
the entire nobility; who staffed the various levels of the judiciary;
and who oversaw the whole charitable establishment of the empire.
**\[19\]** Leading members of the 'ulama ranged from those who acted as
prayer leader at a town mosque to the most influential of courtiers. The
intellectuals among them were sought out as adornments to the various
entourages of the nobility.

A career as *'alim* in this period was seen as a route to prestige, or,
at least, to respectability. Then, as later, anyone who acquired
education could expect the same recognition as that given to scions of
learned families. Education was informal, fees or gifts loosely defined,
and a patriarchal relation between teacher and student the norm. A boy
might study from members of his or a neighboring family; then, if he
proved apt and inclined, go from city to city, staying with relatives or
pious people, and study with scholars known for expertise in various
specialties. A boy who chose to follow a religious career would not only
learn Persian, the language of the court and of letters, but would also
study Arabic. Academic disciplines studied through the medium of Arabic
were divided into two broad categories: *manqulat*, the "transcribed" or
"copied" subjects of Qur'an and the *hadis* or sayings of the Prophet;
and *ma'qulat*, the rational sciences, or those which were the product
of man's own thought and study. These latter subjects ranged from Arabic
grammar and rhetoric to logic, mathematics, philosophy, and theology ,
to--above all--books of legal commentaries and jurisprudence. As a
student completed each book he would receive a certificate from his
teacher testifying to his accomplishment. His knowledge was judged by
the number of books he had read and the scholars under whom he had
studied.**[/6/](#n06)** The Indian 'ulama in the Mughal period
specialized in the rational sciences, many of whose exponents had come
to India from scholarly centers in Transoxiana. However, from the time
of 'Abdu'l-Haqq Dihlawi (1551-1642) and the establishment of close ties
to scholars in the Hijaz, Delhi was known as an important center for the
study of *hadis* as well.**[/7/](#n07)** The core of the curriculum in
India as elsewhere, how- **\[20\]** ever, was the study of works on the
Law or *fiqh*. Commentaries on the Qur'an and collections of *hadis*
were studied only as supplements to it. By the Law, Sunni scholars--far
more numerous in India than the Shi'ah--meant the four schools of Law
that had evolved in the ninth century, each accepted as equally valid
and legitimate. These schools, subsequently known by the names of their
founders as the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i, and Hanbali, respectively, aIl
agreed on basic matters of belief and worship, but differed on a wide
variety of minor points. Each, moreover, had a somewhat different
approach to the Law, so that one could describe the Maliki, for example,
as being closest to the *hadis* and the Hanafi as the most flexible in
adopting customary practices. Generally speaking, each school was
associated with a particular geographic area, the Hanafi being dominant
in India[.**/8/**](#n08) Students studied commentaries and compilations
of decisions based on the works of Abu Hanifa (d. 767) and, like legal
specialists throughout the Muslim world, ceased to consult the Qur'an
and *hadis* in legal matters, and did not even know the writings of the
founder of the law school himself. The most important legal work in
India was thus a twelfth-century Central Asian text, the *Hidayat* of
Burhanu'd-Din Abu'l-Hasan 'Ali Marghinani**[./9/](#n09)**

Education and the subsequent application of the Law were not necessarily
a matter of parroting received answers. The study of the *Hidayat*, for
example, was a substantial undertaking, and its successful application
could be a challenging enterprise. The work consisted of fifty-seven
books covering such diverse aspects of life and belief as the basic
religious duties, purification and cleanliness, apostasy, marriage and
divorce, slavery, criminal offenses, peace and security, taxes, the
status of non-Muslims, the treasury, re- **\[21\]**bellion, partnerships
and trusts, commercial transactions, gifts, wages, preemption, mortgage,
and the administration of justice. Each chapter included divergent
opinions of various scholars, an indication of the inclination of the
majority, and a statement of the author's own preference. The student
did not need to accept the author's opinion, but could consult the
sources mentioned in the text and weigh the opinions of the learned
himself.**[/10/](#n10)**

Those who completed scholarly training in Mughal India usually sought
out official positions or grants and endowments offered by kings and
aristocrats. The Mughal 'ulama did not, however, form a precisely
defined and powerful estate, as did their counterparts among the
Ottomans. There a man who completed his studies sought enrollment as an
officially recognized candidate for office. If subsequently admitted to
a post, he moved through a graded series of teaching positions and
thence into the similarly graded ranks of the religious bureaucracy made
up of mosque functionaries, teachers, jurisconsults, and judges. Such
men were enrolled as 'ulama in official ledgers, exempted from taxation,
and even exempted from confiscation of their personal estates at death.
Their leading families became, one scholar has judged, "the nearest
thing to a hereditary aristocracy in Ottoman history."**[/11/](#n11)**
If less powerful, the Mughal 'ulama may well also have been more
independent. There was among them a strong tradition of moral
detachment, and in every reign there were resignations over policies
deemed irreligious. There were, moreover, semi-independent centers of
scholarly activity. Nevertheless, most 'ulama felt that the significant
arena for their work was among the powerful.

An 'alim would, moreover, associate himself with the state not only in
order to have a successful career, but also **\[22\]**to further his
religious ideas and interpretations. This is clear, for example, in the
career of the eminent religious leader Shaikh Ahmad Sarhindi
(1564-1624). Born into a scholarly family in the Punjab, he traveled to
the capital, where he frequented the court and cultivated relations with
prominent nobles, some of whom became his disciples. He conducted an
extensive correspondence not only with his disciples and students but
with political leaders, including the emperor. Summoned to the court of
Jahangir (r.1605-1627), his views proved offensive to the king, and he
was jailed for a year. Later he again found favor and was the recipient
of royal patronage. His goal was to gain an audience for his
intellectual and religious interpretations, and to do so he adopted the
strategy of lending his prestige and dignity to the support of patrons
who, in turn, furthered his concerns. One can imagine this pattern
repeated at all levels of the government. It held true for Sufi
shaikhs--as, indeed, Ahmad Sarhindi was--as well as for the
'ulama.**[/12/](#n12)**

There were tensions in the balance between religious and political
authorities. But religious leaders who found particular policies
offensive had little choice but to chafe or resign, then to live on
endowments or the earnings of some humble occupation.**[/13/](#n13)** A
ruler, in contrast, could tip the balance ever more in his favor by
patronizing only the compliant religious leaders or by asserting his own
claim to a religious role. Akbar (r.1556-1605) and Aurangzeb
(r.1658-1707), although viewed by historians as archetypal opposites,
both tried to enhance the royal position at the expense of the 'ulama.
Indeed, leading 'ulama resigned from the court of each. Akbar, the
eclectic, initially claimed scholarly preeminence among the 'ulama, and
later went on to assert himself both as an enlightened imam with
immanent spiritual authority and as the most advanced Sufi of his age, a
spiritual guide himself to members of the **\[23\]**
court.**[/14/](#n14)** Aurangzeb, known for his dedication to the
religious Law, seems to have emphasized the perfect ordering of his own
moral life as example and as cause of order in the political life of the
kingdom. That he had little interest in sharing authority with the
'ulama is indicated by his definitive compilation of judicial decisions
in the *Fatawa-yi 'Alamgiri*, for, as the court historian wrote: "When
the work, with God's pleasure, is completed, it will be for all the
world the standard exposition of the law, and render everyone
independent of Moslem doctors."**[/15/](#n15)** Thus there appears to
have been little scope for independent influence on the part of the
religious leadership.

Yet even under the Mughals, Muslims regarded religious leaders as having
authority that did not depend on whatever official position or favor
they might have, but rather on their closeness to God himself. A
courtier or a king who was the disciple of a Sufi shaikh owed him an
unquestioning allegiance far more compelling than that he owed anyone
else. The shaikh was understood to have been preordained for a special
role in spiritual guidance; the king--whatever theories might be
developed--was to be respected only as long as he was considered strong.
Not only the shaikh but the 'alim as well earned respect if he were
skilled and pious. This autonomous moral authority of the religious
leadership was of great importance despite the more obvious strength of
the officials of the state. It was to be apparent in the eighteenth
century, when Mughal authority began to weaken and the relation between
political and religious authority began to change.

With the death of Aurangzeb, the last "Great Mogul," in 1707, the
break-up of the empire began. By mid-century, as shown in Map 1, the
successor states of Bengal, Oudh, Punjab, and the Nizam's territories of
Hyderabad were es- **\[24\] map \[25\]** tablished, as well as the new
kingdoms carved out by the Marathas, Sikhs, Rohillas, and Jats. Although
the imperial line continued at the center, it was subject to the
rivalries of innumerable contenders for influence. From outside Delhi
came the devastating invasion of the Persian Nadir Shah (r.1736-1747) in
1739. As the poetry of the times reveals, no single event shook the
inhabitants of north India more than did that first invasion. The event
was perceived as a catastrophe, not only to Delhi but to civilization as
a whole.**[/16/](#n16)** It was to be followed by the successive attacks
of the Afghan Ahmad Shah Abdali (r.1747-1773) in 1748, 1757, and 1760.
Later historians have pointed to imperial overexpansion and consequent
proliferation of *mansabdari* ranks as central to the decline of the
empire.**[/17/](#n17)** For people alive then the disastrous events
seemed nothing less than a divine judgment.

In general, the religious leadership profited from the decline in
central authority in the eighteenth century. This was true not only of
the 'ulama but also of the Sufi pirs of the medieval shrines who had
continued to form the religious leadership in the areas of Sind and the
Punjab, in particular. There the pirs, like their counterparts elsewhere
in the Muslim world, mediated among their followers and between them and
political authorities and--above all--between the believer and God. Not
necessarily pious themselves, they derived their authority from the
*barakat* or charisma inherent in the tomb and lineage of their saintly
forebear.**[/18/](#n18)** Although Mughal overlordship extended to both
these provinces, the bureaucracy was less effective, and local leaders
had maintained substantial influence. In both **\[26\]** areas the
*pirs*, like other intermediary powers throughout the old empire,
asserted themselves against regional political authorities who no longer
had the backing of the imperial government.**[/19/](#n19)** At the same
time, in each area movements of revitalization endowed the *pirs* with
religious charisma of their own in addition to the authority derived
from the shrine itself.

In Sind, the Sufi *shaikhs* were among the largest landholders of the
area and had long acted as local intermediaries to political powers. The
decline of the empire saw them ever more dominant. With that dominance
came an outburst of religious creativity capped by the work of the Sufi
poet Shah 'Abdu'l-Latif Bhita'i (1689-1752). His poetry transmuted the
meaning of local legends and folk tales by putting them into the
framework of the high, particularly Persian, poetic tradition in which
love for the Divine and love for the human beloved serve as metaphors
for each other.**[/20/](#n20)** In the Punjab the poetry of Bulhe Shah
(d.1752) and Waris Shah (fl.1790) used local materials in exactly the
same fashion.**[/21/](#n21)** The eighteenth century was a period of
great cultural vitality at the regional level, the result in part of the
stimulus provided by shifts in social structure, the patronage of the
new regional powers, and the creative contact between courtly and local
traditions as personnel drifted from the capital to the new
courts.**[/22/](#n22)**

**\[27\]** In the Punjab, as in Sind, the Sufi leadership seems to have
enhanced its position as local notables, and acted not only as foci for
the religious aspirations of their followers but as a worldly leadership
as well. There the eighteenth century saw a revitalization of the
Nizamiyyah branch of the Chishti Sufi order as a major response to the
decay of the imperial institutions. Disciples of the Delhi *pir*, Shah
Kalimu'llah Jahanabadi (d.1729), effectively preached the necessity of
an adherence to the basic requirements of the religious law, denying
that the intercession of the saints of the shrines was sufficient for
leading a truly religious life.**[/23/](#n23)** This emphasis on the
teaching of basic doctrines and requirements of the faith was to be
shared by the popularly based 'ulama of the subsequent century, as both
groups left off discussion of the theological and philosophical issues
that had been the staple of earlier religious leaders. The *pirs*,
however, as locally based aristocrats, continued to work through
political leaders. The preeminent Chishti of the eighteenth century in
the Punjab, for example, Khwajah Nur Muhammad (d.1790), was known to
have great influence over Baha'u'l-Haqq, the ruler of Bahawalpur. He
himself played a political role, taking the field against the Sikhs at
the end of the century, and inspiring the local Muslim population to
join him in resistance. With imperial power in decay, the *pirs* not
only filled a political void but--at least in the case of the
Chishtis--acted to preserve the religious tradition as well.

The religious revitalization evident among the *pirs* in Sind and the
Punjab was no less apparent in the imperial heartland. There the most
prominent influence, affecting Sufis and 'ulama alike, came from the
Naqshbandi order, which had been introduced into India primarily through
the teaching of Khwajah Baqi Bi'llah (1563-1603), whose disciples had
included Shaikh Ahmad Sarhindi and 'Abdu'l- **\[28\]** Haqq Dihlawi. In
the eighteenth century there were prominent Naqshbandi leaders across
north India. In Sind, for example, learned Naqshbandis in Thatta wrote
commentaries on the Qur'an and *hadis*, and opposed local customs such
as that of ecstatic dancing among the tombs of the saints on Makli
Hill.**[/24/](#n24)** In Delhi itself, the leading mystics of the day
were all Naqshbandi, among them Mirza Mazhar Jan-i Janan (1700-1780),
Mir Dard (1721-1785), and the man who was at once the greatest *'alim*
and a leading Sufi, Shah Waliyu'llah. In Delhi, too, vernacular poetry
was a vehicle for expressing religious feeling, and poets infused Urdu
with Persian meters and metaphors in order to make it a medium fit for
poetic expression.**[/25/](#n25)** Jan-i Janan and Dard were among the
Sufi masters distinguished as poets. The Naqshbandi order, increasingly
influential, was to shape the views of many 'ulama toward sobriety in
spiritual experience and rigorous adherence to the religious
Law.**[/26/](#n26)**

The basic response of the 'ulama to the decline in central authority
appears to have been quite different from that of the *pirs*. The 'ulama
had no local base like that of the wealthy shrines, and sought first to
restore the old balance **\[29\]** between themselves and the political
leaders. (In the nineteenth century, when it was evident that no such
balance was possible, they sought--as we shall see--to establish
themselves as popularly based religious guides.) There was an urgency in
the efforts of the leading 'ulama in the eighteenth century, for while
stability had been created in some of the new regional systems, no such
stability existed in the heartland of the empire. The 'ulama--and other
thinkers as well--judged moral and religious failure to be the cause of
the evident political and social failure of the times. Many therefore
urged greater attention to the Law and singled out pervasive Shi'i
influence as a notable problem. Above all, the 'ulama wanted to fulfill
their responsibility of guarding the intellectual heritage of the faith,
even without the court as protector. This impulse was evident in the
protection and development of the learned tradition at Farangi Mahall in
Lucknow, and in the synthetic and encyclopedic work of the great
thinker, Shah Waliyu'llah.

  
*Farangi Mahall*

At the turn of the eighteenth century a family of men famed for their
religious learning and long supported by the Mughal court, settled in
Lucknow.**[/27/](#n27)** Its patriarch, Mulla Qutbu'd-Din (d. 1691/2),
had retained close ties with the Delhi court and, with his sons, had
participated in the collection of the *Fatawa-yi 'Alamgiri*. When
Qutbu'd-Din was killed in a land dispute with a family of rival
*shaikhs*,**[/28/](#n28)** the **\[30\]** emperor punished his opponents
and generously compensated his sons, two of whom had accompanied him on
his campaign to the Deccan. His award included land in Bahraich district
of Oudh, given as *jagir*; and the quarter of Lucknow where a French
adventurer had once built a mansion known as Farangi Mahall, given in
revenue-free tenure. It was to be by the name of Farangi Mahall that the
family was subsequently known.

The shift to Lucknow was significant, for, as we have noted, as the
century progressed the locus of artistic and intellectual vitality was
to be increasingly in the regional kingdoms. In Lucknow, the Nawwab,
although a Shi'i, patronized the school because it offered training for
bureaucrats. He required newly arrived Iranis to present a certificate
from Farangi Mahall before they could receive court patronage. Preparing
*qazis* and *muftis*, the legal officials required by Muslim courts, was
the specialty of Farangi Mahall, which now filled a void left by the
disruption of scholarly centers in the capital.

The scholarly efforts of these 'ulama, however, went far beyond the
simple training of officials. The career of one of the most famous of
the family in the eighteenth century, Maulana 'Abdu'l-'Ali (1731-1810),
suggests the scope of their scholarship. After he had completed his
studies, Abdu'l-'Ali took service under a succession of different
princes. But despite official responsibilities and frequent shifts from
place to place, he demonstrated a prodigious scholarly capacity.
Committed to the metaphysical doctrine of *wahdatu'l-wujud*, he wrote
commentaries on the *Fusus* of Ibnu'l-'Arabi (1165-1240) and on the
*Masnawi* of Jalalu'd-Din Rumi (d.1273). His main fields of scholarship,
however, were jurisprudence, theology, and philosophy. He wrote in
excellent classical Arabic and Persian. A recent scholar has judged his
works to be "according to the fashion of his time, commentaries,
glosses, and super-glosses on **\[31\]** most of the usual text-books."
But his contempories called him "Bahru'l-'Ulum," the "Ocean of the
Sciences," and "Maliku'l-'Ulama," the "chief of the 'ulama," and judged
his contributions to be of great value and significance.[/29/](#n29)

The most important measure of the intellectual contribution of the
Farangi Mahalli 'ulama was their systematization of a new curriculum
which, with modifications, has dominated religious teaching in South
Asia to the present. The Farangi Mahallis, under the direction of a son
of Qutb Sahib, Mulla Nizamu'd-Din (d.1748), expanded the existing corpus
of works typically studied to include a number of books on each of the
various subjects of *ma'qulat*: Arabic grammar, logic, philosophy,
mathematics, rhetoric, *fiqh*, and theology. Qur'an and *hadis* were
only marginally studied, the former through two commentaries, the latter
through one abridgment.[/30/](#n30) This emphasis was to be reversed, as
discussed below, by other groups of 'ulama, but even they were
influenced by the scholarly standard set by this school. The Farangi
Mahallis were respected for their desire to guard and foster the
intellectual tradition in a period of political instability. This
concern was widely shared by the 'ulama, as evidenced by the extent to
which the new syllabus, subsequently known as the *dars-i nizami*, was
adopted. Students came to Farangi Mahall from a wide geographic area,
and they carried this syllabus with them to their homes. When, for
example, the Madrasah-yi 'Aliyah in Calcutta was established under
British auspices in 1780, its first principal was a graduate "who
instituted the nizami curriculum there."[/31/](#n31) To the extent that
an important dimension of the modern transformation of the 'ulama rested
in closer ties among themselves, this contribution of Farangi Mahall was
an important one.

The Farangi Mahallis also fostered the tradition of combining scholarly
and mystic learning. Like other religious **\[32\]** people in this
period, they increasingly came to be initiated in more than one mystic
order, and greatly valued mystic experience. Sufi bonds strengthened the
family, for members would often be bound by common fealty to a *pir*, in
the early eighteenth century to Sayyidu's-Sadat 'Abdu'r-Razzaq Banswi;
and family ties were often reinforced by the passing of *ijazat*, the
permission to make one's own disciples, from one generation to another.
It is significant that the Farangi Mahallis did not eschew Sufi
experience. As we have seen, the Punjabi Chishtis in the same period
came to be known for their teaching of the Law, the subject par
excellence of the 'ulama. Increasingly in post-Mughal India, the pattern
of religious leadership was to become one in which the institutional
distinction of 'alim and Sufi mystic was substantially blurred.

The school's policy of preparing family members and students for careers
in princely service was increasingly fraught with difficulties.
Nonetheless, the family clung to that style of religious occupation.
Wherever there was a prince, the Farangi Mahallis sought positions under
him. Thus in the mid-eighteenth century one family member was appointed
as qazi in Delhi. 'Abdu'l-'Ali, whose scholarship was described above,
journeyed from prince to prince, from Shahjahanpur to Rampur to Buhar to
Madras and finally to the Carnatic, where the Nawwab, who was from
Gopamau in Oudh, granted him both a large stipend and a *madrasah* in
perpetuity. Another member of the family was patronized by Hafiz Rahmat
Khan (1708-1774), the ruler of Rohilkhand; then, as conditions
deteriorated, he fled first to Delhi, then to Rampur.[/32/](#n32) One
family member was appointed *mufti* by the government of Oudh--only the
first of many of the family to hold that post. Three members of the
family joined princely armies. The travels, the varieties of employment,
the violent deaths of at least one member in each of the first four
generations of the family--all this suggests the difficulties facing the
family in maintaining the pattern of dependence on princes.

**\[33\]** Still, this pattern continued without change well into the
nineteenth century. In each generation there would be some to uphold the
family tradition of teaching and serious scholarship. There would also
be pious mystics, one of whom in each generation held the imamship of
the Farangi Mahall mosque. Hazrat Muhammad 'Abdu'l-Wali was one such
*'alim*, a man who had thousands of disciples in the period before 1857.
But most of the family, in any generation, would seek a livelihood in
official employment. After completing their education they would turn to
princes or the British government as a source of jobs and support. Their
motive was in part financial, for many who lacked jobs lived very
impecuniously; but they were also simply following the pattern of
occupation that had continued from Mughal days.

The princes encouraged this arrangement. The Muslim courts of the
eighteenth and early nineteenth century prided themselves on their
cultural attainments, among which religious learning held an important
place. In Rohilkhand a Pathan kingdom flourished; at its height under
Hafizu'l-Mulk as many as five thousand scholars were said to be
supported by the ruler and other patrons. Hafizu'l-Mulk himself presided
over a board of the learned who supervised education, and he honored
those who completed their studies with lavish court ceremonial. But
Hafizu'l-Mulk's kingdom, like that of many princes, did not last long.

The Farangi Mahalli 'ulama, however, even though demand for their skills
declined and the availability of princely patronage was increasingly
scarce, did not consciously seek a more independent position for
themselves by addressing a more widely based audience. Rather they
continued to focus, as had the 'ulama of Mughal days, on abstruse and
technical kinds of scholarship. They did not as a group have the
interest in popular reform characteristic of some other 'ulama. This was
evident in their continued emphasis on *ma'qulat* and in the fact that
they taught Shi'i as well as Sunni students, cooperating as they did
with the Oudh court. The Farangi Mahallis thus represented in attenuated
form the style of religious leadership that had flourished **\[34\]**
\[\[Figure I. A group of scholars at Farangi Mahall today\]\] under the
Mughals. Yet in their independent efforts to maintain a high
intellectual standard for the 'ulama, their success in drawing students
from a wide area, and their integration of the bookish and mystic
traditions, they exemplified increasingly important characteristics of
the 'ulama in the post-Mughal period. It was, above all, their erudition
that won them respect and support from Muslims anxious to guard their
intellectual heritage. When the Farangi Mahallis found themselves,
willy-nilly, without a role at Muslim courts, that distinction
remained.[/33/](#n33)

  
**\[35\]** *Shah Waliyu'llah*

Like the Farangi Mahallis, Shah Waliyu'llah hoped for a restoration of
stable Muslim rule in which the 'ulama would play an important
role.[/34/](#n34) Unlike them, he explicitly analyzed the basis of the
arrangement between ruler and 'ulama and argued the necessity of their
complementary functions and the need for proper balance between the two.
The importance of appropriate political leadership was as self-evident
to him as was the importance of religious leadership. He understood
history to follow an evolutionary pattern in which society progressed
through increasingly complex and encompassing stages from primitive to
urban to monarchical and finally to universal orders. In the final
stage, a caliph would supervise Muslim monarchs who would appoint
officials to enforce the religious Law and foster, to the extent
possible, an Islamic organization of society. For Shah Waliyu'llah, his
era marked a regression, for not only was there no *khilafat* but there
was not even a stable monarchical order. Going beyond analysis to active
involvement, he wrote in turn to Nizamu'l-Mulk (r.1724-1748) of the
successor state of Hyderabad, to Najib-u'd-Daulah (d.1790) of
Rohilkhand, and even to Ahmad Shah Abdali of Afghanistan, inviting each
in turn to take on the required role. In the course of his letters he
offered the leaders of the day advice on statecraft and policy, urging
them to cease indolence, suppress rebellions, and set the revenues
aright by limiting jagir holdings and increas- **\[36\]**ing the amount
of land under direct control.[/35/](#n35) His efforts proved vain, but
he thus enunciated the pervasive ideal of enlightened Muslim leadership
guided by responsible 'ulama.

In that ideal, the "outer caliphate," the *zahiri khilafat*, would be
responsible for securing order and stability, whereas the "inner
caliphate," the *batini khilafat* of the religious leaders, would guide
the ruler and instruct the community. Even in a flawed political order,
however, Shah Waliyu'llah sought an important role for the religious
leadership, the kind of role he himself exemplified in advising rulers,
guiding the community, and safeguarding the intellectual heritage. The
more independent stance he advocated for the 'ulama contrasted with that
of the Farangi Mahalli 'ulama. His own family had chafed at the
subordinate role the Delhi court was willing to accord the leading
'ulama. His father, Shaikh 'Abdu'r-Rahim (1644-1718), had been called on
to assist in the collection of the *Fatawa-yi 'Alamgiri*, but he had
disliked courtly life and had withdrawn to found a college, the
Madrasah-yi Rahimiyyah. Shah Waliyu'llah succeeded his father as
director of that school and devoted his life wholly to study and
teaching.

It was his success in mastering the intellectual tradition that gave him
his influence. In this Shah Waliyu'llah's contribution was no less great
than that of the Farangi Mahalli 'ulama. His success, however, rested
neither in curricular and institutional innovation nor in the
compilation of mere commentaries, but in a major individual effort at
intellectual synthesis and systematization, an unprecedented *tatbiq* of
the whole range of Islamic knowledge. Troubled by the disorder he saw
around him, perhaps even sensing that he was at the end of an age, he
sought to stem the tide of decline by consolidating and clarifying the
entire body of the Islamic tradition. Knowledge of the truth would bring
Muslims to religious obedience that would end the divisions and
deviations he so greatly deplored. He felt himself **\[37\]** uniquely
endowed by divine gifts for a task, as he understood it, never before
attempted.[/36/](#n36) His *Hujjatu'llahu'l-Balighah* is a monument to
his efforts to elucidate and enshrine the glorious intellectual
tradition of the faith.

Shah Waliyu'llah's work was characterized by an insistence on the
necessity of the study of *hadis*, a study that had been peripheral for
most of the 'ulama. Inspired by Shaikh Abu't-Tahir ibn Ibrahim and other
scholars during his stay in the Hijaz, he made *hadis* his major
academic interest to the point that he is, in fact, typically known by
the title of scholar of *hadis*, *muhaddis*. His work and the work of
his family in this field placed the seal on India's reputation in
*hadis* and decisively set the emphasis for many 'ulama who were to
follow.

Shah Waliyu'llah argued that unquestioning adherence to late
compilations of legal decisions was an inadequate guide to religious
truth. He blamed this dominant approach to the Law, known as *taqlid*,
for laxity in religious matters and for differences among the law
schools. Were learned Muslims to study revelation, they could unite in
obedience to authentic teachings. He argued that the "door to ijtihad,"
in the classical phrase, was not closed, and that those skilled in the
traditional sciences had the right and indeed the responsibility to
consult original sources.[/37/](#n37) He did not deny the high worth of
the writings of the imams of the law schools, but rather believed they
should be used in the light of *hadis*. An 'alim, he argued, should know
the judgments of all the law schools and consult them eclectically,
using whichever accorded best with *hadis*. The *Muwatta* of Imam Malik
(d.795), he suggested, best corresponded with the *hadis*, and
disagreements between the Hanafi and Shafi'i schools could be reconciled
by consulting it. The *hadis*, he maintained, provided an absolute
standard, and he sought to demonstrate in his writings how seeming
conflicts among the *hadis* could invariably be rec- **\[38\]**onciled
if they were properly understood, and if only *hadis* of unquestioned
authenticity were accepted. He made the same point about the Qur'an,
arguing cogently in his Qur'anic commentary its consistency and clarity.
He urged acceptance of the obvious meaning of verses and tried to
demonstrate that very few if any had been abrogated by later revelation.
His espousal of jurisprudential eclecticism combined with consultation
of Qur'an and *hadis* clearly enhanced the responsibility of the 'ulama
for interpreting the Law to their followers.

Shah Waliyu'llah explicitly denied the value of study of *ma'qulat*,
regarding those subjects as mere intellectual exercises and a source of
confusion.[/38/](#n38) The value, by contrast, of *manqulat* in bringing
people closer to the central teachings of Islam was apparent. He wanted
both the sources and his interpretations of them readily available to
the whole educated class, not only to the 'ulama. To this end he
translated the Qur'an from Arabic into Persian, the cultural and
political lingua franca of the day. This was one of his earliest
endeavors and a mark of his independence of character, for it earned him
only criticism from the official 'ulama.[/39/](#n39) He was convinced of
the importance of this effort, and in his *Fathu'r-Rahman* he urged
people to study the Qur'an directly, not even using a commentary
and--again insisting on the central role of the religious leadership--to
consult a teacher if in doubt.[/40/](#n40)

Shah Waliyu'llah, however, did not invite all Muslims or even all
educated Muslims to engage in *ijtihad*. In matters of the Law, as in
other aspects of the faith, he sustained the pervasive Islamic
orientation that certain interpretations of the faith could only be
understood by the religious elite, the *khass*, and should not even be
discussed with the *'amm*, who could easily slip into error. Hence, on
the matter **\[39\]** of the Law he felt that most 'ulama and believers
should adhere to the Hanafi school of law, and that only the few should
pursue the reinvigoration of the faith he espoused. Indeed, a divine
revelation had indicated that Hanafi law should be followed in
India.[/41/](#n41) This prudent discrimination also characterized his
work on sufism.

One of the central issues in Indian sufism, one that had engaged
intellectual circles at least since the seventeenth century, was that of
*wahdatu'l-wujud*, literally Unity of Being, but commonly defined as
ontological or existential monism or even as pantheism.[/42/](#n42) The
*wujudi* position had been formulated by the thirteenth-century Spanish
mystic Ibnu'l- 'Arabi and had reached India through the writings of
nearly contemporary Persian poets. The issue derived from the attempt to
define the basic relationship between man and God. In this view, the
better to affirm the singleness of God, creation is denied anything but
an illusory empirical existence. This existence, the mystic argued, had
to obliterate itself (*fana*) in the Existence that alone subsists
(*baqa*). For such identity to be possible, the human spirit has to be a
direct emanation from the Divine. Opponents have claimed that this view
in fact denies *tauhid*, the unity and transcendence of God, and
encourages the believer to be lax in matters of the Law.

In India, opposition to this theory was associated with the early
Naqshbandis, above all with Shaikh Ahmad Sarhindi, who asserted that the
experience of *wahdatu'l-wujud* did not represent all understanding of
the ultimate nature of reality, but rather was merely a perception of
unity that was superseded by perceptions associated with yet higher
stages of spiritual advancement. His position, associated **\[40\]**
with the phrase *wahdatu'sh-shuhud*, Unity of Witness or
phenomenological monism, has usually been understood to refer to this
capacity to understand the unreality of Unity of Being, and the higher
understanding of the transcendence of God.[/43/](#n43)

Shah Waliyu'llah tried in work after work to resolve the controversy on
this issue. His arguments, shared by his contemporary Naqshbandi, Mirza
Mazhar Jan-i Janan, altered the previously dominant view of their
order.[/44/](#n44) Others, one might note--particularly Khwajah Mir
Nasir 'Andalib, his son Khwaja Mir Dard, and Ghulam Yahya--all continued
to adhere to the views of Shaikh Ahmad. But Shah Waliyu'llah argued that
the *wujudi* position was in fact legitimate, and that if properly
understood confirmed the *shuhudi* position.[/45/](#n45) The whole
universe is pervaded by a common existence, he argued, an existence both
immanent and transcendent, but beyond that existence is the Original
Existence of God. His understanding of this problem in no way affected
his commitment to the Law. Yet he knew that others could be misled, and
he therefore argued discretion in discussing such subtle matters. His
father held the *wujudi* position unreservedly, but refused to discuss
the issue publicly.[/46/](#n46) In part because of Shah Waliyu'llah's
interpretation, the *wujudi* position, a complex and important strand in
Sufi thought, has since been dominant in India.

A final issue in Shah Waliyu'llah's writings that attracted interest
both in his time and after was his attitude toward the Shi'ah. The
Shi'ah, who venerated the Prophet's son- in-law 'Ali, his family, and
the imams who inherited his spiritual power, were thought to be little
less than polytheist.[/47/](#n47) Hence to some Sunnis, a particular
provocation to **\[41\]** Divine displeasure in the eighteenth century
was the ascendancy of the Shi'ah, which culminated in the attempts of
the Emperor Bahadur Shah (r.1707-1712) to introduce Shi'i practices at
the imperial court. Two of the most important successor states, Oudh and
Bengal, were explicitly Shi'i. The Lucknow court of Oudh, whose
independence can be dated from 1722, was a center of Shi'i culture,
fostered by the nobility and stimulated by an influx of Iranians. Under
its influence there were notable conversions to Shi'ism even beyond the
boundaries of Oudh, including that of the Sayyids of Amrohah and the
Nawwabs of Rampur.[/48/](#n48) The Lucknow court patronized Shi'i
*mujtahid*s such as the distinguished Dildar 'Ali Khan (1753-1819), who
had studied in Iran and was known for his debates with Sunni 'ulama. The
court also patronized Shi'i madrasahs, among them at least two new ones
founded under the nawwabs.[/49/](#n49) In Hyderabad, even though the
Nizam himself was Sunni, there was a marked increase of Shi'i nobles in
the eighteenth century, among them courtiers who had left places such as
Mysore, Madras, and Oudh, which were affected by the presence of the
British.[/50/](#n50) Some Sunnis have held the turning to Shi'i doctrine
to be a response to decline, "when man depends on things created instead
of on the Creator."[/51/](#n51) Such Shi'i practices as the mourning
assemblies and processions of Muharram were made the particular target
of Sunnis seeking a scrupulous adherence to the Law. The aged Mirza
Mazhar Jan-i Janan focused on opposition to Shi'i practices in his
pronouncements, and met his death **\[42\]** in 1780 at the knife of a
Shi'i assassin.[/52/](#n52) In this atmosphere, Shah Waliyu'llah again
sought unity and reconciliation. He was personally devoted to the
veneration of 'Ali.[/53/](#n53) However, like other Sunnis, he insisted
that the succession of the first four caliphs was legitimate, thus
disagreeing with the Shi'ah who maintained that 'Ali and his family
should have followed the Prophet. He did take the original position that
the first three caliphates were not all superior to that of the fourth,
'Ali's, but rather judged only the first two, when there was unity and
peace among Muslims, to be superior.[/54/](#n54) But he was not notably
successful in persuading Shi'ah and Sunni either to accept this view or
to be reconciled because of it.

The Sunnis at least remember his personality as tolerant and generous in
spirit. The descriptions of later 'ulama perhaps obscure his real
personality in favor of the ideal of religious leadership in Indian
Islam, which emphasized patience and forebearance, tolerance of others'
foibles, and inclination to compromise. But he himself no doubt aspired
to that ideal, and in many instances did exemplify it. His acceptance of
the division of society into the *khass* and *'amm*, for example, was
not considered conspiratorial or opportunist but wise and prudent. A man
of understanding would speak to others in accordance with their capacity
for understanding. This was intrinsic to the breadth religion ought to
have.

He also exemplified the ideal pattern of religious leader by being both
saint and *'alim*. As *'alim* he produced a prodigious body of
scholarship, thanks in part to his regular habits, self-control, and
great discipline.[/55/](#n55) But, as his title *waliyu'llah* (the
friend of God) reveals, he was also a saint. Indeed it had been revealed
to his mother at the tomb of the great Chishti saint Khwajah Qutbu'd-Din
Bakhtiyar (d.1236) that her future offspring would be the
*qutbu'l-aqtab*, **\[43\]** the saint of the age, the pivot around whom
the world revolves. His saintly attainments were such that he himself
was accorded many visions, most notably one in Mecca that instructed him
to undertake his work of religious renewal.[/56/](#n56) His work was a
celebration of Islam, for he held that every injunction of the faith was
of profit and value to man, invariably conducive to some worldly or
spiritual interest.[/57/](#n57) He exulted in his foreordained role of
clarifying and systematizing the faith, for he believed himself to be a
*fatih*, the inaugurator of a new era. He claimed to have created a
synthesis beyond even that of al-Ghazali (d.1111), uniting not only
reason (*'aql*) and tradition (*naql*) but the gnosis (*ma'rifat*) of
the Sufi as well.[/58/](#n58)

Shah Waliyu'llah expected his work to be continued by his quartet of
able sons and, indeed, a dream of the Prophet assured him on his
deathbed it would be.[/59/](#n59) A fundamental orientation of his work,
however, had been the hope that Muslim political leadership would be
restored, with the 'ulama carrying on their collaborative role of
teaching and advising the ruler of the state. His successors found that
hope to be vain, and rather acted as the "internal caliphs" to the
extent that it was possible in a situation of alien rule. In so doing,
they were indebted to Shah Waliyu'llah for a manifold legacy: a sense of
their importance as leaders; a commitment to the study of *hadis* and
Law; a model in personality and attainments; and a desire for unity
based on religious obedience.

Shah Waliyu'llah and the Farangi Mahallis were not alone in defining a
new pattern for the 'ulama. By the time of Shah Waliyu'llah's death in
1762, a pattern had been set for the activity of the 'ulama. In the late
eighteenth century, many had found employment in the new regional
kingdoms, and there, as well as in Delhi, found patronage **\[44\]** and
stimulation for a new commitment to their historic role of preserving
the cultural heritage of the community in times of political
uncertainty. There was then a new self-consciousness about the role and
responsibility of the 'ulama. One significant measure of this was the
beginning of a new genre of writing in India, that of biographical
dictionaries that explicitly took as their purview the 'ulama.
Heretofore in India, with apparently only one exception, dictionaries of
religious leaders were devoted to Sufis alone.[/60/](#n60) To be sure,
many Sufis were in fact scholars as well, just as many of those later
listed as 'ulama were Sufi shaikhs. What is important is that in the
later period the institution of the 'ulama was to be the more
significant one for organizing religious leadership.

Foremost among the eighteenth-century biographers of the 'ulama was Mir
Ghulam 'Ali Azad of Bilgram in Oudh (1704-1786). A contemporary of Shah
Waliyu'llah, he, too, performed the pilgrimage and studied *hadis* in
the Hijaz. He subsequently spent almost half a century settled in
Aurangabad, part of the independent territory of the Nizam, writing on
*hadis*, literature, history, biography, and poetry. He wrote two
biographical dictionaries of the 'ulama, a general one and one limited
to the scholars of Bilgram. He also prepared a compendium of references
to India culled from Qur'anic commentaries and *hadis*, indicating
perhaps that he felt not only a new self-consciousness about the role of
the 'ulama, but also a new awareness of geographic **\[45\]** identity
inspired by his experience in the Hijaz.[/61/](#n61) Such speculation
aside, Azad's career, like the careers of the early Farangi Mahallis and
of Shah Waliyu'llah, indicates clearly that in religious scholarship
many 'ulama had found a role deeply valued by Muslims of their
day.[/62](#n62)/  
  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
NOTES

1. Wilfred Cantwell Smith, "The 'Ulama.' in Indian Politics," in C. H.
Philips, ed., Politics and Society in India (London, 1963), p. 42. \[
[back](#01) \]  
2. From the Hujjatu'lllihu'l-Balighah, quoted in Muhammad Mujeeb, The
Indian Muslims (London, 1967), p. 279. \[ [back](#02) \]  
3. See Peter Hardy, "The Muslim Ruler in India," in William Theodore de
Bary, ed., Sources of Indian Tradition {New York, 1958), pp. 463ff. \[
[back](#03) \]  
4. See Ira M. Lapidus, Muslim Cities in the Late Middle Ages {Cambridge,
1967), for a detailed study of the role of the 'ulama in Muslim social
and political life. \[ [back](#04) \]  
5. Marshall G. S. Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, Ill, The Gunpowder
Empires and Modern Times (Chicago, 1974) discusses at length the
structures of these three empires. \[ [back](#05) \]  
6. Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, pp. 204-205. \[ [back](#06) \]  
7. Aziz Ahmad, An Intellectual History of Islamic India (Edinburgh,
1969), p. 8 suggests that this new interest was in part the result of
the sea opening to the Hijaz, in part "the challenge of Akbar's
eclecticism." \[ [back](#07) \]  
8. Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, p. 58. \[ [back](#08) \]  
9. The work was translated from Arabic into Persian and thence to
English by Charles Hamilton in the late eighteenth century. He left out,
however, the whole section on 'ibadat except for those portions related
to zakat. In 1870 Standish Grove Grady prepared an edition of Hamilton's
translation, omitting further such topics as the role of the qazi,
irrelevant in British India. This edition has been recently reprinted as
The Hedaya or Guide; A Commentary on the Mussulman Laws (Lahore, 1963).
\[ [back](#09) \]  
10. Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, p. 405. \[ [back](#10) \]  
11. Richard L. Chambers, "The Ottoman Ulema and the Tanzimat," in Nikki
R. Keddie, ed., Scholars, Saints, and Sufis: Muslim Religious
Institutions since 1500 (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1972), p. 34. In
addition to the Chambers article, see also Richard Repp, "Some
Observations on the Development of the Ottoman Learned Hierarchy ," pp.
17-32 in the same volume. \[ [back](#11) \]  
12. For an excellent study of Sarhindi's thought, see Yohanan Friedmann,
Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi (Montreal, 1971). \[ [back](#12) \]  
13. For a discussion of the forms of support given the 'ulama, see Irfan
Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India (London, 1963), chapter VIII.
\[ [back](#13) \]  
14. See Hodgson, Venture of Islam, III, 75-80 for an analysis of the
political theories advanced during Akbar's reign. See also the
selections in de Bary, Sources of Indian Tradition, I, chapters XVI and
XVII, for the divergent political theories of Mughal thinkers. \[
[back](#14) \]  
15. Bakhtawar Khan, "Mir-at-i-'Alam," in H. M. Elliott and John Dow-
son, The History of India as Told by Its Own Historians (Allahabad, 1964
reprint), VII, 160. \[ [back](#15) \]  
16. Ralph Russell and Khurshidullslam, Three MughaIPoets: Mir, Sauda,
Mir Hasan (London, 1968), pp. 15-22. \[ [back](#16) \]  
17. See Satish Chandra, Parties and Politics at the Mughal Court:
1700-40 (Aligarh, 1959). \[ [back](#17) \]  
18. J. Spencer Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam (Oxford, 1971)
presents an analysis of the routinization of charisma in these shrines
and the consequent stability and popular influence this afforded. See
also David Gilmartin, .'Tribe, Land, and Religion in the Punjab: Muslim
Politics and the Making of Pakistan" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of
California, Berkeley, 1979) for an excellent discussion of the
shrine-based Punjabi *pirs*. \[ [back](#18) \]  
19. For a study of this process in Bengal, see Philip Calkins, "The
Formation of a Regionally Oriented Ruling Group in Bengal, 1700-1740,"
Journal of Asian Studies, 29 (August 1970),777-806. \[ [back](#19) \]  
20. H. T. Sorley, Shah Abdul Latif of Bhit (Karachi, 1966) includes both
an essay about the poet and his times and translations of his poetry.
Annemarie Schimmel, Pain and Grace: A Study of Two Mystical Writers of
Eighteenth-Century Muslim India (Leiden, 1976) is a detailed study of
the poetry and religious thought of Mir Dard ("Pain") and Shah. Abdu'l-
Latif ("Grace"). \[ [back](#20) \]  
21. For translations of the Punjabi poetry, see Lajwanti Raffia Krishna,
Panjabi Sufi Poets (London and Calcutta, 1938). The entire Hir Ranjha of
Waris Shah, the most popular poem in the language, has been translated
into English by Charles Frederick Usborne, available in an edition
edited by Mumtaz Hasan (Karachi, 1966). \[ [back](#21) \]  
22. Richard B. Barnett, North India Between Empires: Awadh, the Mughals,
and the British, 1720-1801 (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1980) discusses
the extent to which competition among the nobility in a protected state
took the form of cultural competition. \[ [back](#22) \]  
23. See K. A. Nizami, "Cishtiyya," in the Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd ed.
(Leiden, 1954-) (hereafter EI2), II. See also: M. Zameerudin Siddiqi,
"The Resurgence of the Chishti Silsilah in the Punjab during the
Eighteenth Century ," in Indian Historical Congress, Proceedings of the
Thirty- Second Session (Jabalpur, 1970), 1,408-12. \[ [back](#23) \]  
24. Annemarie Schimmel, Mystical Dimensions of Islam (Chapel Hill, N
.C., 1975), p. 397. \[ [back](#24) \]  
25. The flowering of Urdu poetry in the eighteenth century has been well
studied in Russell and Islam, Three Mughal Poets. See also the general
histories of Urdu: Ram Babu Saxena, History of Urdu Literature
(Allahabad, 1940); Muhammad Sadiq, A History of Urdu Literature (London,
1964); and Annemarie Schimmel, Classical Urdu Literature from the
Beginning to Iqbal (Wiesbaden, 1975). Two opposing theories about the
change from Persian to Urdu are in: Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic
Culture in the Indian Environment (London, 1964), pp. 252-53, where the
author anachronistically attributes the change to a concern for the
preservation of a minority culture, seeing it as an "instinctive escape
from the fear of submergence into the Hindu cultural milieu"; and Fritz
Lehman, "Urdu Literature and Mughal Decline," paper delivered at the
82nd meeting of the American Historical Association, Toronto, December
29, 1967, where the change is described as a statement of "lndianness,"
"a desire to speak not to an international but to an Indian Muslim
community." Neither explanation seems to me as significant as the
fundamental shift to a regional focus for political and cultural
expression. \[ [back](#25) \]  
26. For a bibliography of works relating to the Naqshbandi order, see
Hamid Algar, "Biographical Notes on the Naqshbandi Tariqat," in George
F. Hourani, ed., Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science (Albany,
1975), pp. 254-59. \[ [back](#26) \]  
27. The material in this section is primarily abstracted from the
biographical compendium by Muhammad 'Inayatu'llah Ansari, Tazkirah- yi
'Ulama-yi Farangi Mahall (Lucknow, n.d.). I am very grateful to Francis
Robinson for informative comments on Farangi Mahall (in a personal
communication, June 12, 1978). He notes that the family was supported at
least from the sixteenth century, when Akbar made a generous madad- i
ma'ash grant to Mulla Hafiz, Qutbu'd-Din's great-great-grandfather. \[
[back](#27) \]  
28. The term *shaikh* in India is used for a Sufi master and, as here,
for those regarded as descendants of the companions of the Prophet. The
*shaikhs* were part of the *ashraf,* the well-born or respectable of
Indian Muslim society, whose definition seems to have taken form in the
eighteenth century. The *ashraf* were divided into four ranked grades,
each claiming non-Indian descent: the sayyids, the descendants of the
Prophet; the *shaikhs*, the descendants of his companions; the Mughals,
who entered India with the Timurid rulers; and the Pathans or Afghans,
who came both as rulers and settlers. \[ [back](#28) \]  
29. Muhammad Shafi', "Bahr ul-'Ulum," E12, II. \[ [back](#29) \]  
30. Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, pp. 406-408, lists the books included in the
*dars-i nizami*. \[ [back](#30) \]  
31. For this and other examples of students who came to Farangi Mahall
from Bengal, see 'Abdu's-Sattar, Tarikh-i Madrasah-yi 'Aliyah (Dacca,
1959). \[ [back](#31) \]  
32. Syed Altar Ali Barelvi, Life of Hafiz Rahmat Khan (Karachi, 1966),
p.268. \[ [back](#32) \]  
33. Shaikh Muhammad Ikram, Rud-i Kausar (Lahore, 1968), pp. 603-10,
criticizes their activities as totally out of touch with the needs of
the Muslim community. Maulana 'Abdu'l-Halim Sharar, Guzashtah Lakhna'u
ya Mashriq ke Tamaddun ka Akhiri Namunah (Lucknow, n.d.), pp. 25-26, 93,
119-22, the account of a litterateur at the beginning of this century,
offers a far more positive appraisal. This book has recently been
translated by E. S. Harcourt and Fakhir Hussain under the title,
Lucknow: The Last Phase of an Oriental Culture {London, 1975). For
Farangi Mahall see especially pp. 74-76. \[ [back](#33) \]  
34. Shah Waliyu'llah--like the Farangi Mahallis--still awaits a
definitive study. One of the most useful books available on Shah
Waliyu'llah is G. N. Jalbani, Teachings of Shah Waliyullah of Delhi (2nd
ed., Lahore, 1973). It organizes material about him by academic subject:
Qur'an, *hadis, fiqh, tasawwuf,* etc., and attempts to present
faithfully Shah Waliyu'llah's own views. For details of his life, see
Aziz Ahmad, Studies, pp. 201-209; Muhammad Ikram, Rud-i Kauar, pp.
527-68; Masood Ghaznavi, "Shah Wali Ullah Dehlavi: His Political and
Social Thought" (an unpublished paper); and S.A.A. Rizvi, "The Breakdown
of Traditional Society," in The Cambridge History of Islam {Cambridge,
1970), 11,67-96. \[ [back](#34) \]  
35. Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, Shah Waliyu'llah Dihlawi ke Siyasi Maktubat
(Delhi, 1969); Hafeez Malik, Moslem Nationalism in India and Pakistan
(Washington, D.C., 1963), pp. 135-39. \[ [back](#35) \]  
36. Fazlur Rahman, "The Thinker of Crisis: Shah Waliy-ullah," Pakistan
Quarterly, 6:2 {1956), 44. \[ [back](#36) \]  
37. On this subject see Mohammad Daud Rahbar, "Shah Wali Ullah and
Ijtihad," The Muslim World, 45 {October 1955), 357. \[ [back](#37) \]  
38. Mawlavi M. Hidayat Husain, "The Persian Autobiography of Shah
Wali-ullah bin. Abd al-Rahim al-Dihlavi: Its English Translation and a
List of His Works," Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 8 (1912),
167. \[ [back](#38) \]  
39. Mujeeb, Indian Muslims, p. 277. \[ [back](#39) \]  
40. Jalbani, Waliyullah, p. 7. \[ [back](#40) \]  
41. Professor Masood Ghaznavi has, in a personal communication, pointed
to this *kashf* recorded in the *Fuyuzu'l-Haramain*, and has suggested
that this position in particular is suggestive of the comprehensiveness
of Shah Waliyu'llah's *tatbiq*. \[ [back](#41) \]  
42. These are the terms, respectively. of Aziz Ahmad, Studies, p. 187;
L. Gardet, "Allah," EI2, I; and K. A. Nizami, "Hind," EI2, III. Each of
these authors presents a worthwhile perspective on this complex subject.
For a lucid and compelling insight into the *wujudi* philosophy, see the
writings of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, particularly Sufi Essays (London,
1972). \[ [back](#42) \]  
43. Friedmann, Sirhindi, pp. 59-68. \[ [back](#43) \]  
44. Nizami, .'Hind," EI2, III. \[ [back](#44) \]  
45. De Bary, Sources of Indian Tradition, 1,454. \[ [back](#45) \]  
46. Muhammad Ikra.m, Rud-i Kausar, p. 536. \[ [back](#46) \]  
47. For descriptions of Shi'i customs, particularly in the successor
state of Oudh, see Mrs. Meer Hasan Ali, Observations on the Mussulmans
of India (London, 1832), an account of an English woman who married into
a respectable Shi'i family of Lucknow; and Sharar, *Guzishtah Lakhnau*.
For an account of the Shi'ah in the Deccan, see Ja'far Sharif, Islam in
India or the Qanun-i-Islam, translated by G. A. Herklots and edited by
William Crooke (reprint, Delhi, 1972). Also see John Norman Hollister ,
The Shi'a of India {London, 1953), and Murray T. Titus, Islam in India
and Pakirtan (Calcutta, 1959). \[ [back](#47) \]  
48. Muhammad Ayyub Qadiri, Maulana Muhammad Ahsan Nanautawi (Karachi,
1966), p. 6; and Sayyid Manazir Ahsan Gilani, Sawanih-i Qasimi {Deoband,
1955), 1,67. \[ [back](#48) \]  
49. Sayyid Tufail Ahmad Manglauri, *Musalmanon-ka Raushan Mustaqbil*
(Delhi, 1945), p. 138. \[ [back](#49) \]  
50. Karen Leonard, "The Hyderabad Politcal System and Its Participants,"
Journal of Asian Studies, 30:3 {1971),581. \[ [back](#50) \]  
51. Manazir Ahsan Gilani, Sawanih-i Qasimi, I, 60. \[ [back](#51) \]  
52. Zuhuru'l Hasan Kasoli, ed., *Arwah-i Salasah* (Saharanpur, 1950),
pp. 22-23. \[ [back](#52) \]  
53. Muhammad Ikram, *Rud-i Kausar,* p. 57. \[ [back](#53) \]  
54. Zuhuru'l Hasan Kasoli, ed., *Arwah-i Salasah*, pp. 16-17. \[
[back](#54) \]  
55. Muhammad Ikram, *Rud-i Kausar*, p. 550. \[ [back](#55) \]  
56. Zuhuru'l Hasan Kasoli, ed., *Arwah-i Salasah*, pp. 18-19. \[
[back](#56) \]  
57. Muhammad lkram, Rud-i Kausar, p. 570. \[ [back](#57) \]  
58. Dr. A. J. Halepota, Philosophy of Shah Waliullah (Lahore, n.d.), pp.
5-6. \[ [back](#58) \]  
59. Zuhuru'l Hasan Kasoli, ed., *Arwah-i Salasah*, p. 19. \[ [back](#59)
\]  
60. The exception is that of' Abdu'l-Haqq Muhaddis. The general point
about the paucity of early biographical dictionaries of the 'ulama is
made in two introductions to one of the major dictionaries of the
nineteenth century, *Tazkirah-yi 'Ulama'-yi Hind* of Rahman 'Ali,
translated into Urdu by Muhammad Ayyub Qadiri (Karachi, 1964). Maulana
Muhammad 'Abdu'r-Rashid Nu'mani, in his introduction (pp. 30-34),
suggests that scholars of *hadis* are typically interested in biography
as well, pre- sumably because their study necessitates examination of
the lives of transmitters of the traditions in order to decide if they
were reliable. The introduction by Dr. Sayyid Mu'inu'l-Haqq (pp. 35-66)
mentions one other eighteenth-century biographical dictionary (included
in a general history), *Farhatu'n-Nazirin* by Muhammad Aslam, written in
1770. \[ [back](#60) \]  
61. A. S. Bazmee Ansari, "Azad Bilgrami," EJ2, 11. See also his article
"Fadl-i Imam" EI2, 11. Fazl-i Imam Khairabadi {d. 1829), the first
*sadru's-sudur* under the East India Company in Delhi, is also notable
as one of the first biographers of the 'ulama. His *Tarajim ul-Fuzala'*
comprises biographical notices of the leading scholars of Oudh. The text
with translation has been published by the Pakistan Historical Society,
edited by Mufti Intizamullah Shihabi {Karachi, 1965). \[ [back](#61)
\]  
62. For a list of outstanding scholars of the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries, see Mohiuddin Ahmad, Saiyid Ahmad Shahid: His Life
and Mission {Lucknow, 1975), pp. 14-16. \[ [back](#62) \]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --
