+++
title = "68 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source:
http://64.233.161.104/search?q=cache:1KpZZSchZ9MJ:www.farahmahbub.com/PersonalDivergences/EtherEchoes/imgsDilrubaSafarnama/DAWN-BookReviews.pdf+salim+chishti+pir&hl=en  
(downloaded Jan. 2005)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DAWN  
21 November 2004, Sunday, 08 Shawwal 1425  


EXCERPTS: Preaching love and tolerance

By Ali S. Asani

*Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti, who lies buried in Ajmer, was one of the most
revered sufis of India. Ali S. Asani*  
*writes about him and his admirers.*  


Who was Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti and why has his dargah attained such
pre-eminence? Although Muinuddin Chishti looms large in the history of
Islam and Sufism in South Asia, we have, unfortunately, very little
accurate information about him, because of an absence of reliable
contemporary sources. Most of what we know is based on legend and
hagiography that developed around his figure several centuries after his
death. As a result, we know considerably more about the personality of
Muinuddin as it was constructed over time through the veneration of
successive generations of devotees than the actual Muinuddin of history.
As we gingerly sift through legendary accounts to separate historical
fact from pious fiction, certain basic information about him emerges.

A pious, modest Sufi Shaykh, whose family claimed descent from the
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), Muinuddin probably grew up in Sijistan, Iran.
As a young man, he sold the property he had inherited and went to the
Central Asian cities of Samarkand and Bukhara in search of spiritual
instruction. In the course of his extensive travels, he was initiated
into the Chishti Sufi order by Shaykh Usman Harwani, eventually becoming
his principal *khalifa*. Towards the end of the 12th century, Khwaja
Muinuddin came to India, via Afghanistan, settling first in Delhi and
later in Ajmer where he attracted a substantial following, acquiring a
great deal of respect among residents of the city.

Khwaja Muinuddin apparently never wrote down his teachings in the form
of a book, nor did his immediate disciples do so. Consequently, we have
to rely on information transmitted through oral traditions and
hagiographies concerning what he taught. A popular tradition asserts
that Khwaja Muinuddin preached that his disciples should have
"generosity like that of the ocean, mildness like that of the sun, a
modesty like that of the earth". It is very likely that the central
principles that became characteristics of the early Chishti order are
based on his many teachings and practices. They lay stress on
renunciation of material goods; strict regime of self-discipline and
personal prayer; participation in *sama* as a legitimate means to
spiritual transformation; reliance on either cultivation or unsolicited
offerings as means of basic subsistence; independence from rulers and
the state, including rejection of monetary and land grants; generosity
to others, particularly through sharing of food and wealth; and
tolerance and respect for religious differences.

Khwaja Muinuddin married late in life, dying seven years after his
marriage at the age of 97 on Rajab 6, most probably in 1236. His two
principal khalifas, Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar (d.1235) and Hamiduddin Savali
(d. 1276), continued transmitting the teachings of their master through
their disciples, leading to the widespread proliferation of the Chishti
Sufi order in India. Among Qutbuddin's prominent disciples was
Fariduddin Ganj-i-Shakar (the treasure-house of sugar) (d. 1265), whose
*dargah* is at Pakpattan in Pakistan.

Fariduddin's most famous disciple was Nizamuddin Awliya (d. 1325),
popularly referred to as Mahboob-i-Ilahi (God's beloved). His dargah is
located in old Delhi from where his disciples branched out to establish
dargahs in several regions from Sindh in the west to Bengal in the east
and the Deccan in the south. With the development of an extensive
network of Chishti dargahs all over the subcontinent, the Ajmer *dargah*
took on the special distinction of being the 'mother' *dargah* of them
all.

Notwithstanding his piety and charisma, as scholars have noted, Khwaja
Muinuddin was not widely known during his lifetime. This would explain
the absence of references to him in contemporary documents. However, as
the Chishti Sufi order, which he is considered to have introduced to
India, attained supremacy over other Sufi orders in the course of the
14th and 15th centuries, there was a great deal of interest in its
origins. As a result, numerous legends developed around the founder of
this influential order. Many of these legendary accounts also
highlighted his pioneering role in relation to the introduction of Islam
into the  
region.

One such account in the 17th-century Siyar al-Aqtab records that while
on a pilgrimage to Prophet Muhammad's tomb in Medina, Khwaja Muinuddin
heard a voice from inside the tomb ordering him to go to Hindustan,
specifically to Ajmer, to propagate Islam. The legend thus suggests that
the tremendous popularity of Khwaja Muinuddin and that of Chishti
masters who succeeded him is primarily due to the authority and
blessings he is believed to have received from the Prophet himself.

Royal patronage

Khwaja Muinuddin and the early Chishtis were vehemently against any
close association with those in political power as they considered such
contact to be detrimental to a person's moral and spiritual wellbeing.
Ironically, by the early 14th century, the Chishti order began to rise
to prominence precisely on account of the enormous royal patronage it
was attracting. As Muslim rulers of Turko-Persian ancestry began to
establish kingdoms in the subcontinent, they associated their own
personal fortunes and those of their dynasty with that of the Chishti
order.

Such patronage could strengthen their claims of legitimacy in the eyes
of the local population and also bestow upon it spiritual blessings for
continued prosperity and success. As a consequence, a pattern of growing
political patronage of Chishti shrines emerged in many parts of northern
India, from Gujarat to Bengal. Naturally the 'mother' *dargah* at Ajmer
received a great deal of royal attention, all the more so due to its
frontier location.

While the dynasties, both Muslim and non-Muslim, patronized the shrine
at Ajmer, its most generous and loyal patrons were members of the Mughal
dynasty who were firmly convinced that their worldly success was due to
the blessings of the Chishti Shaykhs. As a result, not only did Mughal
emperors bestow lavish endowments for the support of the dargah and
sponsor several construction projects, they also actively involved
themselves in its management by appointing its administrators and
titular heads.

Akbar (r. 1556-1605), in particular, was an ardent devotee. The
Akbarnama records that the emperor's interest in Khwaja Muinuddin and
his dargah was first sparked when he heard some minstrels singing songs
about the virtues of the holy man who lay asleep in Ajmer. He then
resolved to make the annual pilgrimage to Ajmer during the time of the
urs. In all, he undertook 14 pilgrimages to the shrine, several of them
on foot. Two of these pilgrimages, those of 1568 and 1574, were made
immediately after conquering Chittor and Bengal respectively.

Discussing his military successes with the historian Abd al-Qadir
Badauni, Akbar remarked: "All this success has been brought through the
Pir Muinuddin Chishti." Akbar's reverence for and devotion to the
Chishtis increased significantly when Shaykh Salim Chishti, a descendant
of Baba Farid Ganj-i-Shakar, correctly predicted the birth of his son
and heir, Prince Salim. In gratitude, Akbar performed a pilgrimage to
Ajmer, walking on foot all the way from Agra.

He also had his new capital city, Fatehpur Sikri, built near Salim
Chishti's *khanqah* as a tangible way of symbolizing the close
Mughal-Chishti alliance. During every visit to Ajmer, Akbar contributed
generously to the shrine to sponsor several projects such as the
building of a mosque and the renovation of the mausoleum. He also
donated a large *deg*, or cauldron, to start the system of cooking and
distributing food in quantity to pilgrims coming to the shrine.

Akbar's son Jahangir (r. 1605-27) was similarly devoted to the *dargah*,
believing that he owed his very physical existence to the blessings of
Khawaja Muinuddin. He lived in Ajmer for nearly three years, not only
because it pleased him to be near the dargah (during this time he
visited the shrine nine times), but also because he wanted to conduct a
campaign against one of his most formidable opponents, Rana Amar Singh
of Mewar. To commemorate his victory over the Rana, Jahangir performed a
pilgrimage to the *dargah* on foot, distributing money on the way to the
poor and the needy.

During another visit, he donated an enormous cauldron to cook food for
5,000 people, lighting the fire beneath it himself when it was first
used. In 1616, he donated a gold railing with latticework that was
installed around Khwaja Muinuddin's tomb. Jahangir's belief in the power
of Khwaja Muinuddin was such that after his recovery from a serious
illness, during which he had prayed at the shrine, he had his ears
pierced and pearls inserted in them to symbolize his complete devotion
to the Shaykh.

The emperor Shah Jahan (r. 1627-58) visited the dargah five times during
his reign, always approaching it on foot. In fulfillment of a vow of
thanksgiving he had made during a successful military campaign, Shah
Jahan ordered the construction of a major congregational mosque at the
*dargah*. Completed in 1637, the white marble mosque was unrivalled in
beauty. In 1654, to celebrate the defeat of a rebellious local ruler,
Shah Jahan ordered the construction of a large gateway to the shrine.

Shah Jahan's eldest daughter, Jahanara Begum (1614-81), was personally
inclined to Islamic mysticism. A passionate devotee of Muinuddin
Chishti, she wrote a well-known biography on him. In the appendix of
this work, she recounts the details of her own pilgrimage to the shrine
in 1643 and the mystical ecstasy that overcame her one evening while she
was circumambulating the tomb. A generous patroness, Jahanara had a
pillared porch built in marble in front of the tomb. This porch is today
appropriately called the Begumi Dalan, a name derived from her title,
Begum Sahib.

With the collapse of the Mughal dynasty, the dargah at Ajmer lost
stability in its royal patronage as various rival factions attempted to
fill in the political vacuum left by the Mughals. It continued, however,
to occupy the attention of various rulers, Muslim and non-Muslim alike,
for patronage of the shrine was a useful means to securing the political
loyalty of the local population.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mumtaz Currim is Lecturer in Indo-Islamic Architecture and religion at
the University of Mumbai. Her master's dissertation on dargahs was
presented at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London. George Mitchell is an architectural historian specializing in
India. Ali S. Asani is professor of the Practice of Indo-Muslim
Languages and Culture at Harvard University.*

*This coffee table book focuses on some of the historically most
significant dargahs (shrines) of saints in various parts of India.
Excerpted with permission from: Dargahs: Abodes of the Saints. Edited by
Mumtaz Currim and George Mitchell. Photographs by Karoki Lewis. Marg
Publications. Available with Indus Publications, 25 Fareed Chambers,
Abdullah Haroon Road,*  
*Karachi.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

