---
title: Lecturing
---

Write your own introductions.

## Importance

They can add to reputation and opportunities beyond what may be earned
through research. It is also very important during hiring
considerations. It is essential in teaching.

## Objective setting

Have a clear objective. Know your audience.

Distinguish between tutorial presentations, job-talks and conference
presentations. Talks at conferences are meant to encourage reading the
paper, as it may not be possible to present the entire content of the
paper in the given time.

Present to inform and provoke thought. Then you will impress.

## Content

### Importance of preparation

Always prepare the content, in full detail, beforehand. This is
especially important for mathematical presentations.

The preparation is best when you can present naturally, straight from
the short-term memory, without looking at notes. Eg: pradIp, pratIk.

Then you can anticipate questions. Then you will catch your own
mistakes.

If it is unclear, email authors of the paper for such information.

### Expectation-setting

Always set up the audience’s expectations.

Have a clear outline. At any point in the talk, the audience should know
what part of the talk you are covering.

### Varying levels of abstraction

Present the intuition before the details.

Use visual content. A good standard is to have a picture in each slide.

Use analogies and examples.

In presenting mathematics, hide parameters (such as delta) unnecessary
to the main result by replacing them with constant values.

Stick to the point. Do not cram in too much data and bullet slides.

Short phrases better than full sentences.

### Stimulating audience interest and prior knowledge

Motivate the importance of the topic, with examples, problems etc..

Use live demos in lectures, if possible.

You have to insert a break in your presentation every 10 minutes to
refresh the audience.

## Composing yourself

### Calming turbulence

Remember the aim: ’Relax, look at them, tell them what you know. They
may not know it as well as you do.’

Defensiveness about ideas and nervousness come together. Separate
yourself from the ideas you are presenting. You are presenting some
ideas, not your ideas. Keep the mind supple.

Be confident and somewhat animated: very important. Don’t be nervous.

If there is more nervousness, you tend to go over material faster.

### Practice

More practice, less variance in time taken for delivery.

More practice, less nervousness.

Carry water or a refreshing drink to keep energy and enthusiasm from
sagging.

Videotape yourself.

## The delivery

### Guided Dialogue

The talk should be a dialogue with the audience. The audience’s message
may not be in words, but it is often communicated using body language.
You should look for audience reactions, look for signs of doubt or
incomprehension, and adjust your talk appropriately - maybe you should
ask or invite questions at certain points.

It is good to use visual aids like slides and movies, and auditory aids;
but never use it as a crutch\! You should, for the most part, deliver
your message while looking at the audience.

#### Asking questions

If necessary, ask directed questions.

When you ask questions, wait for the answer. (This could take 12 to 15
seconds.)

In case of tutorials, this is especially important: Ask many leading
questions; Let them discover the proof.

#### Math case

Mathematicians talk shop on the board; so there is heavier use of visual
aids.

The ability to read out mathematical expressions in natural language and
explain the intuition behind it is important.

Often it is mostly a matter of transferring ideas from notes to the
board, and explaining it.

### Attention management

Keep motivating current part of the lecture adequately.

Induce seriousness and fun in the class. Eg: RK.

#### Emotion

Excitement and emotion should come accross in presentations. Great
teachers are highly animated. Like sanjay and lexing.

### Using presentation aids

Pointing: Try not to touch the screen and shake it.

Animation: Make lines appear one at a time, to keep the audience’s
attention.

Use live demos where possible: they are always impressive.

### Beginning presentations

Begin talk by thanking the audience for coming to the talk, and saying
’It is my pleasure to talk about XYZ today’.

### Ending presentations

Say conclusion, acknowledgements. Thank the audience for their
attention, and invite questions.

#### Conclusion

Have a take home message.

#### Acknowledgements

Praise and acknowledge roles of others. Sasha acknowledged knowledge
inferred from courses of Klivans, Zuckerman and Gal (Communication
complexity).

### Body language

Use body language appropriate for a guided, honest dialogue. Use smiles
when appropriate.

Make eye contact. This stimulates the amygdala and enable attachment of
emotions to knowledge.

Don’t put your hand in the pocket, don’t cross it over the chest: they
are signs of fear and anxiety.

#### Gestures

Use gestures, move around. Gestures can help you make points,
distinguish concepts. That can aid you in captivating the audience.
Great teachers are highly animated. Like sanjay and lexing.

### Voice

Don’t shout and hurt your voice and mood. Use appropriate aids or ask
audience to move closer.

Venue: Voice carries well in an auditorium: no need to shout.

Do not mumble. Don’t end sentences weakly.

Pauses and expression is important in delivery. Include presentation
cues in your slides (eg: pausing, pitch variation, stressing etc..).

Take extra care with the beginning and the ending. Decrease pitch at the
end of some sentences.

### Feedback, questions

Most of the audience’s feedback is expressed in body-language; but you
should invite a good amount of verbal feedback. Especially when
presenting ideas to close collaborators, questions and ideas flow more
freely.

The dialogue should be a honest one: you should be able to think for a
short while, and be open to the prospect of learning from the audience.
You can think for a larger duration while talking to close
collaborators. Don’t bluff when answering questions, be able to admit
that you don’t know the answer.

Don’t let particular members of the audience make you nervous. Shouldn’t
need to look at pieces of paper to answer questions. You should postpone
tough questions off-line if necessary.

Even criticism is important. If they expose holes in your understanding
and skills, that is especially good.

Keep a pad or a recorder handy to record important comments and
questions.

