+++
title = "Brit lynching"
+++

(A British officer from Anjengo factory in 18th century Travancore nearly lost his life for overlooking at a temple out of his curiosity & saw a Nair lady. The local Nairs chased him and  almost lynched him until he ran & hid himself in a village under moplahs)

These ignorant and bigotted priests seem to hold strangers in abhorrence, and detest every intrusion into their holy retreats: I nearly lost my life by indulging an innocent curiosity near Quilone, a Dutch settlement, twenty miles to the northward of Anjengo. Strolling one evening through a wild scenery of woods and forests, I accidentally saw a Hindoo temple, almost concealed by banyan trees. Pleased with the scenery, I ascended a rising ground within the grove, to take a sketch; and in an adjoining tank saw a Nair girl performing her ablutions: she instantly snatched up her garment, and ran to an inner court; aware of her high caste, I did not attempt to speak to her; but seating myself on the bank, finished my drawing. In the grove was a Nair at his devotions, who, on the female speaking to him with earnestness, looked stedfastly at me, and departed with her to the temple. Thinking no more of either, I returned leisurely towards Quilone; when hearing a noise, I looked round, and perceived the same man, joined by several others, armed with sticks and stones, hastily following, and alarming the forest with their cries. I had neither time for deliberation, nor any weapon to defend myself; but, with a little distance in my favour, ran to the nearest village, and claimed the protection of some Moplals, having received a few stones in my flight.

Upon inquiring from these Mahomedans the nature of an offence so undesignedly committed, they told me I had, in the first instance, ventured on sacred ground, untrod by Europeans; and had seen a woman of high caste in a consecrated tank; crimes of great atrocity among that superstitious people; and had they over taken me, my life might have been the forfeit of my temerity. The next day the brahmins sent orders to the English party at Quilone to keep at a distance from their districts, lest the atmosphere should be tainted by our breath; and some of the milder sort sent a basket of live poultry to an English lady of our party, that during our abode there, we might abstain from eating beef.