+++
title = "15 MELISSA"

+++



  


  


  


  


MELISSA CLEARLY MERITS special attention, if only as mother of one of Gombe’s most dynamic alpha males. Her life was remarkable in other ways too. For one thing, she gave birth, in 1977, to Gombe’s only known twins. I shall never forget my first sight of the babies—fraternal twins whom we named Gyre and Gimble. Melissa was sitting in the late afternoon sun, holding the two tiny bodies close to her breast so that they were all but invisible. One was suckling, the other seemed to be sleeping. When Melissa moved off, followed by her daughter Gremlin, I went with them and by the time I got back to the house that evening I had a real appreciation of the enormity of Melissa’s task. Most infants, by the time they are two or three weeks old, can cling to the mother without support for long periods of time. The twins gripped well enough. But one kept clinging to the other by mistake: then he would pull his brother loose and both would start to fall, uttering loud cries of distress. Melissa had to give them almost constant support, holding them close with one arm, or travelling with her legs bent so as to support their backs with her thighs. Once, that first afternoon, one of the twins half-fell and banged his head on the ground. He screamed loudly and this set the other crying too and it was several minutes before Melissa managed to quieten them. She also had a lot of trouble making her nest. I couldn’t see her well, for she was in dense foliage, but I heard a lot of crying from the babies.

That evening Derek and I talked with Hilali, Eslom and Hamisi around the fire. Hamisi described his first observation, when the babies were only a few days old. Melissa had travelled very slowly, walking a few yards at a time, then sitting and cradling the twins for a minute or two before moving on again. She had seemed exhausted and had made her nest early. The following morning Eslom managed to climb high in a neighbouring tree so that he could see into the nest. Gremlin left her small bed just after 7.00 A.M. and began feeding nearby. But Melissa showed no signs of stirring for another hour and a half. Then she sat up and began to groom herself, occasionally making a few grooming movements on one or other of the twins. Ten minutes later she stood up, ready to go: the infants at once began to whimper. So Melissa sat down again, looked helplessly at the babies for a moment, and then lay down. Fifteen minutes later she again tried to leave—as before both babies began to cry and so Melissa, after cradling and briefly grooming them, lay down once more. The same thing happened several more times, and it was almost two hours after her first attempt to leave that she finally made it. Clutching the twins tightly and ignoring their frenzied screaming, she climbed from the tree with almost desperate haste. Only when they were all three safely on the ground did she stop to comfort them.

For the first three months of the twins’ lives Melissa was followed every day for we all feared that Passion and Pom would strike again and we planned to intervene if they did. And in Melissa’s mind too the memory of their bitter attack on her previous infant must have been vivid for, despite the difficulty she experienced in travelling with her two babies, she managed, during the first month, to keep close to one or other of the big males almost all the time. The advantages of this were made very clear to me one day when the twins were about a month old. I had followed Melissa, Gremlin and Satan as they climbed to the very top of the mountain ridge we call Sleeping Buffalo. It was a grey, cold afternoon in November, with thunder grumbling in the south. Earlier it had rained hard, and our high valley was still dank and chill under the sullen clouds. I shivered as I watched Melissa feeding on palm nuts above me. Suddenly a twig snapped: I turned sharply and found, to my horror, that Passion and Pom had approached, moving almost without sound on the soft, wet, forest floor. Now they stood, motionless, staring up towards Melissa and her babies. None of the chimps above had seen them. With slow, stealthy movements Pom started to climb towards Melissa. Passion, heavily pregnant, climbed as well, but she soon stopped and watched from a low branch. Pom, creeping very quietly, got closer and closer and I was just about to yell a warning when suddenly Melissa saw them. Instantly she began to scream, loudly and urgently and, reckless in her panic, took a huge leap through space, towards the nearest branch of the next tree, the babies supported only by her thighs. My heart was thudding but somehow all three made it and Melissa hurried to sit close to Satan—who had stopped feeding and was watching Pom intently. Melissa, with one hand laid on the big male’s shoulders, turned and barked her defiance at the younger female. And so the attempt was foiled. But if Satan had not been there it seems almost certain that another gruesome battle would have taken place, high above the ground, and there would have been nothing I could have done to help.

Very soon after that incident the twins developed quite bad rashes on their bellies and inner thighs, and Melissa, we noticed, had lost a good deal of hair in the region of her groin. This was because all three were becoming fouled with urine and faeces. Usually a baby’s excrement falls neatly between the thighs of the mother as she sits—and if, by chance, there is a mistake, the mother quickly picks a handful of leaves and wipes herself clean. But it did not work this way with the twins, and Melissa simply could not cope. And then, on top of this, Gyre somehow hurt his foot. Clearly he was in considerable pain, for he screamed loudly almost every time Melissa moved—a strange scream, high-pitched like the wild cries of some sea bird in distress. Poor Melissa—the crying of one sick twin was bad enough, but so often Gimble joined in, frightened, perhaps, by the intensity of his brother’s calls. Sometimes when they yelled Melissa sat and cradled them until they quietened. But at other times, holding them tightly, she moved on very fast, uttering a series of cough-like grunts—as though she was threatening them. Usually they then screamed even louder and, after a few minutes Melissa, utterly confused or fed-up \(or both\), climbed into a tree and, with the same quick movements, constructed a large nest. During this process the screams were redoubled and could be heard from afar. But once Melissa lay in her nest with them, all was quiet.

Now that Melissa could no longer keep up with the big males, she and Gremlin spent much time in the vicinity of camp. It was fortunate indeed that Passion, heavy with child, was no longer interested in devouring the infants of others. And Pom, although she could almost certainly have snatched one of the twins without much difficulty, clearly lacked the nerve to tackle an older female without the support of her high-ranking mother. However, while the danger of a cannibalistic attack thus seemed remote, we were worried on another score. For Melissa, preoccupied with the task of transporting and quietening her twins, spent less and less time in feeding. Some days, indeed, she fed for only an hour—whereas normally an adult chimpanzee spends some six to eight hours a day in feeding. We gave Melissa extra bananas, and the men gathered some of the wild fruits that were in season and offered those as well.

After a week I decided that we should give Melissa a course of antibiotics. I hoped that this would get into her milk and help to clear up Gyre’s infected foot. And so, for five days, we took a little supply of bananas with us when we followed Melissa and, at regular intervals, handed her one—laced with medicinal powder. I don’t know if this helped, but Gyre’s foot did get better and soon Melissa was able to go about her daily business with no more difficulty than before.

Gyre’s injury, however, was a setback from which he never really recovered and from then on it was clear that Gimble was developing much faster than his twin—and even Gimble was way behind a normal youngster. It was not until he was six months old, when most infants are already taking their first steps, that Gimble began to pull himself to different positions on his mother’s body. Yet once he began these exercises, Gimble was soon able to scramble up onto Melissa’s back. Having mastered this skill he very often rode on his mother during travel, or draped himself with his head hanging over her shoulder as she sat feeding. Sometimes he even slept like that. Probably he liked getting away from the somewhat crowded accommodation offered by the maternal lap. It was not until he was ten months old that, for the first time, he broke contact with Melissa to take his first tottering steps and climb onto his first small branch. Gyre, however, never even tried to walk or climb. He remained quietly on his mother’s lap, often with his eyes closed.

The 1978 dry season was unusually harsh and by August there was less food than usual at Gombe. Even before this there had never seemed to be quite enough milk for two infants, and now it was obvious that both twins were permanently hungry—at almost any minute of the day there was one, if not two, infants tugging urgently at Melissa’s breasts. Gimble, stronger and more active than his brother, almost certainly took more than his fair share of the scant supply, and so Gyre became more and more lethargic. When he fell sick with the cold that was going the rounds, his weakened system could not cope. The cold became pneumonia and one day Melissa arrived in camp carrying Gyre, a small limp body, in one hand. He was too weak to cling to her, he breathed with difficulty and his eyes remained closed.

When Melissa climbed into a tree, supporting Gyre only with her thighs, he fell, landing with a thud on the hard ground some ten feet below. Melissa rushed down to gather him up, embrace him and groom him. He was still breathing when she moved off, but she carried him as though he were already dead, slung over her shoulder and held in place with her chin. He fell several times, lying motionless on the ground until she picked him up. The following morning he was dead.

I was sad when Gyre died, and disappointed at the lost opportunity to chart the development of twins in the wild and study the relationship between them. Nevertheless, I couldn’t help but feel that, for both Melissa and Gimble, it was for the best. Certainly Gimble then began to make up for lost time. Soon, although tiny for his age, he was practising acrobatics in the branches and playing with other youngsters. He became increasingly active, gambolling from place to place, performing little stamping displays, turning somersaults, and, on many occasions, playing wildly with fallen leaves. Sometimes he swept them into a great pile with his hands, then moved backwards, pulling them after him. Or he pushed them ahead of him in a mound that grew bigger and bigger as he went. Often he rolled in the leaves, and once he threw handfuls all over his head and back, then rubbed them against his face.

Melissa still had her problems, but they were different now. Gimble often refused to follow her when she was ready to leave: either she had to drag him away, or she had to wait. Once, as she tried to pull him after her, he seized hold of vegetation with both hands and clung on for some moments before she could wrench him free. Eventually she got him onto her back, but after she had taken only a few steps he leapt down and ran back to play. Quickly Melissa grabbed him again and dragged him after her. Soon he escaped and once more ran to play. Melissa chased after him, but he avoided her and hid behind a tree. Melissa followed and, as he gambolled away, grabbed at him—and missed. He be gan to play again. Melissa watched for a moment, then reached out cautiously, seized his hand and began to pull him over the ground after her. Gimble bit her hand but it was only in fun and she reciprocated, tickling him. Soon he was laughing loudly. After that she once more put him on her back and this time he stayed on board.

Throughout Gimble’s infancy Gremlin was an integral part of the family. At Gombe there is no closer relationship in chimpanzee society than that between a mother and her grown daughter. Females seldom start to leave their mothers, even for a few hours, until they are about ten years old—and then only when they are sexually attractive. There are definite benefits for a young female who hangs around with Mother. For one thing, she can often get the better of females older than herself because her mother usually intervenes on her behalf if things go wrong. The mother typically joins forces with her daughter against the early challenges of young males, too. But it is not all roses. The young female has to pay a price for this protection and support: her mother will dominate her utterly, showing all the authoritarian discipline of a Victorian matriarch. Thus it is Mother who chooses the direction of travel, Mother who decides whether they should move fast or slowly, Mother who automatically gets first choice of feeding place and food. Gremlin, like all the other young females, soon found this out for herself.

When, for example, they were termite fishing Melissa repeatedly displaced Gremlin from her working place, or reached over and took her daughter’s tool. At first Gremlin often threw tantrums. I remember one occasion when Melissa seized a spendid long tool that Gremlin had just fetched and prepared: Gremlin hung on tight, whimpered, then gave little screams. At this Melissa embraced her until she quietened—and *then* took the tool\! But as time went on Gremlin became increasingly philosophical: she sometimes whimpered a little when her mother robbed her thus, but then she would move off to find herself a new place to work, or to pick herself another tool. Sometimes Melissa only needed to look towards her daughter with, presumably, an acquisitive gleam in her eye, for Gremlin to relinquish her claim to a food item—to a tunnel in a termite mound or a fruit-laden branch, for example. When Gremlin got to a tree ahead of her mother, and she determined, after gazing up, that there was only a limited supply of food, she would often move away of her own accord, leaving the field clear for Melissa. This was as it should be. Melissa had suckled Gremlin and shared food with her for years—now it was important that she take over the richest supply so that she could build up her strength and nurture other youngsters. And Gremlin, with only her own healthy body to care for, not only had lower nutritional requirements, but also the unbounded energy of youth. Moreover, she could feed high among the slender branches that were out of bounds for her heavier mother.

Of course, Gremlin was quite free to leave her autocratic parent whenever she liked—but then she was at the mercy of all the females who, when she was with her mother, showed her respect. Moreover Melissa, for all her selfishness over matters connected with food, was immensely supportive of her daughter in other ways. Most dramatic was the time when Satan attacked Gremlin and, in response to her daughter’s screams, Melissa actually leapt at the big male, hitting and biting him. She got very badly beaten up for this interference. And so Gremlin, like most daughters, chose to remain firmly attached to the maternal apron strings.

There is no question but that the mother-daughter bond is highly beneficial for the mother, too. Gremlin was loyal and valiant in her defence of Melissa. Once, when still a child, she had even tried to rescue Melissa from a brutal attack by Satan. The fact that she was much too small and light to be of any real help does not diminish her valour. She had hurled herself at the big male, hitting him with her fists, then run over to Goblin who was nearby and pulled at his hand, while looking repeatedly from him towards their embattled mother. Clearly she had been begging him to help. But Goblin, whose relationship with Satan at the time was very tense, had been in no mood for chivalry and he had just sat and watched. So Gremlin once again had hurled her puny self, courageously if futilely, into the fray, joining Melissa in uttering loud barks of defiance at Satan when, finally, he charged away.

She had behaved in the same valorous manner when Melissa had tried to save infant Genie from Passion and Pom. Time and again Gremlin had leapt at the murderous females, beating at them with her small fists. She had even run over to the field staff for help. Standing upright in front of them, she had looked into their eyes, then turned to where Melissa battled for the life of her infant, then back towards the men. They had known she wanted them to help, and they had wanted to intervene; but the battle had been too fast and furious. Feeling helpless, they had done nothing. So Gremlin had run back on her own and had hurled herself at her mother’s assailants just as Pom had pulled the baby away from Melissa. And her intervention had been so fierce that, just for a moment, Melissa had actually managed to retrieve her infant—only to have her once more snatched away. For good.

As Gimble got older Gremlin became increasingly helpful to her mother in one other way—she shared in caring for her young brother. If only Melissa had let Gremlin help when both twins had been alive, how much easier her task would have been. Instead, confused by the burden of caring for two babies, she had been unusually protective, and had forced Gremlin to keep her distance. By the time Gimble was three years old, however, there was scarcely a follow when Gremlin was not seen carrying him for part of the time; and when the family was feeding peacefully, Gimble was frequently closer to his sister than to his mother. If he got into any kind of trouble it was often Gremlin who responded to his whimper or scream of distress, running to gather him close. Once adolescent Atlas, when mating Grem lin, had hit out angrily as Gimble rushed up to push between the couple. Gremlin, outraged, terminated the copulation abruptly, turned and attacked Atlas.

Gremlin’s concern for Gimble went way beyond merely responding to his appeals for help: like a good mother she would anticipate trouble. Thus when Gimble played with young baboons Gremlin often watched closely and, if the game got the least bit rough, and long before Gimble himself seemed worried, she firmly took him away. Once, as she was carrying him along a trail, she saw a small snake ahead. Carefully she pushed Gimble off her back and kept him behind her as she shook branches at the snake until it glided away. Another time Gremlin, with Gimble perched on her back as usual, suddenly stopped just before the trail passed through a patch of tall grasses. Melissa carried on but when Gimble, who had jumped to the ground, tried to follow his mother Gremlin prevented him. She pushed him behind her, hit a few times at the grass ahead, and then herded him around the clump of grass. I expected to find another snake hiding there—instead I saw that it was infested with hundreds of minute ticks.

Gremlin was very tolerant of her small brother. During the termite fishing season, an infant will often seize the opportunity to poke into a hole that has been temporarily vacated by a chimpanzee searching for a new tool. Usually the child will be gently but firmly pushed away as soon as the rightful owner returns, but Gremlin sometimes sat for five minutes or more watching her young brother as he experimented with various abandoned tools, only reclaiming her hole when he gave up. Once, when he was a bit older, Gimble tried to take over the hole when his sister was still working it and when she prevented this he had the audacity to threaten her, raising his arm and giving a childish waa-bark. Gremlin paid no heed to this mixture of disrespect and sheer cheek, just gently pushed him aside and went on with her work.

No wonder she was a good mother to her own first infant, Getty, efficient and assured in her handling of him right from the start. A truly wonderful relationship developed between Getty and his grandmother. Melissa first set eyes on Getty when he was one day old—she had not been present during the birth, for Gremlin like most females had gone off on her own. When Melissa approached, that first time, Gremlin backed away nervously fearing, perhaps, that her domineering mother would try to appropriate this new and precious possession just as she took everything else. But Melissa sat quietly nearby and merely glanced at the new infant from time to time, and soon Gremlin relaxed. Not until Getty was ten months old did we see Melissa touch her grandson at all—and then it was merely to groom him for a few moments during a session with Gremlin.

Soon after that I watched a fascinating incident. It began as Melissa was grooming Gremlin’s back and Getty pushed his way between them. Melissa looked down at him, then lifted him into her lap and began to groom him—just as though he were her own infant. Gremlin glanced round, then seemed to stiffen. Very slowly she turned; very cautiously, glancing into her mother’s face, she reached towards Getty with a soft pleading whimper. He responded at once and climbed into her arms. Quickly Gremlin moved away, settling to rest some five yards distant. Clearly, once again, she had feared that Melissa might try to steal her beloved son.

As the days went by, Melissa seemed to become more and more enchanted by Getty and the bond between them grew. When Melissa and Gremlin were grooming together Getty repeatedly interrupted, leaping down onto his grandmother from some overhanging branch—and Melissa, who had never played much with any of her own offspring, would stop grooming and start to tickle him. During these games, which sometimes lasted for fifteen minutes, Gremlin usually sat watching. Melissa actually initiated some of the play herself—sometimes she even fol lowed Getty when he was romping with another youngster and pulled him away so that she could play with him herself. This was not always to his liking, for he was a self-willed little fellow, and then he would struggle until he had escaped from Granny and could run back to his chosen playmates.

Of all the infants I had known at Gombe, Getty was the most endearing. He was lively and adventurous, always eager to join in any social activity. He was well able to amuse himself, too. Once, as Gremlin fished for termites, Getty played with sand for over ten minutes. He lay on his back with his mouth wide open, scooped up handfuls of loose soil and, holding his hands up in the air, dropped the sand so that it showered all over his body and into his mouth.

When Gimble was six years old Melissa resumed her sexual cycles. This led to the most extraordinary series of incidents; Goblin, who was now nineteen years old, suddenly evinced an incestuous sexual interest in his mother. During Melissa’s previous pinknesses Goblin, like other mature sons, had shown absolutely no desire to mate with his mother. But this time it was different. One day, about half-way through her first period of swelling, Goblin approached Melissa and summoned her with vigorous shaking of vegetation. She ignored him at first and then, when he persisted, she threatened him. This seemed to enrage him—with a scowl he leaped at her and, as she ran off, chased after her and actually stamped on her back. Melissa was beside herself with fury and, as Goblin displayed away, she stamped after him, screaming until I thought she would choke. He left then, but the following day he summoned her again and, when she tried to avoid him, once more threatened her with bristling hair. Then, to my utter astonishment, Melissa actually crouched before her son for copulation. The sexual act was not completed—Melissa pulled away, screeching loudly, after a few seconds. Again Goblin leapt at her and stamped on her back. His own mother\! I couldn’t help but feel incensed—and clearly Melissa felt much the same for she turned and hit him before running off. She climbed high into a tree, as far away from Goblin as she could get. He stayed below, glaring up and angrily shaking branches, but she stayed put and soon he gave up.

After that we followed her every day until her swelling was gone. Goblin made a few more half-hearted attempts, but we did not see any further violence between the two. Nor was he aggressive towards her during her next pinkness, a month later: he did attempt to copulate with her a couple of times but she managed to escape—unviolated.

Goblin’s unnatural behaviour utterly changed the relationship between Melissa and her son. They had been close before, spending much time in one another’s company as they fed or travelled or rested. They were frequent grooming partners, too. Often Goblin hurried to help his mother, whether in her dominance interactions with other females, or when she was being challenged by some callow adolescent male. After Goblin’s attempts to mate his mother, however, relations between them were very strained and tense. Not only did they stop spending time together, but Melissa actually seemed to be frightened of her son. However, during her second period of swelling she became pregnant, after which, like most of the older females, she showed no further periods of oestrus. And so things between Melissa and her son slowly returned to normal. Moreover, even before that, during the height of their temporary estrangement, I saw something which showed that deep down their old relationship was still alive.

It happened when there was a high level of excitement among the chimps, for six females in addition to Melissa were cycling, flaunting their provocative pink bottoms. All the males were there, and most of the other community members, too. They travelled in noisy, boisterous groups, calling back and forth to each other across the valleys. A carnival atmosphere prevailed. The adult males displayed magnificently, the juveniles and in fants romped and wrestled and chased one another through the trees. There were sudden outbursts of screaming as the excitement boiled over and led to aggression. Just occasionally, though surprisingly seldom, there was a serious fight. One of these took place in a tree right over my head—and the victim was Melissa. She was sitting quietly on a branch grooming young Gimble when Evered, who had been threatened by Satan when he courted one of the other females, suddenly leapt at her. She screamed and tried to escape, and as she did so I saw his teeth slash at her pink swollen bottom so that watery blood poured down. At that moment I heard a crashing behind me and Goblin hurtled past me and up into the tree. Without pausing he attacked Evered. All three were locked in combat no more than six feet above my head. I dared not move for the slope was steep and rocky and I was balanced against the trunk of the selfsame tree, so I stayed where I was, praying that the branch would not break and deposit its enraged and screaming burden on top of me. Fortunately the fight ended, as it had begun, up in the tree—except that Evered leapt to the ground, and fled, screaming. Goblin stayed for a little while and watched as Melissa picked leaves with which to dab at her bleeding bottom. And then, as peace returned, he too climbed down and moved away.

The following day Melissa’s swelling was shrivelled—a typical response to physical injury—and she was no longer interesting to the highest-ranking males. But she was to Jomeo. I met the two of them, with Gimble trailing along, quite by chance in Kasekela Valley. Poor Melissa—her bottom was sore and hurting and, on top of that, she had terrible diarrhoea and kept crouching forward as though suffering severe stomach cramps. And instead of being free to recover in peace she was being forced, by Jomeo, to follow him northward. A less likely-looking honeymoon pair would be hard to imagine, for Jomeo was in even worse shape than Melissa. The entire left side of his face was hugely swollen from jaw to eye and the flesh was an ugly shade of pink beneath the tight-stretched skin. He looked, with his one half-white eye, almost grotesque. To complete the pathetic picture, Gimble was in the midst of his weaning depression. He was keeping close to his mother with a sullen expression on his face, his lips pushed forward almost continually in a disgruntled-looking pout.

When I arrived the three were sitting, Melissa and Gimble close together, Jomeo a few yards ahead. He must have had an abscess on one of his upper molars and I think it burst right then, as I watched, because suddenly he began to dab his gum with one finger. He licked the finger, dabbed and licked—on and on. Gimble was fascinated, and peered closely as the big male tended his sore mouth.

Presently Jomeo got to his feet, moved a few yards further from Melissa, looked back and shook some branches. Melissa ignored this summons completely. Then Jomeo began to sway and swagger until every hair stood on end, and I felt sure that Melissa would be attacked. But at the last moment she obeyed and hastened to him with submissive pant-grunts, bowing to kiss his thigh as he groomed her. Ten minutes later Jomeo set off again, and the whole performance was repeated until, reluctantly, Melissa moved on another few yards.

I followed them for most of the rest of the day. We didn’t go far—Melissa saw to that. In between Jomeo’s efforts to move on, the three of them sometimes fed, but often they just sat. Jomeo dabbed at his gum. Melissa crouched or huddled, as though in pain, and, from time to time, plucked leaves to dab at her wounded bottom. Gimble repeatedly pestered his mother, demanding access to her nipples. When he approached her with his pouting face, whimpering and crying, Melissa was too weary and sick to protest for long. She gave in and he crept into her arms and suckled. When I left them, Melissa was lying with her eyes closed, one arm over Gimble who held a nipple firmly in his mouth. Jomeo waited nearby, dabbing at his abscess.

That consortship, like most others in Jomeo’s life, was not successful: two days later the little trio reappeared in the central part of the Kasekela range. And the following month Melissa went on a consortship with Satan—and conceived.

About two months before we reckoned that Satan’s baby was due, Melissa became very sick indeed. Her symptoms—bad cough, heavy mucous discharge and high fever—suggested pneumonia, and we feared for her life. She was unable to climb trees for several days and, at her worst, could barely drag herself along the ground. She ate only a few mouthfuls of food, refusing offerings from the concerned field staff. Amazingly she recovered, although her vocal chords were permanently impaired and her voice, for the rest of her life, came out as a hoarse croak. And, before she was properly better, her pregnancy ended with a miscarriage.

But then, three months later, Melissa once again travelled the hills flaunting the pink sex signal of the female chimpanzee. Almost at once she became pregnant—for the last time. How much better it would have been had she not. That last pregnancy sapped her strength and vitality and when little Groucho was born, Melissa looked frail and much older than her estimated thirty-five years. From the start Groucho was tiny and lethargic. When he was nine months old he occasionally made short forays from Melissa’s side, began to eat solids and, occasionally, played gently with Gimble, but then his condition worsened. By the time he was one year old he was spending most of his time lying listlessly on his mother’s lap. Gimble still tried occasionally to persuade this small brother to play, but Groucho, although he usually responded with a play-face, was too weak for the rough and tumble games typical of his age.

It was at this time, when I was almost expecting to hear that Groucho had died, that I received news—a telephone call from Kigoma—that Getty was missing. I shall never forget the sense of shock and outrage I felt when I arrived at Gombe a week later, and heard that his body, when it was eventually found in the for est, had been horribly mutilated—the head had been cut off and removed. We never discovered exactly what had happened, but we suspected witchcraft, for the old customs are deeply entrenched among the Waha people of the area. Nothing like this had happened before—nor has it happened since. It was a bitter blow for Getty had been the favourite youngster of us all. I feel quite sure, too, that among the chimps it was not only the members of his immediate family who missed him. Getty, with his adventurous and fun-loving nature, had captivated us all.

Gremlin was listless for weeks but eventually, two months after losing her son, she once more resumed her sexual cycles. Then she began spending more time with the males and less with her old mother. Gimble quite often left Melissa too. Goblin, however, now that his relationship with his old mother was back on course, travelled with her periodically, though never for long at a time. One day as I followed them through the forest we heard the pant-hoots of Satan and Evered across the valley. Despite his alpha rank, Goblin’s relationship with the much heavier Satan was often tense. He stared towards the calls, his hair bristling, then turned to his old mother and, with a grin of fear on his face, stretched his hand towards her. She responded at once, reaching to touch his fingers and Goblin was calmed, just as he had been calmed throughout his infancy, by the contact with her. He turned and moved on to face whatever challenge lay ahead. Melissa followed for a while but soon she stopped to rest.

A few months later, as I was walking along the Kakombe Valley, I saw Gimble carrying something large into a tree. It was the dead body of little Groucho. As Melissa and Gremlin groomed each other on the ground, Gimble cradled the corpse on his lap, grooming it intently. When his family moved on Gimble climbed down and followed, the body slung over his shoulder. Presently it fell to the ground, and then he dragged it behind him by one arm. Later, when they stopped to rest again, Melissa gently took the limp body from him and placed it over her own back. She carried the dead baby for two more days and then abandoned his corpse deep in the forest.

After the death of her infant, Melissa seemed to lose the will to live. She had been thin before, now she became emaciated for she ate almost nothing. Often she did not leave her nest until after ten in the morning and sometimes she went to bed as early as four o’clock. During the hours in between she made at least one day nest where she lay, often staring vacantly up through the leaves, for hours at a time. Sometimes Gimble was with her, but he became bored, as well as hungry, and spent more time than before with the big males. Nor was Gremlin there to provide comfort: protesting, she had been led off on a two-week consortship, by Satan, on the evening of the day Groucho died.

Ten days after losing her infant, Melissa, using the last of her strength, climbed high into a tall, leafy *mgwiza* tree and there, surrounded by clusters of purple, sloe-like fruits, she made a large nest—the last she would ever make. Throughout the following day she lay, scarcely moving, while other chimpanzees, attracted by the succulent fruits, arrived, fed for an hour or so, and left. Gimble was nearby for much of the day, and sometimes groomed his mother. But he moved away during the afternoon.

By evening, Melissa was alone. One foot hung down from her nest and every so often her toes moved. I stayed there, sitting on the forest floor below the dying female. Occasionally I spoke. I don’t know if she knew I was there or, if she did, whether it made any difference. But I wanted to be with her as night fell; I didn’t want her to be completely alone. As I sat there the quick tropical dusk gave place to darkness. The stars increased in number and twinkled ever more brightly through the forest canopy. There was a distant pant-hoot far across the valley, but Melissa was silent. Never again would I hear her distinctive hoarse call. Never again would I wander with her from one patch of food to the next, waiting, at one with the life of the forest, as she rested or groomed with one of her offspring. The stars were suddenly blurred and I wept for the passing of an old friend.

The next morning I watched as Melissa took her last, laboured breath: her body shuddered, then relaxed. All around, during those last hours, the branches had swayed and rustled as youngsters played while elders fed on the luscious fruits. *In the midst of life there is death.* This was an appropriate setting for Melissa’s passing, allegorical in its portrayal of the inevitable cycles of nature. I was deeply moved, but my tears were over. Melissa had indeed known a hard life, with many misfortunes, but she had lived fully and, for much of the time, had clearly enjoyed living. She had attained a high rank. And, most importantly, she had left a solid succession; Gimble, small but very determined, Gremlin, strong and healthy who would have other infants to carry on her mother’s genes, and Goblin, top-ranking male of his community.


