+++
title = "8"

+++

The Magic of the South: Popular Religion and Elite Catholicism in Italian Ethnology

*George R. Saunders *

Northern Europeans have long come south to Italy for spiritual and aesthetic refreshment. Goethe, Freud, and Max Weber all discovered some sort of "spirit" in Italy that contrasted sharply with the overly rationalized, passionless instrumentality of their northern lands. Goethe, for example, spent nearly two years in Italy, from 1786 to 1788, recovering from a "terrible disease" brought on, apparently, by his service in the government of Weimar, but perhaps in part by a kind of mid-life crisis deriving from his literary work. In Italy he felt a spiritual and intellectual rebirth, a burst of new energy and excitement. His letters and journal entries from Italy express wonder and enthusiasm, generated in part by the sensual aesthetics and in part by the puzzling otherness of it all. At times, they also describe his dismay and a fair measure of disgust.1 

Freud also, according to biographer Peter Gay, went to Italy first in 1901 after coming out of a depression, and found there a kind of spiritual inspiration. He stood fascinated in front of Michelangelo's statue of Moses, and later referred to the visit as a "high point" in his life \(Gay 1988: 135\). Another of his biographers, Ernest Jones, wrote this terse comment: "Then came the great visit to Rome, after which \[Freud\] says his pleasure in life had increased and his pleasure in martyrdom diminished" \(Jones 1961: 221\). Though Freud seems to have been most taken by the remains of ancient Rome, he clearly found something both marvelous and troublesome in the contemporary city. His last great reflections on the problems of the modern world, in *Civilization and Its Discon tents* \(1961 \[1930\]\), open with a metaphoric association of the city of Rome and the human psyche, in both of which Freud finds the ancient and primitive coexisting with the modern and sophisticated. 

Max Weber's biographers also suggest that he experienced much of his life as a struggle between the "iron cage" of rational, bureaucratized, instrumental, but soulless life \(the North?\) and the emotional, sensuous, aesthetic, and spiritual \(the South?\). At the age of 33 he suffered a major nervous breakdown that immobilized him for several years, and one of the few places he found solace was Italy \(see Bendix 1960; Macrae 1974; Mitzman 1969\). It may not be an accident that his best-known work, *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism*, was begun shortly after his recovery. It is even worth surmising \(a thoroughly unsubstantiated musing\) that his conception of the connection between Protestantism and the capitalist development of the North was inspired by his observation of Catholicism in Italy. 

Italy worked a kind of spiritual magic on these northern Europeans, then, but it also disturbed them. They brought their own forms of personal pathology, longing, and romanticism to the South, and seemed to find there a cultural pathology that buoyed their spirits, perhaps precisely because its "otherness" affirmed their own sense of "modernness" and refreshed them by contrast. The South healed the northerners; it compelled them with its humanity and its soul, but it nonetheless remained for them fundamentally alien. Indeed, it is striking how thoroughly "other" the Italian peninsula has been for northern Europeans and Americans. A 1962 edition of Goethe's *Italian Journey 1786-1788* is introduced by W. H. Auden and Elizabeth Mayer, and includes this observation: 

There are hundreds and thousands of Englishmen and Americans who have made an Italian journey of their own and, to many of them, their encounter with Italy, its landscape, its people, its art, has been as important an experience as it was to Goethe, so that the subject-matter of the book will interest them, irrespective of its author, and they will enjoy comparing the post-World War Il Italy they know with the pre-French-Revolution Italy which Goethe saw. \(Speaking for myself,2 I am amazed at their similarity. Is there any other country in Europe where the character of the people seems to have been so little affected by political and technological change?\) \(Goethe 1962: viii\). 

Most northerners \(including northern Italians\) have felt little compunction about declaring the unchanging otherness of Southern Italy in particular. In discourse at least, it is an alien land, and the alien attracts and repels simultaneously.3 The alien nature of the Italian South is reflected in part in its visual impact, its continuing agrarian character and the failures of infrastructure that impress northerners as "like the Third World." But a central component of the differentness of the Mezzogiorno has always been its religious life — the emotional character of public rituals, the sensuousness of its religious imagery, and the refusal of much of its religious belief and practice to be diluted, rationalized, and bureaucratized as one would expect of "modern" religion. Indeed, the character of popular religion led sixteenth-century Italian Jesuits to think of assignments in the South of Italy as very like missions to the New World, and they sometimes referred to the South as the "India italiana" \(De Martino 1961: 22\). Such conceptions persist in the twentieth century. 

Italian scholars who have focused on the religious life of the South of their own country have approached it with considerably less romanticism, but with every bit as much ambivalence. The spirit of the South, particularly its religiosity and magical practices, has been seen as a form of practical wisdom, a fountain of energy for social transformation, a domain of autarky and of resistance to domination, but also as ignorant superstition, debilitating fatalism and futility, a source of social divisiveness, and an anachronism, in this chapter I want to take at face value the apparent ambivalence of two of these insider—outsider theorists, Antonio Gramsci \(1891—1937\) and Ernesto De Martino \(1908—1965\), and to treat that ambivalence as integral to understanding the place of southern supernaturalism in the larger world of Italy, Europe, and contemporary life.4 

Antonio Gramsci was born in 1891 in Sardinia. He studied at the University of Turin, and as a young man became secretary of the Turin section of the Socialist Party. During the First World War, he left the Socialist Party for the fledgling Italian Communist Party. In the following years, Gramsci was active as a party leader, a journalist, and a political and cultural theorist. His interests spanned practical political organizational tasks, drama and popular literature, and world history. In 1926, the year of his arrest by the fascist government of Mussolini, he wrote his essays on the Southern Question. He was formally tried in Rome in 1928, and was condemned to twenty years in prison. He continued to write from prison, though necessarily in a less referenced and systematic way, and some of his most insightful writings were published as "notebooks" after his death in 1937 at the age of 46. 

Ernesto De Martino was born in 1908 in Naples. He studied there under historians of religion Adolfo Omodeo and Raffaele Pettazzoni, and came into the circle of Benedetto Croce. During the Mussolini years, De Martino took an antifascist stance, and following the Second World War, he worked for a period as an organizer for the Socialist Party and later the Communist Party in Southern Italy. The latter experience was instrumental in focusing his ethnographic attention on Southern Italy, especially its popular religion, and he produced a number of outstanding works that have subsequently shaped the field of anthropology in Italy \(Saunders 1991\). 

Gramsci wrote sparingly and unsysternatically about popular southern religion \(though he commented often about the political and cultural role of the Catholic Church\). De Martino by contrast wrote extensively, creatively, and painstakingly about the religious life of the South. Both theorists, however, seemed at times confounded by popular religion, uncertain about whether to treat it with respect or overt disgust, and both struggled intellectually to figure out how it related to the future of the world that they lived and worked in. Both wanted to understand its humanity, and yet at times could not disguise their conviction of its "otherness." Both distinguished their own reactions to southern magic and religion from those of Protestant polemicists, the liberal bourgeoisie, and the economistic left. In "The Southern Question," for example, Gramsci caricatures northern bourgeois propaganda about the South: "the southerners are biologically inferior beings, semi-barbarians or complete barbarians by natural destiny..., lazy, incapable, criminal, barbarous" \(1957: 31\). Gramsci objects strenuously to such essentialist stereotypes, and yet the South remains a substantial "problem" in his work. In his calls for an alliance between the industrial proletariat \(largely of the North\) and the rural proletariat \(largely of the South\), his tone suggests considerable worry about the potential of the South to join fully as an active partner: 

The South can be described as an area of extreme social disintegration. The peasants who constitute the great majority of the population have no cohesion among themselves .... The society of the South is a great agrarian *bloc* consisting of three social strata: the large, amorphous, scattered peasant masses; the intellectuals of the petty and middle rural bourgeoisie; the big property owners and the top intellectuals. The southern peasants are in perpetual ferment, but as a mass they are incapable of giving a unified expression to their aspirations and their needs \(1957: 42\). 

My goal in this chapter, then, is to interpret the work of Gramsci and De Martino in order to answer a series of interrelated questions. Firstly, what is the dynamic relationship between popular culture and élite, "high," or hegemonic culture; more specifically, to what extent do popular religion and official Catholicism represent shared systems of ideas and values? To what extent is popular religion conservative and ultimately supportive of the values of the élite, or by contrast "oppositional" to dominant culture? If it is "oppositional," is it simply a form of passive resistance, or may it in fact be "progressive," providing an ideological basis for social and cultural change? Secondly, to what extent is popular religion "historical" in the sense of affording its practitioners a place as subjects rather than objects in the movement of time and events?5 To put this last question in another way, does popular religion relegate its practitioners to non-history, to an ahistorical "magical" practice, or does it contain at least the seeds of a consciousness that can allow people an active role in the shaping of their own historical moment?6 



## Catholicism and Hegemony: From the Top Down

Gramsci's writings deal with several aspects of the particularly fragmented character of Italian society of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. North and South represent in certain ways the geographical distribution of class, but not simply in the sense that the North is wealthy and powerful and the South is poor and powerless. The North is the primary home of the industrial proletariat and of such liberal bourgeoisie as has developed in Italy, while the South is the primary home of an agrarian underclass and a landowning élite. The North is a relatively secularized area, or at least liberalism has largely succeeded in pushing religion out of the public political realm. In the South, on the other hand, the disjunction between élite, official Catholicism and the religious beliefs and practices of ordinary country-folk is pronounced, but in one form or another religion retains critical social relevance. This latter issue will be the focus of my analysis here, but it connects directly to the other schisms in Italian society. Indeed, Gramsci put it this way: 

But the peasant question is historically determined in Italy; it is not the "peasant and agrarian question in general". In Italy the peasant question, through the specific Italian tradition, and the specific development of Italian history, has taken two typical and particular forms - the Southern question and that of the Vatican. Winning the majority of the peasant masses thus means, for the Italian proletariat, making these two questions its own from the social point of view \(Gramsci 1978: 443\). 

The Catholic Church thus assumes a particular importance in Gramsci's analysis of Italian society. It is, first of all, not simply a "local" religious institution, hut rather the source of Italy's place in the larger world. "It should not be forgotten that from the sixteenth century onwards Italy contributed to world history especially because it was the seat of the papacy, and that Italian Catholicism was felt not only as a surrogate for the spirit of the nation and the state but also as a worldwide hegemonic institution, as an imperialistic spirit" \(1985: 220-1\). These are strong words, and they recall the important fact that, until the twentieth century, Italy's particular imperialism was unlike that of any other Western power. Rather than a state imperialism that used religion as a form of mystification and legitimation, Italy's was a directly religious imperialism whose international hegemonic role was "multinational" almost in the contemporary sense of being above and beyond the state. This international significance is a central factor in the Church's power in Italian domestic affairs. As Carl Boggs points out, in Gramsci's analysis the Catholic Church is the ideological buttress that sustains a unity, however fragile, in a country in which the economic, political, and cultural gaps separating élites from the poor are otherwise quite pronounced. The role of Catholicism as an official doctrine is to stress "the 'natural' \(God-given\) character of existing structures such as private property and the family, the importance of transcendental commitment over everyday \('earthly'\) collective action to change the world, the supposed moral virtues of poverty and weakness, and the sacrosanct nature of all forms of established authority" \(Boggs 1976: 43\). The struggle of the Catholic Church against the liberal reforms of the nineteenth century in Italy is well known, and the variety of hegemony Catholicism maintained was for Gramsci \(rightly\) quite distinct from liberalism and the associated values of Protestantism.7 The latter were closely associated with the European bourgeoisie, of course, while Catholicism long remained the ideological base of Italy's version of the *Ancien Régime*, an agrarian-based and quasi-feudal social and political system.8 This association in turn explains the Church's formal antagonism to the Italian state following Unification in 1861 until 1929, when it recovered its official role in Italian cultural life through the Concordat with Mussolini. Even in the years of Church—State hostility prior to the Concordat, however, Catholicism remained a dominant force in Italian ideological culture, and continued to do so well into the twentieth century. 

Catholicism's ideological domination of Italian culture is a central topic of investigation for both Gramsci and De Martino. It appears to be, as Boggs suggests, a question of how the religion supports unity in a society otherwise riven by class and cultural differences — a question, that is, of "hegemony." In the introduction to *Il materialismo storico*, Luciano Gruppi summarizes Gramsci's reasoning about this process: "The dominant class in so far as it actuates its own hegemony thus knows how to realize and maintain an historical bloc of contradictory social and political forces, in its base economic and its superstructure civil and governmental, held together by ideology" \(1975: xxxii\). Gramsci thus emphasizes the cultural and symbolic factors as those through which subaltern groups come to be and to remain subaltern. The contradictions in the system and the gaps between groups are masked by the Catholic symbolic and ideological structure, through which rich and poor, powerful and powerless, are alike oriented to life and moved to conformity.9 

In Gramsci's essay on "The Southern Question," there is unfortunately little comment on the Church proper. Gramsci's concern here is that in the South "the agrarian bloc" retains its particular hold on Italian society. Landed élites who derive their incomes from rents dominate southern life, unlike the industrial North, where capital and industry have displaced the agrarian bloc. But for Gramsci, such economic power is always mediated through the ideological factors that induce complicity and establish a sense of legitimacy \(however tenuous\). The Church, as Gramsci makes clear in other places, is the author of this ideological unity, and the intellectuals are its agents. In order for the South to progress, the ideological grip of the Church must be broken. "The proletariat will destroy the southern agrarian bloc insofar as it succeeds, through its party, in organizing increasingly significant masses of poor peasants into autonomous and independent formations. But its greater or lesser success in this necessary task will also depend upon its ability to break up the intellectual bloc that is the flexible, but extremely resistant, armour of the agrarian bloc" \(Gramsci 1978: 462\). 

What is the character of the "intellectual bloc"? The Church attempts to provide an integralist and totalizing world view that obscures the differences between élites and the poor and creates and sustains an illusion of social justice under the hand of God and "Holy Mother Church." "The power of religions and especially of the Catholic Church has consisted and does consist in the fact that they feel strongly the need for the doctrinal unity of the whole 'religious' mass" \(1957: 63\). From the point of view of the Church \(and of the dominant classes in general\), then, a sharp break between "popular religion" and "official religion" would be a serious problem, as would, for that matter, a disjunction between "official religion" and the religious beliefs of élite intellectuals. The Church's conservatism, then, is of a particular type: it wants to hold both ends into the middle. "The Roman church has always been the most tenacious in the struggle to avoid the 'official' formulation of two religions, one for the 'intellectuals' and one for the 'simple people'" \(1957: 63\). Orthodoxy is essential to cultural unity, and thus magic, popular religion, extra-liturgical ritual and extra-ecclesiastical practitioners are serious threats. Gramsci is here suggesting that one revolutionary potential in popular religion is precisely the possibility of its widening the gulf between the élite and ordinary people. 

Incidentally, De Martino has a similar understanding of the workings of Catholicism as a cultural force, and of "the reality that hides behind the name of 'Catholicism,'" noting that "the Catholicism of Cardinal Schuster is one thing, and the Catholicism of a day-laborer of Andria is altogether another" \(De Martino 1977\[1948\]: 41\). Like Gramsci, De Martino argues the need for "precise knowledge of the structure and the technique of the battle by the Church, of the arguments by which the Catholic faith is guaranteed, rooted in the conscience, and transformed into a collective persuasion ..., the concrete modes of the current reactionary functions of the Church." For both theorists, the Church's strength is precisely in its ability to present itself as a universal ideology that transcends time and place, and particularly that transcends the narrow interests of class and political power. For De Martino as for Gramsci, this cultural unity needs to be disrupted and replaced by an alternative unifying ideology. De Martino thus calls for "the unification of the national culture, as Gramsci conceived of it, that is the formation of a new cultural life for the nation that will heal the rupture between high culture and the culture of the people" \(1977\[1951\]: 145.10 

Who specifically are the personnel involved in the creation and reproduction of politically significant \(religious\) ideology? As Torres notes, hegemony "is produced by the organic intellectuals of the ruling classes and is also transmitted by traditional intellectuals. For Gramsci ... the Catholic Church is constituted as the organic intellectual of the governing class, especially under feudalism" \(Torres 1992: 43\). Gramsci himself identifies the particular agents whom he considers important in this process: "There are organic and traditional intellectuals, just as there are superior intellectuals and those who may be considered as being of an intermediate rank and who provide the link that binds the superior level \(whether organic or traditional intellectuals\) and the masses. Schoolteachers and priests who exercise parochial functions constitute this class of intermediate intellectuals" \(Gramsci 1980: 342\). Thus there is a high-level clergy \(as well as high government officials closely allied with the Church\) who are "superior" organic intellectuals, those who shape Church doctrine and relate it to political currents such as liberalism, socialism, or fascism. The intermediate organic intellectuals, at the local level, are priests and schoolteachers who propagate their own versions of these doctrines, and relate them as well to local political and cultural events. 

In Southern Italy, according to Gramsci, these intermediate organic intellectuals are typically rural members of the bourgeoisie: 

In other words, the petty and medium landowner who is not a peasant, who does not work the land, who would be ashamed to be a farmer, but who wants to extract from the little land he has - leased out either for rent or on a simple share-cropping basis - the wherewithal to live fittingly; the wherewithal to send his sons to a university or seminary, and the wherewithal to provide dowries for his daughters, who must marry officers or civil functionaries of the State. From this social layer, the intellectuals derive a fierce antipathy to the working peasant \(1978: 455\). 

This southern intellectual class differs in social situation from that of the North. Gramsci points out that priests in the North have more often been sons of artisans or peasants, sometimes with democratic sympathies and a strong sense of connection to the poor. In addition, the northern priest seems to be more concerned about moral propriety than the southern priest, "who often lives more or less openly with a woman" \(1978: 455\) \(cf. Holmes 1989: 115 ff.\). Furthermore, in the North, the priest's economic power is considerably less than in the South: "In the North, the separation of Church from State and the expropriation of ecclesiastical goods were more radical than in the South, where the parishes and convents either have preserved or have reconstituted considerable assets, both fixed and movable" \(Gramsci 1978: 455\). The southern priest, by contrast, appears directly to peasants as a land administrator, with whom they must negotiate rents and share-cropping agreements, as a usurer, and as "a man subject to all the ordinary passions \(women and money\), and who therefore, from a spiritual point of view, inspires no confidence in his discretion and impartiality" \(1978: 456\). Despite the lack of personal claims to moral authority, the priest remains a powerful figure: the key point of contact, the intermediary between the official doctrine of the Catholic Church, with all its moral injunctions and ideological ramifications, and the day-to-day practical, existential, and spiritual concerns of the poor in the countryside.11 

Traditional intellectuals, on the other hand, are outside the Church in a formal sense, and constitute a class somewhat apart. Gramsci describes the role of traditional intellectuals in his discussion of Benedetto Croce \(though Croce is obviously not a run-of-the-mill traditional intellectual\). 

For Croce religion is a conception of reality with a morality conforming to this conception, presented in mythological form .... A conception of the world cannot show itself valid to permeate all of a society and become a "faith" unless it demonstrates itself to be capable of displacing the preceding conceptions and faiths at all levels of state life. To run back to the Hegelian theory of mythological religion as a philosophy of primitive societies \(the infancy of humanity\) to justify confessional teaching even if only in the elementary schools, signifies nothing if not a sophisticated representation of the formula of the "religion good for the common people," and in reality to abdicate and capitulate in front of the clerical hierarchy. It cannot fail to be revealed, in addition, that a faith that doesn't succeed in translating itself into "popular" terms shows itself by that fact alone to be characteristic of a determined social group \(Gramsci 1975: 229\). 

Thus despite his supposed independence from Catholicism, Grace's idealism is in Gramsci's view ultimately supportive of Catholic hegemony, in that it continues to bolster the national unity. Italian intellectuals, nonetheless, seem to have a habit of distancing themselves from the ordinary people, and Croce is a good example of one whom the Church was unable to control, and who thus augmented that distance. Because of the intellectuals' tendency to an idealism divorced from the practical concerns of ordinary people, then, a weakness in the historical bloc appears, a crack in the masonry. In that fissure is its potential dissolution. 

Gramsci's writings pay much more attention to the character of the Italian intellectuals than to "popular religion" and ordinary people's experience, but in a few places he writes specifically about "folklore" and folk religion.12 The most influential comments are found in four brief entries entitled "Observations on Folklore" \(1985: 188—95\). These contain one of the most frequently cited passages in Italian ethnology: 

Folklore should ... be studied as a "conception of the world and life" implicit to a large extent in determinate \(in time and space\) strata of society and in opposition \(also for the most part implicit, mechanical and objective\) to "official" conceptions of the world \(or in a broader sense, the conceptions of the cultured parts of historically determinate societies\) that have succeeded one another in the historical process \(1985: 189\). 

Gramsci goes on to describe the nature of popular culture: 

This conception of the world is not elaborated and systematic because, by definition, the people \(the sum total of the instrumental and subaltern classes of every form of society that has so far existed\) cannot possess conceptions which are elaborated, systematic and politically organized and centralized in their albeit contradictory development. It is, rather, many-sided - not only because it includes different and juxtaposed elements, but also because it is stratified, from the more crude to the less crude — if, indeed, one should not speak of a confused agglomerate of fragments of all the conceptions of the world and of life that have succeeded one another in history \(1985: 189\). 

There are several things to note about this formulation. First, Gramsci specifically suggests that the "conceptions of the world" expressed in folk beliefs are at least implicitly "in opposition to" official conceptions, although the very notion of hegemony implies that élite culture does in fact largely overcome this "oppositional" character. Indeed, there is even the danger that popular culture can be so conservative as to be genuinely reactionary. De Martino, for example, expresses this latter concern: "Magic and superstition, mythical mentality, primitive and populist modes of opposing the world, all of this represents an immense potential of energies that can be used advantageously in an openly reactionary sense by the dominant classes, to the end of maintaining its threatened hegemony" \(De Martino 1977\[ 1949\]: 58\). De Martino describes particularly the ways in which German Nazism made use of folkloric notions of race and blood in order to develop support for its nationalist and militarist programs. But popular culture surely does not automatically lend itself to such co-optation. As the passage by Gramsci clearly suggests, there is an intrinsic tension between popular culture and official culture, and folklore and popular religion *may* express this tension in an oppositional form. 

In the passage quoted above, Gramsci also notes the central problem of popular culture: its fragmentary, internally contradictory, and unelaborated nature. Popular culture is necessarily "bits and pieces," quilt sections not yet sewn together, some of which clash quite dramatically with others. System is a quality of official and élite cultures, including religion, and not of popular culture. Similarly, Gramsci raises in this passage the problem of the "ahistoricity" of popular culture. Folklore consists of "fragments of all the conceptions of the world and of life that have succeeded one another in history." These fragments are not necessarily relevant to the current moment, and many are survivals of various other moments. They are out of time, and their very anachronistic character makes them in some sense ahistorical. In the context of Italian social thought, this has a particular meaning. 

To say that popular culture is not-historical, in the sense in which Italian historicism has conceived of this problem, is to say that it is not composed of concepts, ideas, or ideologies available to and employed by people who are active agents in the current historical moment. To be "without history" or "out of history" is to lack the consciousness essential to agency, and thus to be unable to make appropriate choices, to be unable to "act" in the moment in order to "make history," and to be, instead, a passive recipient of history as made by others. Note that Gramsci and De Martino are concerned that this is in fact often a characteristic of popular culture. Though I think that they would also have been very sympathetic to the argument of Eric Wolf \(1982; see also O'Brien and Roseberry 1991\) that ahistoricity is often falsely attributed to the dominated by the dominant, here they are arguing that a particular kind of ahistoricity may in fact at least sometimes be a reality for that group. 

It would seem that to the extent that popular culture is "oppositional," however, it at least has the potential to overcome this ahistoricity and to return people to a place as actors in the historical moment. Still, opposition is not necessarily in and of itself productive; it is not necessarily "progressive" and not necessarily a source of agency. Popular culture may express resistance to the status quo without providing a conceptual framework for action against the historical bloc. 

At any rate, for Gramsci, popular religion has this fragmented character, and the nature of the consciousness contained therein is problematic: 

Certainly, there is a 'religion of the people', especially in Catholic and Orthodox countries, which is very different from that of the intellectuals \(the religious ones\) and particularly from that organically set up by the ecclesiastical hierarchy .... Thus it is true that there is a 'morality of the people', understood as a determinate \(in space and time\) set of principles for practical conduct and of customs that derive from them or have produced them. Like superstition, this morality is closely tied to real religious beliefs. Imperatives exist that are much stronger, more tenacious and more effective than those of official 'morality'. In this sphere, too, one must distinguish various strata: the fossilized ones which reflect conditions of past life and are therefore conservative and reactionary, and those which consist of a series of innovations, often creative and progressive, determined spontaneously by forms and conditions of life which are in the process of developing and which are in contradiction to or simply different from the morality of the governing strata \(1985: 190\). 

The political and ideological character of popular religion, then, is a theoretical quagmire. Since it is not a unitary thing, it cannot have a unitary valence in consciousness, or a unitary political significance. And as long as we remain at the level of theory, the importance of popular religion in "the Southern Question" remains unknown. The fragmentary nature of folklore and of popular religion, the ahistorical quality of the "survivals" of the past combined with the historicity of the oppositional elements with potential for the future, all suggest the need for a thorough and genuine analysis of "real," concrete examples of popular religion. Popular religion thus *may* contain the potential for "breaking" the hegemony in the historical bloc, and for creating new forms of consciousness on the part of subaltern groups. But it also may not. The ethnographic information necessary for such a project was clearly out of reach of the imprisoned Gramsci. De Martino made such studies a central project of his work. 

Before examining that work, I should recall that for both Gramsci and De Martino, the goal of study of culture is to find ways to change it, to make it an instrument of unification of national culture through an appropriately progressive ideology. As De Martino put it, 

To us this cultural life of the people oriented toward the past must certainly be of interest, not of course from a tourist's point of view nor for love of the picturesque, nor even for the erudite zeal of preserving the most archaic memories of our populace, but for the much more serious and difficult reason that to modify the tradition it is necessary to know it, and to realize the program of unification of the national culture ... a judicious coming to terms with popular traditions is essential \(De Martino 1977\[1951\]: 146\). 

Here is a key point for our time: the study of popular religion is a political act, or at least a prelude to that act. We have to understand popular religion because it is itself intrinsically political, though its politics are complex, fragmented, and contradictory. We have to understand, furthermore, so that we and those we study maintain a place in history and a realistic sense of agency. 



## Magic, Popular Religion, and Official Catholicism: From the Bottom Up

Ernesto De Martino wrote extensively of magic and popular religion. His earliest books. *Naturalismo e storicismo nell 'etnologia* and *Il mondo magico* both concern religious phenomena, though both of these are focused on the Third World or classical Europe, with only passing attention to the ethnography of contemporary Southern Italy. The South becomes the central ethnographic situation only in *Morte e pianto rituale* \(1975\[ 1958\]\), *Sud e magia* \(1959\), and *La terra del rimorso* \(1961\). The picture of popular southern religion that emerges from these latter writings affirms Gramsci's notion of it as a fragmentary, disorganized, and contradictory set of beliefs and practices that connects in a sporadic and partial way with "official" Catholicism. 

In the belief and practice of ordinary people, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish clearly the emic boundaries between official Catholicism and "magic." Some rituals and beliefs are essentially "officially" Catholic, and yet are transformed in minor ways for popular purposes. Catholic symbols and saints, for example, are regularly used in magical techniques that in themselves have little to do with "official" ritual, and that are performed away from the watchful eye of priests. Other Catholic elements are transformed more completely, and others still seem to have no connection at all with official Catholicism, and indeed may be at odds with it. This last is perhaps most evidently the case in the work of specialists who are clearly "shamans" rather than "priests," and who have no role in the official Church. As De Martino repeatedly points out, however, ordinary people may bring to even the most clearly orthodox Catholic practices their own very heterodox interpretations, "Popular" and "orthodox" religion, then, are unbounded, non-discrete, very fluid categories. 

De Martino's ethnography of magical practices in Lucania \(1959\) begins with a discussion of "la fascinazione," a broad category of beliefs and practices that includes *malocchio* or "the evil eye," and *fattura*, perhaps best described as "sorcery." Fascination manifests itself in symptoms of various types, including headaches, excessive sleepiness, digestive problems, the illnesses of infants, and the failure of mothers' milk to flow. The common factor in all is the sense of being "acted on" or "dominated" by occult forces. Here De Martino's analysis seems to suggest that magic expresses the powerlessness of the rural proletariat, the sense of being at the mercy of a world that acts with its own motives and logic. The ritual practice clearly concentrates not on the active process of "fascinating" someone, but rather on the after-the-fact undoing of it. 

Sometimes formulaic verses are used to cure *fascinazione*, and these often seem to mimic Catholic ritual: 

Padre, Figlio e Spirito Santo Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,   Fascinatura va' da la via Fascination go away from there.   Va' da affascinare N.N. Don't fascinate N.N. \[name\]   ca e carne battezzata. Who is baptized meat.   Padre, Figlio e Spirito Santo Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,   Fascinatura non sci piu nante. Fascination don't go ahead any more   \(De Martino 1959: 16\)     

De Martino notes that some of these exorcistic spells are linked to "exemplary myths of cancellation of the fascination: and the 'word' said and the 'gesture' completed in the rite are efficacious in that they repeat and reactualize the meta-historical model of cancellation" \(1959: 19\), as in the following example: 

Duie uocchie t'hanno affise Two eyes have fixed you   tre te vonno aita Three want to help you   Sant'Anna, Santa Lena Saint Anne, Saint Elena   Santa Maria Maddalena. Saint Mary Magdalene.   Scende la Madonna The Madonna comes down   co' le mane sante with her holy hands   in nome del Padre Figliuolo e in the name of the Father, Son, and   Spirito Santo. Holy Spirit.   \(1959: 19\).     

Again, ritual of this sort seems anything but oppositional, and though it may provide people with a comforting "psychological" sense of control over the world, it hardly seems a consciousness with genuine potential to change their situation in the world or to challenge the hegemony of the Church or the rapaciousness of landlords. 

At other times, "fascination" is used electively for purposes that would clearly find disfavor with Church officials, as when "love magic" is employed to make somebody fall in love. Women may make use of menstrual blood or pubic hair slipped into wine, coffee, or soup, in order to *legare* \("tie" - but the word itself has supernatural overtones\) a man and take him away from a rival. Even in love magic, however, there are links to official Catholicism. Three drops of blood from a woman's finger, for example, can be mixed with pubic and armpit hair, dried into a powder, and carried to Church. At the ritually central moment of the Mass, during the elevation of the host, the woman murmurs: 

Sanghe de Criste Blood of Christ,   demonie, attaccame a chiste demons, attach me to this one   Tante ca li a lega so strongly you must tie him   ca de me non s'avi scurda. that he will not forget me.   \(1959: 22\).     

How does such behavior relate to notions of hegemony or resistance? In some vague way this practice may be "countercultural," especially with respect to gender roles, but it remains, for De Martino, an "unrealistic" solution to real-life problems, and thus its oppositional character, if there at all, is far from progressive.13 

At the other end of the spectrum, official Catholicism also provides a kind of romantic fortune-telling service — however inadvertent — for ordinary people. At the wedding Mass, for example, if the gospel of John is read, it is an auspicious sign, while the gospel of Luke inspires genuine panic among the participants \(1959: 23\). In describing these beliefs, De Martino suggests that the people who hold them are gullible and that priests are duplicitous: "The couple and their relatives, at the end of the Mass, often crowd around the officiating priests and ask anxiously, 'Which Gospel came out?' And the priest, who knows the beliefs of his parishioners, to calm them responds, 'Saint John, Saint John,' even if it's not true" \(1959: 24\). Thus, again, though this form of love magic seems in many senses at odds with Church doctrine, it is nonetheless incorporated into a wider ideological schema in which the Church maintains its role as a legitimate and powerful authority. There seems little here to disrupt the unifying ideology propagated by the Church itself. 

The second part of *Sud e magia*, entitled "Magic, Catholicism, and High Culture," is the analytic heart of the book. Here De Martino develops a theoretical explanation of some aspects of magic, focusing on its relationship to "the crisis of presence," an existential dilemma in which there is a "risk that the very individual presence may lose itself as a center of decision and of choice" \(1959: 90\).14 This possibility is itself universal: it is evident in psychopathology, in great wars, in grief and mourning, and in a variety of other contexts. It is particularly likely, however, where "the immense daily power of the negative" is so evident and overwhelming. In the poor, rural zones of Southern Italy, "the precariousness of the elementary goods of life, the uncertainty of the prospects for the future, the pressure exercised over individuals by uncontrollable natural and social forces, the harshness of toil in the framework of a backward agricultural economy, the narrow memory of efficacious rational actions with which to confront realistically the critical moments of existence constitute so many conditions that favor the maintenance of magical practices" \(1959: 89\). Magic is thus a way of coping in the face of overwhelming social and economic marginalization. It is a cultural aspect of the class system and of an unproductive economy in a difficult ecology. In the absence of effective strategies to counter the overwhelmingly negative aspects of this environment, popular religion helps people to live with their situation. Again, this sounds like a form of mystification that ultimately supports the system and is effectively conservative. 

Magic is not just bad science \(or bad politics, perhaps\), however, but has a larger cultural role related to its historical location as a "folkloric area of a modern civilization" \(1959: 109\), and particularly in its rapport with official Catholicism. Most Lucanian magical practices have analogs elsewhere in the world: the use of exuviae and the body in "sympathetic" and "imitative" rituals; the power of the spoken word in ritual contexts; the connection of harm and cure through the common belief in the power of the supernatural; the importance of "technique" and the instrumental approach. Lucanian magic thus demonstrates remarkable similarities to \(an example cited\) that of the Aranda of central Australia, and it would seem that magic is also in this sense ahistorical, an abstracted phenomenon that occurs everywhere. For De Martino, however, those similarities obscure more than they illuminate. "The historical sense" of Lucanian magic "manifests itself therefore only if we consider those techniques as a moment of a cultural dynamic perceptible in a single civilization, a particular society, and a definite epoch" \(1959: 112\). The emphasis here is on "dynamic" - magic is to be understood in *this* historical moment, not as an archaic "survival" of a past moment. 

This historical sense is recognized particularly in the fact that magic forms a kind of bridge between popular culture and hegemonic culture, a meeting-place for the two, or perhaps better, a communication system between them. This bridge is evident in several ways. One of the old saws of the distinction between "magic" and "religion" is that the former is strictly instrumental and technical, while the latter is \(as Croce noted\) related to a system of morality and of values. The employment of the symbols of Christianity in Lucanian magic, however, opens these practices to a wider horizon, and connects them, however tenuously, to all of the values of Christianity. 

Through the connections and the shadows . . . Lucanian magic communicates therefore with the fundamental themes of the Catholic cult, with the sacramentels and the sacraments, and even with the very sacrifice of the Mass, across a continuum of moments which . . . signal a gradual approach to the heart of the Catholic religion, where the specifically popular or in fact "southern" shadings of Catholicism in part dissolve themselves and in part become attenuated and sublimated, until finally we arrive at that which characterizes Catholicism as a particular Christian confession \(1959: 120\). 

This latter is a system of ethics and values. Furthermore, De Martino goes on to note that the bridge connects in both directions, and official Catholicism, like all religions, continues to contain elements that are clearly magical. It is a short step, he argues, from the "extracanonical exorcism of witches and sorcerers" to the "Mass of exorcism" with its "blessings of water, of salt, prayers against Satan and the other evil spirits" and finally to "pontifical" exorcisms, that is, dedications of churches, blessing of holy oils and bells, and so forth \(1959: 119-22\). The question of the connection of ritual actions to value systems is crucial, and De Martino goes to some length to show, again, that the boundaries between instrumental magic and value-oriented religion are fuzzy. It is in this context that he rejects the Protestant polemics against southern Catholicism which have treated it as a form of "paganism" surviving from pre-Christian Roman ideas and practices. 

However wide the gap between popular and élite conceptions of the world, then, even popular supernaturalism occurs within a thoroughly "Catholic" framework. The priest in the example above knows the meanings that his parishioners will apply to the fact that one gospel rather than another is read at the wedding Mass. No matter what approach he takes to this issue, the priest is clearly in a position of power, and knows how to use that power in the manipulation of meanings. Such power makes his wider values relevant, gives the messages of his sermons a particular impact, and constitutes the basis of his ability to act as an agent of "cultural unity" in the maintenance of the historical bloc. 

By the same token, by virtue of their bridge to orthodox Catholicism, magic and popular religion do lead ordinary people into a conception of the world in which right conduct has a cosmic dimension, and in which the cosmic is a moral domain. However much one may object to the particular moral values of orthodox Catholicism, the analysis seems to imply that this bridge thus establishes the epistemological and cultural foundation for *action* oriented to political and social change. Once morality becomes a relevant issue, there is the potential to turn the judgments of such morality back on those in power themselves. If morality is relevant, then the morality of the local priest is also relevant, and can be used against him and those in power. This is a major source of the progressive potential in popular religion. 

An even more interesting analysis emerges from De Martino's attempt to trace the history of *jettatura*, that is, the "evil eye," through the period of the Enlightenment. Here the particular historical moment and the collocation of the phenomenon in the southern \(in this case, particularly Neapolitan\) context acquire their relevance. De Martino takes up the themes of "rationalism" and "enlightenment" and their relationship to *jettatura*. Beginning in the Renaissance in Naples, he notes a trend away from the popular interpretation of the evil eye as a phenomenon involving Satan and demons, and toward a "naturalistic" and psychologized interpretation. In the latter, the evil eye would be seen as "the product of 'images' that with their charge of envy and evil depart from the eye and the glance, whence by the action of whatever such material particles or 'images' there may be, they cause for the victim distressing alterations of the body or the soul" \(1959: 130\). In this context, "Satan becomes the symbol of the dark side of man" \(1959: 136\), a decided step away from the kind of attitudes that De Martino repeatedly refers to, in this book, as "unrealistic." 

Despite this movement toward a more rational, "scientific" approach, however, belief in the evil eye did not disappear. Rather, by the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, this belief had become more ambiguous, and had acquired a kind of facetious, almost farcical character, especially in literature. Now, De Martino considers the fact that it appears in literature at all to be in itself interesting, and he notes that the continuing reference to evil eye was particularly notable to foreigners: "In general these travelers were struck by the social extent of the belief, and did not fail to note that while in their \[northern European\] countries of origin the educated classes no longer participated in this 'superstition,' ... in Naples all the classes of society were stili involved in it" \(1959: 158\). De Martino points out that even a distinguished university professor of canonical and civil law had published a major book about it, which was widely read among the élite. This book, by Nicola Valletta, was titled *Cicalata sul fascino, volgarmente detto jettatura*. The title is difficult to translate, but might best be rendered something like "Idle Musings about Fascination, Popularly Called *dettatura."* Idle chit-chat, the stuff of blow-hards, not to be taken seriously, the book appears to have been written as a kind of whimsy of Valleta's old age. De Martino notes that Valleta seems to approach the subject with a kind of dual consciousness: "the disposition . .. between serious and facetious with which even today many Italians, and above all southerners, often confront the theme of evil eye, the 'it's not true, but I believe in it' \(or the 'I don't believe in it, but it's true'\)" attitude \(De Martino 1959: 148\). Furthermore, De Martino describes Valleta as "smiling" at the phenomenon, and yet this attitude highlights "above all the contrast between a superior cultural consciousness, which has learned from the Enlightenment the great theme of the rationality of the universe and of the transformative power of human labor brightened by the lamp of reason, and an inferior cultural consciousness, still not overcome, according to which, by contrast, everything goes askance with a regularity and a predictability which constitute exactly the opposite of an 'enlightened' world" \(1959: 142\). 

Why this dual consciousness? Why the persistence of the irrational and the contradictory, even in the "cultivated classes"?15 De Martino's explanation, in the end, is less than fully satisfying, and seems to reaffirm the essentially conservative ideological function of popular religion. To make sense of the continuing significance of the evil eye, De Martino falls back on a rather crude combination of an almost-mystical notion, "the power of the negative in the history of the South" \(1959: 174\), and the failure of Naples and the South to develop an industrially and commercially-oriented bourgeoisie \(1959: 176\). De Martino notes that the figure of the feared *jettatore* in Naples was often an upper-class public official, "by profession *letterati*, doctors, lawyers, and magistrates" \(1959: 177\). But remember that it was not only the poor who made such projections, so this ideology is not simply the poor's way of morally deflating the powerful. Indeed, the belief is found even at the very top of the social structure. King Ferdinand I was said to have refused for years to invite a certain De Jorio for a court audience, because he believed him to be a *jettatore*. And indeed, when he was finally persuaded to see De Jorio, Ferdinand died on the following morning, apparently convinced that his belief had been correct. And later, Ferdinand Il was said to have seen two Capuchin monks eyeing him on his return from a wedding; and he died shortly afterwards, shouting on his death bed, "M'hanno jettato\!" \(1959: 157\). 

In considering this participation of the élite in popular beliefs, De Martino suggests that Naples was stuck in a non-history, and that it failed to develop genuinely rationalized systems, particularly of justice and public administration. "It was thus understandable that the ideology of the *jettatura* should enjoy particular favor precisely in an environment of this type, where the outcome requested or hoped for depended on a myriad of imponderables, and where justice and arbitrary action, law and its abuse, were inextricably confused" \(1959: 178\). The belief in the evil eye attributed misfortune to the moral whimsy of individual men, men who could wield their nefarious powers against the wealthy as well as the poor. Though not intrinsically a "Catholic" doctrine, it was far from contradictory to Church interests, and even such élite defenders of the faith as the Bourbon kings were believers and victims. In a quasi-feudal area where an aristocratic élite was invincible, the belief in the evil eye as a source of misfortune deflected attention from class relations themselves, assigning evil to individuals rather than to social categories. As such, it was one weapon in the armory of the élite, helping to maintain the cultural unity, obscuring the distinctions between élite Catholicism and popular religion, and between élites themselves and the poor. 



## But The Potential Remains

The preface to *Sud e magia* begins like this: 

The opposition between 'magic' and 'rationality' is one of the great themes of which modern civilization has been born. This opposition has its prologue in some motifs of Greek thought and of Gospel teachings, but it is constituted as the dramatic center of modern civilization with the passage from demonological magic to the natural magic of the Renaissance, with the Protestant polemic against Catholic ritualism, with the foundation of the natural sciences and their methods, with the Enlightenment and its faith in a reforming human nature, and with the various currents of thought that are tied to the discovery of the dialectic and of historical reasoning. In this framework even the bloody epoch of the witch trials, though it appears to be a return to the demonological conceptions of medieval magic, recalls immediately this fundamental antimagical polemic that runs through the whole course of Western civilization. The modern nations which comprise the West are "modern" to the extent that they have participated seriously in this varied process in which we are still involved \(De Martino 1959: 7\). 

For De Martino, questions of "progress" have to do with a two-sided historical movement: \(1\) toward increasingly "rational" solutions to human problems; and \(2\) toward a kind of consciousness that affords the individual greater possibility of acting as a subject rather than an object in history, of making choices that afford a measure of "presence" in the world. Popular religion, at least as found in De Martino's ethnographic studies of Southern Italy, seems to provide little basis for such progress, though it does contain that potential. As a "conception of the world," it seems most often to focus on a cosmos of supernatural whimsy, of malevolent forces activated by unseen enemies and of benevolent forces that may be \(but also may not be\) coerced by ritual language into helping one person against another, with little relationship to the moral status or value systems of either. It does little to suggest that choices based on values are essential to action in the world, and provides little basis for such choices themselves. It encourages people to individualize the solutions to their problems, and to deal with them in indirect ways. In all of these senses, popular religion usually inhibits the social conflict that could lead to change. 

Elite Catholicism in a paradoxical way has somewhat more potential for representing progress, simply because of its claims to universal values, which bring the supernatural back to earth and affirm more directly that people's moral behavior matters. \(Certainly in recent years this potential has been realized in "liberation theology" and other political-religious movements within the Catholic Church.\) Still, Catholic doctrine is generally, for De Martino as for Gramsci, a reactionary and mystifying ideology, by which differences between the powerful and the poor are symbolically glossed over and legitimated, and which thus helps to create a cultural unity based on what remains essentially an irrational conception of the world. The "problem" of the relationship between élite Catholicism and ordinary people is that in fact Catholicism has been generally successful in bringing the poor into a value system promulgated by the élite. The organic intellectuals of the South, parish priests, schoolteachers, bureaucrats, and so forth, are effective agents in the creation of a genuine hegemony, however fragile it may be and however contrary to the interests of the poor. 

The successes of official Catholicism are far from uniform and total, however. Popular religion has at least some elements that are oppositional, that contradict official doctrine, and that continue to emphasize the gap between the high-religious ideologues and ordinary people. This gap is a marker both of the degradation of the subaltern classes and of the possibility of their finding a kind of consciousness that could break the hegemonic bloc. The kinds of magic and popular religion that poor people use in the South seem to be, for Gramsci and De Martino, essentially unrealistic. They give a false sense of "presence" and of ability to influence the course of affairs, and they do not in fact bring the poor into history as conscious decision-makers and actors. On the other hand, to the extent that such religion emphasizes to them their own "otherness" with respect to dominant culture, it also contains the seeds of change: contradictions that are evident are the basis of a potential class consciousness and thus of social transformation. To the extent that the popular religion of the South and official Catholicism stand as two distinct and opposed systems, they represent to people the gaps between the poor and the powerful, between South and North, and they thus provide some basis for solidarity and a collective consciousness that may break the ideological unity. This is a weak potential, perhaps, but it is at least potential.16 



## Acknowledgments

This chapter and the paper on which it was based owe a great deal to the collegial friendship of Mariella Pandolfi, who continues to be a source of support and inspiration for my reading of De Martino, and whose own work \(such as 1991\) keeps this seminal thinker on the minds of Italianist scholars at home and abroad. I also owe a special debt in this paper to Carla Pasquinelli, whose edited book, *Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale* \( 1977\), has been a major resource for me, and whose own introduction to the book provides a much clearer and more profound analysis than I manage here. Dorothy Zinn, who is at work on a translation of *La terra del rimorso*, has also stimulated my recent thinking about De Martino. I thank Jane Schneider for the invitation to prepare the paper for the conference, Vincenzo Padiglione for persistent friendship against all odds, Clara Gallini and Amalia Signorelli for an invitation to the special conference on "De Martino in European Culture" held in Rome and Naples in late 1995, and Lawrence University for giving me a job and continuing to pay me for eighteen years now. Much of the background work for this chapter was also completed during two recent stays in Italy, one with the help of National Science Foundation Grant BNS-9005857 \(shared with Salvatore Cucchiari\) and another with a summer stipend from the National Endowment for the Humanities. 




## Notes

1. For an excellent discussion of Goethe's observations on the Roman Carnival, see Crapanzano 1986, 

2. The text does not tell us whether "myself' refers to Auden or Mayer. 

3. We anthropologists are of course not immune to these ambiguous attractions, as David Kertzer reminded us in his recent paper, "Representing Italy," presented at the 1994 meeting of the American Anthropological Association. 

4. The chapter by Nadia Urbinati in this volume \(Chapter 6\) suggests to me that, in the case of Gramsci, "ambivalence" is perhaps not the right word. Rather, his understanding of the South was complex, and changed a great deal over the course of his truncated career. My particular focus here, however, is southern popular religion, and I think that ambivalence is more appropriately descriptive in this domain than in Gramsci's more general views of the place of the South in Italian national culture. 

5. The question of "subjectivity" in De Martino's work is nicely elaborated by di Nola in this volume \(Chapter 7\). See also my article \(Saunders 1993\), and Cherchi and Cherchi \(1987\). 

6. One further note before I begin this interpretation. I emphasize from the beginning that this is an "interpretation" of ideas of these two scholars, ideas sometimes incompletely formed and sometimes contradictory, and sometimes just plain difficult for my limited and English-oriented mind to understand. Accordingly, I am aware that I more than occasionally "force" the interpretation, working from notions that "suggest themselves" to me as I read, rather than from ideas clearly articulated by Gramsci and De Martino themselves. I have also selected, for this particular essay, a particular subset of the writings of each author. For Gramsci, the set is rather eclectic, but includes his commentaries on Catholicism itself, found scattered through the *Prison Notebooks*, and also his comments on the character of "folklore." For De Martino, I will examine a number of his shorter essays, touch briefly on the magnificent *La terra del rimorso*, and concentrate on *Sud e magia*, a major text on the character of magic and popular religion in the South. An additional caveat is appropriate: like Gramsci and De Martino, I write in my "own" time and see things from the perspectives I find in that moment. The point is that though this essay takes texts by Gramsci and De Martino as its foundation, those texts are undoubtedly transformed in my interpretation of them, just as I am transformed by reading them. It's not a fair trade: I take more than I give, and at times I undoubtedly give a poor gift. 

7. An excellent discussion of the Church's position with respect to the kind of intellectual culture that developed out of liberalism can be found in Leone 1985. See also Angrosino 1994. 

8. The Reformation did of course make at least some headway in Italy itself, and in the nineteenth century there was a small but significant development of Protestantism, despite the continuing dominance of the Catholic Church. As elsewhere, Protestantism in Italy was particularly an urban and bourgeois phenomenon in its early stages, though it has subsequently developed a very different base. See for example Chiarini and Giorgi \(1990\), Maselli \(1971, 1978\), Mottu and Castiglione \(1977\), Spini \(1968,1971\), and Saunders \(1995\). 

9. Of course, sometimes the line between "force" and "cultural domination" is thin. I am reminded of Frank Snowden's account of a typical day for an Apulian agricultural day-laborer in 1905, which began literally at dawn: "Only at sunset was it permissible to down tools, and even then the men could not depart until they had knelt in compulsory prayer" \(1986: 26\). 

10. De Martino worried that this new cultural unity might require at least a temporary "barbarianizing of culture," that is, the need for culture to be brought down to a level intelligible and meaningful to ordinary people, apparently until the people could be brought up to a higher level themselves. This notion was drawn from Gramsci \(see De Martino 1977\[1949\]\), and created considerable controversy among leftist theorists of the early postwar period \(see Luporini 1977\[1950\]\). 

11. In my own research in Italy, I have often heard "priest stories" that indicate precisely the kind of tyrannical exercise of power, of questionable legitimacy, that Gramsci was concerned with. In an alpine village where I worked in the middle to late 1970s, for example, people complained that the local health service doctor refused to provide couples with any birth control information unless they first presented him with a letter from the local priest authorizing him to do so. And Pentecostal Protestants in Tuscany told me many stories of priests acting inappropriately in local affairs. One man, for example, told of his parish priest announcing from the pulpit that people could no longer — under threat of excommunication - shop at the small store owned by a woman who had recently joined one of the Protestant groups in the neighborhood. According to my informant, the woman was put out of business in a brief period. 

12. See Urbinati in this volume \(Chapter 6\) for a deeper discussion of the relationship between high culture, "common sense," and folklore. 

13. The countercultural or oppositional character of popular religion has been the focus of a great deal of attention by later Europeanist historians and anthropologists, such as Burke 1978, Christian 1972, 1984, Cirese 1971, Davis 1965, Di Nola 1976, Holmes 1989, Lanternari 1963, and Lombardi-Satriani 1974. Indeed, following Gramsci and de Martino, this was for a time a major theme of Italian anthropological studies of religion. 

14. The notion of "presence" and of a "crisis of presence" runs through much of De Martino's work. A particularly good analysis of this concept can be found in the book by Cherchi and Cherchi \(1987\), and I have also dealt with it in a recent paper \(Saunders 1995\). See especially the chapter by Di Nola in this volume \(Chapter 7\). 

15. For a good discussion of the enduring but complex character of evil eye beliefs in contemporary Italy, see Gait 1982. 

16. As a postscript, it is worth noting that Italian anthropologists who have followed Gramsci and De Martino have found considerably more evidence of the realization of that potential. When De Martino himself looked for "progressive" folklore, he found a bit of it in relatively new, essentially politicized songs and festivals. Most of popular religion remained more conservative. Nonetheless, his work inspired others to search harder for elements of genuine resistance hidden in folklore, some of which might even be "progressive." Though I cannot describe this work in detail here, I refer readers to the work of Lanternari \(1963, 1976\), Lombardi-Satriani \(1974\), Padiglione \(1990\), Tullio-Altan \(1974\), and others. I have described some of this work in my papers \(Saunders 1984, 1991, 1993\). I am also attempting to use some of these ideas in my ethnographic research on Pentecostal Protestantism in Italy. 




## References

+ Angrosino, Michael V. \(1994\) "The Culture Concept and the Mission of the Roman Catholic Church." *American Anthropologist* **96**: 824—32. 
+ Bendix, Reinhard \( 1960\) *Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait*. New York: Doubleday Anchor. 
+ Boggs, Carl \(1976\) *Gramsci's Marxism*. London: Pluto Press. 
+ Burke, Peter \(1978\) *Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe*. New York: Harper Torchbooks. 
+ Cherchi, Placido and Cherchi, Maria \(1987\) *Ernesto De Martino. Dalla crisi della presenza alla comunità umana*. Naples: Liguori. 
+ Chiarini, Franco and Giorgi, Lorenza, eds. \(1990\) *Movimenti evangelici in Italia dall 'Unità ad oggi*. Turin: Claudiana. 
+ Christian, William A. Jr. \(1972\) *Person and God in a Spanish Valley*. New York: Seminar. 
+ —\(1984\) "Tapping and Defining New Power: The First Months of Vision at Ezquioga, July 1931." In *Cultural Dominance in the Mediterranean Area*, ed. A. Blok and H. Driessen, pp. 122-72. Nijmegen: University of Nijmegen. 
+ Cirese, Alberto Maria \(1971\) *Cultura egemonica e culture subalterne*. Palermo: Palumbo. 
+ Crapanzano, Vincent \(1986\) "Hermes' Dilemma: The Masking of Subversion in Ethnographic Description." In *Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography*, ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus, pp. 51—76. Berkeley University of California Press. 
+ Davis, Natalie Zemon \(1965\) *Society and Culture in Early Modern France.* Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
+ De Martino, Ernesto \(1941\) *Naturalismo e storicismo net\! 'etnologia*. Bari: Laterza. 
+ —\(1959\) *Sud e magia*. Milan: Feltrinelli. 
+ —\(1961\) *La terra del rimorso. Contributo a una storia religiosa del Sud*. Milan: Il Saggiatore. 
+ —\(1975 \[1958\] *Morte e pianto rituale. Dal lamento funebre antico al pianto di Maria*. Turin: Paolo Boringhieri. 
+ —\(1977 \[1948\]\) "Cultura e classe operaia." In *Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale. Ernesto De Martino e il dibattito sul mondo popolare subalterno negli anni 1948—1955*, ed. Carla Pasquinelli, pp. 37-46. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 
+ —\(1977 \[1949\]\) "Intorno a una storia del mondo popolare subalterno." In *Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale. Ernesto De Martino e il dibattito sul mondo popolare subalterno negli anni 1948—1955*, ed. Carla Pasquinelli, pp. 46-73. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 
+ —\(1977 \[1951\]\) "Il folklore progressivo." *In Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale. Ernesto De Martino e il dibattito sul mondo popolare subalterno negli anni 1948-1955*, ed. Carla Pasquinelli, pp. 143—6. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 
+ Di Nola, Alfonso M. \(1976\) *Gli aspetti magico-religiosi di una cultura subalterna italiana*. Turin: Boringhieri. 
+ Di Nola, Annalisa \(1995\) "How Critical Was De Martino's 'Critical Ethnocentrism' in Southern Italy?" Paper presented at the Wenner-Gren Foundation Conference on The Southern Question, Tarrytown, New York, May 1995 \(Chapter 7 of the present book\). 
+ Freud, Sigmund \(1961 \[1930\]\) *Civilization and Its Discontents*. New York: Norton. 
+ Gait. Anthony H. \(1982\) "The Evil Eye as Synthetic Image and Its Meanings on the Island of Pantelleria, *Italy." American Ethnologist* **9**: 664-81. 
+ Gay, Peter \(1988\) *Freud: A Life for Our Time*. New York: Norton. 
+ Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von \(1962\) *Italian Journey, 1786-1788*, trans, W. H. Auden and Elizabeth Mayer. San Francisco: North Point Press. 
+ Gramsci, Antonio \(1957\) *The Modern Prince and Other Writings*. New York: International Publishers. 
+ —\(1975\) *Il materialismo storico e la filosofia di Benedetto Croce*, Turin: Riuniti. 
+ —\(1978\) *Selections from Political Writings, 1921—1926*, ed. and trans. Quinton Hoare. London: Lawrence and Wishart. 
+ —1980\) *Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci*, ed. and trans. Quintin Hoare & Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New York: International Publishers. 
+ —\(1985\) *Selections from the Cultural Writings*, ed. David Forgács and Geoffrey Nowell-Smith, trans. William Boelhower. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
+ Gruppi, Luciano \(1975\) "Introduzione." In *Il materialismo storico e la filosofìa di Benedetto Croce*, pp. xiii—xl. Turin: Riuniti. 
+ Holmes, Douglas R. \(1989\) *Cultural Disenchantments: Worker Peasantries in Northeast Italy*. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
+ Jones, Ernest \(1961 \[1953\]\) *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud*. New York: Basic Books. 
+ Lanternari, Vittorio \(1963\) *The Religions of the Oppressed*. New York: Mentor. 
+ —\(1976\) *Crisi e ricerca d'identità. Folklore e dinamica culturale*, 2nd edn. Naples: Liguori. 
+ Leone, Alba Rosa \(1985\) "La chiesa, i cattolici e le scienze dell'uomo: 1860—1960." In *L'antropologia italiana, un secolo di storia*, ed. Pietro Clemente, Alba Rosa Leone, Sandra Puccini, Carlo Rossetti, and Pier Giorgio Solinas, pp. 51-96. Rome: Laterza. 
+ Lombardi Satriani, Luigi M. \(1974\) *Antropologia culturale e analisi della cultura subalterna*. Rimini: Guaraldi. 
+ Luporini, Cesare \(1977 \[1950\]\) "Intorno alla storia del 'Mondo popolare subalterno'." In *Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale. Ernesto De Martino e il dibattito sul mondo popolare subalterno negli anni 1948—1955,* ed. Carla Pasquinelli, pp. 73-89. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 
+ Macrae, Donald G. \(1974\) *Max Weber*. New York: The Viking Press. 
+ Maselli, Domenico \(1971\) *Breve storia dell'altra chiesa. Storia delle chiese evangeliche in Italia*. Naples: Edizioni Centro Biblico. 
+ —\(1978\) *Libertà della parola. Storia delle chiese cristiane dei fratelli, 1886—1946*. Turin: Claudiana. 
+ Mitzman, Arthur \(1969\) *The Iron Cage: An Historical Interpretation of Max Weber.* New York: Grosset and Dunlap. 
+ Mottu, H. and Castiglione, M. \(1977\) *Religione popolare in un 'ottica protestante. Gramsci, cultura subalterna e lotte contadine*. Turin: Claudiana. 
+ O'Brien, Jay and Roseberry, William, eds. \(1991\) *Golden Ages, Dark Ages: Imagining the Past in Anthropology· and History*. Berkeley: University of California, 
+ Padiglione, Vincenzo, ed. \(1990\) *Le parole della fede. Forme di espressività religiosa*. Bari: Edizioni Dedalo. 
+ Pandolfi, Mariella \(1991\) *Itinerari delle emozioni. Corpo e identità femminile nel sannio campano*. Milan: Franco Angeli. 
+ Pasquinelli, Carla, ed. \(1977\) *Antropologia culturale e questione meridionale. Ernesto De Martino e il dibattito sul mondo popolare subalterno negli anni 1948—1955*. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 
+ Saunders, George R. \(1984\) "Contemporary Italian Cultural Anthropology." *Annual Review of Anthropology* **13**: 447-66. 
+ —\(1991\) "Ernesto De Martino." In *International Dictionary of Anthropologists,* ed. Christopher Winters. New York: Garland. 
+ —\(1993\) "'Critical Ethnocentrism' and the Ethnology of Ernesto De Martino." *American Anthropologist* **95**: 875—93. 
+ —\(1995\) "The Crisis of Presence **in** Italian Pentecostal Conversion." *American Ethnologist* **22**: 324-40. 
+ Snowden, Frank M. \(1986\) *Violence and Great Estates in the South of Italy: Apulia, 1900-1922*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
+ Spini, Giorgio \(1968\) "Movimenti evangelici nell'Italia contemporanea." *Rivista storica italiana* **80** \(3\): 463—98. 
+ —\(1971\) *L'evangelo e il berretto frigio. Storia della Chiesa Cristiana Libera in Italia, 1870—1904*. Turin: Claudiana. 
+ Torres, Carlos Alberto \(1992\) *The Church, Society, and Hegemony: A Criticai Sociology of Religion in Latin America*, trans. Richard A. Young. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. 
+ Tullio-Altan, Carlo \(1974*\) I valori diffìcili. Inchiesta sulle tendenze ideologiche e politiche dei giovani in Italia*. Milan: Bompiani. 
+ Urbinati, Nadia \(1995\) "Against Necessity: The Souths of Antonio Gramsci". Paper presented at the Wenner-Gren Foundation Conference on The Southern Question, Tarrytown, New York, May 1995 \(Chapter 6 of this book\). 
+ Wolf, Eric R. \(1982\) *Europe and the People without History*. Berkeley: University of California Press. 



