+++
title = "05 CHAPTER III ENSLAVEMENT OF HINDUS BY ARAB AND TURKISH INVADERS"

+++
**CHAPTER III**  
**ENSLAVEMENT OF HINDUS BY ARAB AND**  
**TURKISH INVADERS**

Turks were not the first Muslims to invade India. Prior to the coming of
Turks the Arab general Muhammad bin Qasim invaded Sindh in the early
years of the eighth century. In conformity with the Muslim tradition,
the Arabs captured and enslaved Indians in large numbers. Indeed from
the days of Muhammad bin Qasim in the eighth century to those of Ahmad
Shah Abdali in the eighteenth, enslavement, distribution, and sale of
Hindu prisoners was systematically practised by Muslim invaders and
rulers of India. It is but natural that the exertion of a thousand years
of slave-taking can only be briefly recounted with a few salient
features of the system highlighted.

*Enslavement by the Arabs*

During the Arab invasion of Sindh (712 C.E.), Muhammad bin Qasim first
attacked Debal, a word derived from Deval meaning temple. It was
situated on the sea-coast not far from modern Karachi. It was garrisoned
by 4000 Kshatriya soldiers and served by 3000 Brahmans. All males of the
age of seventeen and upwards were put to the sword and their women and
children were enslaved.[¹](#1) “700 beautiful females, who were under
the protection of Budh (that is, had taken shelter in the temple), were
all captured with their valuable ornaments, and clothes adorned with
jewels.”[²](#2) Muhammad despatched one-fifth of the legal spoil to
Hajjaj which included seventy-five damsels, the rest four-fifths were
distributed among the soldiers.[³](#3) Thereafter whichever places he
attacked like Rawar, Sehwan, Dhalila, Brahmanabad and Multan, Hindu
soldiers and men with arms were slain, the common people fled, or, if
flight was not possible, accepted Islam, or paid the poll tax, or died
with their religion. Many women of the higher class immolated themselves
in Jauhar, most others became prize of the victors. These women and
children were enslaved and converted, and batches of them were
des-patched to the Caliph in regular installments. For example, after
Rawar was taken Muhammad Qasim “halted there for three days during which
he massacred 6000 (men). Their followers and dependents, as well as
their women and children were taken prisoner.” Later on “the slaves were
counted, and their number came to 60, 000 (of both sexes?). Out of
these, 30 were young ladies of the royal blood… Muhammad Qasim sent all
these to Hajjaj” who forwarded them to Walid the Khalifa. “He sold some
of these female slaves of royal birth, and some he presented to
others.”[⁴](#4) Selling of slaves was a common practice. “From the
seventh century onwards and with a peak during Muhammad al-Qasim’s
campaigns in 712-13”, writes Andre Wink, “a considerable number of Jats
was captured as prisoners of war and deported to Iraq and elsewhere as
slaves.”[⁵](#5) Jats here is obviously used as a general word for all
Hindus. In Brahmanabad, “it is said that about six thousand fighting men
were slain, but according to others sixteen thousand were killed”, and
their families enslaved.[⁶](#6) The garrison in the fort-city of Multan
was put to the sword, and families of the chiefs and warriors of Multan,
numbering about six thousand, were enslaved.

In Sindh female slaves captured after every campaign of the marching
army, were converted and married to Arab soldiers who settled down in
colonies established in places like Mansura, Kuzdar, Mahfuza and
Multan. The standing instructions of Hajjaj to Muhammad bin Qasim were
to “give no quarter to infidels, but to cut their throats”, and take the
women and children as captives.[⁷](#7) In the final stages of the
conquest of Sindh, “when the plunder and the prisoners of war were
brought before Qasim… one-fifth of all the prisoners were chosen and set
aside; they were counted as amounting to twenty thousand in number…
(they belonged to high families) and veils were put on their faces, and
the rest were given to the soldiers”.[⁸](#8) Obviously a few lakh women
were enslaved in the course of Arab invasion of Sindh.

*Ghaznavid capture of Hindu slaves*

If such were the gains of the ‘mild’ Muhammad bin Qasim in enslaving
*kaniz wa ghulam* in Sindh, the slaves captured by Mahmud of Ghazni,
“that ferocious and insatiable conqueror”, of the century beginning with
the year 1000 C.E. have of course to be counted in hundreds of
thousands. Henry Elliot and John Dowson have sifted the available
evidence from contemporary and later sources-from Utbi’s
*Tarikh-i-Yamini*, Nizamuddin Ahmad’s *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, the
*Tarikh-i-Alai* and the *Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh* to the researches of
early European scholars. Mohammad Habib, Muhammad Nazim, Wolseley Haig
and I myself have also studied these invasions in detail.[⁹](#9) All
evidence points to the fact that during his seventeen invasions, Mahmud
Ghaznavi enslaved a very large number of people in India. Although
figures of captives for each and every campaign have not been provided
by contemporary chroniclers, yet some known numbers and data about the
slaves taken by Mahmud speak for themselves.

When Mahmud Ghaznavi attacked Waihind in 1001-02, he took 500,000
persons of both sexes as captive. This figure of Abu Nasr Muhammad Utbi,
the secretary and chronicler of Mahmud, is so mind-boggling that Elliot
reduces it to 5000.[¹⁰](#10) The point to note is that taking of slaves
was a matter of routine in every expedition. Only when the numbers were
exceptionally large did they receive the notice of the chroniclers. So
that in Mahmud’s attack on Ninduna in the Punjab (1014), Utbi says that
“slaves were so plentiful that they became very cheap; and men of
respectability in their native land (India) were degraded by becoming
slaves of common shop-keepers (in Ghazni)”.[¹¹](#11) His statement finds
confirmation in later chronicles including Nizamuddin Ahmad’s
*Tabqat-i-Akbari* which states that Mahmud “obtained great spoils and a
large number of slaves”. Next year from Thanesar, according to
Farishtah, “the Muhammadan army brought to Ghaznin 200,000 captives so
that the capital appeared like an Indian city, for every soldier of the
army had several slaves and slave girls”.[¹²](#12) Thereafter slaves
were taken in Baran, Mahaban, Mathura, Kanauj, Asni etc. When Mahmud
returned to Ghazni in 1019, the booty was found to consist of (besides
huge wealth) 53,000 captives. Utbi says that “the number of prisoners
may be conceived from the fact that, each was sold for from two to ten
*dirhams*. These were afterwards taken to Ghazna, and the merchants came
from different cities to purchase them, so that the countries of
Mawarau-un-Nahr, Iraq and Khurasan were filled with them”. The
*Tarikh-i-Alfi* adds that the fifth share due to the Saiyyads was
150,000 slaves, therefore the total number of captives comes to
750,000.^([13](#13))

Before proceeding further, let us try to answer two questions which
arise out of the above study. First, how was it that people could be
enslaved in such large numbers? Was there no resistance on their part?
And second, what did the victors do with these crowds of captives?

During war it was not easy for the Muslim army to capture enemy
*troops*. They were able-bodied men, strong and sometimes ‘demon like’.
It appears that capturing such male captives was a very specialised job.
Special efforts were made by ‘experts’ to surround individuals or
groups, hurl lasso or ropes around them, pin them down, and make them
helpless by binding them with cords of hide, ropes of hessian and chains
and shackles of iron. Non-combatant males, women and children of course
could be taken comparatively easily after active soldiers had been
killed in battle. The captives were made terror-stricken. It was a
common practice to raise towers of skulls of the killed by piling up
their heads in mounds. All captives were bound hand and foot and kept
under strict surveillance of armed guards until their spirit was
completely broken and they could be made slaves, converted, sold or made
to serve on sundry duties.

In a letter Hajjaj instructed Muhammad bin Qasim on how to deal with the
adversary. “The way of granting pardon prescribed by law is that when
you encounter the unbelievers, strike off their heads… make a great
slaughter among them… (Those that survive) bind them in bonds… grant
pardon to no one of the enemy and spare none of them” etc.,
etc.[¹⁴](#14) The lives of some prisoners could be spared, but they
could not be released. That is how the Arab invaders of Sindh could
enslave thousands of men and women at Debal, Rawar and Brahmanabad. At
Brahmanabad, after many people were killed, “all prisoners of or under
the age of 30 years were put in chains… All the other people capable of
bearing arms were beheaded and their followers and dependents were made
prisoners.”^([15](#15))

That is also how Mahmud of Ghazni could enslave 500,000 “beautiful men
and women” in Waihind after he had killed 15,000 fighting men in a
“splendid action” in November 1001 C.E. Utbi informs us that Jaipal, the
Hindu Shahiya king of Kabul, “his children and grandchildren, his
nephews, and the chief men of his tribe, and his relatives, were taken
prisoners, and being strongly bound with ropes, were carried before the
Sultan (Mahmud) like common evil-doers… Some had their arms forcibly
tied behind their backs, some were seized by the cheek, some were driven
by blows on their neck.”[¹⁶](#16) In every campaign of Mahmud
large-scale massacres preceded enslavement.

The sight of horrendous killing completely unnerved the captives. Not
only were the captives physically tortured, they were also morally
shattered. They were systematically humiliated and exposed to public
ridicule. When prisoners from Sindh were sent to the Khalifa, “the
slaves, who were chiefly daughters of princes and Ranas, were made to
stand in a line along with the menials (literally
shoe-bearers)”.[¹⁷](#17) Hodivala gives details of the humiliation of
Jaipal at the hands of Mahmud. He writes that Jaipal “was publicly
exposed at one of the *slave-auctions in some market in Khurasan*, just
like the thousands of other Hindu captives… (He) was paraded about so
that his sons and chieftains might see him in that condition of shame,
bonds and disgrace… inflicting upon him the public indignity of
‘commingling him in one common servitude”.[¹⁸](#18) No wonder that in
the end Jaipal immolated himself, for such humiliation was inflicted
deliberately to smash the morale of the captives. In short, once reduced
to such straits, the prisoners, young or old, ugly or handsome, princes
or commoners could be flogged, converted, sold for a tuppence or made to
work as menials.

It may be argued that Mahmud of Ghazni could enslave people in hundreds
of thousands because his raids were of a lightning nature when defence
preparedness was not satisfactory. But even when the Muslim position was
not that strong, say, during Mahmud’s son Ibrahim’s campaign in
Hindustan when “a fierce struggle ensued, but Ibrahim at length gained
victory, and slew many of them. Those who escaped fled into the jungles.
Nearly 100,000 of their women and children were taken
prisoners…”[¹⁹](#19) In this statement lies the answer to our first
problem. There was resistance and determined resistance so that all the
people of a family or village or town resisted the invaders in unison.
If they succeeded, they drove away the attackers. If not, they tried to
escape into nearby forests.[²⁰](#20) If they could not escape at all
they were made captives but then all together. They did not separate
from one another even in the darkest hour. Indeed adversity
automatically bound them together. So they determined to swim or sink
together.

Besides, right from the days of prophet Muhammad, and according to his
instructions, writes Margoliouth, “parting of a captive mother from her
child was forbidden… The parting of brothers when sold was similarly
forbidden. On the other hand captive wife might at once become the
concubine of the conqueror.”[²¹](#21) This precept of not separating the
captives but keeping them together was motivated by no humanitarian
consideration but it surely swelled their numbers to the advantage of
the victors. Hence large numbers of people were enslaved.

And now our second question - what did the victors do with slaves
captured in large crowds? In the days of the early invaders like
Muhammad bin Qasim and Mahmud Ghaznavi, they were mostly sold in the
Slave Markets that had come up throughout the Muslim dominated towns and
cities. Lot of profit was made by selling slaves in foreign lands. Isami
gives the correct position. Muhammad Nazim in an article has translated
relevant lines of Isami’s metrical composition.[²²](#22) “He (Mahmud)
scattered the army of the Hindus in one attack and took Rai Jaipal
prisoner. He carried him to the distant part of his kingdom of Ghazni
and delivered him to an agent of the *Slave Market* (*dalal-i-bazar*). I
heard that at the command of the king (Mahmud), the *Brokers of the
Market*, (*maqiman-i-bazar* in the original) sold Jaipal as a slave for
80 Dinars and deposited the money realised by the sale in the
Treasury.”^([23](#23))

When Muslim rule was established in India, the sale of captives became
restricted. Large numbers of them were drafted for manning the
establishments of kings and nobles, working as labourers in the
construction of buildings, cutting jungles and making roads, and on so
many other jobs. Still they were there, enough and to spare. Those who
could be spared were sold in and outside the country, where slave
markets, slave merchants and slave brokers did a flourishing business,
and the rulers made profit out of their sale.

Mahmud of Ghazni had marched into Hindustan again and again to wage
jihad and spread the Muhammadan religion, to lay hold of its wealth, to
destroy its temples, to enslave its people, sell them abroad and thereby
earn profit, and to add to Muslim numbers by converting the captives. He
even desired to establish his rule in India.[²⁴](#24) His activities
were so multi-faceted that it is difficult to determine his priorities.
But the large number of captives carried away by him indicates that
taking of slaves surely occupied an anteriority in his scheme of things.
He could obtain wealth by their sale and increase the Muslim population
by their conversion.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) C.H.I., III, 3.

[²](#2a) Al Kufi, *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 84.

[³](#3a) C.H.I., III, 3.

[⁴](#4a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 154. Raja Dahir’s daughters also were
counted among slave girls, 196.  E.D., I, 172-73 gives the number of
captives as 30,000.

[⁵](#5a) Andre Wink, *Al Hind*, 161.

[⁶](#6a) Mohammad Habib, “The Arab conquest of Sind.” in *Politics and
Society During the Early Medieval Period*, being Collected Works, of
Habib, ed.  K.A. Nizami, II, 1-35. Al Biladuri, 122, has 8000 to 26000.

[⁷](#7a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 155; E.D.I, 173, 211.

[⁸](#8a) Ibid., 163; E.D., I, 181.

[⁹](#9a) Appendix D, ‘Mahmud’s invasions of India,’ in E.D., II,
434-478.  
   Habib, *Sultan Mahmud of Ghaznin*, 23-59.  
   M. Nazim, *The Life and Times of Mahmud of Ghazni*, 42-122.  
   Lal, *Growth of Muslim Population*, 102-04, 211-16.

[¹⁰](#10a) *Tarikh-i-Yamini*, E.D., II, 26; Elliot’s Appendix, 438;
Farishtah, I, 24.

[¹¹](#11a) Utbi, E.D., II, 39.

[¹²](#12a) Farishtah, I, 28.

[¹³](#13a) Lai, *Growth of Muslim Population in Medieval India*, 211-13;
also Utbi, E-.D., II, 50 and n. 1.

[¹⁴](#14a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 155 and n.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ibid., 83-86, 154, 159, 161 ff.

[¹⁶](#16a) Utbi, E.D., II, 26.  Minhaj, 607, n., 5. Al Utbi and other
chroniclers refer to Jaipal on many occasions. H.G. Raverty suggests
that “Jaipal appears to be the title, not the actual name, of two or
more persons”, Minhaj, 81n.

[¹⁷](#17a) *Chachnama*, Kalichbeg, 152.

[¹⁸](#18a) Hodivala, 192-93.

[¹⁹](#19a) Maulana Ahmad and others, *Tarikh-i-Alfi*, E.D., V, 163;
Farishtah, I, 49.

[²⁰](#20a) Lai, Legacy, 263-68.

[²¹](#21a) Margoliouth, *Muhammad*, 461; also Gibbon, II, 693.

[²²](#22a) In his article ‘Hindu Shahiya kingdom of Ohind’, in J.R.A.S.,
1927.

[²³](#23a) Cited in Hodivala, 192-93.

[²⁴](#24a) C.E. Bosworth, *The Ghaznavids*, 235.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


