+++
title = "10 CHAPTER VIII EMPLOYMENT OF SLAVES"

+++
**CHAPTER VIII**  
**EMPLOYMENT OF SLAVES**

Muslim regime in medieval times drafted slaves in every sphere of
activity. Slaves were needed in thousands for any large enterprise
which, in modern technological age, would be accomplished by a few
machines or even gadgets. There was no dearth of slaves either. Muslim
victories in India had provided kings and nobles with innumerable
slaves. From government affairs to domestic errands slaves were employed
on every work.

*On Building Construction*

The first thing the Muslim Sultanate of Delhi started on was
construction of impressive buildings. It aimed at overawing the people
of the land with the greatness and might of the new Islamic regime. This
could be achieved by constructing huge Muslim edifices with the wealth
obtained from war and materials from Hindu buildings after destroying
them. Architecture was considered as the visual symbol of Muslim
political power with which the Turks wished to impress and overawe the
conquered people. It denoted victory with authority. Wherever the Muslim
conquerors marched or ruled in Central Asia or India, they constructed
edifices both gigantic and delicate. The important fact to note in this
connection is that slaves were drafted to construct the
buildings.^([1](#1))

And so thousands of slaves were drafted to construct the edifies (many
even now extant as monuments), so as to complete the work in the
shortest possible time. Surely, the task could be accomplished only by
pressing into service thousands and thousand of slaves captured in early
victories who were made to do the job. The congregational mosque at
Delhi named, purposefully, as the Masjid Quwwatul Islam (Might of
Islam), was commenced by Aibak in 592/1195 within two years of its
conquest.^([2](#2)) It was built with materials and gold obtained by
destroying 27 Hindu and Jain temples in Delhi and its neighbourhood. A
Persian inscription in the mosque testifies to this.^([3](#3)) The
mosque at Ajmer erected by Qutbuddin Aibak soon after its occupation and
known as the *Arhai din ka Jhonpra*, was also built from materials
obtained from demolished temples. The Qutb Minar, planned and commenced
by Aibak sometime in or before 1199 and completed by
Iltutmish,^([4](#4)) was also constructed with similar materials, “the
sculptured figures on the stones being either defaced or concealed by
turning them upside down.” *“In this improvisation,”* rightly observes
Habibullah, *“was symbolised the whole Mamluk history”* (emphasis
added).^([5](#5))

How many slaves were needed to accomplish the task on these three and
the other buildings of Qutbuddin Aibak and Iltutmish such as mosques,
*madrasas*, mausoleums, *qasrs* and tanks (e.g. Hauz-i-shamsi) in and
outside Delhi?  It is difficult to determine but easy to conjecture
their numbers, for these two sultans had embarked on constructional
activity on a very large scale. It is known that Alauddin Khalji,
another great builder, had 70,000 slaves working on his buildings, as
attested to by the contemporary chronicler Ziyauddin Barani.^([6](#6))
Alauddin built “masjids, minars, citadels and tanks”. But his Qutb Minar
alone was an edifice more than equal to all his undertakings. Thus the
men working on the buildings of the first two sultans were probably not
less than those of Alauddin Khalji; they may have been probably more.
These slaves were to dismantle standing temples, very carefully, stone
by stone, carry the carved columns, shafts and pillars to the new sites
of construction, and raise the new structures. Although Hasan Nizami
says that temples were demolished with the help of elephants and one
elephant could haul stones for which 500 men were needed,^([7](#7)) yet
it has to be recognised that not many mechanical devices were available.
Most of the work was done by human hands and muscles. The task was
delicate and the slaves were freely flogged for any damage to stone
slabs thus carried. The *korrah* (whip) of Bernier was not an invention
of Shahjahan’s time; it had been there all along during Muslim conquest
and rule.

Hindu masons and architects were expert builders, they created wonderful
specimens of architecture. About the temples of India, Alberuni says
that his own people “are unable to describe them, much less to construct
anything like them”. Indian builders would never have liked to destroy
their own splendid creations and dismantle their own sacred temples, to
build in their instead mosques and minars for foreign invaders and
rulers. But they had no choice. All Turkish slaves from abroad had
become masters in India as kings, nobles, army officers and even
soldiers, lording over the native workers who had been reduced to the
position of slaves. Furthermore, Hindu masons and labourers turned
slaves under the new dispensation had to do the work in record time.
Barani in his enthusiasm hyperbolically says that during Alauddin’s
reign a palace could be built in 2-3 days and a citadel in two
weeks.^([8](#8))

It was considered a matter of pride for a newly crowned king to build a
city of his own to give name and fame to himself and his dynasty. The
old city of Iltutmish was abandoned by Balban who built the Qasr-i-Lal
or the Red Palace, and Kaiqubad built the city of Kilughari. “It is
their custom,” writes Ibn Battuta, “that the king’s palace is deserted
on his death… and his successor builds a new palace for
himself.”^([9](#9)) The slaves had often to do double the work, destroy
Hindu buildings and construct new ones from the materials of earlier
ones. In those times people lived in congested localities for reasons of
security. A city used to get dirty and uninhabitable after a few years
because of lack of means of disposing off garbage and filth. Ibn Battuta
and Babur^([10](#10)) affirm that all was destroyed because of moisture.
It is because of this reason also that it was thought better to found
and shift to a new town where everything was clean and tidy. Hindu
slaves toiled as scavengers and cleaners in old cities. They toiled with
blood and sweat to create new ones.

Muhammad Tughlaq and Firoz Tughlaq were as keen as Aibak, Iltutmish and
Alauddin about founding new cities, raising new buildings and repairing
old edifices of earlier Muslim rulers. Shams Siraj Afif counts Firoz’s
builders among the 180,000 (or about 2 lakh) slaves of Firoz
Tughlaq,^([11](#11)) but the break up for various duties would point to
there being separate contingent of masons and builders with 12,000
slaves as stone-cutters alone. Even the shifting of the two Ashokan
pillars to Delhi required the services of a few thousand men (*chandin
hazar admi*). No wonder the invader Timur (1399 C.E.) found in India
exquisite Muslim buildings, and enslaved thousands of craftsmen and
builders many of whom he took with him to Samarqand to construct
edifices similar to the Jama Masjid built by Firoz Shah and the Qutb
Minar built by Aibak.^([12](#12)) But after his departure from India new
slaves soon replaced those taken away by Timur, and every sultan and
noble embarked on building enterprises as usual.

Besides the Sultanate, new independent Muslim states sprang up all over
the country throughout the fifteenth century. In all of them feverish
architectural activity was carried on with the help of local slaves. At
the centre, Sultan Sikandar Lodi is credited with constructing mosques
in almost all important cities including Lahore, Karnal, Hansi, Makanpur
(District Kanpur) besides many in Delhi and Agra.^([13](#13)) In
addition to the tombs in Lodi Gardens in Delhi, there are also so many
other nameless tombs belonging to the Lodi period. Sikandar Lodi, like
Firoz Tughlaq before him, is credited with constructing a canal in
1492-93^([14](#14)) and a Baoli in Rajasthan. In “Mathura and other
place” like Allahabad and Banaras he turned temples into mosques, and
established Muslim Sarais, colleges and bazars in Hindu places of
worship.^([15](#15)) Like Firoz Tughlaq, Sikandar was also a great
repairer and conserver of old Muslim monuments. An inscribed frieze at
the entrance doorway of the Qutb Minar credits him with repairing this
edifice in 1503 (909 H).^([16](#16))

We have spoken about only some of the architectural works of just five
sultans of Delhi - Aibak, Iltutmish, Alauddin Khalji, Firoz Tughlaq and
Sikandar Lodi - and noted that thousands and thousands of slaves were
required for their construction. It is unnecessary to repeat that all
Muslim rulers were great builders and the number of slaves engaged on
building cities, mosques, Sarais, tombs of every sultan and noble and
Sufi Shaikh in Delhi and other cities of the Sultanate ran into
thousands. Same was the case with the buildings of the provincial and
independent kingdoms into which the Sultanate of Delhi broke up.

“There was a strain of artistic feeling which ran through the successive
generations of the ruling Moghul house in India,” observed E. Maclagan
in 1932. This artistic feeling found its greatest manifestation in their
architecture. And those who built had unbounded command of both money
and slaves. Babur writes that “680 men worked daily on my buildings in
Agra… only; while 1491 stone-cutters worked daily on my buildings in
Agra, Sikri, Biana, Dulpur (Dholpur), Gwalior and Kuil (Aligarh). In the
same way there are numberless artisans and workmen of every sort in
Hindustan.”^([17](#17)) Some workers were wage-earners, for says he at
another place, “Gifts were made to the stone-cutters, and labourers and
the whole body of workmen in the way customary for master-workmen and
wage-earners of Agra.”^([18](#18)) But as discussed elsewhere slaves
were preferred to servants and wage-earners, and the *Korrah* was the
surest leveller of artisan, handicraftsman, servant and slave. From the
days of Babur to those of Shahjahan during whose “august reign, when…
lovely things reached the zenith of perfection,” money in millions and
slaves in thousands were employed on erecting the hundreds of huge
Mughal buildings still extant.^([19](#19))

The example of kings was universally imitated by their principal nobles.
The opulent grandees in the provinces esteemed it an honour and
obligation to adorn towns and cities of the regions under their control
with magnificent buildings. The law of escheat encouraged them to spend
lavishly. Pelsaert perhaps has the last word on it. “I have often
ventured to ask great lords,” says he, “what is their true object in
being so eager to amass their treasures, when what they have gathered is
of no use to them or to their family (because of escheat)… I have urged
they would share it with the poor, who in this country are hundreds of
thousands, or indeed innumerable \[including of course the
slaves\]… Their answers have been based on the emptiest worldly vanity…”
Buildings they constructed with great zest - gardens, tombs, and palaces
– “they build them with so many hundreds of thousands^([20](#20))… Once
the builder is dead, no one will care for his buildings, but every one
tries to erect buildings of his own, and establish his own reputation
alongside that of his ancestors. If all these edifices were attended to
and kept in repair, the lands of every city, and even village, would be
adorned (covered)^([21](#21)) with monuments; but as a matter of fact
the roads leading to the cities are strewn with fallen columns of
stone.”^([22](#22))

In short, the Turkish and Mughal sultans and nobles were ever busy on a
budding spree without any thought of preserving the edifices. The strain
of their artistic feeling was borne by the blood and toil of the silent
slaves.^([23](#23))

*In the Army*

Another cadre which absorbed the services of large number of slaves from
the beginning of Muslim rule was the Army. Without a strong army there
could be no conquest, no Muslim rule in India. Ziyauddin Barani declares
that “Kingship is the army and the army kingship,”^([24](#24)) that is,
the one was concomitant to the other.  Extension of Muslim rule in India
was not possible without conquest and so the Sultanate was, by its very
nature, committed to maintaining a large army.

Soldiers in permanent service and the king’s bodyguards called Jandars,
were largely drawn from his personal slaves *ghilman* and
*mamalik*.^([25](#25)) Foreign slaves were purchased from all countries
and nationalities. There were Turks, Persians, Seljuqs, Oghus (also
called Iraqi Turkmen), Afghans, Khaljis etc., in the army of Ghaznavids
and Ghaurids. “To sustain the new principalities, slaves, imported as
youths from peripheral regions were trained at the court of their
masters to be a fighting and administrative elite loyal to them alone
and thus comrades in arms.”^([26](#26)) This tradition of obtaining
slaves by all methods and from all regions, was continued by Delhi
sultans. These foreign slaves may be called, for the sake of brevity, by
the generic term Turks and Afghans. Muhammad Ghauri in his last
expedition brought ten thousand Afghan horsemen with him.^([27](#27)) In
the time of Iltutmish, Jalaluddin Mangbarni of Khwarism, fleeing before
Chingiz Khan, had brought contingents of Afghan soldiers. In course of
time many of them took service under Iltutmish.^([28](#28)) Balban
appointed three thousand Afghan horse and foot in his campaigns against
the Mewatis,^([29](#29)) and thousands of others for garrisoning
difficult forts like Gopalgir, Kampil, Bhojpur, Patiali and
Jalali.^([30](#30)) In his royal processions hundreds of Sistani,
Ghauri, Samarqandi and Arab soldiers, with drawn swords, used to march
by Balban’s side. Like the Afghans, the Mongols (again a generic term
ethnically),^([31](#31)) were enslaved or persuaded to join the forces
of the Khaljis. They were called neo-Muslims under Alauddin Khalji.
Persian element in the rank of officers and men was also prominent. 
Purchased Abyssinian slave-soldiers and officers became prominent under
Raziyah. By the time of Firoz Shah Tughlaq indigenous slaves began to
replace foreigners. As an example, “when the Sultan went out in state
the slaves, accompanied him, in distinct corps - first the archers,
fully armed, next the swordsmen, thousands in number (*hazar hazar*),
the fighting men (*bandgan-i-aword*), the *bandgan-i-mahili* riding on
male buffaloes, and slaves from the Hazara, mounted on Arab and Turki
horses, bearing standards and axes. All these thousands upon thousands,
accompanied the royal retinue. About 40,000 were everyday in readiness
as his personal guards.^([32](#32)) Under Saiyyad and Lodi rulers,
Afghans of all tribes and clans flocked into India like ants and
locusts.^([33](#33))

Indian slaves were obtained as presents, part of tribute from
subordinate states, or enslaved during campaigns. Once broken and
trained into loyalty and service they were easily drafted into the army.
Most Hindus belonged to the infantry wing and were called Paiks. Some of
these were poor persons who joined the army for the sake of securing
employment. Others were slaves and war captives. In war small boys were
preferred as captives and they were the easiest to capture. For
instance, in his campaigns in Katehar, Balban massacred mercilessly,
sparing boys only of the age of eight or nine.^([34](#34)) The age
factor is significant. As these boys grew up, they could hardly remember
their parentage or nativity, and remained loyal only to their master. In
other cases also the situation was about the same. The slave was usually
a prisoner of war, and according to Islamic usage his life was at the
mercy of his captor. So when a conqueror or invader chose to spare the
life of a slave and take him in his employment, it was an act of special
benevolence for which the slave felt obliged to him.^([35](#35)) Many
other Paiks were recruited from the open market. Prince Alauddin Khalji,
as governor of Kara, recruited 2,000 Paiks with the revenue he was
supposed to send to Delhi, and marched with them on an expedition to
Devagiri (1296).^([36](#36))

The Paiks were allotted sundry duties to perform. They fed, groomed, and
looked after the horses of the cavalrymen who had a superior status.
Alauddin Khalji had 70,000 cavalrymen besides other
ranks.^([37](#37)) Thousands of slaves were needed to look after them.
Similar was the case with elephant stables. These pilkhanas had
thousands of elephants and *mahouts*, and *ghulams* and Paiks were on
duty to feed and nourish them.^([38](#38)) The number of slaves for
maintaining them and other animals can only be imagined.^([39](#39))

During a campaign, the slaves cleared the jungles and prepared roads for
the army on march. During halts and on arrival at the destination the
slaves and Paiks set up the camp and fixed tents, sometimes on land the
total circumference of which was twelve thousand five hundred and forty
six yards (about ten kilometer square).^([40](#40)) They built Gargach
and Sabat. Gargach was a covered platform on wheels for reaching the
base of the fort under protection. Sabats were platforms raised from the
ground to reach the top of the fort during assault. War drums and
standards were placed in front of tents of load-carrying slaves who were
kept under protective surveillance by mounted soldiers.^([41](#41))

The Paiks were often so stationed as to bear the first brunt of the
enemy’s attack, but they could not leave their posts because “horses are
on their right and left… and behind (them) the elephants so that not one
of then can run away.”^([42](#42)) But the Paiks were also great
fighters. That is how Alauddin’s army of invasion of Devagiri (1296) had
2000 Paiks. Most Persian chroniclers write about Paiks as being good
soldiers lending strength to the Muslim army in Hindustan. Duarte
Barbosa, a Portuguese official in India, writing in 1518 says this about
them: “They carry swords and daggers, bows and arrows. They are right
good archers and their bows are long like those of England… They are
mostly Hindus.”^([43](#43)) Their most important weapon was Dhanuk or
Dhanush.^([44](#44)) During the time of the Khaljis (1290-1320), the
Paik element had become prominent in Alauddin’s army because he had
wrested political power from the Turkish slave-rulers and could not
entirely depend on Turkish soldiers. When Sultan Alauddin was about to
encounter the Mongol invader Qutlugh Khwaja, Malik Alaulmulk, the Kotwal
of Delhi, tried to dissuade him from taking any precipitate action and
one of his arguments was that “our army is composed principally of the
soldiery of Hindustan.”^([45](#45)) Their presence in large number was
disliked by the fanatical Alim and historian Ziyauddin Barani who was
against the recruitment of non-Muslims in the army.^([46](#46)) Indeed
among the Hindus there were sometimes such high officers as Malik
Naik. According to Amir Khusrau it was under Malik Naik, the
Akhurbeg-i-Maisara (Master of Horse of the Left Flank), a ‘Hindu
*banda*’, that thirty thousand horsemen were sent against the Mongols -
All Beg, Tartaq, and Targhi.^([47](#47)) Alauddin’s greatest general was
Malik Kafur Hazardinari. Later in the day we come across names like
Bahadur Nahar, Sarang Khan, Shaikha Khokhar and Mallu Khan, probably all
converted Hindu warriors.

*Loyalty of the Paiks*

In an atmosphere of intrigue, suspicion and treachery, in which kings
were overthrown and dynasties subverted by Turkish slaves or slaves
turned nobles, the Paiks were known for their devotion and loyalty.
Whether captured as small boys or grown ups in war or directly recruited
as troopers, the Paiks in all situations remained mostly loyal to their
masters. The foundation of this loyalty was the attachment of man to
man, first by the relationship of the chief to his captive whose life
had been spared, and if the warrior master succeeded in conquest and
setting up a dominion, by the relation of suzerain to vassal. This
adherence of loyalty to salt is a basic fact of Hindu tradition. There
are many instances where the Paiks came to the rescue of their masters
when danger threatened the latter’s lives. For example, when Sultan
Alauddin was marching to attack Ranthambhor (1301 C.E.), he halted at
Tilpat for a few days during which Sulaiman, also known as Ikat Khan,
planned to assassinate him. Ikat Khan had thought that just as Alauddin
had obtained the throne by murdering his uncle Jalaluddin, so he could
also kill his uncle and occupy the throne. That is why he had attacked
the king. But the latter’s loyal Paiks hedged around him from all sides
and in their native shrewdness began to lament aloud that the Sultan was
dead. The foolish and inexperienced Ikat Khan, partly because he was
unable to lay hands on the Sultan and partly because he was in a hurry
to seize the throne, readily believed the welcome wailings of the Paiks
and dashed off towards the Camp and seated himself on Alauddin’s
throne. In the meantime, Alauddin’s personal bodyguard Paiks dressed his
wounds and he regained consciousness. He arrived in the Camp posthaste,
ascended an eminence, and showed himself to the people. And Ikat Khan
was beheaded.^([48](#48))

After Alauddin’s death, his favourite slave, General and Wazir, Malik
Kafur, wished to gather all power in his own hands and towards that end
began to order the execution of one prince after another. He sent four
Paiks by the names of Mubshir, Bashir, Salih and Munir to blind the
Sultan’s son Mubarak Khan. But when the Paiks approached him in his
prison cell Prince Mubarak reminded them of their loyalty and duty which
they owed to the sons of the late king. Impressed by Mubarak’s appeal
they not only left him untouched, but also murdered Kafur and thus
facilitated Mubarak Khan’s ascension to the
throne.^([49](#49)) Similarly, Rai Bhairon Bhatti, the personal
attendant of Firoz Shah Tughlaq, came to his rescue when his own kith
and kin made plans to murder the Sultan.^([50](#50)) But there was no
hard and fast behavioural pattern. The king was supreme but if the Paiks
developed loyalty towards a nobleman who was inimical to the sultan,
they could as well kill the king. That is how Sarwar-ul-Mulk, the Wazir
of Sultan Mubarak Shah Saiyyad (1421-34), got the latter killed with the
help of a group of Paiks.^([51](#51)) On the other hand, the loyalty of
Hindu officers and soldiers has become legendary.

In short, Indian slaves in the Muslim army performed all and sundry
duties. They served as servants to cavalrymen. They cleared the jungles
and laid roads during campaigns. They manufactured weapons, they fought
in battles for their masters. Even so they were ever kept reminded of
their inferior status so far as their remuneration was concerned. And
this was determined according to Islamic law. In the booty collected
during war, the State’s share was one-fifth, while four-fifth went to
the combatants, but the share of a horseman was twice that of a
footsoldier.^([52](#52)) As a Zimmi, the Hindu Paik had no share in the
booty. Zimmi women and children cannot wage *jihad* and they too had no
claim. But they were all to be paid something “in order to encourage
them to fight and inferiority of their station be rendered manifest to
them.”^([53](#53))

*Employment in Karkhanas*

Large numbers of slaves were drafted to work in the royal Karkhanas. The
Karkhanas (literally workshops) of the Delhi sultans and Mughal emperors
were both manufactories and storehouses where articles of delicacy were
produced, sometimes in bulk, and imports from far off regions and
foreign countries like China, Iraq and Alexandria, were received and
stored. Shams Siraj Afif gives a detailed account of the Karkhanas of
Firoz Shah Tughlaq although such workshops existed during the reigns of
former as well as later sultans also. According to J.H. Krammers,
“Industrial production in Muhammadan countries had developed in a
particular way; it was chiefly characterized by being completely under
the control of the rulers… and by its organization of the craftsmen in
guilds. At the time of Islamic prosperity it had made possible a
development of industrial skill which brought the artistic value of the
products to an unequalled height. In the first place should be mentioned
the products of the textile industry…”^([54](#54))

Under Firoz Tughlaq (1351-88) there were thirty six Karkhanas *directly
under the Sultan*. In these were manufactured and stored articles of
gold and silver and brass and other metals, textiles, wines, perfumes,
armours, weapons, horse and camel saddles and covers of elephants,
leather goods and clothes. But the Karkhanas also looked after “the
elephant, horse and camel stables, the kitchen, the butlery, the candle
department, the dog-kennels, the water-cooling department and other
establishments… the wardrobe, the ‘*Alam-khana* or insignia, the carpet
stores, and the like… About two lakhs of tankahs were expended in the
carpet department, and 80,000 *tankahs* on the ‘Alam Khana.”^([55](#55))
Each of these departments was under the charge of a senior Amir or Khan
and lakhs of *tankahs* were sanctioned as recurring and non-recurring
expenditure for each of the Karkhanas.

Thus some sort of capital investment was there and the guilds were
formed by slaves trained as artisans (*kasibs*) by expert mechanics and
handicraftsmen. 12,000 slaves worked in the Karkhanas of Firoz Tughlaq
and were given a salary from 100 to 10 *tankahs* according to each one’s
competence. These slaves formed some sort of guilds and produced
excellent articles. “There was no occupation in which the slaves of
Firoz Shah (or for that matter any other sultan) were not employed.” We
cannot and need not study about all the departments in detail. Here we
will confine ourselves to a brief account of two departments, those of
wardrobe and weapons. These will suffice to give an idea of the
institution of Karkhanas which employed a very large number, if not the
bulk, of the royal slaves.

*Textiles and Robes*

According to Shahabuddin Al Umri “every year the Sultan (Muhammad
Tughlaq) distributes 200,000 complete dresses: 100,000 in spring and
100,000 in autumn (among nobles)… Dresses are also distributed to the
monasteries and hermitages (*khanqahs* and *dargahs*). The Sultan keeps
in his service 500 manufacturers of golden tissues, who weave the gold
brocades worn by the wives of the Sultan, and given away as presents to
the amirs and their wives.”^([56](#56)) Ibn Battutah’s list of the
presents he carried from Muhammad bin Tughlaq to the Mongol emperor of
Cathay also helps us appraise the development of textile industry in
India manned by slaves. These presents comprised 100 pieces of cotton
fabric called *bairami*, of matchless beauty priced at 100 *dinars* per
piece; 100 pieces of silk called *juz* of variegated tints; 104 pieces
of *Salahiya*, 100 pieces of *Shirinbaf*, 100 pieces of *Shanbaf*, 500
pieces of *muraz*, a kind of woollen fabric of various colours, 100
pieces of *Katan-i-Rumi*, 100 gowns without sleeves, a tent with six
pavilions, four golden candlesticks and four embroidered with silver,
four gold basins and six of silver, and ten dresses of honour
embroidered. Also sent were ten quivers one of which was studded with
pearls, and 10 swords the scabbard of one of which was inlaid with
pearls and jewels.^([57](#57)) Ziyauddin Barani’s list of such items of
textiles also indicates their prices under Alauddin Khalji, that of Abul
Fazl under the Mughals.^([58](#58))

*Staves as Makers of Weapons*

Slaves also manufactured weapons and their accessories including armour
for men and covering of gilded iron for clephants.^([59](#59)) As is
well known, the most important element in the army was heavy cavalry.
Mounted soldiers were armed with the bow for engaging in combat from a
distance and with one or more weapons for hand to hand fighting, like
the lance, the spear, the mace, the lasso. Fakhr-i-Mudabbir gives
primacy to the bow and the sword as the most effective weapons of the
horseman. Both these weapons were of different varieties. Among them
all, the Hindu sword was the best and most lustrous
(*gawhardartar*). Their export to such distant areas as Ummayad Spain
and Seljuq Anatolia too is attested. He also declares that there is no
better lance than the Indian.^([60](#60)) From the time of Iltutmish to
that of Firoz Shah great development had taken place in the manufacture
of weapons and engines of war like Arrada, Manjniq and Maghrabi. These
were stone and missile throwing machines. Haqqaha were rockets. The
*Sirat-i-Firoz Shahi* mentions some very interesting “equipments,
outfits and instruments for waging war”. In the midst of a hotchpotch of
assortment of items like traps, nets, noose and snare, “we find a brief
reference to such instruments as… Bandiqa (venetian crossbow for
throwing stone balls); Faraqha Falakun (slings made of rope for throwing
stones); Kaman Guruha (large mounted crossbow); Harf-i-Kilk (arrow with
inverted sharp points); Julahiq (balls of stone thrown by balists);
Zand-i-Atish (incendiary fire-steel) etc.^([61](#61)) All these weapons
and equipments were manufactured by hundreds and hundreds of slaves, and
were kept stored in the royal Karkhanas.

*Work in Palace and Court*

For invaders and conquerors, the establishment of a regular government
takes some time. It is achieved through an evolutionary process. Its set
up is completed in the course of decades. In medieval times this process
was delayed by dynastic upheavals and arrival of fresh conquerors. But
not too much. Most Muslim law-books and administrative manuals were
ready when the Turks conquered Hindustan and stayed on to rule over it.
And as in the case of construction of edifices and service in the army,
slaves were required in large numbers for the working of the
administrative machinery. Slaves were the hewers of wood and drawers of
water in every sphere of life.

The government departments which needed the largest number of slaves
were the Diwan-i-Wazarat, Diwan-i-Arz, Diwan-i-Insha, the
Diwan-i-Rasalat. The detailed list of ministries, departments and
offices is too large to mention. Thousands of slaves were required in
the Revenue Department, thousands of others in the Postal Department as
carriers of official communication and still others as spies. For
shortage of space and paucity of detailed information about the
employment of slaves in the households of nobles and other important
Muslim elites, we shall confine our study of this aspect only to the
Sultan’s palaces for they “are exclusively occupied by the Sultan, his
wives, concubines, eunuchs, male and female slaves and *mamaliks*”.

How many slaves were on duty in the King’s palace? It is difficult to
surmise. One can only say - in thousands and thousands. At the gate
there was the *nawbat* or the royal band played by a large number of
instrument players in relay service - trumpets, drums, flagesletters,
pipes etc. Hundreds were needed for carrying royal *alams* or standards,
for wielding of fans to keep away flies from the royal person and
wafting breeze, for carrying of *Chatr* (parasol) and *Durbash* (royal
baton), and for attendance near the throne. The head of the Household
staff, *Sarjandar* and *Sarsilahdar* or Commander of the Royal Bodyguard
and head of the Royal Armour-bearer, required other hundreds of slaves
to help them carry out their assignments. Among other officials in
charge of domestic attendance were *Sar-abdar* (or *Aftabchi* of the
Mughals) who looked after the washing and toilet arrangements of the
Sultan, the *Kharitadar* who looked after the royal writing case and
*Tahwildar* who looked after the purse. Each of these officials had
subordinate slaves and servants. The *Chashnigir* (the predecessor of
the *Bakawal* of the Mughals) supervised the royal kitchen with hundreds
of subordinate slaves working under him. *Sar-Jamadar* was in charge of
the royal wardrobe, the *Saqi-i-Khas* of wines and other drinks. The
*Mashaldar* supervised the lighting arrangements of the palace, and the
provision of lamps, candlesticks, lamp-stands etc. All these
functionaries had a regular staff of subordinates comprising mainly of
slaves.^([62](#62))

The scores of subordinates or slaves required to “run” the Muslim
government in India ran into hundreds of thousands. The Muqti and later
the Subedar lived like a miniature king, the paraphernalia of his court
and household was patterned on that of the King. The Iqtadars and
subordinate officers tried to emulate the higher nobles and the number
of slaves continued to, rise. In the heyday of the Sultanate period,
Shihabuddin Al Umari has this to say about the time of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq. At the cost of this prince there are maintained 1,200
physicians; 10,000 falconers who ride on horseback and carry birds
trained for hawking; 300 beaters go in front and put up the game; 3,000
dealers in articles required for hawking accompany him when he goes out
hunting; 500 table companions dine with him. He supports 1,200 musicians
excluding his slave musicians to the number of 1,000 who are more
especially charged with the teaching of music, and 1,000 poets of all
the three languages, Arabic, Persian and Indian. According to one
informant who based his account on the report of the royal cook, 2,500
oxen, 2,000 sheep, and other animals and birds were slaughtered daily
for the supplies of the royal kitchen.^([63](#63)) How many slaves were
required to cater to all these services and amusements can easily be
conjectured. In the Mughal times the numbers of slaves as part of the
ever-expanding paraphernalia went on growing. Some numbers are available
but details are not possible to give.^([64](#64))

The number of men employed in connection with sports and amusements was
in aggregate very large. A numerous staff was employed specially for
hunting and shooting, another for hawking, another for pigeon-flying.
All Muslim rulers and nobles had pigeon-boys - Alauddin Khalji alone had
50,000 of them.^([65](#65)) Provision was made for training the fighting
instincts of a variety of animals “down to frogs and
spiders.”^([66](#66)) The stables swarmed with animals and men. The
number of animals in the stables may be judged from the fact that Sher
Shah employed 3,400 horses for royal postal communications in the
Kingdom, and maintained about 5,000 elephants on an
average.^([67](#67)) An elephants in the royal use had seven men to
attend on it. Terry tells how Jahangir assigned four attendants to each
of the dogs brought to him as presents from England.^([68](#68))

*Slaves and Servants*

The imperial camp employed between 2000 and 3000 servants in addition to
a guard of cavalry; there was one tent in particular which required 1000
men for a week for its erection.”^([69](#69)) As I have said elsewhere,
in Akbar’s time “each camp establishment required for its transport 100
elephants, 500 camels, 400 carts and a hundred bearers. It was escorted
by 500 troopers. Besides, there were 100 *farrashes*, 500 pioneers, 100
water carriers, 50 carpenters, tent makers, and torch bearers, 30
workers in leather, and 150 sweepers.”^([70](#70)) Akbar’s “*zanana*
contained more than 5000 ladies, each of whom had separate apartments;
they were attended by an adequate staff of servants, and watched in
successive circles by female guards, eunuchs… and
porters”.^([71](#71)) The Emperor set the standard in such matters, and
everyone who occupied or aspired to a position at Court followed that
example so far as his means allowed. Ten to twelve servants were
attached to every lady of importance. Some princesses had as many
slave-girls as a hundred.^([72](#72)) Supplies for the Royal Household
were obtained from distant sources, apparently regardless of the amount
of labour expended. Wherever the Emperor might be, water for his use was
brought from the river Ganga, a practice prevailing from the time of
Muhammad Tughlaq if not earlier. Ice came daily by post carriages and by
runners from snowy mountains. Fruit was supplied regularly from Kashmir
and Kabul, and even from more distant places, such as Badakshan and
Samarqand. Relay service on all these and many other such items required
hundreds and thousands of slaves. The Emperor’s personal officers
modelled their establishments on similar lines, “one employing 500
torch-bearers, another having a daily service of thousand rich dishes,
and so on”.^([73](#73)) Each fighting man of any consequence in the
Turki and Mughal army had in the field an average of two or three
servants. That the fashion was not confined to the entourage of the
Emperor is shown by della Valle’s statement that at Surat servants and
slaves were so numerous and so cheap that “everybody, even of mean
fortune, keeps a great family, and is splendidly attended”. Pyrard says
that the Zamorin of Calicut travelled with about 3000 men in his train,
and that on the coast generally the prominent men had always a large
following. He tells of the state maintained at Goa by the Bijapur envoy,
who was accompanied about the town by a crowd of servants, pages,
bearers, grooms, and musicians, and adds that all the great men of the
Deccan indulged in similar display. Thevenot, writing of a later period
(C. 1667) gives a corresponding description of the life in Golkunda.
About North India in Jahangir’s time, Pelsaert writes, “Peons or
servants, are exceedingly numerous in this country, for everyone - be he
mounted soldier, merchant or King’s official - keeps as many as position
and circumstances permit. Outside the house, they serve for display,
running continually before their master’s horse; inside, they do the
work of the house,” like the *bailwan*, the *farrash*, the *masalchi*,
the *mahawat* etc.^([74](#74)) “it will be understood,” writes W.H.
Moreland, “that the profusion of servants, which attracts attention in
India at the present day (early twentieth century), is no modern
phenomenon, but is in fact an attenuated survival of the fashions
prevailing in the time of Akbar and doubtless dating from a much earlier
period,”^([75](#75)) indeed from the time of Qutbuddin Aibak when every
Muslim householder or soldier began to possess a number of
slaves.^([76](#76)) Such exploitation in the Mughal period provided
droves of *khidmatgars* to British officers and men when they
established and ran their Raj in this country.”^([77](#77)) They found
its impoverished people, ready to be used as Coolies to be sent abroad
and exploited this nation as smartly as the Turks and Mughals had done
in the medieval period.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a))*Cambridge History of Islam*, I, 471.

^([2](#2a)) Minhaj, 520 n.

^([3](#3a)) It is reproduced in Thomas, *Chronicles of the Pathan Kings
of Delhi*, 22-23.

^([4](#4a)) Sir John Marshall in C.H.I., III, 578 n1.

^([5](#5a)) A.B.M. Habibullah, *The Foundation of Muslim Rule in India*,
375.

^([6](#6a)) Barani, 341.

^([7](#7a))*Tajul-Maasir*, E.D., II, 222.

^([8](#8a)) Barani, 341.

^([9](#9a)) Ibn Battuta, 77.

^([10](#10a))*Babur Nama*, II, 519-20.

^([11](#11a)) Afif, 271. For short list of his buildings, 329-33.

^([12](#12a)) Percy Brown, *Indian Architecture* (*Islamic Period*), 26;
Harold Lamb, *Tamerlane the Earth Shaker*, London, 1929, 272. Mulla
Sharaf testifies that stone-cutters from Hindustan worked on Timur Beg’s
Stone Mosque, *Babur Nama*, II, 520. For detailed references see K.S.
Lai, *Twilight*, 40.

^([13](#13a))*Arch. Sur. Report*, XVII, 105.

^([14](#14a))*Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal*, 1872, 48.

^([15](#15a)) Nizamuddin, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, I, 335-35; Farishtah, I,
186; *Makhzan-i-Afghani*, fol. 67 a; trs.  Dorn, 66.

^([16](#16a))*Epigraphia Indica*, 1919-20, 4; Carr Stephen, *Archaeology
and Monumental Remains of Delhi* (Calcutta, 1876), pp. 59-60; J. A.
Page, *A Guide to the Qutab Delhi*, 21.

^([17](#17a))*Babur Nama*, II, 520.

^([18](#18a)) Ibid., 634.

^([19](#19a))*Badshah Nama*, I, 221. Also C.H.I. IV, 554.

^([20](#20a)) W.H. Moreland is the translator of Pelsaert’s *Jahangir’s
India* and the author of *India from Akbar to Aurangzeb*. He says that
this paragraph of Pelsaert has some problems of translation, Pelsaert,
56n., and hundreds of thousands may be taken as referring to either
money or labourers.

^([21](#21a)) ‘Adorned’ in Pelsaert, 56, ‘covered’ in *Akbar to
Aurangzeb*, 197. The two words convey very different impressions.

^([22](#22a)) Pelsaert 55-56; *Akbar to Aurangzeb*, 197.

^([23](#23a)) For the estimated cost of some Mughal edifies see *Akbar
to Aurangzeb*,196-197.

^([24](#24a)) Barani *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, 22.

^([25](#25a)) Bosworth, *The Ghaznavids*, 98.

^([26](#26a)) Ira Marvin Lapidus, *Muslim cities in* the Later Middle
Ages, Harvard, Massachusetts 1967, 6, 44.

^([27](#27a))*Makhzan-i-Afghani*, N.B.Roy’s trs. entitled Niamatullah’s
*History of the Afghans*, Santiniketan, 1958, 11.

^([28](#28a)) Olaf Caroe, *The Pathans*, London, 1958, 135.

^([29](#29a)) Minhaj, 315.

^([30](#30a)) Barani, 57, 58.

^([31](#31a))*Ibid*., 218; Farishtah, I, 94.

^([32](#32a)) Habibullah, 119; Afif, 271; E.D., III, 342.

^([33](#33a)) Lal, *Twilight*, 126, 328-29.

^([34](#34a)) Barani, 58-59.

^([35](#35a)) Ashraf, op. cit., 189.

^([36](#36a)) Barani, 222; Farishtah, I, 95.

^([37](#37a)) Barani, 262; Khusrau, *Qiran-us Sadain*, Aligarh text,
19103, 35, 47; Afif, 318, 33940; Farishtah, I, 200.

^([38](#38a)) Minhaj, 83; Barani, 53, 333; Khusrau, *Khazain-ul Futuh*,
Habib trs., 161; Afif, 163, 167 ff; 486.

^([39](#39a)) Even a ruler of an independent kingdom, Sultan Mahmud
Sharqi of Jaunpur, marched against Delhi (1452) with a thousand
elephants. Farishtah, I, 157; II, 308; Lal, *Twilight*, 135.

^([40](#40a)) Khusrau, *Khazain-ul-Futuh*, trs., Habib 63, during
Kafur’s siege of Warangal in 1310.

^([41](#41a))*Adab-ul-Harb*, Trs.  Rizvi, *Adi Turk Kalim Bharat*,
259-60.

^([42](#42a)) Alqalqashindi, *Subh-ul-Asha*, trs. Otto Spies, 76.

^([43](#43a))*The Book of Duarte Barbosa*, I, 181

^([44](#44a)) Barani, *Tarikh*, 593, also 52.

^([45](#45a))*Ibid.*, 255-57.

^([46](#46a))*Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, 25-26.

^([47](#47a))*Khazain-ul-Futuh*, trs. Habib., 26-27; *Deval Rani*,
Persian Text, 320.

^([48](#48a)) Barani, 273-75.

^([49](#49a)) Ibid., p.377; Isami *Fatuh-us-Salatin*, 342-43. Farishtah,
I, 124 mentions two Paiks only, Mubshir and Bashir.

^([50](#50a)) Afif, 102-104.

^([51](#51a)) Yahiya, 234-35; Nizamuddin, *Tabqat-i-Akbari*, I, 267;
Farishtah, I, 169.

^([52](#52a))*Hedaya*, Hamilton, 174.

^([53](#53a)) Ibid,. 178.

^([54](#54a)) Krammers, in *Legacy of Islam*, 104.

^([55](#55a)) Afif, 337-43.

^([56](#56a))*Masalik*, E.D., III, 578.

^([57](#57a)) Ibn Battutah, Def, and Sang., IV, 295, cited in I. Prasad,
*Qaraunah Turks*, 138-39.

^([58](#58a)) Barani, *Tarikh*, 316-18; *Fatawa-i-Jahandari*, 35; Ain.
I, 93-102.

^([59](#59a)) Thomas, *chronicles*, 78-79; *Masalik*, E.D., III, 577.

^([60](#60a)) *Adab-ul-Harb*, trs.  Rizvi, *Adi Turk Kalin Bharat*,
Aligarh, 1956, 258; Simon Digby, *War Horse and Elephant in the Delhi
Sultanate*, Oxford, 1971, 15-20.

^([61](#61a)) ‘A study of the rare Ms. Sirat-i-Firoz Shahi’, by S.M.
Askari, *Journal of Indian History*, Vol.  L II, April, 1974, part I,
127-146, esp. 139.

^([62](#62a)) For detailed reference for the Sultanate period see Afif,
271; for the Mughal period Lal, *Mughal Harem*.

^([63](#63a)) Trs. in E.D., III, 578-80.

^([64](#64a)) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 60-64

^([65](#65a)) Afif, 272.

^([66](#66a)) Moreland, India at the *Death of Akbar*, 88.

^([67](#67a)) Ashraf, 155 on the authority of Abbas Khan Sarwani’s
*Tarikh-i-Sher Shahi*.

^([68](#68a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 88, n. Terry,
141.

^([69](#69a)) Ibid.

^([70](#70a)) Lal, *Mughal Harem*, 64; Ain., I, 49. Also Bernier, 359.

^([71](#71a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 87-88.

^([72](#72a)) *Tarikh-i-Salim Shahi*, 51; Pelsaert, 64; Lal, *Mughal
Harem*, 32.

^([73](#73a)) Moreland, *India at the Death of Akbar*, 88-89.

^([74](#74a)) Pelsaert, 61-62.

^([75](#75a)) Moreland, *op.cit.*, 89.

^([76](#76a)) *Tarikh-i-Fakhruddin*, 20.

^([77](#77a)) Lal, *Legacy*, 298.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


