+++
title = "76 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: *Mohomed Ali Jinnah: an Ambassador of Unity: His Speeches and
Writings, 1912-1917; with a Biographical Appreciation by Sarojini Naidu
and a foreword by the Hon'ble the Rajah of Mahmudabad* (Lahore 1918,
reprint ed. 1989), pp. 29-52. Paragraph numbers in double brackets have
been added by FWP for classroom use, and punctuation slightly clarified
in a few places; a few extremely long paragraphs have been divided into
two. All editorial emendations in square brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Presidential address by Muhammad Ali Jinnah to the Muslim League  
Lucknow, December 1916

  
  

Ladies and gentlemen:

\[\[1\]\] No mere conventional words are needed on my part to express my
deep thanks for the great privilege you have conferred on me by
selecting me as President of the Ninth Annual Session of the All-India
Muslim League. The honour is the highest in the gift of the Muslim
community, to which those alone may aspire who have given freely of
their thought and time to the service of the communal cause. I am fully
sensible of how little I have done to deserve such distinction, nor
could I have the presumption to desire it with such a clear sense of my
own unworthiness. This choice, however, has come to me in the nature of
a mandate from my community, and in such cases individual considerations
cannot and must not stand in the way of the larger will. I accept the
great and heavy responsibilities of the position only in the belief that
I can unreservedly count on your sympathy, zeal, and ready co-operation
in the great task that lies before us.

\[\[2\]\] As President of the Bombay Presidency Provincial Conference,
which was held at Ahmedabad only a few weeks ago, I have had to make a
pronouncement; but at the time I accepted the honour of presiding over
the Conference, I did not know that I should have this unique honour and
responsibility of expressing my views as your President again within so
short a time. Much of the ground was covered by me in that speech of
mine. I do not now wish to repeat what I said then, nor do I wish to
deal with many great and burning questions and problems that affect
India in its internal administration. They will, no doubt, be placed
before you in the form of resolutions which will be submitted by the
speakers in charge of them for your deliberation and consideration. At
the present moment the attention of the country at large is entirely
concentrated and solely rivetted on the war and what will happen after
the war. I have, therefore, decided mainly to deal with the situation in
my Presidential Address on those lines, and I will endeavour to place
before you my humble views for your consideration, at the same time
hoping and trusting that my feeble voice may reach those who hold the
destinies of India in their hands.

Annual stock-taking

\[\[3\]\] In this great annual meeting of representative Musalmans from
all parts of India, who have come to deliberate and take counsel
together on the large and important issues that govern our destiny in
this land, it will not be out of place to take a wide survey of the
conditions in which our lot is cast. This is primarily the time for
annual stock-taking, for testing our position in the light of the
experience of the past year, for an intelligent preparation of ways and
means for meeting the demands of the future, and above all, for
refreshing, so to speak, the ideals that feed the springs of our faith,
hopes, and endeavour. This I take to be the fundamental object for which
the annual sessions of political bodies like the All-India Muslim League
are held. The circumstances, however, in which we meet today are
exceptional, and mark a new epoch in the history of our country. All
that is great and inspiring to the common affairs of men, for which the
noblest and most valiant of mankind have lived and wrought and suffered
in all ages and all climes, is now moving India out of \[=to\] its
depths. The whole country is awakening to the call of its destiny and is
scanning the new horizons with eager hope. A new spirit of earnestness,
confidence, and resolution is abroad in the land. In all directions are
visible the stirrings of a new life. The Musalmans of India would be
false to themselves and the traditions of their past, had they not
shared to the full the new hope that is moving India's patriotic sons
today, or had they failed to respond to the call of their country. Their
gaze, like that of their Hindu fellow-countrymen, is fixed on the
future.

\[\[4\]\] But, gentlemen of the All-India Muslim League, remember that
the gaze of your community and of the whole country is at this moment
fixed on you. The decisions that you may take in this historic hall, and
at this historic session of the League, will go forth with all the force
and weight that can legitimately be claimed by the chosen leaders and
representatives of seventy million Indian Musalmans. On the nature of
those decisions will depend, in a large measure, the fate of India's
future, of India's unity, and of our common ideals and aspirations for
constitutional freedom. The moment for decision has arrived. The
alternatives are clear and unmistakable. The choice lies in our hands.

The war

\[\[5\]\] The future historian, while chronicling the cataclysms and
convulsions of these times, will not fail to note the conjunction of
events of boundless influence and scope that have made the fortunes of
India so largely dependent on the united will and effort of this
generation. These events have, of course, flowed from the worldshaking
crisis into which Europe was plunged in August 1914. What this dark
period has meant in accumulated agony, suffering, destruction and loss
to mankind, is beyond any standard of computation known to history. With
the unfolding of this appalling tragedy have emerged into light, stark
elemental forces of savagery that lay behind a bright and glittering
mask of "Kultur," which threaten to sweep away the very foundations of
civilized life and society. The issues which are in death grips on the
battlefield of three continents, go to the roots of the principles on
which the fabric of modern civilization has been reared by the energy
and toil of countless generations. Freedom, justice, right, and public
law are pitted against despotism, aggression, anarchy, and brute force,
and the result of this deadly combat will decide the future of mankind,
whether the end will come with a stricken and shattered world, lying
bleeding and helpless under the iron heel of the tyrant, with the whole
of humanity stripped bare of its hope and faith and reduced to bondage,
or whether the hideous nightmare will pass away and the world, redeemed
by the blood of the heroic defenders of civilization and freedom,
regains its heritage of peace and reconstruction.

India's loyalty

\[\[6\]\] These are tremendous issues; and the blood of every Indian,
with his usual gift of quick moral perception, is stirred by the feeling
that he is a citizen of an empire which has staked its all in a supreme
endeavour to vindicate the cause of freedom and of right. What India has
given in this fellowship of service and sacrifice has been a free and
spontaneous tribute to the ideals of the great British nation, as well
as a necessary contribution to the strength of the fighting forces of
civilization, which are so valiantly rolling back the tides of
scientifically organized barbarism. In this willing service of the
people of India, there has been no distinction of class or creed. It has
come from every part of the land and from every community with equal
readiness and devotion. In this service there has been no cold,
calculating instinct at work. It has sprung from a clear ,compelling
sense of duty and moral sympathy, and not from any commercial desire to
make a safe political investment. India's loyalty to the Empire has set
no price on itself.

Reconstruction

\[\[17\]\] After such colossal upheavals as this War, the world cannot
quietly slip back into its old grooves of life and thought. Much of what
the existing generations have known in social and political arrangements
is visibly passing away under a deluge of blood and fire. The thick
crust of materialism and pampered ease, the inertia of habit, the
cramping weight of convention and of institutions that have outlived
their use, have fallen off from the lives of the great Western
Democracies under the stress of this great struggle for their existence.
They have been thrown back on themselves. In the hot furnace of
elemental passions, the trifles are being burnt to ashes, the gold is
being made pure of dross; and when the terrible ordeal has passed, the
liberated soul will feel almost primeval ease and power to plan, to
build and to create afresh ampler and freer conditions of life for the
future. The range of choice would be unlimited, and the need for bold
constructive efforts in various directions vital and urgent. Europe
after the war will call for statesmanship of a new order to undertake
the gigantic tasks of peace. The greatest victory for freedom will have
to be conserved. Free nations will have to learn to live freely and
intensely. Freedom itself wiIl have to be organized, its bounds made
vaster and its powers of self-preservation strengthened and increased.

The Indian problem

\[\[18\]\] These tasks have a peculiar urgency and significance in the
case of the vast and various communities comprising the British Empire.
And among the complex series of problems relating to the Imperial
reconstruction awaiting British statesmanship, none is of more anxious
moment \[=importance\] than the problem of reconstruction in India. I
need not set about to discuss in detail the Indian problem in all its
bearings. It has been discussed threadbare by all manner of men from
every conceivable angle of vision. However, there are two cardinal facts
about the Indian situation which practical statesmanship will have to
take into account while addressing itself to the study of the problem
and its adequate solution. There is, first, the great fact of British
rule in India with its Western character and standards of
administration; which while retaining absolute power of initiative,
direction, and decision, has maintained, for many decades, unbroken
peace and order in the land, administered evenhanded justice, brought
the Indian mind, through a widespread system of Western education, into
contact with the thought and ideals of the West, and thus led to the
birth of a great and living movement for the intellectual and moral
regeneration of the people. Here I may quote from the speech of H\[is\]
E\[xcellency\] Lord Chelmsford, delivered in Calcutta the other day:
"The growing self-respect and self-consciousness of her (India's) people
are plants that we ourselves have watered."

\[\[19\]\] Secondly, there is the fact of the existence of a powerful,
unifying process — the most vital and interesting result of Western
education in the country — which is creating out of the diverse mass of
race and creed a new India, fast growing into unity of thought, purpose,
and outlook, responsive to new appeals of territorial patriotism and
nationality, stirring with new energy and aspiration, and becoming daily
more purposeful and eager to recover its birthright to direct its own
affairs and govern itself. To put it briefly, we have a powerful and
efficient bureaucracy of British officers responsible only to the Bitish
Parliament, governing, with methods known as benevolent despotism, a
people that have grown fully conscious of their destiny and are
peacefully struggling for political freedom. This is the Indian problem
in a nutshell. The task of Biritish statesmanship is to find a prompt,
peaceful, and enduring solution of this problem.

\[\[20\]\] If it were possible to isolate the tangled group of social
and political phenomena and subject it to a thorough investigation by
reason unalloyed by sentiment, it would be infinitely easier to find a
safe and sure path for Indian political development and advance. But as
you know, pure, unalloyed reason is not the chief motive power in human
things. In the affairs of our common secular existence, we have to deal
not with angels, but with men, with passions, prejudices, personal
idiosyncrasies, innumerable crosscurrents of motive, of desire, hope,
fear, and hate. The Indian problem has all such formidable complications
in its texture. We have, for instance, the large and trained body of
English officials who carry on the administration of the country and
exercise power over the well-being and happiness of the teeming millions
of this land. They are most of them hard-working, efficient, and
conscientious public servants, and yet they are beset by the prejudices
and limitations that mark them as a class apart. They are naturally
conservative, have a rooted horror of bold administrative changes or
constitutional experiments, are reluctant to part with power or
associate Indians freely in the government of the country. Their main
concern appears to be to work the machine smoothly, content to go
through their common round from day to day; and they feel bored and
worried and upset by the loud, confident, and unsettling accents of New
India. All this is eminently human; but it also means an enormous
aggravation of the difficulties in the path of final settlement. It
means in actual experience, the growth of a tremendous class-interest,
the interest of the governing class as distinct from, if not wholly
opposed to, the interest of the governed. It is, in fact, the existence
of this vast, powerful, and by no means silent "interest" that explains
the origin and wide currency of certain shallow, bastard, and desperate
political maxims, which are flung into the face of Indian patriots at
the least provocation. They are familiar enough to all students of
Indian affairs. As a sample, we may take the following:

\[\[21\]\]  
*1. Democratic institutions cannot thrive in the environment of the
East.* (Why? Were democratic institutions unknown to the Hindu and
Mohammedans in the past? What was the village panchayet? What are the
history, the traditions, the literature, and the precepts of Islam?
There are no people in the world who are more democratic, even in their
religion, than the Musalmans.)

\[\[22\]\]  
*2. The only form of government suitable to India is autocracy, tempered
by English (European) efficiency and character.* (All nations have had
to go through the experience of despotic or autocratic government at one
time or the other in the history of the world. Russia was liberated to a
certain extent only a few years ago. France and England had to struggle
before they conquered the autocracy. Is India to remain under the heel
of a novel form of autocracy in the shape of bureaucracy for all time to
come, when Japan and even China have set up constitutional governments
on the democratic lines of Great Britain and America?)

\[\[23\]\]  
*3. (a) The interests of the educated classes are opposed to those of
the Indian masses*; and *(b) The former would oppress the latter if the
strong protecting hand of the British official were withdrawn.* (This
astonishing proposition beats all reason and sense. It is suggested that
we who are the very kith and kin of the masses, most of us springing
from the middle classes, are likely to oppress the people if more power
is conferred; that the masses require protection at the hands of the
English Officials, between whom and the people there is nothing in
common; that our mterests are opposed to those of the masses — in what
respect, it is never pointed out — and that, therefore, the monopoly of
the administrative control should continue in the hands of non-Indian
officials. This insidious suggestion, which is so flippantly made, is
intended to secure the longest possible lease for the bureaucracy and
\[for them\] to enjoy their monopoly. But it can neither stand the light
of facts, nor the analysis of truth. One has only to look at the past
records of the Congress for more than a quarter of a century, and of the
All-India Muslim League, to dismiss this specious plea. The educated
people of this country have shown greater anxiety and solicitude for the
welfare and advancement of the masses than for any other question during
the last quarter of a century.)

\[\[24\]\]  
*4. Indians are unfit to govern themselves*. (With this last question, I
propose to deal later in my speech.)

These are a few of the baseless and silly generalities in which the
advocates of the existing methods of Indian governance indulge freely
and provocatively ,when the least menace arises to the monopoly of the
bureaucratic authority and power.

Internal situation

\[\[25\]\] Again, if we turn to the internal situation in India, we meet
with a set of social, ethnological, and cultural conditions unparalleled
in recorded history. We have a vast continent inhabited by 315 million
people sprung from various racial stocks, inheriting various cultures,
and professing a variety of religious creeds. This stupendous human
group, thrown together under one physical and political environment, is
still in various stages of intellectual and moral growth. All this means
a great diversity of outlook, purpose, and endeavour. Every Indian
Nationalist who has given close and anxious thought to the problem of
nation­building in India, fully realizes the magnitude of his task. He
is not afraid of admitting frankly that difficulties exist in his path.
Such difficulties have no terrors for him. They are already vanishing
before the forces which are developing in the New Spirit.

India for the Indians

\[\[26\]\] Well, these are the broad aspects of the Indian problem, and
they will give you a fair idea of the obstacles that stand in the way of
a full and speedy realization of the ideals of Indian patriots. We have
a powerfully organized body of conservative "interest," on the one hand,
and a lack of complete organization of the national will and
intelligence, on the other. There is, however, one fundamental fact that
stands out clear and unmistakable, which no sophistry of argument and no
pseudoscientific theories about colour and race can disguise. Amid the
clash of warring interests and the noise of foolish catchwords, no
cool­headed student of Indian affairs can lose sight of the great
obvious truism than India is in the first and the last resort for the
Indians. .Be the time near or distant, the Indian people are bound to
attain to their full stature as a self-governing nation. No force in the
world can rob them of their destiny and thwart the purposes of
Providence. British statesmanship has not become bankrupt or utterly
bereft of its faculty of clear political perception; and its is,
therefore, bound to recognize that the working of the law of national
development in India, which came to birth with the British rule itself,
and is daily gathering momentum under the pressure of the world-forces
of freedom and progress, must sooner or later produce a change in the
principles and methods of Indian governance. It is inevitable.

\[\[27\]\] Then why fight against it, why ignore it, why should there
not rather be honest, straight-forward efforts to clear the way of
doubts, suspicions, and senseless antagonisms to that glorious
consummation? Leaving aside the hare-brained twaddle of the tribe of
scientific peddlers who love to sit in judgement on the East and ape
political philosophy, no man with the least pretensions to common sense
can affect to maintain that the Indian humanity is stamped with a
ruthless psychology and cramped for ever within the prison of its skull.
If the Indians are not the pariahs of nature, if they are not out of the
pale or operation of the laws that govern mankind elsewhere, if their
minds can grow in knowledge and power and can think and plan and
organize together for common needs of the present and for common hopes
of the future, then the only future for them is self-government, i.e.,
the attainment of the power to apply, through properly organized
channels, the common national will and intelligence to the needs and
tasks of their national existence. The cant of unfitness must die. The
laws of nature and the doctrines of common humanity are not different in
the East.

Official attitude

\[\[28\]\] It is a great relief to think that some of the responsible
British statesmen have definitely pronounced in recent years that
India's ambition to attain self­government is neither a catastrophe nor
a sin. Indeed, that great and sympathetic Viceroy, Lord Hardinge, whose
memory will always be cherished with affection by the people of t.qis
country, for the first time recognized the legitimacy of that vital
Indian aspiration. Other indications have not been wanting of late,
which go to show that our national dream and purpose is gaining the
stamp of even official approval. There is, however, a world of
difference between a theoretical approval of an ideal, and its practical
application. The supreme duty of the men that lead the forces of Indian
progress is to insist that India's rulers should definitely set the
ideal before them as the ultimate goal to be attained within \[a\]
reasonable time, and should accelerate the pace accordingly. All our
difficulties now arise from the steady reluctance on the part of Indian
officialdom to keep this end definitely in view and move faster. Mere
sympathy divorced from resolute and active progressive policy can hardly
ameliorate the situation. Honeyed words alone cannot suffice. We may
congratulate each other about a changed "angle of vision," and yet
remain where we are till doomsday. The time for definite decision and a
bold move forward has arrived. The. vital question today is: is India
fit to be free, and to what extent? There can be no shelving of the
issue at this juncture. It has to be settled one way or the other. If
she is not fit today, she has got to be made fit for self-government.
This, I maintain, is no less a duty and responsibility of the Government
than of the people themselves.

Test of fitness

\[\[29\]\] Is India fit for freedom? We who are present here today know
full well that from the Indian standpoint there can be but one answer.
Our critics would probably challenge our conviction. Our only reply to
them would be to go forward and put the matter to the proof. After all,
what is the test of fitness? If we turn to history, we find that in the
past, only such \[=those\] people have been declared to have been fit
for freedom, who fought for it and attained it. We are living in
different times. Peace has its victories. We are fighting, and can only
fight, constitutional battles. This peaceful struggle is not, and will
not, be wanting in the quality of vigour and sacrifice, and we are
determined to convince the British Empire that we are fit for the place
of a partner within the Empire, and nothing less will satisfy India.

Movement for unity

\[\[30\]\] But apart from the numerous other considerations that have
repeatedly been urged in support of the claims of India to responsible
and representative form of Government, the one that has grown to be of
infinitely larger weight and urgency is the living and vigorous spirit
of patriotism and national self-consciousness which is chafing under
irksome restraints and is seeking wider and legitimate outlets for
service and self-expression. The strength and volume of this spirit,
this pent-up altruistic feeling and energy of youth, can be easily
realised by those who have their finger on the pulse of the country. The
most significant and hopeful aspect of this spirit is that it has taken
its rise from a new­born movement in the direction of national unity
which has brought Hindus and Musalmans together involving and \[sic\]
brotherly service for the common cause. Bombay had the good fortune to
see the Indian National Congress and the All-India Moslem League meet
for the first time in the same city last December. These simultaneous
Sessions were brought about with no little labour, anxiety and trouble.
I do not wish to go into past controversy, but I venture to say that the
Session of the All-India Moslem League at Bombay will go down to
posterity as peculiarly interesting in its results.

\[\[31\]\] The so-called opponents. of ours, although for the time being
they caused the utmost anxiety and individual risks — which, after all,
do not count in a national movement — have, I cannot help saying,
rendered the greatest service to our cause. Their unjust. attitude
served only to stiffen the back of the community. The League rose
Phoenix­like, stronger, more solidified and determined in its ideals and
aspirations, with added strength of resolution in carrying out its
programme. And today your historic City of Lucknow, the centre of
Musalman culture and intellect, where three years ago the All-India
Moslem League laid down our cherished ideal of self-Government under the
aegis of the British Crown, is witnessing the simultaneous Sessions of
the Indian National Congress and the All-India Moslem League. once more.
Indeed, the person who fails to read in the Hindu-Moslem rapproachment
within the last few years the first great sign of the birth of united
India has little knowledge of the political conditions of a few years
ago and has no business to talk of India's future.

Ideals of the League

\[\[32\]\] I need hardly say that the Hindu-Moslem question had hitherto
lain as a colossal riddle athwart the numerous unifying forces that make
for the evolution of a common Indian Nationality. The new temper that we
witness today is the measure of the change that has happily come over
Hindu-Moslem relations. What this change really signifies can only be
judged by a reference to the state of things that obtained only a few
years age, when mutual distrust and suspicion were rampant and communal
bigots on either side ruled the roost. Every one of us can easily recall
the .frame of Moslem mind and feeling in which the All-India Moslem
League was founded at Dacca. To put it frankly, the All-India Moslem
League came into existence as an organisation with the main object of
safeguarding Moslem interests. Musalmans, as a community, had till then
abstained from all manner of political agitation, and they were
naturally moved by the loud and insistent demand for constitutional and
administrative reforms which Hindu politicians were pressing on the
Indian Government. They felt — and rightly — the need of organising
themselves for political action, lest the impending changes initiated by
a liberal Secretary of State should swamp them altogether as a
community. This was perhaps the only course open to a community proud of
the traditions of its past, yet weak in numbers and lacking the strength
that organised political activity alone can give. The main principle on
which the first All.lndia Moslem political organisation was based, was
the retention of Moslem communal individuality, strong and unimpaired,
in any constitutional readjustment that might be made in India in the
course of its political evolution.

\[\[33\]\] The creed has grown and broadened with the growth of
political life and thought in the community. In its general outlook and
ideal as regards the future, the All-India Moslem League stands abreast
of the Indian National Congress and is ready to participate in any
patriotic efforts for the advancement of the country as a whole. In
fact, this readiness of the educated Moslems, only about a decade after
they first entered the field of politics, to work shoulder to shoulder
with the .other Indian communities for the common good of all, is to my
mind the strongest proof of the value and need of the separate Moslem
political organisation at present. I have been a staunch Congressman
throughout my public life and have been no lover of sectarian cries, but
it appears to me that the reproach o "separatism" sometimes levelled at
Musalmans is singularly inept and wide of the mark, when I see this
great communal organisation rapidly growing into a powerful factor for
the birth of United India. A minority must, above everything else, have
a complete sense of security before its broader political sense can be
evoked for co-operation and united endeavour in the national tasks. To
the Musalmans of India that security can only come through adequate and
effective safeguards as regards their political existence as a
community. Whatever my individual opinion may be, I am here to interpret
and express the sense of the overwhelming body of Moslem opinion, of
which the All-India Moslem League is the political organ.

Hindu-Moslem relations

\[\[34\]\] It is a matter of infinite gratification to me as well as to
all patriotic Musalmans that the Moslem communal position in this matter
has been recognised and met in an ungrudging spirit by the leaders of
the great Hindu community. This was so amply demonstrated by the happy
and unanimous decision that was arrived at by the Committees of the
Indian National Congress and the All-India Moslem League that met at
Calcutta only last November. Our joint Conferences in Lucknow were
marked by honest.efforts on. either side to find a lasting solution of
our differences, and I rejoice to think that a final settlement has at
last been reached which sets the seal on Hindu-Moslem co-operation and
opens a new era in the history of our country. A few irreconcilable
spirits in .either camp may still exist here and there, but the
atmosphere has on the whole been rid of the menace of sectarian thunder,
and the prospects of the future are bright with a promise that gladdens
the hearts of India's devoted sons. Just as I have no sympathy with a
member of my community who even with an assured communal existence would
not extend the hand of fellowship to his Hindu brother, so I cannot
appreciate the attitude of the Hindu patriot who would insist on his
pound of flesh, though in this struggle the entire future of the
country, for the sake of a small gain to one side or the other, may be
marred forever. As an instance, I would like to point out the recent
unfortunate controversy that was raised in these Provinces over the
passing of the Municipal Act. But surely, we are not wanting in
political wisdom and sagacity. Let us remember, whether Hindus or
Musalmans, that New India wants a wholly different type of public
worker, of more generous spirit and ampler mould, free from the egoism
of sect and the narrowness of bigotry, one who can resist the temptation
to crush the weak and yet would not quail before the aggression of the
strong, who can rise above the petty preoccupations of the day to the
higher plane of devotion and service which alone can give to a people,
faith, hope, freedom, and power.

Scheme of reforms

\[\[35\]\] With the satisfactory solution of the most formidable problem
that stood in the path of Indian progress towards political cooperation
and unity, our constitutional battle may be said to have been half won
already. The united Indian demand, based on the actual needs of the
country and framed with due regard to time and circumstances, must
eventually prove irresistible. It must also be recognised that those
responsible for the Government of India have already shown a disposition
to treat the existing grievances of the people in a broader spirit of
understanding and sympathy. With the restoration of peace, the Indian
problem will have to be dealt with on bold and generous lines, and India
will have to be granted her birth-right as a free, responsible, and
equal member of the British Empire. How this change is to be effected,
and what are to be the lines of development and methods of solution, are
matters that have been fully occupying the thought of Indian publicists
\[=public-spirited intellectuals\] for the past two years; and
authoritative schemes of re-adjustment have already been formulated and
placed before the Government by the nineteen elected representatives of
the Imperial Council. You are aware that a committee of the All-India
Moslem League was formed last year, and was authorised to draw up a
scheme of reform in consultation with the Committee of the Indian
National Congress. That scheme is ready, and will, at this Sessions, be
submitted to you far your consideration and judgment. .

A new bill

\[\[36\]\] After you have adopted the scheme of reforms, you should see
that the Congress and the League take concerted measures to have a Bill
drafted by constitutional lawyers as an amending Bill to the Government
of India Act, which embodies the present constitution of our country.
This Bill ,when ready, should be adopted by the Indian National Congress
and the All-India Moslem League, and a deputation of leading and
representative men from both the bodies should be appointed to see that
the Bill is introduced into the British Parliament and adopted. For that
purpose we should raise as targe a fund as possible to supply the sinews
of war until our aim and object are fulfilled.

Position of India in the Empire

\[\[37\]\] The first and the foremost question that requires to be put
at rest, is that the position of India in the Empire should be defined
in the most unequivocal terms. It should be made clear by the Government
in an authoritative manner that self-Government is not a mere distant
goal that may be attained at some future indefinite time, but that
self-Government for India is the definite aim and object of the
Government, to be given to the people within a reasonable time. That
should be the aim and object of the reconstruction and reformation of
the present constitution of the Government of India, and immediate steps
should be taken after the War to introduce the reforms towards that end
in view, both by the Government and the people.

Imperial partnership

\[\[38\]\] Reading the signs of the times, it appears that the claims of
the Overseas Dominions, such as Canada, Australia, and even South
Africa, viz., to allow them a voice in the declaration of war and the
making of peace and the Imperial foreign policy, if they are to bear the
responsibilities of the Empire, cannot well be resisted, and it might
follow that an Imperial Parliament may be constructed and established,
England, Scotland, and Ireland having their separate parliaments for the
purpose of managing their internal and domestic affairs, such as the
Dominions already have. Sir Joseph Ward, addressing the meeting of the
Insurance Institute at Gresham College only last month, said that "in
the future reconstruction of the Empire there could not be any
interference with local authority and though an Imperial Parliament was
a long way off, they might now work for some effective Imperial Council
and that before an organic Parliament was possible, there must be
devolution in Britain to pave the way for a federal legislature
overseas. The Dominions had no right even to a minority voice as to
whether the nation should go to war or what the peace terms should be."
He quoted Mr. Asquith's speech at the 1911 Imperial Conference, in which
the Prime Minister stated that "an Imperial Parliament scheme would
impair the authority of the British Parliament." "Since then," Sir
Joseph said, "there had been a great evolution of opinion on the
subject. Mr. Bonar Law had declared as a result of the war the time was
coming when the overseas Dominions would share in the Government of the
Empire with Britain. He hoped that before the War ended some *modus
vivendi* would be established."

\[\[39\]\] In the political reconstruction India, the largest part of
the Empire, cannot possibly be allowed to continue a dependency, as an
adjunct to England, Scotland, or Ireland, or to be ruled and governed by
the Dominions. Hitherto the responsibility, the control, and the
supervision of India has been vested in Great Britain. The question
naturally arises, what will be the position of India if an Imperial
Parliament with full representation of the Dominions is constituted? Is
India to have new and additional masters? Is India to be ruled jointly
by England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Dominions? Are we to be handed
over to this Imperial Parliament and to be thus ruled, and to be
governed by the Colonies? Are we not to have a status or *locus standi*
in this Imperial Parliament? I feel sure that I am expressing the
opinion of the entire educated people of this country that India will
never allow herself to be relegated to such \[an\] intolerable position.
Indeed, she does not want a change of masters, nor additional masters.
If an Imperial Parliament, such as indicated above, is established,
India's right should be recognised, and her voice in that Imperial
Parliament must be fully and properly secured, and represented by her
own sons in the Councils of the Empire.

Minimum demands

\[\[40\]\] Next, it is well-known that the reforms that are sought by
the people of India to be introduced in the constitutional Government of
India, were fully adumbrated recently by the nineteen elected members of
the Imperial legislative Council; and I do not wish to repeat them here,
as I believe you are all familiar with them already. I was one of the
signatories, and I would urge upon you to follow them substantially, so
far as fundamental principles are involved in those proposals. Those
demands were formulated by responsible men who owe duty to the
Government and the people alike as "chosen representatives," not in a
spirit of bargaining. Those demands are the minimum in the strictest
sense of the word. It is said that these are extravagant demands. It is
said it is a big thing. It is said that we are not yet ready for them.
It is said that if these reforms are introduced, there will be chaos,
and particularly the Anglo-Indian Press is not only most unreasonable
and disappointing, but alarmed. These are mere destructive methods.
Similar fears were raised and arguments advanced when the Minto-Morley
Reforms were on the legislative anvil. But what is the verdict now,
official and non-official, after nearly seven years of actual trial?
Need I give the answer?

\[\[41\]\] We have not been favoured either by our critics or by the
Government as to what is the alternative scheme. We are not taken into
the confidence of the secret chambers of the Government where the
Government of India, it is said, have been deliberating upon and
preparing a despatch containing their proposals of reform to be
submitted to the Secretary of State for India. In England, the
representatives of the Colonies and the Press and the people and the
Ministers are freely discussing the reconstruction of the constitution
of the Empire after the War; nay, even before the War is over it is
suggested to set up an Imperial Council, whereas in India we are denied
the apportunity of knowing even what the Government are contemplating.
It will be a great misfortune if any decisions are arrived at with
regard to the future of India by the Government and the Secretary of
State for India without the proposals being published and placed before
the country at large for public criticism and opinion. I must earnestly
urge upon the Government that before any final decision is arrived at,
the proposed reforms should be published and the people should be given
an opportunity to urge their views, and that they should be taken into
their confidence. I feel that if the people are bitterly disappointed at
this juncture, it will mean the greatest disaster to the future progress
of this country.

Question of the Caliphate

\[\[42\]\] I should be failing in my duty towards my own people and the
Government if I did not, at this crisis, make it clear that of the many
delicate questions, there is none that requires a closer attention and
study than the question of the Caliphate by the Government and the
Ministers of Great Britain. The sentiments and feelings and the
religious convictions not only of the Musalmans of India but of the
Musalmans of the world, are not to be lightly treated. The loyalty of
the Musalmans of India to the Government is no small asset. From the
very commencement of the great crisis through which the British Empire
has been passing, the allegiance of the Musalmans to the Crown and their
loyalty to the Government has remained whole-hearted and unshaken. May
I, therefore, urge that the Government should have regard for their
dearest and most sacred religious feelings, and under no circumstances
interfere with the question of the future of the Caliphate. It should be
left entirely to the Musalmans to acknowledge and accept their own
Caliph. I do not desire to dilate on this grave and delicate subject;
but much deeper currents underly this exceptional exhortation of mine,
which I have ventured to make both in the interests of the Musalmans and
the Government of Great Britain, than it would be expedient at present
to discuss on a public platform. But the Musalmans may well claim that
their feelings and sentiments relating to their most cherished
traditions should receive consideration in the general policy of the
Empire, particularly when they coincide with the demands of justice,
humanity, and international obligations.

Holy places of Islam

\[\[43\]\] As a spokesman of the Musalmans of India, I must here
acknowledge that the noble assurance of the British Government given to
them through H. E. Lord Hardinge, the late Viceroy of India, as regards
the Holy Places of Islam, was received by them not only with the utmost
satisfaction, but with profound gratitude.

Moslem attitude

\[\[44\]\] I may say a. word as to the attitude of the Musalmans of
India towards the Government. Our clear duty is to be loyal and
respectful, without stooping to a cringing policy. We want no favours,
and crave for no partial treatment. That is demoralizing to the
community and injurious to the State. The Musalmans must learn to have
self respect; what we want is a healthy and fair impetus to be given to
our aspirations and ideals as a community, and it is the most sacred
duty of Government to respond to that claim. Towards the Hindus our
attitude should be of good-will and brotherly feelings. Cooperation in
the cause of our Motherland should be our guiding principle. India's
real progress can only be achieved by a true understanding and
harmonious relations between the two great sister communities. With
regard to our own affairs, we can depend upon nobody but ourselves. We
should infuse \[a\] greater spirit of solidarity into our society. We
should remove the root causes and. the evil effects of the process of
disintegration. We should maintain a sustained loyalty to and
cooperation with each other. We should sink personal differences and
subordinate personal ambitions to the well-being of the community. We
must recognise that no useful purpose is served in petty disputes and in
forming party combinations. We should not lose the sympathy of our
well-wishers in India and in England by creating a wrong impression that
we, as a community, are out only for self-interest and self.gain. We
must show by our words and deeds that we sincerely and earnestly desire
a healthy National unity. For the rest, the seventy millions of
Musalmans need not fear.

Religious difference

\[\[45\]\] A few days ago I came across a paragraph in the "Bombay
Chronicle," the well-known daily paper of Bombay, with \[=that has as\]
its Editor Mr. B. G. Horniman, a friend of the Musalmans who has
rendered great services to us. It is as follows:

> The following incident, reported by the Amrita Bazaar Patrika, may
> well be read with profit by those whose perverse imaginations, in
> spite of proofs to the contrary, always see in the differences of
> religions in India an irremoveable bar against placing Indians in high
> offices of trust and responsibility:
>
> > This is how H\[is\] H\[ighness\] the Nizam has just disposed of a
> > Hindu-Musalman ispute in his territory. Well, for about a year or
> > so, there sprang a quarrel between the Hindus and the'Musalmans of
> > Warrangal about the building of a mosque in a prominent Hindu
> > locality. In spite of many protests from the Hindu population, the
> > other party persisted on constructing one. The Hindus then appealed
> > to His Highness, with the result that he was pleased to appoint a
> > committee of enquiry consisting of two Musalmans and one Hindu to
> > report on the matter. The report was in favour of the Hindus, and
> > His Highness has been pleased to pass his orders accordingly.
>
> The action taken by H. H. the Nizam, it need hardly be added, was in
> accordance with the traditional policy always adopted by the rulers of
> Hyderabad."

Why can't we In British India, the Hindus and the Musalmans, try the
.methods which prove so successful in the territories of H. H. the
Nizam, to settle our differences?

Conclusion

\[\[46\]\] In conclusion I cannot do better than quote a passage from,
the recent speech of the Prime Minister Mr. Lloyd George, every word of
which almost literally applies to the conditions in India. Referring to
the Irish situation he said:

> "He was convinced now that it was a misunderstanding, partly racial,
> partly religious. It was to the interest of both to have it removed.
> But there seemed to have been some evil chance that frustrated every
> effort made for the achievement of better relations. He had tried once
> but did not succeed, But the fault was not entirely on one side. He
> had felt the whole time that we were moving in an atmosphere of
> nervous suspicions and distrust, pervasive and universal, of
> everything and everybody. He was drenched with suspicion of Irishmen
> by Englishmen and of Englishmen by Irishmen and, worse and most fatal
> of all, by the suspicion of Irishmen of Irishmen. It was a quagmire of
> distruct which clogged the footsteps of progress. That was the real
> enemy of Ireland. If that could be slain, he believed, it would
> accomplish an act of reconciliation that would make Ireland greater
> and Britain greater, and would make the United Kingdom and the Empire
> greater than they ever were before."

The Renaissance of India really lies in our own hands. Let us work and
trust to God, so that we may leave a richer heritage to our children
than all the gold of the world, viz., Freedom, for which no sacrifice is
too great.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on M. A. Jinnah](islam_articles.html#jinnah) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
