+++
title = "74 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: *The Nation's Voice, Vol. VII: Launching the State and the End
of the Journey (Aug. 1947 - Sept. 1948)*, ed. by Waheed Ahmad (Karachi:
Quaid-i-Azam Academy, 2003), pp. 243-258. The section headings, and the
footnote, are those provided by the Waheed Ahmad edition. Paragraph
numbers in double brackets have been added by FWP for convenience in
classroom use. Punctuation has been slightly adjusted for clarity.
Editorial additions in square brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

> Address by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Governor General of Pakistan, in
> Dacca, East Pakistan; March 21st, 1948

*Speaking from an eighteen-foot-high rostrum before a gathering of about
five lakhs \[=500,000\] people, the largest in the history of Dacca....
Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah arrived at the meeting ground with imposing
magnificence under military escort and majestically proceeded to the
rostrum and was warmly cheered by the vast multitude who gathered to
listen to him. A government of East Bengal plane showered flower petals
and cameras clicked. The Governor-General saluted the people on all
sides before taking his seat and was garlanded by Khwaja Habibullah,
Chairman of the Reception Committee.... The following is the full text
of the speech of Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah.*

  

\[\[1\]\] I am grateful to the people of this province and to you, Mr.
Chairman of the Reception Committee, and to the people of Dacca for the
great welcome that has been accorded to me. I need hardly say that it
has given me the greatest pleasure to visit East Bengal. East Bengal is
the most important component of Pakistan, inhabited as it is by the
largest single block of Muslims in the world. I have been anxious to pay
this province an early visit, but unfortunately other matters of greater
moment had so far prevented me from doing so. About some of these
important matters you doubtless know. You know for instance of the
cataclysm that shook the Punjab immediately after partition and of the
millions of Muslims who in consequence were uprooted from their homes in
East Punjab, Delhi, and neighbouring districts, \[and who\] had to be
protected, sheltered, and fed pending rehabilitation in Western
Pakistan. Never throughout history was a new state called upon to face
such tremendous problem\[s\]. Never throughout history has a new state
handled them with such competence and courage. Our enemies had hoped to
kill Pakistan at its inception. Pakistan has on the contrary arisen
triumphant, stronger than ever. It has come to stay, and play its great
role for which it is destined.

\[\[2\]\] In your address of welcome you have stressed the importance of
developing the great agricultural and industrial resources of this
province, of providing facilities for the training of young men \[244\]
and women of this province for entry in\[to\] the armed forces of
Pakistan, of the development of the port of Chittagong and of
communications between this province and other parts of Pakistan, of
development of educational facilities; and finally you have stressed the
importance of ensuring that the citizens of Eastern Pakistan do get
their just due and legitimate share in all spheres of government
activities. Let me at once assure you that my government attaches the
greatest importance to these matters, and is anxious, and constantly
engaged in ensuring, that Eastern Pakistan attains its full stature with
the maximum of speed. Of the martial prowess of the people of this
province, history provides ample evidence; and as you are aware,
government had already taken energetic steps to provide facilities for
the training of the youths of this province, both in the regular armed
forces and as volunteers in the Pakistan National Guards. You may rest
assured that the fullest provisions have been made for enabling the
youths of this province to play their part in the defence of this state.

East Bengal government congratulated

\[\[3\]\] Let me now turn to some general matters concerning this
province. In doing so let me first congratulate you, the people of this
province and your government, over the manner in which you have
conducted yourselves during these seven months of trial and
tribulations. Your government and the loyal and hard-working officials
deserved to be congratulated on the speed and efficiency \[245\] with
which it succeeded in building up a workable administration out of the
chaos and confusion which prevailed after Pakistan was created. On
August 15 the provincial government in Dacca was fugitive in its own
home. It was faced with immediate problems of finding accommodation for
thousands of government personnel in which \[=what\] was after all,
before partition, only a small mofussil \[=provincial\] town. Hardly had
government got to grips with \[the\] administrative problems thus
created, when some 70,000 railway and other personnel and their families
suddenly arrived in this province, driven out of India. There was
further upset, when owing to the wholesale departure of the Hindu
personnel, great gaps were left in the administrative machinery, and the
entire transport and communication system had been disorganized. The
immediate task that faced the government, therefore, was hurriedly to
regroup its forces and reorganize its administrative machinery in order
to avert an imminent administrative collapse. This the government did
with extraordinary speed and efficiency. The administration continued to
function unhampered, and the life of the community continued
undisturbed. Not only was the administration speedily reorganized, but
the great administrative shortages were quickly made good, so that an
impending famine was averted and, what is equally important, peace was
maintained throughout the province. In this latter respect, much credit
is due also to the people of this province, in particular to the members
of the majority community who showed exemplary calm and determination to
maintain peace despite the \[246\] great provocation afforded by the
massacre and oppression of the Muslims in the India Dominion in the
months immediately after partition. Despite those horrible happenings,
some 40,000 processions were taken out by the Hindu community during the
last *puja*s in this province without a single instance of the breach of
the peace and without any molestation from the Muslims of this province.

Minorities looked after

\[\[4\]\] Any impartial observer will agree with me that throughout
these troubles the minorities were looked after and protected in
Pakistan better than anywhere else in India. You will agree that
Pakistan was able to keep peace and maintain law and order, and let me
tell you that minorities, not only here in Dacca, but throughout
Pakistan, are more secured, more safe then anywhere else. We have made
it clear that the Pakistan government will not allow \[the\] peace to be
disturbed. Pakistan will maintain law and order at any cost, and it will
not allow any kind of mob rule.

\[\[5\]\] It is necessary to draw attention to these facts, namely, the
building up of an orderly administration; the averting of an imminent
famine; and the maintenance of \[the\] supply of food to some forty
million people in this province at a time of overall food shortage and
subsequent administrative difficulties; and the maintenance of peace;
because there is a tendency to ignore these achievements of this
government and to take these things for granted. It is always easy to
criticize, it is always easy to go on fault-finding, but people \[247\]
forget that \[=the\] things that are being done and are going to be done
for them, and generally they take those for granted without even
realizing as to what trials, tribulations, difficulties, and dangers we
had to face at the birth of Pakistan.

\[\[6\]\] I do not think that your administration is perfect -- far
from it. I do not say that there is no room for improvement, I do not
say that honest criticism for \[=of\] true Pakistanis in unwelcome, but
what \[=when\] I find in some quarters nothing but complaints,
fault-finding, and not a word of recognition as to the work that has
been done either by your govemment or by those loyal officials and
officers who have been working for you day and night, it naturally pains
me.

Say some good words

\[\[7\]\] Therefore, at least say some good words for the good that is
done, and then come and criticize. In a large administration, it is
obvious that mistakes must be made; you cannot expect that it will be
faultless, no country in the world can be so. But our ambition and our
desire is that it should be as little defective as possible. Our desire
is to make it more efficient, more beneficial, more smooth-working. For
what has the government got for its aim? The government can only have
for its aim one objective -- how to serve the people, how to devise ways
and means of \[=for\] their welfare, for their betterment. What other
object can the government have? -- and remember, now it is in your hand
to put the government in power or remove the government from power; but
you must not do it by \[248\] \[a\] mob method. You have the power, you
must learn the art of using it; you must try and understand the
machinery.

Preserve Pakistan

\[\[8\]\] Constitutionally it is in your hands to upset one government
and put another government in power, if you are dissatisfied to such an
extent. Therefore, the whole thing is in your hands; but I advise you
strongly to have patience, and to support the men who are at the helm of
government. Sympathize with them, try and understand their troubles and
their difficulties, just as they should try and understand your
grievances, complaints, and sufferings. It is by the cooperation and
good spirit and goodwill that you will be able not only to preserve
Pakistan which you have achieved, but to make it a great state in the
world. Are you now, after you have achieved Pakistan, going to destroy
\[it\] by your own folly" (*Cries of 'no, no'.*) "Do you want to build
it up? (*Cries of 'yes, yes'.*) Well, then, for that purpose there is
one essential condition, and it is this: complete unity and solidarity
among ourselves.

Living in dreamland

\[\[9\]\] But I want to tell you that in our midst there are people
financed by foreign enemies, who are intent on creating disruption.
Their object is to disrupt and sabotage Pakistan. I want you to be on
your guard, I want you to be vigilant, and not to be taken in by
attractive slogans and catchwords. \[249\] They say that the Pakistan
government and the East Bengal government are out to destroy your
language. The \[=a\] bigger falsehood was never uttered by a man. Quite
frankly and openly, I must tell you that you have got amongst you a few
Communists and other agents financed by foreign help, and if you are not
careful, you will be disrupted. The idea that East Bengal should be
brought back into the India Union is not given up, and it is their aim
yet, and I am confident -- I am not afraid, but it is better to be
vigilant -- that these people who still dream of getting back East
Bengal into the Indian Union are living in a dreamland.

Hindu exodus

\[\[10\]\] I am told that there has been some exodus of the Hindu
community from this province. I have seen the magnitude of this exodus
put at the fantastic figure of 10 lakhs \[=one million\] in the Indian
press. Official estimate\[s\] would not put the figure beyond 2 lakhs
\[=200,000\] at the utmost. In any case, I am satisfied that such exodus
as has taken place has been as a result not of any ill-treatment of the
minority communities. On the other hand \[=on the contrary\], the
minority communities have enjoyed, and rightly so, greater freedom, and
have been shown greater solicitude for their welfare, than the
minorities in any part of the Indian Dominion.

\[\[11\]\] The causes of these \[=this\] exodus are to be found rather
in the loose talk by some warmongering leaders in the Indian Dominion on
the inevitability of war between Pakistan and India; in the
ill-treatment of the minorities in some of the Indian \[250\] provinces,
and the fear among the minorities of the likely repercussion\[s\] of
that ill-treatment here; and in the open encouragement to Hindus to
leave this province being sedulously given by a section of the Indian
leaders producing imaginary accounts of what is called the flight of the
minorities in Pakistan; and by the Hindu Mahasabha.

Propaganda belied

\[\[12\]\] All these propaganda and accusations about the ill-treatment
of the minorities stand belied by the fact that over twelve million
non-Muslims continue to live in this province in peace, and have refused
to migrate from here. Let me take this opportunity of repeating what I
have already said: we shall treat the minorities in Pakistan fairly and
justly. Their lives and properties in Pakistan are far more secure and
protected than in India, and we shall maintain peace, law, and order,
and protect and safeguard fully every citizen of Pakistan without
distinction of cast, creed, or community.

State language

\[\[13\]\] So far so good. Let me now turn to some of the less
satisfactory features of the conditions in this province. There is a
certain feeling, I am told in some parts of this province, against
non-Bengali Muslims. There has also lately been a certain amount of
excitement over the question whether Bengali or Urdu shall be the state
language of this province and of Pakistan. In this latter connection, I
hear that some discreditable attempts have been \[251\] made by
political opportunists to make a tool of students in Dacca to embarrass
the administration.

\[\[14\]\] My young friends, students, who are present here, let me tell
you as one who has always had love and affection for you, who has served
you for ten years faithfully and loyally, let me give you this word of
warning: you will be making the greatest mistake if you allow yourself
to be exploited by one political party or the other. Remember there has
been a revolutionary change. It is our own government, we are \[a\]
free, independent, and sovereign state. Let us behave and regulate our
affairs as free men. We are not suppressed and oppressed in the regime
of a foreign domination. We have broken those chains, we have thrown off
those shackles. My young friends, I look forward to you as the real
makers of Pakistan. Do not be exploited and do not be misled. Create
amongst yourselves complete unity and solidarity. Set an example of what
youths can do. Your main occupation should be -- in fairness to
yourself, in fairness to your parents, in fairness to the state ­-- to
devote your attention to your studies. If you fritter away your energies
now, you will always regret \[it\]. After you leave the portals of your
universities and colleges, then you can play your part freely and help
yourselves and the state.

Dangers facing East Bengal

\[\[15\]\] Let me warn you in the clearest terms of the dangers that
still face Pakistan and your province in particular, as I have done
already. Having failed to prevent the establishment of Pakistan,
thwarted \[252\] and frustrated by failure, the enemies of Pakistan have
now turned their attention to disrupt\[ing\] the state by creating a
split amongst the Muslims of Pakistan. These attempts have taken the
shape principally of encouraging provincialism.

\[\[16\]\] As long as you do not throw off this poison from your body
politic, you will never be able to weld yourselves, mould yourselves,
galvanize yourselves into a real true nation. What you want is not to
talk about Bengalis, Punjabis, Sindhis, Baluchis, Pathans and so on.
They are, of course, units; but I ask you, have you forgotten the lesson
that was taught to us 1300 years ago? If I may point \[it\] out, you are
all outsiders here. Who were the original inhabitants of Bengal? -- not
those who are now living \[in it\]. So what is the use of saying "We are
Bengalis, or Sindhis, or Pathans, or Punjabis"? No, we are Muslims,
Islam had taught us this. Here I think you will agree with me that
whatever else you may be and whatever you are, you are Muslims. You
belong to a nation now. You have now carved out a territory, \[a\] vast
territory, it is all yours. It does not belong to a Punjabi or a Sindhi,
or a Pathan or a Bengali, it is yours. You have got your central
government where the several units are represented. Therefore, if you
want to build up yourselves into a nation, for God's sake give up this
provincialism. Provincialism has been one of the curses, and so is
sectionalism, Shia, Sunni, etc.

\[\[17\]\] It was no concern of our predecessor government, it was no
concern of theirs to worry about it; they were here to carry on the
administration, maintain law and order, and to carry on their trade and
exploit India as much as \[253\] they could. But we are now in a
different position altogether.

America as example

\[\[18\]\] Now I give you an example. Take America. When it threw off
British rule and declared itself independent, how many nations were
there? It had many races: Spaniards, French, German, Italian, English,
Dutch and many more. Well, there they were. They had many difficulties.
But mind you, their nations were actually in existence, and they were
great nations, whereas you had nothing. You have got Pakistan only now.
But there a Frenchman could say "I am a Frenchman and belong to a great
nation," and so on. But what happened? They understood and they realized
their difficulties because they had sense; and within a very short time,
they solved their problems and destroyed all their sectionalism, and
they were able to speak not as a German or a Frenchman or an Englishman
or a Spaniard, but as an American. They spoke in this spirit: "I am an
American" and "We are Americans"; and so you should think, live, and act
in terms that your country is Pakistan and you are a Pakistani.

\[\[19\]\] Now I ask you to get rid of this provincialism because as
long as you allow this poison to remain in the body politic of Pakistan,
believe me, you will never be a strong nation, and you will never be
able to achieve what I wish you could achieve. Please do not think that
I do not appreciate the position. Very often it becomes a vicious
circle. When you speak to a Bengali he says "Yes, you are right, but
\[254\] the Punjabi is so arrogant"; when you speak to the Punjabi or a
non-Bengali he says "Yes, but these people do not want us here, they
want to get us out." Now this is a vicious circle, and I do not think
anybody can solve this Chinese puzzle.

What is more sensible

\[\[20\]\] The question is, who is going to be the more sensible of the
two; and whoever is going to be the more sensible, more practical, more
statesmanlike will be rendering the greatest service to Pakistan. So you
make up your mind, and from today put an end to this sectionalism.

\[\[On language policy\]\]

\[\[21\]\] About language I have already said, this is in order to
create disruption among the Musalmans. Your Prime Minister has rightIy
pointed this out in a recent statement, and I am glad that his
government have decided to put down firmly any attempt to disturb the
peace of this province by political saboteurs or their agents. Whether
Bengali should be the official language of this province is a matter for
the elected representatives of the people of this province to decide. I
have no doubt that this question should be decided solely in accordance
with the wishes of the inhabitants of this province at the appropriate
time. Let me tell you in clearest language that there is no truth \[in
rumors\] that your normal life is to be touched or disturbed, so far as
your Bengali language is concerned. But ultimately it is for you, the
people of this province, to decide what should be the language of your
province.

\[\[22\]\] But let me make it clear to you that the state language of
Pakistan is going to be Urdu and no \[255\] other language. Anyone who
tries to mislead \[you\] is merely the enemy of Pakistan. Without one
state language, no nation can remain tied up solidly together and
function. Look at the history of other countries. There\[fore\] so far
as the state language is concerned, Pakistan's language should be Urdu;
but, as I have said, it will come in time.

Fifth-columnist Muslims

\[\[23\]\] I tell you once again, do not fall into the trap of those who
are the enemies of Pakistan. Unfortunately you have fifth-columnists. I
am sorry to say that they are Muslims -- who are financed by
outsiders.**[/1/](#n01)** But they are making a reat mistake. Weare not
going to tolerate sabotage any more. We are not going to tolerate
enemies of Pakistan. We are not going to tolerate quislings and
fifth-columnists in our state, and if this is not stopped, I am
confident that your government and the Pakistan government will take the
strongest measures and deal with them ruthlessly because \[256\] they
are a poison.

\[\[24\]\] I can quite understand differences of views. Very often it is
said, why cannot we have this party or that party? Now let me tell you,
and I hope you will agree with me, that we have as result of unceasing
efforts and struggles ultimately achieved Pakistan after ten years. It
is the Muslim League which has done it; there were of course many
Musalmans who were indifferent. Some were afraid because they had vested
interests and they thought they might lose \[them\]. Some sold
themselves to the enemy and worked against us, but we struggled and
fought by the grace of God, and with His help we have established
Pakistan, which has stunned the world. Now this is a sacred trust in
your hands -- that is, the Muslim League. Is this sacred trust to be
guarded by us as the real custodian of the welfare of our country and
our people, or not?"

Mushroom parties

\[\[25\]\] Are mushroom parties led by men of doubtful past to be
started, to destroy what we have achieved or capture what we have
secured? I ask you one question. Do you believed in Pakistan?" (*Cries
of "yes, yes."*) Are you happy that you have achieved Pakistan? (*Cries
of "yes, yes."*) Do you want East Bengal or any part of Pakistan to go
into the Indian Union? (*"No, no."*) If you are going to serve Pakistan,
if you are going to build Pakistan, if you are going to reconstruct
Pakistan, then I say that the honest course open to every Musalman is to
join the Muslim League party and serve Pakistan to the best of his
ability. Any other mushroom \[257\] party that is started at present
will be looked upon with suspicion because of their past; not that we
have any feeling of malice, ill-will, or revenge. Honesty is welcome,
but the present emergency requires that every Musalman should come under
the banner of \[the\] Muslim League which is the true custodian of
Pakistan, and build it up and make it a great state before we think of
parties amongst ourselves which may be formed later on sound and healthy
line\[s\].

Don't feel isolated

\[\[26\]\] Just one thing more: Do not feel isolated. Many people have
spoken to me \[and said\] that East Bengal feels isolated from the rest
of Pakistan. No doubt there is a great distance separating the East from
the West Pakistan, no doubt there are difficulties, but I tell you that
we fully know and realize the importance of Dacca and East Bengal. I
have only come here for a week or ten days this time, but in order to
discharge my duties as the head of the state I may have to come here and
stay for days, for weeks, and similarly the Pakistan Ministers must
establish closer contact. They should come here and your leaders and
members of your government should go to Karachi which is the capital of
Pakistan. But you must have patience. With your help and your support,
we will make Pakistan a mighty state.

Keep together

\[\[27\]\] Finally let me appeal to you keep together, \[258\] put up
with inconveniences, sufferings, and sacrifices for the collective good
of our people. No amount of trouble, no amount of hard work or
sacrifice, is too much or to be shirked if you individually and
collectively make a contribution for the collective good of your nation
and your state. It is in that way that you will build up Pakistan as the
first largest \[Islamic?\] state in the world, not only in population,
as it is, but in strength so that it will command the respect of all the
other na tions of the world. With these words I wish you Godspeed.
*Pakistan Zindabad!*  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[/1/](#m01)** *Civil & Military Gazette*, 24 March 1948, reported
Fazlul Huq's reaction as follows: "Fazlul Huq's severe criticism of
Jinnah; Calcutta, March 23: Mr. A. K. Fazlul Huq, ex-Premier of Bengal,
in a statement today, characterized as 'a most unfortunate performance'
the speech delivered by Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali \]innah on Sunday on
the occasion of his first appearance in Dacca. 'It was unworthy of the
solemn occasion and unworthy of the eminent person who delivered it,'
continued Mr. Fazlul Huq. 'The Governor-General of Pakistan has
descended from his high pedestal in order to indulge in a lot of special
pleadings to support a Ministry which is evidently tottering to its
fall,' he said. 'Officials at Dacca had given wrong information to
Quaid-i-Azam and induced him to make many unfounded statements,' said
Mr. Huq. 'The Quaid-i-Azam had thundered against quislings,
fifth-columnists, and enemies of the state. He must have spoken on the
basis of information he has received. But I can say with confidence that
there are no quislings or fifth-columnists or enemies of the state in
Pakistan. People have become restive and are impatient of control, but
this has been due to the fact that the Ministers have forfeited public
confidence by their maladministration, and not to political promptings
of any kind,' he concluded (API)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on M. A. Jinnah](islam_articles.html#jinnah) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp) --
