+++
title = "77 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: G. Allana, *Pakistan Movement Historical Documents* (Karachi:
Department of International Relations, University of Karachi, nd
\[1969\]), pp. 140-151. Some very long paragraphs have been broken into
shorter ones, and the punctuation adjusted in some places for ease of
reading. Section numbers have been added by FWP for convenience in
reference. All editorial annotations in square brackets are by FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  


> Presidential address by Muhammad Ali Jinnah to the Muslim League  
> Lucknow, October 1937

  
Ladies and Gentlemen,

\[\[1\]\] This session of the All-India Muslim League. is one of the
most critical that have taken place during its existence for the last
more than thirty years.

The policy and the programme that you are called upon to formulate and
lay down involves the fate and the future of the Musalmans of India and
the country at large. On 12th April 1936, the Muslim League at its
session, the first time in its history, undertook the policy and
programme of mass contact. The League considered the prevailing
conditions and surveyed the situation, as we had to face the forthcoming
elections on the eve of the inauguration of the new Provincial
Constitution embodied in the Government of India Act, 1935, and had no
alternative but to enter the field and contest the elections to the
Provincial Legislatures. It was also felt that there was no alternative
but to utilise the Provincial Constitution for what it was worth,
although it was far from being satisfactory. I may here reproduce the
resolution that was passed on the 12th April, 1936:

> "Whereas the Parliamentary System of Government which is being
> introduced in this country with the inauguration of the new
> Constitution presupposes the formation of parties with a well-defined
> policy and programme which facilitate the education of the electorate;
> and co-operation between groups with approximate aims and ideals and
> ensures the working of the Constitution to the best advantage; and
> whereas in order to strengthen the solidarity of the Muslim community
> and to secure for the Muslims their proper and effective share in the
> Provincial Governments, it is essential that the Muslims should
> organise themselves as one party, with an advanced and progressive
> programme, it is hereby resolved that the All­India Muslim League do
> take steps to contest the approaching Provincial elections, and for
> this purpose appoint Mr. Jinnah to form a Central Election Board under
> his Presidentship, consisting of not less than 35 membess, with powers
> to constitute affiliate Provincial Election Boards in various
> provinces, having regard to the conditions of each province, and
> devise ways and means for carrying out the aforesaid objects."

  
\[\[2\]\] In pursuance of that decision, the Muslim League Central
Parliamentary Board was established in June 1936, and also in various
provinces Provincial Boards were established, to give effect to the
resolution and the instructions of the League. It was not without
difficulty, and it was no small task, to be performed in the absence of
any previous preparations or any existing efficient organisation and
machinery. It was a stupendous undertakmg to contest elections in all
the provinces, especially when Musalmans all over India are numerically
in a minority and weak, educationally backward, and economically
nowhere.

There never had been made any systematic effort for their social and
economic uplift. Whereas our sister communities have gone far ahead with
their organisations, and the systematic programme supported by a large
bulk of people, especially the Hindus, who are not only in a majority
but better trained, more disciplined, and far better equipped
educationally, economically, and financially.

But here I may mention that within a short time of about six months'
work, before the elections were over, the results were very hopeful, and
there is no need for us to despair. In each and every province where
League Parliamentary Board was establlshed and the League parties were
constituted, we carried away about 60 and 70 per cent of the seats that
were contested by the League candidates; and since the elections were
over I find that hundreds of District Leagues have been established in
almost every province, from the farthest corner of Madras to the
North-West Frontier Province. Since April last the Musalmans of India
have rallied round the League more and more, and I feel confident that
once they understand and realise the policy and programme of the Muslim
League, the entire Musalman population of India will rally round its
platform and under its flag.

\[\[3\]\] The Muslim League stands for full national democratic
self-government for India. A great deal of capital is made as to phrases
more for the consumption of the ignorant and illiterate masses. Various
phrases are used such as Purna Swaraj, self­government, complete
independence, responsible government, substance of independence, and
dominion status. There are some who talk of complete independence. But
it is no use having complete independence on your lips and the
Government of India Act, 1935, in your hands! Those who talk of complete
independence the most, mean the least what it means.

Was the Gandhi-Irwin Pact in consonance with complete independence? Were
the assurances that were required before the offices would be accepted
and the Provincial Constitution could be worked, consistent with Purna
Swaraj; and was the resolution after the assurance were refused,
accepting offices and working the Provincial Constitution, enacted by
the British Parliament and forced upon the people of India by the
imperialistic power, in keeping with the policy and programme and the
declarations of the Congress Party? Does wrecking mean working? These
paper declarations, slogans, and shibboleths are not going to carry us
anywhere. What India requires is a complete united front and honesty of
purpose; and then by whatever name you may call your government is a
matter of no consequence so long as it is a government of the people, by
the people, for the people.

\[\[4\]\] The present leadership of the Congress, especially during the
last ten years, has been responsible for alienating the Musalmans of
lndia more and more, by pursuing a policy which is exclusively Hindu;
and since they have formed the Governments in six provinces where they
are in a majority they have by their words, deeds, and programme shown
more and more that the Musalmans cannot expect any justice or fair play
at their hands. Whenever they are in majority and wherever it suited
them, they refused to co-operate with the Muslim League Parties and
demanded unconditional surrender and signing of their pledges.

The demand was insistent: abjure your party and forswear your policy and
programme and liquidate \[the\] Muslim League; but where they found that
they had not a majority, like the North-West Frontier Province, their
sacred principle of collective responsibility disappeared, and promptly
the Congress Party was allowed in that province to coalesce with any
other group. That \[=then (?)\] any individual Musalman member who was
willing to unconditionally surrender and sign their pledge was offered a
job as a minister and was passed off as a Musalman minister, although he
did not command the confidence or the respect of an overwhelming
majority of the Musalman representatives in the legislature. These men
are allowed to move about and pass off as Muslim ministers for the
"loyal" services they have rendered to the Congress, by surrendering and
signing the pledge unconditionally; and the degree of their reward is
the extent of their perfidy. Hindi is to be the nationall language of
all India, and the Bande Matram is to be the national song, and is to be
forced upon all. The Congress flag is to be obeyed and revered by all
and sundry.

On the very threshold of what little power and responsibility is given,
the majority community have clearly shown their hand: that Hindustan is
for the Hindus; only the Congress masquerades under the name of
nationalism, whereas the Hindu Mahasabha does not mince words. The
result of the present Congress Party policy will be, I venture to say,
class bitterness, communal war, and strengthening of the imperialistic
hold as a consequence. I dare say that the British Government will give
the Congress a free hand in this direction, and it matters very little
to them, nay, on the contrary, it is all to the good, so long as their
interests, imperial or otherwise, are not touched, and the Defence
remains intact; but I feel that a fearful reaction will set in when the
Congress has created more and more divisions amongst Indians themselves,
and made the united front impossible.

\[\[5\]\] Here it will not be out of place to state that the
responsibility of the British Government is no less in the disastrous
consequences which issue \[=ensue\]. It has been clearly demonstrated
that the Government and the Governor-General who have been given the
powers and special responsibility to safeguard and protect the
minorities--under the Constitution which was made so much of by Lord
Zetland, the Secretary of State for India, during the controversy of
\[=over\] the assurances demanded by the Congress Party--have failed to
use them, and have thereby been a party, they have been a party to
passing off men as Muslim ministers by appointing them as such, although
they know full well that they do not command the confidence of the
Muslim representatives or the public outside.

If in a matter like this, the Governors have shown their utter
helplessness and disregard for their sacred obligations which were
assumed by the British Government for the protection of minorities,
could they or would they be able to afford protection in \[a\] hundred
and one other matters which may not come up to the surface to be known,
in the day-to-day working of the Legislatures and the administrative
machinery? These are very serious and not worthy signs of the time. The
one wholesome lesson that I ask the Musalmans to learn, before it is too
late, is that the path before the Musalmans is, therefore, plain. They
must realise that the time has come when they should concentrate and
devote their energies to self-organisation and full development of their
power, to the exclusion of every other consideration.

I have pointed out before that a section of Musalmans is divided, that
there is a group that stands with face turned towards the British. If
they have not learnt by now of the bitter consequences, they will never
learn. God only helps those who help themselves.

There is another group which turns towards the Congress, and they do so
because they have lost faith in themselves. I want the Musalmans to
believe in themselves, and take their destiny in their own hands. We
want men of faith and resolution who have the courage and determination,
and who would fight single-handed for their convictions, though at the
moment the whole world may be against them. We \[must\] develop power
and strength, till the Musalmans are fully organised and have acquired
that power and strength which must come from the solidarity and the
unity of \[the\] people.

\[\[6\]\] No settlement with the majority community is possible, as no
Hindu leader speaking with any authority shows any concern or genuine
desire for it. Honourable settlement can only be achieved between
equals, and unless the two parties learn to respect and fear each other,
there is no solid ground for any settlement. Offers of peace by the
weaker party always mean confession of weakness, and an invitation to
aggression. Appeals to patriotism, justice, and fair play, and for good
will, fall flat. It does not require political wisdom to realise that
all safeguards and settlements would be a scrap of paper, unless they
are backed up by power. Politics means power, and not relying only on
cries of justice or fair play or good will. Look at the nations of the
world, and look at what is happening every day. See what has happened to
Abyssinia; look at what is happening to China and Spain--and not to say
\[=not to speak\] of the tragedy of Palestine to which I shall refer
later.

The Congress High Command speaks in different voices. One opinion is
that there is no such thing as \[the\] Hindu-Muslim question, and there
is no such thing as \[the\] Minorities question, in the country. The
other high opinion is that if a few crumbs are thrown to the Musalmans
in their present disorganised and helpless state, you can manage them.
They are sadly mistaken if they think that the Musalmans can be imposed
upon. The All-India Muslim League has now come to live, and play its
just part in the world of Indian politics; and the sooner \[this\] is
realised and reckoned with, \[the\] better it will be for all interests
concerned. The third opinion is that there is no light to be seen
through the impenetrable darkness; but as the Congress goes on acquiring
strength and power, so the past promises of the blank cheques remain
unfilled and unsigned.

\[\[7\]\] I want the Musalmans to ponder over the situation and decide
their own fate by having one single, definite, uniform policy which
should be loyally followed throughout India. The Congressite Musalmans
are making a great mistake when they preach unconditional surrender. It
is the height of \[a\] defeatist mentality to throw ourselves on the
mercy and good will of others, and the highest act of perfidy to the
Musalman community; and if that policy is adopted, let me tell you, the
community will seal its doom and will cease to play its rightful part in
the national life of the country and the Government.

Only one thing can save the Musalmans and energise them to regain their
lost ground. They must first recapture their own souls, and stand by
their lofty position and principles which form the basis of their great
unity and which bind them in one body-politic. Do not be disturbed by
the slogans and the taunts such as are used against the
Musalmans--Communalists, toadies, and reactionaries. The worst today on
earth, the most wicked communalist today amongst Muslims, when he
surrenders unconditionally to the Congress and abuses his own community,
becomes the nationalist of nationalists to­morrow! These terms and words
and abuses are intended to create an inferiority complex amongst the
Musalmans, and to demoralise them; and are intended to be sown in their
midst and give us a bad name in the world abroad. This is the standard
of propaganda which can only be treated with contempt.

The All-India Muslim League certainly and definitely stands to safeguard
the rights and interests of the Musalmans and other minorities
effectively. That is its basic and cardinal principle. This is the
*casus belli* \['cause of war'\]. That is why the Muslim League and
those who stand by it have incurred the displeasure of the Congress, for
what \[=why\] else are we doing what the Congress objects to? They
\[=Muslim League supporters\] are doing exactly what we decided two
years ago. The League is not going to allow the Musalmans to be
exploited either by the British Government or any other party or group,
inside the legislatures or outside. The Congress with all its boasts has
done nothing in the past for the Musalmans. It has failed to inspire
confidence and to create a sense of security amongst the Musalmans and
other minorities.

\[\[8\]\] The Congress attempt, under the guise of establishing mass
contact with the Musalmans, is calculated to divide and weaken and break
the Musalmans, and is an effort to detach them from their accredited
leaders. It is a dangerous move, and it cannot mislead anyone. All such
manoeuvres will not succeed, notwithstanding the various blandishments,
catchwords, and slogans. The only honest and straightforward course is
to give the minorities a fair deal. All talk of the hunger and poverty
is intended to lead the people towards socialistic and communistic ideas
for which India is far from prepared.

The Muslim League in the present conditions considers the policy of
direct action as suicidal and futile. Two such attempts have hitherto
failed, and have entailed untold misery and suffer:ng to the people; and
it had to be wound up after two decades of persistent efforts in that
direction, with the result that a more reactionary Constitution is
forced upon the people, and the Congress is working \[under\] it now.

To ask, by a resolution, the Governor-General to convey to the Secretary
of State for India to call a constituent assembly on the basis of adult
franchise, is the height of all ignorance. It shows lack of any sense of
proportion. A constituent assembly can only be called by a sovereign
authority and from the seat of power--a special body of men chosen as
the representatives with the authority of the sovereign--to frame such
constitution of the government of the country as they think proper, and
their function ceases and the constitution so framed by them would
automatically take the place and function as the constitution of the
government of the country. Who is to constitute the electorates on the
basis of adult franchise, and how many representatives will be chosen by
these electorates constituted on the basis of adult franchise, and what
will happen to the minorities in such constituencies, and what will the
electorates understand, and how will they make their choice of this
special body of men with final authority and power to frame the
constitution of this great sub-continent? Who will direct the machinery
to choose the special body of men with representative authority to frame
such constitution as they may think proper? Who will set in motion the
machinery? And, above all, what will happen to the minorities in such a
body?

Is the Congress really serious that the Secretary of State is going to
carry out all these requirements, when only a few days ago, the
representative of the British Government speaking with the highest
authority, His Excellency the Viceroy, said that he was full of hope
that they might succeed in securing the federation of India in the near
future, that when he came out to India he had expressed the hope that
the scheme of federation was on the whole one calculated to secure
federation within a reasonable time after the inauguration of provincial
autonomy, and that his experience of the federation within a reasonable
time? \[\[This last clause seems to be garbled.\]\]

\[\[9\]\] Taking the country as a whole, the Congress is still far from
occupying the seat of authority, and it is a travesty of realities to
think of \[the\] British Government calling a constituent assembly; and
\[as\] for the ability of the Congress to do so, \[it\] is pure
moonshine. Let the Congress first bring all principal communities in the
country and all principal classes of interest under its leadership. To
ask the foreign Government, who is the ruling and sovereign authority in
this country, to convene such a body before even the communal bodies in
India have accepted the leadership of the Congress, is like putting the
cart before the horse; and not to \[=do not\] forget that one-third of
Indian India stands on \[a\] very special footing, constituting the
Indian States and ruling Princes.

Instead of ploughing the sands, let the Congress at least concentrate
and see that the all-India Federation scheme embodied in the Government
of India Act, 1935, which is more reactionary than even the present
Central Constitution, is not brought into being, as now it is so
emphatically and confidently asserted by those who speak with authority
on behalf of the British Government that it is soon going to be
inaugurated. What is the Congress going to do? Do they think that they
can single-handed as a party prevent it? Or will some other formula be
evolved and the Congress quietly accept it as a fait accompli, as it had
done the Provincial Constitution, in spite of all the rantings of some
of the foremost leaders of the Congress against it?

\[\[10\]\] May I now turn and refer to the question of Palestine. It has
moved the Musalmans all over India most deeply. The whole policy of the
British Government has been a betrayal of the Arabs from its very
inception. Fullest advantage has been taken of their trusting nature.
Great Britain has dishonoured her proclamation to the Arabs--which had
guaranteed to them complete independence of the Arab homelands, and the
formation of an Arab confederation--under the stress of the Great War.
After having utilised them by giving them false promises, they installed
themselves as the mandatory power with that infamous Balfour
Declaration, which was obvioulsly irreconcilable and incapable of
simultaneous execution; and having pursued the policy to find \[a\]
national home for the Jews, Great Britain now proposes to partition
Palestine; and the Royal Commission's recommendation completes the
tragedy, and if given effect of \[=to\] must necessarily lead to the
complete ruination and destruction of every legitimate aspiration of the
Arabs in their homeland; and now we are asked to look at the realities.

But who created this situation? It has been the handiwork \[of\], and
brought about sedulously by, the British statesmen. The League of
Nations had, it seems, and let us hope, not approved of the Royal
Commission's scheme, and a fresh examination may take place. But is it a
real effort intended to give the Arabs their due? May I point out to
Great Britain that this question of Palestine, if not fairly and
squarely met, boldly and courageously decided, is going to be the
turning point in the history of the British Empire. I am sure I am
speaking not only of the Musalmans of India but of the world, and all
sections of right thinking and fair-minded people will agree when I say
that Great Britain will be digging its grave if she fails to honour her
original proclamation, promises, and intentions--pre-war and even
post-war--which were so unequivocally expressed to !he Arabs and the
world at large.

I find that a very tense feeling of excitement has been created, and the
British Governrnent, out of sheer desperation, are resorting to
repressive measures and ruthlessly dealing with the public opinion of
the Arabs in Palestine. The Muslims of India will stand solidly, and
will help the Arabs in every way they can in their brave and just
struggle that they are carrying on against all odds. May I send a
message on behalf of the All-India Muslim League of cheer, courage, and
determination in their just cause and struggle, which I am sure they
will win through.

\[\[11\]\] To the Musalmans of India in every province, in every
district, in every tahsil, in every town, I say, your foremost duty is
to formulate a constructive and ameliorative programme of work of
\[=for\] the people's welfare, and to devise ways and means of social,
economic, and political uplift of the Musalmans. We shall not hesitate
to co-operate with any party or group in any practical and constructive
programme for the welfare and advance of the provinces or the country. I
entreat and implore that every man, woman, and child should rally round
one common platform and flag of the All-India Muslim League. Enlist
yourselves by hundreds and thousands, as quickly as you can, as members
of the All-India Muslim League, Provincial Leagues, and District
Leagues. Organise yourselves, establish your solidarity and complete
unity. Equip yourselves, as trained and disciplined soldiers. Create the
feeling of esprit de corps, and of comradeship amongst yourselves.

No individual or people can achieve anything without industry,
suffering, and sacrifice. There are forces which may bully you,
tyrannise over you, and intimidate you, and you may even have to suffer.
But it is by going through this crucible of fire--persecution which may
be levelled against you, tyranny that may be exercised, the threats and
intimidations that may unnerve you--and it is by resisting, by
overcoming, by facing these disadvantages \[and\] hardships, and by
suffering and maintaining your true convictions and loyalty, that a
nation will emerge worthy of its past glory and history, and will live
to make the future history greater and more glorious not only of India
but in the annals of the world.

Eighty millions of Musalmans in India have nothing to fear. They have
their destiny in their hands, and as a well-knit, solid, organised,
united force can face any danger; and withstand any opposition to its
united front and wishes. There is the magic power in your own hands.
Take your vital decisions--they may be grave and momentous and
far-reaching in their consequences. Think \[a\] hundred times before you
take any decision, but once a decision is taken, stand by it as one man.
Be true and loyal, and I feel confident that success is with you.  


------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on M. A. Jinnah](islam_articles.html#jinnah) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/~fp7#fwp) --

  
