+++
title = "73 UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
Source: G. Allana, Pakistan Movement Historical Documents (Karachi:
Department of International Relations, University of Karachi, nd
\[1969\]), pp. 407-411. Paragraph numbers in double brackets have been
added by FWP for classroom use; punctuation has been slightly adjusted
for clarity. Editorial comments in square brackets have been added by
FWP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

> Muhammad Ali Jinnah's first Presidential Address to the Constituent
> Assembly of Pakistan (August 11, 1947)

  
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen!

\[\[1\]\] I cordially thank you, with the utmost sincerity, for the
honour you have conferred upon me -- the greatest honour that is
possible for this Sovereign Assembly to confer -- by electing me as your
first President. I also thank those leaders who have spoken in
appreciation of my services and \[thank them for\] their personal
references to me. I sincerely hope that with your support and your
co-operation we shall make this Constituent Assembly an example to the
world. The Constituent Assembly has got two main functions to perform.
The first is the very onerous and responsible task of framing the future
constitution of Pakistan and the second of functioning as a full and
complete sovereign body as the Federal Legislature of Pakistan. We have
to do the best we can in adopting a provisional constitution for the
Federal Legislature of Pakistan. You know really that not only we
ourselves are wondering but, I think, the whole world is wondering at
this unprecedented cyclonic revolution which has brought about the plan
of creating and establishing two independent Sovereign Dominions in this
sub-continent. As it is, it has been unprecedented; there is no parallel
in the history of the world. This mighty sub-continent with all kinds of
inhabitants has been brought under a plan which is titanic, unknown,
unparalleled. And what is very important with regard to it is that we
have achieved it peacefully and by means of an evolution of the greatest
possible character.

\[\[2\]\] Dealing with our first function in this Assembly, I cannot
make any well-considered pronouncement at this moment, but I shall say a
few things as they occur to me. The first and the foremost thing that I
would like to emphasize is this: remember that you are now a Sovereign
Legislative body and you have got all the powers. It therefore places on
you the gravest responsibility as to how you should take your decisions.
The first observation that I would like to make is this: You will no
doubt agree with me that the first duty of a government is to maintain
law and order, so that the life, property and religious beliefs of its
subjects are fully protected by the State.

\[\[3\]\] The second thing that occurs to me is this: One of the biggest
curses from which India is suffering -- I do not say that other
countries are free from it, but I think our condition is much worse --
is bribery and corruption. That really is a poison. We must put that
down with an iron hand, and I hope that you will take adequate measures
as soon as it is possible for this Assembly to do so.

\[\[4\]\] Black-marketing is another curse. Well, I know that
black-marketeers are frequently caught and punished. Judicial sentences
are passed, or sometimes fines only are imposed. Now you have to tackle
this monster, which today is a colossal crime against society, in our
distressed conditions, when we constantly face shortage of food and
other essential commodities of life. A citizen who does black-marketing
commits, I think, a greater crime than the biggest and most grievous of
crimes. These black-marketeers are really knowing, intelligent, and
ordinarily responsible people, and when they indulge in black-marketing,
I think they ought to be very severely punished, because they undermine
the entire system of control and regulation of foodstuffs and essential
commodities, and cause wholesale starvation and want and even death.

\[\[5\]\] The next thing that strikes me is this: Here again it is a
legacy which has been passed on to us. Along with many other things,
good and bad, has arrived this great evil -- the evil of nepotism and
jobbery. I want to make it quite clear that I shall never tolerate any
kind of jobbery \[=corrupt employment practices\], nepotism, or any any
influence directly or indirectly brought to bear upon me. Whenever I
will find that such a practice is in vogue or is continuing anywhere,
low or high, I shall certainly not countenance it.

\[\[6\]\] I know there are people who do not quite agree with the
division of India and the partition of the Punjab and Bengal. Much has
been said against it, but now that it has been accepted, it is the duty
of every one of us to loyally abide by it and honourably act according
to the agreement which is now final and binding on all. But you must
remember, as I have said, that this mighty revolution that has taken
place is unprecedented. One can quite understand the feeling that exists
between the two communities wherever one community is in majority and
the other is in minority. But the question is, whether it was possible
or practicable to act otherwise than what has been done. A division had
to take place. On both sides, in Hindustan and Pakistan, there are
sections of people who may not agree with it, who may not like it; but
in my judgement there was no other solution, and I am sure future
history will record its verdict in favour of it. And what is more, it
will be proved by actual experience as we go on that that was the only
solution of India's constitutional problem. Any idea of a united India
could never have worked, and in my judgement it would have led us to
terrific disaster. Maybe that view is correct; maybe it is not; that
remains to be seen. All the same, in this division it was impossible to
avoid the question of minorities being in one Dominion or the other. Now
that was unavoidable. There is no other solution. Now what shall we do?
Now, if we want to make this great State of Pakistan happy and
prosperous, we should wholly and solely concentrate on the well-being of
the people, and especially of the masses and the poor. If you will work
in co-operation, forgetting the past, burying the hatchet, you are bound
to succeed. If you change your past and work together in a spirit that
every one of you, no matter to what community he belongs, no matter what
relations he had with you in the past, no matter what is his colour,
caste, or creed, is first, second, and last a citizen of this State with
equal rights, privileges, and obligations, there will be no end to the
progress you will make.

\[\[7\]\] I cannot emphasize it too much. We should begin to work in
that spirit, and in course of time all these angularities of the
majority and minority communities, the Hindu community and the Muslim
community -- because even as regards Muslims you have Pathans, Punjabis,
Shias, Sunnis and so on, and among the Hindus you have Brahmins,
Vashnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis and so on -- will vanish.
Indeed if you ask me, this has been the biggest hindrance in the way of
India to attain the freedom and independence, and but for this we would
have been free people long long ago. No power can hold another nation,
and specially a nation of 400 million souls, in subjection; nobody could
have conquered you, and even if it had happened, nobody could have
continued its hold on you for any length of time, but for this.
Therefore, we must learn a lesson from this. You are free; you are free
to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any
other place or worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any
religion or caste or creed -- that has nothing to do with the business
of the State. As you know, history shows that in England conditions,
some time ago, were much worse than those prevailing in India today. The
Roman Catholics and the Protestants persecuted each other. Even now
there are some States in existence where there are discriminations made
and bars imposed against a particular class. Thank God, we are not
starting in those days. We are starting in the days where there is no
discrimination, no distinction between one community and another, no
discrimination between one caste or creed and another. We are starting
with this fundamental principle: that we are all citizens, and equal
citizens, of one State. The people of England in \[the\] course of time
had to face the realities of the situation, and had to discharge the
responsibilities and burdens placed upon them by the government of their
country; and they went through that fire step by step. Today, you might
say with justice that Roman Catholics and Protestants do not exist; what
exists now is that every man is a citizen, an equal citizen of Great
Britain, and they are all members of the Nation.

\[\[8\]\] Now I think we should keep that in front of us as our ideal,
and you will find that in course of time Hindus would cease to be
Hindus, and Muslims would cease to be Muslims, not in the religious
sense, because that is the personal faith of each individual, but in the
political sense as citizens of the State.

\[\[9\]\] Well, gentlemen, I do not wish to take up any more of your
time; and thank you again for the honour you have done to me. I shall
always be guided by the principles of justice and fair play without any,
as is put in the political language, prejudice or ill-will; in other
words, partiality or favouritism. My guiding principle will be justice
and complete impartiality, and I am sure that with your support and
co-operation, I can look forward to Pakistan becoming one of the
greatest Nations of the world.

\[\[10\]\] I have received a message from the United States of America
addressed to me. It reads:

> I have the honour to communicate to you, in Your Excellency's capacity
> as President of the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan, the following
> message which I have just received from the Secretary of State of the
> United States:
>
> On the occasion of of the first meeting of the Constituent Assembly
> for Pakistan, I extend to you and to the members of the Assembly, the
> best wishes of the Government and the people of the United States for
> the successful conclusion of the great work you are about to
> undertake.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- [more on M. A. Jinnah](islam_articles.html#jinnah) --
[Glossary](../00glossary/index.html) -- [fwp's main
page](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Efp7#fwp) --
