+++
title = "ieyesu_to_novaspania 1612"
+++

To His Excellency the Ruler of Novispania.

Your fragrant epistle is before me, and I have perused it without delay. The presents also I have received safely according to the invoice. During the past year the merchants of your honored country have been shipwrecked here from time to time owing to the severe gales on our shores. I have sent them back to you again, and rejoice to hear that they arrived safely. Your honored country and mine are thus strengthening the bonds of friendship, and if ships come every year and exchange the valuable commodities of our two territories even the best government cannot equal the benefit that will ensue to the land and its people. But this land is a Divine country. Since the beginning it has reverenced the Gods and respected the Buddhas. For these Gods and Buddhas are in reality one and the same, being but original form and extraneous manifestation. In the way of loyalty between lord and retainer, and in making firm and trustworthy agreements between the rulers of provinces the Deities are adjured to be witnesses of their faith. And those who do right they reward and those who do evil they punish. Their wondrous efficacy is as plain as an outstretched palm. Is not this the way of Benevolence, Duty, Etiquette, Knowledge, and Sincerity. But the religion that your honored country uses has tendencies of quite a different kind. There seems to be no affinity with anything in this land. In our texts it is written: "People of no affinity are difficult to estimate," so that as regards propaganda on reflection it seems better to cease from it and employ it no more. But the mutually profitable trade that will follow the arrival of merchant vessels is in the highest degree desirable. Therefore we have no objection to your ships calling at any port in any of our provinces. I have given strict orders to this effect to my officers, so set your mind at rest and banish all suspicion and doubt. I send you some products of this country in the accompanying package, which I trust you will accept. Pray take care of yourself in the increasing heat.

July, 1612.