+++
title = "02 1. A Call for an Intellectual (Bauddhika) Kshatriya DAVID FRAWLEY"

+++
**1. A Call for an Intellectual**  
**(*Bauddhika*) Kshatriya**  
DAVID FRAWLEY

We live in the age of the information revolution, which has taken a
quantum leap since the introduction of computers. The information flood
is changing the nature of the society in which we live, in ways that we
do not yet know and for which there is no precedent. This information
revolution is in many respects an information war, with different groups
struggling to put their views out to the general public as the truth. It
is often a disinformation war as well, with groups trying to discredit
those who have different views, using the media as their weapon.

In this contest whoever puts out information first usually gains
credibility by defining the field. Whoever puts out information in the
most sophisticated and high tech manner has the best audience and
generally the best success in promoting their agenda. In the media realm
packaging is more important than content and strong assertion often
takes the role of real proof. People tend to believe what has been well
presented in the media, even if it is otherwise biased or limited.
Billions of dollars are being poured by various vested interest groups
into this information war, with religious and political groups making
great efforts to represent themselves in this new global arena.
Advertisement, public relations, and lobbyists are hard at work, often
to the highest bidder, to give a good image and strong media presence to
their clients, if the price is right.

We live in a mass media dominated society, with daily exposure to some
sort of radio, television, computer, newspaper or magazine. It has been
said that the media is the message, that the media itself has made
itself into the focus of our lives. The media has become our mind. Many
of us spend more time taking in media information than interacting with
other people or with the world of nature. These media images serve to
build up our minds down to a subconscious level. They program our
behavior, a fact that advertising has long known and sought to benefit
from.

Now the Western information and media culture is spreading throughout
the entire world, including what is called the third world, with the
globalization of the world economy. Even villages are now getting
television and the other trappings of Western modernity. India, China,
and Asia in general are being brought under the influence of the media
world.

Unfortunately, this Western media and commercial culture continues the
same goals and influences as previous colonial forces, which only fifty
years ago lost hold in Asia. This commercial culture seeks to supplant
native and traditional cultures with a Western model, not only in terms
of practical conveniences but in terms of thought and belief. It
attempts to Americanize or Europeanize the world. Western religious
groups, particularly Christian Evangelical groups, are learning to use
the media for their advantage as well, doing preaching and
proselytizing, and broadcasting their mass rallies through the media.
Yet Christians as a whole use the media in Asia to promote their agenda
over native Asian religions, which the media often stereotypes as
primitive.

Islamic groups are also realizing the power of the media and spending
large sums to influence public opinion in the Western world, stressing
the humanistic side of Islam. The Islamic lobby in the United States is
one of the largest lobby groups in the country. In Islamic countries the
power of the media is recognized both for good and ill. The media is
strictly controlled by the state to project an Islamic image, and
portray Islam only in a positive light, while striving to keep the
Western media and its views out.

In the context of India the question arises where are Hindus in this
information war and media presentation? The answer is that, with a few
notable exceptions, Hindus generally are not present or only feebly
present, apologetic or half-hearted in their self-presentation in the
information field. The image of Hindus and of Hinduism that prevails in
the information age is created by non-Hindus and by anti-Hindu forces,
not only by intention but also by default because Hindus themselves
seldom challenge wrong views or provide an alternative. In this way
Hinduism is being eroded, particularly in the minds of young Hindus, who
seldom find their religion represented, or who find it denigrated in the
media world around them that is rapidly becoming their reality.

Since independence India has been dominated by Marxist and socialist
thinking that has viewed Hinduism, with its spiritual and religious
values, as its main enemy. Now gradually a more commercial influence is
arising with economic liberalization, but it similarly is trying to
undermine and replace Hindu culture, which, with its self-sufficiency
and spirituality, does not make for an easy commercial target. Hindu
culture, which managed to survive as the predominant model in India even
through a thousand years of domination by first Islamic and then
European Christian influences, finds itself under a new threat, less
overt but perhaps for that very reason more dangerous.

The intelligentsia of India since independence has been often
self-righteously anti-Hindu and naively accepting of Western ideologies,
often merely echoing or imitating the old colonial and missionary
propaganda against their own venerable complex religion that appears
alien to these disenfranchised souls. The result is that the ruling
political parties of India have done little to protect the dominant
culture of the country from media distortions but have in fact often
encouraged these. They have used anti-Hindu propaganda projected through
the media both in the West and in India to try to keep Hindus suppressed
and afraid of asserting themselves, so that there is no Hindu challenge
to their power. The result is that Hinduism continues under siege and
often with little defence, particularly in this new battleground. Even
Hindu religious groups and leaders are often more concerned about their
own particular faction and seldom willing to come to the defense of the
culture as a whole.

Clearly unless this situation is corrected the future of Hinduism is
threatened or at least diminished. While several Hindu groups have
noticed this problem, it still has yet to be faced and addressed in a
complete manner. Hindu society is becoming aware of their difficulty but
it has yet to really awaken and deal with it in the real world.

The front line of the battle in the world today is no longer on any
particular battlefield with the exchange of bullets or bombs. It lies
now in the media and in the information field, which can be quite as
deadly and poisoning in its results as any battlefield. Even the battles
that are fought with weapons gain much more importance if the media is
there. A few people killed in Israel can become world news and shape
global strategies because of the media. Dozens of people killed in Sudan
or China, where there is no media, will have no effect.

In this information war a different kind of warrior is necessary and a
different strategy is required. This is not an entirely new issue
because there has always been something of an information war in the
clash of cultures, nations and religions that has occurred throughout
history. But today it has much more importance in the information age
and has become the central issue.

Each culture has its intellectual defenders. These are its great
thinkers who articulate its cultural values. These intellectual
defenders serve to challenge negative views of the culture. They also
serve to present a more favorable image of the culture and define its
future. Hindus traditionally had their Kshatriya or warrior class to
defend them. There has always been an intellectual Kshatriya as well,
those who defend the culture from attack in the realm of ideas, which
usually precedes or accompanies physical attack.

However Hindus today have failed perhaps more than any other group to
create a defense for their culture in the media world. Hindus are
routinely portrayed through stereotypes of caste, dowry deaths, widow
burning, strange cults, poverty and superstition. The worship of Shiva
appears in The New York Times as the phallic cult of the God of
destruction. Krishna is portrayed in Western universities as an erotic
God with questionable morals. Brahmins appear in the Western media as
rich landowners oppressing their poor slave Shudras, right out of
communist propaganda stories.

The world mass media seldom considers any Hindu point of view. Though
Hindus are the third largest religion in the world, and the largest
non-biblical tradition, in many presentations of world religions Hindus
are left out or denigrated as polytheists, idolaters and animists. Some
universities in the West teach that Hinduism is not a religion at all
but a collection of cults mainly of a primitive nature. Such schools
also teach that India as a nation was created by the British and was
otherwise just a collection of warring states with little in common.

Though India is the largest democracy in the world and the second most
populated country, it has no permanent seat on the U.N. Security
Council. In events of global importance neither an Indian or a Hindu
point of view is given much consideration.  In Bangladesh Hindus are
under siege and frequently have their property taken from them. In
Pakistan Hindus have been almost entirely eliminated. In neither country
has there ever been any prominent Hindu leaders or government officials.
In Fiji Hindus are routinely oppressed. In Malaysia they have to accept
an inferior position, where Hindus can be converted to Islam but no
Muslims can become Hindus. When Hindus work in Islamic Gulf countries
Hindus have to hide their religion. Saudi Arabia requires that India
send only a Muslim ambassador and India has always meekly complied,
bowing down to a nation with 1/20 its population!

In India itself foreign missionary activity is perhaps at its highest
point in history, particularly targeting tribal groups, even to the
extent of encouraging them to secede from the nation and form Christian
states. In South India Catholic priests routinely dress up like Hindu
Swamis and go to the villages speaking of Yoga and Vedanta in order to
convert Hindus to Christianity. Yet Hindus seldom raise a voice and the
world hardly knows of these facts. And, most strangely, it is the media
of India that works probably the hardest to suppress knowledge of these
goings on.

In America the large Islamic lobbyist money works to promote a positive
image of Islam and does not hesitate to denigrate Hindus or India. In
England Pakistanis organize to create a political influence and bend
their politicians to criticize India on Kashmir, while Hindus in the
same country, in perhaps larger numbers and affluence, do little to
counter this. There are many other examples of the same phenomenon, a
Hindu indifference to the media that puts them at a disadvantage even in
their own country.

What Hindus need today, in fact what the whole world needs is an
intellectual Kshatriya or intellectual warrior class. It needs a group
of dedicated workers and activists who uphold the Dharma against this
media and information onslaught. Such individuals must be above
commercial manipulation and self-promotion, working tirelessly to
counter this disinformation flood.

Yet this movement must start in India and in the Hindu community itself
to be really credible. For example, when Hindus in America complained
against media distortions of Hindu groups in India to *The New York
Times* they were told that the information came from Delhi itself.
Clearly the change must start in India to have any real effect.

In India the English language media is generally anti-Hindu and often
pro-Marxist. The universities in India are frequently dominated by
professors whose heart is not in the Dharma of their country but in
Western materialism. Kerala and Bengal today remain under the yoke of
communist governments. In Kerala Hindu workers are being killed. In
Bengal Hindu sadhus are commonly attacked. It is no wonder that Hindus
outside of India are subject to oppression, when Hindus in India itself
are under siege.

The Vedas say that Brahma or spiritual power and Kshatra or political
power must go together. When Brahma or spiritual power develops it
creates an appropriate Kshatra or social power to extend its influence
into society. It provides a dharmic order to our human relations, both
individual and collective. If Brahma or spiritual power fails to impact
the social order and raise the social Dharma, then it is a sign that
this Brahma or spiritual power itself has failed, that it is not
legitimate or real.

Sri Krishna, the great avatar, worked throughout his life to create a
dharmic Kshatriya, an order of noble souls who could establish and
sustain a dharmic social order. He was willing to promote a great
battle, a civil war among the Kshatriyas themselves, to allow his
handpicked dharmic Kshatriya followers to gain power. He purified the
Indian Kshatriya with the blood of a dharmic war. Because of his great
achievement a Kshatriya order was established that maintained a dharmic
society for many centuries. This example should not be lost on us today.
The Kshatriya of India today, its social and political leaders, require
a similar dharmic purification, perhaps not a Kurukshetra in the literal
sense but a purification from false values and egoistic practices that
are rampant everywhere.

Let us also look at the example of the great Swami Vidyaranya of
Sringeri, an Advaitin and a Mayavadin, who yet inspired two Hindu
Kshatriyas who had become Muslims to reconvert to Hinduism and found the
great Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar to protect the Dharma. Would not one
say that if all is Maya or illusion, why would a great Swami start a
kingdom? Such a question shows a profound misunderstanding of Hindu
Dharma. One can only transcend the world by fulfilling one’s dharma and
one’s karma, and even if one has done so for oneself, one still has the
duty to others to teach, guide and raise the world. Let us also look at
the example of Samartha Ramadas, who inspired the great King Shivaji.

Unfortunately so far modern India has not created a Prime Minister of
this sort of inspiration. Many modern Hindus, taking up an excessive
view of non-violence, have rejected the idea of any Hindu Kshatriya
altogether. They have felt that Hindus should not have an army and
should not defend themselves against violence, but should rather offer
themselves meekly to their enemies. This attitude has naturally led to
the idea that Hindus should not even challenge media distortions of
them.

However in the Vedic view a country cannot exist without a Kshatriya
order, which is the pillar of the society. The Mahabharata states that
if there is not a righteous Kshatriya rulership that employs the *danDa*
(rod) or is willing to punish adharma, then the people will end up
eating each other. In the information age we could say that if Hindus do
not create an intellectual Kshatriya then the people will end up
destroying themselves with false beliefs and propaganda.

If a dharmic Kshatriya is not created through the force of Brahma or
spiritual knowledge, then the law is that an adharmic Kshatriya will
come to fill in the vacuum. This is exactly what occurred not only in
modern India but throughout the rest of the world. After the excessive
non-violence in the Indian independence movement no genuine Kshatriya
could or was created in the country. This left the country prey to a
false Kshatriya, based mainly upon Marxist ideals, mixed with war lord
temperaments, such as we have found in communist countries, who
similarly have misled the people and prevented the real growth of the
nation.

One must remember the example of the Sikhs in India. Originally a purely
spiritual movement, they were forced to take up arms and to adapt a
Kshatriya order by the cruel oppression perpetrated against them by the
Muslim rulers of the time, in which torture and genocide was the rule of
the day. In this way they grew and flourished and became a force to be
reckoned with.

Unfortunately India as a whole at that time did not take up the call of
Sikh Dharma, which was the call for a real Kshatriya revival. The
resurgent voice of Hindu Dharma that both Brahma and Kshatra are
required, that spiritual knowledge must create a strong social order and
discipline, was muffled. This movement of a new spiritual Kshatriya of
modern Hindus, which the Sikhs began, needs to be completed today, not
only for the regeneration of Hindu society but for the revival of
Sanatana Dharma or the universal tradition of truth throughout the
world. But it must be completed not so much in the field of arms as in
the field of ideas. The only Kshatriya that can carry the day today is
the intellectual Kshatriya.

Hindus must create a new intelligentsia that has the power to overcome
and absorb the alienated and Western dominated intellectuals of India.
Hindus must project an intellectual view that is articulate and
compelling. They must bring the influence of Sanatana Dharma to the
intelligentsia of the world. For a culture that has produced such
thinkers as the Vedic seers, Upanishadic sages, Kapila, Buddha,
Patanjali and Shankara, and in the modern times Sri Aurobindo and Ramana
Maharshi, this is certainly possible. In fact we can find in such great
modern figures of India as Sri Aurobindo and Swami Vivekananda good
models of intellectual Kshatriya as well as spiritual masters. Clearly
the success of Hindus in such intellectual fields as science, computers,
engineering and medicine shows that they have the capacity. What is
lacking is the motivation, the guidance, and perhaps the inspiration.

Another mistake Hindus have made is being too accommodating under the
guise of synthesis, which erodes clear thinking. Under the guise that
all religions are one Hindus hesitate to develop a proper criticism,
however justified, of the exclusivist creeds working to convert them,
and of other adharmic actions done in the name of religion in the world.
There is also the danger that in trying to attract minorities into their
fold Hindu groups in India will seek to appease minorities rather than
to help them in a dharmic way. The true Kshatriya will help and lead,
giving a positive direction for others to follow, not merely appease and
accommodate in order to gain popularity. A true Kshatriya is devoted to
dharma and cannot be won over by name, fame, influence or money.

The youth in particular need to be awakened to this call for an
intellectual Kshatriya. They have the idealism and the vision of the
future, as well as the vitality, but this needs to be directed not only
by a spiritual urge but one that addresses the problems of society as
well. To be truly relevant, particularly to the youth, this intellectual
voice must address not only the social issues of today but environmental
problems, the role of science, and the future evolution of humanity.

An intellectual Kshatriya must not merely be defensive but creative and
expansive. It must project a positive view of Hindu Dharma, and give it
a futuristic vision. Its purpose is not merely to adjust present or
historical wrongs but chart out a new direction for all to follow. In
this regards Hindu intellectuals must go to the universal roots of their
tradition and find a compelling vision that can gather people of all
backgrounds, helping them break through limited and unspiritual beliefs,
toward a yogic vision of humanity. This is not to water down Hindu
Dharma but to revitalize it in the world today. This new Kshatriya must
be willing to spread Hindu Dharma in a dynamic way along the lines of
the old Vedic impulse - *kriNvanto višvam ãryam*, make all the world
noble.

Such an intellectual Kshatriya must be based upon deep thought. It
cannot be developed through mere rhetoric, character assassination, or
slogans. It requires not only a well thought out critique but a positive
program of action. It requires not only a Hindu examination of religion,
science and politics, but the creation of a Hindu alternative to
existing systems. It also requires a model for revitalizing Hindu
society itself.

For those who wish to take up the role of intellectual Kshatriya there
is much that can be done. An intellectual Kshatriya must challenge media
distortions, whether in schools, books, newspapers, or in the media or
the internet. It must also produce genuine information expressing the
truth of Sanatana Dharma, whether relative to history, art, politics,
religion or philosophy. This means a new revival in the field of Hindu
education, which is perhaps the key factor.

This Hindu intelligentsia must be willing to debate with other groups,
including exposing their distortions and wrong beliefs. It must
resurrect the tradition of *tarka* or intellectual debate that makes the
*darshanas* or philosophies of Hinduism so significant. It must create a
forum in which everything is critically examined so only truth remains.
In short, it must wield the sword of *viveka* or discrimination,
discerning the true from the false, and not bowing down to ignorance
anywhere.

This new intellectual Kshatriya must also throw up an ethical challenge,
which is the challenge of Dharma, exposing the danger of exclusivist
religious cults, materialistic political philosophies, and unchecked
commercialism. The West throws its ethical challenge to the world,
criticizing other countries, including India, for a lack of human
rights. This requires a Hindu response. Let us take an obvious example,
the same America that tries to speak for human rights and democracy all
over the world is also the biggest weapons seller and arms supplier in
the world. The biggest buyers of these weapons are the Gulf Oil
producing Islamic states, none of which are democracies and none of
which have good human rights records, yet none of which are under any
American imposed sanctions. Clearly the Western voice of human rights is
not truly dharmic but motivated by commercial and nationalistic
interests. Hindus need to create an ethical alternative to such
questionable Western humanitarianism.

For it to truly develop, Hindu groups must cultivate and honor their
intellectual Kshatriya, which not only includes listening to them but
promoting their views, and funding their work if necessary. They must
stop hiding in the veil of spirituality and allowing the forces of
adharma to rule the world and even pontificate over their religion,
telling them what it is and what it is worth.

In Western intellectual circles the talk today is of a “clash of
civilizations”. This is mainly spoken of as a clash between the West and
Islam, or a clash between the West and Chinese culture. In this clash of
world civilizations the Hindu has been recognized as one of the players
but has already been written off as minor. Why is this the case? Because
the Hindu voice has only a small place in the world sphere whether
politically, economically or intellectually. Clearly without an
intellectual Kshatriya, Hindus will not likely be part of this churning
out of a new world order.

Now such may not be pleasant items for Hindus to hear. Should we rather
not speak of Rama and Krishna and forget this turmoil of Kali Yuga, some
might say? True spirituality is not an escape but a transcendence. A
truly spiritual person can face the facts of the world, however
unpleasant, without having to turn away or without losing inner
composure. This is also the message of Rama and Krishna, if we really
look at their lives and actions.

There are those who may fear that an intellectual Hindu Kshatriya may
promote a new Hindu fundamentalism or oppression of minorities in India.
The Hindu Kshatriya tradition is not one of aggression but of
protection, not of forcing conversion to a religion but upholding the
Dharma. It is a tradition of holding to truth and creating a culture in
which freedom to pursue truth, not only in the outer world, but in the
religious realm, is preserved. Is this not what the global age really
requires? It is time for that Kshatriya to arise again. The extent that
it does will be the measure of the future of India and perhaps of any
dharmic revival in this generally adharmic world. Let us hope that this
call is heeded! Who is there to answer it?  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


