+++
title = "03 2. Ideological Defence of Hindu Society SITA RAM GOEL"

+++
**2. Ideological Defence of Hindu Society**  
SITA RAM GOEL

1\. Ideological aggression, if not resisted in proper time, leads
invariably to physical aggression.

2\. Instead of promoting a physical clash, ideological defence

> i\. prevents it most of the time because the aggressor stands warned
> that he would be resisted;
>
> ii\. or minimises one-sided violence because the victim also stands
> well-prepared;
>
> iii\. and often helps the aggressor to drop his habit because he comes
> to know that the other side knows his designs or that there is another
> side of the story.

3\. Hindu society has been facing ideological aggression.

> i\. from Islam, for more than thirteen hundred years with the result
> that Islam has gained a large population of converts who have staged
> repeated rounds of violence besides partitioning the country and
> forming permanently hostile states on both sides of our borders;
>
> ii\. from Christianity, for nearly five hundred years with the result
> that native converts in the North-East now feel sufficiently strong to
> mount a series of violent insurrections;
>
> iii\. from Communism, for more than fifty years during which we have
> witnessed several rounds of violence.

4\. Hindu history goes to show that Hindu society has rarely put forward
an ideological defence and all along tried to correct the aggressor by
the catholicity of its spiritual culture.

5\. While Hindu society has survived due to its intrinsic strength, it
has not been able to stop ideological aggression followed by physical
aggression, and has suffered staggering losses in terms of territory,
population and morale, which is more important.  
 

**II**

6\. By now Hindu society has been thrown on the defensive to such an
extent that even a mild protest against further aggression invites
accusations of intolerance, communalism and chauvinism.

7\. The aggressive ideologies operating within the Hindu homeland have
entrenched themselves in the shape of whole communities and have many
centres and seminaries which send out an ever-increasing number of
ideologically equipped cadres for spreading their tentacles farther a
field.

8\. Being foreign in their origins, these ideologies have powerful
international allies who provide to them massive aid and abetment -
financial, diplomatic and moral-psychological.

9\. On the other hand, traditional Hindu saints, sannyasins and scholars
have not been able to meet the challenge

> i\. either because it does not register in their awareness on account
> of their total preoccupation with indigenous themes;
>
> ii\. or because they regard these aggressive ideologies as similar to
> Hindu sects which have to be accommodated in the over-all framework of
> traditional Hindu tolerance;
>
> iii\. or because they do not understand the true character and
> dimensions of aggression, even when they recognise it as such.

10\. The English-educated Hindu elite which controls the commanding
heights in government, educational institutions and mass media has
failed the test

> i\. either because it has become indifferent to Hindu society as a
> result of having imbibed the current cosmopolitan culture;
>
> ii\. or because it has been trained to look at Hindu society through
> eyes which are not of its own ancestral culture and, as a result, has
> become sceptical about, if not actually hostile to the merits of Hindu
> society;
>
> iii\. or because it is too ignorant of Hindu spirituality, cultural
> creativity, social philosophy and historical traditions to put up a
> worthwhile defence even when it is sympathetic and wants to stop the
> aggression.

11\. This desperate situation has been made more difficult by a
degenerate politics through which vote-hungry, sloganised, short-sighted
and nominally Hindu politicians

> i\. weaken Hindu society by dividing it on the basis of caste, sect,
> language and region;
>
> ii\. disarm Hindu society by sanctimonious and one-sided appeals in
> the name of traditional Hindu tolerance;
>
> iii\. strengthen alienated and aggressive communities by supporting
> their separatist demands in the name of secularism.

  
**III**

12\. It is high time for Hindu society to take up a determined stand
against ideological aggression and organise its own defence on an
ideological basis.

13\. The defence has to be simultaneous on two fronts:

> i\. strengthening, reforming, revitalizing and reaffirming our own
> religious, cultural, educational and social institutions and
> traditions;
>
> ii\. exposing the true character of aggressive ideologies with
> reference to their own sources and history and in the light of Hindu
> thought.

14\. The first task has to be shouldered mainly by Hindu religious
leaders and socio-cultural movements, though there is ample scope for
Hindu scholarship to present the deeper unity of Hindu schools of
thought and spirituality, of Hindu cultural variety and of Hindu social
traditions, as also the heroic strain in Hindu history, with a view to
restore Hindu pride in its own rich heritage.

15\. The second task is essentially that of Hindu scholarship which can
collect, collate, interpret and present correct knowledge not only about
the character of aggressive ideologies but also about their means and
methods.  
 

**IV**

16\. This ideological struggle for defence of Hindu society and against
aggressive ideologies has to be viewed and waged not only in the Indian
context but also on a global scale so that

> i\. we find our own international allies in ideological forces which
> are in accord with our own culture;
>
> ii\. we are able to turn back the aggressive ideologies in their own
> bases abroad.

  
**V**

17\. A start can be made in the shape of a Hindu Centre in India which

> i\. will contact and bring together whatever scholars with a Hindu
> perspective are already available in the country;
>
> ii\. reorient such scholars as have the requisite intellectual
> equipment but lack the Hindu perspective;
>
> iii\. train new scholars with a Hindu perspective in different
> disciplines.

18\. In due course, this Centre can become the mother of many more
centres in India and abroad, all of which can be, at some stage,
coordinated into an International Hindu Centre.  
 

**VI**

19\. Utmost care should be taken to see that the whole effort in
developing this scholarship is thought-oriented and not status-oriented,
which means that

> i\. scholars who have the Hindu perspective as also the courage to
> present it publicly should be cultivated and honoured;
>
> ii\. scholars who have the Hindu perspective but not the courage to
> present it publicly in the prevailing atmosphere should be given every
> support so that they come out into the open;
>
> iii\. scholars who have status in the present set-up but not the Hindu
> perspective should be ignored or at least not provided with an
> additional platform;
>
> iv\. scholars who play the tune for whoever pays them should be
> scrupulously avoided.

  
**VII**

20\. The Hindu perspective relating to different problems and fields of
scholarship can be evolved by a committee of religious and
socio-cultural leaders and scholars who have given thought to the
current situation.

21\. Another committees of men of means and influence should be formed
to raise the necessary resources.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This was written at the behest of Shri K.S. Sudarshan of the RSS to
serve as the working paper of a series of seminars at different places
in the country. The first seminar was held at the Deen Dayal Research
Institute, New Delhi, in 1983 and was attended by several bigwigs of the
RSS as well as the VHP. The writer of the working paper had also been
invited. But when he saw the working paper that was distributed to the
participants, he found that it was not the paper he had written but its
“summary” distilled by some Sangh scribe. The logic, language and spirit
of the original paper had been more or less completely knocked out. (The
Sangh Parivar never touches anything which does not originate from
within it, or unless it has been messed up by one of its members. No
Hindu outside the Sangh Parivar carries any credit with the Parivar
unless the person has status either in terms of wealth or in the eyes of
the secularist establishment.) The discussion that followed was a free
for all, the underlying refrain being that the Sangh “knows it all, has
always known it, and can and will solve all problems in due course”. The
only substantial contribution was made by an RSS lawyer hailing from
Anantnag in Kashmir. “I have studied Islam in depth,” he said, “and
found it to be a great religion. I cannot understand anyone placing
Islam in the dock.” Ironically enough this defender of Islam was
literally the first to be shot dead when the ethnic cleansing started in
the Valley in the winter of 1989. The V.P. Singh Government with I.K.
Gujral as its Minister of External Affairs, provided the opportunity the
Islamic terrorists were waiting for.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


