+++
title = "19 "

+++
<div align="right">

**16. Shiv Goud**

</div>

I have received your pamphlet “Time for Stock Taking”, and gone through
it in detail.

Your first document mentions the attitude of Hindu organizations towards
the Muslims problem.

Only Hindus who are unware of the Vedas, say that there is no harm in
adding Jesus and Mohammed to the 33 crore Hindu gods and goddesses. It
is an indication of the slave mentality of Hindus. Christianity and
Islam are Semitic religions. Both of them waged religious wars against
each other but did not accept the religion of the other party, as equal
to their own.

During the Freedom Struggle, Congress said that unless there is unity
between Hindus and Muslims India cannot get independence; therefore,
Muslims were adamant for Pakistan. India was divided at the instance of
Muslims who had never joined the national stream. Pakistan was carved
out of India for the sake of Muslims but the majority of Muslims were
allowed to stay in India, whereas Hindus were wiped out from Pakistan.

There were patriots like V.D. Savarkar who studied the Muslim mentality
microscopically and proposed that instead of crying for Hindu-Muslim
unity we must say, “If the Muslims join the Hindus, with them; if they
do not join, without them, and if they oppose, inspite of them, Hindus
will carry on the struggle for freedom.” Congress leaders did not accept
this proposition and yielded to the demand of Pakistan.

Hindus go to pray at Muslim shrines but not a single Muslim goes to a
Hindu temple and offers even a scent stick. Christians and Muslims are
happy that Hindus are yielding to their dogmas, and adding their Prophet
and Son of God to Hindu gods.

Those Hindus who are for adding Jesus and Mohammed are ignorant of
Christianity and Islam. Without studying the Bible and the Quran, they
are carelessly going for addition, without caring for the harmful
effectas.

Some Hindus wrote “Allopanishad” during the reign of emperor Akbar. They
equated Allah with Eashwar. The same sort of Hindus wrote in the
Bhavishya Purana and the Kalki Purana saying that not only Adam, Noah,
Moses, Christ and Mohammed are Avathara Purushas but also emperor Akbar
and Aurangazeb are Avathars.

Mahatma Gandhi renamed Maharushi Vashista as Maulvi Vashista and
Maharani Sita as Begum Sahiba Sita. But these concessions made no
difference to the Muslim hostility to Hindus.

Hindus are not following the correct path shown by Swami Dayananda, the
founder of Arya Samaj, who wept on their ignorance and suicidal acts.

Islam is a political religion and there is no place for spirituality in
it. Political power is paradise for the Muslims.

It is wrong to say that all religions (including Islam) lead to God. The
mountain is visible but not God. To reach the top of the mountain a man
can go by such a way as is feasible for him. But invisible God is known
only by Yoga which is not found in Christianity and Islam. It is not a
correct approach to compare God with a mountain or any visible matter.

Islam is not good because it teaches that any thief, drunkard and
adulterer can go to paradise if he accepts Islam.

If one Muslim converts to Hindu Dharma they threaten to take his life,
whereas many Hindus are being converted to Islam and Christianity but no
Hindu is worried about their conversions. Sufis are as fanatical as
other fanatical Muslims.

During the Freedom Struggle, Congress gave a call for Hindu-Muslim unity
but India was divided; the same leaders have given the call of
Secularism to convert India into Islamistan and Isaistan. Government of
India has failed to check the flow of foreign money for spreading
foreign religions in India.

The R.S.S. says there is no harm in adding Christ and Mohammed as Hindu
gods. Jews do not accept Christ as the Son of God and Mohammed as a
prophet. Christians do not accept Muhammed as a prophet. But Hindus can
go to any suicidal length to appease the Christians and Muslims.

I find it timely to quote from a book, *Sayings of Ayotollah Khomeini*,
translated from Persian into French in 1979 and then into English in
1980. The book was published in the USA and Canada, by Bantam Boks Inc.,
in 1980 (ISBN 0-55-14032-9), and carries an introduction by Clive
Irving:

> 1\. ‘Moslems have no alternative, if they wish to correct the
> political balance of society and those in power to conform to the laws
> and principles of Islam, to an armed holy war against profane
> Governments.’ (pp. 3-4).
>
> 2\. *‘Holy war means the conquest of all non-Moslem territories.* Such
> a war may well be declared after the formation of an Islamic
> Government worthy of that name, at the direction of the Islamic Imam
> or under his orders. It will then be the duty of every able-bodied
> adult male to volunteer for this war of conquest, the final aim of
> which is to put Koranic Law in power from one end of the earth to the
> other.’ (p. 4).
>
> 3\. ‘We have no recourse other than to overthrow all governments that
> do not rest on pure Islamic principles and are thus corrupt and
> corrupting, and to tear down the traitorous, rotten, unjust, and
> tyrannical administrative systems that serve them. That is not only
> our duty in Iran, but it is also the duty of all Moslems in the world,
> in all Moslem-countries, to carry the Islamic political revolution to
> its final victory.’ (p. 6).
>
> 4\. ‘We affirm that music engenders immorality, lust and
> licentiousness, and stifles courage, valour, and the chivalrous
> spirit; it is forbidden by Koranic laws and must not be taught in the
> schools. Radio Teheran, by broadcasting Western, Oriental and Iranian
> music plays a nefarious role by introducing immorality and
> licentiousness into respectable families.’ (p. 12).
>
> 5\. ‘The Constitution, the civil code, and the criminal code should be
> inspired only by Islamic laws contained in the Koran and transcribed
> by the Prophet. Islamic Government is the Government of divine right,
> and its laws cannot be changed, modified, or contested.’ (p. 15).
>
> 6\. ‘It is often proclaimed that religion must be separated from
> politics, and that the ecclesiastical world should keep out of affairs
> of State. It is proclaimed that high Moslem clerical authorities have
> no business mixing into the social and political decisions of the
> Government. Such proclamations can come only from atheists; they are
> dictated and spread by imperialists. Was politics separate from
> religion in the time of the Prophet (God salute him, him and his
> faithful)? Was there a distinction at that time between the religious
> and the functionaries of the State? Were religious and temporal powers
> separate in the times of the Caliphs? Those are aberrations invented
> by the imperialists with a view to turning the clergy life of Moslem
> peoples, and thus to getting a free hand to pillage their faith.’ (pp.
> 16-17).
>
> 7\. ‘If the enemy attacks the borders of an Islamic country, it is the
> sacred duty of all Moslems in the world to defend it by every means in
> their power, by giving of their wealth or of their persons. They need
> await no permission to fulfil this duty.’ (p. 18).
>
> 8\. ‘In certain cases deception is necessary for the maintenance of
> Islam and of religion in general; without it faith could not survive.’
> (p. 24).
>
> 9\. ‘The person who governs the Moslem community must always have its
> interests at heart and not his own. This is why Islam has put so many
> people to death to safeguard the interests of the Moslem community.
> Islam has obliterated many tribes because they were sources of
> corruption and harmful to the welfare of Moslems.’ (p. 28).
>
> 10\. ‘There are eleven things which are impure; urine, excrement,
> sperm, bones, blood, dogs, pigs, non-Moslem men and women, wine, beer,
> and the sweat of the excrement-eating camel.’ (p. 48).
>
> 11\. ‘Every part of the body of a non-Moslem individual is impure,
> even the hair on his hand and his body hair, his nails, and all the
> secretions of his body.’ (p. 51).
>
> 12\. ‘Wine and all other intoxicating beverages are impure, but opium
> and hashish are not.’ (p. 52).

**Footnotes:**

The writer is an Advocate from Sangareddy, District Medak, in Andhra
Pradesh.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


