+++
title = "24  II"

+++
<div align="right">

**21.  S.D. Laghate**

</div>

I have come across the booklet “Time for stock taking: a swayamsevak
speaks”. Since responses are invited on the opinions expressed therein,
I am writing this piece. I fully agree with the views expressed by Dr.
Shreerang Godbole in the booklet and I think concepts about Islam and
Muslim problem should be made clear to every intelligent Hindu so that
he may not be beguiled by propaganda which has gained authenticity and
support from the powers that be.

However, with due respect to Dr. Godbole I humbly suggest as per the
following. Some basic facts should be well-digested before launching
attack on the Sangh Parivar on this account. Sangh was established to
unite Hindu society. Dr. Hedgewar insisted on keeping its activities
confined to that single objective with devotion. Whatever changes may
have taken place in the recent years in Hindu society, the need to unite
it has not diminished a bit. Dr. Hedgewar stated that all problems will
be solved once the objective of Hindu unity is achieved. RSS should not
waste its energy by going after solving one problem after another,
dividing its attention from the main objective.

Islam may be, and certainly is, a problem with Muslims as stated by Dr.
Godbole, but for Hindus it is a problem with Hindu society. Unaware of
their own worth, Hindus are deluded to conversion by other faiths or to
have high esteem for them.

Therefore RSS insists on arousing Hindus to value their own heritage and
to judge other faiths and themselves too on that basis. Solving problems
including Muslim problem, should not be given priority.

RSS wants to work for Hindu unity without creating enemies - *sarveshãm
avirodhen* - even among Muslims.

Dr. Hedgewar did not see Sangh as an instrument aliened from Hindu
society to serve it. He wanted the Sangh to be one with the entire
society and not a part of it. He never aspired to achieve a distinctive
identity for the RSS as a service project or as the “Guru” for Hindus.
He wanted the society itself to act in unison, taking inspiration from
Sangh workers. Though Sangh is progressively attracting more public
response, it should not get confused about its role.

This is the basic feature which distinguishes the Sangh from other Hindu
organisations. A precaution in this approach is that workers should not
waste their energy in criticizing their own Hindu brothers. Everybody
has his limitations and failings. We should own him with all his
limitations and failings, support him in his endeavours towards the
cause and guide him to adopt better ways. According to Swami Vivekanand
the most significant evil in Hindu society is that they do not allow
their brother to rise, they pull his legs. They fight among themselves
on flimsy grounds. Many a Hindu organisations have been working for
certain Hindu causes, but they failed because they fell into the trap of
correcting and criticizing fellow Hindus instead of concentrating on
constructive work by gaining sympathy of the society in general.

Speciality of Hinduism has been that it accepts all varieties of
thoughts, at the same time keeping in mind the only and the ultimate
truth.  It does not insist on specification but states the truth in
terms relevant to the audience and occasion to command, first of all,
respect from them, step by step.

Thus, we should speak about Muslim problem, whatever its dimension and
intensity today, as one of many problems faced by Hindu society and not
launch “jihad” against it, though Hindu-baiters try their best to
instigate. Our arguments should address to the situation. Rigidly
sticking to gospel is not the Hindu way. There is an inherent danger of
losing grip on the main problem in dwelling on a single one separately.

RSS is in business to solve the problem of lack of unity in Hindus.
Solving Muslim problem is not of that importance. RSS has to have only
some approach towards Muslims and it should be inviting one, not
arrogant. Without strong and united Hindu force, neither Hindu masses
nor Muslims are going to listen to its rhetoric, and when Hindutva will
gain enough force, nobody will dare to neglect its opinion. It is
obvious that Hindutva forces have not reached such a stage yet. Let us
not try to divert our attention from our singular aim, of gaining
strength.

Dr. Godbole admits that VHP is trying to reconvert Muslims and
Christians to Hindu fold which in theory means that ultimately Sangh
Parivar believes in reconverting them to Hindu fold. If there seems to
be some deviation in public utterances of RSS leaders they are for
public consumption. It is an attempt to get foothold in conscience of
the public still under spell of vicious propaganda. Writers like us are
there to correct the impression whenever possible.

Hindu disposition is not for dividing people into two confronting camps
like believers and non-believers, haves and have-nots etc. Hindu way of
life is to create new vistas to accommodate variety of life-styles and
opinions. They give a long rope and many opportunities to the inquisitor
and believe that, if sincere, the inquisitor will ultimately come around
to the right path. Therefore a strategy of four stages is envisaged:
“Saam, Daam, Dand and Bhed”. We have to choose out of these four means,
keeping the strength of our society in mind. Generally, leaders have
unrealistic ideas about strength and weakness of society or they are
highly adventurous. Such leaders have caused a deep scar on the
confidence of Hindu society. Need of the hour is to achieve first and
then talk about concepts leading to that achievement, not the vice
versa. RSS leaders have shown remarkable acumen so far in this regard.

Whatever shortcomings of Islam and Christianity theoretically, they did
not collapse within a century like Communism. If we know about their
vulnerability and failings, we should also pay more attention to points
of strength which have sustained them over centuries and by which they
are still reigning supreme in the vast world today. Ignoring this hard
fact will not bring us any nearer to success. Our strategy should be
based on balanced judgement. They fight unitedly against enemy, though
between themselves they are not exactly friendly.

Hindu is not beguiling, aggressive or cruel like them. He is known for
his mildness because he is sure of his bearings and his staunch belief
in the dictum that truth will ultimately prevail. Why should we act in a
way derogatory to our nature?

The truth is that Hindus should unite to propagate the Sanatan Dharma.
Let there be many ways of expressing it. Let us emulate their strategy,
not their philosophy.  
 

**II**

*Shri Laghate had sent a copy his Response to Dr. Shreerang Godbole
whose rejoinder is reproduced in the lines that follow.*

1\) Thank you for your letter dt. 6-12-96 and the copy of your response
to ‘Time for Stock Taking’ published by ‘Voice of India’. In sending a
response, you seem to be an exception. I had sent copies of my booklet
to all the state and local level RSS functionaries and some related
intellectuals. They are all silent. It may interest you to know that I
had sent a copy of my original letter (to Shri Sudarshanji) to Shri
Dattopant Thengadi for his specific answers, with the additional
question: if you truly feel that all religions are worthy of equal
respect, will you advise the VHP to give up its campaign of
‘parãvartan’? This ‘tallest intellectual of the Sangh Parivar’ has not
cared to reply! One cannot run with the hare and hunt with the hound. In
his vague reply sent to me, Shri Sudarshanji seems to be rankled by my
description of Hindu leaders as stubbornly ignorant and asks me how I
reached this conclusion. Shri Sudarshanji’s statement shows Hindu
leaders in poor fight. It simply means that they are deliberately
misleading their followers. Knowledge is the cure for ignorance. What is
the cure for pretence? In your covering letter, you say that as a
swayamsevak, it is not right to raise controversy against the
organisation. Let us be clear. The RSS is the means, Hindu welfare is
the end. The means can never be greater than the end.

2\) You say that the RSS is in the business to solve the problem of lack
of unity in the Hindus and solving Muslim problem is not of that
importance and should not be given priority. This line of thinking is
simply incomprehensible to me. Could a similar thinking have been
responsible for the inertia of RSS leaders in preventing partition of
India? (The laudable relief work done amongst the refugees is an
entirely different matter.) The Muslim (or Islamic as I see it) problem
will not go away simply because Hindus are consolidated. It can go only
with the demise of Islam in the hearts and minds of its adherents.

3\) One need not be so overawed by the sacrifices made by Hindu leaders
that one should shy away from pointing their mistakes. I myself have the
highest regard for all the great sacrifices made by RSS leaders. That
does not prevent me from showing their mistakes as I see them. Hindus
have paid a terrible price for not questioning their revered leaders
like Tilak (Lucknow Pact) and Gandhi. At least, these leaders could be
excused for doing what they felt was right (though sincerity of purpose
is no excuse for ignorance). Apparently, they had not studied Islam
through its basic texts. But Shri Sudarshanji refuses to admit any such
ignorance. You too say that some deviation in the public utterances of
RSS leaders is for public consumption. I had been under the impression
that saying one thing and doing another is a prerogative of Catholics
and Communists (Islamists are honest in this respect). You seem to have
contracted this disease from them. Thanks for correcting my impression
Nevertheless, do not forget that one day the mask might become the face.

I hope you do not take my bluntness amiss. I cannot help it. Mincing
words is not my forte.  
 

**III**

*Dr. Godbole had sent to Shri K.S. Sudarshan a copy of his rejoinder to
Shri Laghate. He received a postcard in which Shri Sudarshan said that
“there can be different ways of analyzing and solving any problem”, and
advised him (Godbole) “not to use harsh words towards those who might
disagree”. Dr. Godbole’s reply to Shri Sudarshan is reproduced below:*

1\) I have received your postcard in response to the letter I wrote to
Shri Laghate. I sincerely thank you for always taking time off from your
busy schedule to reply to me.

2\) I am however disappointed that you seem to be concerned with the
style and not the substance of my letter. I shall be happy to change my
style if that helps you to squarely face the issues raised by me.

3\) The process of educating Hindus about Islam started as a trickle
with Dayananda, Vivekananda, Savarkar, Ambedkar, Kurundkar and A.B.
Shah. A seminal contribution has been made in our times by those two
outstanding spokesmen for Hinduism - Ram Swarup and Sita Ram Goel. What
a pity that not a single RSS name figures in this list! In fact, I do
not recall a single “bauddhik” on Islamic thought-patterns (emotional
talks on Muslim behaviour patterns can hardly be called “bauddhiks” in
the true sense of the term). Is this not a subject for Hindu youngsters?
What alarms me is that the RSS platform is nowadays regularly hijacked
by “tablighis” like Mualana Wahiduddin who misguides Hindus about Islam
and all it stands for. They are aided in their efforts by the
pseudo-saintly ‘sarva panth samãdarists’ in the Sangh Parivar.

4\) I wish you would not dismiss my questions by saying there are
different ways to analyse and solve the Muslim problem. Granted there
are different approaches. The question is - are all approaches valid?
Was Gandhiji’s espousal of the Khilafat valid? As a Hindu leader, you
are expected to a take a specific stand on Islam.

5\) I pray that you give specific answers to the following specific
questions:

> a\) Do you truly feel that all religions are worthy of equal respect?
>
> b\) If so, will you disown the VHP’s ‘parãvartan’ campaign?
>
> c\) If not, will you disown the Sarva Panth Samãdar Manch?
>
> d\) If you disown neither, pray enlighten me as to how the activities
> of the two can be reconciled? This is beyond my limited intellect.

6\) My questions may seem repetitive but I cannot help if you choose to
ignore them. Sooner or later, the RSS rank and file (educated on Islam
by **Voice of India**, if not by their own leaders) will haunt you with
such uncomfortable questions. So it is no use ducking them.  
 

**Footnotes:**

The writer is an important member of the Sangh Parivar. He gives his
address as that of the Vishva Hindu Parishad headquarters in New
Delhi.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


