+++
title = "52 "

+++
<div align="right">

**1. Sarva Dharma Samabhãva**  
**or Sarva Dharma Sambhrama?**  
**(Unity or Confusion of Religions?)**  
David Frawley

</div>

A common tenet of Hinduism is “Sarva Dharma Samabhãva,” which literally
means that all Dharmas are equal to or harmonious with each other. In
recent times this statement has been highlighted as meaning that “all
religions are the same” - that all religions are merely different paths
to God or the same spiritual goal. Based on this logic the religious
path that one takes is a matter of personal preference, like choosing
whether to eat rice or chapatis in order to fill one’s stomach. One’s
choice in religion is merely incidental and makes no real difference in
the spiritual direction of one’s life.

From this point of view whether one is Hindu, Buddhist, Christian,
Muslim or whatever, religious belief is not important. Whether one goes
to a temple, church or mosque, it is all the same. Whether one prays to
Jesus or Allah or meditates upon Buddha or Atman, the results will be
similar. All religions are equally valid ways of knowing God or truth.
The outer differences between religions are merely incidental while
their inner core in one, knowledge of the Divine or supreme reality.
Therefore, members of all religious groups should live happily together,
recognizing that there is no real conflict in what they believe in but
only superficial variations of name and form.

This view of Sarva Dharma Samabhãva has been turned into a political
principle in modern India. However, other countries, notably Pakistan
and Bangladesh, have not taken it up. Religions espousing an exclusive
or final revelation like Christianity and Islam have almost uniformly
opposed it. Nor has the idea served to create equality of views even
within Hinduism where different sects still compete with one another.
Therefore, one is compelled to examine this issue further. Is the
equality of all religions a spiritual principle that is fundamentally
true or a wishful statement designed to try to create harmony in spite
of actual differences between groups? And is it the real meaning of
Sarva Dharma Samabhãva?

Let us first examine what Sarva Dharma Samabhãva really means. It is a
statement that all Dharmas are equal. But what are Dharmas? Dharmas are
universal truth principles and natural laws that are eternally true. For
example, the Dharma or property of fire is that it bums. One cannot
imagine a fire that does not burn. Similarly there are ethical and
spiritual principles or Dharmas. Such ethical Dharmas are Yogic
principles like non-harming (*ahiMsã*), truthfulness (*satya*), control
of sexuality (*brahmacharya*), non-stealing (*asteya*), and non-hoarding
(*aparigraha*), the Yamas and Niyamas of Yogic thought. For example,
since no creature wishes to be hurt, to cause suffering to others is a
violation of Dharma, while to seek to alleviate the sufferings of others
promotes Dharma. These are principles of right living valid for people
of all societies and walks of life.

Another such Dharmic principle is the law of karma that tells us that
what we do has consequence both in this and in future lives, both for
ourselves individually and for our world collectively. Understanding the
law of karma we act in such a way as to promote the good of all,
regardless of our outer beliefs or appearances of name and form.
Generally traditions that call themselves Dharmic, like Hinduism and
Buddhism, regard religion as a way of meditation designed to bring us to
union with God or to enlightenment, and to release from the cycle of
rebirth. This could be called the Dharmic way of spiritual development.

Hence the question must arise: Is everything that is taught in religions
throughout the world a Dharmic principle? Certainly all religions teach
us in some way to be good, to tell the truth, to control the senses, and
other principles which are Dharmic. Such principles should be accepted
by whoever they are said, yet these do not require any religious belief
to follow them. They are universal ethical principles and largely
self-evident if we look deeply into the interdependence of all life.

Yet beyond this, religions do not have so much in common. Some religions
have a creator God, while some, like Buddhism and Taoism, do not. While
Dharmic traditions look to enlightenment or Moksha as the goal, for
other religions salvation from sin and heaven and hell are ultimate
realities. Some religions regard the world as only six thousand years
old, others see it as billions of years old. Some allow the use of
images in religious worship, others vehemently oppose these. Some
religions are tolerant and accepting of other beliefs, others are
militant and proselytizing. Religion is as varied as any other cultural
phenomenon like dress, language or art. It is hardly of one piece only,
or only occurring at the highest level. In fact religion is often a
place where worn out superstitions and discriminatory practices are
allowed to continue and often appears among the least enlightened
aspects of human life.

Many religions contain beliefs and dogmas that are not universally true
and some which are not Dharmic at all. Otherwise separative religious
identities and the whole history of religious conflict, holy wars, and
the effort to convert others would have never occurred. There are
adharmic principles in all religions and in some religions, at least at
some times, adharmic principles predominate.

Therefore, the question must arise: Are the dogmas and beliefs of all
religions Dharmas or universal truths? Clearly not. The Christian belief
that Jesus Christ is the only son of God is not a Dharmic principle, an
eternal or universal truth, but a belief or imagination of certain
people over a limited period of time. It is an idea conditioned by time,
place and person that cannot be acceptable to everyone. The Islamic
belief that Mohammed is the last prophet is also not a Dharma, but an
identification of truth with a particular person and a specific
historical revelation. Nor is the belief that an historical revelation
like the Bible or the Koran is the Word of God a Dharma or universal law
but the opinion of a particular community.

An eternal heaven and hell are also not Dharmic principles. This idea
proposes an eternal reward or punishment for transient deeds, which
violates the law of karma. While one could argue that such beliefs can
be employed as a means to lead people to Dharma, instilling moral and
ethical virtues on the ignorant, it is also clear that they can be used
for adharmic principles of social domination. Even within Dharmic
traditions are things which are not Dharmic. For example, a caste system
determined by birth is not Dharmic. It does not reflect the nature of
individuals, of which birth is only one factor, and not necessarily the
main one.

So clearly some of the fundamental and primary tenets of different
religions are not Dharmic or universal but limited and therefore
sectarian and divisive in their application. Above all we must recognize
that dogma is not Dharma. That we should respect all Dharmas should not
translate into respecting all dogmas and refusing to question them,
which itself is adharmic. That all Dharmas are one should not be used as
an excuse for adharma to hide itself or place itself beyond question.
That Dharma is one does not mean that adharma should be able to hide
itself in the garb of religion.

While we should respect Dharma wherever we find it, we need not accept
dogma in order to do it. In fact where there is dogma there is no
Dharma. Dogma is an unquestioned belief held to be true by faith alone,
even if it is irrational. Dharma is a universal law that we can discover
through objective inquiry, questioning all dogmas and preconceptions. To
uphold the unity of Dharma we cannot sanction and protect all dogmas. To
raise the banner of Dharma we must question dogma and the darkness of
religious belief, not just in our own religion but in all religions.

Hinduism is the only religion in the world that has defined itself as
Sanatana Dharma or the universal and eternal Dharma.  It does not
require belief or dogma, though it does have its culturally conditioned
forms and vehicles to promote Dharma. Hindu Dharma has tried to accept
all Dharmic principles and to include all these within itself. Buddhism
and Jainism also are called Dharmas and aim at Dharma, sharing the basic
principles of karma, enlightenment, and Yogic practices as Hinduism,
though defined differently.

However, Western and specially missionary religions have never accepted
the Dharmic traditions of India as valid. They are continuing a campaign
to discredit and displace dharmic traditions. They generally insist that
even a good person cannot gain salvation unless he has the proper
religious belief. A good Hindu, by this account, cannot gain
Divine-favor unless he converts and becomes a Christian or a Muslim.
That is, the Dharma or nature of a person is not the deciding factor in
missionary religions but the belief or the dogma that people accept.

Sometimes the further point is made by certain thinkers that, though
religions do have their differences that can be major, they also contain
an inner dimension of mystical teachings that are the same. However, if
we look deeply, we do not find unanimity among mystics either. There are
different views of Moksha and NirvãNa within Buddhist and Hindu
traditions. Christian and Islamic mystics seldom accept the law of karma
and often insist upon heaven or paradise as the highest. There are many
levels and stages of mystical experience between ordinary human
consciousness and the highest Self-realization which can be quite varied
and not free of illusion. Hence while mystics in different religions may
have more in common, they hardly teach the same thing. In fact some
mystics have been missionaries or taken militant roles in crusades and
jihads.

Other thinkers hold that what the original teachers of religions taught
was the same but that their followers later misunderstood or distorted
the teachings, for example that what Jesus, Mohammed and Krishna
originally taught were the same. Yet if we look closely at the existent
teachings of such religious leaders we find very different approaches.
Books like the Koran and the Gita are hardly alike either in their tone
or teaching. If religions differ so much in the world, there is no
reason to believe that their founders must have taught the same thing.
Besides if the majority of the believers today see their religion in a
certain light we must take that as the measure of the religion, not some
mystical view of the religion that most of its believers regard as
heresy.

That we might not regard all religions as the same, however, does not
mean that there is no value in different religions. We can honor
religions for what they have to offer historically, culturally, and
intellectually, without having to make them into something Divine and
not to be questioned. The Bible, for example, is an extraordinary book
with much great history, poetry, and wisdom. But it is hardly the Word
of God, true in all respects or for all time and all people. In this
regard all religions are part of our human legacy and must be
understood, just as all the events and leaders of a nation must be
examined to understand its history.

While we should be open to truth wherever we find it, this does not mean
that we have to accept all religions as true in order to do so. That
there is some aspect of truth in all religions does not mean that all
aspects of all religions are true, or that all religions are essentially
the same. There is an aspect of truth in art, science and non-religious
aspects of human culture. Does Sarva Dharma Samabhãva require equating
all these as well?

Hence we must be careful in associating Dharma with religion and
insisting that different religions are inherently as harmonious as
different Dharmas. In fact different religions have inherent
disharmonies that will require much time, study and communication to
sort out. These have caused much of the misunderstanding that exists in
the world, in which prayers to God have regularly accompanied the call
to war and aggression.

Hindu votaries of Sarva Dharma Samabhãva often tell a Christian to be a
better Christian or a Muslim to be a better Muslim, and would not
encourage them to become Hindus, as if these religions contain the same
teachings and have the same value as Hinduism. This they think is being
liberal in religious matters and will aid everyone in their quest for
God. However, it only consigns people to the limitations of their
religious beliefs. A religion that does not recognize Self-realization,
God-realization or have any Yogic *sãdhanã*, such as most Western
religions, cannot lead people to Moksha in the Hindu sense. If one wants
to help a person find Moksha, which should be one’s real Dharmic
concern, it is better to tell them to follow what is true, to seek out
the Dharma, even if it may require going against their religion as it is
commonly understood to be.

Sarva Dharma Samabhãva has also been equated with the idea that “Truth
is one but the paths are many.” There is indeed One Truth and many paths
to it. However, this does not mean that all paths must lead to truth.
There are paths that lead to falsehood and paths that lead only to
partial truths. A path can only lead us as far as it goes. A religion
that does not teach any experiential path to Self-realization cannot
take us there. It can only take us to its idea of heaven or salvation
that is its stated goal. Nor are the unity of Truth and monotheism, the
idea that there is only one God, the same teaching. Monotheism is often
an exclusive formulation that divides humanity into the believers and
the non-believers and refuses to accept truth that falls outside of the
boundaries of its belief. The unity of Truth cannot limit itself to
monotheism of a particular persuasion but must honor all spiritual
aspiration whatever form it takes.

The correct term for the common Western idea of religion, which is a
particular belief, in Hindu thought would not be Dharma but *“mata”*
meaning a belief, view or opinion. There is no such possible statement
as “Sarva Mata Samabhãva” or the equality and unity of all opinions.
Opinions are as diverse as the minds of creatures. Nor need we seek to
make all opinions one and the same. Diversity of opinions is necessary
as part of freedom of seeking the truth.

Opinions are various and even contradictory. Some may be right, others
may be wrong. They are speculative views that must be proved in
practice. That fire bums is a Dharma. It is its natural quality. If some
one has the opinion that fire does not burn we don’t have to respect
that idea in order to maintain the universality of all Dharmas. We
should allow everyone to have his or her own opinion about religion,
because the minds of living beings are unique and move in different
paths, but we don’t have to sanction all religious opinions as true in
order to do this.

Religions as we know them from the Western world are largely belief
systems which state that truth belongs to a particular person, group,
holy book, or name of God and that those who do not share this belief
are wrong or evil. I challenge any Christian or Islamic leaders to
contradict this statement and say that Hinduism, Buddhism or other
Dharmic traditions are as good as their religions and that therefore all
efforts to convert followers of Dharmic religions are misguided and
should be ended! If all religions follow the same Dharma let all
religious leaders say that they accept the law of karma as valid and
Self-realization as the real goal of life. Let a pope, bishop, mufti or
mullah proclaim that one can find God without Jesus or Mohammed, the
Bible or the Koran. If they are not saying such things, how can anyone,
state that all religions are the same?

Belief-centered religions based upon time, place and person contain much
that is not universal or valid. The exclusivism of their beliefs has
historically led them to forceful efforts to convert others, which can
be called adharmic. Hence religious exclusivism is the real bar on
social harmony between religious groups. Making all religions the same
has not ended this but, on the contrary, has allowed it to continue
without question. It has placed exclusive beliefs on par with more
tolerant traditions. While there is much adharmic about the social evils
that have arisen in the context of the Hindu religion, there is no
adharma in its core formulation that transcends time, place and person,
and emphasizes the eternal over the historical element in religion. It
does not require an exclusive formulation of truth but is open to
diversity and multiplicity, in fact welcomes it.  
 

**Political Ramifications**

Sarva Dharma Samabhãva has become a political principle in India - that
in order to create social harmony we must honor all religions as the
same, so that religious differences do not fuel social conflicts.
Unfortunately the religious conflicts have continued. This is because
pretending religions are the same, which is all that this principle is
doing, does not address the real differences and misunderstandings
between them.

Sarva Dharma Samabhãva has been used to court the favor of various
religious groups and to uphold vote banks based upon religious belief.
It is often a one-way street. Hindus are told to accept Sarva Dharma
Samabhãva which means that they should not mind if Hindus are converted
to Christianity and Islam and should avoid criticizing these religions
even if what they believe appears to be a violation of what Hindus hold
to be true. On the other hand, under the same principle, Muslims and
Christians are not expected to reciprocate, stop their conversion
efforts, or to become Hindus. The result is that Sarva Dharma Samabhãva
has only served to erode the Hindu view of truth and encouraged Hindus
to give up their critical faculties in matters of religion. It is
contrary to the spirit of the Yogis and Rishis in which all manner of
debate was encouraged in order to arrive at truth. Please note the Shad
Darshanas, the six systems of Hindus philosophy, for such a tradition of
free, lively, and friendly debate.

While we should all strive to be kind and respectful people and not
interfere with the religious views of others, this does not mean that we
have to cease thinking in order to do so. To create social harmony
Hindus need not give up defending their religion or critically examining
the religions that oppose them. The logical result of this thinking
would mean that Hindus should give up their religion altogether. Yet
whenever Hindus try to defend their religion, which is still under siege
even in India, they are accused of violating the principle of Sarva
Dharma Samabhãva. On the other hand, when other religious groups violate
this principle, which is what all missionary conversion efforts are
essentially doing, there is little criticism of them for doing so. When
have Christians or Muslims in India ever been criticized for violating
Sarva Dharma Samabhãva?  Does this mean that they have never done so? If
the principle of Sarva Dharma Samabhãva does not apply to them then why
should we interpret it as meaning that all religions are the same?

Under the guise of religious tolerance this idea of equality of
religions is used to prevent scrutiny of religious dogmas. Hindus are
encouraged to accept the Bible or Koran as true like the Gita, for
example, even without looking into what these books really say. Should
Hindus look at other religions in a critical light, however intelligent,
courteous or objective their views, they are called communal. Rather
than uniting all religious groups, this principle of religious equality
serves to sanction existing religions as they are. Aggressive religions
are allowed to continue to be aggressive. Passive religions are expected
not to try to defend themselves. Each religion is given sanctity for
what it has historically done, and religions are given the freedom to
act without question under the veil of belief.

What then is the alternative? What is the way of bringing understanding
on the level of religion and social harmony between religious groups
that often have very different, if not hostile beliefs? For this what is
really needed is tolerance between religions, which requires that we
respect diversity in the religious realm, not make all religions the
same. Members of different religious communities must recognize that
other religions may teach something very different about God, truth,
salvation or liberation than they do. Rather than pretending these
differences do not exist we should acknowledge them and allow people the
freedom to examine them.

Equality of religions should not be confused with tolerance. We should
tolerate all people, even if they do not agree with us. Tolerance of
differences creates harmony, not pretending that differences do not
exist. In fact if we only tolerate people if we make them the same as we
are, we are not really being tolerant at all. Similarly, members of
other religions should learn to tolerate Hindus and respect the fact
that Hindus do not always agree with them on matters of religion - that
Hindus have their own spiritual and ethical views which other religious
groups must consider as well. Should Hindus seek to redress the
historical wrongs committed upon them by aggressive attempts to convert
them, members of the religions involved should be willing to hear the
Hindu point of view and honor it as they would their own grievances.

In a free society religious belief should be a personal matter. There
should be no government enforced religious beliefs or dogmas. There
should be political tolerance of all religious views as long as these do
not involve violent or anti-national activities. On the political level
it should not matter whether one believes in any religion at all, much
less what religion a person may believe in. Political tolerance of all
religious views, however, does not mean that individuals have to accept
all religious views as right or good. In a free society one can be an
atheist or agnostic or believe in any religion. Does this mean that we
have to respect atheism as equally valid as religion in order to truly
practice Sarva Dharma Samabhãva?

In Western democracies there is a growing recognition of a multi-faith
and multi-cultural society. But there is no idea that all religions or
all cultures are the same, that for example there is no difference
between Christianity and Hinduism. Nor are religions, including
Christianity, placed beyond question. In Islamic countries there is
still the attempt to impose Islam upon everyone and little respect for
other religions. In multi-faith dialogues throughout the world there is
a recognition of certain commonalities in religion of moral goodness but
a recognition of the many differences as well, particularly in regard to
metaphysical beliefs. These differences are too significant to simply
cover over. Hindus must recognize this fact as well and learn to act
accordingly. Not the Equality of Religions but the Freedom of Inquiry. A
truly free and tolerant social order should be based on respect for all
people and respect for all life. This means respect for the individual
and not imposing any collective or politically enforced idea of
religious truth upon them. We should recognize our unity as human
beings, even though our religions may have as many differences as they
may have commonalities. The correct principle of a truly free society is
not the equality of religions but freedom from domination by religious
beliefs. This means that everyone should be free to follow or to
question religion as they so chose. Religion is no more beyond question
than any other aspect of human life. While a government should not
criticize religions, it should not prevent their critical examination in
society. In the modern world no one can pretend that their’s is the only
language or culture. True religion should be like science, a seeking of
truth, not an attempt to impose a belief without any examination. This
requires that we do not accept the boundaries of religion but open the
field of religion, all religions, to deep examination. In this regard a
new Hindu critique of religion is necessary to expand the religious
views presented in the world today. A respectful but honest Hindu
examination of other religions is essential to bring out a balance of
views today.

What is necessary is a return to Dharma or universal truth principles,
not respect for all religions as they exist today, which with their
dogmas are often sordid affairs. One must seek to uphold Dharma even if
all the organized religions of the world have to be discarded. It is
time for religions to bow down to Dharma, not for Dharma to be made in
the image of religious beliefs and institutions.

Hinduism as a religion of Dharma rather than dogma should lead the way
in this revolution, which also means clearing up the adharma that can be
found among Hindus today. Unfortunately, the superficial universalism of
the new Sarva Dharma Samabhãva is only serving to create a smoke-screen
for adharmic religious beliefs and dogmas to perpetuate themselves.

One could draw an analogy. That justice is one does not mean that all
governments are good whether they are democratic, fascist, or
communist.  It does not mean that one should not challenge oppression
done under any existing government. Similarly, that spiritual truth is
One does not mean that all religions are necessarily good and correct.
Spiritual truth transcends organized religion, which mainly serves
various political and social aims. Sarva Dharma Samabhãva means the
harmony of Dharma or truth-principles, not the equality of religious
beliefs, dogmas or institutions. Those who use the term otherwise are
misusing it.

We are entering a new era in civilization today, in which religion must
be radically recast, if not discarded. Only those religions willing to
undergo a radical transformation are likely to survive. This change will
be in the direction of experiential spirituality, in which the
individual’s direct experience of God or truth becomes the most
important thing, and religious dogma and institutionalism is set aside.
This is the real Sarva Dharma that no group can claim to own or
dispense. One should not forget the Dharma in Sarva Dharma Samabhãva.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This article has been taken from *Prajna: A Journal of Indian
Resurgence*, January-March, 1997, published by Prajna Bharati,
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


