+++
title = "57 "

+++
<div align="right">

**4. Islam is religious fascism**  
Ibn AI-Rawandi

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
**Why I am not a Muslim** by Ibn Warraq  
(Prometheus Books, £15 to RPA members).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In one of his early works the traditionalist writer Frithjof Schuon
makes an acute observation about the mentality of Muslims: ‘The
intellectual - and thereby the rational - foundation of Islam results in
the average Muslim having a curious tendency to believe that non-Muslims
either know that Islam is the truth and reject it out of pure obstinacy,
or else are simply ignorant of it and can be converted by elementary
explanations; that anyone should be able to oppose Islam with a good
conscience quite exceeds the Muslim’s power of imagination, precisely
because Islam coincides in his mind with the irresistible logic of
things.’ (*Stations of Wisdom*) How true this is will strike anyone who
has tried to have a rational discussion on religion with a Muslim born
of Muslim parents and raised in a Muslim culture.

However, that this situation does admit exceptions is proved by the
author of the book under review. Ibn Warraq was born into a Muslim
family and grew up in a country that now describes itself as an Islamic
republic. His earliest memories are of his circumcision and first day at
Quran school, and his family still consider themselves Muslims. He,
however, now considers himself a secular humanist who believes that:
‘all religions are sick men’s dreams, false - demonstrably false - and
pernicious.’

Given such views, arrived at against such odds and expressed at such
risk, the pusillanimous attitude of many Western intellectuals to the
Rushdie affair is observed with scorn:

> The most infuriating and nauseating aspect of the Rushdie affair was
> the spate of articles and books written by Western apologists for
> Islam - journalists, scholars, fellow travellers, converts (some from
> communism) - who claimed to be speaking for Muslims. This is surely
> condescension of the worst kind, and it is untrue. Many courageous
> individuals from the Muslim world supported and continue to support
> Rushdie.

For Ibn Warraq support for Rushdie has to be seen as part of a larger
war against the rise of ‘fundamentalist’ Islam:

> For those who regret not being alive in the 1930s to be able to show
> their commitment to a cause, there is, first, the Rushdie affair, and,
> second, the war that is taking place in Algeria, the Sudan, Iran,
> Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, a war whose principal victims are Muslims,
> Muslim women, Muslim intellectuals, writers, ordinary decent people.
> This book is my war effort.

Considering the number of Muslims now resident in Western countries this
is a war toward which no one, who values critical thought, free speech
and democracy, can afford to be indifferent.

This is not a matter of ‘the demonisation of Islam’, but of simply and
honestly looking facts in the face, something that Muslims and their
supporters are notoriously incapable of doing. It can be predicted now
that the main response of the Muslim community to this book will be to
shout ‘Apostate’, accuse the author of every kind of moral degeneracy,
and leave the facts and arguments he adduces completely unaddressed.

Those facts and arguments concern the wholly human origin of the Quran,
the moral and intellectual inadequacies of Muhammad, the wholly
tendentious and invented character of the *hadith*, the
sexually-obsessed and anti-feminine nature of the *sharia*, the Arab
empire spread by the sword and maintained by terror, the persecution of
religious and intellectual minorities in that empire in the name of
Islam, the incapacity of Muslims for any kind of critical or
self-critical thought, and the abject intellectual and moral poverty of
Islam vis-à-vis the modern secular West.

The amazing thing is that it has taken so long for such a book to appear
and that it has been left to a non-Westerner to write it, since the
material for its assembly has been around for anything up to a century.
The mealy-mouthed and apologetic character of so much Western
scholarship on Islam springs from the fact that many of these scholars
were, and are, believers, albeit in the rival creed of Christianity.
While they might be willing to show Muhammad in a poor light compared to
Jesus, they were not keen to press the non-historical and non-divine
arguments too far, since they realised that such arguments could just as
well be used against their own cherished beliefs. They preferred a
complicity of intellectual dishonesty with the Muslims in the face of an
increasingly sceptical and secular environment.

Perhaps the most important thing demonstrated by Ibn Warraq is that
Islam is fundamentalist by nature, and not by some peculiar and aberrant
recent development. All Muslims, not just the fanatics, believe that
every word of the Quran is quite literally the word of God, absolutely
and unquestionably true for all times, places, and people, and
practically the same goes for the *hadith* and the *sharia*. Anyone who
wishes to argue that the fanatics’ interpretation of these elements is
wrong and that a far more ‘liberal’ interpretation can be made and that
is the real Islam, have really only their own tastes and inclinations to
support them. There is no Pope in Islam, nor any Councils with authority
to impose a creed. The fanatic who thinks that all unbelievers should be
killed has just as much authority as the Sufi who thinks that all
religions are true and that even atheists go to heaven. Both parties
could adduce Quranic texts and *hadith* to support their positions, and
both would be drawing, in their own minds, upon the immutable word of
god. As Ibn Warraq observes: ‘Even if we concede that Muslim
conservatives have interpreted the sharia in their own way, what gives
us the right to say that their interpretation is the inauthentic one and
that of the liberal Muslim’s, authentic? Who is going to decide what is
authentic Islam?’

With regard to so-called liberal Islam this manifests in the West
chiefly in the form of ‘Sufism or Islamic Mysticism’, the title of
Chapter 12. Unfortunately, this is the shortest chapter in the book, a
mere six pages, and has the appearance of an afterthought, since Sufism
is only really dealt with in the first two pages and there inadequately.
This is unfortunate because Sufism has been taken up by many Western
intellectuals for whom *real* Islam is Sufism, and *real* Sufism is the
Sufism of Ibn Arabi. This is in fact a ludicrous position, since it
amounts to saying that real Islam is a minority view within a minority
view, a view, moreover, that for most of the history of Islam has been
suspected of heresy. What is needed with regard to Sufism is an in-depth
critique of the metaphysics of Ibn Arabi as expounded in the works of
such contemporary scholars as William Chittick and Michel Chodkiewicz,
together with a sociological survey of the circus that surrounds such
contemporary Sufis as Sheikh Nazim al-Qubrusi; but that would amount to
another book.

Another important achievement of Ibn Warraq is that he explodes the myth
of Islamic tolerance, a myth largely invented by Jews and Western
freethinkers as a stick with which to beat the Catholic Church.  Islam
was never a religion of tolerance and it is not tolerant by nature.
Despite the way the apologists would like to depict it, Islam *was*
spread by the sword and has been maintained by the sword throughout its
history, not to mention the scourge and the cross. In truth it was the
Arab empire that was spread by the sword and it is as an Arab empire
that Islam is maintained to this day in the form of a religion largely
invented to hold that empire together and subdue native populations. An
unmitigated cultural disaster parading as God’s will. Religious
minorities were always second-class citizens in this empire and were
only tolerated on sufferance and in abject deference to their
Arab/Muslim masters; for polytheists and unbelievers there was no
tolerance at all, it was conversion or death.

These repulsive characteristics are written into the Quran, the *hadith*
and the *sharia*, and are an ineradicable feature of the religion. There
is no way that Islam can reform itself and remain Islam, no way it can
ever be made compatible with pluralism, free speech, critical thought
and democracy. Anyone convinced they already possess the truth have no
need for such things. Although Muslims resident in non-Muslim countries
clamour for every kind of indulgence for their own beliefs and customs,
there can be no doubt that given any kind of power they would impose
their own beliefs and eliminate all difference.  In short, as Ibn Warraq
describes it in his Dedication, Islam is religious fascism, and it is
only a feeble-minded political correctness that prevents it from being
recognised as such.

Finally, we should note two further important points made by Ibn Warraq.
First, that Islam never really encouraged science, if by science is
meant ‘disinterested enquiry’. What Islam always meant by ‘knowledge’
was religious knowledge, anything else was deemed dangerous to the
faith. All the real science that occurred under Islam occurred despite
the religion not because of it. Second, how indebted the Muslim world
has always been to the West, not only to the Greeks in the beginning,
but particularly in modern times in knowledge of its own intellectual
and cultural history.

These unpalatable, half realised home truths are manifest in the
contemporary Muslim world in the form of a massive resentment and
inferiority complex:

> It is a depressing fact that during the Gulf War almost every single
> Muslim and Arab intellectual sympathized with Saddam Hussein, because,
> we are told ‘he stood up to the West’. In this explanation is summed
> up all the sense of Islamic failure, and feelings of inferiority
> vis-à-vis the West. The Muslim world must be in a dire way if it sees
> hope in a tyrant who has murdered literally thousands of his own
> countrymen.

Indeed, and a Westerner can hardly imagine the courage it must take for
Ibn Warraq to say as much.

The problem with a book such as this is that it will most likely never
reach those most in need of it. That is to say young people in general
and young Muslims in particular, those whose minds have not already been
closed by fanaticism. How many libraries will stock it, or dare stock it
if they knew its contents? A hardback at over twenty pounds, published
by an American publisher, is not likely to find its way on to
high-street book shelves alongside all those uncritical, paperback
apologies for Islam that seem to be appearing in ever increasing
numbers. What is needed is more books like Ibn Warraq’s, published by
British publishers, at reasonable prices and with good distribution. But
dare they do it?

A minor fault that could be corrected in future editions is that several
important books and authors mentioned in text and notes fail to appear
in the bibliography.  
 

**Footnotes:**

This review appeared in the *NEW Humanist*. The place and date of
publication is not mentioned on the photocopy received by us. Nor does
the photocopy give the full name or any other information about the
reviewer.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


