+++
title = "64 "

+++
<div align="right">

*Navabharat Times*  
New Delhi, 9 April 1995  
**5. BJP girds up to appease Muslim**  
Shrikant Sharma

</div>

NEW DELHI, 8, April.  After BJP clearly announced in Goa that ‘Muslim
vote’ is no more ‘the forbidden fruit’ in the elections, BJP leaders
have started making all-out efforts for looking more secular than the
Congress and, on the other hand, they are out to have some special
programmes to lure Muslim voters.

In this venture of attracting Muslim voters, BJP will depend more upon
its Muslim rather than its Hindu leaders. It was quite evident in the
zeal with which Muslim leaders were talking on their way back from Goa.
While talking to the press, Muslim leaders sent out signals that in the
forthcoming parliamentary elections they were planning to work with
quicker paces in this direction. This will include public meetings
alongwith person-to-person interactions.

Leaders like Arif Beg seemed to be more enthusiastic in this matter and,
owing to his over-enthusiasm, leaders from different states after coming
back from Goa, have been planning his election tours in their respective
Muslim majority areas. Beg’s plan of touring Muslim majority areas in
different states will probably start from Haryana’s Mewat region. Mr.
Suraj Bhan, former MP from Ambala and Vice-President of the BJP, and
Mrs. Kamala Varma, former Haryana minister and BJP’s National Executive
member, talked to Mr. Beg in this regard.

Many leaders are of the opinion that Muslim leaders like Mr. Arif Beg
would have more influence on Muslims than the moderate leaders like the
leader of opposition in Rajya Sabha, Mr. Sikander Bakht. In the course
of his talk, Mr. Beg does not hesitate to proclaim proudly that he had
the honour of defeating Mr. Shankar Dayal Sharma. Sixty years old Mr.
Beg is a national level Secretary in the party and he has already held
ministerial portfolios at the Centre and in Madhya Pradesh.

Mr. Beg’s plan is to make at least a thousand Muslim workers parade in
front of party President Lal Krishna Advani. On being asked about the
number of Muslims in the BJP, Mr. Beg says: “The parade by a thousand
Muslim workers in uniform in front of Advani will be held in presence of
the media itself. This is a difficult task no doubt, but not
impossible.” When asked whether they would parade in front of Advani in
RSS uniform, Mr. Beg said, “Their uniform would be *sherwani*, which
would cost at least rupees two thousand each.”

He is eloquent about his day-dream – “My dream is that there should be a
rally of at least one lakh Muslims under BJP’s banner at Delhi’s Ramlila
Grounds.”

The BJP leaders will have to face a number of difficulties in order to
convince the common Muslim populace about their changed policy. Whatever
the BJP leaders like Kailash Joshi and Pyarelal Khandelwal may say, by
having a glance at the party history from the very outset, the common
people, whether Hindu or Muslim, regard the BJP as a Hindu party only.
That is why this tryst of tilting towards Muslims may create on the one
hand the danger of its Hindu voters’ defection and on the other hand on
BJP’s part this would be a breach of promise. It is to be seen as to how
much trust the Muslim voters will place in the BJP.

Joshi and Khandelwal say that BJP’s doors have always been kept open for
Muslims, so nothing special has happened which could be called a change
in the party’s policy. This is all the scurrilous campaign of the
Congress, they maintain. It has been the party’s policy, according to
them, that there should be justice for all and no favour to any
particular community.

These leaders say that they have been in constant contact with Muslim
voters and are trying to clear Muslim misapprehensions. Muslim voters
have the complaint that the BJP wants to create a *‘Hindu Rashtra’* in
India. To this these leaders reply that India is already a *‘Hindu
Rashtra’*, for, Hindus are in majority here. But, there is no plan of
action for creating a *‘Hindu State’*. The present Constitution of the
country is very good, they say, and BJP does not have any plan for
changing it.

In this regard it is necessary to study the call given to party workers
by party President Lal Krishna Advani in his inaugural speech made at
the National Executive meeting in Goa. He has asked them to go all-out
for removing misapprehensions among the minorities, particularly the
Muslims. It is evident from this that BJP leaders are watching Muslim
voters’ attitude towards their party. They know the fact that Muslim
voters, disappointed by the Congress and NF-LF, have started looking
with some hope towards BJP. Of course, it is a negative vote, but BJP
which had thought of attaining power without Muslim votes, has been
realising its advantage.

About the reason for Muslim voters coming to BJP, these leaders are
saying that Muslim voters are realising that the Congress and other
parties do not practise what they preach, but BJP does.

In a nutshell, at present BJP leaders have the forthcoming elections in
mind and for that they have, on the one hand, to tighten their grip over
Hindu voters congregated under Ram Mandir Movement and, on the other
hand, they have to grab Muslim votes coming towards their party by
telling Muslims the difference between *‘Hindu Rashtra’* and *‘Hindu
State’*.  
 

**Footnotes:**

Translated from Hindi.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


