+++
title = "79 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Hindustan Times*  
New Delhi, 19 August 1996  
**20. Babri or “Barabari”?**  
Sudheendra Kulkarni on Muslims’ choice

</div>

Two Prime Ministers, one present and the other his immediate
predecessor, have last week made statements about Indian Muslims which,
despite the sharp differences in their political ideologies, reveal a
remarkable commonality of observation. H.D. Deve Gowda, in an interview
given to a major Hindi daily, has stated that “the socio-economic
conditions of Muslims in some parts of the country are worse than those
of Dalits.” Earlier in the week, addressing a meeting of the Minorities
Morcha of the BJP in the Capital, Atal Behari Vajpayee observed that the
real issue before Indian Muslims was “not Babri but *Barabari*
(equality).^([1](#1))” Implicit in this remark is the admission that a
majority of Muslims in India are, indeed, victims of inequity.

It is not that what Deve Gowda and Vajpayee have said is not already
known to the rest of us. It is sufficient to take a walk through the
dilapidated lanes and bylanes of Bombay’s Bhendi Bazaar, which was a
proud address for the city’s Muslims only fifty years ago, or visit the
awfully unhygienic tanneries of Kanpur, to know how millions of ordinary
Muslims live in this country. Unemployment is high, nutritional
standards are low, educational facilities are few, housing conditions
are shocking; middle and even upper class Muslims find it difficult to
get houses on rent; loans and assistance from official sources are hard
to come by, and the government machinery (irrespective of which is the
ruling party in the state) is unresponsive - such is the woe of common
Muslims today.

By no means are Muslims the only victims of such wretched conditions.
These are the lot of the poor of all castes and communities. But, in the
case of Muslims, they carry a peculiar poignancy - and it is in this
context that the uncharacteristically candid statements of two of our
important politicians assume significance. It is also in this context
that the leaders and intellectuals of Indian Muslims should
self-critically analyse why their community’s plight has an added layer
of inequity and ask themselves the question: “Is it largely because of
our own, or our past leaders’, strategic mistakes and missteps? If so,
shouldn’t we take corrective steps at least now, when the problem of the
present is so stark that it cannot be wished away either by harking back
to the past glory of Muslim rule or dreaming about the future promise of
Dar-ul-Islam?”

A compelling occasion for Muslim introspection is provided by the 50th
year of India’s independence, if for no other reason than the fact that
the costliest Muslim misstep is anchored in the epochal event -
partition of India - which took place in 1947. The two-nation theory has
brought Islamic glory of the most questionable kind to Muslims in
Pakistan and Bangladesh. But to Muslims in India it has brought
something worse: it has created a lingering distrust in the minds of
Hindus which transcends their party or caste affiliations. This distrust
has not disappeared in the past five decades, but assumed darker shades
on account of further missteps by the dominant Muslim leadership. And,
let us face it, it is this distrust which manifests itself in many ugly
and unjustifiable ways to produce that added layer of inequity mentioned
earlier.

One of the major Muslim missteps in post-independence India has been the
stand of the community’s vocal leaders on the Ayodhya issue. This issue,
as also the folly Muslim leaders have committed and are continuing to
commit in this matter, is intrinsically linked to the earlier strategic
blunder: the two-nation theory. This linkage has been deliberately
overlooked by our ultra-secularists in their voluminous and vituperative
condemnation of the demand for reconstructing the Ram temple at the
disputed site in Ayodhya. The basis of the two-nation theory, as
elucidated in the Lahore resolution of the Muslim League in 1940 and as
tirelessly articulated by Mohammed Ali Jinnah in his later years, was
this: “Notwithstanding thousand years of close contact, there is nothing
common between Muslims and Hindus spiritually, culturally, socially,
linguistically or in their perception of their separate national
destinies.” Such a formulation of Muslim self-identity did not leave any
room for Indian Muslims to identify themselves with, and to take pride
in, the pre-Islamic and non-Islamic culture and heritage of the land.
Indeed, advocates of the two-nation theory could derive legitimacy for
their demand for India’s partition only by totally disowning this
heritage.

Now, isn’t the Muslim leaders’ vociferous opposition to the Ram
Janmabhoomi movement also premised on their refusal to identify
themselves with, and to take pride in, India’s pre-Islamic and
non-Islamic heritage? Even lesser considerations of forging
good-neighbourly relations with Hindus would mandate that Muslims
respect the sentiments of the majority community and pave the way for
the temple by agreeing to relocate the Babri Mosque. The refusal to take
this sensible course, coupled with the false hope that non-BJP
governments at the Centre and in Lucknow would implement the Muslim
demand in the matter, complicated the issue to the extent of
precipitating a major confrontation. The unfortunate and undesirable
outcome of this confrontation is too well-known to bear description
here.^([2](#2))

But there has been yet another dimension of this outcome which is
relevant to our present analysis. The stalemate over Ayodhya has
deepened the Hindu distrust towards their Muslim brethren. This, in
turn, has further complicated ordinary Muslims’ legitimate search for
socio-economic equity and advancement. Muslim leaders and their
ultra-secularist non-Muslim supporters would be deceiving themselves if
they thought this to be true only in the states ruled by the
“communal-fascist” BJP. The fact is, this is more or less the sad case
in almost all the states, including those where the BJP is weak and
which have long been under Congress or Janata rule.

Equally futile and self-deluding would be the Muslim leaders’ hope that
one or the other non-BJP governing combination at the Centre would some
day rebuild the Babri Mosque at the same spot. Short of converting India
into a Muslim majority land, no power or ploy on earth can make it
happen. This much should be obvious even from the fact that, not a
single non-BJP party has pledged in its manifesto to rebuild the
demolished structure. Look how P.V. Narasimha Rao has stopped
reiterating the famous line – “What has been destroyed will be rebuilt”
- ever since he uttered it, only once, in his 1993 Independence Day
speech. Look how Taslimuddin was upbraided by his own partymen for
publicly voicing the demand of many Muslim leaders that the idols of Ram
Lalla be removed from the make-shift temple in Ayodhya. Look how the
United Front is back-tracking on its own key promise in the Common
Minimum Programme about referring the Ayodhya matter to the Supreme
Court under Article 138(A) of the Constitution, instead of Article 143.
And look, also, how the Congress president has openly ridiculed the UF
for trying to change the terms of reference, even though his own
government’s reference under Article 143 had been rejected by the apex
court.

Do Muslim leaders really believe that all this unprincipled
hide-and-seek in legalism would bring back the Babri Mosque at the spot
where it stood? They must realise at least now that, at its heart, the
Ayodhya issue is neither legal nor even political. Its solution will,
hence, defy both legalism and electoral politicking. Ayodhya has to do
with India’s conception of its own nationhood. It is not too late even
now. Muslim leaders have an opportunity to learn from their past
mistakes and make themselves and their community equal partners in
nation-building. Let them come forward to remove all hurdles in the way
of building the Ram Temple. This decisive gesture of goodwill-generation
will certainly meet with even more decisive reciprocatory gestures from
Hindu community. Together, the two gestures will de-communalise and
de-politicise the matter once and for all. This, in turn, will herald a
new phase of harmonious Hindu-Muslim relations in India, whose
beneficial effect will help in the rejuvenation of the whole of the
Indian sub-continent. Clearly, both Hindus and Muslims deserve a
different historical fate after 50 years of the blood-soaked partition
of our common land.

For this well-deserved fate to befall us, however, Muslim leaders must
first make their choice: *Babri or Barabari*?  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Playing with words, flying into poetic fancies, and clowning on
public plaltforms have helped Atal Behari Vajpayee to become a
crowd-puller and the Big Brother of the BJP if not of the Sangh Parivar
as a whole (The latest report about Vajpayee playing with words is
provided by *The Hindustan Times*, New Delhi, 13 June 1997: “Addressing
an impressive ‘Gujjar rally’ held today \[June 12\], he \[Kanshi Ram\]
said that the former Prime Minister Vajpayee had called him Shiv in
response to his terming the BJP as a cobra.”) If Vajpayee had not
swallowed the slogans of Nehruvian Secularism and cared to have a close
look at ground realities, he could have seen quite clearly that Muslims
in India have been, in George Orwell’s famous words, ‘more equal than
others’ ever since Vajpayee’s mentor and model, Jawaharlal Nehru,
emerged dominant on the Indian scene. In any case, who told Vajpayee
that Muslims would be satisfied if they got *barabari*? What Muslims
have strived for, always and everywhere, is total dominance.

[²](#2a) Kulkarni is an excellent illustration of Mirza Ghalib’s famous
couplet which may be rendered as follows in English: “There is no dearth
of dunderheads in the world, O Ghalib. If we go in search of one, we run
into thousands (of them).” One wonders why these wise guys refuse to
study the doctrine of Islam and discover the key to Muslim attitudes and
behaviour.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


