+++
title = "89 "

+++
<div align="right">

*The Indian Express*  
New Delhi, 8 June 1997  
**30. Vande Mataram ‘dispute’**  
**at BJP Muslim meeting**  
Express News Service

</div>

NEW DELHI, JUNE 7 - A MISUNDERSTANDING between firebrand BJP leader Uma
Bharati and her senior Sikander Bakht over *“Vande Mataram”* created a
flutter at the National Muslim Youth Convention organised by the
Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha here today.

In a departure from BJP tradition, the convention did not begin with the
national song, inviting Bakht’s wrath. Chiding the Muslim community for
what he called its well-known objections to *Vande Mataram*, the BJP
leader told the gathering that he was “ashamed” by this.

*Vande Mataram* means salutation to the Motherland, he said. “Can’t we
salute our Motherland? Why should we be ashamed of it?” he asked.

Bharati, however, clarified later that she had scrapped the song as the
president of the Morcha because no one had come prepared to sing it. “No
one knew all the words or had practised the song,” she said in defence
of her decision. “Unfortunately, Bakhtji got the wrong impression.”\*

Bakht told ENS that he was not upset with Bharati for her decision. “She
did it out of consideration for the Muslim community. I am upset that
Muslims feel this way about the song. Why should this feeling be there
at all?” he said.  
 

**Footnotes:**

\* Uma Bharati has perfected the art of lying with a straight face.
Hindus should beware of double-faced firebrands like her. She is quite
capable of spitting venom against Hindus and Hinduism in her usual
firebrand fashion if her claim as an OBC leader, or as a warrior for
woman’s rights, or even as a spokesperson for the dalits is not conceded
in due course.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


