+++
title = "Veena Sethi"
unicode_script = "devanagari"
+++

[VII SUPPORTING LETTERS BY ACADEMICS AND SCHOLARS](/web/20110525205156/http://www.letindiadevelop.org/irochtc/07.shtml) » Dr Veena Sethi


On 2/9/06, Veena Sethi ([veenasethi@yahoo.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20110525205156/mailto:veenasethi@yahoo.com)) wrote:

2 Febuary 2006  
Dear Mr. Golden  
This is in response to your article "Defending the Faith" on January 25th in the Wall Street Journal raising the question of accuracy in history text books. I am a visitor to USA and got interested in the topic since I have school going grandchildren studying here. I majored in history and have taught English literature at Delhi University for many years. Coming to your question I have had the opportunity to read three history books recommended for grade 6 and have been quite alarmed at the manner in which some Hindu customs and beliefs are being interpreted and represented. Just to cite a few examples:

- "Discovering Our past", Published by Glencoe McGraw Hill, Glencoe California Series.

  Page 245: the author has given a very incorrect and superficial explanation of the practice of "suttee". S/he should have consulted any standard book on the status of women in ancient India or studied Rajput customs. Also, pray, what is the difference between being cremated and "burned"?

  Page 247: shows a picture of a fire ceremony. The caption reads, "Hindus meet to discuss holy writings." Incidentally this is a photograph of a marriage ceremony being performed where one can clearly see the bride and bridegroom in their bridal attire. The same picture is reproduced in

- "History Alive!"-The Ancient World, published by Teacher's Curriculum Institute on

  page 149. Here the caption reads, "A member of the Brahmin caste reads aloud from the sacred Vedas." It would be interesting to know who has plagiarized from whom.

  Page 142: picture is that of a "sadhu" a holy man who has renounced the world to seek his own salvation and not a Brahmin or priest.

  Page 143: the Ramayana is not just a "famous story". It is one of the greatest epics of the world that has influenced the Far East also.

- "Reflections" Ancient Civilizations, Harcourt School Publishers

  Page 388: caption on the picture reads "Classes in Ancient India" Two of the classes, Brahmins and Khsatriyas are shown wearing costumes of the much later Muslim period!

  Page 403: carries a picture of king Ashoka. He looks more like a headwaiter or doorkeeper in any restaurant or hotel of Delhi! I invite you to come and see for yourself.


The most poignant part of your article was the words of the student who was ashamed for her otherwise glorious heritage. A culture and heritage that, despite its many anomalies, has given much and still has much to give to the world.

Would the great American society like to deprive its younger citizens the opportunity of being proud of their origins?

With best wishes  
**Veena Sethi**