+++
title = "13  10         HIGHLIGHT OF AGITATION AGAINST THE TIPU SULTAN SERIAL"

+++
10  
HIGHLIGHT OF AGITATION AGAINST THE TIPU SULTAN SERIAL

B.N. JOG

Three years back, one news item which appeared on the pages of many
dailies attracted my attention. The news item was about a big
studio-fire in Bangalore, where shooting of Shri Sanjay Khan's
tele-serial, "The Sword of Tipu Sultan" was in progress. Scores of young
artistes died and many others were injured in the studio-fire. While
going through the press report, I was amazed to read that "in this TV
serial Tipu Sultan is being depicted as a great warrior and secular
benevolent ruler". Tipu Sultan who forcibly converted thousands of
Hindus and Christians to Islam, hanged to death hundreds of innocent
women and children, and destroyed and looted scores of temples and
churches in Malabar, Cochin, Coorg, Dindigal, Mangalore and Coimbatore,
a secular, fair-minded ruler! Hypocrisy also must have some limit.

It was this that prompted me to write an article about the historical
character of Tipu in a Marathi weekly, Vivek. Soon another article on
the subject written by a reputed journalist and scholar, Shri Arvind
Kulkarni, appeared in a popular Marathi weekly, Shree. A number of
similar angry criticisms were published in Malayalam and Kannada papers
and weeklies.

A silent storm soon started gathering momentum in the South. A
well-known historian, Dr. Ravindra Ramdas, came to me to discuss about
the effective way of stopping the telecast of blatant lies and distorted
history of Tipu Sultan on the national network. Thereafter, both of us
met and discussed with a leading jurist and advocate, Shri Madhavrao
Pathak, which resulted in filing a Writ Petition in the Bombay High
Court by Dr. Ramdas and three others of Bombay Malayalee Samajam. The
press woke up only when the Court case was filed. Many articles praising
Tipu's secular credentials, administrative genius, and benevolent and
charitable disposition started appearing in the English dailies. Most of
them were based on heresay and secular prejudices of JNU and Aligarh
historians, and were devoid of any authenticity. Interestingly, *The
Times of India* was the only English paper which consistently published
only pro-Tipu articles and biased news items, and refused to publish in
its columns the views and articles sent by nationalist Hindus. But most
of the regional language papers carried articles that had more balance
than those in the English press. Of course, they do not know that the
English press has already ceased to be the opinion-makers in the
country. That credit has already gone to the regional language papers.

Many of my colleagues expressed doubts about getting justice from the
Writ Petition filed in the Bombay High Court. Therefore, Hindu Ekjoot,
an organisation dedicated to the protection of Hindu national identity
and ideology, decided to take the issue of misusing the national network
to the people's court. Dr. Harish Shetty, President of Hindu Ekjoot,
along with many youthful members of Hindu Ekjoot and Bombay Malayalee
Samajam organised a series of street corner meetings, demonstrations and
poster campaigns in Bombay with the active participation and support of
local units of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, the Hindu Mahasabha, and other
nationalist organisations. A big Dharna was organised in front of
Churchgate Station. Also a massive Morcha was taken out to Bombay
Doordarshan Kendra under the joint auspices of Hindu Ekjoot and a number
of similar nationalist organisations. The Morcha was led by Shri
Vidyadhar Gokhale, Shiv Sena M.P., Advocate Madhavrao Pathak, Advocate
P.R. Mukhedkar, Dr. Ravindra Ramdas, Dr. Harish Shetty, and many others.

In the meantime, Bombay Malayalee Samajam and Ekjoot submitted a
memorandum signed by over 500 citizens to the Hon. Minister for
Information and Broadcasting, Shri P. Upendra. When the agitation spread
and the pressure increased, the Hon. Minister stated that he would refer
the controversial tele-serial on Tipu Sultan to a committee of
historians for scrutiny and clearance before releasing it for the
telecast. Hindu Ekjoot then called for a boycott of the products of
companies sponsoring the anti-national tele-serial. While many reputed
companies like Tata and Reliance shied away from the beginning itself,
Parle Products Limited, who were misled by false propaganda, later wrote
to Hindu Ekjoot: "Please note that we have stopped sponsoring the
serial."

Thereafter, the Convenor of Bombay Malayalee Samajam, Shri Nandagopal
Menon, and Advocate P.R. Mukhedkar, who was assisting Advocate Madhavrao
Pathak in fighting the case in the Court, took the agitation to Delhi
where they met Shri L.K. Advani and Ram Naik, both M.Ps, Shri B.L.
Sharma, President of Indraprastha Vishwa Hindu Parishad, Hon. Minister
Shri P. Upendra and also Shri K.R. Malkani who had cleared the
controversial Tipu Serial. Later, they addressed a Press Conference to
highlight the distorted history and objectionable portions in the novel
by Bhagwan Gidwani on which the tele-serial was based. All the Delhi
papers carried the news and also gave wide coverage to the agitation
spreading against the Tipu Serial. Some of them even expressed their
surprise when they learnt about the clean chit given by Shri K.R.
Malkani to Sanjay Khan's tele-serial of blatant lies and distorted
versions of history. A Marathi journalist, Shri Dilip Karambekar of
*Vivek*, published and distributed a forceful rebuttal to the arguments
of Shri Malkani.

I completely fail to understand as to how a person like Shri Malkani
could approve the serial with minor modifications. His argument seems to
be that Muslim community needs a hero to be proud of and only Tipu could
be dressed up or white-washed to fit the bill! He did not even care to
read through a variety of authentic references and documents from
Karnataka and Kerala Gazetteers about Tipu's Islamic prejudices and
atrocities and forcible mass conversions in Kerala, sent to him by
Bombay Malayalee Samajam. He only asked Doordarshan to delete the
offensive word "Sword" from the title, "The Sword of Tipu Sultan". The
inscription on the sword of Tipu Sultan was: "This my victorious sword
is for the destruction of Hindus. Victory to Allah. He is the only
Saviour. O Allah! help us against Hindus who refuse to embrace Islam."
Even the Bombay High Court found the inscription on the sword aggressive
and offensive and hence suggested the deletion of the word "Sword" from
the title of the Serial. Neither the Government of India nor the
Doordarshan agreed to comply with the judicial direction. That is the
respect shown to the judiciary by the secularist Government and its
official agencies!

The Indraprastha Vishwa Hindu Parishad thereupon held a massive Dharna
in front of Mandi House under the leadership of its President, Shri B.L.
Sharma (Premji), to protest against the Government's inaction on the
matter. Later on, a one-day fast was undertaken to protest against the
telecast of the manipulated and distorted version of Tipu Sultan on the
national network. A number of leading public figures participated in the
fast, prominent among them being Mahant Avaidyanath of Hindu Mahasabha,
Uma Bharati of BJP and Shri B.L. Sharma (Premji).

The Bombay Malayalee Samajam sent a mass petition to the Supreme Court
requesting it to take up the matter under Public Interest Litigation.
But the Supreme Court did not entertain the request. The Bombay High
Court finally dismissed the Writ Petition after several months because
many of its earlier judicial decisions had been subsequently reversed by
the Supreme Court on appeal. Even the Supreme Court, from which justice
based on historical facts was sought and expected, did not hand down a
written verdict, nor gave judicial reasons for rejecting the appeal.

Though the appeal was not entertained by the Supreme Court, I am glad on
one score. The Petitioners had put up a relentless fight up to the last
temple of justice - the Supreme Court. Posterity will surely be proud to
recall that Hindu nationalists opposed the anti - national Serial and
went up to the Supreme Court seeking justice based on historical
documents and national pride. It is another matter that they did not get
justice even from the Supreme Court.

The agitation and Court case brought to focus many things:

> 1\. Relief and justice may not be forthcoming even from the highest
> and final legal body - the Supreme Court.
>
> 2\. justice is very often delayed, thus denying justice to the
> aggrieved party who ultimately loses confidence and respect for the
> judiciary.
>
> 3\. Nature of the Court verdict itself need not be very palatable nor
> justifiable as in this case.
>
> 4\. Expenses involved in fighting a case in the Supreme Court are
> beyond the capacity of anyone who is not very rich. Thus it is beyond
> the reach of an ordinary citizen.

The positive side of the agitation was the growing assertion by Hindu
nationalists against the tendency of the secularist Government to
distort and suppress historical records and hurt Hindu sentiments to
suit narrow political needs. Such tendencies were forcefully and
effectively exposed in various meetings addressed by Shri. Durganand
Nadkarni. I would like to mention specially the late Dr. P.C.C. Raja of
the Zamorin family who exposed Shri Bhagwan Gidwani for making obscene
remarks in his novel about the person of a respected Zamorin Raja. He
even wrote to the Government of India not only for banning such a
dubious and vulgar novel but also for prosecuting the fake novelist. Dr.
Muthanna is another eminent scholar who exposed the dubious novelist
through a well-documented book, *Tipu Sultan X-rayed*. There were so
many public figures who contributed to the cause of the agitation
against the distortion of documented history for political purpose. I
also congratulate many journals and weeklies, especially *Vikram* of
Bangalore, *Vivek* and *Tarun Bharat* of Bombay, and *Kesari* and
*Mathrubhoomi* of Calicut. Except a few leftists and anti - Hindu
historians from the JNU and the AMU, all other media-men were generally
supportive of the main cause.

I am certain that the Government and the judiciary will open their eyes
and issue specific guidelines governing the clearance of tele-serials on
the national network similar to provisions of the Cinematography Act. At
present, Doordarshan is a law unto itself. Such guidelines will avoid
many embarrassments, angry agitations, and legal battles in future.

The agitation against this serial has amply made it clear to the
Government and the judiciary that whenever and wherever history is
deliberately distorted or suppressed and Hindu sentiments are hurt to
suit narrow political needs, the vast majority of Hindu nationalist
forces would rise in protest, maybe more forcefully and decisively in
future.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)    [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
