+++
title = "08 8 Christianity and Islam: Ideologies Of Imperialism"

+++
**8**  
**Christianity and Islam: Ideologies Of Imperialism**

The story which I an now going to tell is true. I remember it word by
word, although it happened twenty-five years ago.^([1](#1))

A young Muslim sufi from Kashmir was telling us about the teachings of
his *guru* (this was the word he used for his teacher) who had died some
years earlier. *Prããyãma* was a prominent part of these teachings. This
again was the term he used, though he did not know even the Hindi
language, not to speak of Sanskrit.

The sufi was a very simple and unassuming person. He had had no
schooling. And he made his living by the humble occupation of a tailor.
But we were fascinated by what he told us about the techniques used by
his *guru* for his spiritual training. His language was straightforward
without the slightest touch of pedantry.

As the conversation drew to a close someone from among us started to
play a record of *padãvali kîrtan* by one of the few famous female
specialists from Bengal. The sufi was visibly moved by the pathos in
Radha’s pining for Sri Krishna who had left Vrindavana for Mathura. Soon
after the music stopped, he exclaimed, *“Aisã gãnã hamnê êk hazãr baras
bãd sunã* (I have heard this sort of music after a thousand years).” His
eyes were brimming with tears which he was trying to hide.

We were amazed. He was in his thirties. He could not have been in this
world a thousand years ago. What did he mean by that statement?  We
requested him to explain. He said in a voice full of innocence: *“Pahle
janam mêñ sunã hogã* (I must have heard it in an earlier life).”

I became agog with curiosity. He was talking of transmigration. So I
asked him, *“Ãp kyã is zindgî sê pahlê janam kî bãt mãnatê hain* (Do you
believe in a birth before this present life)?”

The sufi seemed to be somewhat annoyed. He asked a counter-question in a
tone which had a touch of temper: *“Ãp mazhab kã sawãl kyoñ uThãtê hain*
(Why are you raising a theological controversy)?”

I was puzzled by his reply, as was everybody else. I had not the
slightest intention to annoy him. He was our guest. I had asked the
question out of sheer curiosity. So I came forward with a clarification,
and said, *“Sûfîjî, ãp musalmãn hain. Islãm êk hî janam mãnatã hai. Ãpnê
pahle janam kî bãt kahî, isliyê sawãl uThãyã thã* (You are a Muslim.
Islam recognises only one life. You talk about an earlier life. That is
why I had asked the question).”

He relaxed and explained: *“Mazhab tõ wahî bãt kahtã hai. Lekin maiñ tõ
rãz kî bãt kah rahã thã* (It is true that theology says that. But I was
talking of the esoteric way).”

We were surprised by this distinction. This was a new revelation to us -
this separation of esoterism from theology. The sufi continued: *“Rãz kî
bãt ham sab kê sãmanê nahîñ kahtê. Yeh tõ maiñ ãp logoñ se kah rahã thã*
(We do not talk of the esoteric way before everybody. It is only to you
people that I was talking about it).”

All of us asked simultaneously: *“Kyoñ* (Why)?”

The sufî said, *“Woh log* (those people)”… and without completing the
sentence he put the edge of his outstretched palm on his throat and
moved it across. He was trying to convey that “those people” would cut
his throat.

We asked him about “those people”. Who were they? He did not name any.
But he became gloomy. It was obvious that he did not like to continue
the dialogue, which we dropped immediately.

I was sure in my mind that nobody was going to cut his throat these days
even if he proclaimed publicly what he believed privately. Times had
changed. Moreover, he was a citizen of India, not of an Islamic
theocracy. Yet the alarm in his voice was unmistakable.

I knew how Mansur al-Hallaj had been tortured to death by an Islamic
state prompted by Islamic theologians for saying that he himself was the
*Haqq* (Truth). But that was all. I had not yet read any detailed
history of Sufism, nor compared or contrasted the doctrines of Sufism
with the dogmas of prophetic Islam. It was years later when I made such
a study and came to know of the *rishi* tradition in Kashmir Sufism,
that I was suddenly reminded of that talk with the young sufi that day.
He was obviously referring to the tradition of terror which had silenced
the sups of the *rishi* tradition, and forced them to keep in their
breasts the best of their knowledge. The memory of that terror, it
seemed, was still intact in the mind of this sufi.  
 

**THE SUFI AS A FANATIC**

My studies in Sufism also brought back to my mind another encounter with
another sufi at about the same time. He was an elderly man. He was quite
learned in his own way, and could discuss various religious and
philosophical doctrines with some knowledge. He could also manage some
English in which language he also wrote an occasional pamphlet. The
incident which I shall now relate took place when I met him for the
first time, though I had heard a lot about him from a close friend.

I was staying by myself in the house of this friend when this sufi
dropped in one day. I requested him to stay with me for a few days and
give me the benefit of his company. He agreed and we had quite a few
fruitful sessions during which we talked about mysticism and the rest,
without touching the subject of Islam or Hinduism. I was impressed. His
language was quite forceful, particularly when he made fun of atheists,
materialists, and mere philosophers.

One day I was reading an Urdu translation of Sarmad’s Persian poems when
the sufi came into my room and sat down by my side. I put away the book
and had another long talk with him. Then I left the room because I had a
few other things to do. When I returned after about half an hour, I
found the sufi reading the same book by Sarmad. A few days earlier I had
heard him talking about Sarmad with reverence and in a language of
fulsome praise. So I sat down quietly in a corner and waited for him to
read out and explain some significant lines from that book.

But I was taken aback when he suddenly threw the book against the
opposite wall with some violence and shouted, *“Harãmzãdã kãfir hî thã*
(The bastard was an infidel indeed)!” I picked up the book, brought it
back to the sufi, and asked him to show me the lines that had enraged
him so uncontrollably. He leafed through the book and finally put his
finger on two lines almost towards the end. I cannot recall the exact
words of the couplet but I remember very well the message that was
conveyed. Sarmad had addressed himself as follows: “O Sarmad! What is it
that goes on happening to you? You started as a follower of Moses. Next
you put your faith in Muhammad. And now at last you have become a
devotee of Rãm and Lachhman.”

I could see nothing wrong or improper in this couplet. Sarmad was only
telling the story of his seeking which had led him from Moses to
Muhammad to Rãma and LakshmaNa. I had not read the book as fast and as
far as the sufi had done. Nor did I know the real reason for which
Sarmad had been beheaded in Delhi by the order of Aurangzeb. All I had
heard was that Sarmad used to roam about naked on the roads of this
imperial city. I had supposed that he had been punished for his
impudence in the midst of a polished society which placed immense
importance on being properly dressed. It was years later that I learnt
the real nature of Sarmad’s “crime”. It was apostasy which is punishable
with death according to the law of Islam laid down by the Prophet
himself during the days of his tussle with the polytheists of Mecca.

I have never lost my respect for this second sufi. He is a man of
character endowed with a keen mind and a good knowledge of what passes
for mysticism in Islam. But he becomes absolutely impregnable, indeed an
insufferable fanatic, when it comes to the dogmas of prophetic Islam.
His contempt for everything Hindu comes through clearly whenever he
publishes a pamphlet. Hindus, he says, are worshippers of *kankhajûrãs*
(scorpions), *khaTmals* (bugs), *gãy kã gobar* (cowdung), and *Kãlî*.
How he has worked out this combination of four “filthy” things has
always defied my imagination. But one thing becomes obvious whenever he
opens him mouth, namely, that he derives immense satisfaction by
portraying Hinduism in this picturesque manner. Sometimes I feel that
the very vehemence of his language against Hinduism helps him keep the
fire of his fanaticism burning. Whenever he is in this mood, it is
impossible to have a word edgewise with him, or make him realize that he
is being downright ridiculous.^([2](#2))  
 

**THE CHRISTIAN MISSIONARY AND THE MYSTIC**

I had the same experience an year earlier with a Catholic missionary who
was trying to convert me to his own creed. He had taken me to a
monastery in a mountainous region, and put me into what the Christians
call a retreat. The very first sentence he uttered in his very first
lecture was that I should not expect him to give “some funny feeling
inside you”. I did not get the point at that time. Later on I learnt
that he was referring to the mystic experience for which we Hindus are
supposed to have a special weakness. The Father failed to give me any
feeling, funny or otherwise, and the retreat was a total failure. I had
started as an ordinary Hindu and came out of it in the same condition.
The dogmas of Christianity he had dished out sounded to me, to say that
least, rather infantile. But what pained me the most in my meetings with
this otherwise lovable man was his contempt for Hinduism which he always
equated with the “worship of every bug that bites and every cockroach
that crawls around”.

In later years I met another Christian missionary who made it a point to
call on me whenever he visited Delhi. His first fascination in India (he
was a foreigner) was for Raman Maharshi. That led him to Vedanta and the
Upanishads which fascinated him still more. Finally, he gave up his
missionary station in the south and moved to the Himalayas for a quiet
life of study and meditation. He was a prolific writer. He died a few
years ago.

In my first encounter with him I made him feel somewhat uncomfortable by
asking him some unconventional questions about Christian theology,
particularly about Jesus being the only saviour. Next time we met, he
asked me to avoid doctrinal disputation and join him in a deeper
communion of minds in meditation. I agreed with him very gladly, and we
never discussed theology again. Most of the time I listened to him as he
as spoke about the Upanishads, particularly about the experience of
*Advaita*. He had made a very deep study of the subject, and I was
nowhere near him in my own knowledge of it.

But I was puzzled when I read some of his writings. Here he was trying
very heard to reconcile the experience of *Advaita* with what he called
the Christian experience. I referred the matter to Ram Swarup. He told
me that Christian experience was the new name which they were now giving
to Christian theology.

I knew nothing about any experience, advaitic or Christian. Nor do I
know it now. But one thing I know for certain is that human experience,
whatever its level, is human experience. There is nothing Hindu, or
Muslim, or Christian about it as such. The fact that *Advaita* is a
Sanskrit word - a language which flourished in India and is now honoured
by Hindus - as also the fact that it has been discussed most
exhaustively in the Upanishads, which are now known as Hindu shastras,
does not make it a national or sectarian word. For the word only refers
to a state of human consciousness which Kabir has described so aptly as
*bãhar bhîtar ekai jãnõ, yêh guru gyãn batãî* (it is the same
everywhere, whether without or within; this is the secret taught by the
teacher).

Here was a man who was moved so sincerely and so deeply by his seeking
for *Advaita*. Why could he not concentrate on the experience itself,
and forget Christianity for the time being? Why could he not throw his
theological luggage out of the window and travel straight to the station
towards which the train of his own experience was heading? Why should he
look out every now and then to find out if the stations on the way had
their nameplates inscribed in a language which he had inherited by the
accident of his birth? I could not find at that time any satisfactory
answers to these questions.

The young sufi was afraid of being slaughtered for saying what he
believed to be true. The sincere Christian seeker was trying to stick a
label where it failed to stick. Their plight was pathetic.

On the other hand, the old sufi was so sure about himself, about his
Islam, and about the abomination that was Hinduism in his eyes. So was
the Catholic missionary who had tried to save me from perdition. They
seemed to know what was wrong, and where. They seemed to know what was
right, and how. What was it that made them feel so secure in their
beliefs, and so self-righteous in their swearing against Hinduism?  
 

**POLITICS MASQUERADING AS RELIGION**

The questions remained unanswered till I had a chance to read the life
of prophet Muhammad and the history of the rise of Christianity. I knew
a lot of Muslim history in this country, and also abroad. I knew how
blood-soaked it was in all its chapters. I also knew a lot of Christian
history in Europe, and America, and elsewhere. I knew what a horrible
story it was in terms of death and destruction it brought to many lands.
What I did not know for a long time was the genesis of these creeds
which had inflicted so much sufferings on mankind.

It was only when I looked into the source books of these ‘religions’,
and examined the character of their founders that I discovered the
*ãsurika* roots from which they had sprung. It was only then that I
realized the grave error in recognizing these creeds as religions in any
sense of the term. I could see quite clearly that what we were faced
with were purely political ideologies inspired by imperialist ambitions.
It was only then that all pieces of the puzzle fell into a pattern - the
theologies, the histories, the swearologies, and the rest.

Before I take up the genesis of these creeds I should like to make one
point very clear. There are no non-Christian records available about the
birth, rise, and spread of Christianity till it captured state power in
the Roman empire. Whatever I write below about the genesis of
Christianity is based entirely on early Christian records. Similarly, no
non-Muslim records have survived about the rise and spread of Islam in
Arabia. What I write below about the genesis of Islam is based entirely
on Islamic records.  
 

**GENESIS AND CHARACTER OF CHRISTIANITY**

Some historians in the West have serious doubts about the very existence
of a man called Jesus Christ.[³](#3) And almost all historians agree
that if he existed at all, nothing can be known about his person or
teaching because all contemporary sources, Christian and non-Christian,
are either silent or unreliable regarding the subject. Thus all we have
is the Jesus of the Gospels which are now regarded as theological
statements rather than a record of historical events. And Jesus of the
Gospels is a questionable character. He makes tall claims about himself,
and curses all those who do not accept those claims. He denounces his
own people as sons of the Devil and killers of prophets.

In due course, Christian theology came to proclaim that Jesus was the
only-begotten son of the only true god; that he had been sent down in
order to wash with his own blood the sins of mankind by mounting the
cross; that he had risen from the dead on the third day and appeared to
his apostles in flesh and bones; that he was the same as his father
whose divinity he shared in full; that those who accepted him as the
only saviour had all their sins washed by his blood; that he had entered
his apostles as the holy ghost and entrusted them with the mission of
saving all mankind from eternal hell-fire; that the Church founded by
the apostles and joined by the converts was his body and bride; and that
the whole world had been mandated to the Church by the father and the
son and the holy ghost.

What one finds striking about these ridiculous statements is that none
of them can stand the test of human reason or experience. The Church
declares them to be mysteries beyond the reach of human understanding.
The apostles had tried to sell these ‘mysteries’ to the Jews in
Jerusalem. The only response they met was dismissal with contempt. Next,
they tried these ‘mysteries’ on Jewish communities settled in Syria,
Asia Minor and Greece. They had some small success but most of the time
met with considerable resistance. Finally, they took this merchandise to
the metropolitan mart at Rome where their business found some firm
footing for the first time. It was in Rome that the methods of
missionary salesmanship were matured over a period of time. The
structure of the Roman empire provided a model for the structure of the
Church. The missionaries got busy building a state within the state.

In the next two centuries, the Church became a rich and powerful
organisation with members in many leading families of Rome. It found
many adherents among politicians who wielded power, among military
commanders who were superstitious or in need of political support, and
among merchants who had money but no brains for philosophical questions.
The mother of emperor Severus (222-235 AD) became a Christian. So did
emperor Philip the Arabian (244-249 AD). Helena, the mother of
Constantine, was also a Christian convert. Now the Church extended the
Divine Right to rule as a despot to anyone who was prepared to declare
Christianity as the sole state religion and suppress all pagan
religions. Constantine who wanted to secure a dynastic succession for
his family - a practice unknown to Roman politics so far - saw his
opportunity in this new doctrine, and proclaimed in favour of the
Church. The common people in Rome resisted this royal renegade. So he
removed his capital from Rome to Byzantium which was renamed
Constantinople.

The precedent set by Constantine in consolidating a dynastic despotism
with the help of the Church was copied by many crowned heads all over
Europe in subsequent centuries. The king in pagan societies was only the
first among equals. The Church enabled him to become an unbridled
autocrat who derived his authority not from the community over which he
ruled but from God Almighty. The conflicts which developed between these
autocrats and the powerful Church with a Pope at its head, came much
later, after the common people all over Europe had been enslaved and
deprived of their traditional institutions which safeguarded their
fundamental freedoms. For quite some time, the Church cooperated with
the kings to convert the common people everywhere into hewers of wood
and drawers of water.

This was one part of the story. Another was a large-scale destruction of
ancient religions all over Europe, Asia Minor, and North Africa where
the Church spread its tentacles with the help of despotic rulers. All
pagan schools were closed, all pagan temples were demolished or
converted into churches, and all pagan images were publicly defiled and
destroyed. Pagan books were burnt and pagan priests were killed, mostly
by Christian monks who led Christian mobs after lecturing them into
fevered frenzy. That is how Christianity triumphed over pagan religions
and societies - not by the power of its moral or spiritual superiority
or the logic of its doctrines, but by the power of the sword wielded by
despicable despots.  
 

**GENESIS AND CHARACTER OF ISLAM**

Muhammad followed in the footsteps of Jesus in making the same sort of
claims for himself, cursing his own people in the choicest language of
monotheism, and threatening them with slaughter. He, however, did not
have to struggle against a centralized state when he found that his
prophethood had no attraction for the people of Mecca. He migrated to
Medina which was more receptive to monotheism because of a large
presence of Jews in that town, and emerged as a powerful potentate. He
ended by exiling or killing en masse the Jewish population which
resisted him as soon as he came out in his true colours. Meanwhile, he
had amassed much wealth by plundering merchant caravans and scattered
Arab settlements. He created the nucleus of a standing army out of the
toughs and desperados who flocked to him in increasing numbers for
committing crimes and sharing the loot. In short, he built the apparatus
of a military state in Medina and used it for imposing his closed creed
on the tribal settlements of Arabia by means of armed force. The
doctrines of Islam were tailored to the needs of this galloping tyranny,
and sold with the help of the sword. And the sword was stamped with the
name of an almighty Allah in whose service the ancient religion and
culture of Arabia were destroyed root and branch.  
 

**THE MISTAKE MADE BY HINDU SOCIETY**

Hindu society has to understand very clearly that what it is faced with
in the form of Christianity and Islam are not religions but imperialist
ideologies whose appetite has been whetted by running roughshod over a
large part of the world. Hindu society is making a serious, almost a
fatal mistake, in appealing to these ideologies in the name of reason
and morality which are supposed to accompany religion. This sort of
appeal is bound to fail because it falls on deaf ears. The menace has to
be met by methods and means which are suited to the nature and magnitude
of the menace. Hitler had said that “if the chicken and geese pass a
resolution about peace, the wolf is not convinced”. There is little
chance that Hindu society will ever be able to contain Christianity or
Islam if it continues to regard these aggressive and imperialist
ideologies as religions, and extend tolerance to them.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) In 1958.

[²](#2a) This sufi remained a friend till he saw my writings,
particularly *Hindu Society under Siege*. In my last meeting with him he
said that I had “stabbed him in the back”. He died a few years ago.

[³](#3a) See Sita Ram Goel, *Jesus Christ: Artifice for Aggression*,
Voice of India, New Delhi, 1994.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


