+++
title = "13 Statement by Indian intellectuals on Syed Shahabuddin's          attempt to make the authorities impose a ban on the book Hindu View          of Christianity and Islam by Ram Swarup"

+++
THIRTEEN  
Statement by Indian intellectuals on Syed Shahabuddin's attempt to make
the authorities impose a ban on the book *Hindu View of Christianity and
Islam* by Ram Swarup

We strongly condemn all recent attempts in India and abroad to prevent
free inquiry into the history and the doctrines of religions, whether

> 1\. by intimidation and murder of the authors, translators, publishers
> and printers: as with the threats against Salman Rushdie, Taslima
> Nasreen, Rachid Mimouni, Aziz Nesin; physical assault on Rushdie's
> Italian and Norwegian translators and on Prof. Mushir-ul Hasan;
> murders of Rushdie's Japanese translator and of numerous Egyptian,
> Lebanese, Turkish and Algerian writers, including Farag Foda, Ugur
> Mumçu, Md. Boukhobza, Tahar Djaout, and the 36 secularist
> intellectuals burned alive in Sivas;
>
> 2\. by their judicial execution or incarceration: as with Alaa Hamid
> and his printer and publisher incarcerated in Egypt, Sadek Abdel-Kerim
> Malallah beheaded in Saudi Arabia, and others sentenced in Pakistan
> (including a handicapped person and a child), Saudi Arabia and the
> UAE;
>
> 3\. by government action to hurt them in their professional lives: as
> with the sacking of the French civil servant Jean-Claude Barreau to
> appease protesting Arab governments;
>
> 4\. or by the imposition of a ban on printed or audio-visual documents
> or on free assembly and free speech: as with the ban on Taslima
> Nasreen's *Lajja* in Bangladesh, and on many other books and films
> throughout the Muslim world and India, ranging from popular TV serials
> such as Bible ki Kahaniyan (broadcast suspended on Doordarshan) to
> strictly scholarly publications such as R.M. Eaton's *Sufis of
> Bijapur*.

In particular, we condemn the attempt by Syed Shahabuddin to make the
Indian authorities impose a ban on the book *Hindu View of Christianity
and Islam* by Ram Swarup, published by Voice of India, New Delhi, 1992.
This book is one of the first serious comparative studies of religion
written from the Hindu viewpoint; banning it would be a direct attack on
the right of Hindu society to develop an intellectual response to
ideological challenges.

We also condemn the pending ban on Ram Swarup's earlier publication
*Understanding Islam Through Hadis*, a faithful summary in modern
language of the authoritative Hadis collection *Sahih al-Muslim*, banned
in 1990 in spite of twice having been declared unobjectionable by the
Delhi administration's screening committee.

We remind the Government of India and the public that an earlier
book-banning petition by Syed Shahabuddin (The Satanic Verses, 1988) was
not only the start of an international controversy about the banned book
itself, including riots in which demonstrators and others were killed;
but also signalled the start of a worldwide crackdown on freethinkers
critical of the doctrine or the current performance of Islam (dozens of
post-1988 cases have been mentioned above). A new concession to the
attempts of fanatics to clamp an Emergency on India, in which only
praise but no critical inquiry of their religion is allowed, could have
equally serious consequences. Treating Syed Shahabuddin as the
conscience-keeper of the nation is a dangerous game.

We are aware that the prohibition of critical inquiry into the doctrine
and history of Islam has been an intrinsic feature of Islamic regimes
including Medina, the Caliphate, the Sultanates and the contemporary
Islamic Republics. In British India, the prohibition was sought to be
imposed through direct action, e.g. the murders of Pandit Lekh Ram and
Swami Shraddhananda. The British colonial rulers retained some of this
prohibition in the more subtle from of Art. 295A and Art. 153A of the
Indian Penal Code, which are still in force in independent India. Now
that these laws are once more invoked to harass and intimidate a writer
and his publisher, we call for a public debate on whether laws limiting
the freedom of inquiry are compatible with the secular and democratic
principles of our Republic.

We are also aware that the prohibition on critical examination of
Christianity is a thing of the past even in Christian countries; that
modem Christians are rather ashamed of this aspect of Christian history
and have no desire to see this prohibition re-enacted in India.
Christianity has been discussed threadbare, as has Hinduism; there is
nothing about Islam that should make it immune against similar
examination. We demand the same right of free inquiry which the citizens
of Christian countries have come to enjoy under the impact of modernity.
We insist all the more on this freedom of inquiry because it has always
been a native endowment of Indian culture as well.

Delhi, 18 November 1993

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
