+++
title = "14 How should we respond?"

+++
FOURTEEN  
How should we respond?[1](#1)

Arun Shourie

Late in the afternoon on November 15, a police official visited the
office of the *Voice of India*, a publication house that has been
publishing works of academic excellence. These have one distinguishing
feature: There is no other set of books which has done as thorough a job
of nailing the falsehoods and evasions of the secularists as the books
published by this small publishing house. Marxists - and even more,
their fellow travellers - have denounced them as 'communal'.

But when these denouncers have been challenged on the facts, they have
fallen silent. After a few initial skirmishes, therefore, these
'scholars' have opted for prudence: They have studiously ignored these
books, and just gone on repeating their falsehoods. The condition in
which we are will be evident from considering one simple fact: While the
books being published by *Voice of India* are basic to our learning the
truth about our past, to uncovering the roots of the problems that
plague us today, and you may encounter - as I often do - many a
newspaperman speak laudably about these books in private, not one
mainline paper has dared notice even one publication of this house in
its Books pages! 'Dared', did I say? Perhaps I should have said
'condescended'!

Among the authors whose works Voice of India has published none is more
distinguished than Mr. Ram Swarup. I have written about him earlier: Now
about 75, he is one of the deepest thinkers I have come across. His work
is foundational. The occasion for writing about him again is a slim book
by him entitled, *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam*

The essays in the volume are not just works of scholarship, they are
works of insight. His reflections on the claims of milleniarism - that
there is only one way, that it has been revealed to only one person,
that it is set out in only one Book, that for your own good you must
follow it, that if you do not do so I am on duty bound to compel you to
follow it, and, if you still persist in your sin and error, to put you
out; and his reflection on its consequences - aggressive
proselytisation, intolerance, violence and tyranny - are unanswerable.
Even more important is his exposition of the deep significance of
practices which religions like Christianity and Islam condemned and
sought to stamp out - multiplicity of god-concepts and idolatry for
instance.

Where missionaries heaped scorn on the fact that we worshipped many gods
and presented the exclusive exaltation of one God in their religions -
of Jehovah, of Allah - as a higher stage in the development of human
thought and experience. Mr. Swarup reminds us of the deep insight that
the earlier practice embodied. As persons are at different stages of
spiritual attainment, as some are liable to respond better to
suggestions, symbols and practices of one kind than another, it was felt
that different road-maps ought to be sketched for them. And that each
aspirant should be encouraged to discover by introspection, by
reflection on the experiences that were unfolding within him the road
that would best get him to the goal of insight. This was the injunction
so central to the *Gita*, for instance - that of discovering one's
*svadharma*, by looking within, by reflection.

The same goes for idols, They were means by which values and virtues -
too abstract to be contemplated on their own - were given shape and
form. They were endowed into idols and icons, so that the aspirant by
contemplating the form would internalise the values and virtues. The
iconoclast who made smashing of idols an act of heroism and valour and
fidelity, did not just miss the deep significance of the aid. As Swami
Vivekananda used to point out, they themselves became idolaters of the
most elementary kind.

Christian missionaries poured scorn and invective at our idols. Today,
how they venerate statues and pictures of the Virgin Mary, of Jesus, how
in the Vatican they kiss the feet of the statue of St. Paul, how they
venerate the relics of St. Xavier and others! The subjects of the
statues and pictures differ from ours, but is the practice any
different, is the attitude to them any different from that of the most
primitive pagan? Are the statues implored for boons any the less?

The sequence Islam has followed is exactly the same. The Prophet removed
the 360 idols which were in the mosque around the Ka'aba. He had the
pictures within the Ka'aba washed out. But the holy black stone in the
Ka'aba has come to be venerated in exactly the same way as the earlier
idols; it is prayed to, boons are sought of it, the devout touch it and
kiss it, they perambulate around the structure - the Ka'aba - into the
wall of which the stone is embedded. When the new one is draped over the
Ka'aba, the curtain - the *kiswah* - which has been taken down is cut
and sold in small pieces to pilgrims, who venerate it in exactly the way
Hindus venerate the clothing which has been used to cover an idol. Water
from the Well of Zamzam, which lies a few steps from the south-east
corner of the Ka'aba, is ascribed curative powers exactly as the water
at Loudes or the water of the Ganges. "The water is regarded as an
infallible cure for all diseases," *The Dictionary of Islam* records,
"and the devotees believe that the more they drink of it, the better
their health will be, and their prayers the more acceptable to the
Diety… Many pilgrims not content with drinking it merely, strip
themselves in the room, and have buckets of it thrown over them by which
they believe that the heart is purified as well as the outer body… Few
pilgrims quit Makkah without carrying away some of this water in copper
or tin bottles, either for the purpose of making presents, or for their
own use in case of illness, when they drink it, or for ablution after
death…" Substitute 'Varanasi' for 'Makkah', 'Ganges' for the 'Well in
Zamzam', and would the words not describe exactly Hindu pilgrims at the
banks of the Ganges? Similarly, while the Prophet prohibited veneration
of graves and relics of saints etc., *dargahs* and amulets from them are
objects of as intense veneration among Muslims as their counterparts are
among Christians or Hindus.

Now, this is no 'lapse' of Islam or Christianity. Only that the original
claims to superiority, original denunciations and violent erasing of
earlier practices were not what they were made out to be. There is
another lesson: Human beings face identical tribulations, and they
ultimately gravitate towards the same sorts of devices for solace.

But such examples would be but the first approximation to Mr. Swarup's
analysis. He shows how the very features which were regarded as marks of
superiority deflect their adherents from the spiritual quest. His
enunciation of dharma and the direction in which it sets us, and the
contrary direction in which the tenets of Christianity and even more so
of Islam set us is as imbued with insight as it is concise.

One final point, and I will return to the policeman: Throughout the book
the exposition is scholarly, the language restrained and academic.

**The Letter**

The policeman brought with him a letter that Mr. Shahabuddin had written
to Minister of State for Home P.M. Sayeed. Dated August 20, it asked
that the government have the book examined "from the point of view of
banning it under the law of the land." "This book is blatantly offensive
to the religious sensibilities of Muslims and Christians," Mr.
Shahabuddin had written, "calling those religions anti-human and lacking
spirituality" - a characteristic one sentence distortion of an entire
book. The law on the question is absolutely clear, and the judgements on
it have repeatedly held that;

> The impugned publication must be read as a whole, that expressions,
> metaphors, sentences, paragraphs must not be tom out to establish the
> charges;
>
> That taken as a whole the test must be what the ordinary man with
> ordinary common sense, prudence and understanding will deduce from the
> publication, not the constructions that some abnormal or
> hypersensitive man may put on it;
>
> That the publication must constitute "an aggravated form of insult of
> religion", and the author must have "deliberately and maliciously" set
> out to outrage the religious feelings of others.

But it is not the law these people rely on. They rely on intimidation,
It is exactly by tactics of this kind that an earlier book of Mr. Swarup
- *Understanding Islam Through Hadis* - was put out of circulation, The
English edition was published in 1982 in the US and reprinted in India
in 1983. It was nothing but a faithful paraphrase of the Hadis with the
context explained from the earliest and most respected biographies of
the Prophet.

A complaint was engineered against the Hindi edition of the book. It was
twice referred to and twice cleared by the Delhi Administration's
screening committee - each time the committee had concluded that the
book was wholly and entirely based on orthodox and revered source and
that no action against it was warranted. But the publisher, printer and
binder were arrested.

The case went to the courts. Eventually on September 28, 1990 the
magistrate passed his final order. He noted that he had given the
complainant - the gentleman whose missive had led to the arrest of the
publisher - several opportunities to make good his complaint. That in
spite of these, the complainant had not done so. That under the relevant
section of the IPC the case could be taken cognizance of only if prior
permission had been given for prosecution by the relevant government.
That the government had, not once but twice, reviewed the book and had
concluded the no action was warranted. He, therefore, discharged the
matter.

That was seven years after the original book was published; two years
after the screening committee cleared it.

But just two months later, November 27, 1990, under the influence of the
same intimidation the Delhi Administration declared that, contrary to
what it had itself twice decreed, the book was not only objectionable,
was deliberately and malicious so! And the harassment commenced again.
That having subsided, Mr. Shahabuddhin has sought to commence the cycle
using the new book What is this if not the worst form of misuse of law
and the courts?

**Things, to do**

Our response should be three fold. First, whenever an attempt such as
this from quarters such as Mr. Shahabuddin is made to stifle free
speech, to kill even scholarly inquiry, we must go out of our way and
immediately obtain the book, So the thing to do is to write to *Voice of
India*, 2/18 Ansari Road Daryaganj, New Delhi, 110002, to buy a copy of
the *Hindu View of Christianity and Islam* by sending a cheque or draft
or moneyorder of Rs.125.

Secondly, whenever the intimidators prevail and such a book actually
comes to be banned large numbers should take to reprinting it,
photocopying it, to circulating it, and discussing its contents. That is
how the effort of the British to suppress books like Pandit Sunderlal's
*Bharat Mein Angrezi Raj* used to be dealt with.

The third thing is more necessary, and in the long run will be the
complete answer to the intimidators. As long as scholars like Mr. Swarup
are few, intimidators can bully weak governments into shutting them one
by one. But what will they do if 1,000, scholars are to do work of the
same order? This is the way to deal with intimidators. Let 1,000
scholars carry on work Mr. Swarup has pioneered.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This syndicated article was published in *The Observer of
Business and Politics*, New Delhi, on 26 November 1993, and in many
other newspapers and periodicals all over India.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
