+++
title = "17 Standing Up to Scrutinize Islam"

+++
SEVENTEEN  
Standing Up to Scrutinize Islam[1](#1)

G.A. Wells

Why I Am Not a Muslim, By Ibn Warraq (Amherst, N.Y. : Prometheus Books,
1995) 402 pp., $25.95 cloth.

*Why I Am Not a Muslim* certainly deserves the epithet "courageous" with
which R. J. Hoffmann introduces it in his Foreword, not so much because
of its thesis that Islamic civilization often reached magnificent
heights despite the religion of Islam, as because almost all the
fundamental tenets of Islam are here scrutinized uncompromisingly.
Moreover, Ibn Warraq's criticisms are no idiosyncrasies, but supported
with very extensive references to scholarly works. His book is
particularly valuable as a means of acquainting oneself with this
scholarship.

Not surprisingly, he devotes a chapter to the inferior position of women
in Islam, and another to the undemocratic pressures applied by Islamic
immigrants in the West today. He is appalled by the willingness of
British authorities to allow incitement to murder a British citizen
(Salman Rushdie) from a public platform in Britain; and he finds the
French authorities refreshingly less permissive on such matters.

Warraq begins by showing how often politeness to less-civilized
countries has been a whip with which to lash the shortcomings of one's
own society. It was on this basis that Tacitus boosted the Germans and
that eighteenth-century Europeans looked up to "the noble savage." In
the present century, European malaise about colonialism and imperialism
has prompted belief in the superior virtue of subject nations. Attitudes
to Islam and to its history have been affected by such sentiments,
although there have of course been dissenting voices. (Schopenhauer
declared, in an essay on man's metaphysical needs, that he could not
find a single valuable idea in the whole of the Koran.) The
uncompromising monotheism of Islam has been particularly admired. It is
true that Christianity is monotheistic only in virtue of an
unintelligible fiction (the Trinity), and the Judaism's allegiance to
one god was not the same as belief in only one god. But Ibn Warraq
reminds us that monotheism can readily join with exclusive intolerance.

The religion of one day is largely a reshuffling of ideas of a
yesterday, and to this Islam is no exception. It has taken a great deal
from both Jewish and Christian traditions, but I doubt whether many
Christians are aware of in what strange guise Christianity figures in
the Koran. According to Sura 4, Jesus was not crucified: the Jews
"Killed him not, they did not crucify him, but it was made to appear
that way to them." This strikes at the heart of what is now established
as Christian doctrine. If there was no atoning death, there is no
redemption, through such a death. But this was the kind of Christian
teaching that reached Muhammad; for a number of second-century
Christians had regarded suffering, which implies change and
imperfection, as foreign to the divine nature. As our author says, "what
is in the Koran about Christianity derives from heretical sects" (p.
62).

Something else made clear in this book that will probably surprise many
is how much of what has long passed for the early history of Islam has
been put in question by serious scholars. I had always believed that the
swift rise of Muhammad's religion to power - overrunning the whole of
Arabia in his lifetime and defeating Christian armies in Syria soon
after his death - meant that the evidence for its origin will have been
critically sifted at a far-earlier stage than could have occurred in the
case of Christianity, which long remained a jumble of insignificant
sects and took three hundred years to attain state recognition. Also,
the Koran looks much more authentic than the Gospels, in that its author
works no miracles and makes no claim to divinity. Only in later
traditions do his features become implausibly magnified. Ibn Warraq's
chapter on "The Problem of the Sources" must give us pause here. There
is not only disparate material in the Koran, but also repetition of
whole passages in variant versions; and this looks more like belated and
imperfect editing of materials from a plurality of traditions than a
collection of a single author's sayings. Also, there are so many variant
readings that it is misleading to speak of the Koran: "The definitive
text still had not been achieved as late as the ninth century" (p. 154).
As with the New Testament, the faithful are familiar with a uniform text
and know little or nothing of the variants given in any *apparatus
critics*. (To take but one New Testament example, whether Luke has a
doctrine of atonement depends on which manuscripts of his account of the
Last Supper are to be taken as giving the original reading.)

As for the Koran's contradictions, some are quite normal in a single,
individual religious writer and need not be put down to multiple
authorship. An instance is the alternation between predestination
passages ("God misleads whom He will, and whom He will he guides") and
others that give mankind some kind of free will. If what happens has
been predetermined, it is futile to urge people to change their ways.
Yet Muhammad and his followers have always done this, as did St. Paul,
who combined the idea that God blinds people with the doctrine that
their errors are all their own fault. Similarly, Marxists believe that
persons in a certain economic condition will inevitably behave in a
certain way, but nevertheless abuse them for doing so.

Another striking contradiction quite normal in religious writing is that
the God of the Koran is merciful and compassionate, yet consigns those
who do not believe in him to everlasting torment. Our author notes that
"Muhammad really lets his otherwise limited imagination go wild when
describing, in revolting detail, the torments of hell" (p. 125).

Muslim commentators deal with some of the contradictions by claiming
that latter verses in the Koran may cancel earlier ones. What is early
or late is, however, largely conjecture, as the Suras are arranged in
order of length, not chronologically.

The biographies of the prophet have always been known to be relatively
late; and the traditions about the early history of Islam grow, in
characteristic legendary fashion, from one writer to the next: "If one
storyteller should happen to mention a raid, the next one would tell its
exact date, and the third one would furnish even more details" (p. 84).
Ibn Warraq sums this up with: either we conclude with a number of recent
scholars that we do not know a great deal about Muhammad, or we make do
with the traditional sources. He adds: "Muslims would perhaps be better
off accepting the former alternative," since the picture that emerges of
the Prophet from the latter is "not at all flattering. Furthermore,
Muslims cannot complain that this is a portrait drawn by an enemy" (p.
86).

There are of course morally acceptable teachings in the Koran, but there
is also much intolerance. One of its worst legacies is the notion of a
Holy War, developed "with the help of the idea of rewards in paradise
for the holy martyrs who died fighting for Islam" (p. 156). Ibn Warraq
deplores the fact that, although imperialism is now discredited, "hardly
anyone bothers to criticize the Islamic variety that resulted in such
death and destruction" (p. 346). Bernard Lewis, an Islamic scholar whom
our author rightly treats with respect, has argued that, there were
indeed "exaltation and dogmatism on both sides," yet "greater tolerance
on the Turkish." Spanish Jews after the Inquisition found refuge in
Turkey, and "when Ottoman rule in Europe came to an end, the Christian
nations they had ruled for centuries were still there, with their
languages, their cultures, their religions, even to some extent their
institutions, intact," whereas "there are no Muslims today in Spain or
Sicily and no speakers of Arabic" (See Lewis's chapter in the symposium
*The Legacy of Islam*, Oxford University Press, 1974). Ibn Warraq finds
this stress on Islamic pluralism and tolerance quite misplaced: Turkey
was "no inter-faith utopia" (p. 187). He emphasizes atrocities
(including recent ones) in Muslim history ,as a counter to sentimental
nonsense about the 'spiritual East', which, we are constantly told, is
so much superior to the decadent and atheistic West" (p. 161).

Islam certainly keeps a firm grip on its people by making apostasy a
capital offense, as is also blasphemy towards God and the Prophet. "In
modern times blasphemy has simply become a tool for Muslim governments
to silence opposition, or for individuals to settle personal scores" (p.
176). It is of course quite generally the case that religions that
inculcate obedience and submission to established authority tend to be
supported by established governments. Bernard Lewis himself has noted,
in a recent essay, how Khomeini dealt with groups and individuals
opposing the Islamic revolution: for him, insistence on open trials,
defense lawyers, and proper procedures was no more than a reflection of
"the Western sickness among us." Those on trial, he insisted, were
criminals, and criminals should be executed, not tried. Warraq notes
that it was this hatred and loathing of the West that led Arab countries
to sympathize in the Gulf War even with Saddam Hussein: he is a tyrant,
but he "stood up to the West."

When Warraq speaks of science, he allows that it is in this domain that
"we come at last to the true greatness of Islamic civilization" (p.
272). I have recently come across an illustration of this in the 1984
Princeton University Press edition of Galen: *On Respiration and the
Arteries* by British scholars David J. Furley and J. S. Wilkie, who
offer a greatly improved Greek text by utilizing an Arab translation
better than any of the surviving Greek manuscripts. But Warraq argues
that it was *despite* Islam that Islamic science developed. He quotes
Ernest Renan's verdict:

> To give Islam the credit of Averroes and so many other illustrious
> thinkers, who passed half their life in prison, in forced hiding, in
> disgrace, whose books were burned and whose writings almost suppressed
> by theological authority, is as if one were to ascribe to the
> Inquisition the discoveries of Galileo, and a whole scientific
> development which it was not able to prevent.

The older scholars on whom Warraq draws include D. S. Margoliouth, whose
"Mohammedanism" in the series Home University Library of Modern
Knowledge is still a useful introduction. Warraq's recent authorities
include of course Bernard Lewis, and also W. Montgomery Watt, whom he
calls "by common consent the greatest and one of the most influential
living Islamic scholars in Britain." Like Warraq, I have found Watt
informative, yet infuriating, in that he repeatedly recast traditional
doctrines - Christian as well as Muslim - into impressive-sounding
formulas that are really no more than solemn-faced nonsense. For
instance, his version of "O Lamb of god that takes away the sins of the
world" is that "Jesus was deliberately living out an archetypal
synthesis." The then Bishop of Edinburgh quoted this in his Foreword to
Watt's 1959 book (pretentiously entitled The Cure of Human Troubles) and
opined that it may "be difficult to think and express ourselves in these
new terms." There is in fact no difficulty at all in thus "expressing
ourselves." Whether we are thereby thinking of anything other than the
words is another matter.

One truth that Warraq's book brings home very forcibly is that religion
has so often been made the basis for perpetuating social injustices.
Napoleon was but voicing an almost universal attitude when he saw in
Christianity "not the mystery of the Incarnation, but the mystery of
social order," in that inequality of property can be maintained only by
convincing the poor that it is God's will and that they will be better
off in come-come. Warraq allows that it may well be inhuman to tell an
individual who is suffering irredeemably that his belief in God and in
an after-life when all will be righted is sheer delusion; but he sees
that the systematic inculcation of highly suspect doctrine is quite
another matter, and certainly not to be made an excuse for storing
nothing to ameliorate man's lot (p. 162). He remains "convinced that
despite all the shortcomings of Western liberal democracy, it is far
preferable to the authoritarian, mind-numbing certitudes of Islamic
theocracy" (p. 359).

Scriptures and creeds make a religion vulnerable, in that they supply
the critic and the skeptic with a hold. Nevertheless, many Christians
have managed to transcend elements in their sacred books that have been
impugned. Can we not expect the same of Muslims? Liberal Christians will
say, for instance, that God's revelation is presented in the Bible
through miracle stories because miracles were believed in at that time,
whereas we who do not believe in them are free to interpret the miracle
stories in a different way. Can we not expect Muslims to say, sooner or
later, that persecution of "infidels" is enjoined in the Koran because
in Islam's early days only an aggressive attitude to outsiders ensured
its survival, whereas modern believers can be open to divine counsel of
moderation and tolerance? A serious obstacle to any such development is
the hatred of the West that Muslim leaders inculcate. Leaders get the
support of followers by persuading them that they are threatened by a
common enemy. Their argument is not "Support me, because I wish for
power," but "Support me to save yourselves from these hated
imperialists." Without such a basis of hatred, the support for a leader
is apt to become lukewarm; and so he must be continually striking at the
supposed enemy. This it is that militates so strongly against any
compromise. Altogether, in political argument even in democracies, it is
the appeal to moral principles that gives rise to most of the hate, and
it would be much better to talk frankly about interests. One who resists
a moral principle must necessarily be immoral, and therefore not to be
argued with but coerced. On the other hand, when an opposition of
interests is frankly faced, there is a possibility of reaching some kind
of compromise and understanding, without abuse and anger.

Warraq's book shows that the world today is very far from such a
situation and is not moving towards it.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This review appeared in *FREE INQUIRY*, Winter 1995/96. The
reviewer is a Professor at the University of London, a member of the
Academy of Humanism, and the author of *Did Jesus Exist?*

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
