+++
title = "28 Perspective: Ex-defender of the faith"

+++
TWENTY-EIGHT  
Perspective: Ex-defender of the faith[1](#1)

Shabbir Akhtar

*Shabbir Akhtar, 37, was born in Pakistan to a "traditional Muslim
family" At the age of eight be left for England, where be lived first in
London and then in a "Muslim ghetto" in Bradford. He attended a state
school in the day followed by mosque school, where he studied classical
Arabic to enable him to read Islamic texts. At St. Catharine's,
Cambridge, he studied philosophy.*

*A doctorate on Christian existentialism and the role of passion in
religious commitment at the University of Alberta, Canada, was followed
by a post as race relations officer for Bradford council. But after the
Salman Rushdie affair erupted in 1989 Akhtar felt he had to resign.*

*He wrote a book, Be Careful with Muhammed!, setting out the case
against Rushdie and arguing that his Satanic Verses, which had so
inflamed fundamentalists, should be withdrawn from sale in Britain. "Not
on Islamic grounds but on grounds that in a liberal society there should
be respect for the beliefs of minority groups living therein."*

*Akhtar then worked with several Islamic groups, including those of
Kalim Siddiqui and Yusuf Islam (aka Cat Stevens), before accepting a
post at the International Islamic University in Malaysia. For the first
time he found himself in a society where Muslims were in the majority
and in power. Three years later be was beading back to Britain, angered
and disillusioned by the religious intolerance be experienced. "I would
oppose any place where Islam became a political ideology and got into
power - because I have experienced such a society."*

I lived in Malaysia for three years in the kind of uncertainty
westerners face only in times of war. The five daily calls to prayer are
the only predictable events in the capital city, Kuala Lumpur. The power
cuts are frequent, the traffic jams continuous. Islam is the official
religion, but materialism is the ruling creed.

Living in a state where Islam was empowered deepened and darkened my
idealistic view of my faith and my people. I had a second childhood in
northern industrial England. Here I belonged to a powerless minority and
a despised religion. Upon arrival at the International Islamic
University. I joined the ruling Muslim majority. Before, when I was in
the minority, it was easy to play the moral card.

New lecturers must meet the Saudi-Kurdish rector in his opulent rooms on
campus. He invites us to settle down into the comfort and security of
dogma. It is us against the world; and the world, especially the western
hemisphere, is very wicked. Believers, he tells us, having nothing new
to learn, Western-style free inquiry is aimless. Besides, what is the
point of free inquiry if God has already revealed to us the whole truth?

I taught philosophy and comparative religion. It is, I think, an abuse
of podium in a university directly to encourage students either away
from or towards personal religious commitment. But a good teacher should
puncture the immature and incoherent religious beliefs of zealous
undergraduates. In Islamic universities, students and faculty alike are
obsessed with the defence of Islam against western Christian and secular
liberal accusation. As a student in Cambridge in the late 1970s, my
fellow philosophy students were youthful atheists aggressively
dismissive of all religions, particularly Islam, as alien, obscurantist
and hyopocritical.

As a lecturer, I could never dismiss religious faith with the sherry
party cleverness of my philosophy teachers. They mocked the virgin birth
(endorsed by the Koran, too) and the resurrection. They said things
like: "You are all old enough to know how babies are born. And remember.
Dead people stay dead." A teacher's duty is not to use shock tactics,
but rather to refine the simplistic faith of his flock. If some end up
losing their faith, along with their virginity, so be it.

I am not so consumed by philosophical zeal as to seek to destroy the
simple faith of simple people. But let us not spare university students.
In western universities one meets immaturely cynical atheists who cover
their walls with portraits of Marx. In Islamic settings we have devout
students who have never thought critically about their faith. Despite
being formally religious, Muslims are astonishingly reluctant to think
about ultimate issues. I asked my senior students to debate the question
of the providence of God. Every Friday, prayers rise from thousands of
minarets, pleading for Muslim unity, food for the starving, freedom for
the oppressed. Nothing happens; nothing changes. Is not the silence of
God theologically puzzling? Almost all of them quickly dropped the
course I was teaching.

The crucial intellectual defect with my Muslim colleagues in the faculty
of revealed knowledge in my view was their total lack of a sense of
history. These men accepted the Koran's patently unhistorical claim that
there has been in every age since the world began an articulate and
developed monotheism. More dangerously, they believed in the myth of an
early Islamic utopia, a time of universal freedom, tolerance and moral
perfection.

In the West, until recently, there was a similarly romantic view of the
glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome. Classical
antiquity was actually full of brutality and squalor. Islam in its Arab
origins was a revolutionary movement with the normal quota of bloodshed,
compromise and hypocrisy. Apologists for every defeated civilisation
speak of a return to a pure past. Their idealism is not only a factual
error about a dead past, but a political tragedy about the living
present. The past is paradise because the present is hell.

Among my friends were professors blessed with an encyclopaedic intimacy
with the Koran, combined with a total ignorance of the Torah and the New
Testament. I conducted an advanced class in comparative religion in
which students had a chance, for the first time in their lives, to look
at copies of the Judaeo-Christian scriptures in their original languages
with parallel texts in English. The aim was to get Muslim students to
identify and attack the presuppositions that made them feel so uniquely
holy and special. Their academic advisers counselled them to drop this
class as it "constituted a threat to their faith". Nothing must
complicate the sublime simplicity of the true religion. *Simplex
sigillum veri* (the simple is the sign of the true): some conservative
Jews and Christians would concur. Narrow-mindedness at least is always
ecumenical in scope.

My doctoral work was on the metaphysics and epistemology of Christian
dogma. Working on these themes in an Islamic environment readily brought
accusation and insinuation. Some said I was secretly a Christian: others
hinted I was pro-Jewish, a serious charge since it could lead to instant
expulsion from the university. We were a medieval community.

There was continuous and ugly sectarian controversy in the university
leaving little time for research and teaching. Virtually everyone
accused everyone else of heresy or disbelief. The Koran was quoted by
all parties to a dispute, even when the claim was based on common sense.
The scripture is plastic to our wishes: it was wise maxims elastic
enough to cover the aspirations of all contenders. There are no
illegitimate interpretations. What matters is the prestige of the
interpreter: a brilliant interpreter can get away with anything. Some
granted women certain human rights: others saw in the Koran the most
comprehensive charter for keeping women in their place. All were united
in their hatred of the West where women's lives are scandalously free.

Although the university is financed by the Malay government, the senate
decided that modem Arabic should be a requirement for all students and
lecturers. While a reading knowledge of classical Arabic is necessary
for scholarly access to the Koran and Islamic literature, modem
colloquial Arabic is unnecessary. The official argument was that the
adoption of a single spoken tongue would unite the Muslim community
worldwide - yet 23 Arab nations speak the same language without any
signs of political unity. Iraq and Kuwait are not divided by a language
barrier. Surprisingly, the senate's decision was welcomed by the Malays
whose own language was dismissed as primitive. The international staff
tolerated the ordinance with supine indifference. I condemned it as
"Arab linguistic imperialism" and had my reservations minuted. My
examination questions were henceforth subject to the rector's approval.

Islam is practised with ritual precision and with perfect reverence for
its Arabian dimension. All Malays, including the royal family, look up
to Arabs, the white men of the East. The Koran is not theologically
Arabian, but it is ritually and behaviouristically Arabian through and
through. It promotes Arab interests, sanctifies Arab culture and
language, promotes an Arab-centred Islamic brotherhood and vigorously
encourages the defence of Arab political rights in the Holy Land. With
these privileges granted by God and never questioned by non-Arab
Muslims, one can see why Arabs see themselves as patrons rather than
mere adherents of Islam. If we allow for Semitic hyperbole in the Koran,
Islam may have been meant solely for Arabs: its status as universal
religion may be due to a misunderstanding of Arabic idiom.

Most of the literature in the university library was in English: there
was virtually nothing of quality being published in the Islamic world.
This modern movement of an endless intellectual curiosity about all
things is one we owe to western man. In modern analytical philosophy,
there is hardly anything in Arabic or any other Islamic tongue.
Philosophical discussion is best conducted in English. Owing to the
grammatical limitations of Arabic, it is impossible to express most
philosophical claims with an acceptable degree of rigour and clarity.
Moreover, Arabic is a devotional language lacking the vocabulary
requisite for detached discussion of controversial matters.

As the only philosophy department in Malaysia, we were under constant
suspicion. One day, the rector declared, without consultation, that
philosophy was an unIslamic discipline. All staff were to be transferred
within 24 hours to the department of revealed knowledge, their research
and teaching were to be Islamicised under dec4pal supervision. I was
shocked to see my colleagues praise this decision. I was informed that I
was no longer allowed to teach but could research on "a topic that has
no implications about the truth of The True Religion". The dean decided
that I should be permitted to investigate the Dead Sea Scrolls.

I resigned, no longer a defender of the faith. Freedom is a precondition
of profundity: no wonder philosophy has no place in the cultural life of
Muslims. Religion is merely ritual without the spiritual introspection
that philosophical insight brings. I still like mysticism and even
concede the possibility of magic since I am a poet. But I cannot abandon
rationalism for more than an hour a day. It is not the task of religion
to seek to seduce us from the straight path of reason. Besides, we
should be sceptical of any faith whose adherents are eager to offer
themselves as models to the world.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This article appeared in *The Times Higher Education
Supplement* on 22 August 1997.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
