+++
title = "18  SIXTEEN A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-8"

+++
SIXTEEN  
A FELLOW-TRAVELLER OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY-8

As I draw towards the end of this series, I have a second letter saying
that I have not at all succeeded in establishing my case about Prime
Minister Nehru's communist leanings. Mr. Tolo Panjabi from Bombay thinks
that the "tone and trend" of my arguments is "most regrettable and
deliberately misleading", and that my description of Fascism as the
"last-ditch battle of nationalism against communism" shows where my
"sympathies are". He refers to the imperialist record of Fascist Italy
in Africa to prove his point. And then in a bid to defend Pandit Nehru,
he goes on, "I wonder how he would explain the policy of Mr. Nehru on
such matters as Goa, Kashmir, Algeria, and *de jure* transfer of French
occupied territories in India. Let him not tell us that a conflict
between India and Portugal will not embarrass Western countries and
delight Russia, or the occupation of a part of Kashmir and establishment
of American bases there serves the interests of Russia. Certainly, the
Russians are not such naive goblins as would allow such a thing to
happen through one of their stooges. I dare him to analyse Mr. Nehru's
role in Belgrade in the light of his far-fetched arguments."

Before I present my defence against Mr. Panjabi's observations, let me
confess that I have also received, quite frequently, some very laudatory
letters from the readers of these articles. People who have spotted me
behind the mask of my pseudonym have also spoken or written to me
personally some very warm words of appreciation. If I have so far
refrained from referring to this side of the picture, it is partly
because I feel embarrassed whenever I am praised, and partly because,
having known that the overwhelming majority of my countrymen are quite
capable of siding with truth whenever it gets known to them, I am not
surprised by such a positive response.

What surprises me is that there should be some patriotic people in my
country whom no amount of objective evidence or straight logic seems to
satisfy. I can understand a communist when he shows contempt for such
"flimsy things" as facts or when he cold-shoulders "bourgeois logic" in
favour of "proletarian dialectics". For, the major premise of Marxism is
that "all philosophy is partisan". But Mr. Panjabi does not seem to be a
communist for the simple reason that he has not been able to see any
Anglo-American inspiration behind these articles. I, therefore, take Mr.
Panjabi seriously and am overlooking his insinuation that I have been
deliberately trying to mislead my readers.

As regards Mr. Panjabi's charge that I sympathise with Fascism, let me
inform him that being a conscious and convinced Hindu by faith I look at
all these "isms" from the West as mere variations on the single sinful
theme of modern materialism. I see no merit either in capitalism with
its paraphernalia of parliamentary democracy, or in Fascism with its
cant about the corporate State, or in Socialism of any variety with its
witchcraft about social welfare. I stand solidly and without any doubt
whatsoever for the Hindu concept of *Dharma-rajya* as detailed in our
appropriate *Shastras* and as practised by our great monarchies and
republics in the past.

But whenever I discuss the Western world, I do make distinctions between
one ideology and another. I do choose parliamentary democracy wherever
it has not yet become an ally of communism as it had in pre-Fascist
Italy, Weimer Germany, Republican Spain and France of the Popular Front
days. As a student of history, however, I know that parliamentary
democracy has not suited and will not suit any people outside the
Anglo-Saxon peoples and a few small countries like Sweden, Norway,
Denmark and Switzerland, etc. Everywhere else, parliamentary democracy
has, sooner or later, broken the bounds of national unity and become an
instrument of Communism.

And strong maladies always suggest equally strong remedies. Nationalism
must take the form of Fascism wherever the communist cancer eats into
the vitals of a nation. That is why I have described Fascism as the
*last-ditch* battle of nationalism against Communism. Surely, such a
transformation of nationalism must leave a bad taste in the mouth of
everyone who cares for certain basic human values. But it is a million
times better for a nation to go Fascist than surrender its body and soul
to Communism. For, Communism means not only the end of all civil
liberties but also the end of national independence and the destruction
of all national culture.

It is, of course, a false generalisation to say that Fascism must
inevitably erupt into predatory imperialism. Except in the case of
Mussolini's Italy and Hitler's Germany, Fascism has been mostly content
with its "achievements" at home. Nor has any variety of Fascism
committed the crimes in which Communism takes particular pride-forced
starvation and plunder of the peasantry; mass murder of the
intelligentsia; brain-washing and a total extinction of all higher
aspirations of the human mind and spirit. Fascism at its worst has been
physically cruel and politically oppressive. But it has never attempted
to rob every single human being of his soul, and convert him into a mere
moron caught in the matrix of a monolithic materialism.

Next, Pandit Nehru's stand vis-a-vis Goa, Kashmir, Algeria and the *de
lure* transfer of French possessions in India proves to my mind the
opposite of what Mr. Panjabi concludes from these cases. Pandit Nehru is
not an ardent admirer of Algerian nationalism simply because that
nationalism still looks towards Nasser and has not yet become a stooge
of Soviet imperialism. He was very much fascinated by Nasser so long as
Nasser looked like an ally of the communist camp. But as soon as Nasser
came out as an Arab nationalist, first and last, Pandit Nehru visibly
turned cold towards him. Let the Algerians import Soviet arms and Soviet
military advisers and we shall see Pandit Nehru putting on quite another
colour.

And the fact that Pandit Nehru has not ordered the Indian Army to march
into Goa nor amalgamated the French possessions into the Indian Union
without further reference to France, is also a positive proof that he is
not an Indian patriot. I am convinced that not a fly will flutter in
France if the French possessions are integrated forthwith into India.
Portugal will most probably put up a fight over Goa. But, again, I am
sure that no other Western nation will show her much sympathy or give
her any support. Goa under the Portugese and the French possessions
without a *de jure* transfer are only convenient excuses for Pandit
Nehru in his communist game of perverting Indian nationalism and setting
it up against the Western camp. If Goa and the French possessions are
taken by India, he will not know how to harangue against the North
Atlantic Alliance, day in and day out.

The question of Kashmir is a little more complicated. For, it is a
question with a very complicated history. Perhaps Mr. Panjabi does not
know that Pandit Nehru had befriended Shaikh Abdullah simply because the
latter was also, and for a long time, a Soviet-addict like him. I have
in my possession several pamphlets published by the People's Publishing
House in praise of the *Sher-e-Kashmir*. Pandit Nehru dropped Shaikh
Abdullah primarily because the Shaikh picked up a quarrel with Sadiq &
Co., the communist clique in Kashmir. Shaikh Abdullah proved to be a
traitor to India. But we could not catch him as such. We had to invent
an American conspiracy and brand the Shaikh as an American agent before
we could arrest and arraign him. That is the measure of perversion
suffered by our nationalism under the leadership of a communist camp
follower like Pandit Nehru.

Also, Mr. Panjabi does not seem to know why Pandit Nehru promised a
plebiscite in Kashmir without consulting any of his cabinet colleagues
or even Mahatma Gandhi. I refer him to the *Memorandum* which the CPI
had submitted to the British Cabinet Mission and in which Kashmir was
described as a separate nationality which should be given the right of
self-determination to the point of becoming a sovereign State. The CPI
had denounced Kashmir's accession to India as an imperialist annexation
in early 1948. The Indian army in Kashmir had been described as an army
of occupation in all official Soviet publications at that time. So
Pandit Nehru's communist conscience suffered persistent pricks. He not
only promised a plebiscite but also ordered the Indian Army to stop its
triumphant march into Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. He changed his stand on
a plebiscite in Kashmir only when the Soviet Union and the CPI had
changed their stand and come out in support of the Indian case in
Kashmir after Pakistan entered into an alliance with America. And he let
loose a lying campaign against the West which was only reminding him
half-heartedly of the plebiscite promise he had himself made earlier.

Of course, the establishment of American bases in Pakistan-occupied
Kashmir does not serve the interests of Soviet Russia. But was it Pandit
Nehru who invited the Americans to establish those bases there? He has
registered only resentment against those bases and encouraged all sorts
of communist fronts in India to raise a continuous hue and cry on that
score. What more can he do? Go to war with Pakistan? I am sure the
Soviet Union will not relish that so long as it involves the possibility
of a World War. It is significant that-up to date no communist platform
or publication has invited India to wage a war with Pakistan over the
issue of Kashmir. The USA is sure to intervene on the side of Pakistan
if such a war arises. The Soviet Union will have to come to the aid of
India unless she is prepared for a loss of prestige in the eyes of her
own satellites, actual and potential. So it is better to keep the
Kashmir kettle boiling and woo Indian nationalism over to the Soviet
side. Does Mao Tse-tung cease to be a communist because he has done
nothing about American bases in Formosa?

Look at the altogether different attitude of Pandit Nehru in the face of
Chinese occupation of Indian territory. He refuses to enter into any
negotiations with Pakistan unless Pakistan changes her foreign policy.
Taking the excuse of Pakistan's membership, he has attacked, again and
again, the whole system of Western alliances in Europe, the Middle East
and South East Asia. But he has been more than willing to negotiate with
China without raising any accusing finger against China's foreign
policy. He is not tired of sounding China secretly and through all sorts
of diplomatic channels in spite of an overwhelming national demand that
no talks with the aggressor should be held unless aggression is first
vacated. And he has never uttered a word against the Sino-Soviet
military alliance under which China is getting arms aid which may be
eventually used against India.

As regards Pandit Nehru's role at Belgrade, Mr. Panjabi has readily
believed the stories spread by a section of the Western press about
"Nehru, the pro-Western and moderate neutralist" on the eve of the
Conference. Since then the Conference has issued a declaration repeating
all the age-old communist slogans and attacking every Western position
everywhere in the world. And the disappointed Western world is already
shedding tears regarding the role of their knight errant. His role at
Belgrade was particularly pernicious because he would not let the
Conference go into particular instances of right and wrong, and urged it
all along to confine itself to pious proclamations about world peace - a
theme so dear to Soviet hearts if only it is played without reference to
Soviet imperialism and the Soviet stockpile of nuclear bombs. The
subsequent satisfaction expressed by Comrade Khrushchev and the Soviet
press is proof positive that the Conference which accepted Pandit
Nehru's suggestion after initial hesitations has only served the cause
of the Soviet Slave Empire.

And, now, I must get back to my analysis of Pandit Nehru's foreign
policy till today. We have seen, in the foregoing articles, how he
followed, till 1942, every twist and turn of Soviet foreign policy with
the tenacity of a trained communist. Since then we see a noticeable
change in the mode and method of his presentation of his foreign policy.
He always makes out a plausible case without direct reference to the
source of his inspiration. But amidst all the conflicting and
contradictory justifications given by him about the different positions
taken at different occasions vis-a-vis the international scene, we see a
consistent pro-Soviet pattern running all through the theme. In all its
essentials, the foreign policy pursued by him as the Prime Minister of
independent India has closely followed the Soviet lead.

Let us contemplate this foreign policy against the background of the
world situation as it has emerged after the Second World War in order to
realise the full horror and shame implied in it. **The Western nations
have, in most cases, peacefully liquidated their vast empires. Today
only a few pin-points like Hong Kong, Macao, Goa, Aden, and West Irian
are all that is left of Western imperialism in Asia.[1](#1) The vast
continent of Africa is fast becoming free in an orderly manner. From
Latin America, too, the last vestiges of Western imperialism are in the
process of vanishing.

The Soviet Union, on the other hand, has enslaved vast areas and
populations in East and West. The three Baltic States-Latvia, Lithuania,
Estonia-have once again disappeared from the map and into the belly of
the Russian Bear. Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Rumania and
Albania are being ruled by Soviet satraps sustained by Soviet bayonets.
Parts of Finland, Germany, Korea, Vietnam and Laos are under Soviet
armed occupation. Mongolia, China and Tibet have been overrun by
traitorous gangs armed by the Soviet Union. And the totalitarian terror
of Soviet imperialism that now prevails in all these lands has had no
parallel in the whole of human history.

Yet, there is not a single resolution of the Indian National Congress or
a single statement by any Indian Government spokesman which either
appreciates the change of heart among the western nations, or denounces
the dirty deeds of the Soviet warlords. On the contrary, India has
joined her voice to every tirade which the communist parties and fronts
have launched against Western "colonialism". And India has patronised
persistently and painstakingly the puppet regimes which the Soviet Union
has set up in so many countries. It was only the other day that the
Prime Minister of India declared in broad daylight that the East
European Satellites of the Soviet Union were fully sovereign nations!

Similarly, India has been on the Soviet side in every single
international tangle since the Second World War-Palestine, Korea, Tibet,
Viet Nam, Hungary, Cuba, Berlin. And India has never failed to denounce
whatever measures of self-defence the Western nations have adopted
against the communist menace. All that has happened while the West has
honestly tried to understand, appreciate, and accommodate our point of
view and while the Soviet camp has heaped foul abuse and slander upon us
whenever we have strayed away from its stand even by an hair's breadth.

Pandit Nehru made known to the whole world on December 4, 1947 the path
he was going to follow in the field of foreign policy. Speaking before
the Constituent Assembly, he said: "But talking about foreign policies
the house must remember that these are not just empty struggles on a
chess board. Behind them lie all manner of things. *Ultimately, foreign
policy is the outcome of economic policy, and until India has properly
evolved her economic policy, her foreign policy will be rather vague,
rather inchoate, and will be groping*. It is well for us to say that we
stand for peace and freedom and yet that does not convey much to
anybody, except a pious hope. We do stand for peace and freedom. I think
there is something to be said for it. There is some meaning when we say
that we stand for the freedom of Asian countries and for the elimination
of imperialistic control over them. There is some meaning in that.
Undoubtedly it has some substance, but a vague statement that we stand
for peace and freedom by itself has no particular meaning, because every
country is prepared to say the same thing, whether it means it or not.
What then do we stand for? Well, you have to develop this argument in
the economic field. As it happens today, in spite of the fact that we
have been for sometime in authority as a Government, I regret that we
have not produced any constructive economic scheme or economic policy so
far. Again, my excuse is that we have been going through such taxing
times which have taken up all our energy and attention that it was
difficult to do so. *Nevertheless, we shall have to do so and when we do
so, that will govern our foreign policy, more than all the speeches in
this House*."[2](#2)

This was the forecast of Avadi when India under Pandit Nehru's lead
adopted the "socialistic pattern of society", and openly moved into the
"international socialist camp". The communist camp admits in so many
words that India under Pandit Nehru stands on their side. The Vijaywada
thesis of the CPI says: "The interest of the Indian nation demands a
continuation of the present foreign policy. *Nehru, who has been the
main architect of this policy, has shown no inclination to abandon it*.
India stands in the camp of peace and anti-colonialism, against war and
for disarmament."[3](#3)

Comrade Ajoy Ghose, General Secretary of the CPI, proclaimed as follows
before the Vijaywada Congress of the Party: *"It is a matter of great
joy that relations between our country and the Soviet Union have become
more friendly than ever*. This relationship is not only a big factor in
advancing the struggle for world peace but also, as the Political
Resolution adopted by the National Council stresses, helps us to
strengthen our national economy and thereby consolidate our national
freedom. *The sentiment of friendship towards the Soviet Union has
steadily grown and is shared today by people from all walks of life and
following diverse political parties*."[4](#4)

He added in the same speech: *"Conditions in India are in many respects
extremely favourable for the development of a powerful mass movement for
peace, against colonialism, for Afro-Asian solidarity*. Peace is
essential for our national reconstruction and we have long traditions of
anti-imperialist struggle. **Sentiments of friendship for the USSR,
sentiments of solidarity with Afro-Asian countries are strong among our
people. *The Government of India generally takes a position which helps
the cause of peace and national liberation*."[5](#5)

As regards the arguments advanced in defence of this foreign policy,
Pandit Nehru clarified his position on March 8, 1948. Speaking again
before the Constituent Assembly, he said: "Naturally we cannot as a
Government go as far as we might have done as a non-official
organisation in which we can express our opinions as frankly and as
aggressively as possible. Speaking as a Government we have to moderate
our language. We have sometimes to stop doing things which we might
otherwise do. Nevertheless, the fundamental thing is whether we
sympathise and openly sympathise with a country like Indonesia in her
struggle for freedom, or not. That applies not to Indonesia only, but to
several other countries. In each case, we have to face the passive
hostility of various interests, not only the direct interests involved,
but also the indirect interests involved, because the direct and the
indirect interests hang together in such matters ... We have either to
pursue our policy generally within limitations-because we cannot pursue
it wholeheartedly, nevertheless openly-or give it up. *I do not think
that anything could be more injurious to us from any point of view,
certainly from an idealistic and high moral point of view, but equally
so from the point of view of opportunism and national interest in the
narrowest sense of the word than for us to give up the policies that we
have pursued, namely those of standing up for certain ideals in regard
to the oppressed nations, and try to align ourselves with this great
power or that and become its camp followers in the hope that some crumbs
might fall from their table*."[6](#6)

There was in this statement a dig against anyone attempting to revise
India's foreign policy in the light of Soviet hostility to independent
India, and Soviet encouragement of internal subversion through tile
Communist Party of India. Zhdanov divided the world into two
irreconcilable camps in September 1947. India had been placed squarely
in the "imperialist camp" and Pandit Nehru himself described as an
"agent of American imperialism". The Ranadive Resolution had been passed
in the Second Congress of the CPI a few months later. But all that was
of no consequence to Pandit Nehru. He was out to prove that he was a
"man of honour" vis-a-vis the Soviet Union, and that no amount of
dollars would ever delude him.

The Soviet Union recognised after a few years that Pandit Nehru had
stood the severest test and rather very well. From then onwards Krishna
Menon became a bright star in the international firmament. From being a
peon of Pandit Nehru he became a world figure in no time. The scent of
his sinister schemes very soon sent a wave of misgiving in most Indian
minds. But Pandit Nehru staked all his personal prestige in a bid to
protect his protege. Speaking on January 31, 1957 before a mass meeting
in Madras, lie said: "There are some people in this country and some
people in other countries whose job in life appears to be to try to run
down Krishna Menon, because be is far cleverer than they are, *because
he is record of service for Indian freedom is far longer than theirs,
and because he has worn himself out in the service of India*. It is not
necessary for them or for me or for you to agree with Krishna Menon in
everything, although he is my close colleague. I do not agree with T.T.
Krishnamachari, although he is a close colleague. We do not agree with
each other in everything. *But we do agree in our broad approach to
problems, and we do believe in each other's bonafides and integrity.
Otherwise, we cannot cooperate*. But this kind of repeated and
persistent attempt to undermine our policy by throwing mud at a
colleague of ours seems to me not very desirable or proper. It is
because of this, I want to tell you, that though Krishna Menon is a
member of the Rajyasabha, and it was not necessary for him to seek
election, yet we have agreed to his seeking election from the city of
Bombay, for Bombay is a cosmopolitan city and we want our foreign policy
to be voted upon in Bombay. It is for the people to say whether they
agree with our foreign policy or not. *It is our challenge to those who
disagree with our foreign policy*. We do not run away from
criticism."[7](#7) He should have added that he was planning to send the
Indian Army into Goa so that Krishna Menon scored over Acharya
Kripalani.

That is the whole story in which every strand says unmistakably that
Pandit Nehru and not Krishna Menon is the real culprit in the context of
our foreign policy failures. If we want to get rid of Krishna Menon and
all that he symbolises, let us make up our minds to see that Pandit
Nehru is swept out of power as soon as possible. We must mobilise the
whole country against Pandit Nehru after educating our people about the
true character of this Soviet stooge hiding under a Gandhi cap. If we do
not do that, we should be prepared to see a Nehru-Communist coalition
installed at New Delhi in the course of the next few years. The next
article of this series will reveal how Pandit Nehru's collaboration with
the Soviet Union in the field of foreign policy has been accompanied by
a similar collaboration with the Communist Party of India in India's
domestic politics.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) Goa and West Irian, too, have since been freed from Western
colonialism.  

[2](#2a) *Jawaharlal Nehru's Beaches*, 1946-53, p. 203. Italics added.

[3](#3a) *New Age*, May 7, 1961, p. 14. Italics added.

[4](#4a) *New Situation and Our Tasks*, Communist Party Publication, New
Delhi, p. 4. Italics added.

[5](#5a) Ibid., p. 7. Italics added.

[6](#6a) *Jawaharlal Nehru's Speeches*, 1946-53, pp. 214-15. Italics
added.

[7](#7a) *Jawaharlal Nehru's Speeches*, 1947-57, p. 228. Italics added.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://www.voiceofdharma.com/books)    [Back to
Home](http://www.voiceofdharma.com)**
