+++
title = "19 OUR SHAME"

+++



  


  


  


  


EVEN THE GOMBE chimpanzees are threatened by the relentless march of human expansion. I was thinking about this during a recent visit as I followed a large group of chimpanzees high up into the open wind-swept grasslands near the crest of the rift escarpment. I was out of breath when we arrived at our destination—a great stand of *muhandehande* trees. As the chimps, with loud calls of delight, began to feast on the rich crop of yellow nectar-sweet fruits, I settled on a rock, that, shaded by one of the low, stunted trees, still held the coolness of the night air. We were almost at the topmost peak of the chimpanzee’s world, under the pale morning sky. Below us the ground fell away now steeply, now more gently, towards the blue-grey expanse of Lake Tanganyika. Lines and patches of green, starting just below the smooth golden-brown humps and ridges of the dry upper slopes, gradually became darker and thicker, then converged as they followed the maze of gullies and ravines that led down to the thickly forested valleys. To the north and to the south, valley succeeded valley, each leading its own swift-flowing stream westward, from the watershed, high in the hills, down to the lake.

Gombe National Park, a narrow strip of rugged terrain, two miles at its widest, stretches for no more than ten miles along the eastern shore of the lake—a pitifully small stronghold, I re flected, for the three communities of chimpanzees living there. For, although they still roam free, they are effectively imprisoned—their refuge is surrounded on three sides by villages and cultivated land, while along the fourth boundary, the shore of the lake, over one thousand fishermen are camped. Yet these one hundred and sixty or so chimpanzees are safer than almost any other wild chimpanzees in Africa—except for those in the few remaining places, in the central part of the species’ range, that are utterly remote. At least, in Gombe, there is no poaching.

I sat there, cooling down in the fresh breeze, looking out over the chimpanzees’ dwindled realm. When I arrived at Gombe in 1960 you could climb to the top of the rift escarpment and gaze out to the east over chimpanzee habitat stretching into the far distance. The forests and woodlands that offered sanctuary to wildlife stretched almost unbroken from the northern tip of the lake to the southwest border of Tanzania—and beyond. There may have been as many as ten thousand chimpanzees living in Tanzania then, while today there can be no more than two thousand, five hundred. But at least many of these remaining chimpanzees are protected in two national parks, Gombe and the much larger Mahale Mountains area to the south. There are also a number of forest reserves where chimpanzees still roam in comparative safety. Chimpanzees are not eaten by any peoples in Tanzania nor has there ever been a flourishing export trade in live chimpanzees. In most other African countries where chimpanzees still live their plight is far more grim.

At the turn of the century chimpanzees were found, in their hundreds of thousands, in twenty-five African nations. From four countries they have disappeared completely. In five others, the population is so small that the species cannot long survive. In seven countries populations are less than five thousand. And even in the four remaining central strongholds chimpanzees are gradually and relentlessly losing ground to the ever-growing needs of ever-growing human populations. Forests are razed for dwellings and for cultivation. Logging and mining activities penetrate ever deeper into the natural habitats, and human diseases, to all of which chimpanzees are susceptible, follow. Moreover, the dwindling chimpanzee populations become increasingly fragmented and genetic diversity is lost until, in many cases, the small groups of survivors can no longer sustain themselves. In some countries in West and Central Africa chimpanzees are hunted for food. Even in places where they are not eaten, females are often shot, snared, chased with packs of dogs, or even poisoned in order that their infants may be captured for sale to dealers who, in turn, ship them off for the international entertainment and pharmaceutical industries, or sell them as “pets” to anyone who will buy them.

In the tree nearest me I heard soft laughing. Fifi’s two daughters, Fanni and Fiossi, the edge of their appetites dulled, had begun to play. As I looked up, Fifi’s most recent infant, little Faustino, reached out to touch one of the yellow fruits that his mother was chewing, then licked his fingers. Several of the chimpanzees, their hunger satiated, had climbed down and were lying on the ground. Gremlin and Galahad were close to me and, even as I watched, the infant, relaxed by his mother’s gentle grooming fingers, dropped off to sleep. They were five feet from where I sat and once again I was all but overwhelmed by the trust they showed, and poignantly aware of my responsibility towards them: that trust must never be broken. Galahad, dreaming perhaps, suddenly clutched his mother’s hair. Gremlin responded instantly, holding him close, comforting him even as he slept so that he relaxed once more. Watching them I thought, as I so often do now, of the grim fate of hundreds of Africa’s chimpanzees. Of the mothers who are killed, the infants who are seized from their arms and, shocked, terrified and hurt, dragged into a harsh and bitter new life. A life that is barren and cold because the ever-comforting arms of the mother, and the nurture and reassurance of her breast, are no more.

The whole sickening business of capturing infant chimpanzees, for any purpose whatsoever, is not only cruel but also horribly wasteful. The hunters’ weapons are, for the most part, old and unreliable. Many mothers escape, wounded, only to die later of their injuries. Their infants will almost certainly die also. Often youngsters as well as their mothers are hit, particularly when the weapons are old flintlocks stuffed with nails or bits of metal. And if other chimpanzees rush to the defence of the mother and her child—then they may be shot also.

Just occasionally the hunters are thwarted. There is a true story of two hunters who set off in search of a young chimpanzee. After three days, during which they shot four mothers, three of whom escaped wounded and one who was killed along with her infant, they located and killed a fifth. She fell to the ground, her infant still living. Laying down the gun, the man went to seize the terrified, screaming infant as he clung, with the strength of desperation, to his dying mother. All at once there was a great crashing in the undergrowth and an adult male chimpanzee, hair bristling, charged out towards them. With a swiping, grabbing movement he virtually scalped one of the hunters. Seizing the other he hurled him down onto some rocks, breaking several ribs. Then he gathered up the infant and disappeared, back into the forest. When I first heard the tale I assumed that the youngster would die. But that was before we observed how Spindle looked after little Mel. Let us hope that the avenging male showed similar parental concern and skill and that the youngster was as tenacious of life as Mel. The two men managed to get to a hospital—and then, when they had recovered, were sent to jail.

Such incidents, however, must be rare. For most infants, the death of the mother brings their life in the forest to an abrupt end and leads to a succession of terrifying new experiences. After that brutal separation, the infant must first endure a nightmare journey to a native village or a dealer’s camp. The captive, feet and hands often tied together with string or wire, is crammed into a tiny box or basket, or pushed into a suffocating sack. And, with each agonizing jolt, cramped and chafed by the bonds of his new captivity, freedom, comfort and joy are left further and further behind. And let us not forget that an infant chimpanzee will suffer in almost exactly the same way, emotionally and mentally, as a small human child would.

Many youngsters do not survive these journeys, for they receive little if any attention and care en route. Those that do, arrive at holding stations in a sorry plight. Many are wounded, all are dehydrated, starving and suffering from shock. Yet it is unlikely that they will find relief or solace, for the conditions that prevail at such places are typically grim and standards of care atrocious. And as they await shipment to their final destinations, still more infants will die. The survivors must then face further travel to different places around the world. At airports delays are common and there is seldom anyone to nurture the crated captives. Often, indeed, their departure is illegal so that the dealers involved, and those in their pay, do their best to conceal the existence or at least the nature of the cargo. They are the evil ones, these dealers. With the blood of countless innocents on their hands, they grow fat and rich on suffering, like those who traded human slaves in years gone by.

It is surprising that any youngsters leave their cramped air cargo crates alive, yet, against all odds, some do. Like the survivors of the concentration camps of the Third Reich, these little chimpanzees show an amazing tenacity for life. But even their arrival overseas is not necessarily the end of the road—some must travel on via tortuous routes so that their country of origin can be concealed. This is so that they can be imported as *captive-born* chimpanzees into countries that cannot legally import *wild-born* chimpanzees from Africa. And so the grim score of lives wasted continues to mount. Those youngsters that do, eventually, reach their final destinations alive, are often so weak, so emotionally damaged, that it is impossible to restore them to health. It has been estimated by those most familiar with the trade that between ten and twenty chimpanzees will die for every infant that survives to the end of the first year at its ultimate destination.

My thoughts were interrupted as the chimpanzee group, well fed and well rested, started to move down the slope. As I followed Fifi and her family my pleasure at being with them was tempered by a nagging depression. Just watching Faustino as he enjoyed the attentions of his mother and two elder sisters, constantly reminded me, after the musings of the morning, of all the unfortunate infants snatched, so abruptly, from similar family groups.

What happens to the few battered orphans that survive the horror of capture and transport? What do we offer them as reward for their endurance? Alas, only too often their lives will be so grim and wretched that it would have been better for them had they died during those bitter months when first they fell into human hands. Many infants born in captivity face an equally bleak future. The best they can hope for, these chimpanzee prisoners, is to end up in a good zoo. And zoos offering really good conditions to chimpanzees are, sad to relate, still few and far between. Because adult chimpanzees are so strong and so good at escaping, enclosures large enough to provide a proper environment are expensive. Thus countless chimpanzees languish in small cement-floored, steel-barred cells in all parts of the world. Some of these unfortunates have one or two companions with whom to share their incarceration; others must suffer alone through up to fifty years of utter boredom. They become frustrated, apathetic and, eventually, psychotic. Conditions tend to be particularly grim in many African and other Third World zoos—hardly surprising in view of the fact that hundreds of humans there must also endure deprivation and misery. But there is no excuse for the shocking conditions that still prevail in many zoos throughout Europe and in the United States.

Nor is there any excuse for the abuse of young chimps in the coastal resort areas of southern Spain and seaside areas of the Canary Islands. These youngsters, smuggled illegally into the country from Africa, are subjected to years of misery at the hands of a group of photographers who ply their trade during the holiday season, offering tourists the opportunity to be snapped holding a cute young chimpanzee dressed in children’s clothes. The photos serve as reminders of a pleasant holiday in the sun—in a country that seems more exotic because of the presence of wild animals. There are, after all, no chimpanzees to be seen on the promenades of Brighton or Blackpool, or the French Riviera.

The casual tourist has no idea of the suffering inflicted on these pathetic infants. During the day they are carried or led around in the hot sun. At night many are taken into nightclubs and discos where their eyes become inflamed in smoky atmosphere and the noise must be anguish to their sensitive eardrums. Their feet are crammed into shoes that are quite the wrong shape for chimpanzee toes. They wear nappies \(seldom changed\) under plastic pants so that their bottoms become raw and painful. Most of them are heavily drugged. They are disciplined with blows, and some, in addition, with pressure from the tip of a glowing cigarette. As they get older their milk canines, and sometimes other teeth as well, are pulled out so that there is no risk of a customer being bitten. When they are five or six years old they are usually too big and strong for such work and they are either killed or sold to dealers.

Largely thanks to the persistent efforts of a British couple living in Spain, Simon and Peggy Templar, new legislation has been passed that enables the authorities to confiscate chimpanzees who have no permits. I was present when two of these youngsters were moved from the Templars’ holding station in Spain to a sanctuary in England.

One of them, Charlie, had only been rescued a few weeks before we arrived. He was six or seven years of age. All his teeth save for three canines and the molars at the back, which were just coming through, had been knocked out. He was thin, emaciated almost. And his movements were slow and deliberate, those of an old man; he seemed knowledgeable beyond his years and weighed down by what he had learned of life. His eyes appeared to look only inwards, back at his suffering.

A British veterinarian, Kenneth Pack, who had been helping the Templars for years, was there with his blow pipe to sedate the chimpanzees so that they could be put in their travelling crates. When Charlie was hit he gazed calmly at the dart sticking from his arm, with its little tuft of red twine, then slowly pulled it out and examined it carefully. He removed the needle, then seemed to try to put it back. Finally, to my utter disbelief, he tried to inject himself. Of course he failed—there was no needle. He walked over to me and handed me the syringe. But when I made to take it from him he gently directed my hand, holding the syringe, to his arm.

The Templars had described how some of the confiscated youngsters they took in went through all the horrifying symptoms of drug withdrawal, sometimes for weeks after their arrival. As I watched Charlie, with his sad, young-old face, I was sickened. Here was an addict, trying to give himself a “fix.”

And then there are the chimpanzees used in the entertainment industry, in circuses and movies. Of course it is possible to train chimpanzees by kindness, but the polished performances of chimpanzee stars, such as those in the various Tarzan films, *Project X, Bedtime for Bonzo,* and so on are, almost without exception, exacted by harsh cruelty. On the actual film sets there is rarely brutality—it would not be tolerated. But during pretraining sessions the non-human actors-to-be are routinely beaten into submission. Often the trainer uses a lead cosh around which he rolls a newspaper. When training continues on the set, in the presence of the human actors, the rolled-up newspaper is a symbol that ensures instant obedience.

A good many captive infant chimpanzees end up as pets, par ticularly in Africa. Most belong to expatriates who rescue them, hunched and miserable, often close to death, from the marketplace or the roadside. Their mothers have been shot, cut up and sold for meat. There is little flesh on infants, and the hunters, if they are lucky, can get more money by selling them as pets. And so the trade continues.

At first these youngsters are easy to look after in the home. Dressed in diapers they are like living dolls, docile, affectionate, cute. They may be pampered and well cared for and when sympathetic owners take the trouble to provide a nutritious diet, security and love, the infants will enjoy their lives, unnatural though they may be. But as they grow older they become harder to manage and, by the time they are four or five years of age, they have become a nuisance and a liability. They are strong and curious. They want to explore their environment. They climb the curtains, break anything lying around, raid the refrigerator, use keys to unlock cupboards. Increasingly they must be disciplined and they resent punishment. They throw violent tantrums and bite. And so they are banished from the home, often into tiny cages on the veranda. One chimp, Socrates, had been in such a prison for months when I met him. The story of the suffering he had known in his three short years was writ clearly in his face.

Whiskey was chained. I had seen photographs of him tied up at the back of a garage, but even so I was unprepared for the surge of pure anger that swept over me when I saw him. His concrete-floored, brick-walled cell was some five by six feet. There was a gaping hole in the ramshackle roof. The tiny open cubicle was next to an Asian-type lavatory, little more than a hole in the ground with the door half open. Whiskey’s “home” had probably served the same purpose, once.

“He is like a son to me,” said the smiling Arab. I stared at him, dumbfounded. Was it stupidity or insolence that prompted this man to introduce a “son” tied by a two-foot chain to a steel post at the back of a disused lavatory? I looked at Whiskey, met his questioning gaze. “His chain is lengthened at night,” said his “father.” “Then he can move out into the garage.” Yes, I thought, at night—when chimpanzees sleep. I went up to Whiskey and he put his arms around me, returning my embrace.

As I started to move away he began hurling himself about, jerking against the chain, banging the wall with his hands, his feet. He reached out towards me, then threw a banana skin—all that he could find in his prison. Usually he threw faeces, I had been told, but everything had been cleaned in readiness for my visit.

What happens to these unfortunate chimpanzees when they become really big and strong, at adolescence? Or when their owners leave the country? Some end up in a local zoo where, even when intentions are good, funds are usually limited. Moreover, the keepers have their own families to care for, and chimpanzee fare is only too acceptable to small hungry human children. When zoos will not take the young chimps they are often killed—for most countries now have laws prohibiting their legal export. Only too often there is no haven for them in the country that is their rightful home.

There are many chimpanzees owned as pets in the United States, too. There, “loving” owners often take steps to put off the day when they must part with them. Some chimpanzees have their teeth pulled out. One young female had both her thumbs amputated so that she couldn’t \(so her “mother” thought\) climb and destroy the curtains. But in the end these simian members of the family usually have to go. And by that time it is hard for them to adjust to being chimpanzees. All their lives they have been taught to behave like humans. What becomes of them, pathetic outcasts that they are? It is by no means easy to place unwanted home-raised chimpanzees in American zoos, since they tend to be socially inept and poor breeders. Often they are sold to dealers. They end up in roadside zoos, displayed in tiny cages for the ignorant to tease. Or in medical research labs.

And what is the lot of these chimpanzees used by scientists because they are so physiologically like humans? How are they treated by those who use their living bodies to try to learn more about human disease, drug addiction and mental illness? Certainly not as honoured guests in the labs. Indeed, most of them are maintained in conditions similar to those which convicts endured in bygone eras. Yet these chimpanzees are not only innocent of crime, but actually helping to alleviate human suffering. Even in the best of the labs, where breeding groups have relatively large outdoor enclosures, those chimpanzees being used in experimental procedures are housed in relatively small cages with only small outdoor enclosures. And in some of the labs that I have visited, the chimpanzees are kept in conditions that can only be described, at best, as showing absolutely no understanding of the needs of the inmates, and at worst, as shockingly cruel.

The first laboratory I ever visited was just outside America’s capital, in Rockville, Maryland. I had seen a videotape taken during an illicit entry, but even so I was not prepared for the nightmare world into which I was ushered by smiling, white-coated men. As I followed, the door to the outside closed, and all light from the sky was shut off. We moved through dimly lit underground corridors, and I was shown room after room lined with small, bare cages, stacked one above the other, in which monkeys circled endlessly round and round, round and round. Then there was a room where young chimpanzees, two or three years old, were crammed, two together, into tiny cages measuring, I was told, twenty-two inches by twenty-two inches, and two feet high. They could hardly move. Not yet part of any experiment, they had already been confined there for more than three months. Those cages were enclosed in metal boxes that looked like microwave ovens—“isolettes”—so that each prisoner could see out only through a small panel of glass. And what could they see? The bare wall opposite. And what was in the cage to provide occupa tion, comfort, stimulation? Nothing. Nothing except their own faeces and, from time to time, some food.

True, there were two chimps to a cage—at least they had each other for comfort. But not for long. Once infected—with hepatitis, AIDS or some other virulent disease—they would be separated and, like the others I saw that day, placed in cages by themselves. I watched one of these older chimpanzees, a juvenile female, as she rocked from side to side, sealed off from the outside world inside her metal isolation chamber. She was in semidarkness. All she could hear was the incessant roar of air rushing through vents into her cell. When she was lifted out by one of the technicians, she sat in his arms like a rag doll, listless, apathetic. I shall be haunted forever by her eyes, and by the eyes of the other chimpanzees I saw that day. They were dull, blank, utterly without hope. Have you ever looked into the eyes of a person who, stressed beyond endurance, has given up, succumbed utterly to the crippling helplessness of despair? I once saw a little African boy whose whole family had been killed during the fighting in Burundi. He too looked out at the world unseeing, from dull, blank eyes.

Unless long-promised changes do eventually take place, there the chimpanzees will remain for the next three or four years. During that time, they will become permanently disturbed, emotionally and psychologically.

Those cages did not comply with animal welfare regulations. But even if they had, it would have made little difference. I have been saddened to find how many scientists and lab personnel see nothing wrong with the legally required minimum cage size in the United States. Hundreds of chimpanzees are confined, each one alone, in prisons measuring five feet by five feet, and seven feet high. These highly social, highly intelligent beings, whose emotions are so similar to our own, may be locked into these metal-barred boxes for life. For over fifty years.

Imagine being shut up in such a cell, with bars all around; bars on every side, bars above, bars below. And with nothing to do. Nothing to while away the monotony of the long, long days. No physical contact, ever, with another of your kind. Friendly physical contact is so terribly important for chimpanzees. Those long, relaxed sessions of social grooming matter to them, so much.

I can never forget the first time that I gazed into the eyes of a fully adult male imprisoned in one of these standard lab cages. An old motor tyre suspended from the bars above was the only object, other than himself, inside his prison. There were nine other male chimpanzees in the bleak underground room. There were no windows. Nothing to see except the other prisoners. The walls were uniform white, the doors were steel. The sounds of the chimpanzees echoed and reverberated as they greeted our arrival—myself and a veterinarian. The noise, as they hooted, and shook and beat on the bars of their prisons, was almost unbearable.

It was when they quietened that I looked into Jojo’s eyes. I saw no hatred—that would have been easier to bear. Only puzzlement, gratitude that I had stopped to speak to him, to break the unbearable boredom of the day. I thought then of the chimpanzees of Gombe, free to roam the forests, free to play and groom and make nests in the springy branches. Jojo reached out a gentle finger and touched my cheek where the tears slid down into my laboratory mask.

Another nightmare visit was in Austria, just outside Vienna. To get there we drove through beautiful rolling countryside. The sun shone. In the lab the chimpanzees were locked below ground. This was a brand new building for AIDS research and anyone going into the chimpanzees quarters was required to wear heavy protective clothing. It was like struggling into an astronaut suit. If I failed to attach the nozzle of my breathing tube to the air vent in each of the rooms where I was to go, I was told, then I would suffocate. As I pulled the helmet down over my head, and felt hands zipping it closed from behind, I knew a mo ment of panic. My guide disappeared into a chemical shower that would sterilize his suit. I waited for the prescribed number of minutes then, peering through my glass visor, I lumbered awkwardly in his wake.

The heavy door clicked shut. In each of the three small chambers into which I was led there were two chimpanzees, each one imprisoned alone in a five-foot-square cage. There were sheets of some sort of plexiglass, or plastic, hung between the cages, through which the inmates could, I suppose, peer at each other. Most of them, I remember, just looked at us as we entered their rooms. One chimp seemed excited or afraid—I could not tell which. She came to the bars to be reassured by a clumsy, heavily gauntleted hand. As we left, they sank back into apathy—at least, no sounds followed us as the doors closed.

Throughout that brief tour around those dim, underground chambers I felt that I moved in a fantasy world, utterly remote from reality. I tried to imagine a hospital for AIDS patients—human patients—where all the doctors and nurses moved about grotesquely outfitted in space suits, where all the visitors had to strip and struggle into the same protective outfits. How terrified those chimpanzees must have been when first they saw these monstrous figures, heard the sepulchral voices distorted by the helmets. Now they are used to it. For them, the outside world, the real world with trees and sky and the comfort of normal, friendly contact with other living beings, is gone for ever.

How can the people working in these chimpanzee prisons tolerate the conditions there? Are they without feeling, without compassion? Are they utterly lacking in understanding? Are they sadistic, delighting in their power and control over such large and potentially dangerous creatures? For the most part, I think, the attitudes of the staff are forced upon them by the scientific system. Newly employed personnel are usually upset by what they see. Some quit, unable to endure the suffering around them, and feeling powerless to help. And many of those who stay on gradually come to accept the cruelty, believing \(or forcing themselves to believe\) that it is an inevitable part of the struggle to reduce human suffering. Some of them even become hard and callous in the process, “all pity choked with custom of fell deed.”

Fortunately for the chimps, there are a number of compassionate people who never come to terms with the laboratory conditions, but stay because they feel that they can then try to make things better for the chimps. One such is Dr. James Mahoney, who cares deeply about the 250 or so chimpanzees in his charge. It was Jim who introduced me to Jojo. And as I crouched on the floor that day, fighting my tears, Jim, who had moved off to talk to the other chimps, came back and saw my sadness. He bent down and put his arms around me. “Don’t do that, Jane,” he said. “I have to face this every morning of my life.”

And that, of course, made the anguish worse. Jim is one of the most gentle and compassionate people I know. That insight into the hell which, for much of the time, he must endure, added a whole new dimension to my understanding. It is not only for the chimpanzees that the lab conditions must be improved—it is for the caring people, too. The technicians whose own eyes fill with unshed tears when I ask them how they can bear to supervise the snatching of infants from their mothers, the separating of a carefree youngster from the nursery for the start of his life in prison. I know that my visits bring them new hope, courage to fight on for improvements. And so, for them and for the chimpanzees, I go back again—and again. Into what, for me, is hell.

Unfortunately, those who are working, from the inside, for better conditions have a difficult and thankless task. For one thing, most of their colleagues have absolutely no understanding of *real* chimpanzee behaviour. They only know *lab* chimps. And lab chimps, deprived of almost everything they need for their physical comfort and mental stimulation, are likely to be bad-tempered, even vicious. They may spit and throw faeces, grab and bite. It is partly through frustration and aggression, partly because they are trying to establish some kind of contact with people, partly because there is almost nothing else to do. These chimps are poor ambassadors for their kind, and it is not surprising that many technicians and veterinarians dislike and even fear them.

It is true that in many labs the chimpanzees appear to be in reasonably good physical condition, despite their sterile environment. There is a mistaken belief that if animals look healthy, eat well and, above all, reproduce satisfactorily, they must be content—therefore their environment must be suitable. Change is not necessary. Of course, this is not true—certainly not where humans are concerned. Even in concentration camps, babies were born, and there is no good reason to believe that it is different for chimpanzees.

For the most part, the scientists who design the experimental conditions under which their research is to be carried out forget that they are dealing with living, sentient beings. They insist on the animals being maintained in the traditional manner. Only then, they believe, will their experiments and tests yield reliable results. A bleak, sterile and restricting environment, they say, is *necessary* for laboratory animals. Cages must be barren, without bedding or toys, because then the inmates are less likely to pick up diseases or parasites. And, of course, the cages are easier to clean when they are uncluttered. Cages must be small because otherwise it is too difficult to treat the subjects—to inject them or draw their blood. The chimpanzees must be caged individually to avoid the risk of cross-infection.

In fact, things need not be that way, and there *are* labs where more humane attitudes have led to improved conditions. Cages can be bigger because chimpanzees can be taught to approach and present their rumps for injections, their arms for the drawing of blood. They can be taught to go into smaller cages for other kinds of treatment. They can be persuaded to exchange toys, blankets and so on for food rewards so that cage cleaning is easier. And there are even a few labs where single housing of chimpanzees is the exception, rather than the rule. Recently, a number of eminent immunologists and virologists from the USA and Europe have published an article stating that experimental protocols that have, traditionally, required chimpanzees to be housed *singly* during experimentation, can, for the most part, be adapted quite satisfactorily to *pairs* of chimpanzees. This means, for all those chimpanzees currently used in hepatatis and AIDS research \(the majority of all experimental animals\) that the end of solitary confinement should be in sight. Surely anyone caging chimpanzees singly should be forced to prove, convincingly, to a panel of qualified scientists, the need for such inhuman conditions—particularly in view of the growing body of evidence showing that such conditions, which produce stressed animals, are not only cruel but may actually be *harmful* to the results of experiments. Because stress affects the immune system, data pertaining to drug efficiency collected from stressed subjects may be misleading.

Unfortunately, all of us who are fighting for improved conditions in the labs are up against the Establishment. And the Establishment, typically, resists change. The Establishment pits the suffering of experimental animals against the suffering of humans. Reforms, they argue, are costly. If the chimpanzees have bigger cages, social groups, an enriched environment, and better care, it will cost more. Crucial experiments will come to a grinding halt. And this, they argue, will be paid for in human suffering. This, of course, is not true. Truly essential research and testing would continue. It is difficult, on moral grounds, to justify *any* use of chimpanzees as living test tubes under even the best of conditions. That we can tolerate their continued use in lab conditions such as I have described is a damning indictment of the ethical values of our times.

In fact, the winds of change are blowing. Attitudes towards all non-human animals are changing as the general public becomes increasingly aware of the cruelty that goes on around us.

In some primate centres around the world, ethical concerns regarding the use and maintenance of our closest relatives are routinely discussed, and attempts have been or are being made to create better conditions. In some labs there are large outdoor compounds for breeding groups, and experimental animals are at least housed in pairs and given access to outdoor runs. Programmes designed to enrich the lives of the inmates are being introduced in more and more labs, to the benefit not only of the chimpanzees, but also the mental well-being of those employed to care for them. These programmes do not necessarily involve the expenditure of large sums of money—a chimpanzee’s day will be far more enjoyable if he is given, for example, a magazine to read, or a comb or toothbrush and a mirror, or a tough plastic tube stuffed full of raisins and marshmallows along with a supply of twigs which he can use as tools to poke the goodies out. More sophisticated ways of alleviating boredom—such as video games—are in the planning stages.

One of the unexpected rewards I have found as I become increasingly involved in conservation and welfare issues, has been meeting so many dedicated, caring and understanding people who are fighting the same battle, fighting to improve conditions for chimpanzees in captivity, to reduce suffering, to create sanctuaries for abused or orphaned individuals, and to conserve natural habitats. These remarkable people give their time, their money—and sometimes their health—to help chimpanzees in this time of dire plight. Geza Teleki, for example, got river blindness, an incurable disease, when he worked for the government of Sierra Leone to set up a national park there specifically for chimpanzees. These people have already accomplished so much, often struggling alone against powerful adversaries. And now, as though an invisible conductor had suddenly waved his baton, many of these people are joining forces. This will, inevitably, be of great benefit to chimpanzees worldwide. \(For a fuller account of the efforts to help the chimpanzees, see Appendix II.\)

What, realistically, *is* the future of the chimpanzee in Africa, the wild, free and majestic being whom I have come to know so well? The best we can hope for is a series of national parks or reserves, well protected by buffer zones, where the chimpanzees and other forest denizens can live out their natural lives in peace. This, I have no doubt, we shall somehow achieve. Of course it is necessary to persuade the governments of the countries concerned that it is worth their while, that conservation of their natural resources is preferable to immediate exploitation for instant profit. Research projects bring in foreign exchange. Tourism brings in far more. The two must be planned in conjunction so that an influx of visitors disturbs neither the research nor, more importantly, the animals. Education programmes build awareness among local people. Employing field staff from villages surrounding reserved areas, as we have done at Gombe, helps the local economy and, just as important, creates enthusiasm in those people involved, enthusiasm that spreads to families and friends. This is one of the reasons why the Gombe chimpanzees are so safe from poaching.

We must remember that the people living near areas recently set aside for wildlife may have every right to feel resentful. Why should they be deprived of land that their forebears have utilized for generations past? Conservation, education and the influx of tourist dollars are not sufficient recompense. Imaginative agro-forestry projects surrounding forest reserves and parks—the growing of trees for firewood, charcoal, building poles and so on—not only protect the indigenous species, but enable people to utilize the land very much as they did in bygone years. Some conservationists tend to forget that humans are animals too\!

I cannot close this chapter without sharing a story that, for me, has a truly symbolic meaning. It is about a captive chimpanzee, Old Man, who was rescued from a lab or circus when he was about eight years old and placed, with three females, on a man-made island at a zoo in Florida. He had been there for several years when a young man, Marc Cusano, was employed to care for the chimps. “Don’t go on the island,” Marc was told. “Those brutes are vicious. They’ll kill you.”

For a while Marc obeyed instructions, and threw the chimps their food from a little boat. But soon he realized that he could not care for them properly unless he established some kind of rapport with them. He began going ever closer and closer when he fed them. One day Old Man reached out and took a banana from Marc’s hand. How well I remember when, at Gombe, David Graybeard first took a banana from mine. And, as for me with David, that was the start of a relationship of mutual trust between Marc and Old Man. Some weeks later Marc actually went on to the island. Eventually he could groom and even play with Old Man, although the females, one of whom had a baby, were more standoffish.

One day as Marc was cleaning up the island he slipped and fell. This startled the infant, who screamed, and his mother, her protective instinct aroused, at once leaped to attack Marc. She bit his neck as he lay, face down, on the ground, and he felt the blood run down his chest. The other two females rushed to support their friend. One bit his wrist, the other his leg. He had been attacked before, but never with such ferocity. He thought it was all up for him.

And then Old Man charged to the rescue of this, his first human friend in years. He dragged each of the highly roused females off Marc and hurled them away. Then he stayed, close by, keeping them at bay, while Marc slowly dragged himself to the boat and safety. “Old Man saved my life, you know,” Marc told me later, when he was out of hospital.

If a chimpanzee—one, moreover, who has been abused by humans—can reach out across the species barrier to help a human friend in need, then surely we, with our deeper capacity for compassion and understanding, can reach out to help the chimpanzees who need us, so desperately, today. Can’t we?


