+++
title = "07 Chapter 5 Factors Contributing to the Growth of Muslim Population"

+++
**Chapter 5**  
**Factors Contributing to the Growth of Muslim Population**

A study of the preceding pages clearly shows that the rise in Muslim
population was due mainly to conversions of Hindus to Islam.  It also
needs no reiteration that “it was part of the state policy to establish
Islam as the religion of the whole land”.^([1](#1))  It would again be a
truism to say that “Islam is essentially a missionary religion” and
every Muslim is a propagandist of his faith; and as they settled in
India, they must have entered upon proselytizing efforts.^([2](#2)) 
Thus Muslim rulers, nobles, Mashaikh, Maulvis, traders and merchants
were all in one way or the other Muslim missionaries.

**Conversions**

Islam has spread in many parts of the world through wars and campaigns. 
In the medieval Indian chronicles the sovereign is always mentioned as
‘the king of Islam’, the territories of his empire are referred to as
the ‘land of Islam’, its armies as ‘soldiers of Islam’, and its
religious and Judicial head as ‘Shaikh-ul-Islam’.  The monarch was
committed to make Islam the true basis of private and public life
through the enforcement of the Shariat and to convert the people to the
“true faith”.  In India the Muslim rulers’ keenness to obtain converts
in war is vouched by many chroniclers.  The *Tarikh-i-Muhammadi* gives a
clear idea of the psychology of the rulers in this regard.  Its author
was a contemporary of Sultan Nasiruddin Mahmud, the son of Firoz
Tughlaq.  He says that while fighting Rai Subir (Sumer) in the vicinity
of Iraj, the Sultan thought: ‘If I will give orders to the army to fight
(outright), they will not leave even a trace of the Kafirs in the
region, but if I shall advance slowly, then probably these people will
agree to embrace Islam.”^([3](#3))  What professor Mohammad Habib writes
concerning the Mongol applies equally to Turkish expeditions.  “In 1330
the country was invaded by the Mongols who indulged in arson, rape and
murder throughout the Valley (of Kashmir).  The king and the Brahmans
fled away but among the inhabitants who remained… Muslim ways of life
were gradually adopted by the people as the only alternative…”^([4](#4))
Thus warfare brought captives, and captives were made Musalmans.  Such
was not the situation only in the North; in South also such methods of
conversion prevailed, especially during wars between Bahmani and
Vijayanagar kingdoms.  Throughout the medieval period such wars were
common, and forcible conversions helped in the rapid growth of Muslim
population.

The rulers used force and persuasion in equal measure.  Their resources
were great.  They could give jobs, honours, and titles and many other
economic concessions and status benefits as inducements to conversion,
and many people would have taken advantage of these facilities.  We have
referred to Mubarak Khalji’s encouragement to Hindus to accept Islam by
presenting the convert with a robe and a gold ornament.  People used to
be converted in this fashion right up to the reign of Aurangzeb and
perhaps even thereafter.  There were other methods too.  The
Banshasmriti of Satya Krishna Biswas states that in Bengal the Rajas and
Zamindars who could not deposit land revenue by a certain date had to
convert to Muhammadanism.  The *Banshasmriti* narrates an isolated
incident, but as this regulation of the thirteenth century had been
revived by Murshid Quli Khan, or had continued right up to his times,
many local Rajas and Zamindars would have been converted in the course
of four centuries, for full payment of land tax by due date was not
always possible.  Firoz Tughlaq (1351-88) instructed his revenue
collectors to convert Hindus to Islam.^([5](#5))  He rescinded the
Jiziyah to lure people to become Muhammadans, and this measure brought
large additions to Muslim population.  In his *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi*,
Sultan Firoz Tughlaq candidly writes: “I encouraged my infidel subjects
to embrace the religion of the prophet and I proclaimed that everyone
who repeated the *Kalima of tauhid* and became Musalman should be exempt
from Jiziyah… Information of this came to the ears of the people at
large, and great number of Hindus presented themselves, and were
admitted to the honour of Islam.  Thus they came forward day by day from
every quarter, go on coming to this day, and adopting the faith, are
exonerated from the Jiziyah, and are favoured with Khilats and
presents.”^([6](#6))

Side by side the government’s efforts was the proselytizing activity of
the Muslim Sufis.  It is however not clear how far Sufi and other
Mashaikh were interested in the work of conversion and what amount of
success they achieved in this regard.  Following in the footsteps of
T.W. Amold,^([7](#7)) Titus, Aziz Ahmad and Mujeeb assert that
conversions to Islam were mainly a result of the labours of the
mystics.^([8](#8))  Perhaps the idea is to prove that the conversions
were voluntary.  On the other hand Mohammad Habib and S.A.A. Rizvi say
that Sufi Mashaikh were not engaged in effecting conversions.  Prof.
Habib says, “The Musalmans have no missionary labours to record… *We
find no trace of any missionary movement for converting non-Muslims*
(italics by the author himself).  Medieval Islam was a converting creed,
but it failed to develop any missionary activity… So far as our country
is concerned we have to confess frankly that no trace of a missionary
movement for the conversion of non-Muslims has yet been discovered.” In
a footnote he adds: “Some cheap mystic books now current attribute
conversions to Muslim mystics on the basis of miracles they
performed.  So in order to believe in the conversions one has to believe
in the miracles also.  But all such books will be found on examination
to be latter-day fabrications.”^([9](#9))  Prof. Rizvi arrives at the
same conclusion.  He simply says that “the early mystic records
(*Malfuzat and Maktubat*), contain no mention of conversion of the
people to Islam by these Saints.”^([10](#10))

From the hagiological literature also it is evident that Sufi Mashaikh
were not organized for propaganda work in any modern
way.^([11](#11))  Sufi Shaikhs and scholars are not known to have
preceded but always followed the armies of invasion.^([12](#12))  They
mostly lived in metropolitan cities, in their respective Khanqahs or
monasteries, basking in the sunshine of royal favour, and do not appear
to have moved about in the countryside for propaganda work.  The whole
atmosphere in the Khanqah was Muslim: not many, if any, Hindus ever
visited them, not to speak of their coming in large numbers for being
converted.^([13](#13))  The two greatest Chishti Mashaikh of the
medieval period were Muin-ud-din Chishti and Nizam-ud-din Auliya Rizvi
rightly says that Shaikh Muin-ud-din Chishti “was neither a missionary
nor a miracle monger.  He did not work among the masses…”^([14](#14)) 
In the *Fawaid-ul-Fuad*, a biographical memoir on Shaikh Nizam-ud-din
Auliya, there is mention of conversion of only two Hindu
curd-sellers.  Similarly during the reign of Iltutmish, Khwaja
Qutubuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki and Qazi Hamid-ud-din Nagori were two
prominent saints in Delhi but no proselytizing activity is attributed to
them.^([15](#15)) Indeed the Mashaikh sometimes resented government’s
appeals to do proselytizing work; and Muhammad bin Tughlaq, who wanted
to employ this class on missionary work, met with lot of opposition from
them.^([16](#16))

In brief, while it would not be safe to declare that hardly any
conversions through peaceful methods were effected by the Sufi Mashaikh
in India, it has also to be admitted that not many reliable references
to their proselytizing activity are available in genuine hagiological
works.  They may have helped those who showed an inclination to become
Muslim.  Occasionally they restored to force also to convert
people.^([17](#17))  But the Mashaikh were probably responsible only for
stray and individual conversions and their contribution to the growth of
Muslim population may not have been much.  Saiyyad Muhammad bin
Nasiruddin Jafar Makki al-Husaini , the Khalifa of Nasiruddin
Chiragh-i-Delhi “held that there were five reasons which led the people
to embrace Islam:

\(1\) Fear of death,

\(2\) fear of their families being enslaved,

\(3\) propagation (of Islam) on the part of Muslims,

\(4\) the lust for obtaining *mawajib* (pensions or rewards) *ghanaim*
(booty), and

(5) Tassub (bigotry or superstition?).”^([18](#18))

Thus according to Saiyyad Muhammad, propagation of Islam by Muslims did
not necessarily involve missionary activity of Sufi Mashaikh.  Prior to
its introduction in India, Islam had spread in many other countries like
Arabia, Persia and Syria.  No names of missionaries or Sufi saints have
come down to us as having been instrumental in spreading Islam in those
countries.  It is only about India that such a theory is put forward.

Today many classes or groups of people who were originally Hindu are
found to belong to the Muhammadan faith, and their conversion can be
traced to medieval times.  An oft-repeated reason for such conversions
is said to be the tyranny of the Hindu caste system.  Arnold, Titus and
Aziz Ahmad give credit to “the democratic social system of
Islam”^([19](#19)) for the conversion of low caste Hindus to “win a
degree of social freedom” because “for the lower Hindu castes acceptance
of Islam meant an escape from the degraded status they had in the Hindu
society.”^([20](#20))  Dr. Wise thinks that the Muhammadan Julaha (Jolha
or Momin) weaver class of Bengal and Bihar belonged to a “despised Hindu
caste who in a body became converts to Muhammedanism.” Ruben Levy also
talks of the “coarse rabble” or Ajlaf in Bengal, who formed the
functional groups such as weavers, cotton carders, oil pressers,
barbers, tailors etc., as well as converts of originally humble castes
in Bengal.^([21](#21))

However, contemporary writings of Persian chroniclers nowhere mention
caste as a factor leading to conversions.  Muslim historians of medieval
India were surely aware of the existence of the caste system in Hindu
society; Alberuni, Abul Fazl and emperor Jahangir, to mention a few. 
And yet no one mentions even once tyranny on the low caste people as
cause for conversion.  Their evidence shows beyond doubt that
conversions in India were brought about by the same methods and
processes as seen in Arabia, Persia, Central Asia, etc.  India was not
the first country where Islam was introduced in medieval times.  It had
spread in Persia, Central Asia, Afghanistan, and North Africa before it
came to India.  There was no caste system in these countries and yet
there were large-scale conversions there.

Therefore, a little reflection off the beaten track would show that the
reason behind the conversion of some groups *en masse* was not due to
the assumed oppression of the caste system but to escape oppressive
taxes and other disabilities.  Conversion also provided new avenues of
employment and economic advancement in the Muslim regime and society. 
Naturally large numbers of poor people were attracted to Islam as the
following Table, prepared on the basis of U.P. Census Report of 1931,
indicates.

**Table**  
**Showing Some Muslim Low Castes of U.P.^([22](#22))**

[TABLE]

Like U.P. functional groups many occupational groups in other parts of
the country, especially in northern India, too went over to Islam in
large numbers in medieval times.  Now, did the ancestors of the above
Muslim castes convert in medieval times because of the tyranny of the
caste system?  Let us take the Faqirs first.  In Hindu society there is
no ‘caste’ of beggars.  But any number of beggars would be ‘born’ if
they could get free food without doing any work.  It is stated in almost
every chronicle that in medieval times food was very cheap, even then,
many idlers would have avoided to do work if they could get free food
just for a change of name - religion of the poor being the proverbial
bread.  Muslim regime provided it and Faqirs flocked to it and to
Islam.  The number of Faqirs had grown so large by the time of
Ghayasuddin Tughlaq (1320-25) that the sultan wanted to put a stop to a
free treat to them and wanted them to take up some work, but his
attitude was resented and the sultan maligned.^([23](#23))  According to
Ahmad Abbas 40, 000 beggars used to be fed by Ghayas’s successor
Muhammad Tughlaq.^([24](#24))  Muhammad Tughlaq sometimes even attended
the funeral of Faqirs.^([25](#25))  The Faqirs were so well paid under
Firoz Tughlaq^([26](#26)) that some nobles, who used to recommend them
to the liberality of the sultan, did not fail to take a ‘bribe’ out of
their gains.^([27](#27))  Generosity of kings and nobles towards Faqirs
never slackened even during the Mughal period.  A good number of people
would have converted in medieval times to become Muslim Faqirs to form a
caste in the Muslim social order in modern times.

Similar was the position with regard to the Qassab.  Arab geographers of
the ninth to twelfth centuries found most Indians vegetarians.  Some
Hindus ate hunted game but not flesh of animals and animals were not
slaughtered for providing meat.^([28](#28))  By many Hindus meat is
still called ‘shikar’ (game).  The Hindu Gorkhas call it only by this
name.  Therefore, while it could be difficult to categorically state
that Hindus in the pre-Muslim period did not do the work of
meat-selling, there does not seem to have been a caste of Hindu butchers
which went over to Islam because of the oppression of caste system.  The
few Hindu butchers might have become Musalmans because their vocation
found a flourishing and sympathetic clientele among Muhammadans but many
others who were not butchers by profession would have found in cutting
and selling of meat a new avenue of employment in a new society and
joined it to form a Muslim caste of hundred per cent Qassab.

In the case of *darzis* or tailors, their employment chances lay more
with the Muslim community.  Muslims dressed elaborately,^([29](#29)) and
the sartorial habits of Arabs and Turks would point to even some tailors
having come from abroad, and converted Hindu tailors joining their
ranks.

The requirements of the Sultan,^([30](#30)) the elite, and even the
common Muslims would have needed the services of a whole tribe of
tailors, who, passing the whole day in the palace workshops or catering
to the needs of the patronizing Muslim society would have found it
profitable and convenient to become Muslim.  The interdependence of
cotton-carders, weavers, (*dhunia, julaha*) and tailors would have
induced the former to embrace Islam, and once some people of this class
converted to Muhammadanism, others followed suit because of class
affiliation and vocational compulsions.  Cotton-carders, weavers, and
tailors were there both in the urban and the rural areas; only in the
urban they were more skilled and produced fine quality stuffs required
by the Muslim nobility and elite, and conversions seem to have occurred
mostly in the urban areas; and many village *julahas* have remained
Hindu.  A Hajjam does not enjoy a better status in Muslim society than a
Nai in Hindu, but the Hajjam’s profession provided greater avenues of
economic betterment in Muslim society; he did the work of circumcision
and other minor surgical operations.

Such instances need not be multiplied, but some other cases not included
in the above Table may also be mentioned in passing.  Many elephant
drivers (mahauts) are today Muslims.  It is on record that Muslim rulers
were extremely fond of elephants.  Mahmud of Ghazni had an *elephant
corps of 2,500 all collected from India*.^([31](#31))  Minhaj Siraj
affirms that during Bakhtiyar’s Bengal campaign, many elephants were
captured with their drivers.^([32](#32))  He also writes that Sultan
Ruknuddin Firoz Shah (son of Iltutmish), “was very fond of… elephants,
*and all the elephant drivers were much benefited by his bounty*
(italics mine).”^([33](#33))  Ferishtah says that by the time of Bahram
Shah (C.E. 1240), the sultans had monopolised the privilege of keeping
elephants.^([34](#34))  Being in the employment of Muslim rulers and
nobles, living in the palace or Sultans’ forts all the time, and
benefiting from their bounty, it was but profitable for them to convert
to a faith in which advantages of service and profession lay.  On the
contrary those professional groups, which had a mixed Hindu-Muslim
clientele, but whose business would have been adversely affected by
losing the Hindu customers if they had converted to Islam, like the
*panwaris* (betel sellers), *halwais* (sweetmeat sellers), *banias*,
goldsmiths etc., did not convert and have remained Hindu through the
ages.

Besides, not all low-caste Muslims have converted from low caste
Hindus.  Many foreign Muslims also would have been relegated to low
caste on marrying low-caste women.  The sultans and Amirs usually
married in the families of the Rajas and Zamindars they defeated.  But
the common soldiers or common Musalmans would have married either in
their own religious group, that is among the newly converted, or among
the low-caste Hindus.^([35](#35))  And as class distinctions
crystallized in medieval Indian Muslim society, these people would have
been given only a low caste status, having obtained it through their
wives.^([36](#36))  Needless to say that such Muslims, originally of
foreign extraction, would have swelled the ranks of low-caste
Muhammadans.

Thus the few low-caste groups which converted to Islam did so not “to
escape from the tyranny of the caste system” because they have remained
at as lower a rung in Muslim society as they were in Hindu, but because
of new professional and vocational opportunities in a changed society. 
Such conversions took place mostly in urban areas.  Artisans, mechanics,
handicraftsmen were loyal to their guilds and their castes.  Where
guilds were loosely knit or contained many occupational groups, chances
of conversions were more.  There was a greater possibility of such a
situation in the urban areas and port-towns where there was
concentration of Muslim clientele and influences of Muslim religious,
political and economic leadership.  In the conversions at port-towns,
for example, foreign Muslim merchants played a great part.  From what we
know of their contribution in the conversion of South-East
Asia,^([37](#37)) it stands to reason that their propagandism for Islam
in India too would have been very effective.  The Zamorin of Calicut,
for instance, encouraged the fishermen of Malabar to become Musalmans in
order to man his warships; and to this end ordered “that, in every
family of fishermen in his dominions, one or more of the male members
should be brought up as Muhammadans”.^([38](#38)) Either in deference to
the wishes or specific condition of his Arab or other Muslim captains
and crew, or to see that the men working on the ships under Muslims
should have no caste inhibitions, the Zamorin may have issued such
orders.  But the fact is that today many boatmen and fishermen in Bengal
and other parts of the Indian seacoast are Muhammadans.  Similarly some
mercantile groups like Khojas and Bohras also converted to Islam under
the influence of foreign merchants, although legendary accounts
attribute their conversion to saints.

**Immigration**

It was thus mainly conversions that were responsible for the rise and
growth of Muslim population in medieval India.  This component of growth
went on extending with Muslim territorial expansion.  Immigration of
foreign Muslims too helped in its growth.  As has been seen at many
places earlier, from the inception of Muslim rule right up to the
eighteenth century foreign Muslims, especially from Persia, Central Asia
and Abyssinia used to arrive in India and settle down here.  Hindustan
was a paradise for Muslim merchants, scholars and adventures.  Muslim
regime of Hindustan promised and provided excellent jobs to all and
sundry foreign Muslims.  No wonder that the latter came here in large
numbers to settle down and make fortunes.  Hazards of journey were there
no doubt,^([39](#39)) but these were reduced with passing of time and
minimised by migrant adventurers and merchants travelling in
groups.  Throughout the medieval period they came in droves, “like ants
and locusts”,^([40](#40)) and were given here important and influential
positions.  It was naturally a one way traffic; Muslims only came,
nobody migrated from here.  By the seventeenth century they formed many
pressure groups - like Irani and Turani - in the Mughal empire’s
politics and society.  Many Muslims even today take pride in asserting
their extra-territorial identity by adding suffixes like Iraqi and
Bukhari to their names.

**Polygamy**

The most efficacious generator of the quick growth of Muslim population
was their practice of polygamy.  Marriage is enjoined on every Muslim. 
It is related in the Traditions that Muhammad said: “When the servant of
God marries, he perfects half his religion… Consequently in Islam, even
the ascetic orders are rather married than single”.^([41](#41))  In
Islam there is provision for temporary marriages (Mutas),
multi-marriages, divorce, remarriage of widows, concubinage - in short
there is freedom from all inhibitions and reservations in matters of
matrimony.  The insistence is on everybody marrying.  Naturally celibacy
is frowned upon.  One of Muhammad’s companions wanted to live in
celibacy Muhammad “forbade him to do so”.^([42](#42))  According to a
tradition derived from Ibn Abbas and quoted by Ibn Sa’d, popularly known
as Katib al-Waqidi, the prophet’s biographer, Muhammad said: “In my
*ummah*, he is the best who has the largest number of
wives”.^([43](#43))

Practice excelled the precept.  Muslim kings and commoners, nobles and
soldiers, merchants and Ulema, Sufis and Qazis were all known for
maintaining large or small harems according to finances and
circumstances.  There used to be four regular wives, and numberless
concubines.^([44](#44))  The result was prodigious progeny.  And so the
scriptures desired.  Muhammad said: “Marry women who will love their
husbands and be very prolific, *for I wish you to be more numerous than
any other people*”.^([45](#45)) (italics ours).  It is not surprising
therefore that all Muslims ever desire to be more numerous than any
other people.  Polygamy, multi-marriages, etc. sometimes reached
ridiculous limits so “that often the mothers of the sultan’s sons could
not be identified^([46](#46)),” nor perhaps even the children as shown
by the frantic enquiries made after the death of Alauddin, Mubarak
Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughlaq whether any of their sons were alive so
that the throne could be offered to them.  And what is true of the
sultans is also true of the elite.  Among Muhammadans the widows, even
widows of sultans, remarried.^([47](#47)) But a Hindu widow, even if she
did not immolate herself, did not remarry.  Sati and jauhar had a noble
motivation and yet had a demographic aspect; these decimated Hindu
numbers.  Above all in India, as elsewhere, the growth of population is
regulated to a large extent by the material condition of the people.  In
the medieval period the Muslims - but for the very poor sections - had
better lands, more nutritious diet, and, as ruling classes everywhere,
were in happier circumstances.

**Higher Fecundity**

In the Hindu-Muslim mixed marriages the couple and the progeny
invariably became Muslim.  This practice formed another important
component of growth of Muslim population in India.  There is also higher
fecundity among Muslims.  Kingsley Davis rightly remarks that “in six
decades (1881-1941)… at no census have the Muslims failed to improve
their percentage and the Hindus failed to lose…” It is due not only to
the “proportion of Muslim women married, but those who are married also
have a higher fertility.”^([48](#48))  Today every seventh man in the
world is a Muslim,^([49](#49)) and in this great rise of Muslim
population their high fertility should have contributed its
share.  Dudley Kirk, after a detailed study of fertility among various
nationalities and religious groups, too, has arrived at the conclusion
that birth rate among Muslims is the highest.^([50](#50))

**Lesser Losses**

While Muslim population rose through conversion, immigration, and
polygamy, and possibly high rate of fertility, its losses in wars and
famines were lesser than those of the Hindus, and its natural growth was
high.

We have referred at many places to the losses of Muslims in war.  But a
major portion of Muslim armies consisted of Hindus.  Even Mahmud of
Gazni’s forces had Hindu contingents.  During the Sultanate period
Muslims, especially foreign Muslims, belonged to the officer cadre and
were mostly cavalrymen; Hindus are often mentioned as Paiks or
footsoldiers.  The Paiks formed the rank and file and probably the bulk
of the Muslim armies.  There were large armies in India, both in the
North and the South, of Bahmani, Vijayanagar, Mughal.  The second volume
of Abul Fazl’s *Ain-i-Akbari* gives lists of the large number of Hindu
contingents that could be called to duty under Akbar.  Naturally it is
these who were killed in large numbers in wars being placed, as infantry
was then placed, in a vulnerable position.^([51](#51))  The Hindus thus
died not only for defending their kings and kingdoms during the unending
process of Muslims territorial expansion; they also died in large
numbers for their Muslim masters as soldiers in the latter’s
armies.^([52](#52))  Compared with theirs, the loss of the Muslim
numbers was small.  Muslim population at least was not affected by these
wars, because any loss in battles was more than made up by the number of
captives, who used to be converted and also by replenishment through
immigration.

Whenever famines occurred Muslim rulers took necessary steps to provide
relief to the people.  But from the narrative of the chroniclers it is
evident that these relief measures were mostly confined to urban areas. 
And Muslims were mostly concentrated in urban areas.  Even in the cities
sometimes the mission of mercy was marred by bigotry.  “Between 1387 and
1395 the Deccan was visited by a severe famine, and
Muhammad’s^([53](#53)) measures for the relief of his subjects displayed
a combination of administrative ability, enlightened compassion, and
religious bigotry.  A thousand bullocks belonging to the transport
establishment maintained for the court were placed at the disposal of.
those in charge of relief measures, and travelled incessantly to and fro
between his dominions and Gujarat and Malwa, which had escaped the
visitation bringing thence grain which was sold at low rates in the
Deccan, but to Muslims only.”^([54](#54))  And Muhammad Bahmani was not
the only orthodox sultan in medieval India.  It may not be proper to
generalize, but probably in famines and such like calamities the Muslims
suffered less loss than the Hindus.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) Titus, *op. cit.*, p.32.

[²](#2a) Tara chand, *op. cit.*, p.33.

[³](#3a) Muhammad Bihamid Khan!, *Tarikh-i-Muhammadi*, British Museum
Ms. 440 b, trans. into Hindi by A.A. Rizvi in *Uttar Timur Kalin
Bharat*, Pt. II (Aligarh, 1959), p.30.

[⁴](#4a) Mohammad Habib, *Some Aspects of the Foundation of the Delhi
Sultanate, op. cit.*, p.20

[⁵](#5a) Afif, *op. cit.*, pp.268-269.

Also Ishwari Prasad, *Qaraunah Turks, op. cit.*, p.331.

[⁶](#6a) *Fatuhat-i-Firoz Shahi*, trs. in E and D, III, p.368. Also
Hindi trs. Rizvi, *Tughlaq Kalin Bharat*, II, (Aligarh, 1957), p.337.

[⁷](#7a) T.W. Arnold, *The Preaching of Islam, op. cit.*, pp.264 ff.

[⁸](#8a) Titus, *op. cit.*, Chapter III entitled “Peaceful Penetration”,
pp.36-53. Aziz Ahmad, *Studies in Islamic Culture*, pp.81-84. Mujeeb,
*op. cit.*, p.22.

[⁹](#9a) K.M. Ashraf Memorial Lecture, *op. cit.*, pp.18-19. Also P.M.
Currie, *Cult of Muin-al-din Chishti of Ajmer* (Oxford, Delhi, 1989)

[¹⁰](#10a) S.A.A. Rizvi, *Muslim Revivalist Movements in Northern India
in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries* (Agra University, 1965),
p.18.

[¹¹](#11a) Titus, *op. cit.*, p.42.

[¹²](#12a) *Ibid.*, p.44.

[¹³](#13a) Rizvi, *op. cit.*, p.20., P.M. Currie, *The Shrine and Cult
of Muin-d-din-Chishti of Ajmer* (OUP, 1989), pp.20-96, esp. pp.29-30.

[¹⁴](#14a) Rizvi, *op. cit.*, p.15.

[¹⁵](#15a) Ferishtah, I, pp.66-67.

[¹⁶](#16a) Mahdi Husain, *Tughlaq Dynasty*, pp.149-50, 160 and also p.
174 and n.2-3 Also see Kirmani, *Siyar-ul-Auliya*, p.228.

[¹⁷](#17a) As for instance the efforts of Raju Qattal to convert
Nahawan, the Darogha of Ucch. Jamali, *Siyar-ul-Arifin* (Delhi, 1311H),
pp.159-60. Also Ferishtah, op. cit., II, pp.417-18. Eaton, *Sufis of
Bijapur*, esp. Chapter entitled ‘Sufi Warriors’.  Also see their
militant proselytizing activity in Bengal in Chapter 3.

[¹⁸](#18a) Rizvi, *op. cit.*, p.46 citing Sijzi, *Akhbar-ul-Akhiyar*,
p.136.

[¹⁹](#19a) Titus, *op. cit.*, p.36.

[²⁰](#20a) Aziz Ahmad, *op. cit.*, p.82.

[²¹](#21a) Ruben Levy, *The Social Structure of Islam* (Cambridge,
1957), p.73.

[²²](#22a) Compiled from the Census Report of India, 1931, Vol. 18
(United Provinces), Part 2.

[²³](#23a) Barani, *op. cit.*, pp.436-37.

[²⁴](#24a) Rizvi, *Tughlaq Kalin Bharat*, I, *op. cit.*, p.322. Also
Ishwari Prasad, *Qaraunah Turks*, p. 309.

[²⁵](#25a) *Masalik-ul-Absar*, E and D, III, p.580.

[²⁶](#26a) Barani, pp, 558-59.  Afif, pp.448-49, 512.

[²⁷](#27a) Afif, p.449.

[²⁸](#28a) Al Masudi, *op. cit.*, p.19. 

Al Idrisi, *op. cit.*, p.88.   
Qazwini, *op. cit.*, p.96.

  
[²⁹](#29a) Barani, pp.273-74.

Afif, p.263.  
Also Lal, *Twilight of the Sultanate*, pp.271.

  
[³⁰](#30a) Ahmad Abbas says that in the royal workshops of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq 200, 000 robes of honour were prepared every year for
presentation to the nobles alone.  In the Sultan’s manufactory there
were 400 silk-weavers and 500 manufacturers of golden tissues, besides
others.  Masalik, *op. cit.*, p.578.

[³¹](#31a) Minhaj, *op. cit.*, p.83.

Bosworth, *The Ghaznavids*, p.166  
S.H. Hodivala, *Studies in Indo-Muslim History* (Bombay, 1939),
pp.139-40, 146.

  
[³²](#32a) *Tabqat-i-Nasiri*, trs. in E and D, II, p.315.

[³³](#33a) *Ibid.*, p.332.

[³⁴](#34a) Ferishtah, I, p.69.

[³⁵](#35a) Barbosa, *op. cit.*, I, p.74 tells how the Moplahs
inter-married with low-caste natives.

[³⁶](#36a) Such was not the case only with the Muslims.  All foreigners
who married low-caste persons in this country were counted among
low-castes. The case of the early Portuguese in India is an instance in
point.

“After capturing Goa, (it became the policy of the Dominican head of the
Church, and Albuquerque) at Cochin and Goa of encouraging and
subsidizing marriages between native women and the Portuguese.  Since
most of the marriages contracted were between common Portuguese and
low-caste natives… it had the effect of lowering all Christians in the
eyes of the higher castes…”

D.F. Lach, *Asia in the Making of Europe*, I, pp.230-34.

Also cf. Manucci, *op. cit.*, III, p.323 for the seventeenth century.

[³⁷](#37a) D.C.E. Hall, *op. cit.*, pp.176-85.

[³⁸](#38a) Arnold, cited in Titus, p.39.

[³⁹](#39a) Hasan Nizami, the author of *Taj-ul-Maasir* (Crown of
Victories) who had come to India during the reign of Qutbuddin Aibak
graphically describes in his inimitable poetical style the dangers of
the journey to Hindustan.  He set out from Ghazni for Delhi which to him
was the “country of mercy and the altar of wealth… (but there were) the
heat of the fiery blast… the wild beasts… the boughs of the jungle were
so closely interlaced… A tiger was seen in every forest.  In every
ravine and plain poisonous serpents were met with.  It came into his
thoughts, will the boat of his life ever reach the shores of safety? The
crow-like-Hindus had intercepted the roads… You may say they were demons
in human from.” E and D, II, p.208.

[⁴⁰](#40a) For example Lal, *Twilight of the Sultanate*, p.126 for
references from original sources.

[⁴¹](#41a) Hughes, T.P., *Dictionary of Islam*, pp. 313-314.

[⁴²](#42a) Ram Swarup, *Understanding Islam through Hadis* (New Delhi,
1983), p.57.

[⁴³](#43a) *Ibid.*, p.57 n.

[⁴⁴](#44a) Lal, K.S., *The Mughal Harem* (New Delhi, 1988), pp.160-175.

[⁴⁵](#45a) Cited in Hughes; *Dictionary of Islam*, p.314.

[⁴⁶](#46a) M. Mujeeb, *The Indian Muslims*, p.207.

[⁴⁷](#47a) “The Sultan’s (Bahram Shah, son of Iltutmish) sister had been
married to Kazi Nasiruddin, but being widowed, the deputy took her to
wife.” Sultan Nasiruddin’s widowed mother was married to Katlagh Khan,
Minhaj, E and D, II, pp.338, 354 respectively. 

[⁴⁸](#48a) Davis, *op. cit.*, p.193.

[⁴⁹](#49a) H. W. Hazard, *Atlas of Islamic History* (Princeton,1954),
p.5.

[⁵⁰](#50a) Kirk needs to be quoted at length:  
 

“1. Islamic countries uniformly have high birth rates.

2\. These are supported by distinctive Islamic attitudes and practices
in family life rather than by political or religious doctrine.

3\. The ‘normal’ diffusion of birth control to and within Muslim
countries on the European pattern has been inhibited by the cultural
discontinuity between Muslim peoples and their neighbours.

4\. The continuing high birth rates in Muslim countries, matched with
increasing progress in reducing deaths, now lead to rapid population
growth and its especially high visibility as a handicap to economic and
social progress.”

Dudley Kirk “Factors Affecting Moslem Natality” in Olivia Schieffelin
(Ed.) *Muslim Attitudes Towards Family Planning*, Demographic Division,
The Population Council, Inc. (New York, 1967), p.79.

  
[⁵¹](#51a) al-Qalqashindi, describing the battle array of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq clearly brings this point home.  He says, “according to
Sirajuddin-al-Hindi… the Sultan stands in the centre (of the army)… the
archers stand before and behind him… In front of him are the elephants. 
In front of the elephants march the slaves in light dress wearing
shields and weapons.  They hold the ropes of the elephants while the
horsemen are to their right and left… *so that not one of them can run
away*” (Italics mine).  *Subh-ul-Asha*, p.76.

[⁵²](#52a) An interesting incident during the Battle of Haldighati bears
out this statement.  Akbar sent Raja Man Sing and Asaf Khan against Rana
Pratap of Mewar in 1576.  There were Rajput soldiers on both sides;
those under Rana Pratap were fighting the ones under Raja Man Singh.  At
one stage in the fierce struggle, Badaoni asked Asaf Khan how he could
distinguish between the friendly and the enemy Rajputs.  Asaf Khan
replied: “Shoot at whomsoever you like, on whichever side they may be
killed, it will be a gain to Islam.”

Smith, *Akbar the Great Mogul*, pp.108-109.

Lal, *Studies in Medieval Indian History*, pp.171-172.

[⁵³](#53a) Ferishtah, I, p.302 says that the correct name of the sultan
is Muhammad and not Mahmud.  He also writes that relief measures were
undertaken in “large cities and *qasbas*” like Gulbarga, Bidar,
Khandahar, Ellichpur etc.

[⁵⁴](#54a) C.H.I., III, p.385.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voi.org/books)   [Back to Home](http://voi.org)**
