+++
title = "06 BACK TO SQUARE ONE"

+++
# BACK TO SQUARE ONE

I was back to square one. My faith in Gandhism had lost the battle to
Marxism. Now I was no longer a Marxist. I asked myself again and again:
Where do I go from here?

The business of life can go on very well without an ideological frame of
reference. One eats and mates and sleeps and makes a living. One reads
books and papers and gossips and goes about passing conventional
judgments on current events, One has a family, a profession, a circle of
friends, and some hobby to keep one occupied in leisure time. One grows
old, collects one's own share of diseases, and looks back with anguish
towards earlier days when one was young and active. For most of us
ordinary mortals, this is the whole of human life. We take very
seriously our successes and failures and our loves and hates, without
spending a thought on what it is all about.

I have always been an ordinary person with ordinary aspirations. Left to
myself, I would have led an ordinary life. I was a good business
executive by now, having acquired considerable experience in export
business. I could have achieved more success along the same line. Maybe
I would have been invited by some millionaire in Calcutta to become his
junior partner, and earned my own millions in due course. That was one
of the fond dreams which my father had dreamt for me. He knew a few
people who were poor but talented to start with, and who had succeeded
as partners of more successful men. Maybe I would have over estimated
myself in the business world, crashed, and spent the rest of my life
cursing those who conspired to bring about my failure in the final bid.
I had met quite a few specimens of such failure in Calcutta.

But I had already met a man who will not let me be. That was Ram Swarup.
He had tried his best to rescue me from the twin morass of a false self
esteem and a degrading self pity. He had encouraged and assisted me with
timely advice to take an impersonal interest in higher ideas and larger
causes. As I shared his ideas and concern for social causes, I could not
question his command for action.

Now I was invited by him to join a group to serve the new values we
shared with him. The cultural and political atmosphere in India had
become, over the years, chockfull with Communist categories of thought.
Many myths were afloat about a heaven having descended in Soviet Russia,
Red China and the East European countries occupied by Soviet armed
forces and ruled dictatorially by Soviet puppets. The Communist Party of
India was using these myths in order to appear as the harbinger of a
wholesome social order in India. The Communist categories of thought
were helping the Communist Party of India to infiltrate national life in
various fields, with the ultimate aim of subverting Indian democracy and
reducing the nation to the status of a Soviet satellite.

The main task we took upon ourselves was to expose Communist categories
of thought is inimical to human freedom, national cohesion, social
health, economic development, and political and cultural pluralism to
which we were wedded as a people. Simultaneously, we went out to explode
the myths about Communist countries so that our people, particularly our
national and democratic political parties, could see them as they were
totalitarian tyrannies with low standards of living and regimented
culture. This we did simply by telling the truth about Communist regimes
with the help of citations and statistics compiled largely from their
own publications.

Our expectation was that the information supplied by us will help the
national and democratic parties to see the evil that was Communism, and
the conspiracy that was the Communist Party of India. It was for these
parties to fight the political battle against the evil creed and the
foreign fifth column. Our work proved useful to a certain extent. Some
parliamentarians, trade unionists and political workers in the field
used the information supplied by us and put the Communist Cohorts on the
defensive all along the line. Some journalists and intellectuals
welcomed our work and helped us carry on the battle. One of them
complimented us by saying that.we had placed and Communism squarely on
the political map of India.

But we discovered in due course that our friends expected from us much
more than the limited role we had chalked out for ourselves. The
Socialists who were our greatest fellow fighters against Communism
wanted us to fight many more battles on many snore fronts. The
Congressmen, by and large, had either no opinions at all on any
ideological issues or wanted us to fight against Communalism by which
they meant the RSS and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS), who were always
sympathetic, friendly, and helpful to our work, and who wanted us to
place India's national interests above everything else. We listened to
them patiently, pointed out our limitations, tried to soften animosities
amongst political parties wedded to nationalism and democracy, and
highlighted the international nature of the Communist conspiracy.

As the battle against Communism progressed, I became acutely aware that
a positive frame of reference was badly needed if Communism was to be
kept at bay. What could be that frame? Democracy? We had all the
democracy we needed. But the Communists alone were making a purposeful
use of it towards its ultimate subversion. Socialism? We had already
adopted it as a state policy. But the Communists had succeeded in
confusing the language of Socialism, so that Socialism got equated with
an ever expanding public sector which was inefficient, wasteful and
horribly corrupt. Free enterprise? But in the mouths of many it was only
a euphemism for Capitalism with a free licence to plunder the public for
private profit. Moreover, India in the middle of the 20th century was
neither America nor Britain nor Germany nor France nor yet Japan, to try
out a nineteenth century experiment. Her problems as well as resources
had different dimensions.

I had a strong inclination to settle in favour of nationalism as a
strong antidote to Communism. My country, right or wrong that seemed to
be emerging as my main motto. But my bubble was one day pricked by Ram
Swarup to whom I listened as he talked to a friend of RSS-BJS
persuasion. This friend was laying too much emphasis on eschewing
everything that was foreign. Rain Swarup said: *"But foreign should not
be defined in geographical terms. Then it would have no meaning except
territorial or tribal patriotism. To me that alone is foreign which is
foreign to truth, foreign to Atman."* This touched some chord in my own
heart. That was the end of my tether. I did not know which way to turn
next.

Ram Swarup was now becoming more and more meditative and reflective in
his comments on the current political scene. He often talked of a
cultural vacuum which Communism was using to its own great advantage.
Communism, he said, was deriving support from a deeper source, a new
self alienation amongst our political and cultural elite, and advancing
with the help of forces which on the surface seemed to be allied against
Communism. It was not our democratic polity alone which was under attack
from Communism. There were several other forces which had come together
to suffocate and render sterile the deeper sources of India's inherent
strength.

Meanwhile, we became acutely aware of the progressive degeneration of
politics in India. Our politics was no longer national politics. It was
getting increasingly ridden with many fissiparous factors like caste,
language and provincial parochialism. Nation building was no longer the
aim of this politics. Winning elections and grabbing power and
privilege, without a corresponding shouldering of responsibility or
accountability to the people, was becoming an end in itself. A politics
which was no longer informed by a larger and deeper culture was likely
to become pretty poisonous.

A similar degeneration was taking place on the international plane as
well. The United States was prepared for a hot war which may not take
place. But it was not at all prepared for an ideological contest in
which the issues may be decided in the long run. The Soviet Union was
supplying a lot of ideas, ideology and categories of thought in a stream
of books, pamphlets and periodicals. The only response which the United
States could muster against this menace was economic aid. It was widely
believed amongst U.S. thinkers and rulers that a man was likely to
become better wedded to freedom and democracy if his standard of living
was raised. Ram Swarup remarked one day: *"The Soviet Union swears by
Dialectical Materialism. But what it practises is Idealism. On the other
hand, the United States swears by Idealism. But what it practises is
Dialectical Materialism. There is a neat division of roles between the
two powers. The Soviets take care of our heads. The United States takes
care of our hearths and homes."*

In this atmosphere of declining political standards, we decided to
withdraw our anti communist campaign as we have conceived it to start
with. We were convinced that a larger battle, couched along deeper
cultural contours, was needed if the nation was to be saved from the
corrosion of its soul.

It was at this time that I fell seriously ill and lost a lot of weight
which I had never had in plenty. A Catholic missionary whom I had known
earlier in connection with our anti communist work came to visit me. He
was a good and kindly man and had a strong character. He had insisted
upon his religious right to sell our and Communist literature in melas
and exhibitions in spite of his mission's advice that this was no part
of his ordained work and that, in any case, the Government of India
frowned upon it.

The Father, as I called him, found me in a difficult condition,
physically as well as financially. He felt sure that it was in such
times that Jesus Christ came to people. He asked me if I was prepared to
receive Jesus. I did not understand immediately that he was inviting me
to get converted to Catholicism. My impression was that he wanted to
help me with some spiritual exercises prescribed by Christianity.
Moreover, I had always admired Jesus. I had, therefore, no objection to
receiving him. Only I was doubtful if someone was really in a position
to arrange the meeting. But I became aware of the Father's true
intentions as I travelled with him to a distant monastery. He asked
every other missionary he met on the way to pray for his success.

At this monastery, which was a vast place with very picturesque
surroundings, I was advised by the Father to go into a retreat. It meant
my solitary confinement to a room. I was not supposed to look at or talk
to anyone on my way to the bathroom or while taking my morning and
evening strolls on the extensive lawns outside. And I was to meditate on
themes which the Father prescribed for me in the course of four or five
lectures he delivered to me during the course of the day, starting at
about 6.30 in those winter mornings. I was not used to this way of life.
I had never lived in such solitude by my own choice. My only solace was
that I was allowed to smoke and provided with plenty of books on the
Christian creed and theology.

I tried to read some of the books. But I failed to finish any one of
them. They were full of Biblical themes and theological terminology with
which I was not familiar. Most of the time they made me recall Ram
Swarup's observation about mere cerebration. Or they were simplistic
harangues to love Christ and join the Catholic Church. They had a close
similarity to Communist pamphlets which I had read in plenty. The Father
had asked me again and again to invoke Christ and meditate upon him. But
he had not told me how to do it. I had no previous practice in
meditation. I did not know how to invoke Christ, or any other godhead
for that matter. All I could do was to think again and again of Christ
preaching the Sermon on the Mount or saving an adulteress from being
stoned to death. But my thoughts would wander away after every few
moments.

The Father asked me before the start of every new lesson if I was
feeling drawn towards Christ. In my exasperation I told him on the
evening of the second day that the only deity towards whom I was feeling
drawn was Sri Krishna. This was not true. I had told a lie for which I
felt ashamed immediately after. I had felt drawn towards nothing, far
less Sri Krishna. Most of the time my mind was busy in free association
in the Freudian sense. I told the lie because by now I was fed up with
the Father's lectures. They had no relevance to any of the problems with
which I was faced. I wanted the Father to frown at the mention of Sri
Krishna and say something unkind about him so that I could pick up an
argument, defy the discipline he had imposed on me, and get out of his
clutches.

But the Father did not frown. Nor did he say anything unkind about Sri
Krishna. He became thoughtful, almost pensive. He told me at last that
in his long experience of conversions, Jesus had never tarried so long.
He asked me to make another attempt that night. I promised. But I went
to sleep immediately after he left. I was dead tired. Little did I know
that my release from that prison was to come about next morning. While
delivering a lecture on Creation, the Father said that God in his wisdom
and kindness had made all these fishes and animals and birds for man's
consumption. I immediately rose in revolt. I told him very emphatically
that I was a vaishnava and a vegetarian and that I had absolutely no use
for a God that bestowed upon man the right to kill and eat his other
creatures simply because man happened to be stronger and more skilled. I
added that in my opinion it was the duty of the strong and the more
skilled to protect the weaker and the less wily.

The Father also suddenly lost his self possession. He almost shouted:
*"I can never understand you Hindus who go about seeing a soul in every
lice and bug and cockroach that crawl4 around you. The Bible says in so
many words that man is God's highest creation. What is wrong with the
higher lording over the lower?"*

I kept quiet. I could see the pain in his eyes. I did not want to add to
his anguish. He recovered his selfpossession very soon and smiled. Now I
went down on my knees before him and asked his forgiveness for my lack
of strength to go on with the retreat. He agreed, although rather
reluctantly. His sense of failure was writ large on his face. I was very
sorry indeed. I now wished that it would have been better for both of us
if Christ had come to me.

On our way back to the big city where his mission was housed he became
his old normal self again. There was not a trace of bitterness on his
face or in his voice as we talked and joked and discussed several
serious and not so serious matters. Now I took my courage in both my
hands and asked him my final question: *"Father, am I not already a
Christian? I do not normally tell a lie. I do not steal. I do not bear
false witness. I do not covet my neighbour's wife or property. What more
can a man do to demand God's grace and kinship with Christ? Why should
you insist on a formal conversion which in no way helps me to become
better than what I am?"* His reply was very positive and it estranged me
from the Christian creed for good. He said: *"It is an illusion that you
can become a Christian if you practice Christian virtues. One cannot
claim to be virtuous unless one is baptised in the Church of Christ. He
is the only saviour. No one outside his fold can claim salvation. The
only thing the heathens can look forward to is eternal hellfire."*

That evening I had a chat with the librarian in the mission library. He
was young but looked very sad and far away. His surname was Hindu. But
he told me that he had become a Christian a few years ago. He continued:
***"I fell seriously ill. There was no money in the house. I was earning
a small salary and had a wife and two children to support. My relatives
were also poor like me and could not help much, what with the cost of
medicines and a prescribed diet. It was at this moment that the Father
appeared on the scene. I had known him earlier as he frequented our
street in search of converts. He brought all the medicines and fruits
for me . I was very grateful to him. And one day in a moment of my mend
weakness he baptised me. My wife refused to become a Christian. She was
an orthodox Hindu. But she did not desert me. After I had regained my
health, the Fattier insisted that my conversion was not complete unless
I ate beef. As a Kayastha I was already a non vegetarian. I saw no great
harm in eating yet another type of meat. But as soon as my wife learnt
of it, she left with our two children and went away to her father's
place in another town. I went after her. But I was turned out of their
house. I have been excommunicated. No one in my community or amongst my
relatives will share with me so much as a glass of water. I have nowhere
to go. This mission is my only refuge till I die."***

I was reminded of Vivekananda's description of Christianity as
Churchianity. At the same time I was ashamed of the society to which I
belonged. For ages past, this society had perfected the art of losing
its limbs, one after another. But what could I do for that young man? I
was myself in search of a refuge, in the physical as well as the
ideological sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
