+++
title = "08 CHAPTER VIII THE MYTH OF MUSLIM EMPIRE IN INDIA"

+++
**CHAPTER VIII**

**THE MYTH OF MUSLIM EMPIRE IN INDIA**

The apologists of Islam and their secularist lick-spittles argue that if
the Muslim conquerors had practised such systematic, extensive, and
continued terror against Hindus and Hinduism as has been recorded by the
Muslim historians of medieval India, Hindus could not have survived as
an overwhelming majority at the end of the long spell of Muslim rule.

The logic here is purely deductive (formal). Suppose a person is
subjected to a murderous assault, but he survives because he fights
back. Deductively it can be concluded that the person never suffered a
murderous assault because otherwise he could not have been alive! But
this conclusion has little relevance to the facts of the case.

My sixth question, therefore, is: Did Hindus survive as a majority in
their own homeland because the Islamic invaders did not employ
sufficient force to kill or convert them, or because, though defeated
again and again by the superior military skill of the invaders, Hindu
princes did not give up resistance and came back again and again to
reconquer their lost kingdoms, to fight yet another battle, yet another
day, till the barbarians were brought to book?

Before I answer this question, I should like to warn against a very
widely prevalent though a very perverse version of Indian history. In
this popular version, Indian history has been reduced to a history of
foreign invaders who were able to enter India from time to time - the
so-called Aryans, the Iranians, the Greeks, the Parthians, the
Scythians, the Kushanas, the Hunas, the Arabs, the Turks, the Pathans,
the Mughals, the Persians, the Portuguese, the Dutch, the French, and
the British. The one impression which this version of Indian history
leaves, is that India has always been a no-man’s land which any armed
bandit could come and occupy at any time, and that Hindus have always
been a “meek mob” which has always bowed before every “superior” race.

Muslims in India and elsewhere have been led to believe by the mullahs
and Muslim historians that the conquest of India by Islam started with
the invasion of Sindh by Muhammad bin Qasim in 712 AD, was resumed by
Mahmud Ghaznavi in 1000 AD, and completed by Muhammad Ghuri when he
defeated the Chauhans of Ajmer and the Gahadvads of Kanauj in the last
decade of the 12th century. Muslims of India in particular have been
persuaded to look back with pride on those six centuries, if not more,
when India was ruled by Muslim emperors. In this make-belief, the
British rulers are treated as temporary intruders who *cheated* Islam of
its Indian empire for a hundred years. So also the “Hindu Banias”, who
succeeded the British in 1947 AD. Muslims are harangued every day, in
every mosque and *madrasah*, not to rest till they reconquer the rest of
India which, they are told, rightfully belongs to Islam.

The academic historians also agree that India was ruled by Muslim
monarchs from the last decade of the 12th century to the end of the
18th. The standard textbooks of history, therefore, narrate medieval
Indian history in terms of a number of Muslim imperial dynasties ruling
from Delhi - the Mamluks (Slaves), the Khaljis, the Tughlaqs, the
Sayyids, the Lodis, the Surs, the Mughals. The provincial Muslim
dynasties with their seats at Srinagar, Lahore, Multan, Thatta,
Ahmedabad, Mandu, Burhanpur, Daulatabad, Gulbarga, Bidar, Golconda,
Bijapur, Madurai, Gaur, Jaunpur, and Lucknow fill the gaps during
periods of imperial decline.

It is natural that in this version of medieval Indian history the
recurring Hindu resistance to Islamic invaders, imperial as well as
provincial, looks like a series of sporadic revolts occasioned by some
minor grievances of purely local character, or led by some petty
upstarts for purely personal gain. The repeated Rajput resurgence in
Rajasthan, Bundelkhand and the Ganga-Yamuna Doab; the renewed assertion
of independence by Hindu princes at Devagiri, Warrangal, Dvarasamudra
and Madurai; the rise of the Vijayanagara Empire; the farflung fight
offered by the Marathas; and the mighty movement of the Sikhs in the
Punjab - all these then get readily fitted into the framework of a
farflung and enduring Muslim empire. And the Hindu heroes who led this
resistance for several centuries get reduced to ridiculous rebels who
disturbed public peace at intervals but who were always put down.

But this version of medieval Indian history is, at its best, only an
interpretation based on preconceived premises and propped up by a highly
selective summarisation, or even invention, of facts. There is ample
room for another interpretation based on more adequate premises, and
borne out by a far better systematisation of known facts.

What are the facts? Do they bear out the interpretation that India was
fully and finally conquered by Islam, and that the Muslim empire in
India was a finished fabric before the British stole it for themselves
by fraudulent means?  
 

**MUSLIM INVASIONS WERE NO WALK-OVER**

The so-called conquest of Sindh first.

Having tried a naval invasion of India through Thana, Broach, and Debal
from 634 to 637 AD, the Arabs tried the land route on the north-west
during AD 650-711. But the Khyber Pass was blocked by the Hindu princes
of Kabul and Zabul who inflicted many defeats on the Arabs, and forced
them to sign treaties of non-aggression. The Bolan pass was blocked by
the Jats of Kikan. AI Biladuri writes in his *Futûh-ul-Buldãn*: “At the
end of 38 H. or the beginning of 39 H. (659 A.D.) in the Khilafat of
Ali… Harras… went with the sanction of the Khalif to the same frontier…
He and those who were with him, saving a few, were slain in the land of
Kikan in the year 42 H. (662 A.D.). In the year 44 H. (664 A.D) and in
the days of Khalif Muawiya, Muhallab made war on the same frontier… The
enemy opposed him and killed him and his followers… Muawiya sent
Abdullah… to the frontier of Hind. He fought in Kikan and captured
booty… He stayed near the Khalif some time and then returned to Kikan,
when the Turks (Hindus) called their forces together and slew him.”

Next, the Arabs tried the third land route, via Makran. Al Biladuri
continues: “In the reign of the same Muawiya, Chief Ziyad appointed
Sinan… He proceeded to the frontier and having subdued Makran and its
cities by force, he stayed there… Ziyad then appointed Rashid… He
proceeded to Makran but he was slain fighting against the Meds (Hindus)…
Abbad, son of Ziyad then made war on the frontier of Hind by way of
Seistan. He fought the inhabitants… but many Musulmans perished… Ziyad
next appointed Al Manzar. Sinan had taken it but its inhabitants had
been guilty of defection… He (Al Manzar) died there… When Hajjaj… was
governor of Iraq, Said… was appointed to Makran and its frontiers. He
was opposed and slain there. Hajjaj then appointed Mujja… to the
frontier… Mujja died in Makran after being there a year… Then Hajjaj
sent Ubaidullah… against Debal. Ubaidullah being killed, Hajjaj wrote to
Budail… directing him to proceed to Debal… the enemy surrounded and
killed him. Afterwards, Hajjaj during the Khilafat of Walid, appointed
Mohammad, son of Qasim… to command on the Sindhian frontier.” That was
in 712 AD.

Now compare this Arab record on the frontiers of India with their record
elsewhere. Within eight years of the Prophet’s death, they had conquered
Persia, Syria, and Egypt. By 650 AD, they had advanced upto the Oxus and
the Hindu Kush. Between 640 and 709 AD they had reduced the whole of
North Africa. They had conquered Spain in 711 AD. But it took them 70
long years to secure their first foothold on the soil of India. No
historian worth his salt should have the cheek to say that the Hindus
have always been an easy game for invaders.

Muhammad bin Qasim succeeded in occupying some cities of Sindh. His
successors led some raids towards the Punjab, Rajasthan, and Saurashtra.
But they were soon defeated, and driven back. The Arab historians admit
that “a place of refuge to which the Muslims might flee was not to be
found”. By the middle of the 8th century they controlled only the highly
garrisoned cities of Multan and Mansurah. Their plight in Multan is
described by AI Kazwin in *Asr-ul-Bilãd* in the following words: “The
infidels have a large temple there, and a great idol… The houses of the
servants and devotees are around the temple, and there are no idol
worshippers in Multan besides those who dwell in those precincts… *The
ruler of Multan does not abolish this idol because he takes the large
offerings which are brought to it… When the Indians make an attack upon
the town, the Muslims bring out the idol, and when the infidels see it
about to be broken or burnt, they retire.”* (emphasis added). So much
for Islamic monotheism of the Arabs and their military might. They, the
world-conquerors, failed to accomplish anything in India except a
short-lived raid.

It was some two hundred years later, in 963 AD, that Alptigin the Turk
was successful in seizing Ghazni, the capital of Zabul. It was his
successor Subuktigin who seized Kabul from the Hindu Shahiyas shortly
before he died in 997 AD. His son, Mahmud Ghaznavi, led many expeditions
into India between 1000 and 1027 AD. The details of his destructive
frenzy are too well-known to be repeated. What concerns us here is the
facile supposition made by historians in general that Mahmud was not so
much interested in establishing an empire in India as in demolishing
temples, plundering treasures, capturing slaves, and killing the
*kãfirs*. This supposition does not square with his seizure of the
Punjab west of the Ravi, and the whole of Sindh. The conclusion is
unavoidable that though Mahmud went far into the heartland of Hindustan
and won many victories, he had to beat a hasty retreat every time in the
face of Hindu counterattacks. This point is proved by the peril in which
he was placed by the Jats of the Punjab during his return from Somnath
in 1026 AD.

The same Jats and the Gakkhars gave no end of trouble to the Muslim
occupants of Sindh and the Punjab after Mahmud was dead. Another 150
years were to pass before another Islamic invader planned a conquest of
India. This was Muhammad Ghuri. His first attempt towards Gujarat in
1178 AD met with disaster at the hands of the Chaulukyas, and he barely
escaped with his life. And he was carried half-dead from the battlefield
of Tarain in 1191 AD. It was only in 1192 AD that he won his first
victory against Hindus by resorting to a mean stratagem which the
chivalrous Rajputs failed to see through.  
 

**THE TURKISH EMPIRE WAS TEMPORARY**

Muhammad Ghuri conquered the Punjab, Sindh, Delhi, and the Doab upto
Kanauj. His general Qutbuddin Aibak extended the conquest to Ajmer and
Ranthambhor in Rajasthan, Gwalior, Kalinjar, Mahoba and Khajuraho in
Bundelkhand, and Katehar and Badaun beyond the Ganges. His raid into
Gujarat was a failure in the final round though he succeeded in sacking
and plundering Anahilwar Patan. Meanwhile, Bakhtyar Khalji had conquered
Bihar and Bengal north and west of the Hooghly. He suffered a disastrous
defeat when he tried to advance into Assam.

But by the time Muhammad Ghuri was assassinated by the Gakkhars in 1206
AD, and Aibak assumed power over the former’s domain in India, Kalinjar
had been reconquered by the Chandellas, Ranthambhor had renounced
vassalage to Delhi, Gwalior had been reoccupied by the Pratihars, the
Doab was up in arms under the Gahadvad prince Harishchandra, and the
Katehar Rajputs had reasserted their independence beyond the Ganges. The
Yadavbhatti Rajputs around Alwar had cut off the imperial road to Ajmer.
Aibak was not able to reconquer any of these areas before he died in
1210 AD.

Aibak’s successor, Iltutmish, succeeded in retaking Ranthambhor and
Gwalior, and in widening his base around Ajmer. But he suffered several
defeats at the hands of the Guhilots of Nagda, the Chauhans of Bundi,
the Paramars of Malwa, and the Chandellas of Bundelkhand. Beyond the
Ganges, the Katehar Rajputs had consolidated their hold which the Sultan
could not shake. The Doab was still offering a very stiff resistance.
His grip on Ajmer had also started slipping by the time he died in 1236
AD.

The Sultanate suffered a steep decline during the reigns of Razia,
Bahrain, Masud, and Mahmud of the Shamsi dynasty founded by Iltutmish,
though its dissolution was prevented by Balban who wielded effective
power from 1246 AD onwards. The Muslim position in Bengal was seriously
threatened by Hindu Orissa. Another Muslim invasion of Assam ended in
yet another disaster in which the Muslim general lost his life and a
whole Muslim army was annihilated, Hindu chieftains now started
battering the Muslim garrison towns in Bihar. Near Delhi, the Chandellas
advanced up to Mathura. The Rajputs from Alwar made raids as far as
Hansi, and became a terror for Muslims even in the environs of Delhi.
Balban’s successes against this rising tide of Hindu recovery were
marginal. He suffered several setbacks. The Sultanate was once more
reduced to rump around Delhi when Balban died in 1289 AD.

Dr. R.C. Majumdar has summed up the situation so far in the following
words: “India south of the Vindhyas was under Hindu rule in the 13th
century. Even in North India during the same century, there were
powerful kingdoms not yet subjected to Muslim rule, or still fighting
for their independence… Even in that part of India which acknowledged
the Muslim rule, there was continual defiance and heroic resistance by
large or small bands of Hindus in many quarters, so that successive
Muslim rulers had to send well-equipped military expeditions, again and
again, against the same region… As a matter of fact, the Muslim
authority in Northern India, throughout the 13th century, was tantamount
to a military occupation of a large number of important centres without
any effective occupation, far less a systematic administration of the
country at large.”

Jalaluddin Khalji failed to reconquer any land which had been lost by
Muslims during the earlier reign. Alauddin was far more successful. His
generals, Ulugh Khan and Nusrat Khan, were able to conquer Gujarat in
1298 AD. But they were beaten back from Ranthambhor which Alauddin could
reduce only in 1301 AD. His conquest of Chittor in 1303 AD was
short-lived as the Sisodias retook it soon after his death in 1316 AD.
So was his conquest of Jalor in Rajasthan. His own as well Malik Kafur’s
expeditions against Devagiri in Maharashtra, Warrangal in Andhra
Pradesh, Dvarasamudra in Karnataka, and Madurai in Tamil Nadu, were
nothing more than raids because Hindu princes reasserted their
independence in all these capitals soon after the invaders left. And the
Khalji empire collapsed as soon as Alauddin died in 1316 AD. Ghiyasuddin
Tughlaq had to intervene in 1320 AD to save the remnants from being
taken over by Hindus from Gujarat who had been nominally converted to
Islam.

Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq was successful in conquering south and east Bengal. 
But he could not completely subdue Tirhut in Bihar. His son Jauna Khan
suffered defeat in 1321 AD when he tried to reconquer Warrangal, and had
to mount another attack in 1323 AD before he could reduce it.  But by
1326 AD Prataparudra was back in power. In 1324 AD Jauna Khan had been
beaten back from the borders of Orissa. He was more successful when he
came to power as Muhammad Tughlaq. He consolidated his hold over
Devagiri, conquered the small kingdom of Kampili on the Tungbhadra, and
forced Dvarasamudra to pay tribute to the imperial authority of Delhi.
Madurai also came to be included in his empire. He transferred his
capital to Devagiri in order to keep a close watch on Hindu resurrection
in the South, and for establishing another centre of Islamic power in
India. But at the very start of his reign he had been defeated by
Maharana Hammir of Mewar, taken prisoner, and released only after he
ceded all claims to Ajmer, Ranthambhor and Nagaur, besides payment of 50
lakhs of rupees as indemnity. And his empire south of the Vindhyas was
lost to Delhi in his own life-time, and Delhi’s hold over large areas
even in the North disappeared soon after his death in 1351 AD.

Firuz Shah Tughlaq was able to keep together the rump for some time. His
expedition to Orissa was nothing more than a successful raid. And he had
to lead annual expeditions against the Katehar Rajputs north of the
Ganges. Ms successors could not keep even the rump in the north. It
broke down completely after Timur’s invasion in 1399 AD. Meanwhile, the
great Vijayanagara Empire had consolidated Hindu power south of the
Krishna. Rajasthan was ruled by defiant Rajput princes led by Mewar.
Orissa had fully recovered from the devastation of Firuz Shah Tughlaq’s
raid.

The Sayyids who succeeded the Tughlaqs were hardly an imperial dynasty
when they started in 1414 AD. Their hold did not extend beyond Etawah
(U.P.) in the east, and Mewat (Haryana) in the south. Khizr Khan tried
to restore the empire in the north but without success. Mubarak Shah was
able to recover the Punjab and Multan before the Sayyids were supplanted
by the Lodis in 1451 AD.

Bahlol Lodi reduced the Muslim principality of Jaunpur in 1457 AD. But
Sikandar Lodi failed to subdue Gwalior, Rajasthan, and Baghelkhand. He
removed his capital to Agra in order to plan a conquest of Malwa and
Rajasthan. But it bore no fruit. The Lodi “empire” more or less broke
down under Ibrahim Lodi. By this time, Mewar under Rana Sanga had
emerged as the strongest state in North India. Orissa stood its ground
against Muslim Bengal to its north and the Bahmanis to its south. The
power of Vijayanagara attained its acme under Krishnadevaraya (1505-1530
AD).

The situation during the 14th and the 15th centuries has been summed up
by Dr. R.C. Majumdar in the following words: “The Khalji empire rose and
fell during the brief period of twenty years (A.D 1300-1320). The empire
of Muhammed bin Tughlaq… broke up within a decade of his accession (A.D.
1325), and before another decade was over, the Turkish empire passed
away for ever… Thus barring two every short-lived empires under the
Khaljis and Muhammad bin Tughlaq… there was no Turkish empire in India.
This state of things continued for nearly two centuries and a half till
the Mughals established a stable and durable empire in the second half
of the sixteenth century A.D.”  
 

**MUGHAL EMPIRE: A JOINT VENTURE**

Babur won some renowned victories but hardly established an empire.
Humayun lost to Sher Shah Sur, and failed to win back most of what Babur
had won. Sher Shah added Ranthambhor and Ajmer to his empire in north
India. But the fierce fight he faced in Marwar made him confess that he
had almost lost an empire for a handful of millet. His rule lasted only
for a brief span of five years (1540-1545 AD). The Sur “empire” became a
shambles soon after, so much so that the Hindu general Himu was able to
crown himself as Hemachandra Vikramaditya at Delhi in 1556 AD.

The Mughal empire founded by Akbar in 1556 AD proved more stable, and
endured for 150 years. It also expanded in all directions till by the
end of the 17th century it covered almost the whole of India except the
extreme south. But the credit for Mughal success must go largely to
Akbar’s recognition of power realities, and reconciliation with the
Rajputs by suspension of several tenets of a typically Islamic state. It
was the Rajput generals and soldiers who won many of the victories for
which the Mughals took credit. The Rajput states in Rajasthan and
Bundelkhand were vassals of the Mughal emperor only in name. For all
practical purposes, they were allies of the Mughals who had to keep them
in good humour. And Mewar kept aloft the flag of Hindu defiance
throughout the period of effective Mughal rule.

The Mughal empire started breaking up very fast when Aurangzeb reversed
Akbar’s policy of accommodating the Hindus, and tried to re-establish a
truly Islamic state based on terror, and oppression of the
“non-believers”. Rajasthan and Bundelkhand reasserted their independence
during his life-time. So did the Jats around Bharatpur and Mathura. The
Marathas dug Aurangzeb’s grave when they made imperial seats such as
Ahmadnagar and Aurangabad unsafe in spite of large Mughal garrisons, and
invaded imperial territory as far as Khandesh and Gujarat. This Hindu
resurgence shattered the Mughal empire within two decades of Aurangzeb’s
death in 1707 AD.  
 

**THE PROVINCIAL MUSLIM PRINCIPALITIES**

Amongst the provincial Muslim principalities established by rebels and
adventurers after the break-up of the Tughlaq empire, those of Bengal,
Malwa, Gujarat, and the Bahmanis were notable. Hindu Orissa battled
against Bengal till both of them were taken over by the Mughals. The
Sisodias of Mewar engaged Gujarat and Malwa, and almost overcame them in
the reign of Rana Sanga. Gujarat recovered for a short time only to be
taken over by the Mughals. The Vijayanagara Empire contained the
Bahmanis from southward expansion in a fierce struggle spread over more
than two centuries, in which fortunes on both sides waxed and waned. The
destruction of the metropolis at Vijayanagara did not lead to the
destruction of the Vijayanagara Empire. It barred the path of Bijapur
for another seventy years. Meanwhile, the Marathas had come to control
large parts of South India as nominal vassals of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur
even before Shivaji appeared on the scene. And they were soon to deliver
death blows to the remnants of the Bahmani empire which the Mughals
hastened to incorporate in their own empire.  
 

**THE PROPER PERSPECTIVE**

Reviewed as a whole, the period between the last decade of the 12th
century and the first quarter of the 18th - the period which is supposed
to be the period of Muslim empire in India - is nothing more than a
period of long-drawn-out war between Hindu freedom fighters and the
Muslim invaders. The Hindus lost many battles, and retreated again and
again. But they recovered every time, and resumed the struggle so that
eventually the enemy was worn out, defeated, and dispersed in the final
round which started with the rise of Shivaji.

As we read the history of medieval India we find that only a few Hindu
princes made an abject surrender before the proved superiority of Muslim
arms. Muslim historians cite innumerable instances of how Hindus burnt
or killed their womenfolk, and then died fighting to the last man. There
were many instances of Muslims being defeated decisively by Hindu
heroism. Many of the so-called Muslim conquests were mere raids which
succeeded initially but the impact of which did not last for long. The
account which Assam, Rajasthan, Bundelkhand, Orissa, Telingana, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and the Punjab gave of themselves in
successive waves of resistance and recovery, has not many parallels in
human history.

It is, therefore, a travesty of truth to say that Islam enjoyed an
empire in India for six centuries. What happened really was that Islam
struggled for six centuries to conquer India for good, but failed in the
final round in the face of stiff and continued Hindu resistance. Hali
was not at all wrong when he mourned that the invincible armada of Hijaz
which had swept over so many seas and rivers met its watery grave in the
Ganges. Iqbal also wrote his *Shikwah* in sorrowful remembrance of the
same failure. In fact, there is no dearth of Muslim poets and
politicians who weep over the defeat of Islam in India in the past, and
who look forward to a reconquest of India in the future. Hindus have
survived as a majority in their motherland not because Islam spared any
effort to conquer and convert them but because Islamic brutality met
more than its equal in Hindu tenacity for freedom.

Nor is it anywhere near the truth to say that the British empire in
India replaced an earlier Muslim empire. The effective political power
in India had already passed into the hands of the Marathas, the Jats,
and the Sikhs when the British started playing their imperialist game.
The Muslim principalities in Bengal, Avadh, South India, Sindh, and the
Punjab were no match for the Hindu might that had resurged. The Mughal
emperor at Delhi by that time presented a pitiful picture of utter
helplessness. The custodians of Islam in India were repeatedly inviting
Ahmad Shah Abdali from across the border to come and rescue Islam from
the abyss into which it had fallen.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


