+++
title = "06 6. Sangh Parivar, the last Gandhians"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**6. Sangh Parivar, the last Gandhians**

 

         When in 1980, the secularist tendency led by Nana Deshmukh and
Atal Behari Vajpayee imposed "Gandhian socialism" on the newly founded
BJP as its official ideology, all the establishment secularists laughed
at this transparent attempt to acquire a new secular
identity.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  "This party is neither Gandhian nor
socialist", they said.  The party was in fact more socialist than it
would like to admit after liberalization became the new orthodoxy,
certainly more socialist than the non-socialist "cleverest bourgeois
scoundrel" Gandhi ever was, but we can agree that it was less socialist
than was normative in 1980.  What interests us more, is whether the BJP,
always accused of having historical links with Gandhi's assassin, can
legitimately be called Gandhian. 

 

         My view is that within the present political spectrum, the BJP
is definitely and by far the most Gandhian party.  The former socialists
and populists, who had inherited part of the Gandhian legacy through
Jayaprakash Narayan, have become nothing but casteist interest groups
steeped in coercive tactics and crime; there is nothing Gandhian about
them anymore.  Congress, of course, presided over the betrayal of every
single Gandhian policy under Nehru's Prime Ministership, and its level
of morality and dedication to the nation is nothing that Gandhi would be
proud of.

 

         By contrast, the BJP, or rather the Sangh Parivar as a whole,
is definitely a Gandhian movement in many respects.  The Sangh Parivar
supports economic self-reliance (*swadeshi*) coupled with cultural
self-reliance.  The Sangh workers shun luxury and move around by public
transport, in the lowest-class compartments; in communications as well
as in their martial arts practice (with the stick), they are
deliberately settling for older technology, quite comparable to Gandhi's
choice for living in the past with his *charkha*.  Sangh whole-timers
practise the typically Gandhian mix of politics and asceticism
(including sexual abstinence).  The Sangh protests against *Miss World*
flesh shows, the promotion of meat consumption by American fast food
chains, the unnecessary and disruptive promotion of tooth paste at the
expense of indigenous methods of dental hygiene, and other instances of
dumping India's heritage in favour of undesirable and/or foreign
alternatives.  This earns Sangh activists haughty smirks from the elite,
but that itself is yet another point in common with Gandhi and his
spinning-wheel.

 

         In some respects, the RSS follows Gandhi even where Gandhi was
decidedly un-Hindu.  The seeming unwillingness to use the modernmost
technology and media (which is gradually being superseded by modernizing
efforts originating largely in NRI circles) is Gandhian enough, but is
unwarranted from a Hindu viewpoint.  The ancient Hindus in the
Indus-Saraswati civilization were in the vanguard of humanity in science
and technology; Gandhi had his retro-mania from Christian romantics like
Thoreau and Tolstoi.  The combination of social work with celibacy is
characteristic of certain Roman Catholic monastic orders, but is foreign
to Hindu tradition, where a clean separation is maintained between, on
the one hand, the self-supporting worldly society, which takes care of
its needy and in which every able-bodied young man is expected to start
a family, and on the other hand the circles of celibate sadhus from whom
no worldly service is required because their spiritual practice is
contribution enough.

 

         Three central aspects of the Sangh's work are typically
Gandhian, and are also the key to its success.  One is its grass-roots
work, its impressive record in actual social service, which is far
larger and more deserving of a Nobel prize than Mother Teresa's heavily
foreign-financed operations.  Like for Mahatma Gandhi, politics for the
Sangh is but one aspect of a much larger social programme carried out by
the citizens' own initiative and effort.  This creates a much closer
rapport with the masses, a movement with much stronger roots than purely
political movements like the Hindu Mahasabha.

 

         The second Gandhi-like aspect of the Sangh's success is its
religious dimension.  Though the BJP insists on its secular character,
many of the Sangh-affiliated organizations and individuals are not that
shy about their Hindu moorings, and this is precisely one of the reasons
why they strike a chord of confidence among the people.  Tilak,
Aurobindo and Gandhi made the independence movement into a mass movement
by giving it a religious dimension; it is for the same reason that the
Sangh has become a mass movement firmly rooted in the general
population, a pool of Hindu commitment on which the BJP can draw at
voting time.

 

         The third Gandhian trait in the Sangh's style of functioning is
the moral dimension which it gives to its politics.  The BJP advertises
itself as a disciplined party free of corruption.  When during the 1996
Lok Sabha election campaign, Narasimha Rao's men tried to implicate L.K.
Advani in a financial scandal, the public reacted with a sincere
disbelief: he may be a communalist, but we never saw any sign of
corruption in him.  My own experience confirms that in general, the
workers of the Sangh-affiliated organizations are sincerely dedicated to
the well-being of their country and society without expecting personal
benefits in return.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  Of late, this reputation has been
corroded by scandals involving the BJP (though it remains the cleanest
party by far), and even RSS grassroots recruitment is feeling the effect
of the general spread of consumerism in Hindu society.  Traditionally,
Hindus have held self-abnegation as practiced by Sangh workers in high
esteem, but many members of the new generation (yuppie or goonda) merely
find it funny; the RSS-Gandhian ethos has now become an upstream effort
defying the spirit of the times.

 

         The kinship between the Sangh and Gandhi is real enough in
these positive aspects, but it is just as palpable in some negative
respects.  To start with a small but nasty point, Gandhi thought his own
position (call it the Gandhian *sampradaya*/sect) represented the whole
of Hinduism, both at the political and the religio-philosophical level,
and strongly resented alternative centres of Hindu mobilization.  Though
calling himself a Hindu, he claimed the leadership of the whole nation
and not just of the Hindus, though the British secularists and the
Muslims never conceded this more-than-Hindu identity to him (certainly a
parallel with the *Bharatiya* rather than *Hindu* Janata Party).  When
the Muslim League became a formidable challenger to Gandhi's claim, it
would have been in the nation's and his own interest to let the Hindu
Mahasabha counterbalance the League's influence; moderates normally use
the presence of radicals as a useful bargaining-chip.  But Gandhi and
his Congress wanted the whole Hindu cake to themselves. 

 

         The same intolerance of or at least annoyance with rivals for
the Hindu constituency is in evidence in the Sangh.  In surveys of Sangh
history, there is remarkably little reference to the Hindu Mahasabha and
other Hindu organizations.  Especially glaring is the RSS reluctance to
acknowledge the role of Babarao Savarkar (elder brother of V. D.
Savarkar and an outstanding revolutionary in his own right). It was
Babarao who had drafted the original RSS pledge and included the term
‘Hindu Rashtra’ in it. He had suggested the saffron RSS flag. He had
merged his own Tarun Hindu Sabha as well as Sant Panchelgaonkar
Maharaj’s Mukteshwar Dal into the fledgling RSS. He was responsible for
bringing into the RSS such luminaries as Bhalji Pendharkar, the noted
film director and later the Dadasaheb Phalke award winner Kashinath Pant
Limaye who became he provincial head of the Maharashtra RSS, Babu
Padmaraj Jain and other. Baburao toured extensively for the RSS in spite
of his failing health. Both Hedgewar and Golwalkar had great respect for
Babarai. Yet *The RSS Story* by K. R. Malkani does not even mention
Babarao’s name. In fact some narrow minded RSS leaders from Pune had
tempered with the chapter in Babarao’s contribution (written by P. N.
Gokhale) that deals with Babarao’s contribution to the growth of the
RSS. Similarly, no acknowledgement is made of the help which the RSS
received from the Arya Samaj and the Hindu Mahasabha everywhere.

 

During the 1989 elections, when the BJP had an electoral alliance with
the Janata Dal, Balraj Madhok stood as a candidate for the reconstituted
Bharatiya Jan Sangh against the Janata Dal candidate in Lucknow.  Most
Hindutva people were eager to work for Madhok, "one of us", against the
JD secularist officially supported by the BJP.  When Madhok looked sure
to win the election, Vajpayee hurried to Lucknow to discipline the BJP
workers; he could not tolerate that a non-BJP man would enter the Lok
Sabha in spite of his proven merit for the Hindu cause. 

 

         In a way, the Sangh attitude mirrors that of mendacious
secularists who always label anyone speaking up for the Hindus as an
"RSS man": they identify the Hindu cause with the Sangh.  Generally they
do not see beyond the confines of the Sangh and are practically unaware
that there are conscious Hindus outside the Sangh.

 

         A typical Gandhian flaw in BJP functioning, the result of
mixing self-denial (a personal discipline) with politics (a public
affair), is the absence of any healthy sense of *quid pro quo*.  Gandhi
always sacrificed Indian or Hindu interests without asking anything in
return, hoping that this would soften the heart of the beneficiary and
put him in the right mood to give something back at his own initiative. 
Thus, after the outbreak of World War 1, "Indian political leaders,
'moderate' as well as 'extremist', were unanimous that the people of
India should support the British cause against the Germans, but only for
a price: the promise of home rule after the war.  Gandhi was almost
alone in rejecting the idea of a political bargain with the British; he
cherished the hope that in return for unconditional support, a grateful
and victorious Britain would give India her due when the war was
over."[\[3\]](#_edn3)  As it turned out, the British took Gandhi's
services (recruiting Indian volunteers to die a useless and horrible
death in the war against Germans who had done the Indians no harm) but,
except for an embarrassing medal of loyal service to the British Empire,
they gave him nothing in return.  In the real world, politicians bargain
for a tangible *quid pro quo* and don't count on gratitude.

 

         This Gandhian idiosyncrasy has set a trend in Indian foreign
policy.  In his infamous 1954 "Panch sheel" treaty with China, Nehru
conceded China's claim to Tibet but extracted no Chinese acceptance of
India's established borders in return.  In the Indo-Pak wars, Indian
successes on the battlefield were squandered in Nehru's vainglorious
attempt to posture as an apostle of internationalism (bringing in the
UNO in the Kashmir dispute, 1948), or as an occasion to show off India's
sportsmanship (ceding the territory conquered in 1965), or in return for
a meaningless declaration of good intent (releasing the Pakistani
prisoners for a never-kept promise to keep the Kashmir issue bilateral
in 1971).  In 1996, India parted with a large percentage of the Ganga
water supply in an empty show of generosity to Bangladesh, effectively
hurting its own agriculture and shipping industry, without even asking
anything in return: not that Bangladesh treat the Hindu minority
correctly, not that it restore the Chakma lands to its Chakma refugees,
not that it take back its illegal Muslim migrants, not that it close its
borders to separatist guerrilla groups terrorizing India's northeast.

 

         In this habit of making unilateral gestures to undeserving
enemies, Gandhi had no followers more imitative than the BJP.  This
party always sells out its principles and pays homage to everything and
everyone its enemies cherish, without ever exacting even a promise (let
alone a real bargain) in return.  No matter how many concessions A.B.
Vajpayee offered during his 13-day tenure as Prime Minister in search of
a majority, no matter how hard he kicked his Kashmiri refugee supporters
in the groin by promising to preserve Art. 370, no matter how sincerely
he condemned the Ayodhya demolition, he did not get a single undertaking
from a non-"communal" parliamentarian to support the government during
the confidence vote.  No matter how deep the BJP leaders crawl in the
dust begging for certificates of good secular conduct from their
enemies, this has never yielded them anything except contempt.  But so
far, everything indicates that they can be counted upon to continue in
the same direction.

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(           \[1\])  We omit discussion of the lack of an
agreed meaning for the term "Gandhian socialism".  An insider told me
that during one of the constituent meetings of the budding BJP, a vote
was taken on whether the ideology should be "integral humanism" or
"Gandhian socialism"; the latter won with a small majority, but to
please everyone, it was then decided that the "Gandhian socialism" is
actually the same thing as "integral humanism".  The incident reveals
the lack of ideological *sérieux* in the BJP.  Similar illustrations of
this weakness include Govindacharya's 1996 enthusiasm for "social
engineering", a term dear to totalitarian regimes by which he meant
simply the induction of more Backward Caste candidates in the elections.

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(           \[2\])  It is a different matter that this
personal modesty is often combined with a lack of collective Sangh
modesty.  Many Sangh workers are extremely touchy about criticism of the
Sangh, even when they don't mind criticism of Hinduism or India.

</div>

<div id="edn3" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref3)^(           \[3\])  B.R. Nanda: *Gandhi and his Critics*
(OUP, Delhi 1993), p.116.

 

   **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section7.html)**

**   [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section5.html)**

</div>

</div>
