+++
title = "10 10. Anti-intellectualism in action"

+++
<div class="Section1">

**10. Anti-intellectualism in action**

 

         The two most important consequences of the anti-intellectual
prejudice animating the Sangh are, firstly, an extreme ineptness at
public relations, and secondly, the stunted development of the Sangh
Parivar's own intellectual grip on the world.  An example of the first
is the staggering failure of the Hindu campaign reclaiming Ayodhya to
communicate its case to the world, as already discussed.  The worst part
of it is not that the Sangh people failed to communicate the Hindu case
(the biased press was indeed a formidable obstacle), but that it never
took the trouble of verifying whether its message came across nor of
devising ways to deal with the hostile climate in the media and among
India-watchers.

 

         Another example is riot reporting.  Riots, though mostly
started by Muslims (e.g. the Mumbai riots of December 1992 and of
January 1993), are systematically reported in the world media as
"pogroms" committed by well-prepared and well-armed Hindu death squads
against poor defenceless Muslims.  In journalistic and scholarly
references, Advani's peaceful 1990 Rath Yatra has become a proverbially
violent "blood yatra".  Unlike Asghar Ali Engineer and other riot
vultures, the Sangh does not bother to write its own reports on riots,
in spite of its boast that its cadres are omnipresent.  Quite often,
Sangh-related people tell me interesting and potentially explosive
background stories about riots (and other controversial matters such as
discrimination of Hindus, connivance at Bangladeshi infiltration etc.),
but when I ask them for exact names, times, places, it usually turns out
that they have not bothered to record anything: what would have become a
credible-sounding propaganda story in the hands of A.A. Engineer remains
a rumour headed for oblivion in the hands of Sangh people. 

 

         The lie about "pogroms" is giving a bad name not only to the
organized Hindutva forces, but to Hindu society as a whole and to India
as well; for that reason, the Sangh Parivar has no right to neglect the
public relations job inherent in any socio-political movement.  Until a
decade ago, most observers and even enemies of Hinduism were prepared to
concede to it a certain harmlessness and benevolent tolerance as
quintessentially Hindu qualities; today, even that little credit has
been taken away.  Hindus used to take great pride in Swami Vivekananda's
triumphal speech at the Parliament of Religions in 1893, but the
celebration of its 100th anniversary in Washington DC was just
embarrassing because the Ayodhya demolition was generally considered to
have disproven Vivekananda's description of Hinduism as tolerant. 
Hinduism is now never discussed without mentioning the existence of
"Hindu fundamentalism", at best to disclaim this phenomenon as part of
genuine Hinduism, but more often to prove that Hinduism is just as
conducive to fanaticism as Islam and Christianity are.  The credit for
this additional blot on the fair name of Hinduism must go to the Sangh
Parivar, not because it has taken up Hindu causes like Ayodhya, but
because it has handled them in such a mindless way.

 

         We may compare this with the performance of the Bosnian Serbs,
as contrasted with that of the Bosnian Muslims.  Without pronouncing an
opinion on the rights and wrongs of the Yugoslav conflict, we may notice
a few pertinent facts about the strengths and weaknesses of the warring
parties.  The Serb/Yugoslav army started in a very comfortable position,
and easily established control in up to 73% of the territory; the Muslim
separatist government in Sarajevo found itself defenceless after
hopelessly overplaying its hand by declaring independence, but the
Sarajevo underworld provided the arms and expertise to save at least the
capital and turn it into a base for the reconquest of Bosnia.  From that
point onwards, the bragging drunkards on the Serb side squandered their
winning position step by step, while the sobre and determined Muslims
made the most of their limited strength. 

 

         A crucial factor in this war (admittedly more decisive in a
small country than in India) was world opinion.  The Serbs squandered
any goodwill they might have enjoyed, along with a lot of their
ammunition, in useless and ugly-looking actions against civilians and
unimportant targets, e.g. by bombing the museum city of Dubrovnik in a
part of Croatia which they had no intention to conquer.  The Muslims, by
contrast, fully exploited their underdog position in winning
international sympathy, and also hired the services of two American
public-relations firms.  We all know the results: the American
government willingly violated international agreements and its own laws
by helping Iran in shipping weapons and guerrilla fighters to Bosnia,
the CIA trained Bosnian soldiers, NATO air power destroyed the Serb
frontline, the Bosnian army helped by the Croats reconquered one-third
of the Serb-held territory, and the Dayton agreement formally restored
the political unity of Bosnia, definitively refusing recognition to the
*Republika Srpska*, all with the approval of remainder-Yugoslavia.  The
Serbs lost the war exclusively by their mindlessness.      

        

         The most serious consequence of the Sangh's tradition of
mindless activism is the second one, the lack of a developed
intellectual perspective on the Indian and world situations.  In their
political analysis, Hindutva activists often use the categories
developed by their enemies, and are the prisoners of these categories. 
E.g., first they let their enemies lay down the norm of secularism, and
then they try to live up to this norm and prove that they are better
secularists than others (hence BJP "positive secularism" vs. Nehruvian
"pseudo-secularism").  This way, they constantly have to betray their
own political identity and try to fashion themselves a new ("genuinely
secular") identity which their enemies have defined but are not willing
to concede to them.           

 

         Sadly, this is common Hindu practice in the modern age.  Thus,
the Christian and Muslim emphasis on monotheism and condemnation of
polytheism has been interiorized by Hindu reform movements even as the
latter were trying to counter Christian power in India.  Instead of
defending Hindu polytheism against the missionary vilification of
"idolatry", the Brahmo Samaj and Arya Samaj movements claimed that
monotheism was indeed right and polytheism was indeed wrong, but that
Hinduism, properly understood, is more monotheist that Christianity and
Islam.  As the historian Shrikant Talageri has remarked, this is as if
an Indian were to say: "The colonial racists were correct in assuming
the superiority of white skins over brown skins, but Indians have whiter
skins than Europeans."

 

         Such hopeless exercises in trying to defeat an opponent after
first borrowing his thought categories and value judgments, are
understandable as a result of the inferior position in which Hindu
society has found itself for centuries, always trying to live up to
standards set by their victorious enemies.  In an inertial hold-over of
this psychology, today's Hindutva activists have an inferiority complex
and value nothing so much as being accepted by respected people, meaning
secularists.  That is why they always offer their platforms to people
who despise them, people like Inder Kumar Gujral and Khushwant Singh (to
name two whom I've seen scheduled as guests of honour at functions of
the RSS student organization *Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad*), at
the same time spurning staunch Hindus who ought to be their allies but
who have been ostracized by the secularist establishment. 

 

         This approach is, of course, totally counterproductive, and if
the Hindutva strategists had it in them to learn from the feedback they
get from reality, they would have given it up long ago and opted for a
bolder profile.  That this would be more successful, was briefly
illustrated at the height of the Ayodhya controversy.  Sensing that the
public mood was in favour of the Hindu claim to the disputed temple
site, and more generally of some form of affirmation of India's Hindu
identity, the secularists temporarily borrowed the categories from their
opponents and started preaching secularism in the name of Hinduism:
"True Hinduism doesn't fuss about mosques", "Rama himself would not have
approved of this quarrel over his temple", "Swami Vivekananda was a
secularist too", etc.  Suddenly, the tables were turned, Hinduism had
become respectable, just because in spite of themselves, the Hindu
leaders had been bold and defiant for once.

 

         But the BJP leadership has definitely not learned from this
experience.  During the 1996 election campaign, and during the 13-day
tenure of the first-ever BJP Government, A.B. Vajpayee and other BJP
leaders were crawling before the secularist opinion masters and pleading
that they were the most secularist of all.  It recalls the occasion in
1771 when the Peshwa general Mahadji Sindia, militarily the most
powerful man in India, prostrated before Moghul emperor Shah Alam whom
he had rescued from his Pathan rivals, instead of folding up the
decrepit Moghul empire and declaring *Hindu Rashtra*.  The Hindutva
forces, instead of seizing power in their own right and setting up an
avowedly Hindu dispensation, keep on crawling before people whom the
*Organiser* bravely derides as "forces of the past".

 

         I expect Sangh spokesmen to reject this comparison with the
argument that unlike Sindia's, the Vajpayee government's power position
was severely restricted, as it controlled only a minority in the Lok
Sabha.  Fair enough: in the circumstances, the BJP had to tread
carefully, and would have done its duty by just remaining in power
without rocking the boat, if only to break the hysteria about the
"threat of Hindu fundamentalism".  But the point for now is that a
review of past experience would have taught Vajpayee that "more secular
than thou" posturing had no chance at all of making any dent in the
secularist hate front against the BJP.  Hindu society would accept
concessions by a BJP government, on condition that there was a realistic
promise of obtaining certain real gains in return.  Only a fool could
have believed that crawling before the secularists would yield any, but
just *any* reciprocal gesture.  They are, after all, spoiled children,
and the sight of beggars merely makes them laugh.[\[1\]](#_edn1)

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  Moreover, I cannot accept the
explanation frequently given by BJP men, that the BJP cannot do anything
until it comes to power at the centre.  A party with a distinct
ideological identity would certainly give at least a foretaste of its
future achievements through its parliamentary work and through the
performance of its state governments; but the record shows (cfr. infra)
that the BJP has performed as at most a second Congress Party, less
corrupt at best, but hardly more alert to specifically Hindu concerns.

 

   **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section11.html)**

**   [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section9.html)**

</div>

</div>
