+++
title = "11 11. \"I am a Hindu communalist\""

+++
<div class="Section1">

**11. "I am a Hindu communalist"**

 

         A symptom of the ideological power equation is the Sangh
Parivar's permanent checkmate in the "war of the words".  The Sangh is
at the mercy of the meanings which its enemies allot to important terms,
such as "communalism". 

 

         Originally (at least in Indian politics), "communal" was the
term by which the British labelled political arrangements, such as
separate electorates and quota-based recruitment, which took the
religious community as the operative unit rather than the individual or
the family or the region or the nation.  The term was never hurled at
people who rejected these arrangements, but was quite sincerely accepted
by the people who proposed the "communalization" of the polity: the
British and the Muslim League advocated it openly, the Congress started
defending it after becoming a party to it through the Lucknow Pact
(1916).  When the British proposed the Communal Award, its beneficiaries
never thought of treating "communal" as a dirty word and throwing it at
the Communal Award's opponents.  Today, by contrast, the mores of
discourse have sunk to the level where politicans and journalists and
scholars systematically apply the term to a movement which never used it
as a description of its own positions.

 

         Though Gandhi opposed the extension of the communal principle
to the relations between caste Hindus and untouchable Hindus, for the
rest his whole negotiation policy with the League and the British was
situated within the framework of communalism.  The main opposition to
this unapologetic communalism came not from the Congress, but from the
Hindu Mahasabha with, in its shadow, the fledgling Sangh.  If you read
speeches by HMS leaders in the 1930s and 40s, they turn out to be full
of unselfconscious attacks on "communal" politics.  The Hindutva
movement was born in the struggle against communalism, that was its very
*raison d'Ãªtre*.  The HMS's stated programme was to abolish communalism
and make India a secular democracy without separate electorates and
recruitment by communal quota.  Congress, with its bad conscience about
its complicity in the communalization of the polity, tried to cloud the
debate by misapplying the term "communal" to the HMS on the analogy of
the Muslim League.  It falsely posited a symmetry between the Muslim
League and the Hindu Mahasabha, smuggling out of the public's perception
the antisymmetry between the League's adherence and the HMS's opposition
to the communal principle.[\[1\]](#_edn1)  Very quickly, accurate usage
was eclipsed by muddled usage.  

 

         Today, the label "communal" is like a millstone around the
Hindutva movement's neck.  If the Nehruvians who installed and still
support a separate Personal Law for Muslims, a "communal" arrangement
par excellence, can get away with labelling their very opponents
"communalists", we have to admit that they have proven themselves past
masters in the war of the words; it is no use opposing them.  The Sangh
has lost this battle decades ago, but has never mustered the energy and
the brain power to even face its defeat squarely, much less to think up
a way to turn the tables on the Nehruvian Newspeak brigade.  It merely
tries to run away from the label with ridiculous disclaimers ("Hindus
can never be communal") which themselves presuppose the distorted
meaning imposed on this innocent word by the Nehruvians.

 

         The best way out of this impasse is to accept the label and
give it a new meaning.  And I am not proposing yet another distortion to
counter the Nehruvian distortion, no, the new meaning should simply be
the word's true and original meaning.  Before the British introduced
"communal" electorates and "communal" recruiting, the term had an
entirely positive meaning.  It has to do with living together, with
mutual support, with transcending petty divisions, with strengthening
community life, beautiful.[\[2\]](#_edn2)  The *Oxford Dictionary* (1986
reprint) defines *communal* as "of or for the or a community, for the
common use".  It also has an entry *communalism*, defined as "principle
of communal organization of society", and calls the Paris *Commune* a
"communalistic government in Paris in 1871".  Indian journalists going
abroad find to their initial disbelief that no one in the West or
anywhere else ever uses or even understands this swearword
"communalist"; if asked for a guess, few non-Indians would opine that
the word might have a pejorative meaning.  The magic charm "communalism"
which puts the whole Indian political scene in a mood of graveness and
militancy, and which can paralyze all normal thought processes in BJP
circles, is nothing but a provincial and distorted usage exclusive to
India's English-speaking elite. 

 

         The Sangh people, after having been battered and beaten for
decades on the words front, should finally accept the challenge and hit
back.  Instead of swallowing this distorted meaning of the word
"communal" and trying to prove that it doesn't apply to themselves, they
ought to accept the word and reject the distortion.  They should restore
to the word its true meaning and then allot it to those who are already
stuck with it anyway -- themselves.  The only way to stop being chased
around with salvos of "communalists!" is to rename the BJP as
*Communalist Party*.  Every Hindu leader should make it a point to tell
interviewers: "I am a Hindu communalist."  Wage the war of the words,
and win!

 

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:endnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="edn1" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref1)^(             \[1\])  This false symmetry is still
propagated by the likes of Mani Shankar Aiyar, who once called the BJP
the "Hindu chapter of the Muslim League".

</div>

<div id="edn2" style="mso-element:endnote">

[](#_ednref2)^(             \[2\])  Karl Marx tapped from the same
source when he associated his own ideology of self-righteousness and
mass-murder with this string of community-related ideas through the term
*communism*.  We should redeem the much-abused word family of
*community* by reintroducing it through a new derivative with a
genuinely positive meaning.

 

    **[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section12.html)    **

**    [BACK](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section10.html)**

</div>

</div>
