+++
title = "19 Seeing through Indian secularism"

+++
# Appendix 2. Ram Swarup on Indian secularism

I gladly leave the last world to Ram Swarup. By way of introduction, let
me quote the first part of Arun Shourie's article Fomenting reaction,
concerning the ban on the Hindi translation of Ram Swarup's book
understanding Islam through Hadis:

Ram Swarup, now in his seventies, is a scholar of the first rank. In the
1950's when our intellectuals were singing paeans to Marxism and to Mao
in particular, he wrote critiques of communism and of the actual-that
is, dismal - performance of communist governments. He showed that the
*sacrifices* which the people were being compelled to make, had nothing
to do with building a new society in which at some future date they
would be the heirs of milk and honey. On the contrary, the *sacrifices*
were nothing but the results of terrorism, pure and simple- of state
terrorism, to use the expression our progressive use for all governments
save the governments which have used it most brutally and most
extensively. And that this terror was being deployed for one reason
alone: to ensure total dominance, and that in perpetuity, for the
narrowest of oligarchies. He showed that the claims to efficiency and
productivity, to equitable distribution and to high morale which were
being made by these governments, and even more so by their apologists
and propagandists in countries such as India, were wholly unsustainable,
that in fact they were fabrications.

Today, anyone reading those critiques would characterize them as
prophetic. But thirty years ago so noxious was the intellectual climate
in India that all he got was abuse, and ostracism. *"His work of
Hinduism and on Islam and Christianity has been equally scholarly. And
what is more pertinent to the point I want to urge, it has been equally
prophetic. No one has ever refuted him on facts, but many have sought to
smear him and his writing. They have thereby transmuted his work from
mere scholarship into warning"*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Seeing through Indian secularism

The country's political atmosphere is rent with anti communal slogans.
There are deafening warnings against the threat to India's *secularism*.
Everywhere there is a gushing love for the minorities and a hearty
condemnation of the forces of communalism as incarnated in the VHP, the
RSS and the BJP. The parties and personalities who not long ago opposed
India's struggle for freedom and unity are fully in the campaign. The
Left intellectuals who dominate the media lead the Chorus; Muslim
fundamentalism provides the political sinews and the street strength;
that section of the press which had British connections (like the
Statesman and the Times of India) is still carrying on the old tradition
either out of habit or old loyalty or for sheer consistency.

The warnings against communalism are not new. They have a familiar
feature of the post-independence period. They have been sounded partly
to keep the warners in form, and partly because they have been the
stock-in-trade of slick intellectuals in search of a progressive image
and of skillful politicians in search of easy votes. But this time one
also notices a new urgency and shrillness in the alarm bells. It seems
it is no longer a put-up affair and the warners feel really endangered.
It also appears that this time the danger is not felt to be against the
Muslims- their adopted ward- but against themselves. For what has begun
to be attacked is not Muslim fundamentalism but pseudo-secularism
itself. A great threat indeed to those secularist-communists in India
whose model show-piece in Europe is in ruins and whose ideology and the
very way of thinking are under great questioning.

Though borrowed from the West, secularism in India served a different
end. In the West, it was directed against the clergy, tyrannical rulers,
and had therefore a liberating role; in India, it was designed and
actually used by Macaulayites to keep down the Hindus, the victims of
two successive imperialisms expending over a thousand years. In the
West, it opposed the Church which claimed to be the sole custodian of
truth, which took upon itself the responsibility of dictating science
and ordering thought, which decided when the world was created, whether
the earth is flat or round, whether the sun or the earth moves round the
other, which gave definitive conclusions on all matters and punished and
dissent. But in India, secularism was directed against Hinduism which
made no such claims, which laid down no dogmas and punished no dissent,
which fully accepted the role of reason and unhampered inquiry in all
matters, spiritual and secular; which encouraged viewing things from
multiple angles - Syadvada (for which there is no true English
word)[³²³](notes.htm#note323) was only a part of this larger speculative
and venturesome approach.

There is yet another difference. In the West, the struggle for
secularism called for sacrifice and suffering-remember the
imprisonments, the stakes, the Index; remember the condemnation of
Galileo; remember how Bruno, Lucilio Vanini, Francis Kett, Bartholomew
Legate, Wightman and others were burnt at the stake. But in India
secularism has been a part of the Establishment, first of the British
and then of our own self-alienated rulers. It has been used against
Hinduism which has nourished a great spirit and culture of tolerance,
free inquiry and intellectual [³²³](notes.htm#note323). Syadvada
literally means *perhaps-ism*. Approximate translations could be
*cognitive \[as opposed to moral\] relativism*, *viewpointly pluralism*.
The dictionary translations and spiritual integrity. Such a culture
deserves to be honoured and owned and cherished by its inheritors, but
unfortunately under a great misconception it is held in odium and it is
being denied and disowned by a self-forgetful nation. Secularism has
become a name for showing one's distance from this great religion and
culture. Macaulayites and Marxists also use it for Hindu- baiting.

Now turning away from this larger aspect and looking at it in its
present context, we find that secularism is quite a profitable business.
Even more than patriotism, it has become a refuge of many shady
characters of various descriptions Ambitious politicians resort to it
for vote-catching; intellectuals, many of them not too intellectual, use
it for self-aggrandizement . But the slogan has been so often used that
it has become hackneyed; and considering the contexts in which it is
used, it also sounds hypocritical; by a too reckless use, it has even
lost its abusive power.

Religious harmony is a desirable thing. But it takes two to play the
game. Unfortunately such a sentiment holds a low position in Islamic
theology. The situation is made more complicated by certain historical
factors into which we need not go here. The immediately preceding
British period added its own difficulty. More than the policy of *divide
and rule*, the British followed another favourite policy, the policy of
creating privileged enclaves and ruling the masses with the help of
those policies were embraced in their fullness by our new rulers-the
rules of the game did not change simple because the British left. They
have a vested interest in consolidated minorities and minorityism.
Consolidated minorities can be used against a notional majority which
can be further fragmented and rendered powerless a la Mandalisation and
other such devices.

In his book My Eleven Years With Fakhruddin Ahmad, Mr. Fazle Ahmed
Rehmany quotes an incident which throws interesting light on the
psychology of secularism and its need to keep Muslims in isolation and
in a sort of protective custody. During the Emergency period, some
followers of the jama'at-e-Islami found themselves in the same jail as
the members of RSS; here they began to discover that the latter were no
monsters as described by the *nationalist* and secularist propaganda.
Therefore they began to think better of the Hindus. This alarmed the
secularists and the interested Maulvis. Some Maulvis belonging to the
Jama'at-ul-Ulema-i-Hind met President Fakhruddin Ahmad, and reported to
him about the growing rapport between the members of the two
communities. This *stunned* the President and he said that this boded an
*ominous future for Congress Muslim leaders*, and he promised that *"he
would speak to Indiraji about this dangerous development and ensure that
Muslims remain Muslims."* Different political parties have a vested
interest in Muslims retaining their Hindu phobia. This phobia is a
treasure trove of votes for them-or, at least, this is what they
believe. It is unfortunate that the Muslims have not thrown up leaders
who stop playing the anti-Hindu game of some Hindus. It can bring no
religious amity. What Islam needs is an introspective leadership, a
leadership which is prepared to have a fresh look at its traditional
doctrines and approaches. It must give up its religious arrogance and
its fundamentalism, its basic categories of believers and infidels, its
imperialist theories of Zimmis and Jizya, its belief that it has
appeared with a divine mission to replace all other religions and modes
or worship.

*\[Published with some editing in Indian Express, 2/1/1991\]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
  
\[[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)\]  \[[Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)\]  \[[Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)\]  
  
