---
title: Lectures
---


## Difficulty

An acquired skill: Learning to get information out of research seminars
is an acquired skill, usually acquired much later than the skill of
reading mathematics.

### Approximation of private tuition

The purpose of attending a lecture is to learn from the lecturer’s
insights, opinions and ways of solving problems. Private tuition is far
better than a lecture. But lecture exists due to lack of sufficient
number of tutors. If you cannot follow what is going on, and if it is
not too disruptive, ask. If you are lost, ask the lecturer to do an
example.

### Novelty

(Ravi Vakil) You’ll hear various words, whose definitions you’re not so
sure about. At some point you’ll be able to make a sentence using those
words; you won’t know what the words mean, but you’ll know the sentence
is correct. Later you’ll learn the meanings and fill in the details more
efficiently.

## Preparation
- Read before attending the lecture. Read after the lecture. Tackle
  exercises.
- Bringing photocopies of relevant pages of the book to the class
  helps in quick understanding and orderly recording.


## Maintaining attention

Try to ask one question at as many seminars as possible, either during
the talk, or privately afterwards. The act of trying to formulating an
interesting question focuses the mind.

Try pretending that you will be scored based on your understanding of
the lecture.

Sit in the front of the class. During lectures, one must respond with
gestures in order to indicate interest.

### Following the talk

Try to follow the thread of the talk, and when you get thrown, try to
get back on again. This isn’t always possible, and admittedly often the
fault lies with the speaker. The initial parts of the talk is very
critical.

Check claims; consider limits, exercise intuition, use calculation.

Take text or slides to the lecture, if available.

## Post-talk discussions

Befriend a couple of other attendants. Talk to them and to professors
attending the talk, question them about the lecture, acquire their
insights.

Try to answer the questions: What question(s) is the speaker trying to
answer? Why should we care about them? What flavor of results has the
speaker proved? Do I have a small example of the phenonenon under
discussion? See if you can get one lesson from the talk. Criticize the
problem and the solution; see how you can apply ideas thence to your
work.

Try to extract three words from the talk and learn their definitions.
Assimilate notes immediately after the lecture: avoid backlogs.

## On the internet

Video lectures and university course lectures are useful.
