+++
title = "06 6 Revival of Universal Spirituality"

+++
**6**  
**Revival of Universal Spirituality**

The Hindu and Buddhist Gods and Goddesses in India, Nepal, Bali, Burma,
Japan, Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand and elsewhere are only local
expressions of a universal spirituality. In this respect, spirituality
is akin to science. Astronomy, Biology, Chemistry, Geology and Physics
reveal the same secrets of Nature to all men everywhere and at all
times, no matter in what language those secrets are couched or
communicated. In like manner, the spontaneous expressions of
spirituality have been the same everywhere and at all times, though the
language and metaphor of those expressions have been different according
to culture and clime.  In the final analysis, they are variations on the
same sublime theme.  
 

**ALL ANCIENT NATIONS WORSHIPPED MANY GODS**

There was a time when the ancient Assyrians, Babylonians, Chaldeans, and
Egyptians worshipped a multiplicity of Gods in the form of icons
installed in innumerable temples. The ancient Iranians paid homage to
the Fire God in their sacred shrines. The Gods of the Greeks and the
Romans are well known in spite of a large-scale destruction of their
physical manifestations by the vandals of Christianity. The Britons, the
Celts, the Franks, the Germans, the Scandinavians, and the Slavs also
sensed their Gods as residing in many a mountain, river and forest. The
pre-Islamic Arabs had many Gods and worshipped them in many sacred
shrines besides the principle one at Ka‘ba before the prophet of Islam
presided over their destruction.

Nearer home, the pre-Islamic Turks in Central Asia and the pre-Islamic
Indonesians and Malaysians to our south were Hindus and Buddhists with
similar ways of worship as we have in this country. The Cambodians, the
Chinese, the Laotians, the Mongolians, the Tibetans and the Vietnamese
had their own Hindu-Buddhist Gods till the other day before they fell
into the clutches of the Communist monolith.

The Red Indians in North, Central, and South America practised what
their Christian invaders from Europe denounced as ‘idolatry’. The
so-called aborigines of Africa, Australia, New Zealand and the far-flung
islands of Oceania did the same, and met the same punishment at the
hands of Christian invaders and missionaries.

The physical destruction of the icons and temples does not mean that the
Gods have been destroyed. Nor have the Gods become outdated. They do not
belong to a distant past. On the contrary, they are always there,
waiting to be witnessed and worshipped by any one who prepares oneself
to be admitted to their presence. For they dwell in a dimension which
defies time and space. They dwell in the depths of the human heart, in
the innermost sanctuary of the human soul.  Their disappearance from the
physical scene only means that human spirituality has become shallow,
and suffered a steep decline.  
 

**HINDU GODS PROVIDE A LINK WITH ALL ANCIENT GODS**

Ram Swarup has drawn our attention to this eclipse of the ancient Gods
of many people after those people were forcibly converted to
Christianity or Islam, and their temples were destroyed or converted
into churches or mosques. I shall, therefore, quote again at some length
from his book, *The Word As Revelation: Names of Gods:*

“There was a time when these Gods satisfied the religious urges of their
devotees. But in the course of time they came under attack from new Gods
that were appearing on the horizon. They are by now completely replaced
but the old persecution still continues though in a modified form. The
new persecutors are not theologians and religious zealots but staid
academicians. To them these Gods are not false but primitive. They hold
that these Gods represented the attempt of the primitive mind to
express, however imperfectly, through Nature’s symbols and objects, its
groping for a unitary principle. At this stage of human evolution, it
was difficult for man’s mind to rise above the sensuous to the
intellectual and the spiritual, and from the many to the one. That was
left for a later generation to achieve, reaching its high water-mark in
Christianity and modern Europe.

“If Gods are born of religious urges and spiritual intuitions, it is
difficult to see how modern European Christians are superior in this
respect and, therefore, how their ‘one God’ could be truer than the
‘many Gods’ of their ancestors.

“A look at the Hindu Gods may throw light on this aspect of the subject.
The Hindu pantheon has changed to some extent but the old Gods are still
active and are still understood though under modified names. Hindu India
has a sense of continuity with its past which other nations, that
changed their religions at some later stage, lack. It is also known that
the Hindu religion preserves many old layers and forms. Therefore, its
study may link us not only with its own past forms but also with the
religious consciousness, intuitions and forms that prevailed in the past
in Europe, in Greece, in Rome, in many Scandinavian and Baltic
countries, amongst Germanic and Slavic peoples and also in several
countries of the Middle East. In short, the study may reveal a
fundamental form of spiritual consciousness which is wider than its
Hindu expression.

“This discussion should help to promote our understanding not only of
Vedic religion and Vedic Gods but also of a whole archetypal spiritual
consciousness which expresses itself in the language of Many Gods; and
as a result should also help us to understand better the old religions
of Europe and Asia which are no more; it should also help us to see in a
new light the old Gods of Egypt, Persia, Greece, Rome, the Gods of the
Scandinavian and Baltic countries, the Gods of the Germanic, Celtic, and
Slavic peoples.”  
 

**RETURN OF ANCIENT GODS**

Ram Swarup pleads that a revival of universal spirituality should lead
to a return of ancient Gods eclipsed by Christianity and Islam:

“In the cultural history of the world, the replacement of Many Gods by
One God was accompanied by a good deal of conflict, vandalism, bigotry,
persecution and crusading. These conflicts were very much like ‘wars of
liberation’ of today, hot and cold, openly aggressive or cunningly
subversive. Success in such wars played no mean role in making a local
deity, say Allah of certain Arab tribes, win a wider status and assume a
larger, monarchical role.

“Looking at the whole thing from the perspective of today, it is
difficult to say whether the replacement was enriching or impoverishing
in the spiritual and cultural sense. In most cases like these, outer
symbols change without making any significant changes in their psychic
meanings. It would, therefore, be difficult to hold that the present
Gods of Semitic origin are superior to the now defunct pagan Gods. There
was a time when the old pagan Gods were pretty fulfilling and they
inspired the best of men and women to acts of greatness, love, nobility,
sacrifice, and heroism.  It is, therefore, a good thing to turn to them
in thought and pay them our homage. We know pilgrimage, as ordinarily
understood, as wayfaring to visit a shrine or a holy place. But there
can also be a pilgrimage in time and we can journey back and make our
offerings of the heart to those Names and Forms and Forces which once
incarnated and expressed man’s higher life.  They are holy Names and
Symbols.

“The present generations of many countries tend to regard their past as
a benighted period of their history. A more understanding approach
towards their Gods of old will work for a less severe judgement about
their past and their ancestors. It will also fill the generation gap,
not the one we talk about the most these days but a still wider one, the
general rootlessness of a whole nation. Gods provide an invisible link
between the past and the present of a nation; when they go, the link
also snaps. The peoples of Egypt, Persia, Greece, Germany and the
Scandinavian countries are no less ancient than the people of India; but
they lost their Gods, and therefore they lost their sense of historical
continuity and identity.

“Today, there is a spirit of revolt amongst Western youths against their
parents’ religion. Some are seeking light in new symbols. One of the
most fruitful channels for them could be to explore the symbols of their
more remote forefathers. This could help to broaden and deepen the
religion of their parents with the religion of their ancestors.

“What is true of Europe is also true of Africa and South America. The
countries of these continents have recently gained political freedom of
a sort. But it has done little to help them and to give them a spiritual
identity. If they wish to rise in a deeper sense, they must recover
their soul, their Gods, their roots in their own psyche; there has to be
a spiritual reassertion, a resurrection of their Gods. If they need any
change, and there is no doubt they do, it must come from within
themselves as a part of their own experience. If they do enough
self-churning, then their own Gods will put forth new meanings in
response to their new needs. They have to make the best of their own
psychic and spiritual gifts and discover their own Gods within
themselves. No people can import their Gods ready-made and rise
spiritually under the aegis of imported deities, saviours and prophets.

“But one cannot retain old Gods or revive their memory artificially. One
should develop a spiritual way of looking at things. One should live
with these Gods and spend much time with them. In a sense, all Gods are
jealous Gods. They want a person wholly with themselves before they
become wholly his. One has to dwell with them and meditate on them
before they become vivifying forces. If there is sufficient aspiration,
invoking, and soliciting, there is no doubt that even Gods apparently
lost could come back again. They are there all the time. For nothing
that has any truth in it can be destroyed. It merely goes out of
manifestation; but it could reappear under propitious circumstances. So
could the old Gods come to life again in response to new summons.”

Hindu society has to help the peoples of Asia, Africa, America, Europe,
and Oceania to go back to their own Gods, their own ancient shastras
which their Gods will reveal again. Hindu society can perform this
onerous task only if it reawakens to its own Gods, repels the attack
which monotheistic creeds are mounting again on its own spiritual
traditions, and turn the tables on mullahs and missionaries who are
stinkingly sick with self-righteousness.  
 

**MONOTHEISM IS THEOLOGY, NOT SPIRITUALITY**

The very fact that Christianity and Islam fall outside the commonwealth
of this universal spirituality, goes to show that there is something
seriously wrong with the consciousness which has constructed these
coercive creeds. The very fact that Christianity and Islam are intensely
hostile to universal spirituality expressing itself through diverse
deities, goes to prove that there is something particularly perverse in
the psychology of these thoughtless theologies. A special effort has to
be made to psychoanalyse the pathological behaviour of Christianity and
Islam, and spot the source of their spiritual sickness.

Ram Swarup has something significant to say about Monotheism which also
I shall quote:

“Ancient Rome, Greece and Egypt, all polytheistic cultures, were
relatively free from religious wars though they had their full quota of
wars otherwise.

“In polytheistic Rome too, men of different religious persuasions and
sects met and built their temples and worshipped in their own way. But
this freedom disappeared when Christianity, the religion of One True
God, took over.

“Monotheism was not always a spiritual idea. In many cases, it was an
ideology. It was consolidated in wars and in turn it led to further
wars. There were wars between different tribes, each tribe claiming its
own God to be supreme. Eventually, the Gods of the tribe that lost in
battle were supplanted by Gods of the winning side. Or, sometimes, a
tribe exchanged its Gods for power. It accepted the Gods of the
conquered people in order to consolidate its power over them. Or,
perhaps, there was a larger association to create, an empire to
consolidate, or other nations and tribes to conquer, and the idea of a
‘One True God’ was handy in the pursuit of this object. Thus, diplomacy,
the sword, systematic vandalism, all played their part in making a
particular god supreme. From very early days, the One God of
Christianity was bound up with the imperial needs of Rome. In more
recent times, the Biblical God has tried to consolidate what the
European arms and trade have conquered.

“When the urge for unity is spiritual, the theology of One God is no bar
and the seeker reaches a position no different from *Advaita*, from
*ekam sat*. He realizes that God alone is, and not that there is only
one God.

“But if the motive for unity is merely intellectual, it helps little,
spiritually speaking. God remains an outward being and does not become
the truth of the Spirit. It does not even help to reduce the number of
Gods; instead it multiplies the number of Devils if Christianity is any
guide in the matter. We know how Medieval Christianity was chock-full of
them. In fact, they occupied the centre of attention of the Church for
many centuries to the exclusion of everything else. During these
centuries, it was difficult to say whether the Church worshipped God or
those devils. One authority calculated that the number of demons was six
and a half million. According to another authority, there were 7,905,926
lesser demons presided over by 72 Princes of Hell. All of them were
intriguing against the Church and were undermining its work and
authority. Each of the Princes had his allotted work. Lucifer promoted
pride, Asmodeus lechery, Belphegor sloth, and so on.”

Christian and Islamic imperialism gave wide currency to monotheistic
theologies during periods of Christian and Muslim domination over large
parts of the world. These theologies, in turn, supported totalitarian
tyrannies practised by Christian and Muslim theocracies, and mobilised
mobs against subject populations belonging to other faiths. The worst
thing that happened was that these theologies confused the language of
religion and philosophy. Their impact on imbecile minds can be judged by
the thesis of Dr. Tarachand and his tribe that Advaita was a concept
coined by the Adi Shankaracharya in imitation of Islamic Monotheism
brought to Kerala by Muslim merchants (mind you, merchants!) in the
early years of the 8th century AD.  
 

**MONSTROSITIES OF MONOTHEISM**

Monotheism, polytheism, in fact, the whole brood of concepts born of the
basic concept called theism, are products of a petrified mind and an
inert intellect. These are theological concepts and not spiritual
perceptions. That is why they move so mechanically, back and forth,
without illumining any corner of the human mind or improving any part of
human behavior. They create a lot of casuistry and cantankerous cant.
They are not only irrelevant to any practical spiritual purpose, but
also positive impediments on the path of spiritual progress. Anyone who
is interested in the upliftment of human life as lived should shun these
concepts like a plague.

What is worse, Monotheism has manufactured a number of hate-filled words
- infidel, *kãfir*, unbeliever, *munkir, mushrik*, heathen, heretic,
hypocrite, polytheist, pantheist, pagan - which raise unbreakable
barriers between brother and brother, and which divide the one human
family into a number of warring camps. These swear-words are hurled at
unoffending people belonging to other faiths like stones thrown by
street hooligans at peaceful citizens. These malicious words have
motivated many crusades, *jihãds*, inquisitions, genocides, imperialist
aggressions, and campaigns for pillage and rapine. Rivers of innocent
human blood have been made to flow in the service of these spiteful
words, and for causes that are of no consequence at all, either for the
moral upliftment or the spiritual illumination of mankind. The only way
a monotheist can conceive of human brotherhood is that everyone accepts
his exclusive creed.

What is still worse, Monotheism and the monstrosities that logically
follow from it such as *the* saviour, *the* prophet, *the* revelation,
*the ilhãm*, *the* church, *the* ummah, have been selling the most
degenerate type of idolatry known to human history. Being dead to the
intimations of immortality conveyed by icons of Gods, the monotheistic
mind manufactures any number of myths about its all-too-human saviours,
prophets, saints, and sufis, and attributes any number of miracles to
them. Being bereft of any true sense of divinity, this materialistic
mind starts seeing the supernatural in the dirt and dross of its
prophets and saints such as the saliva, the hair, the shoe, the shirt,
and the shroud. And this mind ends up by kissing and kowtowing before
these dead objects in a surfeit of sickening superstition. There is a
brisk trade in ‘holy relics’ till the total number or weight of each
relic reaches fantastic proportions, far in excess of what had really
survived the prophet or the saint. Stinking tombs and sepulchers take
the place of sublime temples. Less said about the slaughter of innocent
animals in a round of so-called sacrifices, the better.

The monotheist reaches the limit of the ludicrous when he struts around
as an iconoclast or a *butshikan*, saying that the false Gods of the
infidels could not save themselves from his sword and fire. He secretly
expects the idols to perform the same sort of miracles as he attributes
to the saliva, the hair, the shoe, the shirt, and the shroud of his own
prophets and saints. But if he is requested that his own relics be
subjected to the same physical test, he loses his balance, shouts that
his religion is being insulted, and takes to violence at very short
notice.

No one who knows anything about the sanctity of icons has ever
attributed any powers or miracles to them, except the power to point to
a still greater sanctity beyond themselves and the miracles they work in
human hearts. No one who knows the mystery of icons manifesting
themselves has ever expected them to rise in self-defence, sword in
hand, against gangsters styling themselves as *ghãzîs*. Yet the
monotheistic mind has spread many yarns about Hindus and Buddhists
believing that their icons were repositories of magical powers, and
could raise deadly storms and armies of demons!  
 

**PIETY WITHOUT UNIVERSALITY IS POISONOUS**

Some people are impressed by the piety displayed by some merchants of
Monotheism such as poverty, penance, patience, chastity, obedience, etc.
No doubt these are great virtues, and can add a lot to the loftiness of
human character. But a piety which is not preceded by self-purification
and which is not permeated by universality (*samatã*) born of wisdom
(*prajñã*), can easily turn into poison in the human soul. This sort of
self-flattering piety lacks charity and compassion, and feeds
self-righteousness as is evident in the case of Muslim mullahs and
sufis, and Christian monks and missionaries. They have been not only
advocates of inhuman persecution of those they describe as infidels, but
also privileged members of imperialist establishments. They have always
been out to save others without ever having a look at their own hardened
hearts and closed minds. Quite a few of them have been sanctimonious
humbugs selling salvation to others without first trying to salvage
themselves from hatred towards fellow human beings. St. Francis Xavier
is an excellent example of spiritual lepers deluding themselves that
they are spiritual healers.

The Buddha is very emphatic that mere piety leads nowhere, and saves no
soul. He says: “It is the blockheads who believe about me that I preach
piety (*shîla*). I say that I teach meditation (*samãdhi*) and wisdom
(*prajñã*).” The self-transcendence and the opening of a universal
vision in which Hindu spirituality specializes have been predicated not
on piety but on purification. According to the BRhadãrNyaka Upanishad,
the journey is from darkness to light (*tamaso mã jyotirgamaya*). Piety
alone cannot be of much help on this inner pilgrimage, not at all when
it consists of only an outer code of conduct such as laid down in the
Ten Commandments, or the Sunnah of the Prophet. It needs be added that
the shîla which the Buddha finds inadequate is much larger and loftier
than the pretentious piety which is prescribed by Christianity or Islam,
and which degenerates into exhibitionism more often than not. Sufis have
been the exhibitionists par excellence. Read the lives of Shykh Farid
Ganj Shakar and Nizamuddin Awliya, for instance.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


