+++
title = "09 9 Character Of Nehruvian Secularism"

+++
**9**  
**Character Of Nehruvian Secularism**

Twenty years ago I had been invited to a seminar on Hurdles To
Secularism.^([1](#1)) It was presided over by the late Shri Jayaprakash
Narayan (JP). The Working Paper had been prepared by the late Professor
A.B. Shah. It was a surprising departure from the usual norm of such
papers. While he had repeated the current cliches about ‘Hindu
communalism’, Professor Shah had been equally unsparing about what he
had nailed down as ‘Muslim communalism’.

In the event, however, the paper remained irrelevant to the discussion
that took place. The several speakers that rose, one after another,
became red in the face and foamed at the mouth as they fulminated
against Hindu society for denying employment to Muslims in the public as
well as the private sector, for reducing the Muslim minority to the
status of second class citizens, for committing untold atrocities on the
poor and helpless Muslims in a repeated round of riots, and so on so
forth. All these speakers wore Hindu names. The most vociferous of them
was Balraj Puri who has managed to masquerade for many years as a martyr
in the service of what he proclaims to be humanist causes.

There were four or five Muslim participants present in that seminar. One
of them was a professor of Arabic from a leading university. Another was
a lawyer well-known for his championing of all communist and Islamic
causes at all times. They were invited to speak next. But they all
smiled and said that they had nothing to add to what their ‘Hindu
brethren’ had already said so ‘loudly and so lucidly’.

And then all of a sudden I saw some fireworks from the same silent and
satisfied Islamic fraternity. They had all stood up, shaking with
uncontrollable rage, and were shouting at the same time, “He is lying!”
They were pointing their fingers at the gentleman who had been invited
to speak by the president, and who had said only a few sentences. Balraj
Puri kept sitting. But he looked as if he would burst out of his skin.

This was the late Hamid Dalwai. I had heard of him. But this was the
first time I saw him. He was a tall man with a slight stoop, a smiling
face, and a rather relaxed self-possession. He was saying, “All that has
been said about Hindu communalism today is nothing new. We have heard it
for the nth time. The intention of the working paper of this seminar,
however, was to highlight for the first time what has so far been
ignored by all progressive people who swear by secularism. What I want
to expose today is Muslim communalism which has already divided the
motherland, and which is still strong enough to poison our
body-politic…”

It was at this point that the Muslim gentlemen had stood up and started
shouting. I had been asked by JP not to speak at all. He was of the view
that I being a well-known ‘Hindu communalist’ was quite likely to say
something wild and thus mar the proceedings. It was Professor Shah who
had extended the invitation to me, and then conveyed to me the condition
laid down by JP if I wanted to be present. So I had kept quiet in spite
of the insufferable Balraj Puri staring at me provokingly, off and on.
But I could restrain myself no more. I stood up and addressed JP as
follows: “For almost an hour and a half we have been listening patiently
to what so many Hindus have said about Hindu society. Now a Muslim
gentleman wants to say something about Muslim society. Why should we not
listen to him with the same patience? Why should this gentleman, who is
attending this seminar not as a gate-crasher but as an invited
participant, be shouted down in this shameless manner?”

JP had also come to feel very strongly the iniquity of it all. He looked
at the Islamic fraternity with annoyance on his face, and said with a
touch of temper in his voice, “I insist that Hamid should be allowed to
say whatever he wants to say.” The Islamic fraternity collapsed in their
seats with pained and perplexed expression on their faces. They felt
betrayed. It was the most unkindest cut of all, coming as it did from a
man of such eminent standing in the world of India’s Secularism.

Hamid continued:

“Hindu society has produced many communalists. Admitted. But it has also
produced men like Mahatma Gandhi who went on a fast unto death to save
the Muslims of Bihar from large-scale butchery. It has produced men like
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru who had the Bihari Hindus bombed from the air
when they did not respond to the Mahatma’s call. These have not been
isolated men in Hindu society, as Rafi Ahmad Kidwai and M.C. Chagla have
been in Muslim society. The Mahatma was a leader whom the whole Hindu
society honoured. Pandit Nehru has been kept as Prime Minister over all
these years by a majority vote of the same Hindu society.

“Now let me give you a sample of the leadership which Muslim society has
produced so far, and in an ample measure. The foremost that comes to my
mind is Liaqat Ali Khan, the first Prime Minister of Pakistan.
Immediately after partition, there was a shooting in Sheikhupura in
which many Hindus who were waiting for repatriation in a camp, were shot
down. There was a great commotion in India, and Pandit Nehru had to take
up the matter in his next weekly meeting with Liaqat Ali in Lahore. The
Prime Minister of Pakistan had brought the Deputy Commissioner of
Sheikhupura with him. The officer explained that the Hindus had broken
out of the camp at night in the midst of a curfew, and the police had to
open fire. Pandit Nehru asked as to why the Hindus had broken out of the
camp. The officer told him that some miscreants had set the camp on
fire. Pandit Nehru protested to Liaqat Ali that this was an amazing
explanation. Liaqat Ali replied without batting an eye that they had to
maintain law and order. This exemplifies the quality of leadership which
Muslim society has produced so far. This…”

All hell now broke loose as the Islamic fraternity stood up again, and
started shouting that they had not come to the seminar to be insulted by
“a hired hoodlum of the RSS fascists”. JP could restrain them no more,
and declared the proceedings closed with a note of anguish in his voice.
As we walked out, I saw that the Hindu champions of Secularism avoided
Hamid as if he was a snake. He was trying to take leave of them by
approaching each one of them with a smile still lingering on his face. I
was the only Hindu who shook hands with him, and patted him on the back
for the brave stand he had taken in the face of a rowdy opposition  
 

**GENESIS OF SECULARISM IN EUROPE**

Ever since then I have pondered over the subject of Secularism which has
become a political cult next only to Socialism,^([2](#2)) and to which
all political parties subscribe without so much as a why. What has
Secularism come to mean in the Indian context? How did the concept
arise? Who were those that gave to it its current shape and content? I
have absolutely no doubt in my mind that Secularism in its present
Indian form is no more than an embodiment of anti-Hindu animus, and is
supported by all those who want to destroy Hindu society and culture.

Secularism is essentially a political concept which originated and took
shape in nineteenth century Europe. Till about the middle of the 18th
century, the State in all European countries was allied with one
denomination or another of the splintered Christian Church. In fact, the
State was described by the Church as its secular arm. It was not unoften
that the State carried out pogroms against ‘heretics’ and ‘dissidents’
at the behest of the dominant Christian denomination. The King of
England is still described as Defender of the Faith whenever the full
array of his titles is trotted out. This is a relic and a reminder of
that dark period in European history when the king in every country was
used by the Church to maintain its stranglehold, and when he used the
Church in turn to sustain his unbridled despotism.

Then came the Enlightenment when the exclusive claims of Christianity
were questioned, and a wave of anti-clericalism attracted the
intellectual elite in all European countries. This was followed by the
rising tide of rationalism and humanism, fostered and fed by the
empiricism of modern science. The churches defended their dogmas very
doggedly. But there was very little in those dogmas which could survive
a ration or moral scrutiny.  That was why the Church had needed a
secular arm to maintain its monopoly of truth for more than fourteen
hundred years.

It was in this atmosphere of revolt against Christianity and its closed
culture that the concept of Secularism was evolved and employed in
country after country in Europe. The secular power of the State was no
longer to be the secular arm of the Church. It was to become secular on
its own, that is, a power which secured equal rights to all its citizens
without bothering about their beliefs. The Church was separated from the
State which was no longer supposed to interfere with the religious life
of the citizens, or to discriminate against any citizen on the basis of
his on her religion or absence of it. Religion was now to be treated as
a purely private matter in which the state was not supposed to pry, and
which was not to be projected in public affairs.  
 

**HINDU SOCIETY HAS ALWAYS BEEN SECULAR**

India had never known a theocratic state till the advent of Islam in
this country in the first quarter of the eighth century AD. Hindu Dharma
has always been a pluralistic religion. Hindu culture and society too
have been pluralistic throughout their hoary history. It was, therefore,
impossible for the Hindus to erect an established church or to proclaim
a state religion and call upon the State to impose it by force. The
Hindu state extended its patronage to all religious sects equally, even
when a king and his courtiers adhered to a particular sect in their
private lives. Religious strife followed by bloodshed had never
blackened the fair face of Hindu society.

Things changed radically when Islamic imperialism invaded India, and
brought with it a fully developed theory as well as the apparatus of a
theocratic state. The Islamic state had already destroyed by fire and
sword the ancient religions of the Arabs, the Persians, and the Turks.
It started to do the same in India, and succeeded to a large extent in
several parts of the North-West. But the resistance offered by Hindu
nation in the rest of the country was too strong. The Mughals under
Akbar had to abandon the experiment in order to save and extend their
empire. And the Islamic state met the fate it deserved when Aurangzeb
tried to reverse the trend.

The Hindu experience of a theocratic state was a very painful
experience, spread as it was over several centuries. Even so, the Hindus
did not learn any lessons in theocracy. The Hindu states which
re-emerged under the Rajputs, the Marathas, the Sikhs, and the Jats were
secular states which did not molest the Muslim population in spite of
Hindu memories of what Islam had done to Hindu religion and culture
during the days of its domination. The same Secularism characterised the
national movement for freedom from British imperialism which was manned
overwhelmingly by the Hindu masses. Hindu leaders tried their best to
take along the Muslim masses in the fight for freedom.  
 

**THE RISING TIDE OF MUSLIM REVIVALISM**

On the other hand, the Muslim society in India which consisted almost
entirely of those whose forefathers had been converted by force, started
throwing up one revivalist movement after another throughout the period
of British rule. All these movements reminded Muslim society that it had
lost political power in India due to its own fall from the faith, that
it had to purify itself in the image of the first four Khalifas who had
founded the world-wide Islamic empire, and that it could not and should
not rest till it recaptured political power and restored its theocratic
state. It is debatable whether any of these movements achieved any
purification of Muslim society except a spasmodic outburst of beards on
many Muslim faces. But it is on record that every one of these movements
turned into a jihãd against the Hindus wherever the latter were found in
a minority and unable to defend themselves. The British power had to
intervene against the mullahs and the mujãhids not to protect the Hindus
so much as to restore law and order. Some of the Muslim fanatics got
killed in these encounters and were hailed by Muslim society as martyrs
(shahîds) for the greater glory of Islam. Recently the Communist Party
of India has been resurrecting these riots staged by Islamic lust for
Hindu blood as illustrious instances of the Muslim fight for freedom
against the hated British imperialism!

Muslim society in India, therefore, looked at the freedom movement with
suspicion, and frequently denounced it as a Hindu conspiracy to capture
power to the detriment of Islam. The British had started feeling the
impact of the freedom movement in the opening years of the twentieth
century. They saw an ally in Islamic revivalism, and made up their mind
to pit it against a nation in revolt. The foundation of the Muslim
League in 1906 was a command performance at the instance of a British
Viceroy as is now very well known. It followed immediately after the
partition of Bengal (1905) in order to carve out a Muslim majority
province in the east of India. The partition had to be undone due to
fear of Hindu revolutionaries. But the alliance that was thus forged
between British imperialism and Islamic revivalism continued, and got
consolidated in the years to come. Muslim society now started staking
its claims for a lion’s share whenever the British were forced to make
any concessions to the freedom fighters.

By the time Mahatma Gandhi appeared on the scene, the Muslim League had
acquired a position which the British could play up on every bargaining
counter between Indian nationalism on the one hand and British
imperialism on the other. The mischievous message conveyed by the
British rulers was that it was not they who were blocking India’s
progress towards freedom but the Hindus themselves by their refusal to
come to terms with the “Muslim minority”. At the same time, the British
made it clear that they were not going to quit under “Hindu pressure”
and leave the “Muslim minority” to the “tender mercies of a brute Hindu
majority”. It was this stalemate that the Mahatma tried to break by his
sudden decision to support the Khilafat agitation.

The agitation ended as a farce when Mustafa Kamal forced the Turkish
Sultan (who was also the Khalifa of Islam) to abdicate and sink into
oblivion. But it had created an illusion of Hindu-Muslim unity in India
for as long as it lasted. The streets in most Indian cities resounded
with the emotionally surcharged slogan of Hindû-Muslim-Bhãî-Bhãî which
frightened the British authority, at least for the time being. Not many
Hindu nationalists were able to notice that the Khilafat agitation was
just another recrudescence of Islamic revivalism which was now making a
bid to use the national movement for its own imperialist purposes. The
few doubting Thomases who raised their voice of warning, were silenced
by the prevailing euphoria for communal amity.

The curtain was raised on the reality behind the rhetoric when the
Moplah Muslims of Malabar started another jihãd against their Hindu
neighbours who were caught uncautioned and unprepared. The British had
to send some armed forces before the Muslim butchery of innocent Hindus
could be brought under control. The Moplah violence was the opening
scene of unprecedented riots staged by Muslims all over India. The
Muslim leaders were once more taking it out on the Hindus for their
frustration over Khilafat. It was the same story all over again - music
before a mosque, or a pig in a Muslim mohalla, or a private fracas
between two toughs belonging to the two communities. The Muslims have
never needed a more substantial excuse whenever they are in a nasty
mood. Nor has the nasty mood been able to mend itself for long because
of the continued Muslim failure to recapture power all over India and
re-establish their ‘lost empire’. In case the Hindus failed to provide
the necessary provocation, the Muslims could always slaughter a cow in
the presence of Hindus, or abduct and molest a Hindu girl in keeping
with the best behests of Islam, or take out a rowdy tãjiã procession
through a thoroughfare thickly populated by Hindus.

The need of the situation was to remind Hindu society that Muslim
objection to music before the mosque was a legacy of Islamic imperialism
under which the kãfirs were not allowed to celebrate their religious and
social festivals loudly, and that cow-slaughter and tãjiã processions
through Hindu mohallas were discriminatory privileges enjoyed by Muslims
during the days of their dominance. Muslim society had to be told in no
uncertain terms that Islamic rule in India was no more, and that the
privileges enjoyed by the Muslim and the disabilities imposed on the
Hindus were not going to be tolerated. At the same time, Hindu society
had to prepare itself to meet effectively the violence to which Muslim
society had become addicted under inspiration from the Quran and the
Sunnah of the Prophet.  
 

**GENESIS OF SECULARISM IN INDIA**

But Hindu society did not take any of these steps, though there were
several voices which warned this society to mend its fences while there
was still some time. The Indian National Congress came to be
increasingly dominated by constitutionalists who wanted to settle with
the Muslim League on terms of the latter’s choosing in order to be in a
better position to bargain with the British. And failing to persuade
Muslim society to shed its separatism, these constitutionalists started
training all their guns against those who objected to Islamic
revivalism, or criticized it as an obstacle in the path of national
progress towards freedom. The Congress started undergoing a
transformation which was fraught with fatal consequences. In the
process, the phrase ‘Hindu communalism’ gained currency as a pejorative
phrase.

The constitutionalists were soon reinforced and then replaced by a brood
of Leftists most of whom were educated in the West where they had caught
the contagion of Communist thought-categories. Their animus against
Hindu society to which they belonged by accident of birth was incurable
because they had pawned their brains to what they glorified as
progressivism. It was these Leftists who branded Indian nationalism as
Hindu communalism, and then placed this swearology at the service of
Islamic separatism in India. It was these Leftists who converted the
Hindu-Muslim conflict into a class conflict in which Hindu were
presented as the parasitic landlords and capitalists and the Muslims as
the poor peasants and the proletariat whom Hindus were out to exploit
and oppress. It was these Leftists who started the game of parading
Islam as the champion of social equality and human brotherhood while
pooh-poohing Sanãtana Dharma as the bulwark of brahmin domination and
caste discrimination. And it was these Leftists who divided the Indian
National Congress into “progressives who stood for eradication of
poverty” and “reactionaries who were out to safeguard and extend the
Birla empire”. Most Congressman who had any feeling for Hindu society
and who saw the menace of Islamic imperialism were in this “reactionary”
camp of the Congress. The Leftists started lampooning them as “Hindu
communalists” as soon as the “reactionaries” opened their mouths.

The Leftists were small in number to start with. But they were
ideologically equipped and spoke in a language which was prestigious in
the eyes of the fast multiplying English-educated Hindu elite. They were
supported by university professors and student leaders who had become
fascinated by Marxist phraseology with which the country was being
flooded by both Soviet Russia and Western democracies, and which the
British authorities patronised to wean away the nationalist
revolutionaries from what was described as terrorism. But what was most
significant, the Aligarh school of Islamic imperialism in particular and
the Muslim League leadership in general picked up the refrain in no
time, and converted Islamic separatism into a peasant and proletarian
protest against “Hindu exploitation and oppression”. The wolf was now
going about in sheep’s clothing, and the poor sheep was being portrayed
as a man-eater.

Hindu society was not ideologically equipped to meet this new challenge.
The language of nationalism was the only language it knew and could
speak with conviction. But the doublespeak devised by the Leftists had
already made this language of nationalism sound like the language of
“reaction” and “sectarian self-interest”. Nor did Hindu society suspect
that the Leftists were, by and large, being financed and made to
function in the service of Soviet imperialism. Hindu society was taken
in by the loudness of their language against British imperialism.
Traitors were stealing a march or the patriots, and those who failed to
jump on the bandwagon were left by the roadside.

What followed was inevitable. The Indian National Congress surrendered
to Islamic separatism in stages, and finally sold millions of people to
slaughter and slavery on both sides of the border. And the Leftists who
had worked untiringly to bring about this disaster and bloodshed blamed
it on “Hindu communalism”, while they themselves slipped into positions
of power for which they had bargained with the British in the meanwhile.
The leader of this perfidious operation was Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who
became the Prime Minister of truncated India. The erstwhile Muslim
Leaguers who failed to find a berth in Pakistan flocked to the Indian
National Congress to strengthen “secularism” which was now proclaimed as
the new religion of India that is Bharat.  
 

**SAPPERS AND MINERS OF SEVERAL IMPERIALISMS**

This is the genesis of the Nehruvian Secularism. A concept which was
evolved in Europe in order to free societies from religious fanaticism
has been converted by the Nehruvian ruling class into a cover for
furthering the cause of religious fanaticism. The verbal shell is the
same. But it has been surreptitiously stuffed with the potent poison of
Islamic imperialism. Secularism in India today is the single most
powerful shield for protecting the further progress of Islamic
imperialism in the truncated Hindu homeland.

It is small wonder that the Muslim leaders in independent India have
revived in stages all the old strategies of Islamic imperialism -
contrived grievances, the posture of being a persecuted minority, street
riots, and so on.  The Leftists who now style themselves as secularists
are again shouting themselves hoarse against “Hindu communalism”. Only
the whipping boy has changed. It was the Arya Samaj, Purushottam Das
Tandon, the Hindu Mahasabha, and Sardar Patel in pre-independence India.
It is the RSS and other patriotic organisations in the post-independence
period.

What is worse, the success of Islamic imperialism in dividing India and
in continuing to steal another march on the Hindu homeland, has
encouraged another Indian community, the Sikhs, to copy the Islamic
model as well as the Islamic methods. The Ek OMkãr has been converted
into Allah. The vãNî of the Gurus has been converted into wahî which is
supposed to be the latest and the best. The Gurus themselves are being
paraded as prophets who proclaimed exclusive power for the Panth. And
the Panth itself has been made into an Ummah which claims a monopoly of
virtue for its members simply because they swear by a book and wear a
distinctive hairdo.

The Panth now proclaims that its scriptures do not permit it to separate
religion from politics. It accuses Hindus of a conspiracy to destroy its
religious and cultural identity. It is uncontrollably angry with the
“brute Hindu majority” for denying to it what it “more than amply
deserves by virtue of its achievements in the past”.  It has passed a
resolution which demands an exclusive domination over a well-defined
area without reference to the wishes of other inhabitants of that area.
And it is increasingly taking to violence to frighten the
“lãlãs”^([3](#3)) into surrender. It will not be long before the Panth
opts for a separate homeland “after having exhausted all peaceful
methods of an honourable accommodation with the Hindus”. The slogan has
already been raised by a section of the Panth. Meanwhile, the Panth has
grabbed and is enjoying more than its fair share in the economy, polity,
and administration of the country. Here is another wolf prowling around
in sheep’s clothing.

The response from the secularist ruling class is bound to be the same
old stereotype which was evolved in the face of the Muslim wolf. The
secularists have started by being concerned over the “communal
situation” in the Punjab, and have thus already placed the aggressor and
the victim of aggression on the same pedestal. In the next round, the
“legitimate” demands of the Panth will be conceded. And “illegitimate”
demands will go on becoming “legitimate” as the tempo of violence
increases. In the final round, the demand for separation is bound to
become fully “legitimate”. The dreadful deed will then be blamed on
“Hindu communalist” which “refused to see reason at the right
time”.^([4](#4))  
 

**HINDUS SHOULD REJECT THIS SHAM SECULARISM**

Hindu society will fail to defend itself unless it sees through this
Secularism and rejects it not only as a counterfeit coin but also as
high treason to the Indian nation. Hindu society will never be able to
defeat this gangster game unless it stops going on the defensive every
time a secularist shouts his subversive slogans. Hindu society will have
to tell the secularist that a Hindu cannot be a communalist in his own
homeland. Anyone who accuses a Hindu of being a communalist is like the
thug who accused the brahmin of buying a dog while, in fact, the brahmin
had bought a calf. The thug is out to hoodwink and steal.

An honest Secularism had a lot to learn from Hindu history and culture.
It would have held up Hindu society as the model of a secular society.
It would have informed Muslim society, in very firm language, that the
seeds of its trouble lay not in “Hindu communalism” but in the
exclusiveness of Islam. It would have tried to re-educate Muslim society
so that this society shed its self-righteous aggressiveness, and learnt
to live peacefully with non-Muslim societies. And it would have carried
the same meaningful message to the Christian and Sikh communities. In
short, an honest Secularism would have been a defender of Hindu society
instead raising a brood of the sappers and miners of Islamic imperialism
in particular and of other imperialisms in general.  
 

**Footnotes:**

[¹](#1a) It was in 1963.

[²](#2a) Thank God, the cult of Socialism is now dead except for some
orphans of the Soviet Union and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia.

[³](#3a) A term of contempt coined by the Muslim League for Hindus in
general. Now the Sikhs had made it a part of their swearology.

[⁴](#4a) This section was written in 1982, before the rise of
Bhindranwale and the demand for Khalistan.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------


