+++
title = "01 Foreword"

+++
**Foreword**

There was a time, not so long ago, when the exponents of jihãd minced no
words and pulled no punches. They were brutally frank in spelling out
what *jihãd* really meant.

But times have changed, particularly after the collapse of Christianity
in the West and the rise of modern rationalism and humanism. Standards
of moral judgment have increasingly tended to become universal, and no
statement of faith can escape scrutiny simply because it is made in a
book hailed as holy by some people. Defenders of *jihãd* have been
forced to develop an apologetics. They are now trying to protect by
means of scholarship a doctrine which has so far been sustained by means
of the sword.

In the present study, Professor Suhas Majumdar has seen through this
“scholarship”, and demolished it brick by brick. He has rescued the
doctrine of *jihãd* from under the mass of pretentious verbiage, and
made it stand in its pristine purity. Let no one say any more that
*jihãd* does not mean what it has meant all along in the blood-soaked
history of Islam, and what we are witnessing today in Kashmir.

At the end of it all, however, I wonder why scholarship should be needed
for making people see what the ordinary common sense can see straight
away. There is plenty of evidence that the common sense of the Pagans of
Arabia had seen Islam for what it was worth when Muhammad proclaimed his
prophethood. For common sense is after all a combination of natural
reason and natural moral conscience which all human beings share in
greater or lesser measure.

The story of why common sense had to keep quiet wherever and whenever
the prophetic creeds came to prevail (and among prophetic creeds I would
certainly place Christianity as closest in tie and kindred to Islam) is
yet to be pieced together. There is no better place than India for
piecing together this story. For India’s yogic spirituality has never
worked counter to man’s natural reason and natural moral conscience. On
the contrary, yogic spirituality has raised that reason and that
conscience to their highest stations.

A hoary and hallowed Hindu tradition recognises six types of gangsters.
The šloka in which gangsterism stands defined, occurs frequently in the
Itihãsa-PurãNa and the Dharmašãstras. It says:

*agnidah gardašcaiva šastrapãNirdhanãpahah*  
*kSetra-dãra-harašcaiva, SaDêtê ãtatãyinah*

(He who sets fire to (other people’s properties), he who poisons (other
people), he who wields weapons (for committing murders), he who robs
(other people’s) wealth, he who forcibly occupies (other people’s)
lands, and he who forcibly carries away (other people’s) women - these
six are gangsters.)

The same tradition prescribes a punishment for acts of gangsterism - the
gangster should he killed as soon as he is sighted. The Gita, which
deals with this subject among many others of high spiritual import,
calls for this punishment when it says, *“jahi mã vyatiSThã* (kill them,
do not hesitate).

There is, however, another tradition which we meet in the Bible (at
least in some of its books) and the Quran. This tradition has been
elaborated endlessly and spelled out in unmistakable terms in the
theologies of Christianity and Islam. In this tradition, the
above-mentioned acts of gangsterism are supposed to have been sanctioned
by no less an authority than Almighty God himself. And the persons who
perform these acts or advocate their performance, stand hallowed as
apostles, prophets, saints, sufis, and the rest.

This tradition also prescribes a punishment. But not for those who
practise or advocate gangsterism. On the contrary, it lays down that
those who object to advocacy of gangsterism or resist gangster acts,
should be put to death.

This second tradition arrived in India at first in the guise of Islam,
and later on in the guise of Christianity, particularly in its
Portuguese incarnation. Hindus were not slow to identify Islamic and
Christian practices for what they were. The only point at which Hindus
failed was to trace the Islamic and Christian behaviour patterns back to
their systems of belief. It was a great failure indeed. For, in course
of time, Hindus were led to believe, mostly by their own scholars, that
Islamic and Christian behaviour patterns were not enshrined in the Bible
and the Quran, and that Muslims and Christians could be brought round by
appealing to them in the name of “true Islam” and “true Christianity”.
Mahatma Gandhi became the most eminent embodiment of this Hindu
illusion, which has now become the stock-in-trade of one school of
Secularism in this country - that of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva*.

Votaries of *sarva-dharma-samabhãva* are not likely to relish the charge
that for all practical purposes they become passive accomplices of
gangsterism when they equate Hinduism with Islam and Christianity, and
advocate equal respect for the two predatory creeds. But that is the
truth, and it has to be told in order to cure them of their smug
self-righteousness.

As for the second school of Secularism, namely, that which is rooted in
Marxism and allied ideologies imported from the modern West, it does not
practise *samabhãva* between Hinduism on the one hand and Islam and
Christianity on the other. It is openly hostile to Hinduism, and stands
unashamedly allied with Islam and Christianity. That is but natural, and
this stance should be understood rather than assailed. For, in the
ultimate analysis, Marxism is the same as the other two creeds. All of
them have their source in the Bible. Those who have applauded the
gangsterism of Lenin, Stalin, and Mao, cannot be expected to thwart the
other sort, particularly when it is aimed against Hindus whom they
regard as the main enemy. They are bound to be active accomplices of
Christian and Islamic gangsterism.  
 

New Delhi

<div align="right">

SITA RAM GOEL 

</div>

15 July 1994

                                                   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
