+++
title = "03 REFERENCES"

+++
**REFERENCES**

1\. *The Meaning of the Glorious Koran*, by Mohammed Marmaduke
Pickthall.

2\. *Sahih Muslim*, 4 volumes, translated by Abdul Hamid Siddiqi.

3\. *Mishkãt Sharîf* (in Bengali), Vol. 7, translated by M. Aflatoon
Kaisar.

4\. *The Life of Mahomet*, by Sir William Muir.

5\. *Mohammed and the Rise of Islam*, by D.S. Margoliouth.

6\. *Hidãyah* (the standard digest of Islamic tenets according to the
School of Imam Hanifa), by Shaikh Burhanuddin Ali, translated by Charles
Hamilton.

7\. *The Calcutta Quran Petition*, by Sita Ram Goel

8\. *History of Aurangzeb*, Vol. III, by Jadunath Sarkar.  
 

**SOME IMPORTANT ARABIC WORDS**

The best introduction to any Islamic topic is some familiarity with
Arabic technical terms related to it. Islam has a large assortment of
such technical terms for every aspect of its doctrinal structure, and
the doctrine of *jihãd* is no exception. Knowledge of some general terms
is also necessary for a clear understanding of Islam.  
 

**General Islamic Terms**

*Wahy* : Revelation with a capital R. Every verse of the Koran is
*wahy*. The one and only source book of *wahy* is the Koran.

*Sunnah* : Literally ‘practice’, in Islamic parlance it means ‘practice
of the Prophet regarded as canonical and co-equal with injunctions
proffered in the Koran’. The source book of Sunnah is the Hadis. It must
be remembered that not every practice of the Prophet is Sunnah. His
having nine wives at a time, for example, does not constitute Sunnah;
but his practice of enslaving the children and wives of vanquished
infidels is Sunnah par excellence. Again, the bloodless conquest of
Mecca is not Sunnah, but the massacre of Banu Kuraizah is.

*Sûrah* : A chapter of the Koran.

*Ãyat* : A verse of the Koran.

*Hadîs* : Literally ‘a report’, technically ‘a report of some action or
some saying of the Prophet regarded as Sunnah’.

*Ahãdîs* : Plural of *hadîs*.

*Sharîat* : Generally, anything derived from the Koran and the Hadîs. In
the restricted sense used in this book it refers to the literature of
Islamic schools of jurisprudence.

*Kãfir* : An infidel, a non-Muslim against whom *jihãd* is permanently
established.

*Mushrik* : A non-monotheist Kãfir or an idolater, a term of strong
vituperation in the Koran.

*Munãfîq* : A Muslim not wholly devoted to the cause of Islam or a
renegade lukewarm in *jihãd*, a term of full-throated abuse.

*Kitãbî or Ahl-ul-Kitãb* : Jews and Christians whose scriptures (*Kitãb*
in Arabic), *Taurãt* (Old Testament) and *Injîl* (New Testament), are
recognised by the Koran as wahy (=revelation), but superseded by the
Revelation in Arabic.  
 

**Terms Relating to *Jihãd***

*Jihãd* : Literally ‘effort’ or ‘striving’, doctrinally ‘aggressive war
for spreading Islam’. The full Koranic expression is *Jihãd fi
Sabilillah* (that is, *jihãd* in the way of Allah).

*Mujãhid* : A soldier engaged in *jihãd*.

*Ghazwah* : Jihadic war undertaken by the Prophet in person.

*Ghãzî* : Literally ‘warrior’, technically ‘a victorious,
infidel-slaying soldier of Islam’.

*Shahîd* : Literally ‘witness’, technically ‘a martyr killed in
*jihãd’*.

*Ghanîmah* : Literally ‘good fortune’, technically ‘plunder accruing
from the successful conclusion of *jihãd’*. It has two parts: (1)
Plunder of the vanquished infidels' property; (2) Plunder of the
vanquished infidels' women and children.

*Ma Malakat ayman-u-kum* : Literally ‘that which your right hand
possesses’, technically ‘infidel prisoners captured in *jihãd*, in
particular captive infidel women sold into slavery and used for
concubinage’.

*Khums* : Literally ‘the holy one-fifth’, technically ‘the one-fifth of
the jihadic plunder due to the Prophet or his latter-day
representative’.

*Fai* : The whole plunder accruing to the Prophet (or his
representative) when the infidel army surrenders without a fight.
*Jizyah* is a species of Fai.

*Jizyah* : The poll-tax extorted from infidels vanquished in *jihãd* but
suffered to reside in their dwellings without loss of limb or life. The
tax has to be paid in person and in a posture of abject humility.
According to the *Hidãyah, Jizyah* literally means ‘retribution money
for obstinately clinging to one’s ancestral religion’.

*Kharãjguzãr* : General expression for an infidel residing in an Islamic
state indicating that he is a ‘payer of the poll-tax’.

*Zimmî* : Literally ‘a person under tutelage’, technically it indicates
the status of the *kharãjguzãr* in an Islamic state. The status is that
of a resident non-citizen wearing out his life in a condition of
semi-slavery.  
 

**Important *Ghazwahs* Mentioned in this Study**

1\. Raid of Nakhla (Late 623 AD) - The first blood shed in the cause of
Islam.

2\. Battle of Badr (624 AD) - The first full-fledged war against the
Koreish of Mecca.

3\. Expulsion of Banu Kainuka (624 AD) - The first Jewish tribe evicted
from Medina.

4\. Battle of Uhud (625 AD) - Defeat and setback for *mujãhids* under
the Prophet by the Koreish of Mecca.

5\. Expulsion of Banu Nazir (625 AD) - The second Jewish tribe expelled
from Medina. The plunder of their properties was reckoned *Fai*.

6\. *Jihãd* against Banu Mustalik (626-627 AD) – The Mustalik were an
Arab tribe.

7\. Battle of the Ditch (627 AD) - Also called Battle of Ahzãb in which
the besieging Koreish were repulsed from Medina by the Prophets’
superior generalship.

8\. Destruction of Banu Kuraizah (627 AD) - The third Jewish clan of
Medina consigned to wholesale slaughter, their women and children being
sold for buying horses and arms.

9\. Expedition of Hudaibiyah (628 AD) - Presented as a pilgrimage
because the Koreish did not permit the Prophet and his horde to enter
Mecca.

10\. Conquest of Khaibar (628 AD) - Surprise attack mounted on a
non-Medinese Jewish tribe, which was reduced to the status of the first
*kharãjguzãrs* in Islam.

11\. Conquest of Mecca (630 AD)

12\. The Battle of Hunain (630 AD) - A battle fought after the conquest
of Mecca and followed by the siege of Taif.

13\. The Tabuk campaign (630 AD) - The last *ghazwah* led by the
Prophet.

   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
