+++
title = "04 Introduction"

+++
**Introduction**

*Jihãd* is one of the basic doctrines of Islam, but the average Indian’s
knowledge of it is both superficial and unsatisfactory. Hindus usually
render the term as *dharmayuddha*, but this rendering is totally
misleading. *Dharmayuddha* means ‘war fought according to rules laid
down in the *Dharmashãstras’* such as not attacking a person who does
not have a weapon or has dropped it, not molesting an adversary who has
surrendered, not pursuing a defeated enemy who has run away, not
attacking the non-combatants in the enemy camp, not harming the women
and holy people and places in the enemy’s territory, etc. Hindus have
never known the concept of a religious or holy war, a concept which is
characteristic of the monotheistic creeds. Therefore, to the common
Hindu, in particular to those who are ignorant of the history of the
many religious wars waged by monotheistic creeds of Asia and Europe,
*jihãd* is a lofty conception. It is nothing less than war aimed at
establishing what they consider righteousness in the world. Very few
Hindus care to remember that the boy-emperor Akbar had become a *ghãzî*
by slaughtering his helpless and fatally wounded prisoner Himu at the
bidding of Bairam Khan in 1556 AD. Actually, even those Hindus who
remember the story do not know that the title *ghãzî* is conferred only
on victorious, *kãfir* - slaughtering *mujãhids*.^([1](#1)) In truth,
*jihãd* is war for the destruction of infidels (*kãfirs*) and infidelity
(*kufr*). To obviate prevailing misconception, it is important to
explain the meaning of *jihãd* from the Koran, the Hadis and the corpus
of theological works collectively going by the name of Shariat. As
*jihãd* is a basic doctrine of Islam and as its focus is on the infidel,
it is not fit that Hindus should go on cherishing their deep-seated
delusion regarding its meaning.

For the matter of that, even the average Muslim’s knowledge of this
doctrine is superficial. Every Islamic tenet is spread over the 6,000
and odd verses of the Koran in a desultory, haphazard manner. Few
Muslims are competent enough to assemble the relevant verses enjoining
*jihãd* in order to get a systematic, coherent meaning. Such a work of
systematisation as the present one professes to be, could therefore be
useful to Hindus and Muslims alike.

There is another, a more compelling, reason for present-day Indians to
have a clear understanding of the doctrine of *jihãd*. The so-called
communal conflict in India which from day to day has been gaining in
intensity has clear overtones of an all-out *jihãd* that could burst
upon us at any moment. This is not to deny that with the average Muslim
the desire for peace and communal harmony is as strong as with most
Hindus. But the common Muslim is mostly ignorant regarding how to
channel his desire for peace without controverting the basic tenets of
Islam. In the epilogue to this book, an attempt has been made in that
direction. But it is not possible to take a stand against *jihãd*
without a clear knowledge of its meaning and its many-sided
implications. This book is primarily a search for this meaning, and in
this search our only guides are the Koran, the Hadis and the Shariat.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) *Mujãhid* - one who engages in *jihãd*. Akbar’s repudiation
of the story of his becoming a *ghãzî*, without repudiating the title
itself, is discussed in Appendix IV.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
