+++
title = "19 Appendix III Development of the Doctrine of Jihãd in the Koran"

+++
**Appendix III**

**Development of the Doctrine of *Jihãd* in the Koran**

The study of any Islamic doctrine as it developed step by step in the
Koran is important on many counts. Not least among these is the
consideration as to how far the doctrine was moulded by pressure of
immediate circumstance, and how far it stood for any perennial religious
concern. As regards *jihãd* this question can be answered with some
assurance. For *jihãd* was never contemplated in Mecca where the Koranic
verses started being revealed from 609-10 AD onwards and continued upto
622. It was in the Medinese *sûrahs* alone that *jihãd* was enjoined
right from the beginning, and by the time the 9th *sûrah* was revealed
towards the end of the Prophet’s career it became the chief concern of
Islam overshadowing every other concern. Chronologically these *sûrahs*
mark a clear change of tone and temper. What begins as a hesitant call
to arms for the defence of ‘Mosques, Churches and Synagogues’ ends by
being transformed into a violent call for all round destruction of
non-Muslims, working murder and rapine all along the line.

The reader must remember that although the *sûrahs* revealed at Medina
can be broadly arranged in a chronological series, scholars are by no
means unanimous as to the chronology of individual verses. All Koranic
scholars are agreed that verses revealed on very different occasions are
included in a single *sûrah* without any reference to their date of
revelation. With this warning, a broad analysis of the jihadic verses
can be made so as to bring out the historical development of their
message.  
 

**Stage 1**

The first stage in the pronouncements on *jihãd* is marked by a tone of
apology and fervent insistence on the necessity for war by representing
the Muslims as a sort of a beleaguered garrison whose only assurance of
safety lay in taking up arms rather than in peaceful pursuit of their
religion. Roughly, this stage extends from 622 AD to early 626 AD. It is
interesting to note that plunder, though already recognised as a
legitimate aim of *jihãd*, is at this stage made subservient to the aim
of defeating and slaughtering the infidels (K 8/69). Forcible conversion
on any massive scale is not contemplated.

“Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been wronged;
and Allah is indeed able to give them victory; those who have been
driven from their homes unjustly only because they said: Our Lord is
Allah. For had it not been for Allah’s repelling some men by means of
others, cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques, wherein the
name of Allah is mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled down” (K
22/39-40).

These verses are extremely interesting as calling for *jihãd* in a tone
of injured innocence. Sir William Muir has placed these among the
earliest jihadic verses, and, if the traditional ascription of their
being the very earliest be taken into account, they reveal a most
interesting psychology. Allah’s concern for ‘cloisters and churches’
turns out to be a cruel joke, when we consider that within a few years
the Prophet would start demolishing the idol-temples of Hijãz with
joyous abandon, and, after him, Muslim armies would fan out farther
afield to destroy the ‘churches and cloisters’ in hundreds and even
thousands in conquered Christian countries. The joke seems all the more
atrocious in its concern for the fate of ‘mosques’ of which at the time
of this revelation there were at most two in existence, and they were
never subject to the least apprehension of attack. These verses,
therefore, foreshadow the stock Islamic argument advanced during the
last several centuries against other peoples’ places of worship, namely,
that their own places of worship were somehow endangered by the former.
But the point here is that these earliest verses of *jihãd* are
apologetic in tone and betray an uncertainty regarding the reaction of
its hearers to Allah’s sophistical pleading for war. The only grain of
truth in this tissue of untruths is that Muslims had to leave Mecca
under some sort of duress as the Koreish would not listen to
long-drawn-out palavers for the destruction of their own mode of
worship.

“Warfare is ordained for you though it is hateful unto you, but it may
happen that ye hate a thing which is good for you, and ye love a thing
which is bad for you” (K 2/216).

Here again the tone of apology is manifest. Allah all but grants that
war is a ‘hateful thing’, but pleads that even a seemingly hateful thing
may be ordained by him under certain circumstances.

“They question thee (O Muhammad) with regard to warfare in the sacred
month. Say, Warfare therein is a great (transgression) but to turn (men)
from the way of Allah and to disbelieve in Him and in the inviolable
place of Worship (i.e. the Kaba) and to expel people thence is greater
with Allah, and persecution is worse than killing” (K 2/217).

This verse is another piece of incredible sophistry. Traditionally it
refers to the raid at Nakhla (late 623 AD) in which, according to Ibn
Ishãq, the first blood for the cause of Islam was shed in the sacred
month of Rajab. It is said that the Prophet was at first embarrassed by
this spilling of innocent blood by his followers in the season of peace,
but Allah showed him a way out by this very verse. Here again, the
migration of Muslims from Mecca, which was at least partly voluntary, is
made much of, and concern is even shown for being denied participation
in the (idolatrous) worship of Ka‘bah. Aggression and unprovoked
spilling of innocent blood was never covered up more sanctimoniously
than in this verse.  
 

**Stage 2**

The second stage in the development of the doctrine of *jihãd* is
revealed most clearly in *Sûrah* 48. The stage extends (roughly) from
627 AD to the conquest of Mecca (630 AD). This stage is mostly concerned
with the sanctification of plunder, the lure of which is the keynote of
the *Sûrah Fath* (K/48). This *sûrah* has been discussed in extenso
previously. The mask of apology has been dropped at this stage but mass
conversion and *jizyah* are not yet mentioned.  
 

**The Final Stage 3**

The final stage is revealed in *Sûrah Taubah* (the 9th *sûrah*) which
has already been discussed in detail. This contains the ban on idolatry
in Arabia. It pronounces the immunity from truce with idolaters. It
institutes *jizyah*. It again calls for destruction of even mosques not
sanctioned by the Prophet (K 91107). Above all, the mask of apology is
so far thrown aside that Allah pronounces the imperialist doctrine of
conquest for glory in the following words:

“If ye go not forth He will afflict you with a painful doom, and will
choose instead of you a folk other than you” (K 9/39).  
 

These stages and the development of the jihadic theory they represent,
prove with transcendent clarity (if indeed any proof was needed) that
*jihãd* was never contemplated as a permanent dispensation by Allah
until almost towards the end, when the all round victory of Islam was
assured in Arabia. The doctrine developed by stages and by the
exigencies of the political situation and was never anything but an ad
hoc dispensation. There is thus every reason to suggest that it be
renounced as all ad hoc dispensations are renounced when their need
ceases, and the lineaments of a peaceful Islam be conjured up and given
shape by people who know better and see further.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
