+++
title = "21 Appendix V Doctrine of Jihãd as Defensive War"

+++
**Appendix V**

**Doctrine of *Jihãd* as Defensive War**

This book has attempted to show by means of adequate citations from the
Koran that *jihãd* is aggressive war par excellence, with one or two
verses thrown in, in between, to indicate that counsels of moderation
and non-aggression are not wholly absent from the Islamic scheme of
things. But as Islamic apologists the world over have of late started
protesting rather loudly that Koranic^([1](#1)) *jihãd* is war in
self-defence and nothing else, it is important that we discuss
threadbare the worth of the Koranic verse which is most often referred
to in this connection.

The verse in question is K2/190 which in Marmaduk Pickthall’s
translation professes to enjoin:

“Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, but
begin not hostilities, Lo! Allah loveth not aggressors.”

Taken in isolation, this verse has almost a Gandhian ring. But as
indicated in Chapter 11, the immediately succeeding verse makes the
uncompromising declaration:

“And slay them wherever ye find them, and drive them out of the places
whence they drove you out, for persecution is worse than slaughter”
(K2/191).

This verse has nothing Gandhian in it - quite the contrary. It breathes
a spirit of uncompromising vengeance rendered worse by the commoner
versions of the last clause, which in Sir William Muir’s, N.J. Dawood’s
and Yusuf Alie’s translation says: “for idolatry is worse than carnage”
instead of “for persecution is worse than slaughter”. If the ultimate
justification for such fierce vengeance is the enemy’s alleged crime of
idolatry, we are driven to conclude that the *non-aggression* counselled
in K2/190 is only a cover behind which the ferocity of the *jihãd*
business is to be cleverly concealed. The ferocity comes out no less
clearly in Pickthall’s rendering of 2/191 than in the other renderings.

This explanation of the matter receives added confirmation from other
versions of K2/190 in which the reference to *non-aggression* is
conspicuous by its absence, and the verse turns out to be nothing more
than a plea for *compensatory retaliation* (so to speak). Thus in Muir’s
rendering the verse has this to say:

“Fight in the way of God with them that fight against you: but
transgress not, for God loveth not the Transgressors” (K2/190).

In this rendering as also in Pickthall’s version, the first sentence
enjoins *compensatory retaliation*. The second part merely asks the
‘believer’ to desist from transgression and nothing else. Now as
*transgression of the limits of Allah* is one of the stock phrases of
the Koran, the balance of credibility is in favour of Muir’s rendering
which is totally silent about the non-aggression clause. Pickthall’s
rendering is suspect on two counts. First, in his rendering the verse
2/190 is completely at variance with the succeeding verse which enjoins
terrible vengeance upon the putative peace-loving Mussalman with a
Gandhian outlook. In the second place, the fact of the Koran preaching
non-aggression is totally out of tune with other verses, notably the
Immunity Verses (K9/1-12) and many others of a similar tenor.

As for *compensatory retaliation* the sentence ‘fight against those who
fight you’ does not preclude the possibility of starting the fight on
one’s own, but merely emphasizes the duty of hitting back when the
fighting is started by the enemy. But even the plea for hitting back
when attacked has a ring of speciousness in the Koran which comes out
clearly when contrasted with such verses as:

“Warfare is ordained for you although it is hateful unto you; but it may
happen that ye hate a thing which is good for you and ye love a thing
that is bad for you. Allah knoweth, and ye know not (K2/216, Pickthall’s
translation).

This verse, which preludes the second set of jihadic pronouncements
included in the second chapter of the Koran, is disarming in its candour
as regards the excellence of jihadic war as an end in itself. Certainly
this verse does not preach *compensatory retaliation*, - very far from
it. Allah ordains warfare for the believer and there’s an end of the
matter. The believer can do nothing about it for Allah has foreclosed
all avenues of escape.^([2](#2))

As if to drive the point home with redoubled emphasis, the immediately
succeeding verse (K2/217) sets out to justify unprovoked bloodshed even
in the season of peace. All commentators agree that this verse refers to
the raid at Nakhla (Late 623 AD) in the sacred month of Rajab against an
unarmed caravan of the Meccans. It was in this raid (as the earliest
biographer of the Prophet, Ibn Ishãq remarks) that “the first booty was
obtained by the Muslims, the first captives seized and the first life
taken by them”. Far from being an act of *non-aggression* it could not
even count as *compensatory retaliation* by any stretch of
imagination. If it was intended as compensatory retaliation for the
Muslims’ supposed expulsion from Mecca in the first place - such in fact
is the drift of the reasoning used in this verse - it was the most
dastardly act of retaliation possible.^([3](#3)) As for being an act of
non-aggression, such an interpretation is of course absolutely
frivolous.

To sum up, the Koran does not even preach the doctrine of *compensatory
retaliation* in the sense of adequately hitting back at an enemy who was
the first to attack. It preaches hitting back ten-fold or hundred-fold.
As for non-aggression, the whole tenor of the jihadic verses of the
Koran is against such an interpretation. The handful of verses with a
conciliatory ring, when closely examined, brings out the vengeful and
aggressive intent lurking beneath a string of plausible words. The
theory of *jihãd* as defensive war must, in the circumstances, be
rejected as a figment of the modern apologist’s imagination. The figment
does not bear even the most superficial scrutiny.  
 

**Footnotes:**

^([1](#1a)) The emphasis is on the qualifying expression ‘Koranic’.

^([2](#2a)) The reader will remember that the Koran often refers to the
believer’s reluctance to engage in violent confrontations. Allah
everywhere holds such reluctance culpable.

^([3](#3a)) Historically, the Migration (*Hijrat*) was not an expulsion
but a voluntary withdrawal from Mecca for the purpose of waging war
against the Koreish. Thus the reasoning itself is worthless.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)   [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)   [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
