+++
title = "05 FIVE         The Case of Sadhvi Ritambhara"

+++
FIVE  
The Case of Sadhvi Ritambhara

  
IN THE COURT OF SANJAY KUMAR AGGARWAL  
METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE, DELHI.

State FIR no.19/91  
Vs PS: Vivek Vihar  
Sadhvi Ritambara[1](#1) U/S:153-A IPC

  
ORDER ON CHARGE

Vide this order, this court shall decide as to whether Prima facie case
u/s 153-A IPC or any other offence is made out against the accused or
not.

Briefly stated the facts of the case are that on 29/11/90 at Chowk
Vishwas Nagar, Delhi, the accused Sadhvi Ritambara delivered a speech
which was considered objectionable and actionable u/s 153-A IPC on the
ground of inciting the Hindus in the context of construction of Shri Ram
Temple at Ayodhya and attempting to spread feelings of animosity against
the Muslims. After the delivery of the said speech a letter Dtd. 11/1/91
was written by the then Deputy Secretary (Home) to the DCP Special
Branch. The contents of letter are of great importance and hence
reproduced in this order.

Dear Shri Singh

Kindly refer to your office letter no. 37340/Come (C-3/H) Dtd. 30/11/90
regarding the speech made by Sadhvi Ritambara at Chowk Vishwas Nagar,
East Delhi on 29/11/90. I would like to inform you that screening
committee at its meeting held on 3/1/91 has adjudged the speech
actionable under 153-A of Indian Penal Code on the ground of inciting
the Hindus in the context of construction of Shri Ram Temple at Ayodhya
and attempting to spread feelings of animosity against the Muslims. The
following extracts of her speech were considered to be actionable,
objectionable.

"The Hindus have been so much humiliated and insulted since 1947 that
sometimes it seems doubtful whether they are living in their own country
adding that in Kashmir & Punjab Hindu blood is being shed so much so
that even in Ayodhya unarmed Kar Sevaks including the Sadhus were
brutally killed."

She gave a call to Hindus to unite and fight bravely against injustice
and atrocities being perpetrated on them like the brave Kar Sevaks who
martyred themselves at Ayodhya in connection with construction of Shri
Ram Temple.

You are therefore kindly to initiate criminal proceedings against Sadhvi
Ritambara under S. 153-A of Indian Penal Code immediately.

yours sincerely  
(M.U. Siddique)

This was the letter written by the Deputy Secretary (Home) to the D.C.P.
Special Branch for registration of case. On the basis of the letter FIR
no. 19/91 was registered. This letter will be read as Mark A. Thereafter
order was passed by Deputy Secretary (Home), Mr. M.U. Siddiqui, granting
sanction to initiate criminal proceedings in the court of competent
jurisdiction. After investigation, chargesheet was filed in the Court.

I have heard the Ld APP along with the chief prosecutor Shahdara Court.
I have also heard the accused and her defence counsel Sh. Alok Kumar
Advocate and Sh. K.L. Sabharwal Advocate. I have perused the record with
care.

The Ld APP submitted that taking into account all the factors and the
speech made by accused, prima facie case u/s 153-A IPC is made out
against the accused and prays framing of charge.

The Ld Defence Counsel Sh. Alok Kumar who argued the case on the point
of charge at length submitted that case not be proceeded further due to
the fact that even at this stage the prosecution is not having
sufficient evidence against the accused which may warrant framing of
charge u/s 153-A IPC or any other offence against the accused. The Ld
defence counsel submitted that he could not understand as to how the
prosecution is going to prove the "spoken words" in the absence of
witnesses and other evidence on record because the dispute in this case
related to spoken words u/s 153-A (a) of IPC. The Ld defence counsel
submitted that the prosecution is not having any video or audio tapes of
speech and it is only on the basis of hearsay evidence that the present
case is being registered.

The Ld defence counsel has drawn the attention of this court towards
letter Dtd. 15/6/92 titled 'legal' opinion on the speeches/slogans
delivered in Jan Sabha written by DCP East District which elaborates
about the fashion of recording of speeches. The main contents of letter
are:

"According to the instructions mentioned in the CID manual, the secret
information i.e. how to record and who has recorded speeches and
collected information cannot be disclosed. The officer of (SB) branch
cannot be a P.W. in any case."

The Ld defence counsel submitted that when a witness who has recorded
the speeches cannot be a prosecution witness as per CID manual then how
it is possible for the prosecution to prove the spoken words. The
prosecution was asked regarding this query wherein the Chief Prosecutor
after perusal of police file submitted that the prosecution had asked
the police department regarding this fact where the prosecution received
reply vide query no. 3 in police file that some unknown person had
recorded the speeches.

Secondly the Ld defence counsel submitted that there is only one
eyewitness and that too a Pujari of nearby temple whose statement was
recorded after lapse of four months of delivery of speech.

The Pujari in his statement u/s 161 CrPC simply stated that the accused
had given speech. The contents of speech were not put to him. Hence the
Ld defence counsel submitted that Pujari may only prove the factum of
delivery of speech but not the contents of speech in order to bring it
within the preview of 153-A IPC.

Thereafter the Ld Defence Counsel contended about the portion cited as
"Mark A" in this order. He submitted that only the portion "Mark A" was
considered to be objectionable by the sanctioning authority and not the
entire speech. He explained that even the portion "Mark A" of this order
does not have such impact as to bring it within the preview of S. 153-A
IPC. He submitted that the accused has not spoken anything against any
community or to hurt the feelings of any particular community. He
submitted that neither this speech was made for inciting the Hindus in
the context of construction of Sri Ram Temple at Ayodhya nor attempting
to spread the feelings of animosity against the Muslims. The Ld Defence
Counsel submitted that he could not understand as to how the prosecution
has brought Muslims in this affair as nowhere in the alleged
objectionable portion, the accused has said anything against the
Muslims.

The words that in the Punjab & Kashmir, Hindu blood is being shed
pertain to the hostilities between Indian Troops and Public with the ISI
of Pakistan. Regarding the words 'Even in Ayodhya, unarmed Kar Sevaks
including Sadhus were brutally killed' she described it as atrocities
committed by the then Chief Minister Mulayam Singh Yadav. Regarding the
wordings "she gave a call to Hindus to unite and fight bravely against
injustice and atrocities being perpetrated on them like the brave Kar
Sevaks who martyred themselves at Ayodhya in connection with the
construction of Sri Ram Temple" the Ld Defence Counsel submitted that it
was covered under right to freely profess and propagation of religion
and if call is given for construction of temple, then there is nothing
wrong in it. The Ld defence counsel further submitted that in these
words even the accused has not said anything against any other community
for destruction of any religious place. The Ld Defence Counsel further
contended that no witness has stated that he felt bad after hearing the
speech or he was disturbed neither any riots or any disturbance took
place. In the last Ld Defence Counsel submitted that sanction letter dtd
3/9/91 issued by Deputy Secretary (Home) is not signed by any one and
moreover it is merely a photocopy.

The senior prosecutor Mr. Ahluwalia and the Ld APP again conducted their
arguments in response to arguments advanced by Ld Defence Counsel and
that at the time the speech was being delivered by the accused, there a
dispute was going on regarding the construction of Ram Temple at Ayodhya
which could have incited the feelings of different communities. The
chief prosecutor was asked by the Court as to whether the prosecutor is
having any video or audio cassettes for the speeches. The prosecutor
said no to this question.

> Section 153-A IPc states:  
> whoever  
> (a) by words, either spoken or written or by signs or by visible
> representations or otherwise promotes or attempts to promote on ground
> of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
> community or any other ground whatsoever disharmony or feelings of
> enmity, hatred or illwill between different religious, racial,
> language or regional groups or castes or communities shall be punished
> with imprisonment……

To my mind it appears that Ld Defence Counsel is clear on the point
regarding "spoken words". He had already submitted that the prosecution
is not having sufficient material on record to prove spoken words. The
prosecution is not having any audio or video cassettes of speeches.

The most important thing is that there is not even a single witness on
record who can be able to say that he had heard the speeches and
speeches were inflamating so as to cover it under S. 153-A IPC. There is
only one eyewitness Pujari. His statement u/s 161 CRPC becomes open to
suspicion because it is recorded after four months of the delivery of
the alleged speech. Moreover the witness Pujari has stated nothing about
inflamatory language used by the accused but simply stated that he had
heard the speech. Hence it is clear that even if Pujari is called as
prosecution witness, he can prove the factum of delivery of speech but
not its contents so as to bring it within the preview of S. 153-A IPC.

The prosecution is also weak on the point regarding the recording of
speeches. In a letter which is on record, the DCP has stated to
prosecution that the speeches were recorded by a person of CID (S.
Branch) and he cannot be prosecution witness but the Ld APP had stated
that in the police file, when the queries were made regarding the factum
of recording of speeches they had received information vide query no. 3
that some unknown person had recorded the speeches. Hence it is clear
that when the prosecution does not know as to who has recorded the
speeches how it is possible for the prosecution to prove the alleged
speeches. As regards the extracts of the speech which were considered to
be objectionable by the Deputy Secretary (Home), I find force in the
arguments advanced by Ld Defence Counsel as discussed earlier. The
accused has stated nothing against any particular community so as to
insult the feelings of any other community but it appears after perusal
of alleged objectionable part that accused has stated the same in
propagation of her own religion.

The Deputy Secretary (Home) had stated in his letter dtd. 11/1/96 that
objectionable portion of speech as mentioned in the said letter was
likely to spread the feeling of animosity against the Muslims.

The Court would like to mention a Quotation of Gandhiji who said, "India
cannot cease to be one nation because people belonging to different
religions live in it…. In no part of the world are one nationality and
one religion synonymous terms, nor has it ever been so in India."

I have also perused the objectionable extracts of speech of accused.
Keeping in view the above words of Gandhiji and keeping in view the fact
that India should remain united despite existence of so many religions,
the Home Secretary should have taken wider interpretation of the terms
of speeches made by the accused. The Home Secretary had taken a very
narrow interpretation. In India one is free to profess and propagate his
religion because it is his fundamental right enshrined in the
Constitution of India. This Court finds nothing objectionable in the
alleged objectionable portion of speech as mentioned in letter "Mark A".
There is nothing in the said objectionable extracts of alleged speech
which may attract the provisions of S. 153-A IPC or any other offence.

This court has found force in the arguments advanced by Ld Defence
Counsel Sri Alok Kumar & Sh K.L. Sabharwal.

Lastly there is no evidence on record which may suggest that feelings of
any particular community, person were hurt after hearing of the alleged
speech.

Hence after going through the records and above noted discussion and
after hearing the prosecution as well as the defence, this Court is of
opinion that registration of present case against the accused appears to
be influenced by political forces. The case has been registered in a
haphazard manner and chargesheet has been filed without proper scrutiny
and without proper investigation.

Hence I have no option but to discharge the accused Sadhvi Ritambara of
the offence u/s 153-A IPC as prima facie no case u/s 153-A IPC or any
other offence against the accused is made out.

The accused Sadhvi Ratambara is discharged u/s 153-A IPC.

Announced in open court on 13/2/96.  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) The name is spelled wrongly. The correct name is given in the
chapter heading.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
