+++
title = "11 The Point we always Evade"

+++
ELEVEN  
The Point we always Evade[1](#1)

Arun Shourie

'I think the ban should be lifted,' says Mushir-ul-Hasan, pro
Vice-Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia", reported Sunday. 'I think,'
Hasan told the correspondent, 'every person has a right to be heard and
to be read.' He added that, as happens in all cases of this sort,
banning Rushdie's book had given it greater notoriety and in addition
given our country the image of being 'intolerant and undemocratic'. As
such the ban in his view, the report said, "qualifies as an indefensible
move".

Students of Jamia Millia Islamia paralysed the university. Liberals got
up and acted, that is, they wrote a letter to the editor saying Hasan
had a right to speak his mind. Hasan buckled, issuing three statements
clarifying his position: he expressed 'sincere and profound regret over
my remarks' and maintained that he had never wished to demand that the
ban on Rushdie's book be lifted.

The liberals were at a loss for words. Now, none of us may sit in
judgement on a man beleaguered. Anyone of us may react in the same way.
Rushdie himself had felt compelled to announce his reconversion to being
a Believer and to express regrets for the hurt the book had caused. The
point at issue thus is not Hasan's courage but the pressure which the
students have felt entitled to exert on him and how, even while
castigating it as undemocratic, the liberals have flinched from talking
about the set of beliefs which lead the protagonists to the conviction
that they are entitled to bend another man, that they are entitled to
silence him.

**Two phases**

Each time a controversy like this arises, and the facts are pointed out,
we are told that actually Islam preaches tolerance and peace. Allah, we
are reminded, told the Prophet, "Let there be no compulsion in religion;
Truth stands out clear from error…" (Quran, 2.256); that He told him to
"Invite (all) to the Way of Thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching, and persuade them in ways that are best and most gracious…"
(Quran, 18.25); that He admonished Muslims, "And if ye catch them out,
(in a controversy), catch them out of worse than they catch you out" and
that the best course is to show 'for bearance" (18.126), "O,
unbelievers", Allah urges Mohammed to tell them, "…to you your religion,
and to me my religion" (109).

But the fact is that these conciliatory verses pertain to the earlier
period when the Prophet was trying to persuade the various clans in
Mecca, including those who made their living off the various idols in
the Kaaba. Once he had to leave for Medina, and specially after he began
welding the Arabs into a State, Allah commanded him to be harsh in the
extreme. Reviewing the drastic change, and recalling the new commands to
fight the unbelievers so that they either submitted or were put to
death; the famous Iranian scholar Ali Dashti says in his *Twenty Three
Years: A study in the Prophethood of Mohammed*, "Mohammed's announcement
of this edict… indicates that with Islam in power, polite and rational
discussion with dissentients was no longer deemed necessary. The
language of future discourse with them was to be the language of the
sword." "Mohammad is the Messenger of Allah", Allah proclaimed, "and
those who are with him are hard against the unbelievers, merciful to one
another…"(48.29). Allah repeatedly warned the faithful that many will
say one thing in their presence and another when "they are alone with
their evil". They shall spare nothing to ruin you, Allah warned the
faithful, they yearn for you to suffer: "Hatred has already shown itself
of their mouths, and what their breasts conceal is yet greater", He
warned. "They but wish that ye should reject Faith as they do and be on
the same footing (as them)," He warned. Do not take them as friends, He
admonished, be harsh in dealing with them (for instance, Quran, 2.14-16,
3.118-120, 4.89, 4.140, 5.6O.)

"They swear by God that they said nothing (evil)," Allah pointed out in
a vital verse that is sure to be cited in the present round, "but indeed
they uttered blasphemy. And they did it after accepting Islam; and they
meditated a plot which they are unable to carry out; this revenge of
theirs was (their) only return for the country with which God and His
Apostle had enriched them; if they repent, it will be best for them. But
if they turn back (to their evil ways), Allah will punish them with a …
penalty in this life and in the hereafter. They shall have none on earth
to protect them or help them" (8.74). "O, Prophet", Allah therefore
commanded, "strive hard against the unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and
be firm against them. Their abode is Hell - an evil refuge indeed"
(9.73).

How are Rushdie and Hasan - both Muslims, both whom Allah has enriched
by His bounty of the one true faith - to be dealt with in terms of such
commands? Where is the room in any of this for the principle liberals
cherish, namely that, "Every person has a right to be heard and be
read"?

The point is this: while liberals etc. always take comfort in the
revelation Allah had sent down to the Prophet when the latter was yet
alone and his followers few, and try to make out that a liberal Islam
can be founded on these, Islam itself has been founded on the
commandments to harshness which Allah set down once the Prophet had
established himself in Medina. The entire history of Islamic rule bears
testimony to this.

**The Prophet's example**

In instances such as those of Rushdie, the point is even sharper; there
is in fact no room for relenting. And the reason for that is two fold.
Islam is founded on, it revolves around the personality of the Prophet.
Any thing that casts a shadow on that personality is therefore taken to
undermine Islam. There was of course, as has been pointed out, an
attempt - for instance by the Ashrite school, in particular by its great
theologian, Al-Baqillani - to maintain that the central thing was the
Revelation - the Quran - the one through whom it was made being of
lesser importance. But it was soon evident how such a position would
leave Islam vulnerable, and so most have insisted that the Prophet's
conduct, motives, personality must not be called into question in any
way. This position leaves no room for Rushdie.

But there is not just the negative point - if such licence is allowed in
regard to the Prophet, Islam itself will be endangered - there is the
positive example. The Prophet's life, what he said and did is the ideal
example which every Muslim must aspire to follow - in every particular,
and to the fullest extent.

Now, the Prophet himself was very particular about what people said
about him. Upon conquering Mecca, for instance, the Prophet proclaimed
an amnesty for all except six persons who, he ordered, must be killed
wherever and whenever they were found: his previous scribe who had said
that he had renounced Islam upon seeing that the Prophet altered the
text of the Revelations at his - i.e. the scribe's - prompting (he was
saved by his proximity to Othman, though against the Prophet's
inclination); two slave girls who were reported to have sung satires
about him, and their master etc. Similarly, Abu Afak was killed although
he was well over a hundred years of age: the Prophet himself ordered the
killing of this 'rascal' as he called Afak, as the latter had tried to
make light of him. The killing of a man so old led a poetess - Asma B.
Marwan - to compose verses criticising the Prophet. She too was
therefore killed - "She was sleeping with her children about her,"
writes Maxime Rodinson in his well known biography of the Prophet. "The
youngest, still at the breast, lay asleep in her arms. He (Umayr ibn
Adi, who had been spurred by the Prophet's 'will no one rid me of this
daughter of Marwan?') drove his sword through her, and in the morning he
went to Mohammed. 'Messenger of God,' he said, 'I have killed her!' 'You
have done a service to Allah and his Messenger, Umayr! was the reply…'
These and other killings are listed in every canonical biography of the
Prophet, they are listed among the expeditions of early Islam. As they
originated from the Prophet whose words and deeds are the ideal which
every Muslim must emulate, they constitute the norm. (To get the flavour
of the Prophet's attitude to those who sought to mock him, the reader
will do will to read one of the most revered and earliest biographies of
the Prophet - Ibn Ishaq's *Sirat Rasul Allah* which is available in the
translation of the great Islamicist, A Guillaume: *The Life of
Mohammed*, Oxford University Press, Karachi, 1978, in particular, pp.
307-8, 384-9, 550-1, and 675-6 for the incidents mentioned above).

These examples were soon codified in treatises. Annemarie Schimmel, a
diligent and also one of the most sympathetic scholars of Islam,
summarizes in her *And Mohammed is his Messenger* the position as it
came to be. She writes: "For how could one defame or slander a person
whose name is mentioned close to that of God in the second half of the
profession of faith? If someone should commit this sin, he has to be
asked to return to Islam: if he refuses, he has to be put to death.
Other authorities went further; the slanderer of the Prophet was
declared to deserve immediate capital punishment, which could not be
averted even by contrition. And indeed Islamic historians now and then
report that someone was either executed legally or lynched by an enraged
mob when he had been overheard slandering the Prophet. It is ironic that
one of the greatest theologians in Islamic history, the medieval
reformist Ibn Taimiyya, was sentenced to heavy punishment because of his
alleged 'lack of veneration' for the Prophet when he spoke up against
certain unhealthy exaggerations in the popular cult of the Prophet in
Damascus, such as the veneration of his footprint…"

"Reports of Muhammad's own reactions to slander and insult are
contradictory," Schimmel continues. "Many hadith emphasise the Prophet's
mildness and generosity in such cases: others found it necessary to give
a much harder picture of his reactions. An example of the latter is Ibn
Taimiyya - once himself accused of lack of reverence for the Prophet! -
who composed a special work with the telling title *Aggaarim al-maeluul
alaa shaatim ar-rasuul* (the Sword Drawn against the Vilifier of the
Prophet), in which he states 'whoever vilifies a prophet is to be killed
and whoever vilifies his companions is to be flogged.' The latter
sentence is of course directed against the Shiites, who curse the first
three caliphs and other Companions…"

Freedom of speech in this setting? Taking back Khomeini's fatwa in view
of such precedents? It is this central fact - that the only sort of
freedom of speech which Islam sanctions is the freedom to laud it -
which the liberals do not want to face. But unless they do so they will
in each round be reduced to doing what they were to in this instance:
writing a letter to the editor one day, and falling silent the next.

**The Worsening Position**

The situation in India is far worse than it is in other countries. The
French Marxist scholar Maxime Rodinson's biography of the Prophet,
Mohammed, is freely available abroad: its English edition is published
by Penguin. It traces the revelations which appeared from time to time -
specially the ones pertaining to personal law - to the personal dilemmas
the Prophet was facing at that turn: such an exercise by an Indian
scholar would be shouted down, and his book banned. Ali Dasthti's,
*Twenty Three Years* to which I have referred earlier shows in graphic
details how the Prophet's attitude to one thing after another - to
power, to the Jews, to those who did not fall in line, to women -
changed after his position in Medina became secure. It is freely
available abroad, the English version having been published by George
Allen & Unwin. The same book, had it been written by an Indian, would
have called forth demands for a ban, demands which would certainly have
prevailed.

And the situation in India has been getting worse over the years.
Imagine one of us - who happens to be a Hindu - writing today,
"Excepting our own almost all the other great religions in the world are
inevitably connected with the life or lives of one or more of their
founders. All their theories, their teachings, their doctrines, and
their ethics are built round the life of a personal founder, from whom
they get their sanction, their authority, and their power: and strangely
enough, upon the historicity of the founder's life is built, as it were,
all the fabric of such religions. If there is one blow dealt to the
historicity of that life, as has been the case in modern times with the
lives of almost all the so-called founders of religions; we know that
half of the details of such lies is not now seriously believed in, and
that the other half is seriously doubted - if this becomes the case, if
that rock of historicity, as they pretend to call it, is shaken and
shattered the whole building tumbles down, broken absolutely, never to
regain its lost status…" There would be a howl - "fascism," "cultural
imperalism" - and demands that the book be kept out of schools and
universities. Yet the passage is Swami Vivekananda's - and he makes the
point repeatedly in almost identical words.

Imagine a scholar today referring to the "obvious defects of the Koran,"
to the "crudities of the Koran". Imagine a scholar casting doubts on the
revelations which came to the Prophet characterizing the claim to having
received them to be a "doubious claim," and saying about such claims,
"Such experiences always result from cerebral disorder which takes place
whenever the prescribed practices are carried too far. Fixed ideas,
however fantastic or imaginary, may appear to take concrete form if the
mind is focused on them so as to exclude the consciousness of other
sanctions. A scientific study of the psychology of seers reveals the
fact that 'inspiration' or any other 'religious experience' is the
result of the pathological state brought about either accidentally or
purposely through prescribed practices." Imagine the scholar going
further and writing that when Muhammad himself doubted the
"psycho-pathological symptoms" and the "the worldly wise" Khadija, who
stepped in and "was quick to appreciate the spiritual value of the
mental aberrations of her husband. She persuaded him that his visions
were not signs of insanity, but were messengers of God. Taking advantage
of his psycho-pathological state of suggestibility, she could easily
make him 'see' an angel entering the room to deliver to him the Message
of God…" Imagine a scholar writing this today - the book could be
pounded on, effigies of the author burned…

Yet the sentences are from that most effusive - and one of the
shallowest - apologies of Islam: M N Roy's *The Historical Role of
Islam*. In brief, the situation has worsened over the decades. No one
today could write even this much, and it is only the good fortune that
our people do not read these older books which allows them to continue
in circulation.

The point about Khomeini's *fatwa* is that it has worked: it has
intimidated into silence scholars and writers all over the world. And
the agitation against Hasan will work too: it took three years for a
Muslim scholar to say as much - or, as little - as he did. It will take
twice that many years for another one to say half as much.

And no one has contributed to making these things work, to smothering
free inquiry and speech in this vital sphere as the liberals and
secularists. We supported the ban on Rushdie's book at that time, writes
a leading commentator, as we knew the reactions the book would provoke.

Does that "prudence" not go to the fundamentalists to work up a fury
each time they want to have their way? Is that not what they are doing
now?  

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This syndicated article appeared on 18 March 1992 in *The
Observer of Business and Politics*, New Delhi. It also appeared in many
other newspapers and periodicals all over India.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
