+++
title = "15 Ban this Book"

+++
FIFTEEN  
Ban this Book[1](#1)

Koenraad Elst

In a letter dated August 20, 1993, Janata Dal MP Syed Shahabuddin has
asked the Minister of State for Home, P.M. Sayeed, to ban the book
*Hindu View of Christianity and Islam* by Ram Swarup (Voice of India,
New Delhi 1992). It is not his first time: in 1988, Shahabuddin was
instrumental in getting Salman Rushdie's *The Satanic Verses* banned.
This time he has not been equally successful in getting the book swiftly
banned, but judicial proceedings are under way to get it banned after
all. As a European India-watcher, I leave it to Indian commentators to
advise the public on how to react to this new onslaught on the freedom
of publication, and will limit myself to some background analysis.

To clear up a common confusion first: it is wrong to deduce from
Shahabuddin's leadership role in the Rushdie affair, the Shah Bano case
and the Babri Masjid campaign that the man is a communalist. Every page
of every issue of his monthly *Muslim India* is full of "defending
secularism" and "combating the communal forces". On its editorial board,
you find hard secularists like I. K. Gujral and Khushwant Singh. The
latter explicitly supported the ban on the Verses, as did Shahabuddin's
co-secular elections opponent M.J. Akbar, and many other pen-wielders of
secularism. When the Calcutta weekly *Sunday* defied the ban by
publishing a few excerpts, the secularist Press Council condemned this
stand for press freedom as "a deviation from the path of ethical
rectitude' (a lyrical way of saying: "wrong").

As for the Babri Masjid campaign: in spite of its hundreds of victims
(nearly every riot of the last decade has been described in the media as
"Ayodhya-related"), the entire secularist spectrum is still solidly on
Shahabuddhin's side. Till today, most of them fiercely support his
demand that Islam be given the privilege to plump a mosque right on what
Hindu ritual convention considers Rama's birthplace, the Rama devotee's
equivalent of Mecca. Far from being a communalist, Syed Shahabuddin is
India's secularist par excellence.

The ban on Rushdie's book has as a side-effect that everyone who finds
himself in conflict with Islam gets bracketed with the Indo-British
writer of below-the-belt satire on the founder of Islam. This is often
an unfair comparison. Thus, Taslima Nasreen is far more sobre and
dignified (and readable) than Rushdie. The same is even more true of Ram
Swarup, the 73-year-old Delhi-based thinker whose essay *Hindu View of
Christianity and Islam* is currently targeted by Shahabuddin.

Another effect of the spectacular worldwide success of the anti-Rushdie
petition is that the book-banners' appetite for more bonfires of
offending books has been whetted. Though persecution and even murder of
freethinkers are nothing new, one cannot fail to notice that the last
five years have seen a very high incidence of these phenomena: scores of
writers and journalists have been murdered, executed or imprisoned for
"insulting Islam", in Iran, Egypt, Pakistan, Algeria, Turkey and
elsewhere, and even more have received threats of the same. Banning is
also a regular feature. In India, the year 1993 has witnessed the
attempt to get the TV serial *Bible ki Kahaniyan* off the screen
(because it showed Abraham, considered by the Muslims as a prophet and
builder of the Kaaba), and Bangladesh banned Taslima Nasreen's *Lajja*
(not because she is a social activist, as secularists have claimed to
divert attention from the real reason, but because she has broken the
taboo on writing about the victims of Islam, i.e. the Hindus in
Bangladesh).

The active or passive support from the secularists is certainly one
factor in the arrogance of these Inquisition squads. Another source of
encouragement is that even the so-called Hindu communalists never object
very strongly.

They like to cite the *Verses* ban as a case of "Muslim appeasement",
but they did precious little to defend Rushdie's freedom of publication.
Quite a few books have been banned for "insulting Islam" without a word
of protest from the supposedly anti-Muslim BJP. Thus, Colin Maine's *The
Dead Hand of Islam* and Arvind Ghosh' *The Koran and the Kafir* have
been banned for giving lists of Koranic verses which incite hatred
against non-Muslims; no protest was heard. R.M. Eaton's doctoral
dissertation *Sufis of Bijapur*, which debunks the pious fable of the
Sufis as peace-loving humanists (in reality they were hate-mongers and
spies), has been banned without any ado.

In 1990, the Delhi administration banned the Hindi translation of
*Understanding Islam Through Hadis* by Ram Swarup, after a mob came to
threaten the binder. In 1991, the English original was also banned
although it had been in print and circulation for seven years.
Eventhough Ram Swarup as an independent writer has occasionally defended
the same positions as taken by the BJP, this party has not come out in
his defence. Now, Shahabuddin requests that Ram Swarup's latest essay be
banned, on the plea that it is "blatantly offensive" to the sentiments
of the followers of Christianity and Islam by calling these religions
"anti-human" and "lacking in spirituality".

Before discussing the contents, a juridical technicality first.
Shahabuddin claims that the book re-employs material contained in an
already-banned book (which in Ram Swarup's case can only be
*Understanding Islam Through Hadis*), so that it really falls under the
earlier ban. This is factually untrue: the older material re-employed in
this book consists of Ram Swarup's prefaces to reprints of the Mohammed
biographies by W. Muir and D.S. Margoliouth, which have so far not been
subjected to a ban. Conversely, a ban on the present book would, by
Shahabuddin's logic, lead to the automatic banning of Muir's and
Margoliouth's books, at least in editions with Ram Swarup's foreword.

Very briefly, Ram Swarup's thesis is the following. There is a radical
distinction between the Indian (and other "Pagan") and the Abrahamic
religions, which have "prophetic monotheism" as their defining doctrine.
Whereas the different Pagan traditions locate the divine in a universal
medium (nature), and the Upanishadic tradition locates the divine
dimension within the consciousness of each individual, the Abrahamic
religions make the divine presence in this world into the exclusive
preserve of a Chosen People, an Only-Begotten Son, a Final Prophet.

Though monotheism has a recorded history of endless wars against the
worshippers of "false gods", one might conceive of monotheism as a less
harmful, inclusive belief system: the belief that there is one God who
is worshipped by people in numerous different forms. It is in this sense
that many modern Hindus understand the Vedic religion as monotheistic
("The wise call the One Truth by many names"). However, that is
decidedly not the view of the Abrahamic religions. From Moses who
smashed the Golden Calf and had all sacred groves cut down and idols
broken, down to the Afghan *mujahedin* who go to Buddhist ruins to
behead the left-over Buddha statues, the Egyptian terrorists who threw a
bomb into the famous pharaonic temple at Karnak in 1992, and the
Pakistani and Bangladeshi mobs who destroyed hundreds of Hindu temples
in 1992 as well as on earlier occasions: intolerance of alternative ways
of naming and picturing the divine has been a regular feature of this
monotheism.

An important factor in the intolerance of Abrahamic monotheism is its
combination with prophetism, i.e. the belief that this God reveals
Himself exclusively through special spokesmen, prophets. On the one hand
He is the only God, valid for all, on the other hand He is only
accessible to the Prophet or Saviour and his coterie. Ram Swarup
therefore calls Islam and Christianity "proxy religions", where
religious experience is not direct but through an intermediary. It is in
this sense that they are "lacking in spirituality".

To an extent, the belief in privileged mediums of the divine is present
in all religions. Brahminism has its reliance on professional
*karmakânDa* (priestcraft), which is however counterbalanced by the
self-reliant Upanishadic *jñânakânDa* (cultivation of individual
consciousness). Many religions used diviners, experts of techniques to
know the divine will. Shamanism is centered around mediumistic
practices: the shaman allows a spirit to take possession of his body and
mind, and becomes, a channel for spirit revelations.

A famous case is Chengiz Khan, who would go into a trance and utter
spirit messages, which a secretary wrote down and read out to him after
the trance subsided. The messages, attributed to the sky-god Tengri,
included instructions on which country to attack next, and Chengiz duly
obeyed these instructions. If these spirit messages had been compiled
into a book, it would be a fairly exact parallel to the Quran: Mohammed
too received messages while in a trance (wahi), and he too obeyed the
divine instructions leading him into military campaigns.

There is however a crucial difference between this shamanistic
"channeling" of spirit messages, and Abrahamic prophetism. While no
shaman or oracle declared to be the exclusive medium of divine messages,
and while the ruthless Chengiz Khan had at least the merit of religious
pluralism and respect for all religions, the Abrahamic prophets do show
an increasing tendency to exclusivism and intolerance. The earliest
Hebrew prophets are still part of the shamanistic tradition, wedded to
one particular god, but aware and respectful of other gods speaking
through other mediums. But with the growing impact of monotheism,
intolerance becomes the norm and soon leads to massacres of the priests
and prophets of other traditions (as that of the Baal priests by
Elijah). The end result is seen in the Gospel, where only those who
believe in Jesus are said to win salvation, and in the Quran, where
those who refuse to believe in Mohammed's prophethood are sentenced to
subjugation or death, and to eternal hellfire.

It is remarkable that the Abrahamic mainstream religion, Judaism, later
softened into a humane religion which practised "live and let live",
while its offshoots Christianity and Islam became the torch-bearers of
exclusivism and of the monotheist ambition of world-conquest. This is
one of the reasons why the use of the term "Semitic" (occasional in this
book, systematic in some publications by Romila Thapar and other
secularists who allege that the Hindutva movement represents a
"semitization of Hinduism") is unfortunate: prophetic monotheism is by
far not identical with the religious traditions of the Semitic-speaking
peoples. Some Semitic peoples, notably the Arabs, had prophetic
monotheism imposed on them by force; while the New Testament as the
founding statement of the monotheist campaign of world conquest, was
written in non-Semitic Greek.

In contents too, the Gospel represents a departure from the "Semitic"
Hebrew tradition, in that it created a credal religion. Judaism is a
communal religion, a nation, to which you can belong regardless of any
statement of belief. Like Hinduism it requires that you abide by certain
rules, but takes a relaxed attitude towards items of belief. By
contrast, Christianity and Islam are based on a declaration of belief
(the Nicean Creed, the *Shahâda*); even small differences on points of
belief have led to large-scale persecutions of the "heretics". Mature
rabbinical Judaism (a creation of the much-maligned Pharisees) presents
a mixed picture of theological exclusivism along with practical respect
for the multiplicity of viewpoints, fostered by the sublime Talmudic
hermeneutics and by the day-to-day experience of living as a vulnerable
minority. But Christianity and Islam in their classic forms have been
highly intolerant religions, to the extent of trying to weed out all
other religions by means of propaganda campaigns and military conquest.

It is correct that Ram Swarup describes Christianity and Islam as
"anti-human". This could be understood in the ordinary sense, after
listing atrocities on unbelievers and heretics down the centuries. But
here it is meant in a profounder sense, viz. that they do not respect
humanity and human beings as such; rather, they believe in two
humanities with a radically different status. "Outside the Church no
salvation", non-Christians are doomed to eternal hellfire, and they
should not count on much respect in this world either (ask the Native
Americans, or the Hindus of Goa whose priests were killed and temples
turned into churches). The Quran is even more outspoken about this
doctrine: the unbelievers have not only forfeited heaven, but the earth
as well; they must be enslaved or put into a position of third-class
citizens. Other **Voice of India** publications have mustered the
evidence from scripture and history to prove this "anti-human" trait in
prophetic monotheism.

There is no doubt that with his ban petition, Syed Shahabuddin is
targeting **Voice of India** as a whole. He wants to intimidate and
silence the one intellectual centre which is busy processing ideologies,
history and contemporary problems from the Hindu viewpoint. While Islam,
Christianity and Communism have an enormous apparatus at their disposal.
Hindu society has practically no institution that can represent it in
the intellectual arena. Considering its humble means, **Voice of India**
has done a remarkable job so far.

To give just one example: the two-volume study *Hindu Temples, What
Happened to Them* (1990\~92) by Sita Ram Goel has caused quite a panic
among "secularist" historians who claim that there was always
Hindu-Muslim amity and that the Islamic temple destructions are a myth.
Its first volume gives the list of 2000 Muslim monuments including many
mosques standing on the sites of demolished temples, list which is never
quoted or discussed. The only review of this first volume (by Manini
Chatterjee) dismisses it as a "very bad book", but fails to pick a
single hole in the book's thesis. Of the hundreds of secularist
historians who have signed statements denouncing "communal history
distortion", not a single one has been able to challenge even one of the
2000 claims in the list. No wonder that all the anti-temple publications
carefully ignore this book.

It gets even more serious when we come to the second volume, which gives
hundreds of Islamic testimonies of systematic temple destruction,
presents in full the Islamic theology of iconoclasm, and conclusively
refutes the recent canard that Hinduism has a similar record of
persecution vis-à-vis Buddhism. It also describes in detail a few crass
cases of history distortion by reputed Marxist historians. That is why
this book, which is the key to the whole Ayodhya affair, has been
absolutely ignored. Eminent secularist historians hope and pray that
this book does not reach the libraries of foreign India-watchers,
because their balloon of "eminence" could get pin-pricked. They strongly
sympathize with Syed Shahabuddin's assault on **Voice of India,** but
hope that the latest ban petition doesn't give too much publicity to
this dreaded book. The book now targeted for a ban is equally dangerous,
but at a different level. It is one of the first attempt to process the
world-conquering religions in terms of Hindu spirituality. So far, it
was usually the other way round: Hindus tried to live up to the
standards set by their enemies, to rethink Hinduism in terms popularized
by the spokesmen of Islam and Christianity.

Thus, Swami Dayananda Saraswati's *Satyartha Prakash* ("Light of Truth",
1875), probably the very first Hindu writing to polemicize against
Christianity and Islam, has interiorized some of the
prophetic-monotheistic categories upheld by Christian preachers: it
rejects idol-worship and polytheism, and claims the Veda as the sole
revealed scripture. Even when defending Hinduism, the Swami was casting
it in the mould of its enemy religions. At that time, this was perhaps
the best thing one could realistically hope for, and it is not to
detract from Dayananda's merit that we notice how even in criticizing
Islam and Christianity, he implicitly extolled them by putting their
imprint on his own Hinduism.

But Dayananda at least took the trouble of studying and criticizing
Christian and Islamic scriptures in detail, and of showing that there
was much "anti-human" and "lacking in spirituality" in them (no wonder,
his chapter on Islam got banned by the provincial government of Sindh).
By contrast, later Hindu spiritualists like Vinoba Bhave, the
Ramakrishna Mission, and numerous Swamis and secularists, have merely
memorized a handful of goody-goody points from the Bible and the Quran,
and hold these up as proof that "Hindus have a lot to learn from them",
or that "all religions essentially say the same thing". This nauseating
sentimentalism has by now become an unquestionable dogma, except among
those anti-Hindu secularists who insist that there is a radical
difference after all: between Mohammed's proto-socialist religion of
equality (or Mother Teresa's religion of love and charity) on the one
hand and abominable caste-ridden Hinduism on the other.

It is against this background that the publication of Ram Swarup's
analysis of Christianity and Islam should be evaluated as a major event.
Much to the indignation of those who treat Hinduism as a museum object,
this book proves that Hinduism is not yet dead. Conversely, banning this
book would send a signal that the present establishment will do what it
can to prevent Hinduism from rising up, from regaining self-confidence,
from facing the challenge of hostile ideologies.

Syed Shahabuddin's plea is implicitly based on the right of Christians
and Muslims to be spared the existence of literature which might hurt
their feelings. But for adults, no such right exists. We all have to
live in a world where opinions mercilessly challenging our cherished
beliefs are at large, in print and on the air.

Just ask the Hindus. They, and all non-Muslims living near mosques, have
to hear five times a day that "there is no God but Allah", implying that
Shiva, Vishnu and the rest are false gods and that all religions except
Islam are false. The Quran itself minces no words in denouncing every
form of "unbelief", esp. the Arab polytheist religion which had so much
in common with Hinduism; yet, millions of copies of this book are freely
available in India. And it is not only from the Islamic side that Hindus
have to live with criticism. In spite of some agitation, Dr. Ambedkar's
book *Riddles in Hinduism* is not only freely available in India, but
has actually been published with taxpayers' money by the Government of
Maharashtra.

The harsh treatment to which Hinduism has become used esp. as compared
with Islam, comes out most clearly when we survey the Western and
Christian reporting on these two religions. Both in India and abroad,
Christian missionaries spread no end of pamphlet literature denouncing
Hinduism as "anti-human" (any secularist will gladly repeat the list:
dowry, female infanticide, untouchability, sati) and as "lacking in
spirituality" (Sai Baba's materialist miracle-mongering, Rajneesh's
"tantrism", the "selfish godless navel-contemplation" of yoga).
Invariably, Hinduism itself is branded as being the root cause of all
kinds of social evils. Thus, though none of the people involved in
female infanticide in Tamil Nadu has ever declared that "I killed my
infant daughter because it is what my Hindu religion tells me to do,
still most articles on this strictly secular problem will convey the
message that "this is what their religion does to them".

By contrast, when social evils of Muslim society are dealt with, care is
taken to exonerate Islam itself beforehand, and to treat these evils as
aberrations. When *mujahedin* who kill Christians in Egypt explicitly
declare that they do this as a matter of religious duty in a Holy War,
quoting chapter and verse from the Quran, even Christian papers will
claim that in fact, these persecutions are a "violation of the true
Islam, which is a religion of peace". The history of Islamic slavery,
which deported many more Blacks (apart from millions of Whites and
Indians) than the Atlantic slave trade, is invariably approached with
kid gloves, if mentioned at all. Though the. Western press does show a
lot of gun-wielding Islamic militants, it is absolutely untrue that
Islam (as opposed to a supposed aberration called "fundamentalism") is
getting a raw deal. Neither the Press, nor the academic Islamic Studies
centres, nor the Christian churches show any inclination to subject
Islam to criticism.

Shahabuddin claims that not only Muslims will feel hurt by Ram Swarup's
book, but Christians as well. This looks like a ploy to enlist Christian
support, just in case this becomes another big affair. But it seems he
is totally unaware that Christians have grown accustomed to living with
much fiercer criticism (apart from crude satire) than what Ram Swarup
politely offers in his essay. Let me give a few examples from the past
decade.

In *Kriminalgeschichte des Christentums*, the German leftist scholar
Karl-Heinz Deschner surveys the "criminal history of Christianity". It
describes the Christian march to the status of world religion through
scriptural fraud, complicity in social evils, disruption of the Pagan
majority culture, capture of state power by all means, followed by
persecution of the Pagans, falsification of history, book-burning etc.
It gives information similar to that in the offending parts of *Sufis of
Bijapur*, but it is -much more comprehensive and scathing in tone. Even
so, it is freely available in Christian countries.

In *Histoire du Mèchant Dieu*, the French right-wing scholar Pierre
Gripari debunks some pious fables about the creators of the
Judeo-Christian tradition. Thus, he points out the racist trait in
Abraham's family, a Mesopotamian immigrant tribe in Palestine: Ismael is
rejected as Abraham's son because his mother is Egyptian; Esau is
rejected as Issac's heir because he has taken Hittite wives rather than
getting wives from Mesopotamia, as Jacob does; Jacob's sons murder their
sister's Palestinian bridegroom with his entire clan. Gripari also draws
attention to the fact that Moses' brother Aaron encourages the
Israelites to worship the Golden Calf, yet he is the only one who
servives Moses' crackdown on the "apostates". Explanation: like Mao's
"Hundred Flowers" campaign, Aaron's Golden Calf movement was a
calculated provocation to bring the simmering opposition to Moses'
policies out in the open, so as to destroy it more effectively. Though
this candid secular reading of the Bible may be shocking to some, the
book can be bought in bookshops throughout Europe.

In *Is Christianity True?*, Bible scholar Michael Arnheim dissects the
Scriptural sources of some basic Christian beliefs, and shows that the
semi-literate Gospel authors have poorly concealed their innumerous
concoctions and distortions. Thus, in their frantic attempts to show
that Jesus was born in Bethlehem, as the Messiah was supposed to, they
land themselves in contradictions and demonstrably false historical
claims (e.g. there was no Roman census at the given time) which give the
game away. After fabricating a genealogy linking Jesus' father Joseph
with King David, they declare that Jesus was born from a virgin and
Joseph was merely his forster-father. They also don't manage to conceal
that Jesus's contemporaries considered him an illegitimate child, which
completely explains why the Gospel writers had to invent the "virgin
birth". Similar made-up stories are shown to surround the other great
moments of Jesus' life. This type of historicization of sacred
narratives is increasingly accepted, and some Catholic theologians (Hans
Kung, Edward Schille-beeckx, Eugen Drewermann) go all the way in a
similar "demythologization" of the Gospel.

In *Jesus de Messias, Was het Christendom een Vergissing?* ("Jesus the
Messiah, Was Christianity a Mistake?"), the Flemish psychologist and
Bible scholar Dr. Herman Somers, an ex-Jesuit, argues that "Christianity
was a mistake": its basic doctrine, conveyed by Jesus to his illiterate
and gullible followers, was a delusion about himself, viz. that he was
the Son of God. Dr. Somers goes on to argue that those parts of the
Gospel which can reasonably be taken as authentic, show us a Jesus who
clearly suffers from a pathological delusion, accompanied by typical
symptoms including the catastrophic sense of an impending end of the
world. With this approach, Dr. Somers is not an eccentric: he merely
refines and elaborates a hypothesis which had earlier been formulated by
other psychologists and Bible scholars, and which is increasingly
capable of explaining all the riddles which centuries of Christian Bible
research had left unsolved. Far from being a "misplaced projection of
modern categories onto a radically different culture", this approach is
partly based on information given in the Gospel itself, where Jesus'
family is said to think that he had gone out of his mind.

In 1993, Dr. Somers published a similar study on Mohammed (*Een Andere
Mohammed*, "A Different Mohammed"), whose life and personality are known
to us in far greater detail than that of any other Abrahamic prophet.
His bold conclusion is that Mohammed suffered of a very typical case of
paranoia, complete with frequent hallucinations and a fundamental
delusion about himself, viz. that he had been selected by God for a
special mission. Again, it is in Islamic scripture itself that we find
Mohammed's contemporaries describing him as "ghost-possessed" and "a mad
poet". The ancients did not have our developed science of
psychopathology, but they did have a healthy skepsis when confronted
with claims of divine mission and of hearing God's own voice.

One may or may not agree with these theories, but the point is: this is
the kind of intellectual exploration which secularism has made possible
in ex-Christian society, and this is the point of comparison by which
one can measure whether Ram Swarup's book is an outrage and a threat to
secularism.

It seems to me that in comparison with the above mentioned Western
secular authors, Ram Swarup's approach is more respectful and less
hurtful for the human beings who call themselves Christians or Muslims,
even if it is equally devastating for the doctrines of Christianity and
Islam. The difference is that the said Western authors, who tend to
identify religion with the type of religion they themselves grew up with
(mostly Christianity), end up rejecting religion altogether, rather than
just the specific doctrine they are criticizing in detail. Belivers who
hear that a point of belief is being refuted, may get panicky because
they think that the religious basis of their lives is under threat. In
the case of many ex-Christian secularists, that is indeed true: along
with the outdated belief in Jesus Christ, they are rejecting the entire
spiritual dimension. Or if they have shown that Mohammed was suffering
of a common paranoid delusion, they think that henceforth every person
somehow associated with religion has a mental problem.

At this point, Ram Swarup's approach is radically different: he does
value religion, and his critique is not from a secular but from a
religious angle. In that sense, he is more up-to-date than the Western
secularists, because many modems have come to recognize that there is
still a need for religion even after Christianity, and even after man
has awoken from the slumber of superstition and pre-scientific
ignorance.

In a sense, Islam is currently capitalizing on this postmodern revival
of religion. While the disillusion with secularization is felt across
continents, and Western man is looking for new forms of spirituality,
Islam happens to still be sitting in a power position in most of the
lands it once conquered. In the religious sweep often dubbed as
"fundamentalism", a distinction must be made between on the one hand
this universal trend of religious revival (with its rejection of
decadent consumerism and of Americanism), and on the other hand the
medieval grip of Islamic doctrine, which is still in place and ready to
use the religious fervour of the people for its own ends.

It is unfortunate that Iranians who had a good case in revolting against
the Shah, ended up persecuting Bahais and other minorities, simply
because Islam has channelled people's religious commitment to acts of
intolerance. The thing to do is to show them that religion is possible
without belief in exclusive revelations, final prophets, and divisions
of mankind into saved believers and doomed unbelievers; to remind them
that in fact, their own ancestors used to practise a religion which
provided for the spiritual as well as the ethical dimension of life
without identifying them with this obsession with some historical
character who claimed prophethood.

Those educated Muslims who are willing to rethink their religion, will
feel much more attracted to the thoughtful Hindu critique of Ram Swarup
than to the sweeping secularist critique of atheist Western authors.
After getting over their initial shock with Ram Swarup's radical
questioning of Islam's exclusivist claims, they will realize that this
Hindu approach preserves and respects all that they consider humanly
important in religion: values of self-restraint, inferiority, awareness
of a larger whole, participation in the common good. They may well come
to realize that there is life after Islam, even a good and spiritual
life. That is why Syed Shahabuddin does well to try and get this book
banned: with this book, Islam is in danger.

 

Footnotes:

 

[1](#1a) This article was published in *The Observer of business and
Politics*, New Delhi, on 1 December 1993.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Back to Contents Page](index.htm)    [Back to VOI
Books](http://voiceofdharma.org/books)    [Back to
Home](http://voiceofdharma.org)**
