+++
title = "00 Koenraad Elst"

+++
<div class="Section1">

# Introduction

         Many people inside or close to the BJP, and inside or close to
the broader Sangh Parivar, have become dissatisfied with what they
perceive as the increasing distance between the BJP's actual policies
and the Hindu expectations among the public on which the party
capitalizes.  To some extent, the problem lies with the BJP itself,
distinguishing it from other Hindutva organizations, who then tend to
blame the increasing non-Sangh element inside the BJP for this
"degeneration", especially the opportunists who jumped onto the
promising BJP bandwagon after the 1989 and 1991 electoral
breakthroughs.  To a large extent, however, the BJP problem is the RSS
problem.  In the BJP, the RSS approach is put to the test of day-to-day
political practice, in confrontation with the enemies of Hindutva,
without the benefit of the secretiveness which characterizes the
functioning of other Sangh-affiliated organizations.  Except for the
recent defection and corruption scandals, the major failures of the BJP
can be traced to RSS policies and RSS ideological conditioning.

 

         At any rate, the problem is serious enough, even in the eyes of
many BJP or RSS members, to warrant a frank debate.  It is to this
debate that the present paper wants to contribute.  The prime focus of
our attention will be the BJP's performance, but with constant reference
to the RSS background.  Most examples will be drawn from the one aspect
of Hindutva politics which is by far the most conspicuous and the most
common target of secularist criticism: the relation with Islam. 
Historically, the RSS was created in a context of Hindu-Muslim tension,
and till today, its activists have frequently been in conflict with the
Muslim community politically or even physically.  An organization which
has had to deal with India's Islam problem for more than 70 years may be
expected to have developed a clear analysis of this problem, and an
effective strategy to counter it.

 

         Many Sangh Parivar activists are not going to like this paper. 
They have a childlike affection for the organization which has given
them togetherness and solidarity, a feeling of purpose and of home. 
Often self-effacing idealists, they don't mind criticism of their own
person, and they can listen to insults to India and Hinduism without
being moved, but they are very touchy when it comes to criticism of the
Sangh.  I apologize to them for any hurt caused by this text, but I am
convinced of its urgent necessity.  The Sangh is benumbed by the
decades-long crossfire of criticism by its enemies, but is not used to
listen to criticism from friendly quarters.

 

         On the other hand, a lot of Sangh people are going to agree
with my remarks.  It is partly because of complaints from Sangh
activists themselves that I have resolved to formulate this critique. 
Little does the Sangh leadership realize that numerous idealistic
volunteers have joined one of the many Sangh-affiliated organizations
because they want to do something for Hinduism, not because they care
about the specific Sangh outlook.  The Sangh Parivar just happens to be
around, just happens to be the largest organization reputed to be
working for Hinduism, so Hindu-minded people join one of its fronts
rather than go through the wasteful trouble of setting up their own
rivalling shop; but that doesn't mean they are enthusiastic about
certain Sangh fads which will come up for scrutiny in this paper.  

 

         The present text is a much-enlarged version of a two-part guest
column published in the *Observer of Business and Politics* (Delhi) of 6
and 7 December 1996, and contributed at the suggestion of Mr. R.K.
Mishra and Mr. Balbir Poonj.  I thank them for their interest and for
the courage of publishing that column, but of course they bear no
responsibility whatsoever for its contents.  Among all the Sangh people
whom I should thank for giving me access to information, I want to
mention Mr. K.R. Malkani and Mr. Devendra Swarup in particular.  I hope
they can appreciate the spirit in which I offer the comments which
follow.

 

## Koenraad Elst

### Leuven, 17 January 1997

 

**[NEXT](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/section1.html)**

**[HOME](http://www.bharatvani.org/books/bjp/index.html)**

 

</div>
